
1. Cell Cycle. 2016 Mar 18;15(6):827-39. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1149273.

B-cell lymphoma 6 promotes proliferation and survival of trophoblastic cells.

Muschol-Steinmetz C(1), Jasmer B(1), Kreis NN(1), Steinhäuser K(1), Ritter A(1), 
Rolle U(2), Yuan J(1), Louwen F(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics , School of Medicine, J. W.
Goethe-University , Frankfurt, Germany. (2)b Department of Pediatric Surgery and 
Pediatric Urology , School of Medicine, J. W. Goethe-University , Frankfurt ,
Germany.

Preeclampsia is one of the leading causes of maternal and perinatal mortality and
morbidity and its pathogenesis is not fully understood. B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6),
a key regulator of B-lymphocyte development, is altered in preeclamptic
placentas. We show here that BCL6 is present in all 3 studied trophoblast cell
lines and it is predominantly expressed in trophoblastic HTR-8/SVneo cells
derived from a 1(st) trimester placenta, suggestive of its involvement in
trophoblast expansion in the early stage of placental development. BCL6 is
strongly stabilized upon stress stimulation. Inhibition of BCL6, by
administrating either small interfering RNA or a specific small molecule
inhibitor 79-6, reduces proliferation and induces apoptosis in trophoblastic
cells. Intriguingly, depletion of BCL6 in HTR-8/SVneo cells results in a mitotic 
arrest associated with mitotic defects in centrosome integrity, indicative of its
involvement in mitotic progression. Thus, like in haematopoietic cells and breast
cancer cells, BCL6 promotes proliferation and facilitates survival of
trophoblasts under stress situation. Further studies are required to decipher its
molecular roles in differentiation, migration and the fusion process of
trophoblasts. Whether increased BCL6 observed in preeclamptic placentas is one of
the causes or the consequences of preeclampsia warrants further investigations in
vivo and in vitro.

PMID: 27029530  [PubMed - in process]


2. Cancer Sci. 2016 Mar 30. doi: 10.1111/cas.12942. [Epub ahead of print]

MYC translocation and/or BCL2 protein expression are associated with poor
prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Kawamoto K(1,)(2), Miyoshi H(2), Yoshida N(2), Nakamura N(3), Ohshima K(2), Sone 
H(1), Takizawa J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine,
Niigata University, Niigata, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan. (3)Department of Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tokai University, Isehara, Japan.

Genomic alterations and protein expression levels have been established as
prognostic factors for survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL). In particular, double-hit DLBCL (DHL), which exhibits translocations in 
MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6, is known to be associated with a poor prognosis.
However, the clinical significance of gene alterations and protein expression
levels for MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 are unclear. In this study, we analyzed 61 adult
patients diagnosed with DLBCL without DHL, who were treated with rituximab,
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (R-CHOP) or
R-CHOP-like regimens. There were no differences in the distribution of MYC
expression rates among the different MYC gene statuses. In log-rank tests, MYC
translocation was a prognostic factor for overall survival (OS; P = 0.011),
whereas BCL2 and BCL6 translocation were not prognostic indicators (P = 0.999, P 
= 0.925, respectively). Although the expression levels of MYC and BCL6 were not
significantly associated with OS, the expression of BCL2 was a prognostic factor 
for OS (P = 0.027). Furthermore, copy number gains in the MYC, BCL2, and BCL6
genes did not affect OS. MYC translocation (hazard ratio [HR], 4.769; range,
1.518-14.98; P = 0.007) and BCL2 protein expression (HR, 3.072; range,
1.002-9.413; P = 0.049) were independent prognostic factors for survival in
multivariate analysis. In conclusion, MYC translocation and BCL2 expression may
need to be investigated at the initial diagnosis to predict prognosis in patients
with DLBCL. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27027803  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8273. [Epub ahead of print]

Bcl6 modulation of acute lymphoblastic leukemia response to chemotherapy.

Slone WL(1), Moses BS(1), Hare I(1,)(2), Evans R(1), Piktel D(1), Gibson
LF(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Alexander B. Osborn Hematopoietic Malignancy and Transplantation Program of
The WVU Cancer Institute, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Morgantown, WV, USA. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center,
West Virginia University School of Medicine, Morgantown, WV, USA.

The bone marrow niche has a significant impact on acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) cell phenotype. Of clinical relevance is the frequency with which quiescent
leukemic cells, in this niche, survive treatment and contribute to relapse. This 
study suggests that marrow microenvironment regulation of BCL6 in ALL is one
factor that may be involved in the transition between proliferative and quiescent
states of ALL cells. Utilizing ALL cell lines, and primary patient tumor cells we
observed that tumor cell BCL6 protein abundance is decreased in the presence of
primary human bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC) and osteoblasts (HOB). Chemical
inhibition, or shRNA knockdown, of BCL6 in ALL cells resulted in diminished ALL
proliferation. As many chemotherapy regimens require tumor cell proliferation for
optimal efficacy, we investigated the consequences of constitutive BCL6
expression in leukemic cells during co-culture with BMSC or HOB. Forced chronic
expression of BCL6 during co-culture with BMSC or HOB sensitized the tumor to
chemotherapy induced cell death. Combination treatment of caffeine, which
increases BCL6 expression in ALL cells, with chemotherapy extended the event free
survival of mice. These data suggest that BCL6 is one factor, modulated by
microenvironment derived cues that may contribute to regulation of ALL
therapeutic response.

PMID: 27015556  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2529. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of miR-155 promotes the proliferation and invasion of oral
squamous carcinoma cells by regulating BCL6/cyclin D2.

Zeng Q(1), Tao X(1), Huang F(2), Wu T(1), Wang J(1), Jiang X(1), Kuang Z(1),
Cheng B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510055, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Guanghua
School of Stomatology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510055, P.R. China.

Although microRNA-155 (miR-155) is known to play an important role in many
cancers, its expression and function in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) was
not fully understood. Thus, in the present study, we investigated the expression 
of miR-155 and also the role this miR plays in OSCC. We used the OSCC cell
line (CAL27) and paired tumor and non-tumor tissue samples from patients with
OSCC in order to detect the expression of miR-155. Cell proliferation, migration 
and invasion assays were then undertaken in order to determine the effect of
miR-155 on the biological behavior of CAL27 cells following transient
transfection with miR-155 mimic and antagomir. The regulatory effect of miR-155
on its target gene B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and downstream gene
cyclin D2 (CCND2) was also analyzed. We found that miR-155 expression in OSCC
cell and tumor tissues was significantly higher than that of the controls. We
noted that the miR-155 mimic enhanced CAL27 cell proliferation, migration and
invasion ability, downregulated BCL6 levels, and increased cyclin D2 expression. 
However, we noted that abrogating miR-155 with the miR-155 antagomir suppressed
CAL27 cell proliferation, migration and invasion, upregulated BCL6 and reduced
cyclin D2 expression. These results indicate that miR-155 plays a tumor-promoting
role in OSCC by regulating the BCL6/cyclin D2 axis.

PMID: 26986233  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Mar 17:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

A unique subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma primarily involving the bone
marrow, spleen, and liver, defined by fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission
tomography combined with computed tomography.

Iioka F(1), Honjo G(2), Misaki T(3), Toda Y(1), Izumi K(1), Kamoda Y(1), Nagai
Y(1), Akasaka T(1), Kitamura K(3), Nakagwa M(4), Fukutsuka K(4), Okumura A(4),
Ohno H(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Departments of Hematology, Tenri Hospital , Mishima, Tenri , Japan ; (2)b
Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Tenri Hospital , Mishima, Tenri , Japan ;
(3)c Department of Radioisotope Center, Tenri Hospital , Mishima, Tenri , Japan ;
(4)d Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Tenri Institute of Medical Research , Tenri ,
Japan.

We describe 10 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) confined to the
bone marrow (BM), spleen, and liver, as evidenced by the uniformly increased
uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) on positron emission tomography combined with 
computed tomography (PET/CT). Ages ranged from 56 to 87. All, but one patient
presented with 'B' symptoms, a poor performance status, and hepatosplenomegaly.
All patients showed cytopenia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase levels and were 
classified into the high-risk category of the International Prognostic Index
scoring. BM infiltration was diffuse, interstitial/intrasinusoidal, or mixed, and
all showed the nongerminal center B immunophenotype. Five patients had a
rearrangement involving 3q27/BCL6, while six had increased copies of MYC, BCL2,
or BCL6. All patients were initially treated with rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone, leading to complete responses in six 
out of eight evaluable patients. We propose BM, spleen, and liver-type DLBCL,
which is defined by the findings of FDG-PET/CT.

PMID: 26984373  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Management of Patients with MYC-Altered Lymphomas.

Landsburg DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Cancer Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center Blvd,
PCAM 2, South Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. daniel.landsburg@uphs.upenn.edu.

Patients diagnosed with non-Burkitt high-grade B cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas
demonstrating rearrangement in MYC, an oncogene promoting cellular proliferation,
frequently do not achieve long-term disease-free survival due to a suboptimal
response to standard front-line and salvage therapies. Double-hit lymphomas,
harboring rearrangements in MYC as well as BCL2 and/or BCL6, appear to carry a
particularly poor prognosis, although patients with this disease appear to
achieve better survival outcomes when treated with intensified chemotherapy.
Increased expression of MYC protein by immunohistochemistry as well as increased 
copy number or amplification of MYC may also be adverse pathologic features of
non-Burkitt high-grade B cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas, although the benefit of
treating these patients with intensified as opposed to standard dose chemotherapy
remains unclear. Recognition and proper management of patients with MYC-altered
lymphomas is crucial to improving patient outcomes.

PMID: 26983958  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Blood. 2016 Mar 16. pii: blood-2015-10-678706. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted Rho-associated kinase 2 (ROCK2) inhibition decreases clinical and immune
pathology of murine and human chronic GVHD through Stat3-dependent mechanism.

Flynn R(1), Paz K(1), Du J(1), Reichenbach DK(1), Taylor PA(1),
Panoskaltsis-Mortari A(1), Vulic A(2), Luznik L(2), MacDonald KK(3), Hill GR(3), 
Nyuydzefe MS(4), Weiss JM(4), Chen W(4), Trzeciak A(4), Serody JS(5), Aguilar
EG(6), Murphy WJ(6), Maillard I(7), Munn D(8), Koreth J(9), Cutler CS(9), Antin
JH(9), Ritz J(9), Waksal SD(4), Zanin-Zhorov A(4), Blazar BR(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of Minnesota, Masonic
Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Minneapolis, MN, United States;
(2)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Oncology, The
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States; (3)Department of
Immunology, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, QL, Australia;
(4)Kadmon Research Institute, New York, NY, United States; (5)Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States; (6)Department of Dermatology, School of
Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States; (7)Life
Sciences Institute and Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Hematology-Oncology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States;
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA,
United States; (9)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States.
(10)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of Minnesota,
Masonic Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Minneapolis, MN, United
States; blaza001@umn.edu.

Chronic Graft-versus-Host disease (cGVHD) remains a major complication following 
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. The discovery of novel therapeutics is
dependent upon assessment in pre-clinical murine models of cGVHD. Rho-associated 
kinase 2 (ROCK2) recently was shown to be implicated in regulation of IL-21 and
IL-17 secretion in mice and humans. Here, we report that the selective ROCK2
inhibitor KD025 effectively ameliorates cGVHD in multiple models: a full
MHC-mismatch model of multi-organ system cGVHD with bronchiolitis obliterans
syndrome as well as a minor MHC-mismatch model of sclerodermatous GVHD. Treatment
with KD025 resulted in normalization of pathogenic pulmonary function, which
correlates with a marked reduction of antibody and collagen deposition in the
lungs of treated mice to levels comparable to non-cGVHD controls. Spleens of mice
treated with KD025 had decreased frequency of T follicular helper cells and
increased frequency of T follicular regulatory cells, accompanied by a reduction 
in STAT3 and concurrent increase in STAT5 phosphorylation. The critical role of
STAT3 in this cGVHD model was confirmed by data showing that mice transplanted
with inducible STAT3 deficient T cells had pulmonary function comparable to the
healthy negative controls. The therapeutic potential of targeted ROCK2 inhibition
in the clinic was solidified further by human data demonstrating the KD025
inhibits the secretion of IL-21, IL-17, and IFN<U+03B3> along with decreasing
phosphorylated STAT3 and reduced protein expression of IRF4 and BCL6 in human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells purified from active cGVHD patients. Together 
these data highlight the potential of targeted ROCK2 inhibition for clinical
cGVHD therapy.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26983850  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. J Oncol Pract. 2016 Mar;12(3):232-8. doi: 10.1200/JOP.2015.009647.

A Clinician's Approach to Double-Hit Lymphoma: Identification, Evaluation, and
Management.

Staton AD(1), Cohen JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University, Atlanta, GA. (2)Emory University, Atlanta, GA
jonathon.cohen@emory.edu.

Double-hit lymphomas have concurrent rearrangements of CMYC and BCL2 or
occasionally BCL6. Although double-hit lymphomas are a part of the mature B-cell 
lymphoma lineage, they have an aggressive clinical course that is complicated by 
an extremely poor response to standard therapy for aggressive non-Hodgkin
lymphoma. Overall survival is short for many patients with double-hit lymphomas, 
which reinforces the importance of identifying appropriate therapies for these
patients. Fortunately, recent reports have demonstrated improved outcomes with
the use of intensive induction therapies. This article discusses the biology,
therapeutic considerations, treatment opinions, possible role of autologous
stem-cell transplant, and need for ongoing clinical trials for this subgroup of
patients with lymphoma.

Copyright © 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

PMID: 26962166  [PubMed - in process]


9. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2016 Jan-Mar;59(1):41-6. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.178220.

C-MYC and BCL2 translocation frequency in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas: A study
of 97 patients.

Akkaya B(1), Salim O, Akkaya H, Ozcan M, Yucel OK, Erdem R, Iltar U, Undar L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive non-Hodgkin
lymphoma with marked biologic heterogeneity. MYC and BCL2 rearrangements have
been reported in a proportion of DLBCLs, where they may be associated with an
adverse clinical outcome. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of
MYC and BCL2 translocations in DLBCL and assess the prognostic impact in DLBCL
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, we evaluated the expression patterns
of CD 10, BCL6, and MUM 1 by immunohistochemistry in 121 cases with DLBCL in
tissue microarray (TMA): 62 cases in germinal center B-cells (GCBs); and 59 cases
in activated B-cells (ABCs) of which 60 were females and 61 were males. MYC and
BCL2 rearrangements were investigated by interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridization on TMAs in 97 DLBCLs.
RESULT: MYC rearrangements were observed in 11 of 97 cases. There was no
association with other clinical features, including age, sex, and
nodal/extranodal disease. MYC rearrangement was associated with significantly
worse overall survival (P < 0.01). BCL2 rearrangements were observed in 14 of 97 
cases. There was no association with other clinical features including age and
sex. BCL2 rearrangement had a worse outcome (P < 0.01). MYC and BCL2
rearrangements were observed in 3 of 97 cases with the age of<U+200A> 53 (female), 53,
63 years old, respectively, died in 24, 18, and 35 months after the diagnosis.
Two cases had primary nodal and one case primary extranodal presentations. All
these patients had stage IV disease.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that C-MYC and BCL2 may contribute to aggressive
transformation, and more mechanism-based therapy should be explored. Targeted
therapies involving these rearrangements and its associated pathways may change
the fate of DLBCLs. Analysis of MYC gene rearrangement along with BCL2 is
critical in the identification of high-risk patients with poor prognosis.

PMID: 26960633  [PubMed - in process]


10. EMBO J. 2016 Mar 8. pii: e201591459. [Epub ahead of print]

The transcriptional coactivator Bob1 promotes the development of follicular T
helper cells via Bcl6.

Stauss D(1), Brunner C(2), Berberich-Siebelt F(3), Höpken UE(1), Lipp M(1),
Müller G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Genetics and Immunogenetics, Max-Delbrück-Center for
Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of Physiological Chemistry,
Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Ulm,
Ulm, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany. (4)Department of Tumor Genetics and Immunogenetics, Max-Delbrück-Center 
for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany g.mueller@mdc-berlin.de.

Follicular T helper (Tfh) cells are key regulators of the germinal center
reaction and long-term humoral immunity. Tfh cell differentiation requires the
sustained expression of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6; however, its
regulation in CD4(+) T cells is incompletely understood. Here, we report that the
transcriptional coactivator Bob1, encoded by the Pou2af1 gene, promotes Bcl6
expression and Tfh cell development. We found that Bob1 together with the octamer
transcription factors Oct1/Oct2 can directly bind to and transactivate the Bcl6
and Btla promoters. Mixed bone marrow chimeras revealed that Bob1 is required for
the expression of normal levels of Bcl6 and BTLA, thereby controlling the pool
size and composition of the Tfh compartment in a T cell-intrinsic manner. Our
data indicate that T cell-expressed Bob1 is directly involved in Tfh cell
differentiation and required for mounting normal T cell-dependent B-cell
responses.

© 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMID: 26957522  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Feb;20(4):664-72.

Identification of key genes involved in HER2-positive breast cancer.

Zhong BL(1), Bian LJ, Wang GM, Zhou YF, Chen YY, Peng F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Second People's Hospital of Guangdong
Province/Guangdong Provincial Emergency Hospital, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
kejingwangkjw@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: As an invasive cancer, breast cancer is the most common tumour in
women and is with high mortality. To study the mechanisms of HER2-positive breast
cancer, we analyzed microarray of GSE52194.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GSE52194 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus
including 5 HER2-positive breast cancer samples and 3 normal breast samples.
Using cuffdiff software, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially
expressed long non-coding RNAs (DE-lncRNAs) were screened. Functions of the DEGs 
were analyzed by Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses. Then,
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the DEGs was constructed using
Cytoscape and modules of the PPI network were screened by CFinder. Moreover,
lncRNA-DEG pairs were screened.
RESULTS: Total 209 lncRNA transcriptions were predicted, and 996 differentially
expressed transcriptions were screened. Besides, FOS had interaction
relationships with EGR1 and SOD2 separately in module E and F of the PPI network 
for the DEGs. Moreover, there were many lncRNA-DEG pairs (e.g.
TCONS_00003876-EGR1, TCONS_00003876-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-BCL6B, 
lnc-TEAD4-1:1-FOS and lnc-TEAD4-1:1-BCL6B), meanwhile, co-expressed DEGs of
TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and lnc-TEAD4-1:1 were enriched in p53 signaling
pathway, MAPK signaling pathway and cancer-related pathways, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: ANXA1, EGR1, BCL6, SOD2, FOS, TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and
lnc-TEAD4-1:1 might play a role in HER2-positive breast cancer.

PMID: 26957268  [PubMed - in process]


12. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 2. pii: S0304-3835(16)30125-2. doi:
10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.047. [Epub ahead of print]

The anti-proliferative effects of type I IFN involve STAT6-mediated regulation of
SP1 and BCL6.

Hsu YA(1), Huang CC(2), Kung YJ(3), Lin HJ(4), Chang CY(5), Lee KR(6), Wan L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; School of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan. Electronic address: krlee@mx.nthu.edu.tw. (7)School of Chinese Medicine, 
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Asia
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Gynecology, China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address: leiwan@mail.cmu.edu.tw.

Type I IFN-induced STAT6 has been shown to have anti-proliferative effects in
Daudi and B cells. IFN-sensitive (DS) and IFN-resistant (DR) subclones of Daudi
cells were used to study the role of STAT6 in the anti-proliferative activities. 
Type I IFN significantly increased STAT6 mRNA and protein expression in DS but
not DR cells. STAT6 knockdown significantly reduced the sensitivity to IFN in
both cell lines. The molecular targets and functional importance of IFN-activated
STAT6 were performed by chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip (ChIP-on-chip)
experiments in type I IFN-treated Daudi cells. Two target genes (Sp1 and BCL6)
were selected from the ChIP-on-chip data. IFN-induced STAT6 activation led to Sp1
upregulation and BCL6 downregulation in DS cells, with only minimal effects in DR
cells. siRNA inhibition of STAT6 expression resulted in decreased Sp1 and BCL6
mRNA and protein levels in both DS and DR cells. IFN treatment did not increase
Sp1 and BCL6 expression in a STAT2-deficient RST2 cell line, and this effect was 
mitigated by plasmid overexpression of STAT2, indicating that STAT2 is important 
for STAT6 activation. These results suggest that STAT6 plays an important role in
regulating Sp1 and BCL6 through STAT2 to exert the anti-proliferative effects of 
type I IFN.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26945968  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Allergy. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.1111/all.12869. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of STOML2 as a putative novel asthma risk gene associated with
IL6R.

Revez JA(1), Matheson MC(2), Hui J(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Baltic S(7); AAGC
collaborators, James A(8,)(9), Upham JW(10), Dharmage S(2), Thompson PJ(7),
Martin NG(1), Hopper JL(2), Ferreira MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. (2)Melbourne
School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia. (3)PathWest Laboratory Medicine of Western Australia (WA), Nedlands,
Australia. (4)School of Population Health, University of WA, Nedlands, Australia.
(5)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of WA, Nedlands,
Australia. (6)Busselton Population Medical Research Institute, Sir Charles
Gairdner Hospital, Perth, Australia. (7)Institute for Respiratory Health,
University of WA, Perth, Australia. (8)School of Medicine and Pharmacology,
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Australia. (9)Department of Pulmonary 
Physiology, West Australian Sleep Disorders Research Institute, Nedlands,
Australia. (10)School of Medicine, Translational Research Institute, The
University of Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Functional variants in the interleukin-6 receptor gene (IL6R) are
associated with asthma risk. We hypothesized that genes co-expressed with IL6R
might also be regulated by genetic polymorphisms that are associated with asthma 
risk. The aim of this study was to identify such genes.
METHODS: To identify genes whose expression was correlated with that of IL6R, we 
analyzed gene expression levels generated for 373 human lymphoblastoid cell lines
by the Geuvadis consortium, and for 38 hematopoietic cell types by the
Differentiation Map Portal (DMAP) project. Genes correlated with IL6R were then
screened for nearby single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were
significantly associated with both variation in gene expression levels (eSNPs)
and asthma risk.
RESULTS: We identified 90 genes with expression levels correlated with those of
IL6R and that also had a nearby eSNP associated with disease risk in a published 
asthma GWAS (N=20,776). For 16 (18%) genes, the association between the eSNP and 
asthma risk replicated with the same direction of effect in a further independent
published asthma GWAS (N=27,378). Amongst the top replicated associations
(FDR<0.05) were eSNPs for four known (IL18R1, IL18RAP, BCL6 and STAT6) and one
putative novel asthma risk gene, Stomatin-like protein 2 (STOML2). The expression
of STOML2 was negatively correlated with IL6R, while eSNPs that increased the
expression of STOML2 were associated with increased asthma risk.
CONCLUSION: The expression of STOML2, a gene that plays a key role in
mitochondrial function and T-cell activation, is associated with both IL-6
signaling and asthma risk. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26932604  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncol Res. 2016;23(3):137-46. doi: 10.3727/096504015X14500972666761.

Flow Cytometric Evaluation of Double/Triple Hit Lymphoma.

Roth CG(1), Gillespie-Twardy A, Marks S, Agha M, Raptis A, Hou JZ, Farah R, Lin
Y, Qian Y, Pantanowitz L, Boyiadzis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Hematopathology, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

"Double" or "triple" hit lymphomas (D/THL) with recurrent translocations
involving MYC/8q24 and BCL2/18q21 and/or BCL6/3q27 are characterized by a poor
prognosis, but their identification is hampered by the clinicopathologic overlap 
with other disease categories. Cases with circulating blastic-appearing cells may
initially cause concern for lymphoblastic leukemia a diagnostic dilemma, which
has not been well studied. There is only limited literature regarding the flow
cytometric (FC) D/THL phenotype and its clinical correlates. The FC features of
20 D/THL (11 BCL2(+)/MYC(+), 5 BCL6(+)/MYC(+), 4 BCL2(+)/BCL6(+)/MYC(+)) were
evaluated, compared to 20 B-lymphoblastic leukemias (B-LBL), and correlated with 
overall survival. Most (89%, 17/19) D/THL were CD10(+), 47% (9/19) lacked surface
light chain, and a significant subset underexpressed CD45 (47%, 9/19), CD20 (42% 
8/19), and/or CD19 (39%, 7/18), which did not vary by genetic subgroup. Compared 
to B-LBL, D/THL less frequently underexpressed CD45 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001) and CD20
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0004). Lower levels of BCL2 expression were noted in the BCL6(+)/MYC(+)
and BCL2(+)/BCL6(+)/MYC(+) subgroups versus BCL2(+)/MYC(+) cases (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0014). Of
the flow cytometric parameters assessed, dim CD45 expression correlated with
inferior survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). Although there is some overlap with B-LBL, D/THL
demonstrates a characteristic immunophenotype which may have prognostic
significance and warrants further investigation.

PMID: 26931436  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Immunol. 2016 Apr 1;196(7):3159-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502400. Epub 2016
Feb 29.

POU2AF1 Functions in the Human Airway Epithelium To Regulate Expression of Host
Defense Genes.

Zhou H(1), Brekman A(2), Zuo WL(2), Ou X(2), Shaykhiev R(2), Agosto-Perez FJ(2), 
Wang R(2), Walters MS(2), Salit J(2), Strulovici-Barel Y(2), Staudt MR(2), Kaner 
RJ(3), Mezey JG(4), Crystal RG(5), Wang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Sichuan 610041, China; Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065; (2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065; (3)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065; Division of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
NY 10065; and. (4)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
New York, NY 10065; Department of Biological Statistics and Computational
Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, NY 14853. (5)Department of Genetic
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065; Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065; and geneticmedicine@med.cornell.edu.

In the process of seeking novel lung host defense regulators by analyzing
genome-wide RNA sequence data from normal human airway epithelium, we detected
expression of POU domain class 2-associating factor 1 (POU2AF1), a known
transcription cofactor previously thought to be expressed only in lymphocytes.
Lymphocyte contamination of human airway epithelial samples obtained by
bronchoscopy and brushing was excluded by immunohistochemistry staining, the
observation of upregulation of POU2AF1 in purified airway basal stem/progenitor
cells undergoing differentiation, and analysis of differentiating single basal
cell clones. Lentivirus-mediated upregulation of POU2AF1 in airway basal cells
induced upregulation of host defense genes, including MX1, IFIT3, IFITM, and
known POU2AF1 downstream genes HLA-DRA, ID2, ID3, IL6, and BCL6. Interestingly,
expression of these genes paralleled changes of POU2AF1 expression during airway 
epithelium differentiation in vitro, suggesting POU2AF1 helps to maintain a host 
defense tone even in pathogen-free condition. Cigarette smoke, a known risk
factor for airway infection, suppressed POU2AF1 expression both in vivo in humans
and in vitro in human airway epithelial cultures, accompanied by deregulation of 
POU2AF1 downstream genes. Finally, enhancing POU2AF1 expression in human airway
epithelium attenuated the suppression of host defense genes by smoking. Together,
these findings suggest a novel function of POU2AF1 as a potential regulator of
host defense genes in the human airway epithelium.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4799774 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26927796  [PubMed - in process]


16. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7495. [Epub ahead of print]

Stratifying diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients treated with
chemoimmunotherapy: GCB/non-GCB by immunohistochemistry is still a robust and
feasible marker.

Batlle-López A(1), González de Villambrosía S(1), Mazorra F(1), Malatxeberria
S(1), Sáez A(2), Montalban C(3), Sánchez L(4), Garcia JF(5), González-Barca E(6),
López A(7), Ruiz-Marcellan MC(7), Mollejo M(8), Grande C(9), Richards KL(10), Hsi
ED(11), Tzankov A(12), Visco C(13), Xu-Monette ZY(14), Cao X(14), Young KH(14),
Angel Piris M(1), Conde E(1), Montes-Moreno S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Haematology and Pathology, Hospital Marques de Valdecilla, and 
IDIVAL, Santander, Spain. (2)Biobanco del Sistema Sanitario Público de Andalucía,
Spain. (3)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain. (4)Biotechnology Programme,
Histology and Immunohistochemistry Core Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (5)Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Madrid,
Spain. (6)Department of Haematology, Hospital de Bellvitge (ICOIRO), Spain.
(7)Departments of Pathology and Haematology, Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Spain.
(8)Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain. (9)Hematology, Hospital 12 de
Octubre, Madrid, Spain. (10)Department of Hematology-Oncology, University of
North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (11)Department of
Clinical Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (12)University
Hospital, Basel, Switzerland. (13)Department of Hematology, San Bortolo Hospital,
Vicenza, Italy. (14)Department of Hematopathology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous group of aggressive
lymphomas that can be classified into three molecular subtypes by gene expression
profiling (GEP): GCB, ABC and unclassified. Immunohistochemistry-based cell of
origin (COO) classification, as a surrogate for GEP, using three available
immunohistochemical algorithms was evaluated in TMA-arranged tissue samples from 
297 patients with de novo DLBCL treated by chemoimmunotherapy (R-CHOP and
R-CHOP-like regimens). Additionally, the prognostic impacts of MYC, BCL2, IRF4
and BCL6 abnormalities detected by FISH, the relationship between the
immunohistochemical COO classification and the immunohistochemical expression of 
MYC, BCL2 and pSTAT3 proteins and clinical data were evaluated.In our series,
non-GCB DLBCL patients had significantly worse progression-free survival (PFS)
and overall survival (OS), as calculated using the Choi, Visco-Young and Hans
algorithms, indicating that any of these algorithms would be appropriate for
identifying patients who require alternative therapies to R-CHOP. Whilst MYC
abnormalities had no impact on clinical outcome in the non-GCB subtype, those
patients with isolated MYC rearrangements and a GCB-DLBCL phenotype had worse PFS
and therefore might benefit from novel treatment approaches.

PMID: 26910115  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Annu Rev Immunol. 2016 Feb 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Follicular Helper T Cells.

Vinuesa CG(1), Linterman MA(2), Yu D(3), MacLennan IC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia; email:
Carola.Vinuesa@anu.edu.au. (2)Lymphocyte Signalling and Development Institute
Strategic Programme, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom;
email: michelle.linterman@babraham.ac.uk. (3)Laboratory for Molecular
Immunomodulation, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Center
for Inflammatory Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800,
Australia; email: di.yu@monash.edu. (4)School of Immunity and Infection,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Although T cell help for B cells was described several decades ago, it was the
identification of CXCR5 expression by B follicular helper T (Tfh) cells and the
subsequent discovery of their dependence on BCL6, that led to the recognition of 
Tfh cells as an independent helper subset and accelerated the pace of discovery. 
More than 20 transcription factors, together with RNAbinding proteins and
microRNAs, control the expression of chemotactic receptors and molecules
important for the function and homeostasis of Tfh cells. Tfh cells prime B cells 
to initiate extrafollicular and germinal center antibody responses and are
crucial for affinity maturation and maintenance of humoral memory. In addition to
the roles that Tfh cells have in antimicrobial defense, cancer, and as HIV
reservoirs, regulation of these cells is critical to prevent autoimmunity. The
realization that follicular T cells are heterogeneous, comprising helper and
regulatory subsets, has raised questions regarding a possible division of labor
in germinal center B cell selection and elimination. Expected final online
publication date for the Annual Review of Immunology Volume 34 is May 20, 2016.
Please see http://www.annualreviews.org/catalog/pubdates.aspx for revised
estimates.

PMID: 26907215  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 22;11(2):e0149146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149146.
eCollection 2016.

Bcl6 Is Required for Somatic Hypermutation and Gene Conversion in Chicken DT40
Cells.

Williams AM(1), Maman Y(1), Alinikula J(1), Schatz DG(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy 
Chase, Maryland, United States of America.

The activation induced cytosine deaminase (AID) mediates diversification of B
cell immunoglobulin genes by the three distinct yet related processes of somatic 
hypermutation (SHM), class switch recombination (CSR), and gene conversion (GCV).
SHM occurs in germinal center B cells, and the transcription factor Bcl6 is a key
regulator of the germinal center B cell gene expression program, including
expression of AID. To test the hypothesis that Bcl6 function is important for the
process of SHM, we compared WT chicken DT40 B cells, which constitutively perform
SHM/GCV, to their Bcl6-deficient counterparts. We found that Bcl6-deficient DT40 
cells were unable to perform SHM and GCV despite enforced high level expression
of AID and substantial levels of AID in the nucleus of the cells. To gain
mechanistic insight into the GCV/SHM dependency on Bcl6, transcriptional features
of a highly expressed SHM target gene were analyzed in Bcl6-sufficient and
-deficient DT40 cells. No defect was observed in the accumulation of single
stranded DNA in the target gene as a result of Bcl6 deficiency. In contrast,
association of Spt5, an RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and AID binding factor, was
strongly reduced at the target gene body relative to the transcription start site
in Bcl6-deficient cells as compared to WT cells. However, partial reconstitution 
of Bcl6 function substantially reconstituted Spt5 association with the target
gene body but did not restore detectable SHM. Our observations suggest that in
the absence of Bcl6, Spt5 fails to associate efficiently with Pol II at SHM
targets, perhaps precluding robust AID action on the SHM target DNA. Our data
also suggest, however, that Spt5 binding is not sufficient for SHM of a target
gene even in DT40 cells with strong expression of AID.

PMCID: PMC4762950
PMID: 26900682  [PubMed - in process]


19. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Feb 18:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Double- and triple-hit lymphomas can present with features suggestive of
immaturity, including TdT expression, and create diagnostic challenges.

Moench L(1), Sachs Z(2), Aasen G(1), Dolan M(1), Dayton V(1), Courville EL(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology , University of Minnesota , 
Minneapolis , MN , USA ; (2)b Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology,
Oncology, and Transplantation , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , MN , USA.

Double- and triple-hit lymphomas (DHL/THL) are aggressive B-cell neoplasms
characterized by translocation of MYC with concurrent BCL2 and/or BCL6
translocation. In this retrospective study from one institution, we report
clinicopathologic features of 13 cases (9 DHL/4 THL). The median age was 59 years
(range 30-74) and patients included eight females and five males. Presentation
included enlarging lymphadenopathy/masses (11 patients) and abnormal peripheral
blood findings (2 patients). Features which raised the differential of an
immature neoplasm included terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase positivity (four
cases, two THL/two DHL); dim CD45 expression (seven cases), lack of CD20 (two
cases), or lack of surface immunoglobulin light chain (three cases) by flow
cytometry; and blastoid morphology (two cases). We conclude that expression of
TdT in a B-cell lymphoma with mature features or expression of surface light
chain in a case otherwise suggestive of B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma should 
prompt an expedited evaluation for DHL/THL.

PMID: 26892631  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Feb 17. doi: 10.1002/eji.201546094. [Epub ahead of print]

Follicular regulatory T cells repress cytokine production by follicular helper T 
cells and optimize IgG responses in mice.

Wu H(1), Chen Y(2), Liu H(1), Xu LL(1), Teuscher P(1), Wang S(2), Lu S(2), Dent
AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells provide crucial help to germinal center B (GCB)
cells for proper antibody production, and a specialized subset of regulatory T
cells, follicular regulatory T (Tfr) cells, modulate this process. However
Tfr-cell function in the GC is not well understood. Here, we define Tfr cells as 
a CD4(+) Foxp3(+) CXCR5(hi) PD-1(hi) CD25(low) TIGIT(high) T-cell population.
Furthermore, we have used a novel mouse model ("Bcl6FC") to delete the Bcl6 gene 
in Foxp3(+) T cells and thus specifically deplete Tfr cells. Following
immunization, Bcl6FC mice develop normal Tfh- and GCB-cell populations. However, 
Bcl6FC mice produce altered antigen-specific antibody responses, with reduced
titers of IgG and significantly increased IgA. Bcl6FC mice also developed IgG
antibodies with significantly decreased avidity to antigen in an HIV-1 gp120
"prime-boost" vaccine model. In an autoimmune lupus model, we observed strongly
elevated anti-DNA IgA titers in Bcl6FC mice. Additionally, Tfh cells from Bcl6FC 
mice consistently produce higher levels of Interferon-<U+03B3>, IL-10 and IL-21. Loss of
Tfr cells therefore leads to highly abnormal Tfh-cell and GCB-cell responses.
Overall, our study has uncovered unique regulatory roles for Tfr cells in the GC 
response. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26887860  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 15;16(1):103. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2154-z.

BCORL1 is an independent prognostic marker and contributes to cell migration and 
invasion in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yin G(1), Liu Z(2), Wang Y(3), Dou C(4), Li C(5), Yang W(6), Yao Y(7), Liu Q(8), 
Tu K(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West Road, Xi'an, 710061, China.
yinguozhi2007@126.com. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West Road, Xi'an, 
710061, China. liuzhikui.1234@163.com. (3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery,
the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West
Road, Xi'an, 710061, China. wangyufeng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn. (4)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, No.277 Yanta West Road, Xi'an, 710061, China. dcwtmac@sina.cn.
(5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West Road, Xi'an, 710061, China.
qixinlichao@163.com. (6)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West Road, Xi'an, 710061,
China. drbobyang@163.com. (7)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West Road, Xi'an, 
710061, China. yaoyingmin@sina.com. (8)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta West Road,
Xi'an, 710061, China. liuqingguang@vip.sina.com. (9)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No.277 Yanta
West Road, Xi'an, 710061, China. tks0912@foxmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The deregulation of E-cadherin has been considered as a leading cause
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) metastasis. BCL6 corepressor-like 1 (BCORL1) is
a transcriptional corepressor and contributes to the repression of E-cadherin.
However, the clinical significance of BCORL1 and its role in the metastasis of
HCC remain unknown.
METHODS: Differentially expressed BCORL1 between HCC and matched tumor-adjacent
tissues, HCC cell lines and normal hepatic cell line were detected by Western
blot. The expression of BCORL1 was altered by siRNAs or lentivirus-mediated
vectors. Transwell assays were performed to determine HCC cell invasion and
migration.
RESULTS: Increased expression of BCORL1 protein was detected in HCC specimens and
cell lines. Clinical association analysis showed that BCORL1 protein was
expressed at significant higher levels in HCC patients with multiple tumor nodes,
venous infiltration and advanced TNM tumor stage. Survival analysis indicated
that high expression of BCORL1 protein conferred shorter overall survival (OS)
and recurrence-free survival (RFS) of HCC patients. Multivariate Cox regression
analysis disclosed that BCORL1 expression was an independent prognostic marker
for predicting survival of HCC patients. Our in vitro studies demonstrated that
BCORL1 prominently promoted HCC cell migration and invasion. Otherwise, an
inverse correlation between BCORL1 and E-cadherin expression was observed in HCC 
tissues. BCORL1 inversely regulated E-cadherin abundance and subsequently
facilitated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in HCC cells. Notably, the
effect of BCORL1 knockdown on HCC cells was abrogated by E-cadherin silencing.
CONCLUSIONS: BCORL1 may be a novel prognostic factor and promotes cell migration 
and invasion through E-cadherin repression-induced EMT in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4754820
PMID: 26879601  [PubMed - in process]


22. Aging (Albany NY). 2016 Feb;8(2):345-65.

p63 expression confers significantly better survival outcomes in high-risk
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and demonstrates p53-like and p53-independent tumor
suppressor function.

Xu-Monette ZY(1), Zhang S(2), Li X(1), Manyam GC(3), Wang XX(1), Xia Y(1), Visco 
C(4), Tzankov A(5), Zhang L(3), Montes-Moreno S(6), Dybkaer K(7), Chiu A(8),
Orazi A(9), Zu Y(10), Bhagat G(11), Richards KL(12), Hsi ED(13), Choi WW(14), van
Krieken JH(15), Huh J(16), Ponzoni M(17), Ferreri AJ(17), Zhao X(18), Møller
MB(19), Parsons BM(20), Winter JN(21), Piris MA(6), Medeiros LJ(1), Young
KH(1,)(22).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)University of Indiana School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (3)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (4)San Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza, Italy. (5)University Hospital, Basel,
Switzerland. (6)Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain.
(7)Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (8)Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (9)Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (10)The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (11)Columbia University Medical Center and New York Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, NY 10032, USA. (12)University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27513, USA. (13)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, 
USA. (14)University of Hong Kong Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, Hong Kong,
China. (15)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(16)Asan Medical Center, Ulsan University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(17)San Raffaele H. Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. (18)Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Zhejiang, China. (19)Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark. (20)Gundersen Medical Foundation, La Crosse, WI 54601, USA. (21)Feinberg
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (22)The
University of Texas School of Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The role of p53 family member p63 in oncogenesis is the subject of controversy.
Limited research has been done on the clinical implications of p63 expression in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). In this study, we assessed p63 expression 
in de novo DLBCL samples (n=795) by immunohistochemistry with a
pan-p63-monoclonal antibody and correlated it with other clinicopathologic
factors and clinical outcomes. p63 expression was observed in 42.5% of DLBCL, did
not correlate with p53 levels, but correlated with p21, MDM2, p16INK4A, Ki-67,
Bcl-6, IRF4/MUM-1 and CD30 expression, REL gains, and BCL6 translocation. p63 was
an independent favorable prognostic factor in DLBCL, which was most significant
in patients with International Prognostic Index (IPI) >2, and in
activated-B-cell-like DLBCL patients with wide- type TP53. The prognostic impact 
in germinal-center-B-cell-like DLBCL was not apparent, which was likely due to
the association of p63 expression with high-risk IPI, and potential presence of
<U+2206>Np63 isoform in TP63 rearranged patients (a mere speculation). Gene expression
profiling suggested that p63 has both overlapping and distinct functions compared
with p53, and that p63 and mutated p53 antagonize each other. In summary, p63 has
p53-like and p53-independent functions and favorable prognostic impact, however
this protective effect can be abolished by TP53 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4789587
PMID: 26878872  [PubMed - in process]


23. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Jan;37(1):30-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2016.01.006.

[Expression and prognostic value of CARD11 in diffuse large B cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao DQ(1), Li DM, Zhong DR, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the CARD11 expression and its prognostic value in diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
METHODS: This retrospective study included previously untreated patients
diagnosed with DLBCL from January 2007 to December 2012. Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded blocks of these patients were collected. Tissue microarray was 
built and expression of CARD11 was examined immunohistochemically. Subtype of
DLBCL was determined by Hans algorithm (CD10, BCL6, MUM1). The pattern of CARD11 
was further studied and their correlation with outcome was analyzed.
RESULTS: 79 patients with DLBCL were enrolled and two reactive lymph nodes were
used as control. The positive rate of high CARD11 expression in DLBCL was 65.33%,
which showed no significant associations with patients' characteristics. Positive
CARD11 expression was associated with an inferior event free survival (EFS)(2-
year EFS: 52.03%vs 86.12%,P=0.036). Even in patients with a high international
prognostic index (IPI, 3-5 points), this difference still remained significant
(Median EFS not reached vs 557 days,P=0.033).
CONCLUSION: DLBCL patients with high CARD11 expression had a shorter EFS compared
with low level of CARD11. This difference remained significant when patients were
in high IPI (3-5 points), which might indicate the value of CARD11 in
stratification of high-risk DLBCL patients.

PMID: 26876250  [PubMed - in process]


24. Cell Rep. 2016 Feb 23;14(7):1735-47. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.038. Epub 2016
Feb 11.

Genome-wide Analysis Identifies Bcl6-Controlled Regulatory Networks during T
Follicular Helper Cell Differentiation.

Liu X(1), Lu H(2), Chen T(3), Nallaparaju KC(4), Yan X(5), Tanaka S(6), Ichiyama 
K(4), Zhang X(7), Zhang L(8), Wen X(3), Tian Q(5), Bian XW(7), Jin W(2), Wei
L(9), Dong C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua University Institute for Immunology and School of Medicine, Beijing
100084, China; Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (2)Tsinghua
University Institute for Immunology and School of Medicine, Beijing 100084,
China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China. (4)Department of Immunology, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA. (5)Institute for Systems Biology,
Seattle, WA 98103, USA. (6)Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (7)Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Center,
Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.
(8)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA. (9)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.
Electronic address: weil9@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (10)Tsinghua University Institute for
Immunology and School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address:
chendong@tsinghua.edu.cn.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cell is a unique T cell subset specialized in promoting
humoral immunity. B-cell lymphoma 6 protein (Bcl6) has been identified as
an obligatory transcription factor in Tfh cells; however, the molecular mechanism
underlying Bcl6 function remains largely unknown. Here, we defined Bcl6 target
genes in Tfh cells by analyzing genome-wide Bcl6 occupancy together with
transcriptome profiling. With consensus sequences being different from those
in Th9, B cells, and macrophages, Bcl6 binding in Tfh cell was closely associated
with a decrease in 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). Importantly, Bcl6 promoted Tfh
cell differentiation through antagonizing IL-7R (CD127)/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) 5 axis; deletion of the Bcl6 gene in T cells
resulted in enhanced IL-7R-STAT5 signaling and substantial expansion of CD127(hi)
non-Tfh cells. Thus, our study systemically examines Bcl6-controlled regulatory
networks and provides important insights into Bcl6's biological functions in Tfh 
cells.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876184  [PubMed - in process]


25. Cancer Med. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.1002/cam4.650. [Epub ahead of print]

Machine learning-based classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients
by eight gene expression profiles.

Zhao S(1,)(2,)(3), Dong X(1,)(2), Shen W(1,)(2), Ye Z(1,)(2), Xiang R(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Nankai
University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin, 300071, China. (2)Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, Nankai University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin, 300071, China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Neurovascular Regulation,
Tianjin, 300071, China.

Gene expression profiling (GEP) had divided the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) into molecular subgroups: germinal center B-cell like (GCB), activated
B-cell like (ABC), and unclassified (UC) subtype. However, this classification
with prognostic significance was not applied into clinical practice since there
were more than 1000 genes to detect and interpreting was difficult. To classify
cancer samples validly, eight significant genes (MYBL1, LMO2, BCL6, MME, IRF4,
NFKBIZ, PDE4B, and SLA) were selected in 414 patients treated with CHOP/R-CHOP
chemotherapy from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data sets. Cutoffs for each gene 
were obtained using receiver-operating characteristic curves (ROC) new model
based on the support vector machine (SVM) estimated the probability of membership
into one of two subgroups: GCB and Non-GCB (ABC and UC). Furtherly, multivariate 
analysis validated the model in another two cohorts including 855 cases in all.
As a result, patients in the training and validated cohorts were stratified into 
two subgroups with 94.0%, 91.0%, and 94.4% concordance with GEP, respectively.
Patients with Non-GCB subtype had significantly poorer outcomes than that with
GCB subtype, which agreed with the prognostic power of GEP classification.
Moreover, the similar prognosis received in the low (0-2) and high (3-5) IPI
scores group demonstrated that the new model was independent of IPI as well as
GEP method. In conclusion, our new model could stratify DLBCL patients with
CHOP/R-CHOP regimen matching GEP subtypes effectively.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26869285  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Cancer Immunol Res. 2016 Apr;4(4):337-44. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0161.
Epub 2016 Feb 9.

A Critical Role of miR-144 in Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma Proliferation and
Invasion.

Wang H(1), Wang A(1), Hu Z(1), Xu X(1), Liu Z(2), Wang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University,
Weifang, Shandong, China. (2)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Hematology, 
Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong, China.
zhanju_w@126.com.

MicroRNAs are endogenous noncoding RNAs that play important roles in a wide
variety of biologic processes such as apoptosis, development, aging, and
tumorigenesis. The B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) transcriptional repressor has emerged
as a critical therapeutic target in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL), but
the mechanisms regulating BCL6 are still unclear. In the current study, we
screened the microRNA expression profiles in DLBCL specimens and cell lines by
qRT-PCR and found that the expression of miR-144 was significantly downregulated 
in DLBCL tissues and cell lines and negatively correlated with BCL6 expression.
We further demonstrated that BCL6 was the direct target gene of miR-144, and
miR-144 suppressed the expression of BCL6 via binding the 3'untranslated region
ofBCL6mRNA. Biologically, forced expression of miR-144 significantly attenuated
cell proliferation and invasion of OCI-Ly3 cellsin vitro, and the
tumor-suppressor effect of miR-144 was also confirmed using a xenograft mouse
modelin vivo Taken together, our results reveal that miR-144 regulates BCL6 in
DLBCL and provide a rationale for developing strategies that target miR-144 as a 
therapeutic intervention for DLBCL.Cancer Immunol Res; 4(4); 337-44. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26865454  [PubMed - in process]


27. Immunol Rev. 2016 Mar;270(1):65-77. doi: 10.1111/imr.12395.

Stable long-term cultures of self-renewing B cells and their applications.

Kwakkenbos MJ(1), van Helden PM(1), Beaumont T(1), Spits H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)AIMM Therapeutics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Monoclonal antibodies are essential therapeutics and diagnostics in a large
number of diseases. Moreover, they are essential tools in all sectors of life
sciences. Although the great majority of monoclonal antibodies currently in use
are of mouse origin, the use of human B cells to generate monoclonal antibodies
is increasing as new techniques to tap the human B cell repertoire are rapidly
emerging. Cloned lines of immortalized human B cells are ideal sources of
monoclonal antibodies. In this review, we summarize our studies to the regulation
of the replicative life span, differentiation, and maturation of B cells that led
to the development of a platform that uses immortalization of human B cells by in
vitro genetic modification for antibody development. We describe a number of
human antibodies that were isolated using this platform and the application of
the technique in other species. We also discuss the use of immortalized B cells
as antigen-presenting cells for the discovery of tumor neoantigens.

© 2016 The Authors. Immunological Reviews Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4755196
PMID: 26864105  [PubMed - in process]


28. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2016 Feb 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression Pattern of the BCL6 and ITM2B Proteins in Normal Human Brains and in
Alzheimer Disease.

Baron BW(1), Pytel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

We reported that the integral membrane 2B gene (ITM2B, also called BRI2) is a
target of BCL6 repression in lymphomas. Molecular alterations in ITM2B are
associated with 2 neurodegenerative diseases, Familial British and Danish
dementia, and dysregulation of ITM2B function has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD). Although ITM2B expression has been
studied, the distribution of BCL6 in human brain has not been described. Our goal
is to analyze BCL6 and ITM2B localization in normal human brains and in AD by
immunohistochemistry to understand their relationship. We found that, in general,
they have a reciprocal relationship. BCL6 expression is present in isolated
cortical neurons, granule cells in the cerebellum, scattered glial cells, and in 
some cells of the ependyma and choroid plexus. ITM2B is expressed in most
cortical neurons, neurons of the hippocampus and dentate nucleus, cerebellar
Purkinje and granule cells, and (newly described here) in focal neurons in the
basal ganglia, many neurons of the thalamus and brainstem, many cells in the
ependyma and choroid plexus, and in the smooth muscle of blood vessels. ITM2B
expression is prominent in plaques in AD-containing dystrophic neurites but
absent in neurofibrillary tangles; BCL6 expression is absent in neurofibrillary
tangles and in the nuclei of cells associated with plaques in AD. It is essential
to understand the localization of BCL6 and ITM2B in the brain before considering 
manipulation of their expression as a potential therapeutic tool.

PMID: 26862951  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2016;57(1):9-14. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.57.9.

Immunodeficiency-associated Burkitt lymphoma developed in a patient receiving a
long-term methotrexate therapy for rheumatoid arthritis.

Katsuragi T(1), Iwashige A, Tsukada J.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, University of Occupational and Environmental Health.

An increased risk of lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD) has been demonstrated in
patients treated with methotrexate (MTX) for rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The role 
of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been discussed in the pathogenesis of
immunodeficiency-associated LPDs. We herein present a RA patient, who developed
Burkitt lymphoma during MTX treatment. The patient was a 61-year-old Japanese
female with a 10-year history of weekly MTX therapy for RA. She presented with a 
one-month history of submandibular lymph node swelling and fever. Remarkable
increases in serum lactate dehydrogenase and blood EBV DNA were observed.
Serology for HIV was negative. Biopsy specimens demonstrated diffuse
proliferation of medium-sized lymphoid cells. The cells were positive for CD10,
CD20 and BCL6, and negative for BCL2, MUM1, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
and CD34. The MIB-1 index was almost 100%. EBV in the tumor cells was identified 
by using EBV-encoded RNA in situ hybridization. A chromosomal translocation
t(8;14) was found and further confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
Her condition improved following discontinuation of MTX and initiation of
prednisolone. After three cycles of a dose-reduced CHOP-like regimen,
chemotherapy was discontinued due to severe complications. However, there has
been no sign of recurrence for six years to date without additional intensive
chemotherapy.

PMID: 26861097  [PubMed - in process]


30. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 9;6:20465. doi: 10.1038/srep20465.

The distinct clinical features and prognosis of the CD10(+)MUM1(+) and
CD10(-)Bcl6(-)MUM1(-) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Lu TX(1,)(2), Miao Y(1), Wu JZ(1), Gong QX(3), Liang JH(1), Wang Z(3), Wang L(1),
Fan L(1), Hua D(2), Chen YY(1), Xu W(1), Zhang ZH(3), Li JY(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of
Oncology, the Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214062, Jiangsu
Province, China. (3)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center For Cancer Personalized Medicine, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

Using an immunohistochemistry (IHC) based method, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) can be classified into germinal center B-cell (GCB) and non-GCB subtypes.
However, the prognostic value of Hans algorithm was contradictory in the
literature. Using IHC and fluorescence in situ hybridization, we analyzed the
antibodies applied in Hans algorithm and other genetic factors in 601 DLBCL
patients and prognostic value of Hans algorithm in 306 cases who were treated
with chemoimmunotherapy. The results showed that patients with GCB subtype have
better overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) than non-GCB
cases. However, to some extent, double positive (CD10(+)MUM1(+), DP) and triple
negative (CD10(-)Bcl6(-)MUM(-), TN) showed different clinical characteristics and
prognosis to others that were assigned to the same cell-of-origin group. The DP
group showed similar OS (median OS: both not reached, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.3650) and PFS (median
PFS: 47.0 vs. 32.7 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0878) with the non-GCB group while the TN group 
showed similar OS (median OS: both not reached, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.9278) and PFS (median PFS: 
both not reached, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.9420) with the GCB group. In conclusion, Recognition of
specific entities in Hans algorithm could help us to accurately predict outcome
of the patients and choose the best clinical management for them.

PMCID: PMC4746587
PMID: 26857366  [PubMed - in process]


31. Mol Immunol. 2016 Mar;71:54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.01.011. Epub 2016 Feb 
4.

Pre-existing CD19-independent GL7(-) Breg cells are expanded during inflammation 
and in mice with lupus-like disease.

Wang X(1), Wei Y(2), Xiao H(1), Liu X(3), Zhang Y(4), Han G(1), Chen G(1), Hou
C(1), Zhang L(5), Ma N(6), Shen B(1), Li Y(1), Egwuagu CE(7), Wang R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850,
China. (2)Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing 
100850, China; Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou 310013, China. (3)Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100850, China; Department of Nephrology, The 307th Hospital of 
Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100850, China. (4)Laboratory of
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850, China; College
of Pharmacy, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China. (5)Department of
Dermatology, Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China. (6)Department of Rheumatology, First hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun 130021, China. (7)Molecular Immunology Section, Laboratory of
Immunology, National Eye Institute (NEI), National Institutes of Health (NIH),
Bethesda, MD 20892-1857, USA. Electronic address: egwuaguc@nei.nih.gov.
(8)Laboratory of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850,
China. Electronic address: wang_renxi@yahoo.com.

Interleukin 10 (IL-10)-producing regulatory B-cells (Bregs) suppress inflammatory
responses that mediate autoimmune diseases. However, it is unknown whether Bregs 
derive from a pre-existing dedicated B-cell lineage or if any B-cell can
differentiate into Bregs in response to BCR or TLR activation. GL7(+) B-cells are
antigen-experienced differentiated B-cells while GL7(-/lo) are at an early stage 
of B-cell differentiation. While both GL7(-/lo) and GL7(+) B cells can produce
IL-10, differentiation of GL7(-) B-cells into Bregs does not require CD19- or
Bcl6-induced signals, suggesting that BCR-induced proliferation or Ig
class-switching is not necessary for generation of Breg cells. Of particular
importance, we show that GL7(-) Breg cells are dramatically expanded in
lupus-like mice and GL7(-) Bregs suppressed inflammatory responses in lupus-like 
mice by inducing expansion of Foxp3(+)Treg cells. Taken together, these results
suggest that pre-existing GL7(-)IL-10(+) cells are expanded during inflammation, 
differentiate into GL7(+) Bregs and contribute to immune-regulation in lupus-like
mice.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26852110  [PubMed - in process]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 26;471(1):82-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.175. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

MicroRNA-187-3p mitigates non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) development through 
down-regulation of BCL6.

Sun C(1), Li S(2), Yang C(1), Xi Y(1), Wang L(1), Zhang F(1), Li D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR China. (2)Department of Occupational and
Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR China;
Wuhan Hospital for the Prevention and Treatment of Occupational Diseases, 430071 
Wuhan, PR China. (3)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School
of Public Health, Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR China. Electronic address:
lodjlwhu@sina.com.

Hsa-microRNA-187-3p (miR-187-3p) has recently been discovered having anticancer
efficacy in different organs. However, the role of miR-187-3p on non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) is still ambiguous. In this study, we investigated the role
of miR-187-3p on the development of NSCLC. The results indicated that miR-187-3p 
was significantly down-regulated in primary tumor tissues and very low levels
were found in NSCLC cell lines. Ectopic expression of miR-187-3p in NSCLC cell
lines significantly suppressed cell growth as evidenced by cell viability assay
and colony formation assay, through inhibition of BCL6. In addition, miR-187-3p
induced apoptosis, as indicated by concomitantly with up-regulation of the
activities of caspase-3 and caspase-7, and inhibited cellular migration and
invasiveness through inhibition of BCL6. Further, oncogene BCL6 was revealed to
be a putative target of miR-187-3p, which was inversely correlated with
miR-187-3p expression in NSCLC. Taken together, our results demonstrated that
miR-187-3p played a pivotal role on NSCLC through inhibiting cell proliferation, 
migration, invasion, and promoting apoptosis by targeting oncogenic BCL6.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26845350  [PubMed - in process]


33. Ter Arkh. 2015;87(8):77-85.

[Diagnosis and treatment in patients with B-cell lymphoma unclassified that is
intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt's lymphoma].

[Article in Russian]

Baryakh EA(1), Misyurina AE(1), Kovrigina AM(1), Obukhova TN(1), Gemdzhyan EG(1),
Vorob'ev VI(1), Mangasarova YK(1), Polyakov YY(1), Magomedova AU(1), Klyasova
GA(1), Misyurin VA(1), Yatsyk GA(1), Shevelev AA(1), Kostina IE(1), Vorob'ev
AI(1), Kravchenko SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Center, Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow, Russia.

AIM: To characterize a group of patients with B-cell lymphoma (BCLU) unclassified
that is intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt's
lymphoma, to identify poor prognostic factors, and to evaluate therapeutic
efficiency in patients with BCLU.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Twenty-five patients with BCLU were examined. Double-hit
lymphoma (DHL) was diagnosed in 8 (32%) patients. According to the Ann-Arbor
classification of lymphoma, its stages II, III, and IV were diagnosed in 3 (12%),
2 (8%), and 20 (80%) patients, respectively. MYC rearrangement was observed in 11
(48%) out of 23 patients: single-hit lymphoma in 3 patients and DHL in 8
(BCL2+/MYC+ in 6 cases and BCL6+/MYC+ in 2). The expression of <U+0441>-MYC (cut off
=40%) was revealed in 17 (74%) out of 23 patients; that of BCL2 (cut off =50%)
was detected in 14 (58%) out of 24 patients; coexpression of both proteins was
seen in 12 (52%) out of 23 patients. The DHL group showed a correlation between
the rearrangement of the BCL2+/MYC+ genes and the expression of MYC and BCL2
proteins in 5 out of 6 patients. Taking into account the heterogeneity of the
entire patient group, DHL and non-DHL subgroups were considered separately. Both 
subgroups were comparable by clinical characteristics. BCLU patients younger than
60 years of age received treatment according to the LB-M-04 ± rituximab; those
aged 60 or older had CHOP-like regimens ± rituximab. Autologous stem cell
transplantation (auto-SCT) was performed in 5 patients belonging to a high-risk
group.
RESULTS: The 3-year overall survival (OS) was 62% and the 3-year event-free
survival (EFS) was 51%. The 3-year OS was lower for the DHL group than that for
the non-DHL group (43 and 75%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: In the DHL group, both OS and EFS are significantly lower (the risk
of poor outcome, including death, is higher) than those in the non-DHL group. It 
is conceivable that intensified chemotherapy with auto-SCT increases treatment
results in patients with BCLU; however, a larger number of observations are
needed to obtain valid data.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26824820  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 2;113(5):E577-86. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1524677113. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Subtype-specific addiction of the activated B-cell subset of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma to FOXP1.

Dekker JD(1), Park D(2), Shaffer AL 3rd(3), Kohlhammer H(3), Deng W(1), Lee
BK(1), Ippolito GC(2), Georgiou G(2), Iyer VR(1), Staudt LM(4), Tucker HO(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; (2)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; Department of Chemical
Engineering, Cockrell School of Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712; (3)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(4)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu lstaudt@mail.nih.gov. (5)Department of Molecular
Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu
lstaudt@mail.nih.gov.

High expression of the forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) transcription factor distinguishes
the aggressive activated B cell (ABC) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
subtype from the better prognosis germinal center B-cell (GCB)-DLBCL subtype and 
is highly correlated with poor outcomes. A genetic or functional role for FOXP1
in lymphomagenesis, however, remains unknown. Here, we report that sustained
FOXP1 expression is vital for ABC-DLBCL cell-line survival. Genome-wide analyses 
revealed direct and indirect FOXP1 transcriptional enforcement of ABC-DLBCL
hallmarks, including the classical NF-<U+03BA>B and MYD88 (myeloid differentiation
primary response gene 88) pathways. FOXP1 promoted gene expression underlying
transition of the GCB cell to the plasmablast-the transient B-cell stage targeted
in ABC-DLBCL transformation-by antagonizing pathways distinctive of GCB-DLBCL,
including that of the GCB "master regulator," BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6). Cell-line
derived FOXP1 target genes that were highly correlated with FOXP1 expression in
primary DLBCL accurately segregated the corresponding clinical subtypes of a
large cohort of primary DLBCL isolates and identified conserved pathways
associated with ABC-DLBCL pathology.

PMCID: PMC4747717 [Available on 2016-08-02]
PMID: 26787899  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1550-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501904. Epub 2016
Jan 18.

Gut Microbiota Regulates K/BxN Autoimmune Arthritis through Follicular Helper T
but Not Th17 Cells.

Block KE(1), Zheng Z(2), Dent AL(3), Kee BL(4), Huang H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; Section of 
Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637;
Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60637; (2)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202; and.
(4)Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; Department 
of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637. (5)Committee on
Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; Section of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; Knapp Center
for Lupus and Immunology Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637;
hhuang@bsd.uchicago.edu.

The bacterial community that colonizes mucosal surfaces helps shape the
development and function of the immune system. The K/BxN autoimmune arthritis
model is dependent on the microbiota, and particularly on segmented filamentous
bacteria, for the autoimmune phenotype. The mechanisms of how the gut microbiota 
affects arthritis development are not well understood. In this study, we
investigate the contribution of two T cell subsets, Th17 and follicular helper T 
(Tfh), to arthritis and how microbiota modulates their differentiation. Using
genetic approaches, we demonstrate that IL-17 is dispensable for arthritis.
Antibiotic treatment inhibits disease in IL-17-deficient animals, suggesting that
the gut microbiota regulates arthritis independent of Th17 cells. In contrast,
conditional deletion of Bcl6 in T cells blocks Tfh cell differentiation and
arthritis development. Furthermore, Tfh cell differentiation is defective in
antibiotic-treated mice. Taken together, we conclude that gut microbiota
regulates arthritis through Tfh but not Th17 cells. These findings have
implications in our understanding of how environmental factors contribute to the 
development of autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4744513 [Available on 2017-02-15]
PMID: 26783341  [PubMed - in process]


36. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2015;55(3):175-80. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.55.175.

Nodal Marginal Zone Large B-Cell Lymphoma with Burkitt Translocation and Complex 
Chromosomal Changes Associated with Overexpression of BCL2, MYC, and BCL6.

Jelic TM(1), Huang TW, Brenholz P, Estallila OC, Khalid AA, Juranovic T,
Kuenstner TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Hospital CAMC.

We report the first case of a nodal marginal zone large B-cell lymphoma and the
first with MYC rearrangement. This high proliferation rate lymphoma (40% of
cells) occurred in the bilateral cervical, axillary, and para-aortic lymph nodes 
of an 82 year old woman. It involved extensively her bone marrow, and was lethal.
Malignant B-cells were CD10 negative, harbored Burkitt translocation, and
multiple chromosomal changes including trisomies of chromosomes 3 and 18, and
three copies of 8q with an intact q24 cytoband (in addition to MYC
rearrangement), associated with overexpression of BCL6, BCL2, and MYC
respectively. We suggest that in aggressive nodular marginal zone lymphomas
(clinical picture or high proliferation rate of lymphoma cells), fluorescence in 
situ hybridization analysis for MYC rearrangement, with break-apart probe, and
for MYC/IGH translocation, in addition to chromosome analysis, should be
performed. MYC rearrangement associated with a more rapid progression of the
neoplasia, might warrant a more aggressive treatment. [J Clin Exp Hematop 55(3) :
175-180, 2015].

PMID: 26763367  [PubMed - in process]


37. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2015;55(3):137-43. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.55.137.

Cytogenetic Study and Analysis of Protein Expression in Plasma Cell Myeloma with 
t(11;14)(q13;q32): Absence of BCL6 and SOX11, and Infrequent Expression of CD20
and PAX5.

Yokoi S(1), Sakai H, Uchida A, Uemura Y, Sato K, Tsuruoka Y, Nishio Y, Matsunawa 
M, Suzuki Y, Isobe Y, Kato M, Inoue Y, Hoshikawa M, Miura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Showa University School
of Medicine.

The t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation is the most common chromosomal translocation 
in plasma cell myeloma (PCM), but the cytogenetic and immunophenotypic features
of PCM with t(11;14)(q13;q32) remain to be fully elucidated. To address the
issue, we retrospectively analyzed 21 newly diagnosed PCM patients with the
t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation in our institute. CD20 is a B-cell-specific
transmembrane protein that is the topic of much focus as a potential target in
immunotherapy. We observed a low incidence of CD20 expression (2 of 21 patients, 
11%), although the expression of CD20 was previously reported to be associated
with t(11;14)(q13;q32). PAX5 is an essential transcriptional factor involved in
B-cell development and commitment, and is down-regulated upon plasma cell
differentiation. We observed one patient (6%) with expression of PAX5. The
expression of CD19, CD56, and CD138 was detected in one (0.7%), nine (60%), and
13 patients (87%), respectively. Cyclin D1, CD38, and BCL2 were detected in all
patients; on the other hand, neither BCL6 nor SOX11 was detected in any of the
evaluated patients. Abnormalities of chromosome 13 were detected in six patients 
(38%), but deletion of TP53 was not observed in any of the evaluated patients.
Our results suggest the absence of BCL6 and SOX11 expression, and infrequent
expression of CD20, PAX5, and CD56 in PCM with t(11;14)(q13;q32), in contrast to 
the findings of earlier reports. [J Clin Exp Hematop 55(3) : 137-143, 2015].

PMID: 26763361  [PubMed - in process]


38. Virchows Arch. 2016 Jan 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Intrafollicular Epstein-Barr virus-positive large B cell lymphoma. A variant of
"germinotropic" lymphoproliferative disorder.

Lorenzi L(1), Lonardi S(1), Essatari MH(1), Pellegrini V(1), Fisogni S(1),
Gazzola A(2), Agostinelli C(2), Vermi W(1), Rossi G(3), Massarelli G(4), Pileri
SA(5,)(6), Facchetti F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine; Section of Pathology,
University of Brescia, Spedali Civili, 25123, Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of
Experimental Hematopathology and Hematology Sections, Diagnostic and Specialty
Medicine, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Hematology, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Departments of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy. (5)European Institute of Oncology, Milano,
Italy. (6)School of Medicine, Bologna University, Bologna, Italy. (7)Department
of Molecular and Translational Medicine; Section of Pathology, University of
Brescia, Spedali Civili, 25123, Brescia, Italy. fabio.facchetti@unibs.it.

Germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorders were previously described as
localized disorders associated with coinfection by human herpes virus 8 and
Epstein-Barr virus and characterized by good clinical outcome. We report the
clinical, morphological, phenotypical, and molecular features of three cases of a
hitherto unreported variant of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive, human herpes
virus 8 (HHV8)-negative large B cell lymphoma with exclusive intrafollicular
localization. All cases occurred in elderly individuals (63, 77, and 65 years
old; one male, two females) without obvious immunedeficiency, who presented with 
high stage disease. Lymph nodes showed an effaced nodular architecture with
abnormal B follicles colonized by EBV+ large, pleomorphic atypical cells,
including Reed-Sternberg-like cells, showing an activated B cell phenotype
(CD10-FOXP1-Bcl6-IRF4+ or CD10-FOXP1+Bcl6+IRF4+) and intense expression of CD30. 
No monoclonal light-chain restriction was detected by immunohistochemistry or in 
situ hybridization, and IGH rearrangement was polyclonal; notably, EBV clonality 
was detectable in one case. Lymphoma cells in all cases showed diffuse expression
of the c-Myc protein, while Bcl2 was dim or negative; moreover, the strong
expression of phosphorylated-STAT3 in tumor cell nuclei suggested activation of
the JAK-STAT pathway. FISH analysis was performed in two cases and showed no
translocations of BCL2, BCL6, MYC, and PAX5 genes. Response to treatment was poor
in 2/3 patients: one died after 18 months, one is alive with disease after
12 months. The intrafollicular EBV-positive large B cell lymphoma expands the
spectrum of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders in immunocompetent
individuals.

PMID: 26762526  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Jan 11;12(1):e1004696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004696. 
eCollection 2016.

A Network Model to Describe the Terminal Differentiation of B Cells.

Méndez A(1,)(2), Mendoza L(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Doctorado en Ciencias Bioquímicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Ciudad de México, México. (2)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México, México. (3)C3, Centro 
de Ciencias de la Complejidad, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de
México, México.

Terminal differentiation of B cells is an essential process for the humoral
immune response in vertebrates and is achieved by the concerted action of several
transcription factors in response to antigen recognition and extracellular
signals provided by T-helper cells. While there is a wealth of experimental data 
regarding the molecular and cellular signals involved in this process, there is
no general consensus regarding the structure and dynamical properties of the
underlying regulatory network controlling this process. We developed a dynamical 
model of the regulatory network controlling terminal differentiation of B cells. 
The structure of the network was inferred from experimental data available in the
literature, and its dynamical behavior was analyzed by modeling the network both 
as a discrete and a continuous dynamical systems. The steady states of these
models are consistent with the patterns of activation reported for the Naive, GC,
Mem, and PC cell types. Moreover, the models are able to describe the patterns of
differentiation from the precursor Naive to any of the GC, Mem, or PC cell types 
in response to a specific set of extracellular signals. We simulated all possible
single loss- and gain-of-function mutants, corroborating the importance of Pax5, 
Bcl6, Bach2, Irf4, and Blimp1 as key regulators of B cell differentiation
process. The model is able to represent the directional nature of terminal B cell
differentiation and qualitatively describes key differentiation events from a
precursor cell to terminally differentiated B cells.

PMCID: PMC4720151
PMID: 26751566  [PubMed - in process]


40. Immunity. 2016 Jan 19;44(1):131-42. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.009. Epub 2015 
Dec 29.

Interleukin-23-Induced Transcription Factor Blimp-1 Promotes Pathogenicity of T
Helper 17 Cells.

Jain R(1), Chen Y(1), Kanno Y(2), Joyce-Shaikh B(1), Vahedi G(2), Hirahara K(2), 
Blumenschein WM(1), Sukumar S(1), Haines CJ(1), Sadekova S(1), McClanahan TK(1), 
McGeachy MJ(1), O'Shea JJ(2), Cua DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. 
(2)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
& Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. (3)Merck Research Laboratories, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 
94304, USA. Electronic address: daniel.cua@merck.com.

Interleukin-23 (IL-23) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine required for the
pathogenicity of T helper 17 (Th17) cells but the molecular mechanisms governing 
this process remain unclear. We identified the transcription factor Blimp-1
(Prdm1) as a key IL-23-induced factor that drove the inflammatory function of
Th17 cells. In contrast to thymic deletion of Blimp-1, which causes T cell
development defects and spontaneous autoimmunity, peripheral deletion of this
transcription factor resulted in reduced Th17 activation and reduced severity of 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Furthermore, genome-wide occupancy and
overexpression studies in Th17 cells revealed that Blimp-1 co-localized with
transcription factors ROR<U+03B3>t, STAT-3, and p300 at the Il23r, Il17a/f, and Csf2
cytokine loci to enhance their expression. Blimp-1 also directly bound to and
repressed cytokine loci Il2 and Bcl6. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that Blimp-1 is an essential transcription factor downstream of IL-23 that acts
in concert with ROR<U+03B3>t to activate the Th17 inflammatory program.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26750311  [PubMed - in process]


41. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 8;7:10285. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10285.

IL-7 signalling represses Bcl-6 and the TFH gene program.

McDonald PW(1), Read KA(1), Baker CE(1), Anderson AE(1), Powell MD(1),
Ballesteros-Tato A, Oestreich KJ(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, Roanoke, Virginia 24016, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.
(3)Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine, Roanoke, Virginia 24016, USA.

The transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 is linked to the development of both CD4(+) T
follicular helper (TFH) and central memory T (TCM) cells. Here, we demonstrate
that in response to decreased IL-2 signalling, T helper 1 (TH1) cells upregulate 
Bcl-6 and co-initiate TFH- and TCM-like gene programs, including expression of
the cytokine receptors IL-6Ra and IL-7R. Exposure of this potentially bi-potent
cell population to IL-6 favours the TFH gene program, whereas IL-7 signalling
represses TFH-associated genes including Bcl6 and Cxcr5, but not the TCM-related 
genes Klf2 and Sell. Mechanistically, IL-7-dependent activation of STAT5
contributes to Bcl-6 repression. Importantly, antigen-specific IL-6Ra(+)IL-7R(+) 
CD4(+) T cells emerge from the effector population at late time points post
influenza infection. These data support a novel role for IL-7 in the repression
of the TFH gene program and evoke a divergent regulatory mechanism by which
post-effector TH1 cells may contribute to long-term cell-mediated and humoral
immunity.

PMCID: PMC4729877
PMID: 26743592  [PubMed - in process]


42. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 5;6:18778. doi: 10.1038/srep18778.

Bcl6 Sets a Threshold for Antiviral Signaling by Restraining IRF7 Transcriptional
Program.

Xu F(1), Kang Y(2), Zhuang N(2), Lu Z(2), Zhang H(2), Xu D(2,)(3), Ding Y(2), Yin
H(2), Shi L(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, China. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Key Lab of Immunology and Molecular Medicine, School
of Medicine, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310036, China.
(3)MIMR-PHI Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing University of Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing 210046, China.

The coordination of restraining and priming of antiviral signaling constitute a
fundamental aspect of immunological functions. However, we currently know little 
about the molecular events that can translate the pathogenic cues into the
appropriate code for antiviral defense. Our present study reports a specific role
of B cell lymphoma (Bcl)6 as a checkpoint in the initiation of the host response 
to cytosolic RNA viruses. Remarkably, Bcl6 specifically binds to the
interferon-regulatory factor (IRF)7 loci and restrains its transcription, thereby
functioning as a negative regulator for interferon (IFN)-ß production and
antiviral responses. The signal-controlled turnover of the Bcl6, most likely
mediated by microRNA-127, coordinates the antiviral response and inflammatory
sequelae. Accordingly, de-repression of Bcl6 resulted in a phenotypic conversion 
of macrophages into highly potent IFN-producing cells and rendered mice more
resistant to pathogenic RNA virus infection. The failure to remove the Bcl6
regulator, however, impedes the antiviral signaling and exaggerates viral
pneumonia in mice. We thus reveal a novel key molecular checkpoint to orchestrate
antiviral innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC4700451
PMID: 26728228  [PubMed - in process]


43. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Jan 4:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Malignant hematopoietic cell lines: in vitro models for double-hit B-cell
lymphomas.

Drexler HG(1), Eberth S(1), Nagel S(1), MacLeod RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department Human and Animal Cell Lines , Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms & Cell Cultures , Braunschweig , Germany.

Mature B-cell lymphomas with concurrent rearrangements of MYC and BCL2 (more
rarely BCL6), "double-hit lymphomas" (DHLs), form a heterogeneous group. Recent
studies have shown that DHLs often present with an aggressive clinical course and
a poor prognosis with standard therapy. This distinct clinical entity would
benefit from more detailed pathobiological characterization to develop improved
treatment options. Lymphoma cell lines are important and informative research
tools. Several cell lines have been established from B-cell lymphoma patients
harboring MYC rearrangements combined with either (double-hit) or both
(triple-hit) BCL2 or BCL6 translocations. All rearrangements have been detected
by cytogenetics and validated by FISH. These cell lines provide preclinical
models for basic and translational research which speed development of effective 
treatment strategies.

PMID: 26727417  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2015;38(5):398-402. doi: 10.2177/jsci.38.398.

The importance of B cell-T cell interaction in autoimmune diseases.

Iwata S(1), Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health.

  B cells play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. In
addition, B cells require interaction with helper CD4+ T cells to become
activated. We assessed change of gene regulatory network that controls B cell
differentiation after stimulation with BCR cross-linking, sCD40L, Toll-like
Receptor (TLR) and cytokines such as IL-4/IL-21 in vitro. We found that
combination with BCR, CD40 and TLR9 or IL-4/IL-21 signal via tyrosine kinases
such as Syk/Btk/JAK caused robust gene expression of AICDA, BCL6, XBP1 and IgG
production. We found that levels of Syk/Btk phosphorylation in B cells were
preferentially higher in RA and SLE patients compared to healthy subjects. RA
patients with higher p-Syk levels were significantly correlated to strongly
positive for anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs). Treatment with
abatacept significantly reduced the levels of p-Syk in RA peripheral blood B
cells, and also reduced the proportion of follicular helper T (Tfh) cells. We
highlight tyrosine kinase such as Syk/Btk/JAK as potential targets for inhibiting
B cell-T cell interactions in autoimmune diseases such as RA and SLE. We also
state recent evidence of these drugs.

PMID: 26725861  [PubMed - in process]


45. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Dec 15;8:3757-65. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S86343. eCollection
2015.

Role of NSC319726 in ovarian cancer based on the bioinformatics analyses.

Xue J(1), Yang G(1), Ding H(1), Wang P(2), Wang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chinese Medicine, The Second Hospital of Jilin University,
People's Republic of China. (2)The Clinical Medical College of Jilin University
(Grade 2013), People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Chinese Medicine,
China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun City, People's Republic
of China.

AIM: This study aimed to explore the molecular mechanisms of NSC319726 in ovarian
cancer by bioinformatics analyses.
METHODS: Gene expression profile GSE35972 was downloaded from the Gene Expression
Omnibus database. The data set contains six samples, including three samples of
TOV112D cells untreated and three samples of TOV112D cells treated with
NSC319726. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between untreated and
treated samples were analyzed using the limma package. Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes pathway analysis was performed using the signaling pathway
impact analysis package, followed by the functional annotation of DEGs and
protein-protein interaction network construction. Finally, the subnetwork was
identified, and Gene Ontology functional enrichment analysis was performed on the
DEGs enriched in the subnetwork.
RESULTS: A total of 120 upregulated and 126 downregulated DEGs were identified.
Six Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways were significantly perturbed
by DEGs, and the pathway of oocyte meiosis was identified as the most perturbed
one. Oocyte meiosis was enriched by eight downregulated DEGs, such as ribosomal
protein S6 kinase, 90 kDa, and polypeptide 6 (RPS6KA6). After functional
annotation, eight transcription factors were upregulated (such as B-cell
CLL/lymphoma 6 [BCL6]), and three transcription factors were downregulated. Seven
tumor suppressor genes, such as forkhead box O3 (FOXO3), were upregulated.
Additionally, in the protein-protein interaction network and subnetwork, cyclin
B1 (CCNB1) and cell division cycle 20 (CDC20) were hub genes, which were also
involved in the functions related to mitotic cell cycle.
CONCLUSION: NSC319726 may play an efficient role against ovarian cancer via
targeting genes, such as RPS6KA6, BCL6, FOXO3, CCNB1, and CDC20, which are
involved in oocyte meiosis pathway.

PMCID: PMC4689271
PMID: 26719703  [PubMed]


46. Int Immunol. 2015 Dec 29. pii: dxv071. [Epub ahead of print]

CD4 memory T cells develop and acquire functional competence by sequential
cognate interactions and stepwise gene regulation.

Kaji T(1), Hijikata A(2), Ishige A(3), Kitami T(4), Watanabe T(5), Ohara O(5),
Yanaka N(6), Okada M(7), Shimoda M(8), Taniguchi M(9), Takemori T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunological Memory, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, 1-7-22, Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(2)Immunogenomics, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22,
Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (3)Laboratory for
Immunological Memory, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22,
Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan Laboratory for Immune
Regulation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences RCAI, 1-7-22,
Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (4)Cellular Bioenegetic 
Network, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences RCAI (IMS-RCAI), 1-7-22,
Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (5)Laboratory for
Integrative Genomics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences RCAI, 1-7-22,
Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (6)Department of
Molecular and Applied Bioscience, Graduate School of Biosphere Science, Hiroshima
University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8528, Japan. (7)Integrated Cellular 
Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences RCAI, 1-7-22, Suehirocho, 
Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (8)Department of Dermatology, School
of Medicine, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.
(9)Laboratory for Immune Regulation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences RCAI, 1-7-22, Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(10)Laboratory for Immunological Memory, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, 1-7-22, Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan Drug 
Discovery Antibody Platform Unit, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences
RCAI, 1-7-22, Suehirocho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan
toshitada.takemori@riken.jp.

Memory CD4(+) T cells promote protective humoral immunity; however, how memory T 
cells acquire this activity remains unclear. This study demonstrates that CD4(+) 
T cells develop into antigen-specific memory T cells that can promote the
terminal differentiation of memory B cells far more effectively than their naive 
T-cell counterparts. Memory T cell development requires the transcription factor 
B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6), which is known to direct T-follicular helper (Tfh) cell
differentiation. However, unlike Tfh cells, memory T cell development did not
require germinal center B cells. Curiously, memory T cells that develop in the
absence of cognate B cells cannot promote memory B-cell recall responses and this
defect was accompanied by down-regulation of genes associated with homeostasis
and activation and up-regulation of genes inhibitory for T-cell responses.
Although memory T cells display phenotypic and genetic signatures distinct from
Tfh cells, both had in common the expression of a group of genes associated with 
metabolic pathways. This gene expression profile was not shared to any great
extent with naive T cells and was not influenced by the absence of cognate B
cells during memory T cell development. These results suggest that memory T cell 
development is programmed by stepwise expression of gatekeeper genes through
serial interactions with different types of antigen-presenting cells, first
licensing the memory lineage pathway and subsequently facilitating the functional
development of memory T cells. Finally, we identified Gdpd3 as a candidate
genetic marker for memory T cells.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2015. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26714588  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Leukemia. 2015 Dec 29. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.355. [Epub ahead of print]

SOX11 defines two different subtypes of mantle cell lymphoma through
transcriptional regulation of BCL6.

Palomero J(1), Vegliante MC(1), Eguileor A(1), Rodríguez ML(1), Balsas P(1),
Martínez D(2), Campo E(1,)(2), Amador V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain. (2)Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

PMID: 26710884  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;44(8):559-64.

[Expression of CD68, cyclin D1 and rearrangement of bcl-6 gene are adverse
prognostic factors in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Liang X(1), Wang J(2), Bai W(1), Sun R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shanxi Cancer Hospital, Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan 030013, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Shanxi Cancer Hospital, Shanxi
Medical University, Taiyuan 030013, China; E-mail: jfenw@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study expression of CD68, cyclin D1 protein and rearrangement of
bcl-6 gene impact on the prognosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
METHODS: Gets paraffin samples of the 105 cases DLBCL with the detailed follow-up
information, and were studied by using immunohistochemical EnVision method for
CD3, CD10, CD20, CD68, cyclin D1, bcl-6, MUM 1, SOX-11 immunolabeling. The DLBCL 
were classified into germinal center B cell-like (GCB) subtypes and non-germinal 
center B cell-like (non-GCB) subtypes according to Hans'algorithm. Application of
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique to detect the bcl-6 gene
rearrangement. The relationship between CD68, cyclin D1 protein, the bcl-6 gene
and the curative effect of chemotherapy and survival was analyzed using
statistical software. Respectively by GCB type, non-GCB type immune phenotype and
CHOP, R-CHOP chemotherapy group, compare the curative effects.
RESULTS: 105 patients had GCB 19 cases (18.1%), non-GCB 86 cases (81.9%), CD68
expression was 18 cases (17.1%), cyclin D1 high expression 36 cases (34.3%),
bcl-6 gene rearrangement in 21 cases (21.9%), there is no correlation among the
three (P > 0.05). One-way analysis of variance showed that age = 60 years,
clinical stage I-II, IPI score 0 to 2 points, LDH (U/L) < 245 IU/L,GCB subtypes, 
R-CHOP therapy, the prognosis of patients with better (P < 0.05), But gender,
primary site no correlation with prognosis (P > 0.05). CD68, cyclin D1 high
expression, bcl-6 rearrangement had poor prognosis (P < 0.05). Stratification
analysis results show GCB-type or non-GCB type with high expression of CD68
contrast alloimmune phenotype groups had a poor prognosis, non-GCB type with high
expression of cyclin D1 and rearrangement of bcl-6 gene had a poor prognosis (P <
0.001, P = 0.02). Treatment scheme of layered display, the CHOP treatment,
significantly correlated with overall survival with high expression of CD68,
cyclin D1 (P < 0.05), the R-CHOP treatment, there was no statistically
significant difference between CD68, cyclin D1 high expression and overall
survival (P = 0.428 and 0.168). Multivariate COX model analysis showed that high 
expression of CD68 (P = 0.026), high expression of cyclin D1 (P = 0.003) and high
levels of LDH (P = 0.005) were adverse prognostic factors independent.
CONCLUSIONS: high expression of CD68, cyclin D1 and rearrangement of bcl-6 gene
suggests poor prognosis, CD68, cyclin D1 protein and bcl-6 gene can be used as a 
prognostic indicator in patients with DLBCL.

PMID: 26705179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood. 2016 Feb 18;127(7):869-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-10-673236. Epub 2015
Dec 23.

Targetable genetic features of primary testicular and primary central nervous
system lymphomas.

Chapuy B(1), Roemer MG(2), Stewart C(3), Tan Y(4), Abo RP(5), Zhang L(4), Dunford
AJ(3), Meredith DM(6), Thorner AR(5), Jordanova ES(7), Liu G(4), Feuerhake F(8), 
Ducar MD(5), Illerhaus G(9), Gusenleitner D(4), Linden EA(10), Sun HH(6), Homer
H(1), Aono M(1), Pinkus GS(6), Ligon AH(6), Ligon KL(6), Ferry JA(11), Freeman
GJ(1), van Hummelen P(5), Golub TR(12), Getz G(13), Rodig SJ(6), de Jong D(14),
Monti S(4), Shipp MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA;
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA;
Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; (3)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA; (4)Section of Computational
Biomedicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA; (5)Center for
Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; (6)Department 
of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA; (7)Center of Gynaecologic
Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (8)Department
of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; (9)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
(10)Massachusetts General Hospital/North Shore Cancer Center, Danvers, MA;
(11)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; and.
(12)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA. (13)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA; Department of
Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; and. (14)Department of
Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;

Primary central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSLs) and primary testicular
lymphomas (PTLs) are extranodal large B-cell lymphomas (LBCLs) with inferior
responses to current empiric treatment regimens. To identify targetable genetic
features of PCNSL and PTL, we characterized their recurrent somatic mutations,
chromosomal rearrangements, copy number alterations (CNAs), and associated driver
genes, and compared these comprehensive genetic signatures to those of diffuse
LBCL and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). These studies identify
unique combinations of genetic alterations in discrete LBCL subtypes and
subtype-selective bases for targeted therapy. PCNSLs and PTLs frequently exhibit 
genomic instability, and near-uniform, often biallelic, CDKN2A loss with rare
TP53 mutations. PCNSLs and PTLs also use multiple genetic mechanisms to target
key genes and pathways and exhibit near-uniform oncogenic Toll-like receptor
signaling as a result of MYD88 mutation and/or NFKBIZ amplification, frequent
concurrent B-cell receptor pathway activation, and deregulation of BCL6. Of great
interest, PCNSLs and PTLs also have frequent 9p24.1/PD-L1/PD-L2 CNAs and
additional translocations of these loci, structural bases of immune evasion that 
are shared with PMBL.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4760091 [Available on 2017-02-18]
PMID: 26702065  [PubMed - in process]


50. Oncoscience. 2015 Nov 21;2(11):912. eCollection 2015.

Targeting BCL6 and STAT3 in triple negative breast cancer: the one-two punch?

Walker SR(1), Frank DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Departments
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

PMCID: PMC4675785
PMID: 26697522  [PubMed]


51. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 21;5:18388. doi: 10.1038/srep18388.

The variant Polycomb Repressor Complex 1 component PCGF1 interacts with a
pluripotency sub-network that includes DPPA4, a regulator of embryogenesis.

Oliviero G(1), Munawar N(1), Watson A(1), Streubel G(2), Manning G(1), Bardwell
V(3), Bracken AP(2), Cagney G(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin 4, IRELAND. (2)Department of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 2, IRELAND. (3)Developmental Biology Center, Masonic Cancer Center, and
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.

PCGF1 encodes one of six human Polycomb RING finger homologs that are linked to
transcriptional repression and developmental gene regulation. Individual PCGF
proteins define discrete Polycomb Repressor Complex 1 (PRC1) multi-protein
complexes with diverse subunit composition whose functions are incompletely
understood. PCGF1 is a component of a variant PRC1 complex that also contains the
BCL6 co-repressor BCOR and the histone demethylase KDM2B. To further investigate 
the role of PCGF1, we mapped the physical interactions of the protein under
endogenous conditions in a cell model of neuronal differentiation. Using
stringent statistical cut-offs, 83 highly enriched interacting proteins were
identified, including all previously reported members of the variant PRC1 complex
containing PCGF1, as well as proteins linked to diverse cellular pathways such as
chromatin and cell cycle regulation. Notably, a sub-network of proteins
associated with the establishment and maintenance of pluripotency (NANOG, OCT4,
PATZ1, and the developmental regulator DPPA4) were found to independently
interact with PCGF1 in a subsequent round of physical interaction mapping
experiments. Furthermore, knockdown of PCGF1 results in reduced expression of
DPPA4 and other subunits of the variant PRC1 complex at both mRNA and protein
levels. Thus, PCGF1 represents a physical and functional link between Polycomb
function and pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC4685312
PMID: 26687479  [PubMed - in process]


52. Oncoscience. 2015 Sep 14;2(10):783-4. eCollection 2015.

The epigenetic regulator CTCF modulates BCL6 in lymphoma.

Batlle-López A(1), Cortiguera MG(1), Delgado MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria, IBBTEC
(CSIC-Universidad de Cantabria) Santander, Spain.

PMCID: PMC4671918
PMID: 26682243  [PubMed]


53. Immunology. 2016 Mar;147(3):305-20. doi: 10.1111/imm.12563. Epub 2016 Jan 17.

Natural killer group 2D and CD28 receptors differentially activate
mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin to alter murine effector CD8(+) T-cell 
differentiation.

McQueen B(1), Trace K(1), Whitman E(1), Bedsworth T(1), Barber A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Longwood University,
Farmville, VA, USA.

Memory CD8(+) T cells are an essential component of anti-tumour and anti-viral
immunity. Activation of the mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway has been implicated in regulating the differentiation of effector and
memory T cells. However, the mechanisms that control mTOR activity during
immunity to tumours and infections are not well known. Activation of
co-stimulatory receptors, including CD28 and natural killer group 2D (NKG2D),
activate phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and subsequently may activate the mTOR
pathway in CD8(+) T cells. This study compared the activation of the mTOR
signalling pathway after co-stimulation through CD28 or NKG2D receptors in murine
effector CD8(+) T cells. Compared with CD28 co-stimulation, activation through
CD3 and NKG2D receptors had weaker activation of mTORc1, as shown by decreased
phosphorylation of mTORc1 targets S6K1, ribosomal protein S6 and eukaryotic
initiation factor 4E binding protein 1. NKG2D co-stimulation also showed
increased gene expression of tuberous sclerosis protein 2, a negative regulator
of mTORc1, whereas CD28 co-stimulation increased gene expression of Ras homologue
enriched in brain, an activator of mTORc1, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a and
vascular endothelial growth factor-a, pro-angiogenic factors downstream of
mTORc1. Strong mTORc1 activation in CD28-co-stimulated cells also increased
expression of transcription factors that support effector cell differentiation,
namely T-bet, B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein (BLIMP-1), interferon
regulatory factor 4, and inhibitor of DNA binding 2, whereas low levels of mTORc1
activation allowed for the expression of Eomes, B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), and
inhibitor of DNA binding 3 during NKG2D stimulation, and increased expression of 
memory markers CD62 ligand and CD127. These data show that compared with CD28,
co-stimulation through the NKG2D receptor leads to the differential activation of
the mTOR signalling pathway and potentially supports memory CD8(+) T-cell
differentiation.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4754608 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26661515  [PubMed - in process]


54. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Jan;40(1):127-36. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000567.

Primary Cutaneous Follicle Center Lymphomas Expressing BCL2 Protein Frequently
Harbor BCL2 Gene Break and May Present 1p36 Deletion: A Study of 20 Cases.

Szablewski V(1), Ingen-Housz-Oro S, Baia M, Delfau-Larue MH, Copie-Bergman C,
Ortonne N.

Author information: 
(1)*Pathology Department, CHU Montpellier, Gui de Chauliac Hospital, Montpellier 
Dermatology Department §Immunology and Hematology Department ¶Pathology
Department, AP-HP, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier INSERM, U955 team 9
<U+2225>Medical University, Paris Est Creteil university (UPEC), UMR-S, Créteil, France.

The classification of cutaneous follicular lymphoma (CFL) into primary cutaneous 
follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) or secondary cutaneous follicular lymphoma
(SCFL) is challenging. SCFL is suspected when tumor cells express BCL2 protein,
reflecting a BCL2 translocation. However, BCL2 expression is difficult to assess 
in CFLs because of numerous BCL2+ reactive T cells. To investigate these issues
and to further characterize PCFCL, we studied a series of 25 CFLs without any
extracutaneous disease at diagnosis, selected on the basis of BCL2 protein
expression using 2 BCL2 antibodies (clones 124 and E17) and BOB1/BCL2 double
immunostaining. All cases were studied using interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridization with BCL2, BCL6, IGH, IGK, IGL breakapart, IGH-BCL2 fusion, and
1p36/1q25 dual-color probes. Nineteen CFLs were BCL2 positive, and 6 were
negative. After a medium follow-up of 24 (6 to 96) months, 5 cases were
reclassified as SCFL and were excluded from a part of our analyses. Among BCL2+
PCFCLs, 60% (9/15) demonstrated a BCL2 break. BCL2-break-positive cases had a
tendency to occur in the head and neck and showed the classical phenotype of
nodal follicular lymphoma (CD10+, BCL6+, BCL2+, STMN+) compared with
BCL2-break-negative PCFCLs. Del 1p36 was observed in 1 PCFCL. No significant
clinical differences were observed between BCL2+ or BCL2- PCFCL. In conclusion,
we show that a subset of PCFCLs harbor similar genetic alterations, as observed
in nodal follicular lymphomas, including BCL2 breaks and 1p36 deletion. As BCL2
protein expression is usually associated with the presence of a BCL2
translocation, fluorescence in situ hybridization should be performed to confirm 
this hypothesis.

PMID: 26658664  [PubMed - in process]


55. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):3520-32. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6513.

Selective targeting of BCL6 induces oncogene addiction switching to BCL2 in
B-cell lymphoma.

Dupont T(1), Yang SN(1), Patel J(1), Hatzi K(1), Malik A(1), Tam W(2), Martin
P(1), Leonard J(1), Melnick A(1,)(3), Cerchietti L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Oncology Division, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY, USA. (3)Pharmacology Department, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY, USA.

The BCL6 oncogene plays a crucial role in sustaining diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCL) through transcriptional repression of key checkpoint genes.
BCL6-targeted therapy kills lymphoma cells by releasing these checkpoints.
However BCL6 also directly represses several DLBCL oncogenes such as BCL2 and
BCL-XL that promote lymphoma survival. Herein we show that DLBCL cells that
survive BCL6-targeted therapy induce a phenomenon of "oncogene-addiction
switching" by reactivating BCL2-family dependent anti-apoptotic pathways. Thus,
most DLBCL cells require concomitant inhibition of BCL6 and BCL2-family members
for effective lymphoma killing. Moreover, in DLBCL cells initially resistant to
BH3 mimetic drugs, BCL6 inhibition induces a newly developed reliance on
anti-apoptotic BCL2-family members for survival that translates in acquired
susceptibility to BH3 mimetic drugs ABT-737 and obatoclax. In germinal center B
cell-like (GCB)-DLBCL cells, the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and the NEDD
inhibitor MLN4924 post-transcriptionally activated the BH3-only sensitizer NOXA
thus counteracting the oncogenic switch to BCL2 induced by BCL6-targeting. Hence 
our study indicates that BCL6 inhibition induces an on-target feedback mechanism 
based on the activation of anti-apoptotic BH3 members. This oncogene-addition
switching mechanism was harnessed to develop rational combinatorial therapies for
GCB-DLBCL.

PMID: 26657288  [PubMed - in process]


56. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Dec 11;5:e374. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.99.

Four genetic lymphoma-specific events (MYC, BCL2, BCL6 and CCND1) identified in a
high grade B lymphoma case.

Ittel A(1), Hélias C(1), Wissler MP(2), Toussaint E(3), Miguet L(1), Chenard
MP(2), Monier L(1), Gervais C(1), Mauvieux L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, CHU de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Département de Pathologie, CHU Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France. (3)Département
d'Onco-Hématologie, CHU Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France.

PMCID: PMC4735075
PMID: 26657198  [PubMed - in process]


57. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 11;5:17957. doi: 10.1038/srep17957.

Uncovering MicroRNA Regulatory Hubs that Modulate Plasma Cell Differentiation.

Tsai DY(1,)(2), Hung KH(1,)(3), Lin IY(1), Su ST(1), Wu SY(4), Chung CH(1), Wang 
TC(1,)(5), Li WH(1,)(5), Shih AC(4), Lin KI(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (2)Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Information Science, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (5)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica,
Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Using genome-wide approaches, we studied the microRNA (miRNA) expression profile 
during human plasma cell (PC) differentiation induced by stimulation of human
blood B cells with T follicular helper cell-dependent signals. Combining the
profiles of differentially expressed genes in PC differentiation with gene
ontology (GO) analysis revealed that a significant group of genes involved in the
transcription factor (TF) activity was preferentially changed. We thus focused on
studying the effects of differentially expressed miRNAs on several key TFs in PC 
differentiation. Cohorts of differentially expressed miRNAs cooperating as miRNA 
hubs were predicted and validated to modulate key TFs, including a down-regulated
miRNA hub containing miR-101-3p, -125b-5p, and -223-3p contributing to induction 
of PRDM1 as well as an up-regulated miRNA hub containing miR-34a-5p, -148a-3p,
and -183-5p suppressing BCL6, BACH2, and FOXP1. Induced expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and
PRDM1 during PC differentiation controlled the expression of up- and
down-regulated miRNA hubs, respectively. Co-expression of miR-101-3p, -125b-5p,
and -223-3p in stimulated B cells showed synergistic effects on inhibition of PC 
formation, which can be rescued by re-introduction of PRDM1. Together, we
catalogue the complex roadmap of miRNAs and their functional interplay in
collaboratively directing PC differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4675970
PMID: 26655851  [PubMed - in process]


58. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;31(12):1677-81.

[Expression and clinical significance of BCL6 corepressor-like 1 in non-small
cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao X(1), Tuo H(2), Si M(3), Wang L(4), Liang P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Second Hospital of Yulin City, Yulin
719000, China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Second Hospital of Yulin City, Yulin 719000, China. (4)Department of 
Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061,
China. (5)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Second Hospital of Yulin City,
Yulin 719000, China. *Corresponding author, E-mail: khp_smu@163.com.

Objective To detect the expression of BCL6 corepressor-like 1 (BCORL1) in tumor
tissues of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and determine the effect of
BCORL1 on cell migration and invasion in A549 cells by knockdown of BCORL1.
Methods Sixty-eight pairs of NSCLC and nontumor tissues were collected and the
expressions of BCORL1 and E-cadherin in them were detected using
immunohistochemical staining. The expression of BCORL1 was knocked down by siRNA 
in A549 cells. Transwell(TM) assays were performed to test NSCLC cell migration
and invasion in vitro. Results The expression of BCORL1 in NSCLC was
significantly higher than that in paired noncancerous tissues, while E-cadherin
was down-regulated in NSCLC as compared with nontumor tissues. Pearson
correlation coefficient analysis suggested that BCORL1 was negatively correlated 
with E-cadherin expression in NSCLC tissues. Clinical association analysis
suggested that the elevated expression of BCORL1 was evidently associated with
the higher incidence of lymph node metastasis and more advanced TNM stage. When
the expression of BCORL1 was down-regulated by a specific siRNA, E-cadherin was
up-regulated, and BCORL1 knockdown obviously inhibited cell migration and
invasion in A549 cells. Conclusion BCORL1 is overexpressed in NSCLC tissues and
it is negatively correlated with E-cadherin expression. Its high expression is
correlated with poor prognostic features. BCORL1 knockdown up-regulates
E-cadherin expression and subsequently inhibits cell migration and invasion of
lung cancer cells.

PMID: 26648304  [PubMed - in process]


59. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 8;10(12):e0144654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144654.
eCollection 2015.

IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-21 Double Producing T Cells Are Bcl6-Independent and Survive into
the Memory Phase in Plasmodium chabaudi Infection.

Carpio VH(1,)(2), Opata MM(1), Montañez ME(1,)(2), Banerjee PP(3), Dent AL(4),
Stephens R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Center for Human Immunobiology of 
Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United
States of America. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.

CD4 T cells are required to fight malaria infection by promoting both phagocytic 
activity and B cell responses for parasite clearance. In Plasmodium chabaudi
infection, one specific CD4 T cell subset generates anti-parasitic IFN-<U+03B3> and the 
antibody-promoting cytokine, IL-21. To determine the lineage of these
multifunctional T cells, we followed IFN-<U+03B3>+ effector T cells (Teff) into the
memory phase using Ifng-reporter mice. While Ifng+ Teff expanded, the level of
the Th1 lineage-determining transcription factor T-bet only peaked briefly. Ifng+
Teff also co-express ICOS, the B cell area homing molecule CXCR5, and other Tfh
lineage-associated molecules including Bcl6, the transcription factor required
for germinal center (GC) T follicular helper cells (Tfh) differentiation. Because
Bcl6 and T-bet co-localize to the nucleus of Ifng+ Teff, we hypothesized that
Bcl6 controls the Tfh-like phenotype of Ifng+ Teff cells in P. chabaudi
infection. We first transferred Bcl6-deficient T cells into wildtype hosts.
Bcl6-deficient T cells did not develop into GC Tfh, but they still generated
CXCR5+ IFN-<U+03B3>+ IL-21+ IL-10+ Teff, suggesting that this predominant population is 
not of the Tfh-lineage. IL-10 deficient mice, which have increased IFN-<U+03B3> and
T-bet expression, demonstrated expansion of both IFN-<U+03B3>+ IL-21+ CXCR5+ cells and
IFN-<U+03B3>+ GC Tfh cells, suggesting a Th1 lineage for the former. In the memory
phase, all Ifng+ T cells produced IL-21, but only a small percentage of highly
proliferative Ifng+ T cells maintained a T-bethi phenotype. In chronic malaria
infection, serum IFN-<U+03B3> correlates with increased protection, and our observation 
suggests Ifng+ T cells are maintained by cellular division. In summary, we found 
that Ifng+ T cells are not strictly Tfh derived during malaria infection. T cells
provide the host with a survival advantage when facing this well-equipped
pathogen, therefore, understanding the lineage of pivotal T cell players will aid
in the rational design of an effective malaria vaccine.

PMCID: PMC4672895
PMID: 26646149  [PubMed - in process]


60. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2015 Dec;16(12):58. doi: 10.1007/s11864-015-0374-0.

Aggressive B cell Lymphoma: Optimal Therapy for MYC-positive, Double-Hit, and
Triple-Hit DLBCL.

Dunleavy K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Building 10, Room 4N-115, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD, 20892,
USA. dunleavk@mail.nih.gov.

OPINION STATEMENT: Approximately 10% of cases of diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) harbor a MYC rearrangement and this has been associated with an inferior 
outcome following standard therapy across many different studies. Double-hit and 
triple-hit lymphomas harbor concurrent rearrangements of MYC and BCL2 and/or BCL6
and are also associated with a very aggressive course and poor clinical outcome. 
It is unclear and there is lack of consensus on how these diseases should be
approached therapeutically. They are characterized typically by high tumor
proliferation and likely require Burkitt lymphoma-type strategies and several
retrospective studies suggest that more intensive approaches than rituximab,
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) may be
beneficial. One challenge in this respect is that most patients with these
diseases are older than 60 years and generally have poor tolerability of regimens
typically used in Burkitt lymphoma. Dose-adjusted EPOCH-R is an alternative
effective immunochemotherapy platform for DLBCL and is effective in Burkitt
lymphoma, and retrospective studies suggest that it is effective and feasible in 
patients with DLBCL that harbors a MYC rearrangement with or without a BCL-2
translocation (double-hit). A multicenter study of this approach in
MYC-rearranged DLBCL is ongoing and preliminary results are very encouraging.
There is a lack of consensus on the role of consolidation stem cell
transplantation in patients who achieve a good response to initial therapy but at
this point in time, no (retrospective) studies have demonstrated any benefit.
These diseases are also associated with a high rate of CNS involvement and
progression and checking for cerebrospinal fluid by cytology and flow cytometry
at initial diagnosis should be considered. In summary, based on retrospective
data and preliminary prospective data (as more mature data is awaited), while
Burkitt-type regimens may be feasible in young patients, DA-EPOCH-R is a
reasonable approach for patients with these diseases, particularly for those over
the age of 60 years. CNS prophylaxis is a reasonable consideration (depending on 
clinical characteristics) given that the rate of CNS progression is high. Many
exciting new small molecule inhibitors such as BCL-2 and MYC inhibitors are in
development and are exciting for these diseases and attempts are underway to
combine them with effective immunochemotherapy platforms.

PMID: 26634708  [PubMed - in process]


61. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Mar;46(3):634-46. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545925. Epub 2016 Jan
8.

NFATc1 releases BCL6-dependent repression of CCR2 agonist expression in
peritoneal macrophages from Saccharomyces cerevisiae infected mice.

Busch R(1,)(2), Murti K(1,)(2), Liu J(1,)(2), Patra AK(1,)(2), Muhammad K(1,)(2),
Knobeloch KP(3), Lichtinger M(4), Bonifer C(4), Wörtge S(5), Waisman A(5),
Reifenberg K(6), Ellenrieder V(7), Serfling E(1,)(2), Avots A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, Julius Maximilians 
University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. (2)Comprehensive Cancer Center
Mainfranken, Julius Maximilians University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Neuropathology, University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)School of Cancer Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research, College of
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (6)German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Clinic of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology,
University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.

The link between the extensive usage of calcineurin (CN) inhibitors cyclosporin A
and tacrolimus (FK506) in transplantation medicine and the increasing rate of
opportunistic infections within this segment of patients is alarming. Currently, 
how peritoneal infections are favored by these drugs, which impair the activity
of several signaling pathways including the Ca(++) /CN/NFAT, Ca(++) /CN/cofilin, 
Ca(++) /CN/BAD, and NF-<U+03BA>B networks, is unknown. Here, we show that Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae infection of peritoneal resident macrophages triggers the transient
nuclear translocation of NFATc1ß isoforms, resulting in a coordinated,
CN-dependent induction of the Ccl2, Ccl7, and Ccl12 genes, all encoding CCR2
agonists. CN inhibitors block the CCR2-dependent recruitment of inflammatory
monocytes (IM) to the peritoneal cavities of S. cerevisiae infected mice. In
myeloid cells, NFATc1/ß proteins represent the most prominent NFATc1 isoforms.
NFATc1/ß ablation leads to a decrease of CCR2 chemokines, impaired mobilization
of IMs, and delayed clearance of infection. We show that, upon binding to a
composite NFAT/BCL6 regulatory element within the Ccl2 promoter, NFATc1/ß
proteins release the BCL6-dependent repression of Ccl2 gene in macrophages. These
findings suggest a novel CN-dependent cross-talk between NFAT and BCL6
transcription factors, which may affect the outcome of opportunistic fungal
infections in immunocompromised patients.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26631626  [PubMed - in process]


62. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 2;5:17651. doi: 10.1038/srep17651.

Specific immunotherapy in combination with Clostridium butyricum inhibits
allergic inflammation in the mouse intestine.

Shi Y(1), Xu LZ(2), Peng K(1), Wu W(1), Wu R(1), Liu ZQ(2,)(3), Yang G(2,)(3),
Geng XR(2,)(3), Liu J(4), Liu ZG(2), Liu Z(1), Yang PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai 200072, China. (2)ENT Institute of Shenzhen University
School of Medicine, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy &Immunology, Shenzhen,
518060, China. (3)Longgang Central Hospital, Shenzhen 518116, China. (4)Shenzhen 
Women &Children Healthcare Center, Shenzhen, China.

The current therapy on allergic inflammation is unsatisfactory. Probiotics
improve the immunity in the body. This study aims to test a hypothesis that
administration with Clostridium butyricum (C. butyricum) enforces the effect of
specific immunotherapy (SIT) on intestinal allergic inflammation. In this study, 
an ovalbumin (OVA) specific allergic inflammation mouse model was created. The
mice were treated with SIT or/and C. butyricum. The results showed that the
intestinal allergic inflammation was only moderately alleviated by SIT, which was
significantly enforced by a combination with C. butyricum; treating with C.
butyricum alone did not show much inhibitory efficacy. The increase in the
frequency of the interleukin (IL)-10-producing OVA-specific B cell (OVAsBC) was
observed in mice in parallel to the inhibitory effect on the intestinal allergic 
inflammation. The in vitro treatment of the OVAsBCs with OVA increased the
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) phosphorylation, modulated the transcription of the
Bcl6 gene, and triggered the OVAsBCs to differentiate to the IgE-producing plasma
cells. Exposure to both OVA and butyrate sodium in the culture increased the
expression of IL-10 in OVAsBCs. In conclusion, administration with C. butyricum
enforces the inhibitory effect of SIT on allergic inflammation in the mouse
intestine.

PMCID: PMC4667269
PMID: 26627845  [PubMed - in process]


63. Leukemia. 2015 Dec 1. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.330. [Epub ahead of print]

Similar clinical features in follicular lymphomas with and without breaks in the 
BCL2 locus.

Leich E(1,)(2), Hoster E(3), Wartenberg M(1,)(2), Unterhalt M(4), Siebert R(5),
Koch K(6), Klapper W(6), Engelhard M(7), Puppe B(1,)(2), Horn H(8), Staiger
AM(8), Stuhlmann-Laeisz C(5), Bernd HW(9), Feller AC(9), Hummel M(10), Lenze
D(10), Stein H(11), Hartmann S(12), Hansmann ML(12), Möller P(13), Hiddemann
W(4), Dreyling M(4), Ott G(14), Rosenwald A(1,)(2); German Low Grade Lymphoma
Study Group (GLSG).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken (CCC MF), Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology, University of
Munich, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany. (5)Institute of Human Genetics,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Kiel, Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology, Hematopathology Section and Lymph Node 
Registry, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. (7)Department
for Radiotherapy, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. (8)Margarete
Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus,
Stuttgart and University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (9)Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany. (10)Institute
of Pathology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,
Germany. (11)Pathodiagnostik Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (12)Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Frankfurt am, Frankfurt, Germany. (13)Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany. (14)Department of Clinical Pathology,
Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany.

Approximately 15% of follicular lymphomas (FLs) lack breaks in the BCL2 locus.
The aim of this study was to better define molecular and clinical features of
BCL2-breakpoint/t(14;18)-negative FLs. We studied the presence of BCL2, BCL6 and 
MYC breaks by fluorescence in situ hybridization and the expression of BCL2,
MUM1, CD10, P53 and Ki67 in large clinical trial cohorts of 540 advanced-stage FL
cases and 116 early-stage disease FL patients treated with chemotherapy regimens 
and radiation, respectively. A total of 86% and 53% of advanced- and early-stage 
FLs were BCL2-breakpoint-positive, respectively. BCL2 was expressed in almost all
FLs with BCL2 break and also in 86% and 69% of BCL2-breakpoint-negative advanced-
and early-stage FLs, respectively. CD10 expression was significantly reduced in
BCL2-breakpoint-negative FLs of all stages and MUM1 and Ki67 expression were
significantly increased in BCL2-break-negative early-stage FLs. Patient
characteristics did not differ between FLs with and without BCL2 breaks and
neither did survival times in advanced-stage FLs. These results suggest that the 
molecular profile differs to some extent between FLs with and without BCL2 breaks
and support the notion that FLs with and without BCL2 breaks belong to the same
lymphoma entity.Leukemia advance online publication, 22 January 2016;
doi:10.1038/leu.2015.330.

PMID: 26621338  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


64. Immunity. 2015 Dec 15;43(6):1064-74. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.10.015. Epub 2015
Nov 24.

The FOXO1 Transcription Factor Instructs the Germinal Center Dark Zone Program.

Dominguez-Sola D(1), Kung J(2), Holmes AB(3), Wells VA(3), Mo T(3), Basso K(4),
Dalla-Favera R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address:
david.dominguez-sola@mssm.edu. (2)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (3)Institute for
Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (4)Institute for
Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of
Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(5)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA; Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address:
rd10@cumc.columbia.edu.

The pathways regulating formation of the germinal center (GC) dark zone (DZ) and 
light zone (LZ) are unknown. In this study we show that FOXO1 transcription
factor expression was restricted to the GC DZ and was required for DZ formation, 
since its absence in mice led to the loss of DZ gene programs and the formation
of LZ-only GCs. FOXO1-negative GC B cells displayed normal somatic hypermutation 
but defective affinity maturation and class switch recombination. The function of
FOXO1 in sustaining the DZ program involved the trans-activation of the chemokine
receptor CXCR4, and cooperation with the BCL6 transcription factor in the
trans-repression of genes involved in immune activation, DNA repair, and plasma
cell differentiation. These results also have implications for the role of FOXO1 
in lymphomagenesis because they suggest that constitutive FOXO1 activity might be
required for the oncogenic activity of deregulated BCL6 expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26620759  [PubMed - in process]


65. Acta Med Croatica. 2015 Mar;69(1):25-32.

[PROGNOSTIC ROLE OF NF-<U+03BA>B EXPRESSION IN DIFFUSE LARGE B-CELL LYMPHOMA SUBGROUPS].

[Article in Croatian]

kunca Z, Planinc-Peraica A.

OBJECTIVE: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with germinal center B-cell
(GCB) phenotype has better prognosis than activated mature B-cell (ABC) phenotype
or type 3 subgroup. Previous studies have reported on a major role of the nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in ABC and type 3 phenotypes, whereas GCB phenotype is
characterized by frequent REL amplifications.
METHODS: In 99 patients diagnosed with DLBCL, the presence of CD10, BCL6 and MUM1
was analyzed by immunohistochemical method to divide them into the GCB, ABC and
type 3 subgroups. Then, NF-<U+03BA>B expression was analyzed in the nucleus and
cytoplasm. Nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B expression was detected in 22 (22%) cases from all DLBCL
subgroups. NF-<U+03BA>B expression in the cytoplasm was recorded in 77 (77%) cases from 
all DLBCL subgroups and this finding was significant.
RESULTS: Results on the presence of CD10, BCL6 and MUM1 and the presence of NF-xB
in the nucleus were not significant. Analysis of nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B accumulation is
not associated with any of the clinical parameters including age, sex, stage of
disease, therapy administered and IPP. According to Hans et al., patients with
NF-<U+03BA>B expressed in the cytoplasm have significantly poorer survival irrespective 
of the subgroup than patients without cytoplasmic NF-<U+03BA>B, and these results are
significant. Patients with GCB phenotype and negative nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B expression
have better survival than those with GCB phenotype and positive nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B
expression, and these results are also significant. Patients having received
chemotherapy according to the R-CHOP schedule and with positive nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B
expression have better survival; however, these results are not significant.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: These data suggest that nuclear and cytoplasmic NF-<U+03BA>B 
expression may be a prognostic factor in DLBCL, thus explaining the stratified
risk observed in patients in combination with GCB/non-GCB phenotype. Our study
showed the NF-<U+03BA>B activity to be crucial in all DLBCL subgroups, thus potentially 
representing a promising molecular target for future therapies.

PMID: 26606782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Blood. 2016 Feb 18;127(7):858-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-05-645069. Epub 2015
Nov 24.

Combinatorial targeting of nuclear export and translation of RNA inhibits
aggressive B-cell lymphomas.

Culjkovic-Kraljacic B(1), Fernando TM(2), Marullo R(2), Calvo-Vidal N(2), Verma
A(3), Yang S(2), Tabbò F(4), Gaudiano M(5), Zahreddine H(1), Goldstein RL(2),
Patel J(2), Taldone T(6), Chiosis G(6), Ladetto M(7), Ghione P(8), Machiorlatti
R(9), Elemento O(3), Inghirami G(5), Melnick A(2), Borden KL(1), Cerchietti L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer and Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada; (2)Hematology and
Oncology Division. (3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute for
Computational Biomedicine, and. (4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Department, 
Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY; Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Health Science and Center for Experimental Research
and Medical Studies (CeRMS), University of Turin, Turin, Italy; (5)Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine Department, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell
University, New York, NY; (6)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry, 
Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; 
and. (7)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Science and Center for
Experimental Research and Medical Studies (CeRMS), University of Turin, Turin,
Italy; Division of Hematology, Department of Experimental Medicine and Oncology, 
University of Turin, Turin, Italy. (8)Division of Hematology, Department of
Experimental Medicine and Oncology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(9)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Science and Center for
Experimental Research and Medical Studies (CeRMS), University of Turin, Turin,
Italy;

Aggressive double- and triple-hit (DH/TH) diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs)
feature activation of Hsp90 stress pathways. Herein, we show that Hsp90 controls 
posttranscriptional dynamics of key messenger RNA (mRNA) species including those 
encoding BCL6, MYC, and BCL2. Using a proteomics approach, we found that Hsp90
binds to and maintains activity of eIF4E. eIF4E drives nuclear export and
translation of BCL6, MYC, and BCL2 mRNA. eIF4E RNA-immunoprecipitation sequencing
in DLBCL suggests that nuclear eIF4E controls an extended program that includes
B-cell receptor signaling, cellular metabolism, and epigenetic regulation.
Accordingly, eIF4E was required for survival of DLBCL including the most
aggressive subtypes, DH/TH lymphomas. Indeed, eIF4E inhibition induces tumor
regression in cell line and patient-derived tumorgrafts of TH-DLBCL, even in the 
presence of elevated Hsp90 activity. Targeting Hsp90 is typically limited by
counterregulatory elevation of Hsp70B, which induces resistance to Hsp90
inhibitors. Surprisingly, we identify Hsp70 mRNA as an eIF4E target. In this way,
eIF4E inhibition can overcome drug resistance to Hsp90 inhibitors. Accordingly,
rational combinatorial inhibition of eIF4E and Hsp90 inhibitors resulted in
cooperative antilymphoma activity in DH/TH DLBCL in vitro and in vivo.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4760090 [Available on 2017-02-18]
PMID: 26603836  [PubMed - in process]


67. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2016 Apr;142(4):733-40. doi: 10.1007/s00432-015-2076-1. 
Epub 2015 Nov 21.

CD4+ T cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia inhibit the proliferation 
of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells by secretion of miR-10a.

Yu Z(1), Li D(1), Ju XL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, 107 Wen Hua Xi
Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, 107 Wen Hua Xi Road, Jinan,
Shandong, 250012, People's Republic of China. jxiuli2015@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The abnormality of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(BM-MSCs) has been reported to contribute to the pathogenesis of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). T cell immunodeficiencies play important roles in the progression
of leukemia. This study investigated the effect of CD4+ T cells from AML patients
on the proliferation of BM-MSCs.
METHODS: The growth rate of BM-MSCs from AML patients and healthy donor was
compared. CD4+ T cells were separated and identified from AML patients. Through
co-culturing CD4+ T cells from AML patients and BM-MSCs from healthy, we detected
the proliferation of BM-MSCs from healthy by MTT assay. qRT-PCR was performed to 
examine the expression of miR-10a. Luciferase reporter assay was used to analyze 
the regulation of miR-10a on the expression of BCL6.
RESULTS: Here, we observed that BM-MSC from AML patients grew slower than that
from healthy. CD4+ T cells from AML patients inhibited the proliferation of
BM-MSCs through secreting miR-10a. In addition, miR-10a was found to target BCL6 
and regulated its expression in transcription and translation levels. Correlation
analysis revealed that the level of miR-10a in serum of AML patients was
negatively correlated with BCL6 in BM-MSC.
CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence that CD4+ T cells from AML patients
suppress the proliferation of BM-MSCs via secreting miR-10a.

PMID: 26590574  [PubMed - in process]


68. Trends Immunol. 2015 Dec;36(12):758-60. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2015.11.001. Epub 2015 
Nov 15.

TCF-1 at the Tfh and Th1 Divergence.

Chen Y(1), Yu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunomodulation Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash University, Victoria
3800, Australia. (2)Molecular Immunomodulation Laboratory, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash
University, Victoria 3800, Australia; Centre for Inflammatory Diseases, School of
Clinical Sciences, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia. Electronic
address: Di.Yu@monash.edu.

Three recent studies provide new insight into the mechanisms that promote the
differentiation of antigen-primed T cells into the follicular helper T (Tfh)
lineage, revealing a key role for the transcription factor TCF-1 in the
regulation of the Bcl6-Blimp-1 axis that mediates the divergence between the Tfh 
and the Th1 lineages.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26588880  [PubMed - in process]


69. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2015 Fall;45(5):574-81.

Childhood de novo CD5+ Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma: a Separate Entity?

Coffey A(1), Allen A(2), Thomsen MB(3), Sulis ML(4), Murty V(5), Hoehn D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY, USA amc2343@columbia.edu. (2)Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, Divison of Hematopathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, NY, USA Department of Anatomical and Clinical Pathology, Cooper University 
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA Department of Pathology and
Cell Biology, Divison of Hematopathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, NY, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology and Oncology, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (5)Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

De novo CD5-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (CD5+ DLBCL) is a subtype of
DLBCL found predominantly in older individuals. This particular subtype has been 
associated with a female predominance and a more aggressive clinical course.
Conversely, this entity has not been described in the pediatric population. We
report a case of a 12 year-old boy who presented with an ileocecal
intussusception. Radiologic, morphologic, and immunophenotypic analysis revealed 
an isolated extranodal mass consistent with a CD5+ DLBCL, germinal center cell
phenotype. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis was negative for cMYC,
BCL6, BCL2, MLL, and IGH/CCND1 rearrangement and showed loss of one copy of MLL
in 32% cells. The patient was treated with four cycles of cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, prednisolone, methotrexate, and doxorubicin and achieved complete
remission. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first detailed report of a
de novo CD5+ DLBCL occurring in a child.

© 2015 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 26586711  [PubMed - in process]


70. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 24;13(8):1692-704. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.10.037. Epub
2015 Nov 12.

Combined Loss of Tet1 and Tet2 Promotes B Cell, but Not Myeloid Malignancies, in 
Mice.

Zhao Z(1), Chen L(2), Dawlaty MM(3), Pan F(4), Weeks O(5), Zhou Y(6), Cao Z(6),
Shi H(7), Wang J(8), Lin L(2), Chen S(9), Yuan W(6), Qin Z(10), Ni H(11), Nimer
SD(9), Yang FC(12), Jaenisch R(13), Jin P(14), Xu M(15).

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA; Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin 300060, China; Department of Pediatrics, Herman
B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research and the Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (4)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA; Department of
Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, FL
33199, USA. (6)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of
Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China. (7)Sylvester Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA; State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology,
Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China. (8)Department
of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (9)Sylvester Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA. (10)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, 
Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
60612, USA. (12)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA; Department of
Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (13)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research and the Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: jaenisch@wi.mit.edu.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: peng.jin@emory.edu. (15)Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Herman B.
Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. Electronic address: mxx51@miami.edu.

TET1/2/3 are methylcytosine dioxygenases that regulate cytosine
hydroxymethylation. Tet1/2 are abundantly expressed in HSC/HPCs and are
implicated in hematological malignancies. Tet2 deletion in mice causes myeloid
malignancies, while Tet1-null mice develop B cell lymphoma after an extended
period of latency. Interestingly, TET1/2 are often concomitantly downregulated in
acute B-lymphocytic leukemia. Here, we investigated the overlapping and
non-redundant functions of Tet1/2 using Tet1/2 double-knockout (DKO) mice. DKO
and Tet2(-/-) HSC/HPCs show overlapping and unique 5 hmC and 5 mC profiles. DKO
mice exhibit strikingly decreased incidence and delayed onset of myeloid
malignancies in comparison to Tet2(-/-) mice and in contrast develop lethal B
cell malignancies. Transcriptome analysis of DKO tumors reveals expression
changes in many genes dysregulated in human B cell malignancies, including LMO2, 
BCL6, and MYC. These results highlight the critical roles of TET1/2 individually 
and together in the pathogenesis of hematological malignancies.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4764044
PMID: 26586431  [PubMed - in process]


71. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):2401-16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6262.

Prognostic impact of concurrent MYC and BCL6 rearrangements and expression in de 
novo diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Ye Q(1), Xu-Monette ZY(1), Tzankov A(2), Deng L(1), Wang X(1), Manyam GC(3),
Visco C(4), Montes-Moreno S(5), Zhang L(3), Dybkær K(6), Chiu A(7), Orazi A(8),
Zu Y(9), Bhagat G(10), Richards KL(11), Hsi ED(12), Choi WW(13), van Krieken
JH(14), Huh J(15), Ponzoni M(16), Ferreri AJ(16), Parsons BM(17), Møller MB(18), 
Piris MA(5), Winter JN(19), Medeiros LJ(1), Hu S(1), Young KH(1,)(20).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (2)University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)San Bortolo Hospital,
Vicenza, Italy. (5)Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, Santander,
Spain. (6)Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (7)Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (8)Weill Medical College 
of Cornell University, New York, New York, USA. (9)Houston Methodist Hospital,
Houston, Texas, USA. (10)Columbia University Medical Center and New York
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, USA. (11)University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. (12)Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA. (13)University of Hong Kong Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, Hong Kong, China. (14)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (15)Asan Medical Center, Ulsan University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (16)San Raffaele H. Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(17)Gundersen Lutheran Health System, La Crosse, Wisconsin, USA. (18)Odense
University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (19)Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (20)The University of Texas
School of Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, USA.

Double-hit B-cell lymphoma is a common designation for a group of tumors
characterized by concurrent translocations of MYC and BCL2, BCL6, or other genes.
The prognosis of concurrent MYC and BCL6 translocations is not well known. In
this study, we assessed rearrangements and expression of MYC, BCL2 and BCL6 in
898 patients with de novo diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with standard
chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone plus
rituximab). Neither BCL6 translocation alone (more frequent in activated B-cell
like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) nor in combination with MYC translocation
(observed in 2.0% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) predicted poorer survival in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients
with MYC/BCL6 co-expression did have significantly poorer survival, however,
MYC/BCL6 co-expression had no effect on prognosis in the absence of MYC/BCL2
co-expression, and had no additive impact in MYC+/BCL2+ cases. The isolated
MYC+/BCL6+/BCL2- subset, more frequent in germinal center B-cell like diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, had significantly better survival compared with the
isolated MYC+/BCL2+/BCL6- subset (more frequent in activated B-cell like diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma). In summary, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients with
either MYC/BCL6 rearrangements or MYC/BCL6 co-expression did not always have
poorer prognosis; MYC expression levels should be evaluated simultaneously; and
double-hit B-cell lymphoma needs to be refined based on the specific genetic
abnormalities present in these tumors.

PMID: 26573234  [PubMed - in process]


72. Sci China Life Sci. 2015 Dec;58(12):1226-32. doi: 10.1007/s11427-015-4919-z. Epub
2015 Nov 14.

Mechanisms of action of BCL6 during germinal center B cell development.

Huang C(1), Melnick A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Immunology & Department of Immunobiology and
Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025,
China. huangcx@shsmu.edu.cn. (2)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, 10065, USA. 
amm2014@med.cornell.edu.

The transcriptional repressor B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) controls a large
transcriptional network that is required for the formation and maintenance of
germinal centers (GC). GC B cells represent the normal counterpart of most human 
B-cell lymphomas, which are often characterized by deregulated BCL6 expression or
BCL6-mediated pathways. BCL6 suppresses gene transcription largely through
recruitment of its co-repressors through its distinct repression domain.
Understanding the precise biological roles of each repression domain in normal
and malignant B cells is helpful for development of targeted inhibition of BCL6
functions that is emerging as the basis for design of anti-lymphoma therapies.
This review focuses on recent progress in the molecular mechanisms of action of
BCL6 in B cells and discusses remaining unresolved questions related to how these
mechanisms are linked to normal and malignant B cell development.

PMID: 26566802  [PubMed - in process]


73. Cancer. 2016 Feb 15;122(4):559-64. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29781. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Impact of oncogene rearrangement patterns on outcomes in patients with double-hit
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Landsburg DJ(1), Petrich AM(2), Abramson JS(3), Sohani AR(4), Press O(5),
Cassaday R(5), Chavez JC(6), Song K(7), Zelenetz AD(8), Gandhi M(2,)(9), Shah
N(10), Fenske TS(10), Jaso J(11), Medeiros LJ(11), Yang DT(12), Nabhan C(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (3)Center for Lymphoma, Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of
Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (5)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington. (6)Department of Malignant Hematology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida. (7)Leukemia/BMT Program of British
Columbia, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York. (9)Virginia Cancer Specialists, Fairfax, Virginia. (10)Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(11)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University
of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin. (13)Section of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

BACKGROUND: Double-hit lymphomas (DHLs) are collectively defined as B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphomas harboring rearrangements of MYC as well as B-cell lymphoma 
2 (BCL2) and/or B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6). To the authors' knowledge, the impact
of specific oncogene rearrangements on outcomes of patients with DHL who are
treated with immunochemotherapy has not been previously described.
METHODS: The authors identified patients whose diagnostic tissue specimens
underwent metaphase karyotyping or fluorescence in situ hybridization for MYC as 
well as both BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangements. Cohorts were defined by the presence
(+) or absence (-) of rearrangements: MYC+/BCL2+/BCL6- (BCL2-DHL),
MYC+/BCL2-/BCL6+ (BCL6-DHL), and MYC+/BCL2+/BCL6+ (triple-hit lymphoma; THL).
RESULTS: A total of 117 patients were included in the current analysis (76
BCL2-DHL patients, 16 BCL6-DHL patients, and 25 THL patients). Compared with
patients with BCL2-DHL, those with BCL6-DHL were more likely to be classified as 
having a non-germinal center cell of origin, presented with extranodal disease,
and appeared to achieve higher rates of complete response despite receiving
intensive induction therapy less frequently. However, patients with BCL6-DHL
experienced a shorter median overall survival if achieving an initial complete
response compared with patients with BCL2-DHL. Patients with THL experienced
survival outcomes similar to those of patients with BCL2-DHL.
CONCLUSIONS: Recognition of the specific oncogene rearrangements may be of
prognostic value and potentially guide future therapeutic strategies for patients
with DHL. Cancer 2016;122:559-564. © 2015 American Cancer Society.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26565895  [PubMed - in process]


74. Tumour Biol. 2015 Nov 9. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-339-5p inhibits migration and invasion in ovarian cancer cell lines by
targeting NACC1 and BCL6.

Shan W(1,)(2), Li J(1,)(2), Bai Y(1,)(2), Lu X(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan
University, 128 Shenyang Road in Yangpu District, Shanghai, 200011, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases,
Shanghai, 200011, China. (3)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Gynecology
Hospital of Fudan University, 128 Shenyang Road in Yangpu District, Shanghai,
200011, China. 052108365@fudan.edu.cn. (4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female
Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases, Shanghai, 200011, China.
052108365@fudan.edu.cn.

This study aimed to explore the role of miR-339-5p in ovarian cancer. The
expression of miR-339-5p in seven ovarian cancer cell lines (Hey, SKOV3, OVCAR5, 
SKOV3-IP, A2780, CAOV3, and OVCA433) was detected by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The miR-339-5p mimic and inhibitor were used
to regulate its expression. Migration, invasion, and proliferation were examined.
A bioinformatics analysis was used to predict targets, and a dual-luciferase
reporter system was applied for validation, along with Western blot verification.
Additionally, the association of miR-339-5p and its target genes with ovarian
cancer was analyzed based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. OVCAR5 and 
SKOV3 had the highest and lowest miR-339-5p expression, respectively. Inhibition 
of miR-339-5p expression increased the migration and invasion of OVCAR5 cells,
while in SKOV3 cells, upregulated miR-339-5p attenuated the migration and
invasion ability. Modulation of miR-339-5p had no effect on proliferation. The
genes nucleus accumbens associated 1(BEN and BTB (POZ) domain containing) (NACC1)
and B cell lymphoma-6 (bcl6) were validated to be targets of miR-339-5p.
Clinically, patients with a high expression of NACC1 had a high risk in the
survival analysis. miR-339-5p inhibits migration and invasion in ovarian cancer
by targeting NACC1 and BCL6. miR-339-5p may be a biomarker of metastasis in
ovarian cancer; NACC1 had a predictive value for ovarian cancer progression.

PMID: 26553360  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Oct;35(10):1451-6.

[Construction of human Bcl-6 3'UTR reporter vector and expression vector and
their functional assessment].

[Article in Chinese]

Han BY(1), Cui HZ, Yan X, Huang P, Huang HL, Fan ZY, Dou JT.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Endocrinology, General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China; 
2Department of Endocrinology, 264 Hospital of Beijing Military Command, Taiyuan
030000, Chin. E-mail: bzy229@sina.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the direct regulation of miR-127 on Bcl-6 and the effect of
Bcl-6 in rescuing miR-127-induced cell cycle and cell growth inhibition.
METHODS: The 3'UTR and coding region of human bcl-6 gene were amplified by PCR
and cloned into pcDNA3.0-Luc and pcDNA3.0-Flag vectors, respectively. Mutations
were introduced into the seed sequences of the predicted miR-127 target sites
within the Bcl-6 3'UTR using recombinant PCR. Luciferase assay was used to verify
the direct targeted regulation of miR-127 on Bcl-6. In HepG2 cell models with
overexpression or knockdown of miR-12, the changes of cell cycle and cell growth 
were investigated after transfection with the constructed vectors.
RESULTS: The recombinant plasmids were successfully obtained as confirmed by
double digestion and sequence identification. Luciferase assay showed that in
293T and HepG2 cells, miR-127 inhibited the activation of wild-type Bcl-6 3'UTR
reporter vector but not mutated Bcl-6 3'UTR vector. Overexpression of miR-127
induced cell cycle arrest at G(2)/M phase and suppressed the growth of HepG2
cells, and these effects were reversed by Bcl-6 overexpression.
CONCLUSION: We successfully cloned wild-type and mutated 3'UTR reporter vectors
and expression vector of bcl-6 gene and confirmed their biological functions.

PMID: 26547340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Nov;16(15):e555-67. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00005-4.

Double-hit and double-protein-expression lymphomas: aggressive and refractory
lymphomas.

Sarkozy C(1), Traverse-Glehen A(2), Coiffier B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France; University Lyon
1, Lyon, France. (2)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Lyon, France; University Lyon 1, Lyon, France. (3)Haematology Department,
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France; University Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
Electronic address: Bertrand.coiffier@chu-lyon.fr.

Double-hit lymphoma (DHL) is a subgroup of aggressive lymphomas with both MYC and
BCL2 gene rearrangements, characterised by a rapidly progressing clinical course 
that is refractory to aggressive treatment and short survival. Over time, the
definition was modified and now includes diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
with MYC translocation combined with an additional translocation involving BCL2
or BCL6. Some cases that have a similar clinical course with concomitant
overexpression of MYC or BCL2 proteins were recently characterised as
immunohistochemical double-hit lymphomas (ie, double-protein-expression lymphomas
[DPLs]). The clinical course of these DPLs is worse than so-called standard DLBCL
but suggested by some studies to be slightly better than DHL, although there is
overlap between the two categories. Present treatment does not allow cure or
long-term survival in patients with genetic or immunohistochemical double-hit
lymphomas, but several new drugs are being developed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Feb;46(2):360-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201546043. Epub 2015 Nov
24.

TGF-ß induces the differentiation of human CXCL13-producing CD4(+) T cells.

Kobayashi S(1), Watanabe T(2), Suzuki R(3), Furu M(4), Ito H(5), Ito J(3),
Matsuda S(5), Yoshitomi H(1,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovation in Immunoregulative Technology and Therapeutics, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (2)The Tazuke-Kofukai
Medical Research Institute, Kitano Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of
Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Department of the Control for Rheumatic Diseases,
Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (5)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. 
(6)Department of Tissue Regeneration, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

In the ectopic lymphoid-like structures present in chronic inflammatory
conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, a subset of human effector memory CD4(+)
T cells that lacks features of follicular helper T (Tfh) cells produces CXCL13.
Here, we report that TGF-ß induces the differentiation of human CXCL13-producing 
CD4(+) T cells from naïve CD4(+) T cells. The TGF-ß-induced CXCL13-producing
CD4(+) T cells do not express CXCR5, B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), and other Tfh-cell
markers. Furthermore, expression levels of CD25 (IL-2Ra) in CXCL13-producing
CD4(+) T cells are significantly lower than those in FoxP3(+) in vitro induced
Treg cells. Consistent with this, neutralization of IL-2 and knockdown of STAT5
clearly upregulate CXCL13 production by CD4(+) T cells, while downregulating the 
expression of FoxP3. Furthermore, overexpression of FoxP3 in naïve CD4(+) T cells
downregulates CXCL13 production, and knockdown of FoxP3 fails to inhibit the
differentiation of CXCL13-producing CD4(+) T cells. As reported in rheumatoid
arthritis, proinflammatory cytokines enhance secondary CXCL13 production from
reactivated CXCL13-producing CD4(+) T cells. Our findings demonstrate that
CXCL13-producing CD4(+) T cells lacking Tfh-cell features differentiate via TGF-ß
signaling but not via FoxP3, and exert their function in IL-2-limited but
TGF-ß-rich and proinflammatory cytokine-rich inflammatory conditions.

© 2015 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26541894  [PubMed - in process]


78. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:241301. doi: 10.1155/2015/241301. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Identification of Novel Epigenetic Markers of Prostate Cancer by NotI-Microarray 
Analysis.

Dmitriev AA(1), Rosenberg EE(2), Krasnov GS(3), Gerashchenko GV(2), Gordiyuk
VV(2), Pavlova TV(4), Kudryavtseva AV(3), Beniaminov AD(3), Belova AA(3),
Bondarenko YN(5), Danilets RO(5), Glukhov AI(6), Kondratov AG(2), Alexeyenko
A(7), Alekseev BY(8), Klein G(4), Senchenko VN(3), Kashuba VI(9).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia ; P.A. Herzen Moscow Cancer Research Institute, Ministry of
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (2)Institute of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev
03680, Ukraine. (3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Moscow 119991, Russia. (4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell
Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Institute of Urology, 
National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev 04053, Ukraine.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Kurchatov NBIC Centre NRC "Kurchatov
Institute", Moscow 123182, Russia. (7)Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life
Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm,
Sweden. (8)P.A. Herzen Moscow Cancer Research Institute, Ministry of Healthcare
of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (9)Institute of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev 03680,
Ukraine ; Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska
Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

A significant need for reliable and accurate cancer diagnostics and prognosis
compels the search for novel biomarkers that would be able to discriminate
between indolent and aggressive tumors at the early stages of disease. The aim of
this work was identification of potential diagnostic biomarkers for
characterization of different types of prostate tumors. NotI-microarrays with 180
clones associated with chromosome 3 genes/loci were applied to determine genetic 
and epigenetic alterations in 33 prostate tumors. For 88 clones, aberrations were
detected in more than 10% of tumors. The major types of alterations were DNA
methylation and/or deletions. Frequent methylation of the discovered loci was
confirmed by bisulfite sequencing on selective sampling of genes: FGF12, GATA2,
and LMCD1. Three genes (BHLHE40, BCL6, and ITGA9) were tested for expression
level alterations using qPCR, and downregulation associated with hypermethylation
was shown in the majority of tumors. Based on these data, we proposed the set of 
potential biomarkers for detection of prostate cancer and discrimination between 
prostate tumors with different malignancy and aggressiveness: BHLHE40, FOXP1,
LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860,
LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY, and LRRC58. Moreover, we probabilistically
estimated putative functional relations between the genes within each set using
the network enrichment analysis.

PMCID: PMC4602334
PMID: 26491211  [PubMed - in process]


79. Lab Med. 2015 Fall;46(4):320-6. doi: 10.1309/LM0BOC84GSQGHYKD.

B Lymphoblastic Leukemia With a Novel t(11;15) (q23;q15) and Unique Burkittoid
Morphologic and Immunophenotypic Findings in a 9-Year-Old Boy.

Smith MC(1), Kressin MK(2), Crawford E(3), Wang XJ(4), Kim AS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN Currently at the Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
Smith9mg@ucmail.uc.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN Currently at Austin Pathology
Associates, Austin, TX. (3)Genetics Associates, Inc, Nashville, TN. (4)Department
of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN. (5)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN Currently at the Department
of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.

B lymphoblastic leukemia is a B progenitor cell neoplasm with a range of immature
immunophenotypes and several associated cytogenetic lesions. In contrast, Burkitt
leukemia/lymphoma is a mature B lymphocyte neoplasm with a characteristic
germinal center immunophenotype and MYC rearrangement. With modern
immunophenotyping and cytogenetic methods, the distinction between these 2
entities is seldom ambiguous. Herein, we report a case of a 9-year-old white boy 
with circulating leukemic cells that demonstrate morphologic overlap between
Burkitt leukemia and B lymphoblastic leukemia. Flow cytometry and
immunohistochemical stains demonstrated expression of sets of markers with
overlap between immature and mature immunophenotypes. While the leukemic cells
tested positive for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), they expressed
CD20, BCL6 (in a subset), and lambda-restricted surface light chain. Molecular
studies confirmed a true clonal light chain rearrangement, whereas fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) results were negative for MYC rearrangement. Metaphase 
cytogenetics identified a novel gene rearrangement, t(11;15)(q23;q15), that does 
not involve the MLL gene. This unique cytogenetic abnormality involves the loss
of INO80, an adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) with DNA binding ability. This
cytogenetic abnormality may represent a unique feature of this overlap entity of 
B lymphoblastic lymphoma that expresses markers of maturity and demonstrates
Burkitt-like morphology.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology (ASCP).

PMID: 26489677  [PubMed - in process]


80. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Nov;144(5):805-10. doi: 10.1309/AJCPV3F9BEFCTAOQ.

Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma associated with an extracutaneous
dissemination: a cytogenetic finding of potential prognostic value.

Subramaniyam S(1), Magro CM(2), Gogineni S(2), Tam W(2), Mathew S(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY.
ssubramaniyam@winthrop.org. (2)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New
York, NY.

OBJECTIVES: Cytogenetic studies on cutaneous lymphomas are rare, and very little 
is known about their prognostic value. We present a rare case of primary
cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL) with a complex translocation
presenting with cutaneous and extracutaneous dissemination in the lymph node.
METHODS: Morphologic, immunohistochemical, conventional cytogenetic, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were performed on this patient.
RESULTS: A combination of cytogenetic and FISH analysis identified a complex
novel four-way t(2;14;9;3) (p11.2;q32;p13;q27) translocation involving
rearrangements of BCL6, immunoglobulin light and heavy chain genes, and an
unknown gene on 9p.
CONCLUSIONS: Our report elaborates the morphologic and immunohistochemical
features in combination with cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic analysis of
PCFCL, which provide additional insight into the clinical and biologic behavior
of this lesion.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 26486746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 11;290(50):30163-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.663518. Epub
2015 Oct 19.

IL-1R/TLR2 through MyD88 Divergently Modulates Osteoclastogenesis through
Regulation of Nuclear Factor of Activated T Cells c1 (NFATc1) and B
Lymphocyte-induced Maturation Protein-1 (Blimp1).

Chen Z(1), Su L(2), Xu Q(3), Katz J(2), Michalek SM(4), Fan M(5), Feng X(6),
Zhang P(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pediatric Dentistry, the Department of Prosthodontics,
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310006, China, and. (2)From the Departments of Pediatric Dentistry. (3)From the
Departments of Pediatric Dentistry, the The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of
Basic Science of Stomatology and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine of Ministry
of Education, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430079, China. (4)Microbiology, and. (5)the The State Key Laboratory Breeding
Base of Basic Science of Stomatology and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine of
Ministry of Education, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, Hubei 430079, China. (6)Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294. (7)From the Departments of Pediatric Dentistry,
pingz@uab.edu.

Toll-like receptors (TLR) and the receptor for interleukin-1 (IL-1R) signaling
play an important role in bacteria-mediated bone loss diseases including
periodontitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteomyelitis. Recent studies have shown
that TLR ligands inhibit the receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-induced
osteoclast differentiation from un-committed osteoclast precursors, whereas IL-1 
potentiates RANKL-induced osteoclast formation. However, IL-1R and TLR belong to 
the same IL-1R/TLR superfamily, and activate similar intracellular signaling
pathways. Here, we investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the distinct
effects of IL-1 and Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (LPS-PG) on
RANKL-induced osteoclast formation. Our results show that LPS-PG and IL-1
differentially regulate RANKL-induced activation of osteoclast genes encoding
Car2, Ctsk, MMP9, and TRAP, as well as expression of NFATc1, a master
transcription factor of osteoclastogenesis. Regulation of osteoclast genes and
NFATc1 by LPS-PG and IL-1 is dependent on MyD88, an important signaling adaptor
for both TLR and IL-1R family members. Furthermore, LPS-PG and IL-1
differentially regulate RANKL-costimulatory receptor OSCAR (osteoclast-associated
receptor) expression and Ca(2+) oscillations induced by RANKL. Moreover, LPS-PG
completely abrogates RANKL-induced gene expression of B lymphocyte-induced
maturation protein-1 (Blimp1), a global transcriptional repressor of
anti-osteoclastogenic genes encoding Bcl6, IRF8, and MafB. However, IL-1 enhances
RANKL-induced blimp1 gene expression but suppresses the gene expression of bcl6, 
irf8, and mafb. Our study reveals the involvement of multiple signaling molecules
in the differential regulation of RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis by TLR2 and
IL-1 signaling. Understanding the signaling cross-talk among TLR, IL-1R, and RANK
is critical for identifying therapeutic strategies to control bacteria-mediated
bone loss.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4706008 [Available on 2016-12-11]
PMID: 26483549  [PubMed - in process]


82. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;17(10):1084-7.

[Roles of follicular helper T cells and follicular regulatory T cells in
pathogenesis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura in children].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang CM(1), Luo Y, Wang YC, Sheng GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450000, China. meichun123@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the roles of follicular helper T (Tfh) cells and follicular
regulatory T (Tfr) cells in the pathogenesis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) in
children.
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were collected from 40 HSP children and 25
healthy controls. The percentages of Tfh and Tfr cells were measured by flow
cytometry; the mRNA expression levels of Bcl-6, c-MAF, Blimp-1, and PD-1 in
peripheral blood were measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Compared with the controls, the children with HSP had significantly
increased percentage of Tfh cells and Tfh/Tfr ratio but a significantly reduced
percentage of Tfr cells in the peripheral blood (P<0.05). Compared with the
controls, the children with HSP had significantly increased mRNA expression of
Bcl-6 and c-MAF but significantly reduced mRNA expression of Blimp-1 in CD4+ T
cells (P<0.05), and had significantly increased mRNA expression of PD-1 but
significantly reduced mRNA expression of Blimp-1 in CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells 
(P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal percentages of Tfh and Tfr cells may be involved in the
pathogenesis of HSP in children, and over-expression of Bcl-6, c-MAF, and PD-1
mRNA and inhibited expression of Blimp-1 mRNA may be considered as important
reasons for abnormal percentages of Tfh and Tfr cells.

PMID: 26483229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Virchows Arch. 2016 Feb;468(2):127-39. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1864-y. Epub 2015 
Oct 19.

The heterogeneity of follicular lymphomas: from early development to
transformation.

Xerri L(1), Dirnhofer S(2), Quintanilla-Martinez L(3), Sander B(4), Chan JK(5),
Campo E(6), Swerdlow SH(7), Ott G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Pathology, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille
University, Marseille, France. xerril@ipc.unicancer.fr. (2)Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Institute of
Pathology and Neuropathology, Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen and
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong, SAR, China. (6)Hospital Clinic,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Division of Hematopathology,
Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA. (8)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Hospital and Dr.
Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a lymphoma composed of germinal center B cells, i.e.,
centroblasts and centrocytes, that almost always show at least a focal follicular
growth pattern. Most cases have a characteristic CD5-, CD10+, BCL6+, and BCL2+
immunophenotype, and 85 % of cases exhibit the hallmark translocation
t(14;18)(q32;q21) involving BCL2 and IGH. Although the typical
clinicopathological findings of FL are well recognized, cases with unusual
clinical, morphologic, immunophenotypic, and genetic features may pose problems
in diagnosis and nomenclature. In the slide workshop organized by the European
Association for Haematopathology (EAHP) and the Society for Hematopathology (SH) 
held in Istanbul, Turkey, unusual variants of FL were discussed based on the
submitted cases, including early lesions, localized extranodal presentation,
uncommon immunophenotype, rare genetic alterations, diffuse variant, and marginal
zone differentiation. Interesting features such as blastoid morphology and
unusual progression forms were presented, aiming to understand the genetic basis 
of transformation. In this report, novel findings and diagnostic challenges
emerging from the submitted cases will be highlighted, and new terminologies for 
some of these lesions are proposed.

PMID: 26481245  [PubMed - in process]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):13324-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1507312112. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

Bcl6 middle domain repressor function is required for T follicular helper cell
differentiation and utilizes the corepressor MTA3.

Nance JP(1), Bélanger S(1), Johnston RJ(1), Hu JK(1), Takemori T(2), Crotty S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute of Allergy and Immunology,
La Jolla, CA 92037; (2)Center for Integrated Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan; (3)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute of Allergy 
and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037; Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037 shane@lji.org.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are essential providers of help to B cells. The
transcription factor B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) is a lineage-defining regulator
of Tfh cells and germinal center B cells. In B cells, Bcl6 has the potential to
recruit distinct transcriptional corepressors through its BTB domain or its
poorly characterized middle domain (also known as RDII), but in Tfh cells the
roles of the Bcl6 middle domain have yet to be clarified. Mimicked acetylation of
the Bcl6 middle domain (K379Q) in CD4 T cells results in significant reductions
in Tfh differentiation in vivo. Blimp1 (Prdm1) is a potent inhibitor of Tfh cell 
differentiation. Although Bcl6 K379Q still bound to the Prdm1 cis-regulatory
elements in Tfh cells, Prdm1 expression was derepressed. This was a result of the
failure of Bcl6 K379Q to recruit metastasis-associated protein 3 (MTA3). The loss
of Bcl6 function in Bcl6 K379Q-expressing CD4 T cells could be partially rescued 
by abrogating Prdm1 expression. In addition to Prdm1, we found that Bcl6 recruits
MTA3 to multiple genes involved in Tfh cell biology, including genes important
for cell migration, cell survival, and alternative differentiation pathways.
Thus, Bcl6 middle domain mediated repression is a major mechanism of action by
which Bcl6 controls CD4 T-cell fate and function.

PMCID: PMC4629362 [Available on 2016-04-27]
PMID: 26460037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 12;36(1):50-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00861-15.

Hepatic Long Intergenic Noncoding RNAs: High Promoter Conservation and Dynamic,
Sex-Dependent Transcriptional Regulation by Growth Hormone.

Melia T(1), Hao P(1), Yilmaz F(1), Waxman DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA djw@bu.edu.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) are increasingly recognized as key
chromatin regulators, yet few studies have characterized lincRNAs in a single
tissue under diverse conditions. Here, we analyzed 45 mouse liver RNA sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) data sets collected under diverse conditions to systematically
characterize 4,961 liver lincRNAs, 59% of them novel, with regard to gene
structures, species conservation, chromatin accessibility, transcription factor
binding, and epigenetic states. To investigate the potential for functionality,
we focused on the responses of the liver lincRNAs to growth hormone stimulation, 
which imparts clinically relevant sex differences to hepatic metabolism and liver
disease susceptibility. Sex-biased expression characterized 247 liver lincRNAs,
with many being nuclear RNA enriched and regulated by growth hormone. The
sex-biased lincRNA genes are enriched for nearby and correspondingly sex-biased
accessible chromatin regions, as well as sex-biased binding sites for growth
hormone-regulated transcriptional activators (STAT5, hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 
[HNF6], FOXA1, and FOXA2) and transcriptional repressors (CUX2 and BCL6).
Repression of female-specific lincRNAs in male liver, but not that of
male-specific lincRNAs in female liver, was associated with enrichment of
H3K27me3-associated inactive states and poised (bivalent) enhancer states.
Strikingly, we found that liver-specific lincRNA gene promoters are more highly
species conserved and have a significantly higher frequency of proximal binding
by liver transcription factors than liver-specific protein-coding gene promoters.
Orthologs for many liver lincRNAs were identified in one or more supraprimates,
including two rat lincRNAs showing the same growth hormone-regulated, sex-biased 
expression as their mouse counterparts. This integrative analysis of liver
lincRNA chromatin states, transcription factor occupancy, and growth hormone
regulation provides novel insights into the expression of sex-specific lincRNAs
and their potential for regulation of sex differences in liver physiology and
disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702595 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26459762  [PubMed - in process]


86. Case Rep Med. 2015;2015:137682. doi: 10.1155/2015/137682. Epub 2015 Sep 20.

Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma with Extensive Cutaneous Relapse.

Malkan UY(1), Gunes G(1), Yayar O(1), Demiroglu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, School of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 0100
Ankara, Turkey.

Herein, we aimed to report a diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) case that had 
extensive cutaneous relapse with no skin involvement previously. A 59-year-old
man presented to hospital in April 2014 with fatigue, anorexia, fever, and
anemia. Cervical lymph node biopsy revealed CD20+, BCL2+, MUM1+, BCL6+ high grade
B lymphoproliferative neoplasm. After FISH investigation, he was diagnosed as
DLBCL. He was given 7 cycles of R-CHOP and achieved remission. However, in
November 2014, he had emerging skin lesions that cover nearly all of his body. A 
control PET-CT revealed diffuse cutaneous involvement. CD20+, BCL2+, MUM1+, BCL6+
high grade B cell lymphoma infiltration was detected with skin biopsy. He was
diagnosed as relapse lymphoma, so 2 cycles of R-DHAP were given. There was no
treatment response; therefore, R-ICE regimen was started. The patient had
achieved second complete remission and his skin lesions were completely
regressed. The involvement of skin with CD20+ cells after 7 cycles of rituximab
therapy favors that there is a rituximab resistant disease which tends to involve
the skin. To conclude, DLBCL may relapse extensively with cutaneous involvement
and the best treatment option in these patients is salvage chemotherapy followed 
by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4592711
PMID: 26457084  [PubMed]


87. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4892-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500247. Epub 2015
Oct 9.

Limited Internodal Migration of T Follicular Helper Cells after Peripheral
Infection with Herpes Simplex Virus-1.

Stankovic S(1), Harpur CM(1), Macleod BL(1), Whitney PG(1), Gebhardt T(2), Brooks
AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3000,
Australia. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute 
for Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3000,
Australia gebhardt@unimelb.edu.au agbrooks@unimelb.edu.au.

The ability of CD4 T cells to give rise to specialized T follicular helper cells 
(TFH) critical to initiating appropriate Ab responses is regulated by
environmental cues in lymphoid tissues draining the site of infection. In this
study, we used a skin infection with HSV-1 characterized by the successive
involvement of interconnected but distinct lymph nodes (LNs), to investigate the 
anatomical diversification of virus-specific CD4 T cell responses and the
migratory capacity of TFH or their precursors. Whereas Th1 effector CD4 T cells
expressing peripheral-targeting migration molecules readily migrated from primary
to secondary reactive LNs, Bcl6(+) CXCR5(+) PD1(hi) TFH were largely retained at 
the site of initial activation with little spillover into the downstream LNs
involved at later stages of infection. Consistent with this, TFH maintained
high-level surface expression of CD69, indicative of impaired migratory capacity.
Notably, the biased generation and retention of TFH in primary LNs correlated
with a preferential generation of germinal centers at this site. Our results
highlight a limited anatomical diversification of TFH responses and germinal
center reactions that were imprinted within the first few cell divisions during
TFH differentiation in LNs draining the site of initial infection.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26453747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb;40(2):253-61. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000542.

High-grade B-cell Lymphoma With MYC Rearrangement and Without BCL2 and BCL6
Rearrangements Is Associated With High P53 Expression and a Poor Prognosis.

Li S(1), Weiss VL, Wang XJ, Desai PA, Hu S, Yin CC, Tang G, Reddy NM, Medeiros
LJ, Lin P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *PathologyHematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TNDepartment of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Patients with MYC/BCL2 double-hit lymphoma (DHL) are known to have an aggressive 
clinical course and to respond poorly to various therapies including intensive
chemotherapy and stem cell transplant. Less is known about high-grade B-cell
lymphoma with MYC rearrangement without concomitant BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangement, 
designated here as single-hit lymphoma (SHL). In this study, we assessed 61 cases
of SHL and compared them with 83 cases of DHL, all confirmed by MYC, BCL2, and
BCL6 fluorescence in situ hybridization studies. Although many clinicopathologic 
features overlap between patients with SHL and those with DHL, distinct features 
were observed in SHL. Patients with SHL had tumors with a higher prevalence of
p53 overexpression (P=0.047), less frequent expression of CD10, BCL2, and BCL6
(P<0.05), and less often had a history of low-grade B-cell lymphoma (P=0.01). In 
addition, MYC was more frequently partnered with IGH in SHL than in DHL (P=0.04).
With a median follow-up of 25 months, the overall survival of 61 SHL patients was
poor and similar to that of DHL patients (2-y overall survival rate of 41% in SHL
vs. 48% in DHL; P=0.35) and significantly worse than patients with diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate
between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma, without MYC and BCL2 
rearrangements (P<0.0001). In conclusion, patients with SHL have distinct
clinicopathologic features but a similar poor prognosis compared with patients
with MYC/BCL2 DHL. The poor prognosis of patients with SHL may be partially
related to the higher frequency and level of p53 expression in these tumors.

PMID: 26448193  [PubMed - in process]


89. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 27;6(33):34475-93. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5922.

Characterization of adipose-derived stem cells from subcutaneous and visceral
adipose tissues and their function in breast cancer cells.

Ritter A(1), Friemel A(1), Fornoff F(1), Adjan M(1), Solbach C(1), Yuan J(1),
Louwen F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, School of Medicine, J. W.
Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany.

Adipose-derived stem cells are capable of differentiating into multiple cell
types and thus considered useful for regenerative medicine. However, this
differentiation feature seems to be associated with tumor initiation and
metastasis raising safety concerns, which requires further investigation. In this
study, we isolated adipose-derived stem cells from subcutaneous as well as from
visceral adipose tissues of the same donor and systematically compared their
features. Although being characteristic of mesenchymal stem cells, subcutaneous
adipose-derived stem cells tend to be spindle form-like and are more able to home
to cancer cells, whereas visceral adipose-derived stem cells incline to be
"epithelial"-like and more competent to differentiate. Moreover, compared to
subcutaneous adipose-derived stem cells, visceral adipose-derived stem cells are 
more capable of promoting proliferation, inducing the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, enhancing migration and invasion of breast cancer cells by cell-cell 
contact and by secreting interleukins such as IL-6 and IL-8. Importantly, ASCs
affect the low malignant breast cancer cells MCF-7 more than the highly
metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells. Induction of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition is mediated by the activation of multiple pathways especially the
PI3K/AKT signaling in breast cancer cells. BCL6, an important player in B-cell
lymphoma and breast cancer progression, is crucial for this transition. Finally, 
this transition fuels malignant properties of breast cancer cells and render them
resistant to ATP competitive Polo-like kinase 1 inhibitors BI 2535 and BI 6727.

PMCID: PMC4741467
PMID: 26439686  [PubMed - in process]


90. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;31(10):1383-6.

[The differentiation and clinical significance of follicular helper T cells
during acute exacerbation in asthma patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Geng S(1), Gao S(1), Hu H(1), Hu Y(1), Yu S(1), Zhao S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Wuhan Central Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the differentiation of follicular helper T (Tfh) cells in
asthma patients during acute exacerbation and post-treatment periods, and explore
the clinical significance of Tfh cells in asthma.
METHODS: We detected the percentages of CD4<U+207A>CXCR5<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>ICOS<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>CXCR5<U+207A>ICOS<U+207A> T 
cells in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by flow cytometry, the level 
of Bcl-6 mRNA in CD4<U+207A> T cells by reverse transcription PCR, and the level of
interleukin 21 (IL-21) in plasma by ELISA in healthy controls and asthma patients
during acute exacerbation and post-treatment release periods. The linear
regression analysis was used to analyze the correlations of the level of IL-21 in
plasma with forced expiratory volume in one second/forced vital capacity
(FEV1/FVC) and forced expiratory volume in one second/prediction (FEV1/Pre) in
acute exacerbation period of asthma patients.
RESULTS: The percentages of CD4<U+207A>CXCR5<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>CXCR5<U+207A>ICOS<U+207A> T cells in PBMCs, the
level of Bcl-6 mRNA in CD4<U+207A>T cells, and the level of IL-21 in plasma increased in
acute exacerbation of the asthma patients compared to the healthy controls. After
treatment, the percentages of CD4<U+207A>CXCR5<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>ICOS<U+207A>, CD4<U+207A>CXCR5<U+207A>ICOS<U+207A> T cells in
PBMCs, the level of Bcl-6 mRNA in CD4<U+207A>T cells, and the level of IL-21 in plasma
in asthma patients were all reduced as compared with the acute exacerbation
period. There were negative correlations between IL-21 and lung function
parameters such as FEV1/FVC and FEV1/Pre.
CONCLUSION: The differentiation of Tfh cells was enhanced in acute exacerbation
of asthma patients, and ameliorated after treatment. Tfh cells may participate in
the inflammatory reaction of asthma, and the differentiation degree of Tfh cells 
may reflect the extent of airway limitation in asthma patients.

PMID: 26429540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Histopathology. 2015 Oct 1. doi: 10.1111/his.12884. [Epub ahead of print]

MYC/BCL6 double-hit lymphoma (DHL): a tumour associated with an aggressive
clinical course and poor prognosis.

Li S(1,)(2), Desai P(1), Lin P(1), Yin CC(1), Tang G(1), Wang XJ(2), Konoplev
SN(1), Khoury JD(1), Bueso-Ramos CE(1), Medeiros LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

AIMS: Large B cell lymphomas with MYC and BCL6/3q27 rearrangements, designated
MYC/BCL6 DHL, are uncommon. Our aim was to better characterize this group of
tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied the clinicopathological features and outcome of
13 patients with MYC/BCL6 DHL and compared this group to a group of 83 MYC/BCL2
DHL patients. There were eight men and five women, with a median age of 63 years.
Eleven tumours were classified as diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL) and two 
were B cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between DLBCL
and Burkitt lymphoma (BCLU). Immunohistochemical analysis showed that these
tumours were positive for BCL6 (100%), BCL2 (eight of 10; 80%) and CD10 (eight of
10; 80%). Nine of 12 (75%) cases had a germinal centre B cell (GCB)
immunophenotype; in one case data were incomplete. All patients were treated with
chemotherapy. The clinicopathological features of MYC/BCL6 DHL were similar to
MYC/BCL2 DHL, except that MYC/BCL6 DHL had a GCB immunophenotype less often.
Patients with MYC/BCL6 DHL had a poor overall survival, similar to patients with 
MYC/BCL2 DHL (P = 0.32).
CONCLUSIONS: MYC/BCL6 DHL is an aggressive B cell lymphoma and patients often
have an aggressive clinical course and poor prognosis, similar to patients with
MYC/BCL2 DHL.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26426741  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


92. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 17;6(36):38591-616. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5774.

MYC-driven aggressive B-cell lymphomas: biology, entity, differential diagnosis
and clinical management.

Cai Q(1,)(2), Medeiros LJ(2), Xu X(1), Young KH(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Hematopathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (3)The
University of Texas School of Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, Texas, USA.

MYC, a potent oncogene located at chromosome locus 8q24.21, was identified
initially by its involvement in Burkitt lymphoma with t(8;14)(q24;q32). MYC
encodes a helix-loop-helix transcription factor that accentuates many cellular
functions including proliferation, growth and apoptosis. MYC alterations also
have been identified in other mature B-cell neoplasms and are associated with
aggressive clinical behavior. There are several regulatory factors and
dysregulated signaling that lead to MYC up-regulation in B-cell lymphomas. One
typical example is the failure of physiological repressors such as Bcl6 or BLIMP1
to suppress MYC over-expression. In addition, MYC alterations are often developed
concurrently with other genetic alterations that counteract the proapoptotic
function of MYC. In this review, we discuss the physiologic function of MYC and
the role that MYC likely plays in the pathogenesis of B-cell lymphomas. We also
summarize the role MYC plays in the diagnosis, prognostication and various
strategies to detect MYC rearrangement and expression.

PMCID: PMC4770723
PMID: 26416427  [PubMed - in process]


93. Cancer Cytopathol. 2016 Feb;124(2):135-43. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21626. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

CD10, BCL6, and MUM1 expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma on FNA samples.

Cozzolino I(1), Varone V(2), Picardi M(3), Baldi C(4), Memoli D(4), Ciancia G(2),
Selleri C(4), De Rosa G(2), Vetrani A(1), Zeppa P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, University of Naples "Federico II, " Naples,
Italy. (2)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University of Naples
"Federico II, " Naples, Italy. (3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University 
of Naples "Federico II, " Naples, Italy. (4)Department of Medicine and Surgery,
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling has divided diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) into 2 main subgroups: germinal center B (GCB) and non-GCB type. This
classification is reproducible by immunohistochemistry using specific antibodies 
such as CD10, B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), and multiple myeloma oncogene 1 (MUM1).
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) plays an important role in the diagnosis of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and in some cases FNA may be the only available
pathological specimen. The objectives of the current study were to evaluate CD10,
BCL6, and MUM1 immunostaining on FNA samples by testing the CD10, BCL6, and MUM1 
algorithm on both FNA cell blocks (CB) and conventional smears (CS), evaluating
differences in CB and CS immunocytochemical (ICC) performance, and comparing
results with histological data.
METHODS: Thirty-eight consecutive DLBCL cases diagnosed by FNA were studied.
Additional passes were used to prepare CB in 22 cases and CS in 16 cases; the
corresponding sections and smears were immunostained using CD10, BCL6, and MUM1
in all cases. The data obtained were compared with histological immunostaining in
24 cases.
RESULTS: ICC was successful in 33 cases (18 CB and 15 CS) and not evaluable in 5 
cases (4 CB and 1 CS). The CD10-BCL6-MUM1 algorithm subclassified DLBCL as GCB (9
cases) and non-GCB (24 cases). ICC data were confirmed on histologic staining in 
24 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: CD10, BCL6, and MUM1 ICC staining can be performed on FNA samples.
The results herein prove it is reliable both on CB and CS, and is equally
effective and comparable to immunohistochemistry data. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol)
2016;124:135-143. © 2015 American Cancer Society.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26414904  [PubMed - in process]


94. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Dec;59 Pt B:78-90. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.08.009. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

A survey of disease connections for CD4+ T cell master genes and their directly
linked genes.

Li W(1), Espinal-Enríquez J(2), Simpfendorfer KR(3), Hernández-Lemus E(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, North Shore LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY,
USA. Electronic address: wtli2012@gmail.com. (2)Computational Genomics
Department, National Institute of Genomic Medicine, México, D.F., Mexico;
Complexity in Systems Biology, Center for Complexity Sciences, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico. (3)The Robert S. Boas Center
for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research,
North Shore LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY, USA.

Genome-wide association studies and other genetic analyses have identified a
large number of genes and variants implicating a variety of disease etiological
mechanisms. It is imperative for the study of human diseases to put these genetic
findings into a coherent functional context. Here we use system biology tools to 
examine disease connections of five master genes for CD4+ T cell subtypes (TBX21,
GATA3, RORC, BCL6, and FOXP3). We compiled a list of genes functionally
interacting (protein-protein interaction, or by acting in the same pathway) with 
the master genes, then we surveyed the disease connections, either by
experimental evidence or by genetic association. Embryonic lethal genes (also
known as essential genes) are over-represented in master genes and their
interacting genes (55% versus 40% in other genes). Transcription factors are
significantly enriched among genes interacting with the master genes (63% versus 
10% in other genes). Predicted haploinsufficiency is a feature of most these
genes. Disease-connected genes are enriched in this list of genes: 42% of these
genes have a disease connection according to Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
(OMIM) (versus 23% in other genes), and 74% are associated with some diseases or 
phenotype in a Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) (versus 43% in other genes). 
Seemingly, not all of the diseases connected to genes surveyed were immune
related, which may indicate pleiotropic functions of the master regulator genes
and associated genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411796  [PubMed - in process]


95. Protein Cell. 2015 Nov;6(11):825-32. doi: 10.1007/s13238-015-0210-0.

Phenotypic Tfh development promoted by CXCR5-controlled re-localization and IL-6 
from radiation-resistant cells.

Chen X(1,)(2), Ma W(3,)(4), Zhang T(3), Wu L(3,)(4), Qi H(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
100084, China. xin.chen01@foxmail.com. (2)Laboratory of Dynamic Immunobiology,
Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
100084, China. xin.chen01@foxmail.com. (3)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. (4)Laboratory of Dynamic
Immunobiology, Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China. (5)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084, China. qihai@tsinghua.edu.cn. (6)Laboratory of
Dynamic Immunobiology, Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084, China. qihai@tsinghua.edu.cn.

How follicular T-helper (Tfh) cells develop is incompletely understood. We find
that, upon antigen exposure in vivo, both naïve and antigen-experienced T cells
sequentially upregulate CXCR5 and Bcl6 within the first 24 h, relocate to the T-B
border, and give rise to phenotypic Bcl6(+)CXCR5(+) Tfh cells before the first
cell division. CXCR5 upregulation is more dependent on ICOS costimulation than
that of Bcl6, and early Bcl6 induction requires T-cell expression of CXCR5 and,
presumably, relocation toward the follicle. This early and rapid upregulation of 
CXCR5 and Bcl6 depends on IL-6 produced by radiation-resistant cells. These
results suggest that a Bcl6(hi)CXCR5(hi) phenotype does not automatically define 
a Tfh lineage but might reflect a state of antigen exposure and non-commitment to
terminal effector fates and that niches in the T-B border and/or the follicle are
important for optimal Bcl6 induction and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4624673
PMID: 26404031  [PubMed - in process]


96. Blood. 2016 Jan 7;127(1):102-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-628164. Epub 2015 Sep
18.

AID-associated DNA repair pathways regulate malignant transformation in a murine 
model of BCL6-driven diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Gu X(1), Booth CJ(2), Liu Z(3), Strout MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cancer Center, Section of Hematology. (2)Section of Comparative Medicine,
and. (3)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT.

Somatic hypermutation and class-switch recombination of the immunoglobulin (Ig)
genes occur in germinal center (GC) B cells and are initiated through deamination
of cytidine to uracil by activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). Resulting
uracil-guanine mismatches are processed by uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG)-mediated 
base-excision repair and MSH2-mediated mismatch repair (MMR) to yield mutations
and DNA strand lesions. Although off-target AID activity also contributes to
oncogenic point mutations and chromosome translocations associated with GC and
post-GC B-cell lymphomas, the role of downstream AID-associated DNA repair
pathways in the pathogenesis of lymphoma is unknown. Here, we show that
simultaneous deficiency of UNG and MSH2 or MSH2 alone causes genomic instability 
and a shorter latency to the development of BCL6-driven diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) in a murine model. The additional development of several
BCL6-independent malignancies in these mice underscores the critical role of MMR 
in maintaining general genomic stability. In contrast, absence of UNG alone is
highly protective and prevents the development of BCL6-driven DLBCL. We further
demonstrate that clonal and nonclonal mutations arise within non-Ig AID target
genes in the combined absence of UNG and MSH2 and that DNA strand lesions arise
in an UNG-dependent manner but are offset by MSH2. These findings lend insight
into a complex interplay whereby potentially deleterious UNG activity and general
genomic instability are opposed by the protective influence of MSH2, producing a 
net protective effect that promotes immune diversification while simultaneously
attenuating malignant transformation of GC B cells.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4705602 [Available on 2017-01-07]
PMID: 26385350  [PubMed - in process]


97. Blood. 2015 Nov 26;126(22):2466-74. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-05-647602. Epub 2015 
Sep 15.

MYC-IG rearrangements are negative predictors of survival in DLBCL patients
treated with immunochemotherapy: a GELA/LYSA study.

Copie-Bergman C(1), Cuillière-Dartigues P(2), Baia M(3), Briere J(4), Delarue
R(5), Canioni D(6), Salles G(7), Parrens M(8), Belhadj K(9), Fabiani B(10),
Recher C(11), Petrella T(12), Ketterer N(13), Peyrade F(14), Haioun C(9), Nagel
I(15), Siebert R(15), Jardin F(16), Leroy K(1), Jais JP(17), Tilly H(16), Molina 
TJ(18), Gaulard P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier,
Département de Pathologie, Creteil, France; Universite Paris-Est, Faculté de
Médecine, Unité Mixte de Recherche Scientifique 955, Créteil, France; INSERM,
Unité 955, Creteil, France; (2)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France;
(3)INSERM, Unité 955, Creteil, France; (4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Hôpital Saint-Louis, Department of Pathology, Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie, Paris, France; (5)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker, Department of Hematology, Paris, France; (6)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Hôpital Necker, Department of Pathology, Université Paris Descartes,
Paris, France; (7)Hospices Civils de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon-1,
Service d'Hématologie, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5239, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Lyon, France; (8)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Bordeaux, Université de Bordeaux, EA2406, Bordeaux, France; (9)Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, Unité
Lymphoïde, Créteil, France; (10)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Saint-Antoine, Department of Pathology, Paris, France; (11)Service d'Hématologie,
Institut Universitaire du Cancer, Toulouse, France; (12)Department of Pathology, 
Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montreal, Canada; (13)Pluridisciplinary Center for 
Oncology, University Hospital-Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne,
Switzerland; (14)Centre de Lutte Contre le Cancer de Nice, Nice, France;
(15)Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel and
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany; (16)Centre Henri Becquerel
and INSERM Unité 918, Institut de Recherche et d'Innovation Biomédicale, Rouen,
France; (17)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker, Department of 
Biostatistics, Paris, France; (18)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital 
Necker, Department of Pathology, Université Paris Descartes, EA 7324, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Nov 26;126(22):2439-40.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with MYC rearrangement (MYC-R) carries an
unfavorable outcome. We explored the prognostic value of the MYC translocation
partner gene in a series of MYC-R de novo DLBCL patients enrolled in first-line
prospective clinical trials (Groupe d'Etudes des Lymphomes de l'Adulte/Lymphoma
Study Association) and treated with rituximab-anthracycline-based chemotherapy. A
total of 774 DLBCL cases characterized for cell of origin by the Hans classifier 
were analyzed using fluorescence in situ hybridization with BCL2, BCL6, MYC,
immunoglobulin (IG)K, and IGL break-apart and IGH/MYC, IGK/MYC, and IGL/MYC
fusion probes. MYC-R was observed in 51/574 (8.9%) evaluable DLBCL cases. MYC-R
cases were predominantly of the germinal center B-cell-like subtype 37/51 (74%)
with no distinctive morphologic and phenotypic features. Nineteen cases were MYC 
single-hit and 32 cases were MYC double-hit (MYC plus BCL2 and/or BCL6) DLBCL.
MYC translocation partner was an IG gene in 24 cases (MYC-IG) and a non-IG gene
(MYC-non-IG) in 26 of 50 evaluable cases. Noteworthy, MYC-IG patients had shorter
overall survival (OS) (P = .0002) compared with MYC-negative patients, whereas no
survival difference was observed between MYC-non-IG and MYC-negative patients. In
multivariate analyses, MYC-IG predicted poor progression-free survival (P =
.0051) and OS (P = .0006) independently from the International Prognostic Index
and the Hans classifier. In conclusion, we show in this prospective randomized
trial that the adverse prognostic impact of MYC-R is correlated to the MYC-IG
translocation partner gene in DLBCL patients treated with immunochemotherapy.
These results may have an important impact on the clinical management of DLBCL
patients with MYC-R who should be routinely characterized according to MYC
partner gene. These trials are individually registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov 
as #NCT00144807, #NCT01087424, #NCT00169143, #NCT00144755, #NCT00140660,
#NCT00140595, and #NCT00135499.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26373676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. AIDS. 2015 Sep 24;29(15):1943-51. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000780.

Stromal immune infiltration in HIV-related diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is
associated with HIV disease history and patient survival.

Chao C(1), Xu L, Silverberg MJ, Martínez-Maza O, Chen LH, Castor B, Abrams DI,
Zha HD, Haque R, Said J.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California,
Pasadena bDivision of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland
cDepartments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Microbiology, Immunology and
Molecular Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California
Los Angeles dDepartment of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health,
Los Angeles eDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles fDepartment of Medicine and
San Francisco General Hospital, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco gLos Angeles Medical Center, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Understanding tumor microenvironment and its impact on prognosis of
HIV-related lymphomas may provide insight into novel therapeutic strategies.
DESIGN: We characterized the relationship between infiltrating immune cells with 
tumor characteristics, HIV disease history and survival in 80 patients with
HIV-related diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) diagnosed in the era of
combined antiretroviral therapy (1996-2007) at Kaiser Permanente California.
Eighty patients with HIV-unrelated DLBCL were included for comparison.
METHODS: Data on patients' clinical history were obtained from Kaiser
Permanente's electronic health records. The density of stromal CD4, CD8 and FOXP3
T cells and CD68 macrophages, as well as tumor molecular characteristics were
examined using immunohistochemistry. The associations between stromal immune
infiltration and patient's clinical history or tumor characteristics were
examined using Kruskal-Wallis tests or Pearson's correlation coefficient. The
effect of stromal immune infiltration on 2-year mortality was evaluated in
multivariable logistic regression.
RESULTS: Compared with HIV-unrelated DLBCL, patients with HIV-related DLBCL had
significantly reduced stromal CD4 and FOXP3 T cells, but increased density of
macrophages. Increased density of stromal macrophages was correlated with lower
circulating CD4 cell count at DLBCL diagnosis. Tumor molecular characteristics,
including BCL6, p53 and cMYC expression, but not Epstein-Barr virus infection
status, were significantly correlated with stromal immune infiltration,
particularly FOXP3 T cells. A higher density of infiltrating CD8 T cell was
significantly associated with reduced mortality in patients with HIV-related
DLBCL (odds ratio<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.30 [0.09-0.97] for =25 vs. <10%).
CONCLUSION: These data provide evidence for the prognostic significance of
cytotoxic T cells in determining outcomes of HIV-related lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC4632648 [Available on 2016-09-24]
PMID: 26355571  [PubMed - in process]


99. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Aug;56(8):1082-8. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.1082.

[Human herpesvirus 8-negative primary effusion lymphoma-like lymphoma with
t(8;14)(q24;q32)].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogasawara Y(1), Machishima T, Shimada T, Takahashi H, Fukunaga M, Mizoroki F,
Dobashi N, Usui N, Aiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Oncology / Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine,
The Jikei University School of Medicine.

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is a large B-cell lymphoma proliferating only in 
the body cavity effusion. It often occurs in advanced AIDS patients and is
associated with human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8). On the other hand, HHV-8 negative
effusion lymphoma, which is different from PEL in many ways, has also been
reported and is referred to as HHV8-unrelated PEL-like lymphoma. This lymphoma is
very rare and its clinical characteristics have not yet been fully clarified. We 
therefore report an HIV seronegative elderly patient with HHV8-unrelated PEL-like
lymphoma. An 89-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to general
fatigue and dyspnea. The patient presented with left pleural effusion in the
absence of lymphadenopathy and tumor masses. The pathological examination of the 
pleural effusion showed proliferation of atypical large lymphoid cells, which
were positive for CD19, CD20, CD10, CD38, CD7, BCL2 and BCL6 but negative for
CD5, CD30, MUM1, surface immunoglobulin, HHV-8 and EBV. Cytogenetic analysis
showed a complex karyotype including t(8;14)(q24;q32). The pleural effusion
decreased in response to monotherapy with oral low-dose etoposide, but recurrence
was detected 7 months later. Rituximab was transiently effective for the
recurrent pleural effusion, but the patient died of lymphoma exacerbation 13
months after the diagnosis.

PMID: 26345571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):20043-57.

Survivin co-ordinates formation of follicular T-cells acting in synergy with
Bcl-6.

Andersson KM(1), Brisslert M(1), Cavallini NF(1), Svensson MN(1,)(2), Welin A(1),
Erlandsson MC(1), Ciesielski MJ(3), Katona G(4), Bokarewa MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, The Sahlgrenska Academy 
at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Division of Cellular Biology,
La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)Department of 
Neurosurgery, Roswell Park Cancer Institute and State University of New York
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, NY, USA. (4)Department of
Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Follicular T helper (Tfh) cells are recognized by the expression of CXCR5 and the
transcriptional regulator Bcl-6. Tfh cells control B cell maturation and antibody
production, and if deregulated, may lead to autoimmunity. Here, we study the role
of the proto-oncogene survivin in the formation of Tfh cells. We show that blood 
Tfh cells of patients with the autoimmune condition rheumatoid arthritis, have
intracellular expression of survivin. Survivin was co-localized with Bcl-6 in the
nuclei of CXCR5+CD4 lymphocytes and was immunoprecipitated with the Bcl-6
responsive element of the target genes. Inhibition of survivin in arthritic mice 
led to the reduction of CXCR5+ Tfh cells and to low production of autoantibodies.
Exposure to survivin activated STAT3 and induced enrichment of PD-1+Bcl-6+ subset
within Tfh cells. Collectively, our study demonstrates that survivin belongs to
the Tfh cell phenotype and ensures their optimal function by regulating
transcriptional activity of Bcl-6.

PMCID: PMC4652986
PMID: 26343374  [PubMed - in process]


101. Pathol Oncol Res. 2016 Apr;22(2):233-43. doi: 10.1007/s12253-015-9972-1. Epub
2015 Aug 30.

A Novel Non-Immunoglobulin (non-Ig)/BCL6 Translocation in Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma Involving Chromosome 10q11.21 Loci and Review on Clinical Consequences
of BCL6 Rearrangements.

Jarosova M(1), Kriegova E(2), Schneiderova P(2), Fillerova R(2), Prochazka V(3), 
Mikesova M(3), Flodr P(4), Indrak K(3), Papajik T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky
University Olomouc and the University Hospital Olomouc, Hnevotinska 3, 77900,
Olomouc, Czech Republic. marie.jarosova@fnol.cz. (2)Department of Immunology,
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University Olomouc, Hnevotinska 3,
77900, Olomouc, Czech Republic. (3)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University Olomouc and the University Hospital
Olomouc, Hnevotinska 3, 77900, Olomouc, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Clinical
and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University
Olomouc and the University Hospital Olomouc, Hnevotinska 3, 77900, Olomouc, Czech
Republic.

BCL6 rearrangements (3q27) are the most common chromosomal abnormalities in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), with numerous immunoglobulin (Ig) and
non-Ig genes as partners. In DLBCL, the translocations occur predominantly in the
"major breakpoint region" encompassing the first noncoding exon and a part of the
first intron of BCL6; few cases with "alternative breakpoint cluster" located
245-285 kb 5' BCL6 were also described. The regulatory sequences of known Ig and 
non-Ig partners replace the 5' untranslated region of the BCL6 in the same
transcriptional orientation. Contrary to Ig/BCL6 fusions typical by high BCL6
gene expression, in non-Ig/BCL6 translocations were observed unexpectedly low
BCL6 mRNA levels. From the clinical point of view, the survival rate of DLBCL
patients with non-Ig partners is inferior to those with Ig/BCL6 translocations,
suggesting that non-Ig/BCL6 fusion is a poor prognostic indicator. Hereby we
provide comprehensive information about known non-Ig translocation partners and
clinical consequences of BCL6 rearrangements in DLBCL. Moreover, we describe a
novel reciprocal translocation t(3;10) in refractory patient with DLBCL with the 
breaking points at 5' untranslated region of BCL6 and 5' untranslated region of
the RASGEF1A gene on chromosome 10q11.21 loci; this rearrangement was associated 
with low BCL6 and RASGEF1A gene expressions. Our patient harbouring dual
chromosomal rearrangement involving BCL2 and BCL6 genes relapsed three-times and 
died soon; thus, further supporting the notion that non-Ig/BCL6 fusion is a poor 
prognostic indicator of DLBCL. There is evidence of prognostic value of BCL6
rearrangements also in rituximab era.

PMID: 26319027  [PubMed - in process]


102. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 26;10(8):e0134923. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134923.
eCollection 2015.

Pathway-Based Genome-Wide Association Studies for Plasma Triglycerides in Obese
Females and Normal-Weight Controls.

Jiao H(1), Wang K(2), Yang F(1), Grant SF(3), Hakonarson H(3), Price RA(4), Li
WD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, 300070, China. (2)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute and Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, United 
States of America. (3)Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, United States of America; Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA, 19104, United States of America. (4)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, United States of America. (5)Research Center of Basic
Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China; Center for 
Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, United States of America.

Pathway-based analysis as an alternative approach can provide complementary
information to single-marker genome-wide association studies (GWASs), which
always ignore the epistasis and does not have sufficient power to find rare
variants. In this study, using genotypes from a genome-wide association study
(GWAS), pathway-based association studies were carried out by a modified Gene Set
Enrichment Algorithm (GSEA) method (GenGen) for triglyceride in 1028 unrelated
European-American extremely obese females (BMI=35kg/m2) and normal-weight
controls (BMI<25kg/m2), and another pathway association analysis (ICSNPathway)
was also used to verify the GenGen result in the same data. The GO0009110 pathway
(vitamin anabolism) was among the strongest associations with triglyceride
(empirical P<0.001); the result remained significant after FDR correction (P =
0.022). MMAB, an obesity-related locus, included in this pathway. The ABCG1 and
BCL6 gene was found in several triglyceride-related pathways (empirical P<0.05), 
which were also replicated by ICSNPathway (empirical P<0.05, FDR<0.05). We also
performed single-marked GWAS using PLINK for TG levels (log-transformed).
Significant associations were found between ASTN2 gene SNPs and plasma
triglyceride levels (rs7035794, P = 2.24×10-10). Our study suggested that vitamin
anabolism pathway, BCL6 gene pathways and ASTN2 gene may contribute to the
genetic variation of plasma triglyceride concentrations.

PMCID: PMC4550433
PMID: 26308950  [PubMed - in process]


103. Hum Pathol. 2015 Oct;46(10):1566-71. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.06.020. Epub
2015 Jul 7.

Rare variants in the spectrum of human herpesvirus 8/Epstein-Barr
virus-copositive lymphoproliferations.

Papoudou-Bai A(1), Hatzimichael E(2), Kyriazopoulou L(2), Briasoulis E(2),
Kanavaros P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ioannina, Ioannina
45110, Greece. Electronic address: apapoudoubai@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ioannina, Ioannina 45110, Greece. 
(3)Department of Anatomy-Histology-Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ioannina, Ioannina 45110, Greece.

We report 2 rare variants in the spectrum of human herpesvirus 8
(HHV8)/Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-copositive lymphoproliferations arising in
HIV-seronegative patients, including a large B-cell lymphoma arising in the
setting of multicentric Castleman disease and a germinotropic lymphoproliferative
disorder. In the first case, histology revealed features of multicentric
Castleman disease and a proliferation of large lymphoid cells forming clusters or
arcs or rings replacing the periphery of follicles or sheets of frank lymphoma
outside the follicles. In the second case, a proliferation of large lymphoid
cells totally or partially invaded follicle germinal centers. In both cases, the 
large cells were positive for EBV-encoded small RNA, HHV8 (LANA-1), MUM1/IRF4,
and CD38 and negative for CD45, CD79a, CD10, BCL6, and CD138. In the large B-cell
lymphoma, the large cells did not express detectable cytoplasmic immunoglobulin
light- and heavy-chains, whereas in the germinotropic lymphoproliferative
disorder, the large cells expressed µ heavy chain. The present cases broaden the 
spectrum of HHV-EBV--copositive lymphoproliferations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26299509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Blood. 2015 Oct 1;126(14):1730-1. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-07-657999. Epub 2015
Aug 14.

Convergent BCL6 and lncRNA promoters demarcate the major breakpoint region for
BCL6 translocations.

Lu Z(1), Pannunzio NR(1), Greisman HA, Casero D(2), Parekh C(3), Lieber MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Departments of Pathology, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Molecular
Microbiology & Immunology, and Biological Sciences (Section of Molecular and
Computational Biology), University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA. (2)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA.

PMCID: PMC4591794 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26276666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jun 1;8(6):7559-64. eCollection 2015.

Utility of immunohistochemistry with an antibody against MYC at the initial
diagnosis of follicular lymphoma, grade 3A, for predicting a more aggressive
clinical course: a case report and review of the literature.

Ichikawa K(1), Aritaka N(2), Ogura K(3), Hosone M(4), Ota Y(5), Sato E(2),
Komatsu N(6), Hirano T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Juntendo University
School of Medicine Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Hematology, Juntendo University
Urayasu Hospital Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Hematology, Juntendo University
Nerima Hospital Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Juntendo
University Nerima Hospital Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, Nippon
Medical School Tama-Nagayama Hospital Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Pathology,
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department
of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Juntendo University School of
Medicine Tokyo, Japan.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is the most common indolent lymphoma, and associated
with the chromosomal translocation t(14;18)(q32;q21). While, FL harboring both
BCL2 and MYC translocation at diagnosis is very rare. The evaluation of MYC
expression in typical FL at presentation using southern blot, G-banded
karyotyping or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses has been
described so far. However, there are no reports about the use of
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate MYC protein expression in FL at
presentation. Here, we present a FL patient who transformed to a B-cell lymphoma,
unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
and Burkitt's lymphoma, accompanied by concurrent BCL2, BCL6, and MYC
translocations; i.e., triple-hit lymphoma. Paraffin-embedded tissue section-FISH 
analysis demonstrated that the FL was negative for MYC, but MYC protein
expression was subsequently detected in the lymph node specimen obtained at the
initial diagnosis using IHC. This case revealed aggressive clinical course and
central nervous system involvement. In the literature concerning MYC positive FL 
five out of 8 patients were dead within 24 months. The detection of MYC protein
expression in FL using IHC might be useful to predict more aggressive clinical
course.

PMCID: PMC4526003
PMID: 26261669  [PubMed - in process]


106. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Aug 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary Intestinal Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma in Taiwan Showed a Relative
Higher Rate of Perforation and EBV Association.

Lu YH(1), Chang ST, Yang SF, Weng SF, Huang WT, Hsieh PP, Hsu JD, Tsou MH, Chuang
SS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Radiology, Chi Mei Medical Center, Liouying Pathology
<U+2225>Medical Research, Chi-Mei Medical Centre, Tainan, Taiwan Department of Nursing,
National Tainan Institute of Nursing, Tainan, Taiwan §Department of Pathology,
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital and School of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University ¶Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical Centre #Chang Gung University College of Medicine
**Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital and Centre for General Education, Yuh-Ing Junior College of Health Care 
and Management, Kaohsiung Department of Pathology, Chung Shan Medical
University Hospital and School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Koo Foundation Sun
Yat-Sen Cancer Centre §§Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical University and
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

We retrospectively investigated 59 surgically resected primary intestinal diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas (PI-DLBCL) including 31 males and 28 females with a median
age of 66. Eleven (19%) tumors were perforated at presentation; 8 (14%) were
multicentric. Ileum (n=24; 43%) and ileocecum (n=17; 30%) were most frequently
involved. Twenty-one (36%) patients did not receive chemotherapy or radiotherapy 
including 6 with perforation and died in 0.2 to 7 months. The 1-, 2-, and 5-year 
overall survival rates were 68.4%, 56.5%, and 50.0%, respectively. Seven (12%) of
59 cases were positive for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) by in situ hybridization.
IGH, BCL2, BCL6, and MYC foci were rearranged in 22%, 3%, 17%, and 7% cases,
respectively, with 14% exhibiting gain/amplification at the MYC locus.
Perforation (P=0.009), high ECOG PS (=2) (P=0.018), and no adjuvant chemotherapy 
(P<0.001) were poor prognostic factors but not immunophenotype including
co-expression of bcl-2 and myc, EBV status, or chromosomal aberrations.
Perforation and chemotherapy remained significant by multivariate analysis.
PI-DLBCL in Taiwan carried a relatively higher rate of perforation, lower
frequency of germinal center B-cell phenotype, and higher EBV association as
compared with studies from other geographic areas. Furthermore, perforation was a
poor prognostic factor.

PMID: 26258754  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


107. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Jul;56(7):905-10. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.905.

[Successful treatment with dose-adjusted EPOCH-R for triple-hit lymphoma having
BCL2, BCL6 and MYC translocations].

[Article in Japanese]

Hashimoto A(1), Fujimi A, Kanisawa Y, Nakajima C, Hayasaka N, Yamada S, Okuda T, 
Minami S, Matsumoto T, Shibata T, Hamaguchi K, Kamihara Y, Iwasaki S, Kato J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Oji General Hospital.

Double- and triple-hit lymphomas (DHL/THL), high-grade B-cell lymphomas with an
extremely poor prognosis, are defined by a chromosomal breakpoint affecting the
MYC/8q24 locus in combination with another recurrent breakpoint. The successful
use of dose-adjusted (DA) EPOCH-R in patients with MYC-positive lymphoma and
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) was recently reported. A 74-year-old man with acute renal
dysfunction and hyperkalemia was transferred to our emergency center by
ambulance. PET-CT revealed a left renal hilar mass enveloping the abdominal
para-aortic domain and bladder and hydronephrosis. High (18)F-FDG uptake revealed
lymph node, peritoneum, and multiple bone metastases. Analysis of the bone marrow
aspirate revealed abnormal lymphoid cells with deeply basophilic cytoplasm and
numerous vacuoles resembling Burkitt cells. Chromosomal analysis revealed a
complex chromosomal karyotype, including t(14;18)(q32;q21), and FISH analysis
confirmed split BCL2, BCL6, and MYC signals. Bone marrow biopsy revealed
diffusely infiltrating large abnormal lymphoid cells with a CD10<U+207A>, CD20<U+207A>, BCL2<U+207A>, 
BCL6<U+207A>, c-MYC<U+207A> and MUM1(-) immunophenotype. B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable with
features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and BL, was
diagnosed. The patient achieved a partial response after eight courses of
DA-EPOCH-R chemotherapy. Our experience suggests that DA-EPOCH-R may be an
effective treatment for DHL/THL.

PMID: 26256929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Med. 2015 Jul 30. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00122. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypothesis: neuroendocrine mechanisms (hypothalamus-growth hormone-STAT5 axis)
contribute to sex bias in pulmonary hypertension.

Sehgal PB(1,)(2), Yang YM(1), Miller EJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New 
York. (2)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York.
(3)Center for Heart and Lung Research, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, New York.

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a disease with high morbidity and mortality. The
prevalence of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) and hereditary
pulmonary arterial hypertension (HPAH) is approximately 2-4-fold higher in women 
than in men. Paradoxically, there is an opposite male bias in typical rodent
models of PH (chronic hypoxia or monocrotaline); in these models administration
of estrogenic compounds [e.g. estradiol-17ß (E2)] is protective. Further
complexities are observed in humans ingesting anorexigens (female bias), and in
rodent models such as after hypoxia plus SU5416/Sugen (little sex bias) or
involving serotonin transporter overexpression or dexfenfluramine administration 
(female bias). These complexities in sex bias in PH remain incompletely
understood. We recently discovered that conditional deletion of STAT5a/b in
vascular smooth muscle cells abrogated the male bias in PH in hypoxic mice, and
that late-stage obliterative lesions in patients of both sexes with IPAH and HPAH
showed reduced STAT5a/b, reduced Tyr-P-STAT5 and reduced BCL6. In trying to
understand the significance of these observations we realized that there existed 
a well-characterized E2-sensitive central neuroendocrine mechanism of sex bias,
studied over the last 40 years, that, at its peripheral end, culminated in
species-specific male ("pulsatile") vs female ("more continuous") temporal
patterns of circulating growth hormone (GH) levels leading to male vs female
patterned activation of STAT5a/b in peripheral tissues, and thus sex-biased
expression of hundreds of genes. In this essay we consider the contribution of
this neuroendocrine mechanism (hypothalamus-GH-STAT5) in the generation of sex
bias in different PH situations.

PMCID: PMC4749490
PMID: 26252185  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


109. Cancer Discov. 2015 Oct;5(10):1058-71. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0370. Epub
2015 Jul 30.

Detection of Enhancer-Associated Rearrangements Reveals Mechanisms of Oncogene
Dysregulation in B-cell Lymphoma.

Ryan RJ(1), Drier Y(1), Whitton H(2), Cotton MJ(1), Kaur J(1), Issner R(2),
Gillespie S(1), Epstein CB(2), Nardi V(3), Sohani AR(3), Hochberg EP(4),
Bernstein BE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. Broad Institute of Harvard University and MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. (2)Broad Institute of Harvard University and MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. (3)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (5)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Broad Institute of Harvard
University and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Bernstein.Bradley@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Oct;5(10):1018-20.

B-cell lymphomas frequently contain genomic rearrangements that lead to oncogene 
activation by heterologous distal regulatory elements. We used a novel approach
called "pinpointing enhancer-associated rearrangements by chromatin
immunoprecipitation," or PEAR-ChIP, to simultaneously map enhancer activity and
proximal rearrangements in lymphoma cell lines and patient biopsies. This method 
detects rearrangements involving known cancer genes, including CCND1, BCL2, MYC, 
PDCD1LG2, NOTCH1, CIITA, and SGK1, as well as novel enhancer duplication events
of likely oncogenic significance. We identify lymphoma subtype-specific enhancers
in the MYC locus that are silenced in lymphomas with MYC-activating
rearrangements and are associated with germline polymorphisms that alter lymphoma
risk. We show that BCL6-locus enhancers are acetylated by the BCL6-activating
transcription factor MEF2B, and can undergo genomic duplication, or target the
MYC promoter for activation in the context of a "pseudo-double-hit"
t(3;8)(q27;q24) rearrangement linking the BCL6 and MYC loci. Our work provides
novel insights regarding enhancer-driven oncogene activation in
lymphoma.SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate a novel approach for simultaneous detection
of genomic rearrangements and enhancer activity in tumor biopsies. We identify
novel mechanisms of enhancer-driven regulation of the oncogenes MYC and BCL6, and
show that the BCL6 locus can serve as an enhancer donor in an "enhancer
hijacking" translocation.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592453
PMID: 26229090  [PubMed - in process]


110. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 30;43(19):9198-213. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv780. Epub
2015 Jul 30.

Global identification of the genetic networks and cis-regulatory elements of the 
cold response in zebrafish.

Hu P(1), Liu M(2), Zhang D(2), Wang J(2), Niu H(2), Liu Y(2), Wu Z(2), Han B(2), 
Zhai W(2), Shen Y(3), Chen L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Aquacultural Resources and Utilization, Ministry of
Education, College of Fisheries and Life Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University,
Shanghai 201306, China Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Aquacultural
Resources and Utilization, Ministry of Education, College of Fisheries and Life
Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai 201306, China. (3)Institute of
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China. (4)Key Laboratory of Aquacultural Resources and Utilization, Ministry of
Education, College of Fisheries and Life Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University,
Shanghai 201306, China lbchen@shou.edu.cn.

The transcriptional programs of ectothermic teleosts are directly influenced by
water temperature. However, the cis- and trans-factors governing cold responses
are not well characterized. We profiled transcriptional changes in eight
zebrafish tissues exposed to mildly and severely cold temperatures using RNA-Seq.
A total of 1943 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, from which
34 clusters representing distinct tissue and temperature response expression
patterns were derived using the k-means fuzzy clustering algorithm. The promoter 
regions of the clustered DEGs that demonstrated strong co-regulation were
analysed for enriched cis-regulatory elements with a motif discovery program,
DREME. Seventeen motifs, ten known and seven novel, were identified, which
covered 23% of the DEGs. Two motifs predicted to be the binding sites for the
transcription factors Bcl6 and Jun, respectively, were chosen for experimental
verification, and they demonstrated the expected cold-induced and cold-repressed 
patterns of gene regulation. Protein interaction modeling of the network
components followed by experimental validation suggested that Jun physically
interacts with Bcl6 and might be a hub factor that orchestrates the cold response
in zebrafish. Thus, the methodology used and the regulatory networks uncovered in
this study provide a foundation for exploring the mechanisms of cold adaptation
in teleosts.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4627065
PMID: 26227973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Pathol Int. 2015 Oct;65(10):519-27. doi: 10.1111/pin.12335. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Clinicopathological features of double-hit B-cell lymphomas with MYC and BCL2,
BCL6 or CCND1 rearrangements.

Yoshida M(1), Ichikawa A(1), Miyoshi H(1), Kiyasu J(1), Kimura Y(1), Arakawa
F(1), Niino D(1), Ohshima K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Double-hit (DH) lymphomas are B-cell lymphomas characterized by chromosomal
rearrangements, specifically of MYC and either BCL2, BCL6 or CCND1. We reviewed
22 cases of DH lymphomas. BCL2/MYC DH lymphomas constituted the majority of these
DH lymphomas (17 cases; 77%), followed by BCL6/MYC (2 cases; 9%) lymphomas.
Assessing morphological features using the 2008 World Health Organization
classification system, 15 cases (68%) were determined to be B-cell lymphoma,
unclassifiable with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma (BCLU) (10 cases; 45%), or as DLBCL (5 cases; 23%), 
and 2 cases (9%) were classified as morphologically untransformed follicular
lymphoma. Burkitt lymphoma was rare (1 case; 5%) among DH lymphomas. Nineteen
cases were treated with R-CHOP or a high dose chemotherapy regimen. After a
median follow-up of 11 months, 7 patients had died, and the 1-year survival rate 
was 62.5%. High dose chemotherapy did not improve the outcome. We suggest that
screening of genetic variations to detect DH lymphomas is required in diagnosing 
all lymphomas, even those determined morphologically to be follicular lymphoma.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26224092  [PubMed - in process]


112. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):980-90. doi: 10.1038/ni.3226. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

LEF-1 and TCF-1 orchestrate T(FH) differentiation by regulating differentiation
circuits upstream of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6.

Choi YS(1), Gullicksrud JA(2), Xing S(3), Zeng Z(4), Shan Q(3), Li F(3), Love
PE(5), Peng W(4), Xue HH(2), Crotty S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, California, USA. (2)1] Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (4)Department of Physics,
The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. (5)Section on Cellular and
Developmental Biology, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) are specialized effector CD4(+) T cells
that help B cells develop germinal centers (GCs) and memory. However, the
transcription factors that regulate the differentiation of T(FH) cells remain
incompletely understood. Here we report that selective loss of Lef1 or Tcf7
(which encode the transcription factor LEF-1 or TCF-1, respectively) resulted in 
T(FH) cell defects, while deletion of both Lef1 and Tcf7 severely impaired the
differentiation of T(FH) cells and the formation of GCs. Forced expression of
LEF-1 enhanced T(FH) differentiation. LEF-1 and TCF-1 coordinated such
differentiation by two general mechanisms. First, they established the
responsiveness of naive CD4(+) T cells to T(FH) cell signals. Second, they
promoted early T(FH) differentiation via the multipronged approach of sustaining 
expression of the cytokine receptors IL-6Ra and gp130, enhancing expression of
the costimulatory receptor ICOS and promoting expression of the transcriptional
repressor Bcl6.

PMCID: PMC4545301
PMID: 26214741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):991-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.3229. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

The transcription factor TCF-1 initiates the differentiation of T(FH) cells
during acute viral infection.

Xu L(1), Cao Y(1), Xie Z(1), Huang Q(1), Bai Q(1), Yang X(1), He R(1), Hao Y(1), 
Wang H(1), Zhao T(1), Fan Z(2), Qin A(2), Ye J(2), Zhou X(1), Ye L(1), Wu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. 
(2)1] Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Avian Preventive Medicine,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China. [2] Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou, China.

Induction of the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 in CD4(+) T cells is critical
for the differentiation of follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells), which are
essential for B cell-mediated immunity. In contrast, the transcription factor
Blimp1 (encoded by Prdm1) inhibits T(FH) differentiation by antagonizing Bcl-6.
Here we found that the transcription factor TCF-1 was essential for both the
initiation of T(FH) differentiation and the effector function of differentiated
T(FH) cells during acute viral infection. Mechanistically, TCF-1 bound directly
to the Bcl6 promoter and Prdm1 5' regulatory regions, which promoted Bcl-6
expression but repressed Blimp1 expression. TCF-1-null T(FH) cells upregulated
genes associated with non-T(FH) cell lineages. Thus, TCF-1 functions as an
important hub upstream of the Bcl-6-Blimp1 axis to initiate and secure the
differentiation of T(FH) cells during acute viral infection.

PMID: 26214740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J BUON. 2015 May-Jun;20(3):820-8.

BCL2 positive and BCL6 negative diffuse large B cell lymphoma patients benefit
from R-CHOP therapy irrespective of germinal and non germinal center B cell like 
subtypes.

Jovanovic MP(1), Mihaljevic B, Jakovic L, Martinovic VC, Fekete MD, Andjelic B,
Antic D, Bogdanovic A, Boricic N, Terzic T, Jelicic J, Milenkovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.

PURPOSE: Despite major advances in the treatment of diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), approximately one third of the patients progress or die, suggesting the 
existence of additional oncogenic events. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the prognostic value of the "Hans classifier", and BCL2 and MYC protein 
expression and gene alterations in DLBCL patients treated with CHOP or R-CHOP
chemotherapy over a 5-year period. Furthermore, we tried to correlate these
parameters with the International Prognostic Index (IPI).
METHODS: The immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of CD10, BCL6, MUM1 and BCL2 on
paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tumor samples from 103 centroblastic DLBCLs was 
analyzed. IHC expression of MYC and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for
MYC and BCL2 gene alterations was performed on 67 samples using the tissue
microarray (TMA) method.
RESULTS: The Hans algorithm was not predictive of survival in both therapy
groups. No significant difference in BCL2 and MYC alterations or MYC protein
expression in relation to complete response (CR), event-free survival (EFS) and
overall survival (OS) was observed in our study. High IPI correlated
significantly with poor outcome and it was identified as independent prognostic
factor for OS and EFS (both p=0.000). The 5-year OS was 61% in the R-CHOP
compared to 38% in the CHOP group (p=0.007). Rituximab significantly improved the
OS in the BCL2 positive (60 vs 29%, p=0.008), and the BCL6 negative (73 vs 25%,
p=0.001) cases.
CONCLUSION: IPI is an independent prognosticator for DL-BCL patients and the
addition of rituximab significantly improved survival. Furthermore, patients with
BCL2+ and BCL6-DLBCL benefited from R-CHOP.

PMID: 26214636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 1;195(5):2080-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500335. Epub 2015 Jul
17.

An Inhibitory Role for the Transcription Factor Stat3 in Controlling IL-4 and
Bcl6 Expression in Follicular Helper T Cells.

Wu H(1), Xu LL(1), Teuscher P(1), Liu H(1), Kaplan MH(2), Dent AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202; and. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202; and
Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202; and adent2@iupui.edu.

The transcription factor Bcl6 is required for development of follicular helper T 
(TFH) cells. Cytokines that activate Stat3 promote Bcl6 expression and TFH cell
differentiation. Previous studies with an acute virus infection model showed that
TFH cell differentiation was decreased but not blocked in the absence of Stat3.
In this study, we further analyzed the role of Stat3 in TFH cells. In Peyer's
patches, we found that compared with wild-type, Stat3-deficient TFH cells
developed at a 25% lower rate and expressed increased IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-4. Whereas
Peyer's patch germinal center B cells developed at normal numbers with
Stat3-deficient TFH cells, IgG1 class switching was greatly increased. Following 
immunization with sheep RBCs, splenic Stat3-deficient TFH cells developed at a
slower rate than in control mice, and splenic germinal center B cells were
markedly decreased. Stat3-deficient TFH cells developed poorly in a competitive
bone marrow chimera environment. Under all conditions tested, Stat3-deficient TFH
cells overexpressed both IL-4 and Bcl6, a pattern specific for the TFH cell
population. Finally, we found in vitro that repression of IL-4 expression in CD4 
T cells by Bcl6 required Stat3 function. Our data indicate that Stat3 can repress
the expression of Bcl6 and IL-4 in TFH cells, and that Stat3 regulates the
ability of Bcl6 to repress target genes. Overall, we conclude that Stat3 is
required to fine-tune the expression of multiple key genes in TFH cells, and that
the specific immune environment determines the function of Stat3 in TFH cells.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4546859 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26188063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biol Open. 2015 Jul 17;4(8):1024-39. doi: 10.1242/bio.012815.

Cooperation of the BTB-Zinc finger protein, Abrupt, with cytoskeletal regulators 
in Drosophila epithelial tumorigenesis.

Turkel N(1), Portela M(1), Poon C(1), Li J(2), Brumby AM(1), Richardson HE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle and Development Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia. (2)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia. (3)Cell Cycle and
Development Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria 3002, 
Australia Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, Department of Anatomy and
Neuroscience, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia School of Molecular Sciences, La
Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia
h.richardson@latrobe.edu.au.

The deregulation of cell polarity or cytoskeletal regulators is a common
occurrence in human epithelial cancers. Moreover, there is accumulating evidence 
in human epithelial cancer that BTB-ZF genes, such as Bcl6 and ZBTB7A, are
oncogenic. From our previous studies in the vinegar fly, Drosophila melanogaster,
we have identified a cooperative interaction between a mutation in the
apico-basal cell polarity regulator Scribble (Scrib) and overexpression of the
BTB-ZF protein Abrupt (Ab). Herein, we show that co-expression of ab with actin
cytoskeletal regulators, RhoGEF2 or Src64B, in the developing eye-antennal
epithelial tissue results in the formation of overgrown amorphous tumours,
whereas ab and DRac1 co-expression leads to non-cell autonomous overgrowth.
Together with ab, these genes affect the expression of differentiation genes,
resulting in tumours locked in a progenitor cell fate. Finally, we show that the 
expression of two mammalian genes related to ab, Bcl6 and ZBTB7A, which are
oncogenes in mammalian epithelial cancers, significantly correlate with the
upregulation of cytoskeletal genes or downregulation of apico-basal cell polarity
neoplastic tumour suppressor genes in colorectal, lung and other human epithelial
cancers. Altogether, this analysis has revealed that upregulation of cytoskeletal
regulators cooperate with Abrupt in Drosophila epithelial tumorigenesis, and that
high expression of human BTB-ZF genes, Bcl6 and ZBTB7A, shows significant
correlations with cytoskeletal and cell polarity gene expression in specific
epithelial tumour types. This highlights the need for further investigation of
the cooperation between these genes in mammalian systems.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4542289
PMID: 26187947  [PubMed]


117. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:747645. doi: 10.1155/2015/747645. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

IFI16 Expression Is Related to Selected Transcription Factors during B-Cell
Differentiation.

Piccaluga PP(1), Agostinelli C(1), Fuligni F(1), Righi S(1), Tripodo C(2), Re
MC(3), Clò A(3), Miserocchi A(3), Morini S(3), Gariglio M(4), Ferri GG(5),
Rinaldi-Ceroni A(5), Piccin O(5), De Andrea M(6), Pileri SA(1), Landolfo S(6),
Gibellini D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Hematopathology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (2)Department of Human Pathology, University of Palermo,
90127 Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty
Medicine, Bologna University Medical School Unit of Microbiology, S. Orsola
Malpighi Hospital, 40138 Bologna, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Medical School of Novara, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Otolaryngology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (6)Department of Public Health and Microbiology, University
of Turin, 10126 Turin, Italy. (7)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic,
University of Verona, 35124 Verona, Italy.

The interferon-inducible DNA sensor IFI16 is involved in the modulation of
cellular survival, proliferation, and differentiation. In the hematopoietic
system, IFI16 is consistently expressed in the CD34+ stem cells and in peripheral
blood lymphocytes; however, little is known regarding its regulation during
maturation of B- and T-cells. We explored the role of IFI16 in normal B-cell
subsets by analysing its expression and relationship with the major transcription
factors involved in germinal center (GC) development and plasma-cell (PC)
maturation. IFI16 mRNA was differentially expressed in B-cell subsets with
significant decrease in IFI16 mRNA in GC and PCs with respect to naïve and memory
subsets. IFI16 mRNA expression is inversely correlated with a few master
regulators of B-cell differentiation such as BCL6, XBP1, POU2AF1, and BLIMP1. In 
contrast, IFI16 expression positively correlated with STAT3, REL, SPIB, RELA,
RELB, IRF4, STAT5B, and STAT5A. ARACNE algorithm indicated a direct regulation of
IFI16 by BCL6, STAT5B, and RELB, whereas the relationship between IFI16 and the
other factors is modulated by intermediate factors. In addition, analysis of the 
CD40 signaling pathway showed that IFI16 gene expression directly correlated with
NF-<U+03BA>B activation, indicating that IFI16 could be considered an upstream modulator
of NF-<U+03BA>B in human B-cells.

PMCID: PMC4491573
PMID: 26185770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 15;195(4):1538-47. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500224. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

Histone Arginine Methylation by PRMT7 Controls Germinal Center Formation via
Regulating Bcl6 Transcription.

Ying Z(1), Mei M(2), Zhang P(1), Liu C(1), He H(1), Gao F(3), Bao S(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China; and. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China;
(3)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; slbao@genetics.ac.cn.

B cells are the center of humoral immunity and produce Abs to protect against
foreign Ags. B cell defects lead to diseases such as leukemia and lymphomas.
Histone arginine methylation is important for regulating gene activation and
silencing in cells. Although the process commonly exists in mammalian cells, its 
roles in B cells are unknown. To explore the effects of aberrant histone arginine
methylation on B cells, we generated mice with a B cell-specific knockout of
PRMT7, a member of the methyltransferases that mediate arginine methylation of
histones. In this article, we showed that the loss of PRMT7 led to decreased
mature marginal zone B cells and increased follicular B cells and promoted
germinal center formation after immunization. Furthermore, mice lacking PRMT7
expression in B cells secreted low levels of IgG1 and IgA. Abnormal expression of
germinal center genes (i.e., Bcl6, Prdm1, and Irf4) was detected in conditional
knockout mice. By overexpressing PRMT7 in the Raji and A20 cell lines derived
from B cell lymphomas, we validated the fact that PRMT7 negatively regulated Bcl6
expression. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR, we found that PRMT7 could
recruit H4R3me1 and symmetric H4R3me2 to the Bcl6 promoter. These results provide
evidence for the important roles played by PRMT7 in germinal center formation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26179907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Sep;36(3):712-24. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2281. Epub 2015 Jul 
10.

Genetic analysis of genes causing hypertension and stroke in spontaneously
hypertensive rats: Gene expression profiles in the kidneys.

Watanabe Y(1), Yoshida M(1), Yamanishi K(2), Yamamoto H(3), Okuzaki D(4), Nojima 
H(4), Yasunaga T(5), Okamura H(3), Matsunaga H(2), Yamanishi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hirakata General Hospital for Developmental Disorders, Hirakata, Osaka
573-0122, Japan. (2)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. (3)Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences,
Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. (4)DNA-Chip
Development Center for Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (5)Department of Genome
Informatics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, 
Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and stroke-prone SHRs (SHRSP) are
frequently used as models not only of essential hypertension and stroke, but also
of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Normotensive Wistar-Kyoto
(WKY) rats are normally used as controls in these studies. In the present study, 
we aimed to identify the genes causing hypertension and stroke, as well as the
genes involved in ADHD using these rats. We previously analyzed gene expression
profiles in the adrenal glands and brain. Since the kidneys can directly
influence the functions of the cardiovascular, endocrine and sympathetic nervous 
systems, gene expression profiles in the kidneys of the 3 rat strains were
examined using genome-wide microarray technology when the rats were 3 and 6 weeks
old, a period in which rats are considered to be in a pre-hypertensive state.
Gene expression profiles were compared between the SHRs and WKY rats and also
between the SHRSP and SHRs. A total of 232 unique genes showing more than a
4-fold increase or less than a 4-fold decrease in expression were isolated as
SHR- and SHRSP-specific genes. Candidate genes were then selected using two
different web tools: the 1st tool was the Database for Annotation, Visualization 
and Integrated Discovery (DAVID), which was used to search for significantly
enriched genes and categorized them using Gene Ontology (GO) terms, and the 2nd
was Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), which was used to search for interactions
among SHR- and also SHRSP-specific genes. The analyses of SHR-specific genes
using IPA revealed that B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) and SRY (sex determining
region Y)-box 2 (Sox2) were possible candidate genes responsible for causing
hypertension in SHRs. Similar analyses of SHRSP-specific genes revealed that
angiotensinogen (Agt), angiotensin II receptor-associated protein (Agtrap) and
apolipoprotein H (Apoh) were possible candidate genes responsible for triggering 
strokes. Since our results revealed that SHRSP-specific genes isolated from the
kidneys of rats at 6 weeks of age, included 6 genes related to Huntington's
disease, we discussed the genetic association between ADHD and Huntington's
disease.

PMCID: PMC4533772
PMID: 26165378  [PubMed - in process]


120. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 30;6(21):18374-88.

MYC or BCL2 copy number aberration is a strong predictor of outcome in patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Lu TX(1), Fan L(1), Wang L(1), Wu JZ(1), Miao KR(1), Liang JH(1), Gong QX(2),
Wang Z(2), Young KH(3), Xu W(1), Zhang ZH(2), Li JY(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of
Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu
Province Hospital, Nanjing, China. (3)Department of Hematopathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Collaborative
Innovation Center for Cancer Personalized Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL). Patients with DLBCL harboring MYC aberrations concurrent with BCL2 or/and 
BCL6 aberrations constitute a specific group with extremely poor outcome. In this
study, we retrospectively investigated the incidence and prognosis of MYC, BCL2, 
and BCL6 aberrations with DLBCL patients in Chinese population. We applied
fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis in 246 DLBCL 
patients. The results showed that patients with MYC or BCL2 copy number
aberration (CNA) had significantly worse overall survival (OS) and
progression-free survival (PFS) than negative cases (P < 0.0001). Patients with
both MYC and BCL2 CNA had similar outcomes to those with classic double hit
lymphoma or protein double expression lymphoma (MYC and BCL2/BCL6 coexpression). 
By multivariate analysis, MYC CNA, BCL2 CNA and double CNA were the independent
worse prognostic factors. In conclusions, patients with MYC or BCL2 CNA
constituted a unique group with extremely poor outcome and may require more
aggressive treatment regimens.

PMCID: PMC4621897
PMID: 26158410  [PubMed - in process]


121. JAMA Neurol. 2015 Sep;72(9):1066-7. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.1149.

Lymphomatosis Cerebri: A Diagnostic Challenge.

Hatanpaa KJ(1), Fuda F(1), Koduru P(1), Young K(2), Lega B(3), Chen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas. (2)Department of Hematopathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston. (3)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2015 Dec;72(12):1536.
    JAMA Neurol. 2015 Dec;72(12):1536.

PMID: 26147788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Anim Sci. 2015 Jun;93(6):3152-63. doi: 10.2527/jas.2014-8597.

Genome wide transcriptomic analysis identifies pathways affected by the infusion 
of Clostridium perfringens culture supernatant in the duodenum of broilers in
situ.

Athanasiadou S, Russell KM, Kaiser P, Kanellos T, Burgess ST, Mitchell M, Clutton
E, Naylor SW, Low CJ, Hutchings MR, Sparks N.

Clostridium perfringens type A is the main etiological factor for necrotic
enteritis, a multifactorial enteric disease that penalizes performance, health,
and welfare of poultry. Lack of knowledge of host responses and disease
pathogenesis is slowing down progress on developing therapies for disease
control. A combined genomewide and targeted gene approach was used to investigate
pathways and biological functions affected by the infusion of C. perfringens
culture supernatant in the duodenum of broilers in 2 experiments. An in situ
isolated loop of duodenum was prepared in anesthetized broilers of 3 wk of age
(Exp. 1) and was infused either with crude C. perfringens culture supernatant (n 
= 7; treated), positive for necrotic enteritis B-like toxin (NetB) as determined 
by a cytotoxicity assay, or with a control preparation (n = 6; control). Birds
were maintained alive for 1 h and then euthanized for tissue recovery. The use of
the Affymetrix chicken genome array on RNA samples from loop tissue showed top
biological functions affected by culture supernatant infusion included cell
morphology, immune cell trafficking, and cell death; pathways affected included
death receptor signaling, inflammatory response, and nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B
signaling. In a second in situ study (Exp. 2), broilers were maintained alive for
4 h to monitor temporal expression patterns of targeted genes. Duodenal tissue
was removed at 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 h post-infusion with culture supernatant (n = 9) 
or a control preparation (n = 5) for histology and gene expression analysis.
Genes encoding proinflammatory cytokines, such as interferon <U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>), cell
trafficking, such as neuroblastoma 1 (NBL1) and B cell CLL/Lymphoma 6 (BCL6), and
cell death, such as Fas cell surface death receptor (FAS) and GTPase IMAP family 
member 8 (GIMAP8), were differentially expressed in the duodenum of treated and
control broilers (P < 0.05). We have demonstrated that C. perfringens culture
supernatant (NetB positive) infusion resulted in histological and gene expression
changes consistent with necrotic enteritis in the duodenum of broilers. In the
absence of live bacteria, crude culture supernatant resulted in early
immunomodulation, inflammation, and cell death in the duodenum. The pathways
identified here can be targeted for the development of new drugs, vaccines, and
novel therapies for necrotic enteritis in broilers.

PMID: 26115301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Clin Transl Oncol. 2015 Nov;17(11):841-6. doi: 10.1007/s12094-015-1322-y. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Mutual interaction between BCL6 and miRNAs contributing to the pathogenesis of
various cancers.

Wei Z(1,)(2), Gao W(1,)(3), Wu Y(1), Ni B(4), Tian Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing,
400038, People's Republic of China. (2)The Battalion 10 of Cadet Brigade, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, 400038, People's Republic of China.
(3)Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 400038, People's Republic of
China. (4)Institute of Immunology, PLA, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, 400038, People's Republic of China. nibing@tmmu.edu.cn. (5)Institute
of Immunology, PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 400038,
People's Republic of China. tianyi19831015@hotmail.com.

MicroRNA (miRNA), a class of non-protein-coding RNAs, plays a critical role in
many cellular processes, such as invasion, proliferation and migration, and also 
function in disease pathology. The transcription factor and proto-oncogene B cell
CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is aberrantly expressed in various cancers. An increasing
body of evidence has demonstrated that miRNAs and BCL6 can target one another and
mutually adjust their expression which are of great importance in the
pathogenesis of various cancers. In this report, we summarize the mutual
interaction between miRNAs and BCL6, which have been studied in cancers,
highlighting their mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets in cancers.

PMID: 26108407  [PubMed - in process]


124. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2015;55(1):51-3. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.55.51.

Double-Hit Lymphoma.

Goyal G(1), Caponetti GC, Silberstein PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, CHI Health Creighton University Medical
Center.

PMID: 26106008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2015;55(1):23-8. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.55.23.

Lymphocyte-Rich Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma. A Case with Difficulty in
Distinguishing from Nodular Lymphocyte-Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma.

Sakai J(1), Tanae K, Takahashi N, Nagata K, Yoshino T, Tamaru J, Niitsu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, International Medical Center, Saitama Medical
University.

A 35-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of left supraclavicular
and cervical lymphadenopathies. Histopathological examination of the lymph nodes 
revealed reactive lymphadenopathy. He visited our hospital three years after the 
initial diagnosis because of enlarged left cervical lymph nodes.
Histopathologically, both Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (H/RS) and
lymphocyte-predominant (LP) cells were found in the lymph node. We first
suspected nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL), because these 
cells were CD15(-) and CD30(-). However, the diagnosis of lymphocyte-rich
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (LRCHL) was finally confirmed, because these cells
were found to be CD20(-), Bob.1(+), Oct.2(-), and BCL6(-) by additional
immunostaining. The patient was treated with six cycles of ABVD chemotherapy, and
a complete response was achieved. However, he underwent autologous stem-cell
transplantation after high-dose chemotherapy owing to a relapse 10 months after
primary treatment. Distingushing LRCHL from NLPHL was difficult in this patient, 
because histopathological examination showed both H/RS and LP cells, and
immunostaining revealed these cells to be triple negative (CD15(-), CD30(-) and
CD20(-)). Accumulation of such cases are necessary to establish better criteria
for the differential diagnosis and assessment of clinical behavior.

PMID: 26106003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 10;6(16):13933-45.

Age cutoff for Epstein-Barr virus-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma--is it
necessary?

Ok CY(1), Ye Q(1), Li L(1), Manyam GC(2), Deng L(1), Goswami RR(1), Wang X(1),
Montes-Moreno S(3), Visco C(4), Tzankov A(5), Dybkaer K(6), Zhang L(2), Abramson 
J(7), Sohani AR(7), Chiu A(8), Orazi A(9), Zu Y(10), Bhagat G(11), Richards
KL(12), Hsi ED(13), Choi WW(14), van Krieken JH(15), Huh J(16), Ponzoni M(17),
Ferreri AJ(17), Zhang S(18), Parsons BM(19), Xu M(20), Møller MB(21), Winter
JN(22), Piris MA(3), Xu-Monette ZY(1), Medeiros LJ(1), Young KH(1,)(23).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. 
(3)Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain. (4)San Bortolo
Hospital, Vicenza, Italy. (5)University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland. (6)Aalborg 
University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (7)Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (8)Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (9)Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA. (10)Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston,
Texas, USA. (11)Columbia University Medical Center and New York Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, New York, USA. (12)University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. (13)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA. (14)University of Hong Kong, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, Hong
Kong, China. (15)Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands. (16)Asan Medical Center, Ulsan University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. (17)San Raffaele H. Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. (18)Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (19)Gundersen Lutheran
Health System, La Crosse, Wisconsin, USA. (20)Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA. (21)Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(22)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(23)The University of Texas School of Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Houston, Texas, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly (EBV+
DLBCL-e) is a molecularly distinct variant of DLBCL, characterized by a
monoclonal B-cell proliferation that occurs in patients >50 years of age without 
a history or clinicopathologic evidence of immunodeficiency. However, patients
with EBV+ DLBCL younger than 50-years-old also exist in Western countries. We
evaluated the clinicopathologic, immunophenotypic and genetic features in
Cacausian patients with EBV+ DLBCL who are =50 years of age and compared this
patient group to patients who are >50 years. In patients who are =50 years, less 
frequent expression of BCL6 and a trend of more frequent expression of CD30 and
pSTAT3 were found in patients with EBV+ DLBCL. In patients who are >50 years,
common expression of CD30, p50, pSTAT3 and less frequent expression of BCL6 were 
observed. Older patients also more commonly had a poor performance status
(ECOG=2). Comparing EBV+ DLBCL patients in =50 years versus >50 years, both
groups had similar clinicopathologic, immunophenotypic and genetic features. Gene
expression profiling, microRNA profiling and treatment outcome of the younger
patients with EBV+ DLBCL was not distinctive from tumors in older patients. Based
on our data, we suggest that the arbitrary age cutoff for EBV+ DLBCL is
unnecessary and should be eliminated in the WHO lymphoma classification scheme.

PMCID: PMC4546442
PMID: 26101854  [PubMed - in process]


127. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1006-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500767. Epub 2015
Jun 22.

Targeting Antigen to Clec9A Primes Follicular Th Cell Memory Responses Capable of
Robust Recall.

Kato Y(1), Zaid A(1), Davey GM(1), Mueller SN(1), Nutt SL(2), Zotos D(2),
Tarlinton DM(2), Shortman K(2), Lahoud MH(3), Heath WR(4), Caminschi I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Peter Doherty Institute, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; (2)Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia;
Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria
3010, Australia; (3)Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public
Health, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia; and Department of Immunology, Monash
University, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia. (4)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, The Peter Doherty Institute, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; caminschi@burnet.edu.au
wrheath@unimelb.edu.au. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Peter
Doherty Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia; Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public Health,
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia; and caminschi@burnet.edu.au
wrheath@unimelb.edu.au.

Targeting Ags to dendritic cell (DC) surface receptors can induce a variety of
responses depending on the DC type targeted, the receptor targeted, and the
adjuvant used. Clec9A (DNGR-1), which is expressed by CD8(+) DCs, has been shown 
to bind F-actin exposed on damaged cells. Targeting Ag to this receptor in mice
and nonhuman primates induces strong humoral immunity even in the absence of
adjuvant, a process seen for a few select DC receptors. In contrast with other
receptors, however, targeting Clec9A induces long-lived, affinity-matured Ab
responses that are associated with efficient CD4(+) T cell responses shown to
possess properties of follicular Th cells (TFH). In this article, we provide
definitive evidence that Clec9A targeting promotes the development of TFH by
showing that responding CD4 T cells express CXCR5, PD1, the TFH transcription
factor Bcl6, and the cytokine IL-21, and that these cells localize to germinal
centers. Furthermore, we extend studies from the model Ag OVA to the viral Ag
glycoprotein D of HSV-1 and examine the capacity of primed TFH to form functional
memory. We show that targeting glycoprotein D to Clec9A even in the absence of
adjuvant induced long-lived memory CXCR5(+) PD1(hi) CD4(+) T cells that
proliferated extensively upon secondary challenge and rapidly developed into
effector TFH. This was associated with enhanced germinal center B cell responses 
and accelerated Ab production. Our study indicates that targeting Ags to Clec9A
in the absence of adjuvant routinely generates TFH responses that form long-lived
memory capable of robust secondary TFH responses.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26101322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):861-3. doi: 10.1038/ng.3338. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Consistent in-frame internal tandem duplications of BCOR characterize clear cell 
sarcoma of the kidney.

Ueno-Yokohata H(1), Okita H(1), Nakasato K(1), Akimoto S(1), Hata J(2), Koshinaga
T(3), Fukuzawa M(4), Kiyokawa N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Research, National Research
Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Central Institute
for Experimental Animals, Kawasaki, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Osaka Medical Center and
Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2015 Aug;12(8):416.

Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK) is one of the major pediatric renal
neoplasms, but its associated genetic abnormalities are largely unknown. We
identified internal tandem duplications in the BCOR gene (BCL6 corepressor)
affecting the C terminus in 100% (20/20) of CCSK tumors but in none (0/193) of
the other pediatric renal tumors. CCSK tumors expressed only an aberrant BCOR
allele, indicating a close correlation between BCOR aberration and CCSK
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26098867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncoscience. 2015 Apr 26;2(4):428-42. eCollection 2015.

Circadian disruption-induced microRNAome deregulation in rat mammary gland
tissues.

Kochan DZ(1), Ilnytskyy Y(1), Golubov A(1), Deibel SH(2), McDonald RJ(2),
Kovalchuk O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB,
Canada. (2)Canadian Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience, Department of
Neuroscience, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB, Canada.

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy affecting women worldwide, and
evidence is mounting that circadian-disruption-induced breast cancer is a
warranted concern. Although studies on the role of epigenetics have provided
valuable insights, and although epigenetics has been increasingly recognized in
the etiology of breast cancer, relatively few studies have investigated the
epigenetic link between circadian disruption (CD) and breast cancer. Using a
proven photoperiod-shifting paradigm, differing degrees of CD, various
tissue-extraction time points, and Illumina sequencing, we investigated the
effect of CD on miRNA expression in the mammary tissues of a rodent model system.
To our knowledge, our results are the first to illustrate CD-induced changes in
miRNA expressions in mammary tissues. Furthermore, it is likely that these miRNA 
expression changes exhibit varying time frames of plasticity linked to both the
degree of CD and length of reentrainment, and that the expression changes are
influenced by the light and dark phases of the 24-hour circadian cycle. Of the
differentially expressed miRNAs identified in the present study, all but one have
been linked to breast cancer, and many have predicted circadian-relevant targets 
that play a role in breast cancer development. Based on the analysis of protein
levels in the same tissues, we also propose that the initiation and development
of CD-induced breast cancer may be linked to an interconnected web of increased
NF-<U+03BA>B activity and increased levels of Tudor-SN, STAT3, and BCL6, with aberrant
CD-induced downregulation of miR-127 and miR-146b potentially contributing to
this dynamic. This study provides direct evidence that CD induces changes in
miRNA levels in mammary tissues with potentially malignant consequences, thus
indicating that the role of miRNAs in CD-induced breast cancer should not be
dismissed.

PMCID: PMC4468328
PMID: 26097876  [PubMed]


130. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 17;35(11):1373-85. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.193. Epub 2015 Jun
22.

Steroid induction of therapy-resistant cytokeratin-5-positive cells in estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer through a BCL6-dependent mechanism.

Goodman CR(1), Sato T(1), Peck AR(1), Girondo MA(1), Yang N(1), Liu C(1), Yanac
AF(1), Kovatich AJ(2), Hooke JA(2), Shriver CD(2), Mitchell EP(3), Hyslop T(4),
Rui H(1,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA,
USA. (2)John P. Murtha Cancer Center, Walter Reed National Military Medical
Center, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics &
Bioinformatics, Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Therapy resistance remains a major problem in estrogen receptor-a (ERa)-positive 
breast cancer. A subgroup of ERa-positive breast cancer is characterized by
mosaic presence of a minor population of ERa-negative cancer cells expressing the
basal cytokeratin-5 (CK5). These CK5-positive cells are therapy resistant and
have increased tumor-initiating potential. Although a series of reports document 
induction of the CK5-positive cells by progestins, it is unknown if other
3-ketosteroids share this ability. We now report that glucocorticoids and
mineralocorticoids effectively expand the CK5-positive cell population.
CK5-positive cells induced by 3-ketosteroids lacked ERa and progesterone
receptors, expressed stem cell marker, CD44, and displayed increased
clonogenicity in soft agar and broad drug-resistance in vitro and in vivo.
Upregulation of CK5-positive cells by 3-ketosteroids required induction of the
transcriptional repressor BCL6 based on suppression of BCL6 by two independent
BCL6 small hairpin RNAs or by prolactin. Prolactin also suppressed 3-ketosteroid 
induction of CK5+ cells in T47D xenografts in vivo. Survival analysis with
recursive partitioning in node-negative ERa-positive breast cancer using
quantitative CK5 and BCL6 mRNA or protein expression data identified patients at 
high or low risk for tumor recurrence in two independent patient cohorts. The
data provide a mechanism by which common pathophysiological or pharmacologic
elevations in glucocorticoids or other 3-ketosteroids may adversely affect
patients with mixed ERa+/CK5+ breast cancer. The observations further suggest a
cooperative diagnostic utility of CK5 and BCL6 expression levels and justify
exploring efficacy of inhibitors of BCL6 and 3-ketosteroid receptors for a subset
of ERa-positive breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4800289
PMID: 26096934  [PubMed - in process]


131. Virchows Arch. 2015 Sep;467(3):345-55. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1796-6. Epub 2015 
Jun 19.

Pattern of MEF2B expression in lymphoid tissues and in malignant lymphomas.

Krenács D(1), Borbényi Z, Bedekovics J, Méhes G, Bagdi E, Krenács L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Jobb fasor 23/B,
Szeged, H-6726, Hungary.

Myocyte enhancer binding factor 2 B (MEF2B) is a member of the evolutionary
conserved transcription family MEF2. MEF2B has been shown to directly control
biological activity of the B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) gene in germinal center (GC) 
B cells. To validate MEF2B as an immunohistochemical marker, we studied a large
consecutive series of hyperplastic lymphoid tissues (n = 38) and malignant
lymphoproliferative conditions (n = 471), including all major categories of B and
T cell neoplasms. In hyperplastic lymphoid tissues, MEF2B staining revealed
intense and crisp nuclear expression confined to GC B cells. Unlike BCL6, MEF2B
was not detected in follicular T cells. In addition, weak nuclear staining of
plasma cells was noted. MEF2B staining labeled neoplastic cells of follicular
lymphoma both in common and variant cases as well as in bone marrow biopsies with
high sensitivity, while it was almost consistently negative in marginal zone
lymphoma. Consistent MEF2B expression was found in Burkitt lymphoma and nodular
lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma as well as in the large majority of cases
of mantle cell lymphoma and diffuse large cell B cell lymphoma. MEF2B protein
expression showed a statistically significant association with that of BCL6 in
cases of diffuse large B cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified. We conclude that
MEF2B is a valuable marker of normal GC B cells, potentially useful in
differential diagnosis of small B cell lymphomas.

PMID: 26089142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jun 14;8:70. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0168-7.

Multiparameter analysis of homogeneously R-CHOP-treated diffuse large B cell
lymphomas identifies CD5 and FOXP1 as relevant prognostic biomarkers: report of
the prospective SAKK 38/07 study.

Tzankov A(1), Leu N(2), Muenst S(3), Juskevicius D(4), Klingbiel D(5), Mamot
C(6), Dirnhofer S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40,
CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. alexandar.tzankov@usb.ch. (2)Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40, CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland.
nora.leu@ukbb.ch. (3)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel,
Schoenbeinstrasse 40, CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. simone.muents@usb.ch.
(4)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40,
CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. darius.juskevicius@usb.ch. (5)Swiss Group for
Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK), Effingerstrasse 40, CD-3008, Bern, Switzerland. 
dirk.klingbiel@sakk.ch. (6)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cantonal Hospital
Aarau, Tellstrasse house Nr. 40, CH-5001, Aarau, Switzerland.
christoph.mamot@ksa.ch. (7)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel,
Schoenbeinstrasse 40, CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. stephan.dirnhofer@usb.ch.

BACKGROUND: The prognostic role of tumor-related parameters in diffuse large B
cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a matter of controversy.
METHODS: We investigated the prognostic value of phenotypic and genotypic
profiles in DLBCL in clinical trial (NCT00544219) patients homogenously treated
with six cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine,
prednisone (R-CHOP), followed by two cycles of R (R-CHOP-14). The primary
endpoint was event-free survival at 2 years (EFS). Secondary endpoints were
progression-free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Immunohistochemical (bcl2,
bcl6, CD5, CD10, CD20, CD95, CD168, cyclin E, FOXP1, GCET, Ki-67, LMO2, MUM1p,
pSTAT3) and in situ hybridization analyses (BCL2 break apart probe, C-MYC break
apart probe and C-MYC/IGH double-fusion probe, and Epstein-Barr virus probe) were
performed and correlated with the endpoints.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-three patients (median age 58 years) were evaluable. 
Immunohistochemical assessment succeeded in all cases. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization was successful in 82 instances. According to the Tally algorithm,
81 cases (66%) were classified as non-germinal center (GC) DLBCL, while 42 cases 
(34%) were GC DLBCL. BCL2 gene breaks were observed in 7/82 cases (9%) and C-MYC 
breaks in 6/82 cases (8%). "Double-hit" cases with BCL2 and C-MYC rearrangements 
were not observed. Within the median follow-up of 53 months, there were 51
events, including 16 lethal events and 12 relapses. Factors able to predict worse
EFS in univariable models were failure to achieve response according to
international criteria, failure to achieve positron emission tomography response 
(p < 0.005), expression of CD5 (p = 0.02), and higher stage (p = 0.021). Factors 
predicting inferior PFS were failure to achieve response according to
international criteria (p < 0.005), higher stage (p = 0.005), higher
International Prognostic Index (IPI; p = 0.006), and presence of either C-MYC or 
BCL2 gene rearrangements (p = 0.033). Factors predicting inferior OS were failure
to achieve response according to international criteria and expression of FOXP1
(p < 0.005), cyclin E, CD5, bcl2, CD95, and pSTAT3 (p = 0.005, 0.007, 0.016, and 
0.025, respectively). Multivariable analyses revealed that expression of CD5 (p =
0.044) and FOXP1 (p = 0.004) are independent prognostic factors for EFS and OS,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Phenotypic studies with carefully selected biomarkers like CD5 and
FOXP1 are able to prognosticate DLBCL course at diagnosis, independent of stage
and IPI and independent of response to R-CHOP.

PMCID: PMC4472251
PMID: 26071053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 2015;42(2):156-60.

Decreased Bcl-6 and increased Blimp-1 in the peritoneal cavity of patients with
endometriosis.

Yeol SG, Won YS, Kim YI, Lee JW, Choi YJ, Park DC.

PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATION: The authors investigated the expression patterns of
interleukin (IL)-lß and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, cytokines associated with 
peritoneal inflammatory reactions, and of B cell leukemia lymphoma (Bcl)-6 and B 
lymphocyte inducer of maturation program (Blimp)-1, transcriptional factors
associated with immunoglobulin (Ig) production; the concentrations of Igs, and
their correlation, in patients with and without endometriosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors analyzed the peritoneal fluid of 98 patients, 
46 with endometriosis, and 52 with benign tumors.
RESULTS: IL-1 and TNF-a mRNAs and IgG and IgA concentrations were higher in the
endometriosis group, but the differences were not statistically significant.
However, Bcl-6 mRNA level was significantly lower and Blimp-1 mRNA level was
significantly higher in the endometriosis group with significant correlations
among transcriptional factors, Igs, and cytokines (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Peritoneal immune responses in patients with endometriosis may be due
to increased IgG and IgA concentrations, as well as to changes in expression of
proinflammatory cytokines and transcriptional factors.

PMID: 26054109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Lett. 2015 Sep 1;365(2):190-200. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.05.029. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

BCL6 induces EMT by promoting the ZEB1-mediated transcription repression of
E-cadherin in breast cancer cells.

Yu JM(1), Sun W(1), Hua F(1), Xie J(1), Lin H(1), Zhou DD(1), Hu ZW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Pharmacology Group, The State Key Laboratory of
Natural Product Structure and Function, The Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 1 Xian Nong Tan
Street, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Molecular Immunology and Pharmacology Group,
The State Key Laboratory of Natural Product Structure and Function, The Institute
of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, 1 Xian Nong Tan Street, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address:
huzhuowei@imm.ac.cn.

B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6), a transcriptional repressor, is involved in the
development and progression of breast cancers with uncertain mechanism. The
purpose of this study is to investigate the potential effect and mechanism of
BCL6 in the regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a critical
cellular process for controlling the development and progression of breast
cancers. We found that BCL6 promoted invasion, migration and growth by
stimulating EMT in breast cancer cells. BCL6 induced EMT by enhancing the
expression of transcriptional repressor ZEB1 which bound to the E-cadherin
promoter and repressing the E-cadherin transcription. Deletion of ZEB1 protected 
against the pro-EMT roles of BCL6 by restoring the expression of E-cadherin in
these cells. Moreover, inhibition of BCL6 with BCL6 inhibitor 79-6 suppressed
these functions of BCL6 in breast cancer cells. These findings indicate that BCL6
promotes EMT via enhancing the ZEB1-mediated transcriptional repression of
E-cadherin in breast cancer cells. Targeting BCL6 has therapeutic potential
against the development and progression of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26049022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;39(8):1093-101. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000445.

Skin Involvement of Mantle Cell Lymphoma May Mimic Primary Cutaneous Diffuse
Large B-cell Lymphoma, Leg Type.

Wehkamp U(1), Pott C, Unterhalt M, Koch K, Weichenthal M, Klapper W, Oschlies I.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Dermatology Medical Department II §Department of Pathology,
Hematopathology Section, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of Munich, Munich, Germany.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a B-cell neoplasm with a variable and generally
aggressive clinical course. So far our knowledge of skin involvement of MCL is
limited. To understand the clinical and histopathologic features of MCL with skin
involvement, the files of the Lymph Node Registry Kiel were screened for MCL
diagnosed in the skin. Over a period of 13 years, 1321 biopsy specimens were
diagnosed as MCL; among them, 14 patients (1%) showed skin involvement. Of these,
skin was the initial site of manifestation in 6/11 (55%) cases. One patient
presented with a skin-limited lymphoma. Furthermore, 7/12 (58%) patients
presented with lesions on the leg. The lymphomas were highly proliferative with
blastoid cytology in 12/14 (86%) cases. Moreover, the immunophenotype with
expression of BCL2 (100%), MUM-1/IRF4 (83%), and IgM (82%) and lack of CD10 (25%)
and BCL6 (0%) closely resembled the features of primary cutaneous diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma, leg type. Solely the expression of cyclin D1 (100%) and the
presence of t(11;14) (100%) allowed a distinction from cases of primary cutaneous
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type. Only 2 MCL cases with skin involvement
presented with classical cytology. Interestingly, in these 2 cases skin
involvement occurred simultaneously in a lesion of coexisting primary cutaneous
marginal zone lymphoma. Our data suggest that clinical presentation on the leg
and blastoid cytology along with high proliferation and expression of Bcl2,
Mum-1/IRF4, and IgM are typical for MCL involving the skin. Lymphomas with these 
features might be erroneously diagnosed as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg
type, if cyclin D1 staining is not performed.

PMID: 26034867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Pathol Transl Med. 2015 May;49(3):243-8. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2015.03.30. Epub
2015 May 15.

Smad1 expression in follicular lymphoma.

Go JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dankook University College of Medicine, Cheonan,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Follicular lymphomas present with various immunohistologic patterns. 
The immunohistochemical markers used in the diagnosis of follicular lymphoma show
variable degrees of sensitivity and specificity, and thus, additional germinal
center markers are required. Smad1 has been reported to be overexpressed in
follicular lymphoma, but little is known regarding the expression patterns of
Smad proteins in human lymphoid tissue.
METHODS: In the present study, we performed immunohistochemistry for traditional 
germinal center markers and for Smad1 in human reactive lymphoid and follicular
lymphoma tissues to investigate Smad1's usefulness in the diagnosis of follicular
lymphoma.
RESULTS: In the reactive germinal centers, most cells were positive for Smad1.
Among the 27 follicular lymphoma cases, 17 of 21 (80%) were Smad1 positive, 17 of
27 (63%) were positive for CD10, and 23 of 27 (85%) were positive for Bcl6.
Notably, three cases expressed CD10 only, and one only expressed Bcl6. All these 
cases were grade 3 tumors and showed follicular and diffuse growth patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that Smad1 is a candidate as a germinal
center marker. Furthermore, they suggest that the Smad signaling pathway might be
involved in follicular lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC4440936
PMID: 26018516  [PubMed]


137. Acta Med Croatica. 2014 Jun;68(3):299-305.

[Clinical features in DLBCL and translocation BCL2/c-MYC "double hit" lymphoma].

[Article in Croatian]

kunca , Domimis M, Plninc-Peraica A, Jakic B.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is classified as lymphoma and various
entities using the gene expression of proteins are classified into three groups. 
The aim of this study was to clarify the clinical, biological, immunophenotypic
and cytogenetic features of DLBCL with translocation t (14; 18) and 8q24/c-MYC.
Eleven DLBCL patients with dual translation were monitored during the 2000-2009
period. The characteristics of these patients included morphological,
immunohistochemical and cytogenetic analysis. Study results showed that all
patients had aggressive characteristics, presence of B symptoms (64%), general
patient condition according to ECOG scale = 2 (55%), elevated serum lactate
dehydrogenase activity (73%), clinical stage III and IV (82%), extranodal
involvement of the disease (73%), and IPI = 2 (73%). Partial remission was
achieved in 73% of all patients and all patients (73%) died within a short time. 
Patients were treated with CHOP and similar protocols (COP, CVP, CNOP), with the 
addition of MabThera. Immunophenotyping was performed and determined expression
of the CD20, CD3, CD10, BCL6 and MUM1 markers. The cytogenetic
analysis/fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed complex karyotype changes.
Thus, we analyzed the presence of BCL2, BCL6 and c-MYC genes and found eight
patients to have BCL2 and c-MYC translocation genes, while three had
translocation of the BCL6 and c-MYC genes. Despite appropriate therapy, the
patient prognosis is poor. The median survival in these patients was 1.85 years. 
DLBCL with BCL2 and c-MYC rearrangement of the subgroups of lymphoma is
associated with very poor survival. The presence of these two translocations has 
an aggressive clinical course.

PMID: 26016222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. APMIS. 2015 Jul;123(7):596-603. doi: 10.1111/apm.12390. Epub 2015 May 22.

MYC protein expression is associated with poor prognosis in primary diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma of the central nervous system.

Tapia G(1), Baptista MJ(2), Muñoz-Marmol AM(1), Gaafar A(3), Puente-Pomposo M(4),
Garcia O(2), Marginet-Flinch R(1), Sanz C(1), Navarro JT(2), Sancho JM(2), Ribera
JM(2), Ariza A(1), Mate JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autonoma 
de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain. (2)Department of Hematology, ICO- Hospital Germans
Trias i Pujol, Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain. (3)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario
Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain. (4)Department of Hematology, Hospital Universitario
Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain.

MYC and BCL2 gene translocations and protein expression have recently
demonstrated to be of prognostic significance in systemic diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL). However, their role in primary central nervous system DLBCL
(CNS-DLBCL) prognosis has been scarcely analyzed. We studied the immunophenotype,
the status of the MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 genes and the clinical features of a series
of 42 CNS-DLBCL and evaluated their prognostic significance. We found high MYC
protein expression in 43% of cases, and this was associated with lower overall
survival (OS). Cases with concurrent expression of MYC and BCL2 showed a lower
OS, although the difference did not reach statistical significance.
Translocations involving the MYC or BCL2 genes were not detected. The BCL6 gene
was frequently translocated, but was unrelated to survival. We conclude that MYC 
protein expression detected by immunohistochemistry identifies a CNS-DLBCL subset
with worse prognosis and may contribute to a more accurate risk stratification of
CNS-DLBCL patients.

© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26010683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2015:e449-57. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2015.35.e449.

ABC, GCB, and Double-Hit Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma: Does Subtype Make a
Difference in Therapy Selection?

Nowakowski GS(1), Czuczman MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY.

Personalized therapy for the treatment of patients with cancer is rapidly
approaching and is an achievable goal in the near future. A substantial number of
novel targets have been developed into therapeutic agents. There is a substantial
variability to antitumor activity by novel therapeutics because of the unique
heterogeneity and biology that exists both between and within lymphoma subtypes. 
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL). Approximately 40% of patients have refractory disease or disease 
that will relapse after an initial response, and the majority of patients with
relapsed DLBCL will succumb to the disease. There are two major biologically
distinct molecular subtypes of DLBCL: germinal center B-cell (GCB) and activated 
B-cell (ABC). ABC DLBCL is associated with substantially worse outcomes when
treated with standard chemoimmunotherapy. In addition to GCB and ABC subtypes,
double-hit lymphomas (approximately 5% to 10% of patients) and double-expressor
lymphomas, which overexpress MYC and BCL2 protein, are aggressive DLBCLs and are 
also associated with a poor prognosis. Double-hit lymphomas have concurrent
chromosomal rearrangements of MYC plus BCL2 (or less likely, BCL6). Advances in
molecular characterization techniques and the development of novel agents
targeting specific subtypes of DLBCL have provided a foundation for personalized 
therapy of DLBCL based on molecular subtype. A number of early clinical trials
evaluating combinations of novel targeted agents with standard chemotherapy
(R-CHOP) have been completed and have demonstrated the feasibility of this
approach with encouraging efficacy. As such, molecular classification of DLBCL is
not only important for prognostication, but moves to center stage for
personalization of therapy for DLBCL.

PMID: 25993209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 1;21(17):3986-94. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2116.
Epub 2015 May 19.

Genome-Wide Analysis Uncovers Novel Recurrent Alterations in Primary Central
Nervous System Lymphomas.

Braggio E(1), Van Wier S(2), Ojha J(2), McPhail E(3), Asmann YW(4), Egan J(2), da
Silva JA(5), Schiff D(6), Lopes MB(6), Decker PA(3), Valdez R(2), Tibes R(2),
Eckloff B(3), Witzig TE(3), Stewart AK(2), Fonseca R(2), O'Neill BP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona. braggio.esteban@mayo.edu. (2)Mayo Clinic,
Scottsdale, Arizona. (3)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (4)Mayo Clinic,
Jacksonville, Florida. (5)National Institute of Cancer, Brazil. (6)University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.

PURPOSE: Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is an aggressive
non-Hodgkin lymphoma confined to the central nervous system. Whether there is a
PCNSL-specific genomic signature and, if so, how it differs from systemic diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is uncertain.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed a comprehensive genomic study of tumor samples 
from 19 immunocompetent PCNSL patients. Testing comprised array-comparative
genomic hybridization and whole exome sequencing.
RESULTS: Biallelic inactivation of TOX and PRKCD was recurrently found in PCNSL
but not in systemic DLBCL, suggesting a specific role in PCNSL pathogenesis. In
addition, we found a high prevalence of MYD88 mutations (79%) and CDKN2A
biallelic loss (60%). Several genes recurrently affected in PCNSL were common
with systemic DLBCL, including loss of TNFAIP3, PRDM1, GNA13, TMEM30A, TBL1XR1,
B2M, CD58, activating mutations of CD79B, CARD11, and translocations IgH-BCL6.
Overall, B-cell receptor/Toll-like receptor/NF-<U+03BA>B pathways were altered in >90%
of PNCSL, highlighting its value for targeted therapeutic approaches.
Furthermore, integrated analysis showed enrichment of pathways associated with
immune response, proliferation, apoptosis, and lymphocyte differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, genome-wide analysis uncovered novel recurrent
alterations, including TOX and PRKCD, helping to differentiate PCNSL from
systemic DLBCL and related lymphomas.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4558226
PMID: 25991819  [PubMed - in process]


141. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 14;290(33):20455-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634816. Epub
2015 May 15.

Early Growth Response Genes 2 and 3 Regulate the Expression of Bcl6 and
Differentiation of T Follicular Helper Cells.

Ogbe A(1), Miao T(2), Symonds AL(2), Omodho B(3), Singh R(3), Bhullar P(3), Li
S(4), Wang P(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Biosciences, Department of Life Sciences, Brunel
University, Kingston Lane, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom and the Blizard Institute of
Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AD, United Kingdom. 
(2)the Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street,
London E1 2AD, United Kingdom. (3)From the Division of Biosciences, Department of
Life Sciences, Brunel University, Kingston Lane, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom and.
(4)From the Division of Biosciences, Department of Life Sciences, Brunel
University, Kingston Lane, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom and su-ling.li@brunel.ac.uk.
(5)the Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street,
London E1 2AD, United Kingdom p.wang@qmul.ac.uk.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells support differentiation of B cells to plasma
cells and high affinity antibody production in germinal centers (GCs), and Tfh
differentiation requires the function of B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6). We have now
discovered that early growth response gene 2 (EGR2) and EGR3 directly regulate
the expression of Bcl6 in Tfh cells, which is required for their function in
regulation of GC formation. In the absence of EGR2 and -3, the expression of BCL6
in Tfh cells is defective, leading to impaired differentiation of Tfh cells,
resulting in a failure to form GCs following virus infection and defects in
production of antiviral antibodies. Enforced expression of BCL6 in
EGR2/3-deficient CD4 T cells partially restored Tfh differentiation and GC
formation in response to virus infection. Our findings demonstrate a novel
function of EGR2/3 that is important for Tfh cell development and Tfh
cell-mediated B cell immune responses.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4536451
PMID: 25979336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;5(2):651-62. eCollection 2015.

Epigenetic silencing BCL6B induced colorectal cancer proliferation and metastasis
by inhibiting P53 signaling.

Hu S(1), Cao B(2), Zhang M(2), Linghu E(3), Zhan Q(4), Brock MV(5), Herman JG(6),
Mao G(7), Guo M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, General Air Force Hospital #30 Fucheng Road,
Beijing 100142, China ; Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Chinese PLA 
General Hospital #28 Fuxing Road, Beijing 100853, China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital #28 Fuxing Road,
Beijing 100853, China ; Medical College of NanKai University Tianjin, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital #28 
Fuxing Road, Beijing 100853, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular
Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &
Peking Union Medical College Beijing 100021, China. (5)Oncology Center, Johns
Hopkins University 1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, U.S.A. (6)The 
Hillman Cancer Center, Suite 2.18/Research, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute 5117 Centre Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. (7)Department of
Gastroenterology, General Air Force Hospital #30 Fucheng Road, Beijing 100142,
China.

BCL6B, a homologue of BCL6, has been reported to be frequently methylated in
human gastric cancer. The epigenetic change and the function of BCL6B remains to 
be elucidated in colorectal cancer. 7 colorectal cancer cell lines (RKO, HT-29,
DLD1, LOVO, HCT116, SW480, SW620) and 102 cases of primary colorectal cancer
samples were used in this study. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR, methylation specific
PCR (MSP), Flow cytometry and western blot were employed. Loss of BCL6B
expression was found in HT29, RKO LOVO, SW480, SW620 and DLD1 cells, and reduced 
expression was found in HCT116 cell line. Complete methylation was found in HT29,
RKO, LOVO, SW480, SW620 and DLD1 cells, partial methylation was detected in
HCT116 cells. Restoration of BCL6B expression was induced by 5-Aza treatment in
these colorectal cancer cells. BCL6B was methylated in 79.4% (81/102) of primary 
human colorectal cancer and reduced expression was associated with promoter
region hypermethylation (p < 0.05). Methylation of BCL6B is associated with late 
stage (p < 0.05) and lymph node metastasis (p < 0.05). Re-expression of BCL6B
inhibited cell proliferation, invasion and migration in RKO and HT29 cells. BCL6B
activated P53 signaling and induced apoptosis, Re-expression of BCL6B sensitized 
RKO and HT29 cells to 5-fluorouracil. In conclusion, BCL6B was frequently
methylated in human colorectal cancer and its expression was regulated by
promoter region methylation. Methylation of BCL6B is a prognostic and
chemo-sensitive marker in colorectal cancer. BCL6B suppresses colorectal cancer
growth by activating P53 signaling.

PMCID: PMC4396025
PMID: 25973304  [PubMed]


143. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5604-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500201. Epub 2015
May 11.

Cutting edge: Bcl6-interacting corepressor contributes to germinal center T
follicular helper cell formation and B cell helper function.

Yang JA(1), Tubo NJ(1), Gearhart MD(2), Bardwell VJ(2), Jenkins MK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Immunology, University
of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455; and. (2)Developmental Biology
Center, Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455; and University of Minnesota Masonic Cancer
Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN
55455; and jenki002@umn.edu.

CD4(+) germinal center (GC)-T follicular helper (Tfh) cells help B cells become
long-lived plasma cells and memory cells. The transcriptional repressor Bcl6
plays a key role in GC-Tfh formation by inhibiting the expression of genes that
promote differentiation into other lineages. We determined whether BCOR, a
component of a Polycomb repressive complex that interacts with the Bcl6 BTB
domain, influences GC-Tfh differentiation. T cell-targeted BCOR deficiency led to
a substantial loss of peptide:MHC class II-specific GC-Tfh cells following
Listeria monocytogenes infection and a 2-fold decrease following immunization
with a peptide in CFA. The reduction in GC-Tfh cells was associated with
diminished plasma cell and GC B cell formation. Thus, T cell-expressed BCOR is
critical for optimal GC-Tfh cell differentiation and humoral immunity.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4458443 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25964495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5599-603. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500200. Epub 2015
May 8.

Cutting edge: T follicular helper cell differentiation is defective in the
absence of Bcl6 BTB repressor domain function.

Nance JP(1), Bélanger S(1), Johnston RJ(2), Takemori T(3), Crotty S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute of Allergy and Immunology,
La Jolla, CA 92037; (2)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080; and. (3)RIKEN
Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, Yokohama City, Kanagawa 230-0045,
Japan. (4)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute of Allergy and
Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037; shane@lji.org.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are essential for germinal centers (GCs) and most
long-term humoral immunity. Differentiation of Tfh cells depends on the
transcriptional repressor B cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (Bcl6). Bcl6 mediates gene
repression via the recruitment of corepressors. Currently, it is unknown how Bcl6
recruits corepressors to regulate gene expression of Tfh cells. In this article, 
we demonstrate, using a mutant form of Bcl6 with two BTB (bric-a-brac, tramtrack,
broad-complex) mutations that abrogate corepressor binding, that the Bcl6 BTB
domain is required for proper differentiation of Tfh and GC-Tfh cells in vivo.
Importantly, we also observe a significant defect in GC B cell development. These
results are consistent in multiple contexts, including a novel lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus nucleoprotein-specific TCR-transgenic mouse model. Taken
together, these data suggest that the Bcl6 BTB domain is a key mediator of the
differentiation of Tfh cells.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4456636
PMID: 25957170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Genet. 2015 Jun;208(6):303-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.03.007. Epub
2015 Mar 18.

Acquisition of a t(11;14)(q13;q32) in clonal evolution in a follicular lymphoma
with a t(14;18)(q32;q21) and t(3;22)(q27;q11.2).

Koduru PR(1), Chen W(2), Garcia R(2), Fuda F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
Electronic address: prasad.koduru@UTSouthwestern.edu. (2)Department of Pathology,
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Chromosome translocations involving an immunoglobulin (IG) locus and another
gene, either BCL or MYC, are common events in B-cell lymphoma. Occasionally, two 
IG loci, one with BCL and the other with MYC, are simultaneously involved; such
cases are classified as double-hit (DH) lymphomas. These tumors often show
intermediate histologic features between those of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
and those of Burkitt lymphoma. Patients with DH lymphoma have a poor prognosis.
Rarely, lymphomas in which three IG loci are simultaneously involved with two
different BCL genes and MYC have been reported. These cases are classified as
triple-hit lymphomas; virtually all these are aggressive tumors with an even
worse prognosis. We present here a unique case of follicular lymphoma (FL) with
rearranged BCL2, BCL6, and BCL1 (also known as CCND1) genes. Lymphoma cells at
first clinical relapse had a complex karyotype that included a t(3;22)(q27;q11)
and t(14;18)(q32;q21). About 15 years after initial diagnosis, the lymphoma cells
showed clonal cytogenetic evolution and acquired a t(11;14)(q13;q32). This
article is the first case report of a low grade B-cell lymphoma that had three
lymphoma-associated reciprocal translocations not involving MYC and that had a
long indolent clinical course.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25953460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Epigenetics. 2015;10(5):431-45. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1039216.

Selective inhibition of esophageal cancer cells by combination of HDAC inhibitors
and Azacytidine.

Ahrens TD(1), Timme S, Hoeppner J, Ostendorp J, Hembach S, Follo M, Hopt UT,
Werner M, Busch H, Boerries M, Lassmann S.

Author information: 
(1)a Dept. of Pathology; University Medical Center ; Freiburg , Germany.

Esophageal cancers are highly aggressive tumors with poor prognosis despite some 
recent advances in surgical and radiochemotherapy treatment options. This study
addressed the feasibility of drugs targeting epigenetic modifiers in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) cells. We
tested inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by SAHA, MS-275, and FK228,
inhibition of DNA methyltransferases by Azacytidine (AZA) and Decitabine (DAC),
and the effect of combination treatment using both types of drugs. The drug
targets, HDAC1/2/3 and DNMT1, were expressed in normal esophageal epithelium and 
tumor cells of ESCC or EAC tissue specimens, as well as in non-neoplastic
esophageal epithelial (Het-1A), ESCC (OE21, Kyse-270, Kyse-410), and EAC (OE33,
SK-GT-4) cell lines. In vitro, HDAC activity, histone acetylation, and p21
expression were similarly affected in non-neoplastic, ESCC, and EAC cell lines
post inhibitor treatment. Combined MS-275/AZA treatment, however, selectively
targeted esophageal cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, cell viability
loss, and apoptosis, and by decreasing cell migration. Non-neoplastic Het-1A
cells were protected against HDACi (MS-275)/AZA treatment. RNA transcriptome
analyses post MS-275 and/or AZA treatment identified novel regulated candidate
genes (up: BCL6, Hes2; down: FAIM, MLKL), which were specifically associated with
the treatment responses of esophageal cancer cells. In summary, combined
HDACi/AZA treatment is efficient and selective for the targeting of esophageal
cancer cells, despite similar target expression of normal and esophageal cancer
epithelium, in vitro and in human esophageal carcinomas. The precise mechanisms
of action of treatment responses involve novel candidate genes regulated by
HDACi/AZA in esophageal cancer cells. Together, targeting of epigenetic modifiers
in esophageal cancers may represent a potential future therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC4623041 [Available on 2016-04-29]
PMID: 25923331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Rep. 2015 May 5;11(5):715-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.03.059. Epub 2015
Apr 23.

An oncogenic role for alternative NF-<U+03BA>B signaling in DLBCL revealed upon
deregulated BCL6 expression.

Zhang B(1), Calado DP(2), Wang Z(3), Fröhler S(4), Köchert K(4), Qian Y(5),
Koralov SB(6), Schmidt-Supprian M(7), Sasaki Y(8), Unitt C(9), Rodig S(9), Chen
W(4), Dalla-Favera R(10), Alt FW(11), Pasqualucci L(10), Rajewsky K(12).

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, and Immune
Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02215, USA. Electronic address: baochun_zhang@dfci.harvard.edu. (2)Program of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, and Immune Disease
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Max Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str 10, Berlin 13125, Germany; Cancer Research 
UK, London Research Institute, London WC2A 3LY, UK; Peter Gorer Department of
Immunobiology, Kings College London, London SE1 9RT, UK. Electronic address:
dinis.calado@cancer.org.uk. (3)Program of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Children's Hospital, and Immune Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)Max Delbrück Center 
for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str 10, Berlin 13125, Germany.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (6)Program of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Children's Hospital, and Immune Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Pathology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (7)Program of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Children's Hospital, and Immune Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Hematology and Oncology, Klinikum rechts der
Isar, Technische Universität München, Ismaninger Strasse 22, Munich 81675,
Germany. (8)Program of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, and 
Immune Disease Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (9)Department of Pathology, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (10)Institute for Cancer Genetics and
the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA; Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA. (11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, and Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (12)Program of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, and Immune Disease Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Max Delbrück Center for Molecular
Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str 10, Berlin 13125, Germany. Electronic address:
klaus.rajewsky@mdc-berlin.de.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a complex disease comprising diverse
subtypes and genetic profiles. Possibly because of the prevalence of genetic
alterations activating canonical NF-<U+03BA>B activity, a role for oncogenic lesions
that activate the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway in DLBCL has remained elusive. Here, 
we show that deletion/mutation of TRAF3, a negative regulator of the alternative 
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, occurs in ~15% of DLBCLs and that it often coexists with BCL6
translocation, which prevents terminal B cell differentiation. Accordingly, in a 
mouse model constitutive activation of the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway cooperates
with BCL6 deregulation in DLBCL development. This work demonstrates a key
oncogenic role for the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway in DLBCL development.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4426003 [Available on 2016-05-05]
PMID: 25921526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Exp Med. 2015 May 4;212(5):715-28. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141518. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

ICOS and Bcl6-dependent pathways maintain a CD4 T cell population with
memory-like properties during tuberculosis.

Moguche AO(1), Shafiani S(2), Clemons C(1), Larson RP(1), Dinh C(2), Higdon
LE(3), Cambier CJ(3), Sissons JR(2), Gallegos AM(4), Fink PJ(3), Urdahl KB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute (renamed Center for Infectious Disease
Research), Seattle, WA 98109 Department of Immunology, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98104. (2)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute
(renamed Center for Infectious Disease Research), Seattle, WA 98109.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98104. (4)Department of Immunology, International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi 110067, India. (5)Seattle Biomedical
Research Institute (renamed Center for Infectious Disease Research), Seattle, WA 
98109 Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98104 kevin.urdahl@cidresearch.org.

Immune control of persistent infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
requires a sustained pathogen-specific CD4 T cell response; however, the
molecular pathways governing the generation and maintenance of Mtb protective CD4
T cells are poorly understood. Using MHCII tetramers, we show that Mtb-specific
CD4 T cells are subject to ongoing antigenic stimulation. Despite this chronic
stimulation, a subset of PD-1(+) cells is maintained within the lung parenchyma
during tuberculosis (TB). When transferred into uninfected animals, these cells
persist, mount a robust recall response, and provide superior protection to Mtb
rechallenge when compared to terminally differentiated Th1 cells that reside
preferentially in the lung-associated vasculature. The PD-1(+) cells share
features with memory CD4 T cells in that their generation and maintenance
requires intrinsic Bcl6 and intrinsic ICOS expression. Thus, the molecular
pathways required to maintain Mtb-specific CD4 T cells during ongoing infection
are similar to those that maintain memory CD4 T cells in scenarios of antigen
deprivation. These results suggest that vaccination strategies targeting the ICOS
and Bcl6 pathways in CD4 T cells may provide new avenues to prevent TB.

© 2015 Moguche et al.

PMCID: PMC4419347
PMID: 25918344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Leuk Res. 2015 Jul;39(7):730-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.04.003. Epub 2015 Apr
17.

Concurrent inhibition of MYC and BCL2 is a potentially effective treatment
strategy for double hit and triple hit B-cell lymphomas.

Cinar M(1), Rosenfelt F(2), Rokhsar S(2), Lopategui J(1), Pillai R(1), Cervania
M(1), Pao A(1), Cinar B(3), Alkan S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States. (2)Tower Hematology Oncology Medical Group,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States. (3)Department of
Medicine and Hematology/Oncology and Division of Cancer Biology, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Department of Medicine, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
United States. Electronic address: bekir.cinar@cshs.org. (4)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, 
United States. Electronic address: serhan.alkan@cshs.org.

Double hit lymphoma or triple hit lymphoma (DHL/THL) is a rare form of aggressive
B-Cell Lymphoma. Overexpression of MYC, BCL2 or/and BCL6 due to genomic
rearrangements are the key molecular features of DHL/THL. Patients with DHL/THL
show very aggressive disease course and poor survival due to the lack of
effective treatment modalities. Here, we established new THL cell model and
assessed its in vitro growth characteristics along with the DHL cell line in
response to potent MYC inhibitors, 10058-F4 and JQ-1, and a BCL2 inhibitor,
ABT-199, with or without chemotherapeutic agent vincristine or doxorubicin. We
found that 10058-F4, JQ-1 or ABT-199 exposure as a single agent inhibited the
growth of DHL/THL cells in a dose-dependent manner. Combined exposure of 10058-F4
or JQ-1 and ABT-199 as well as vincristine or doxorubicin markedly suppressed the
growth of DHL/THL cells compared with the single treatment. As assessed by
multiple approaches, apoptosis induced by ABT-199, 10058-F4 or JQ-1 was
underlying cause of the observed growth suppression. These findings suggest that 
co-inhibition of MYC and BCL2 signaling is a promising therapeutic strategy for
patients with DHL/THL lymphomas.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25916698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Br J Haematol. 2015 Aug;170(4):504-14. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13463. Epub 2015 Apr 24.

Front-line, dose-escalated immunochemotherapy is associated with a significant
progression-free survival advantage in patients with double-hit lymphomas: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Howlett C(1,)(2), Snedecor SJ(3), Landsburg DJ(4), Svoboda J(4), Chong EA(4),
Schuster SJ(4), Nasta SD(4), Feldman T(5), Rago A(4), Walsh KM(4), Weber S(4),
Goy A(5), Mato A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Clinical Services, John Theurer Cancer Center at
Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA. (2)Ernest Mario School
of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(3)Pharmerit International, Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Lymphoma Program, Abramson
Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (5)John Theurer
Cancer Center at Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, USA.
(6)Center for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia and Lymphoma Program, Abramson Cancer 
Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

'Double-hit lymphomas' (DHL), defined by concurrent MYC and BCL2 (or,
alternatively, BCL6) rearrangements, have a very poor outcome compared to
standard-risk, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Consequently,
dose-intensive (DI) therapies and/or consolidation with high-dose therapy and
transplant have been explored in DHL, although benefit has been debated. This
meta-analysis compared survival outcomes in DHL patients receiving dose-escalated
regimens [DI: R-Hyper-CVAD (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
doxorubicin, dexamethasone) or R-CODOX-M/IVAC (rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, methotrexate/ifosfamide, etoposide, high dose
cytarabine); or intermediate-dose: R-EPOCH (rituximab, etoposide, doxorubicin,
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone)] versus standard-dose regimens
(R-CHOP; rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) in
the first-line setting. Data were synthesized to estimate hazard ratios of
dose-escalated treatments versus R-CHOP using a Weibull proportional hazards
model within a Bayesian meta-analysis framework. Eleven studies examining 394
patients were included. Patients were treated with either front-line R-CHOP
(n = 180), R-EPOCH (n = 91), or R-Hyper-CVAD/rituximab, methotrexate, cytarabine 
(R-M/C), R-CODOX-M/R-IVAC (DI) (n = 123). Our meta-analysis revealed that median 
progression-free survival (n = 350) for the R-CHOP, R-EPOCH and DI groups was
12·1, 22·2, and 18·9 months, respectively. First-line treatment with R-EPOCH
significantly reduced the risk of a progression compared with R-CHOP (relative
risk reduction of 34%; P = 0·032); however, overall survival (n = 374) was not
significantly different across treatment approaches. A subset of patients might
benefit from intensive induction with/without transplant. Further investigation
into the role of transplant and novel therapy combinations is necessary.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25907897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Genomics. 2015 Mar 19;16:215. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1405-8.

Global gene expression profiling of brown to white adipose tissue transformation 
in sheep reveals novel transcriptional components linked to adipose remodeling.

Basse AL(1,)(2), Dixen K(3,)(4), Yadav R(5,)(6), Tygesen MP(7), Qvortrup K(8),
Kristiansen K(9), Quistorff B(10), Gupta R(11), Wang J(12,)(13,)(14,)(15), Hansen
JB(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200,
Copenhagen, Denmark. astrid.basse@bio.ku.dk. (2)Department of Systems Biology,
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark,
DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. astrid.basse@bio.ku.dk. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark.
dixen.karen@gmail.com. (4)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological
Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark. dixen.karen@gmail.com. (5)Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, DK-2100, Copenhagen, Denmark. rachita@cbs.dtu.dk. (6)Department of
Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of
Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. rachita@cbs.dtu.dk. (7)Department of
Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-1870,
Frederiksberg, Denmark. mpt@stevnslam.dk. (8)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark. qvortrup@sund.ku.dk.
(9)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
karsten.kristiansen@bio.ku.dk. (10)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University 
of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark. bqui@sund.ku.dk. (11)Department of
Biology, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.
ramneek@cbs.dtu.dk. (12)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological
Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark. wangj@genomics.org.cn. (13)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
wangj@genomics.org.cn. (14)Princess Al Jawhara Center of Excellence in the
Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi
Arabia. wangj@genomics.org.cn. (15)Macau University of Science and Technology,
Avenida Wai Long, Taipa, Macau, 999078, China. wangj@genomics.org.cn.
(16)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
jacob.hansen@bio.ku.dk.

BACKGROUND: Large mammals are capable of thermoregulation shortly after birth due
to the presence of brown adipose tissue (BAT). The majority of BAT disappears
after birth and is replaced by white adipose tissue (WAT).
RESULTS: We analyzed the postnatal transformation of adipose in sheep with a time
course study of the perirenal adipose depot. We observed changes in tissue
morphology, gene expression and metabolism within the first two weeks of
postnatal life consistent with the expected transition from BAT to WAT. The
transformation was characterized by massively decreased mitochondrial abundance
and down-regulation of gene expression related to mitochondrial function and
oxidative phosphorylation. Global gene expression profiling demonstrated that the
time points grouped into three phases: a brown adipose phase, a transition phase 
and a white adipose phase. Between the brown adipose and the transition phase 170
genes were differentially expressed, and 717 genes were differentially expressed 
between the transition and the white adipose phase. Thirty-eight genes were
shared among the two sets of differentially expressed genes. We identified a
number of regulated transcription factors, including NR1H3, MYC, KLF4, ESR1, RELA
and BCL6, which were linked to the overall changes in gene expression during the 
adipose tissue remodeling. Finally, the perirenal adipose tissue expressed both
brown and brite/beige adipocyte marker genes at birth, the expression of which
changed substantially over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Using global gene expression profiling of the postnatal BAT to WAT
transformation in sheep, we provide novel insight into adipose tissue plasticity 
in a large mammal, including identification of novel transcriptional components
linked to adipose tissue remodeling. Moreover, our data set provides a useful
resource for further studies in adipose tissue plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4407871
PMID: 25887780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. BMC Genomics. 2015 Apr 2;16:258. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1389-4.

Gene expression profiles in Rana pirica tadpoles following exposure to a
predation threat.

Mori T(1), Yanagisawa Y(2), Kitani Y(3), Sugiyama M(4), Kishida O(5), Nishimura
K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Science and Resources, Nihon University College of
Bioresource Sciences, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, 252-0880, Japan.
mori.tsukasa@nihon-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Liberal Art, Nihon University
College of Bioresource Sciences, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, 252-0880, Japan.
yukio713@brs.nihon-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Marine Science and Resources, Nihon 
University College of Bioresource Sciences, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, 252-0880,
Japan. youichirokitani@hotmail.co.jp. (4)Department of Marine Science and
Resources, Nihon University College of Bioresource Sciences, Kameino 1866,
Fujisawa, 252-0880, Japan. nautilus@gaea.ocn.ne.jp. (5)Teshio Experimental
Forest, Field Science Center for Northern Biosphere, Hokkaido University,
Horonobe, Hokkaido, 098-2943, Japan. kishida@fsc.hokudai.ac.jp. (6)Graduate
School of Fisheries Sciences, Hokkaido University, Hakodate, 041-8611, Japan.
kinya@fish.hokudai.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Rana pirica tadpoles show morphological changes in response to a
predation threat: larvae of the dragonfly Aeshna nigroflava induce heightened
tail depth, whereas larval salamander Hynobius retardatus induce a bulgy
morphology with heightened tail depth. Although both predators induce similar
tail morphologies, it is possible that there are functional differences between
these tail morphs.
RESULTS: Here, we performed a discriminant microarray analysis using Xenopus
laevis genome arrays to compare tail tissues of control and predator-exposed
tadpoles. We identified 9 genes showing large-scale changes in their expression
profile: ELAV-like1, methyltransferase like 7A, dolichyl-phosphate
mannosyltransferase, laminin subunit beta-1, gremlin 1, BCL6 corepressor-like 1, 
and three genes of unknown identity. A further 80 genes showed greater than 5
fold differences in expression after exposure to dragonfly larvae and 81 genes
showed altered expression after exposure to larval salamanders. Predation-threat 
responsive genes were identified by selecting genes that reverted to control
levels of expression following removal of the predator. Thirteen genes were
induced specifically by dragonfly larvae, nine others were salamander-specific,
and sixteen were induced by both. Functional analyses indicated that some of the 
genes induced by dragonfly larvae caused an increase in laminins necessary for
cell adhesion in the extracellular matrix. The higher expression of gremlin 1 and
HIF1a genes after exposure to dragonfly larvae indicated an in vivo hypoxic
reaction, while down-regulation of syndecan-2 may indicate impairment of
angiogenesis. Exposure to larval salamanders caused down-regulation of XCIRP-1,
which is known to inhibit expression of adhesion molecules; the tadpoles showed
reduced expression of ca(E)-catenin, small muscle protein, dystrophin, and myosin
light chain genes.
CONCLUSION: The connective tissue of tadpoles exposed to larval salamanders may
be looser. The differences in gene expression profiles induced by the two
predators suggest that there are functional differences between the altered tail 
tissues of the two groups of tadpoles.

PMCID: PMC4403775
PMID: 25886855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):421-31. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv128. Epub 2015 Apr 
15.

Deriving a cardiac ageing signature to reveal MMP-9-dependent inflammatory
signalling in senescence.

Ma Y(1), Chiao YA(2), Clark R(1), Flynn ER(1), Yabluchanskiy A(1), Ghasemi O(3), 
Zouein F(1), Lindsey ML(4), Jin YF(5).

Author information: 
(1)San Antonio Cardiovascular Proteomics Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA
Mississippi Center for Heart Research, Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 North State St., Jackson, MS
39216-4505, USA. (2)San Antonio Cardiovascular Proteomics Center, San Antonio, TX
78229, USA Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)San Antonio Cardiovascular Proteomics Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, One UTSA Circle, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA. (4)San Antonio
Cardiovascular Proteomics Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA Mississippi Center
for Heart Research, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of
Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 North State St., Jackson, MS 39216-4505, USA
Research Services, G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, USA mllindsey@umc.edu yufang.jin@utsa.edu. (5)San Antonio
Cardiovascular Proteomics Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at San Antonio, One 
UTSA Circle, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA mllindsey@umc.edu yufang.jin@utsa.edu.

AIMS: Cardiac ageing involves the progressive development of cardiac fibrosis and
diastolic dysfunction coordinated by MMP-9. Here, we report a cardiac ageing
signature that encompasses macrophage pro-inflammatory signalling in the left
ventricle (LV) and distinguishes biological from chronological ageing.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Young (6-9 months), middle-aged (12-15 months), old (18-24
months), and senescent (26-34 months) mice of both C57BL/6J wild type (WT) and
MMP-9 null were evaluated. Using an identified inflammatory pattern, we were able
to define individual mice based on their biological, rather than chronological,
age. Bcl6, Ccl24, and Il4 were the strongest inflammatory markers of the cardiac 
ageing signature. The decline in early-to-late LV filling ratio was most strongly
predicted by Bcl6, Il1r1, Ccl24, Crp, and Cxcl13 patterns, whereas LV wall
thickness was most predicted by Abcf1, Tollip, Scye1, and Mif patterns. With age,
there was a linear increase in cardiac M1 macrophages and a decrease in cardiac
M2 macrophages in WT mice; of which, both were prevented by MMP-9 deletion. In
vitro, MMP-9 directly activated young macrophage polarization to an M1/M2
mid-transition state.
CONCLUSION: Our results define the cardiac ageing inflammatory signature and
assign MMP-9 roles in mediating the inflammaging profile by indirectly and
directly modifying macrophage polarization. Our results explain early mechanisms 
that stimulate ageing-induced cardiac fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4498140 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25883218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Blood. 2015 Jun 11;125(24):3688-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-01-567842. Epub 2015 
Apr 15.

Rationale for targeting the pre-B-cell receptor signaling pathway in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Müschen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA.

Inhibitors of B-cell receptor (BCR) and pre-BCR signaling were successfully
introduced into patient care for various subtypes of mature B-cell lymphoma
(e.g., ibrutinib, idelalisib). Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) typically
originates from pre-B cells that critically depend on survival signals emanating 
from a functional pre-BCR. However, whether patients with ALL benefit from
treatment with (pre-) BCR inhibitors has not been explored. Recent data suggest
that the pre-BCR functions as tumor suppressor in the majority of cases of human 
ALL. However, a distinct subset of human ALL is selectively sensitive to pre-BCR 
antagonists.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4463734 [Available on 2016-06-11]
PMID: 25878119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0124339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124339.
eCollection 2015.

Relevance of vitamin D receptor target genes for monitoring the vitamin D
responsiveness of primary human cells.

Vukic M(1), Neme A(1), Seuter S(1), Saksa N(1), de Mello VD(2), Nurmi T(2),
Uusitupa M(2), Tuomainen TP(2), Virtanen JK(2), Carlberg C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland. (2)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University
of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.

Vitamin D3 has transcriptome- and genome-wide effects and activates, via the
binding of its metabolite 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 to the transcription factor
vitamin D receptor (VDR), several hundred target genes. Using samples from a
5-month vitamin D3 intervention study (VitDmet), we recently reported that the
expression of 12 VDR target genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
as well as 12 biochemical and clinical parameters of the study participants are
significantly triggered by vitamin D3. In this study, we performed a more focused
selection of further 12 VDR target genes and demonstrated that changes of their
mRNA expression in PBMCs of VitDmet subjects significantly correlate with
alterations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 serum levels. Network and self-organizing map
analysis of these datasets together with that of the other 24 parameters was
followed by relevance calculations and identified changes in parathyroid hormone 
serum levels and the expression of the newly selected genes STS, BCL6, ITGAM,
LRRC25, LPGAT1 and TREM1 as well as of the previously reported genes DUSP10 and
CD14 as the most relevant parameters for describing vitamin D responsiveness in
vivo. Moreover, parameter relevance ranking allowed the segregation of study
subjects into high and low responders. Due to the long intervention period the
vitamin D response was not too prominent on the level of transcriptional
activation. Therefore, we performed in the separate VitDbol trial a short-term
but high dose stimulation with a vitamin D3 bolus. In PBMCs of VitDbol subjects
we observed direct transcriptional effects on the selected VDR target genes, such
as an up to 2.1-fold increase already one day after supplementation onset. In
conclusion, both long-term and short-term vitamin D3 supplementation studies
allow monitoring the vitamin D responsiveness of human individuals and represent 
new types of human in vivo vitamin D3 investigations.

PMCID: PMC4395145
PMID: 25875760  [PubMed - in process]


156. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 May;32(4):239-49. doi: 10.3109/08880018.2015.1013231.
Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Pediatric non-Hodgkin lymphomas: first report from Central Africa.

Budiongo AN(1), Ngiyulu RM, Lebwaze BM, Gini-Ehungu JL, Mafuta EM, Ekulu PM,
Kabongo-Mpolesha JM, Aloni MN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatric Hemato-Oncology and Nephrology, Department of
Paediatrics, University Hospital of Kinshasa, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Kinshasa , Kinshasa , Democratic Republic of Congo.

BACKGROUND: Information on presentation and outcome of pediatric non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma is limited from Africa. The demographic characteristics, distribution of
different subtypes were noted and compared with published reports from other
parts of the world.
METHODS: The study was conducted in Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of Congo
between January 2002 and December 2012.
RESULTS: A total of 63 cases of pediatric non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were
retrospectively analyzed. This cohort represents the largest series of pediatric 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma presented from sub-Saharan Africa. Median age was 8.7±3.6 
years. There were 43 (68.3%) males. A mean of 82 ± 59 days passed from detection 
of the first sign to referral to oncology unit. Morphology distribution showed
that 42 cases (66.7%) had a diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma, 16 cases (25.4%) had
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 5 cases (7.9%) had NHL-not otherwise specified.
The majority of patients (82.5%) had advanced stage (stage III and IV).
Immunohistochemistry findings were available for 32 biopsy samples. All (100%)
cases were B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and immunohistochemistry had identified 
18 (56.3%) cases of Burkitt lymphoma. In our cohort, 22 of 32 cases expressed
positive bcl-2 and 12 (37.5%) were found to be positive for bcl-6. Thirty-one
(96.7%) cases were positive for high Ki-67 antigen expression. Assuming that
cases lost to follow-up worsened and died, the mortality would be 98.4%.
CONCLUSION: In comparison to western data, we observed higher proportion of
B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Burkitt Lymphoma and patients with bcl-2
expression.

PMID: 25871614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2015 Jan-Feb;48(1):108-11. doi:
10.1590/0037-8682-0153-2014. Epub 2015 Jan 1.

Diagnosing lymphoma in a setting with a high burden of infection: a pediatric
case of Epstein-Barr virus-associated aggressive B-cell lymphoma with t(8;14)
(q23;q32) and extensive necrosis mimicking tuberculosis.

Barros MH(1), Leite E(2), Chabay P(3), Morais V(2), Stefanoff G(4), Hassan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Oncovirologia, Instituto Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro,
RJ, Brazil. (2)Unidade de Oncologia Pediátrica, Hospital Universitário Oswaldo
Cruz, Universidade de Pernambuco, Recife, PE, Brazil. (3)Servicio de Patologia,
Laboratorio de Biologia Molecular, Hospital de Niños "Ricardo Gutiérrez", Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. (4)Coordenação de Pesquisa Clínica, Instituto Nacional de
Câncer (INCA), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

The association of lymphoma with necrotic granuloma can pose diagnostic
challenges and delay treatment, especially in settings with a high burden of
infection. In these settings, the timely use of cytogenetic and molecular methods
is most relevant. Here, we report a case of B-cell lymphoma with t (8;14) in a
5-year-old male child. The lymphoma was associated with necrotic granuloma and
was initially misdiagnosed as tuberculosis. Polymerase chain reaction was used to
detect clonal lymphoproliferation and to rule out Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection. Tumor cells harbored Epstein-Barr virus and expressed CD20, CD10,
BCL6, and Ki67 (30%), leading to the diagnosis of B-cell lymphoma with features
intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma.

PMID: 25860476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Jan;57(1):151-60. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1037758. Epub
2015 May 18.

Isotype-switched follicular lymphoma displays dissociation between
activation-induced cytidine deaminase expression and somatic hypermutation.

Scherer F(1), Navarrete MA(2,)(3), Bertinetti-Lapatki C(1), Boehm J(4),
Schmitt-Graeff A(5), Veelken H(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology and Oncology , University Medical Center Freiburg ,
Germany. (2)b Department of Hematology , Leiden University Medical Center , The
Netherlands. (3)c School of Medicine, University of Magallanes , Punta Arenas ,
Chile. (4)d Department of Pathology , RWTH University Hospital , Aachen ,
Germany. (5)e Department of Pathology , University Medical Center Freiburg ,
Germany.

In B-cells, activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is required for somatic
hypermutation (SHM) and class switch recombination (CSR) of immunoglobulin genes.
AID introduces mutations in immunoglobulin variable regions (IGV) during B-cell
receptor affinity maturation, but may also introduce aberrant mutations into
non-immunoglobulin genes, most commonly BCL6. Follicular lymphoma (FL) B-cells
constitutively express AID and undergo CSR, SHM and aberrant SHM. We have studied
AID expression, the presence of SHM mutations, CSR, and aberrant SHM in BCL6 in a
cohort of 75 FL patients. Whereas IgM-expressing (non-switched) FL were
characterized by an expected positive correlation between AID and IGV and BCL6
mutations, isotype-switched FL showed dissociation between AID expression and
aberrant SHM, and inverse correlation between SHM and AID expression. Our results
unveil two manifest biological subgroups of FL and indicate that the specific
dissociation between AID and SHM after isotype switch may correlate with the
clinical outcome of this heterogeneous disease.

PMID: 25860234  [PubMed - in process]


159. Database (Oxford). 2015 Apr 8;2015:bav035. doi: 10.1093/database/bav035. Print
2015.

miRGate: a curated database of human, mouse and rat miRNA-mRNA targets.

Andrés-León E(1), González Peña D(2), Gómez-López G(2), Pisano DG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Unit (UBio), Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme,
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain and High Technical 
School of Computer Engineering, University of Vigo, Ourense, Spain
eleon-ibis@us.es. (2)Bioinformatics Unit (UBio), Structural Biology and
Biocomputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid,
Spain and High Technical School of Computer Engineering, University of Vigo,
Ourense, Spain.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding elements involved in the
post-transcriptional down-regulation of gene expression through base pairing with
messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Through this mechanism, several miRNA-mRNA pairs have
been described as critical in the regulation of multiple cellular processes,
including early embryonic development and pathological conditions. Many of these 
pairs (such as miR-15<U+2009>b/BCL2 in apoptosis or BART-6/BCL6 in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas) were experimentally discovered and/or computationally predicted.
Available tools for target prediction are usually based on sequence matching,
thermodynamics and conservation, among other approaches. Nevertheless, the main
issue on miRNA-mRNA pair prediction is the little overlapping results among
different prediction methods, or even with experimentally validated pairs lists, 
despite the fact that all rely on similar principles. To circumvent this problem,
we have developed miRGate, a database containing novel computational predicted
miRNA-mRNA pairs that are calculated using well-established algorithms. In
addition, it includes an updated and complete dataset of sequences for both miRNA
and mRNAs 3'-Untranslated region from human (including human viruses), mouse and 
rat, as well as experimentally validated data from four well-known databases. The
underlying methodology of miRGate has been successfully applied to independent
datasets providing predictions that were convincingly validated by functional
assays. miRGate is an open resource available at http://mirgate.bioinfo.cnio.es. 
For programmatic access, we have provided a representational state transfer web
service application programming interface that allows accessing the database at
http://mirgate.bioinfo.cnio.es/API/ Database URL: http://mirgate.bioinfo.cnio.es

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4390609
PMID: 25858286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1291:27-38. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2498-1_3.

Tracking early T follicular helper cell differentiation in vivo.

Baumjohann D(1), Ansel KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Sandler Asthma Basic Research Center,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA,
dirk.baumjohann@med.uni-muenchen.de.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells provide essential help to B cells for the
generation of high-affinity antibodies. These mechanisms provide the basis for
the success of modern vaccines, but dysregulated Tfh cell responses are also
linked to autoimmune diseases. In addition to their established role in driving
humoral immunity, Tfh cells are gaining attention for their role in other
processes of the adaptive immune system. For example, Tfh cells may serve as
transitional differentiation intermediates during effector and memory T-helper
cell differentiation and as a reservoir of HIV-infected cells. While B cells are 
required for the full maturation and maintenance of Tfh cell responses, they are 
dispensable for the initial induction of the Tfh cell phenotype, which occurs at 
the priming stage through interaction with dendritic cells. Nevertheless, the
precise mechanisms of these early events during Tfh cell differentiation remain
relatively unknown. Here, we describe a method for tracking early Tfh cell
differentiation by following cell division kinetics and phenotypic changes of
recently activated antigen-specific CD4(+) T cells in vivo. As an example, we use
this method to visualize the requirements for T cell-expressed CD28 for the
differentiation of CXCR5(+)Bcl6(+) Tfh cells.

PMCID: PMC4558195
PMID: 25836299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1291:13-25. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2498-1_2.

Identification of follicular T helper cells in tissue sections.

Ding Y(1), Mountz JD, Hsu HC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham, SHEL 337, 1825 University Blvd,
Birmingham, AL, 35294, USA.

Follicular T helper (Tfh) cells are a critical population of CD4 T helper cells
that are primarily localized in the germinal centers (GCs) to help B cell
maturation and antibody production. Tfh cells can be identified in tissue
sections based on the expression of a panel of classical Tfh surface makers,
transcription marker(s), and effector-function cytokines, as well as by their
unique anatomic proximity to other GC cells, including follicular dendritic cells
(FDC) and GC B cells. Here, we describe an immunofluorescence staining method for
visualization of GC Tfh cells in frozen spleen tissue sections of the autoimmune 
BXD2 mouse using a confocal imaging strategy. Tfh cells were characterized based 
on the expression of CD4, CXCR5, Bcl6, IL-21, and IL-17.

PMID: 25836298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;39(8):1132-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000434.

Triple-hit B-cell Lymphoma With MYC, BCL2, and BCL6
Translocations/Rearrangements: Clinicopathologic Features of 11 Cases.

Wang W(1), Hu S, Lu X, Young KH, Medeiros LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.

Lymphomas with translocations/rearrangements of MYC, BCL2, and BCL6, so-called
triple-hit B-cell lymphoma, are rare, and few studies on these tumors are
available in the literature. We report 11 cases of triple-hit B-cell lymphoma and
characterize their clinicopathologic findings. All patients were men, with a
median age of 64 years (range, 45 to 80 y), and 4 patients had antecedent or
concurrent follicular lymphoma. Using the 2008 World Health Organization
classification, these cases were classified as: 5 B-cell lymphoma,
unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
(DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma; 4 DLBCL; 1 DLBCL with concurrent follicular
lymphoma; and 1 low-grade follicular lymphoma. All cases were positive for CD10, 
BCL2, and FOXP1. Ten of 11 cases were positive for CD20. MYC expression was high 
in 10/11 (91%), BCL6 was positive in 8/11 (73%), and MUM1/IRF4 was positive in
6/11 (55%) cases. T-cell antigens, TdT, and Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA were
negative in all cases. Ten of 11 cases showed a high proliferation index-70% to
100%, and the follicular lymphoma had a 30% proliferation rate. Using most
algorithms, all cases belonged to germinal center B-cell-like group. All patients
received standard or more aggressive immunochemotherapy regimens. Three patients 
had no response to chemotherapy; 4 patients showed a partial response; 2 patients
had complete remission after chemotherapy; and 2 patients had just begun
chemotherapy. Three patients underwent a stem cell transplant. The median
follow-up time was 5.3 months. Five patients died, and 6 patients were alive at
last follow-up. Two patients who underwent stem cell transplant after complete
response to chemotherapy were in remission with 16 to 19 months of clinical
follow-up. In summary, triple-hit lymphomas are clinically aggressive tumors
associated with a poor prognosis. Patients often respond poorly to chemotherapy, 
but a subset may completely respond to chemotherapy followed by stem cell
transplant.

PMID: 25828391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(11):3082-9. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1034699. Epub 2015 
May 12.

Isolated MYC cytogenetic abnormalities in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma do not
predict an adverse clinical outcome.

Caponetti GC(1), Dave BJ(2), Perry AM(3), Smith LM(4), Jain S(2), Meyer PN(5),
Bast M(6), Bierman PJ(6), Bociek RG(6), Vose JM(6), Armitage JO(6), Aoun P(7), Fu
K(8), Greiner TC(8), Chan WC(7), Sanger WG(2), Weisenburger DD(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology , Creighton University Medical Center , Omaha , NE ,
USA. (2)b Human Genetics Laboratory, Munroe Meyer Institute for Genetics and
Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical Center , Omaha , NE , USA. (3)c
Department of Pathology , University of Manitoba , Winnipeg, Manitoba , Canada.
(4)d Department of Biostatistics , University of Nebraska Medical Center , Omaha 
, NE , USA. (5)e Southern Arizona Veterans Administration Health Care , Tucson , 
AZ. (6)f Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center , Omaha , NE , 
USA. (7)g Department of Pathology , City of Hope National Medical Center , Duarte
, CA , USA. (8)h Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center , Omaha , NE , USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(11):3003-4.

In this study, we investigated the significance of MYC, BCL2 and BCL6 gene
abnormalities in a cohort of 205 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) patients
studied by conventional and/or fluorescence in situ hybridization cytogenetic
analysis. Combining these methods, 172 cases (84%) were classified as MYC-, 17
(8%) were MYC+/BCL2-/BCL6-, and 16 (8%) were double/triple-hit lymphomas (i.e.
MYC+/BCL2+, MYC+/BCL6+, or MYC+/BCL2+/BCL6+). We found a significant difference
in event-free survival (EFS) among the three groups (p = 0.02), with the
double/triple-hit group having the worst EFS. Patients who were MYC+, but BCL2-
and BCL6-, had the best EFS. We conclude that patients with MYC+ DLBCL, but
without BCL2 or BCL6 abnormalities, do not have a worse outcome when compared to 
those who are MYC-. However, patients with double/triple-hit DLBCL have a very
poor outcome and should be treated with aggressive or novel therapies.

PMID: 25827211  [PubMed - in process]


164. RNA Biol. 2015;12(1):21-5. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017232.

Mutual interaction between BCL6 and microRNAs in T cell differentiation.

Wei Z(1), Gao W, Wu Y, Ni B, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Immunology; PLA; Third Military Medical University ; Chongqing 
, PR China.

The transcription factor B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and the regulatory factor
microRNAs (miRNAs) are of great importance in the differentiation of T cell
subsets. An increasing body of evidence has demonstrated that BCL6 and miRNAs can
target one another and mutually adjust their expression in T cell subsets, such
as T helper (Th)-2, Th17, CD8+ regulatory T (CD8+Treg) and T follicular helper
(Tfh) cells. Here, we discuss the most recent advances and emerging concepts in
how BCL6 and miRNAs regulate one another, and the effects of such mutual
regulations on T cell subset differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4615890
PMID: 25826411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 14;112(15):E1888-97. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1422490112. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

RNA-binding protein hnRNPLL regulates mRNA splicing and stability during B-cell
to plasma-cell differentiation.

Chang X(1), Li B(2), Rao A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Signaling and Gene Expression and Sanford Consortium for
Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037; and. (2)Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037; (3)Divisions of
Signaling and Gene Expression and Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine,
La Jolla, CA 92037; and Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 arao@liai.org.

Posttranscriptional regulation is a major mechanism to rewire transcriptomes
during differentiation. Heterogeneous nuclear RNA-binding protein LL (hnRNPLL) is
specifically induced in terminally differentiated lymphocytes, including effector
T cells and plasma cells. To study the molecular functions of hnRNPLL at a
genome-wide level, we identified hnRNPLL RNA targets and binding sites in plasma 
cells through integrated Photoactivatable-Ribonucleoside-Enhanced Cross-Linking
and Immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP) and RNA sequencing. hnRNPLL preferentially
recognizes CA dinucleotide-containing sequences in introns and 3' untranslated
regions (UTRs), promotes exon inclusion or exclusion in a context-dependent
manner, and stabilizes mRNA when associated with 3' UTRs. During differentiation 
of primary B cells to plasma cells, hnRNPLL mediates a genome-wide switch of RNA 
processing, resulting in loss of B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) expression and
increased Ig production--both hallmarks of plasma-cell maturation. Our data
identify previously unknown functions of hnRNPLL in B-cell to plasma-cell
differentiation and demonstrate that the RNA-binding protein hnRNPLL has a
critical role in tuning transcriptomes of terminally differentiating B
lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC4403190
PMID: 25825742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Exp Med. 2015 Apr 6;212(4):539-53. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141380. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

BCL6 orchestrates Tfh cell differentiation via multiple distinct mechanisms.

Hatzi K(1), Nance JP(2), Kroenke MA(2), Bothwell M(3), Haddad EK(4), Melnick
A(5), Crotty S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
Cornell University, New York, NY 10065. (2)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La
Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037. (3)University of 
California, San Diego Department of Surgery and Division of Pediatric
Otolaryngology, Rady Children's Hospital-San Diego, San Diego, CA 92123
University of California, San Diego Department of Surgery and Division of
Pediatric Otolaryngology, Rady Children's Hospital-San Diego, San Diego, CA
92123. (4)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute of Florida, Port St. Lucie, FL
34987. (5)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical
College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065 shane@lji.org
amm2014@med.cornell.edu. (6)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for
Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037 shane@lji.org amm2014@med.cornell.edu.

Follicular helper T cells (Tfh cells) are required for T cell help to B cells,
and BCL6 is the defining transcription factor of Tfh cells. However, the
functions of BCL6 in Tfh cells have largely remained unclear. Here we defined the
BCL6 cistrome in primary human germinal center Tfh cells to assess mechanisms of 
BCL6 regulation of CD4 T cells, comparing and contrasting BCL6 function in T and 
B cells. BCL6 primarily acts as a repressor in Tfh cells, and BCL6 binding was
associated with control of Tfh cell migration and repression of alternative cell 
fates. Interestingly, although some BCL6-bound genes possessed BCL6 DNA-binding
motifs, many BCL6-bound loci were instead characterized by the presence of DNA
motifs for AP1 or STAT. AP1 complexes are key positive downstream mediators of
TCR signaling and external stimuli. We show that BCL6 can directly bind AP1, and 
BCL6 depends on AP1 for recruitment to BCL6-binding sites with AP1 motifs,
suggesting that BCL6 subverts AP1 activity. These findings reveal that BCL6 has
broad and multifaceted effects on Tfh biology and provide insight into how this
master regulator mediates distinct cell context-dependent phenotypes.

© 2015 Hatzi et al.

PMCID: PMC4387288
PMID: 25824819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Neuro Oncol. 2015 Jul;17(7):1016-21. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nov046. Epub 2015 Mar
26.

Prognostic impact of B-cell lymphoma 6 in primary CNS lymphoma.

Kreher S(1), Jöhrens K(1), Strehlow F(1), Martus P(1), Borowiec K(1), Radke J(1),
Heppner F(1), Roth P(1), Thiel E(1), Pietsch T(1), Weller M(1), Korfel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charite
Berlin, Berlin, Germany (S.K., F.S., E.T., A.K.); Institute of Pathology, Charite
Berlin, Berlin, Germany (K.J.); Institute of Clinical Epidemiology and Applied
Biostatistics, University Tuebingen, Tuebingen (P.M.); Institute of
Neuropathology, University Bonn Medical Center, Brain Tumor Reference Center of
the DGNN, Bonn, Germany (K.B., T.P.); Institute of Neuropathology, Charite
Berlin, Berlin, Germany (J.R., F.H.); Department of Neurology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland (P.R., M.W.).

BACKGROUND: We investigated the prognostic significance of B-cell differentiation
status and common B-cell differentiation markers in a post hoc analysis of 119
patients with primary CNS lymphoma (PCNSL) homogeneously receiving high-dose
methotrexate (HDMTX)-based chemotherapy within the prospective G-PCNSL-SG1 trial.
METHODS: We evaluated protein expression of B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2), BCL6, CD10,
and multiple myeloma oncogene 1/interferon regulatory factor 4 (MUM1/IRF4) by
immunohistochemistry and analyzed the association with survival.
RESULTS: The median follow-up of all patients was 67.5 months. Median
progression-free survival (PFS) was 10.61 months (95% CI: 4.23-17.00). Median
overall survival (OS) was 28.85 months (95% CI: 17.96-39.73). Eighty-nine tumors 
expressed BCL2 (92.7%), 24 (20.5%) expressed CD10, 60 (54.1%) expressed BCL6, and
87 (79.0%) expressed MUM1/IRF4. On the basis of the Hans algorithm, 80 tumors
(73.4%) were classified to the non-germinal center B group, suggesting a
post-germinal center origin of PCNSL. Expression of BCL6 (cutoff point 30%), but 
none of the other markers, was associated with shorter PFS (P = .047) and OS (P =
.035). On multivariate analysis, BCL6 expression was associated with shorter PFS 
(hazard ratio: 1.95, 95% CI: 1.22-3.12, P = .005) but not OS (hazard ratio: 1.85,
95% CI: 0.71-4.80, P = .21). Classification according to Hans algorithm and
expression status of the single B-cell markers BCL2, CD10, and MUM1/IRF4 did not 
correlate with prognosis.
CONCLUSION: The findings are limited by the fact that only 23% of all G-PCNSL-SG1
patients could be included in the analysis. If validated in an independent
cohort, BCL6 may assume clinical relevance as an unfavorable prognostic biomarker
in PCNSL.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25817328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Apr;35(4):796-803. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.304723. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

Regulation of Csf1r and Bcl6 in macrophages mediates the stage-specific effects
of microRNA-155 on atherosclerosis.

Wei Y(1), Zhu M(1), Corbalán-Campos J(1), Heyll K(1), Weber C(1), Schober A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Experimental Vascular Medicine, Institute for Cardiovascular
Prevention, Medical Faculty of Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich,
Germany (Y.W., M.Z., J.C.-C., K.H., C.W., A.S.); Institute for Molecular
Cardiovascular Research, Medical Faculty of RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany (Y.W., J.C.-C., K.H., C.W., A.S.); and Munich Heart Alliance, Munich,
Germany (C.W., A.S.). (2)From the Experimental Vascular Medicine, Institute for
Cardiovascular Prevention, Medical Faculty of Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Munich, Germany (Y.W., M.Z., J.C.-C., K.H., C.W., A.S.); Institute for
Molecular Cardiovascular Research, Medical Faculty of RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany (Y.W., J.C.-C., K.H., C.W., A.S.); and Munich Heart Alliance,
Munich, Germany (C.W., A.S.). aschober@med.lmu.de.

OBJECTIVE: The function of microRNAs is highly context and cell type dependent
because of their highly dynamic expression pattern and the regulation of multiple
mRNA targets. MicroRNA-155 (miR-155) plays an important role in the innate immune
response by regulating macrophage function; however, the effects of miR-155 in
macrophages on atherosclerosis are controversial. We hypothesized that the
stage-dependent target selection of miR-155 in macrophages determines its effects
on atherosclerosis.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The expression of miR-155 increased in lesional macrophages
of apolipoprotein E-deficient mice between 12 and 24 weeks of a high-cholesterol 
diet. Mir155 knockout in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice enhanced lesion
formation, increased the lesional macrophage content, and promoted macrophage
proliferation after 12 weeks of the high-cholesterol diet. In vitro, miR-155
inhibited macrophage proliferation by suppressing colony-stimulating factor-1
receptor, which was upregulated in lesional macrophages of Mir155(-/-)
apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. By contrast, Mir155 deficiency reduced necrotic 
core formation and the deposition of apoptotic cell debris, thereby preventing
the progression of atherosclerosis between 12 and 24 weeks of the
high-cholesterol diet. miR-155 inhibited efferocytosis in vitro by targeting
B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 6 and thus activating RhoA (ras homolog gene family,
member A). Accordingly, B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 6 was upregulated in lesional
macrophages of Mir155(-/-) apolipoprotein E-deficient mice after 24 weeks, but
not after 12 weeks of the high-cholesterol diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate a stage-specific role of miR-155 in lesion 
formation. miR-155 suppressed macrophage proliferation by targeting
colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor in early and impaired efferocytosis by
downregulating B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 6 in advanced atherosclerosis. Therefore,
targeting the interaction between miR-155 and B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 6 may be a
promising approach to inhibit the progression of atherosclerosis.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25810298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Semin Hematol. 2015 Apr;52(2):97-106. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2015.01.009.
Epub 2015 Jan 21.

MYC alterations in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Karube K(1), Campo E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Hospital Clínic,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: ecampo@clinic.ub.es.

MYC is a transcription factor associated with numerous physiological functions,
including apoptosis, and strong oncogenic potential. MYC expression is tightly
regulated in normal lymphoid cells with high levels in the initial steps of the
secondary lymphoid follicle formation and in a subset of centrocytes of the
germinal center light zone. BCL6 and BLIMP1 repress MYC expression in normal
germinal center B and plasma cells, respectively. Paradoxically, most lymphomas
with MYC genetic alterations originate from cells that usually do not express
MYC, suggesting that these tumors need to develop additional oncogenic events to 
overcome the MYC regulatory mechanisms and also its proapoptotic function. MYC
rearrangements, and to a lesser extent gene amplifications, have been detected in
approximately 5% to 14% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and these
alterations are frequently associated with BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangements. The
concurrent presence of these alterations confers a more aggressive behavior to
the tumors with poor outcome of the patients. BCL2 and MYC protein may also be
coexpressed in DLBCL independently of gene alterations and this double expression
also confers poor prognosis, although not as dismal as that of double genetic
hits. Additional factors may modulate the biological effect of the double hit
lesions because tumors in which MYC is translocated to non-IGH partner or MYC and
BCL2 protein that are expressed at lower levels may have a less aggressive
behavior. Further studies are needed to define the clinical implications of MYC
aberrations in DLBCL and determine the most appropriate diagnostic strategy to
identify these tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25805589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Arch Toxicol. 2016 Apr;90(4):793-803. doi: 10.1007/s00204-015-1500-2. Epub 2015
Mar 19.

Long-term arsenite exposure induces premature senescence in B cell lymphoma A20
cells.

Okamura K(1), Nohara K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, 305-8506, Japan. (2)Center for Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, 305-8506, Japan.
keikon@nies.go.jp.

Chronic arsenite exposure induces immunosuppression, but the precise mechanisms
remain elusive. Our previous studies demonstrated that arsenite exposure for 24 h
induces G0/G1 arrest in mouse B lymphoma A20 cells and the arrest is caused
through induction of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16(INK4a) followed by
accumulation of an Rb family protein, p130. In this study, we further
investigated the consequences of long-term arsenite exposure of A20 cells. The
results demonstrated that exposure to 10 µM sodium arsenite up to 14 days induces
a great increase in G0/G1 arrest, irreversible cell growth suppression, cellular 
morphological changes and positive staining for senescence-associated
ß-galactosidase. The long-term arsenite exposure also induced up-regulation of
p16(INK4a) followed by robust accumulation of p130 and activation of the p53
pathway. Knockdown experiments with siRNA showed that p130 accumulation is
essential for cell cycle arrest by long-term arsenite exposure. Since p16(INK4a) 
and the p53 pathway are known to be activated by DNA damage, we investigated the 
involvement of DNA damage formation by long-term arsenite exposure. We found that
a variety of DNA repair-related genes were significantly down-regulated from 24 h
of arsenite exposure and activation-induced cytidine deaminase was greatly
up-regulated after long-term arsenite exposure. Consistent with these findings,
long-term arsenite exposure increased a DNA double-strand break marker, <U+03B3>-H2AX
and increased mutation frequency in a Bcl6 gene region. These results revealed
that long-term arsenite exposure induces premature senescence through DNA damage 
increase and p130 accumulation in lymphoid cells.

PMID: 25787150  [PubMed - in process]


171. Am J Clin Pathol. 2015 Apr;143(4):547-57. doi: 10.1309/AJCPO4U4VYAAOTEL.

BCL6 expression correlates with the t(1;19) translocation in B-lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Deucher AM(1), Qi Z(2), Yu J(2), George TI(3), Etzell JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the University of California, San Francisco, and
anne.deucher@ucsfmedctr.org. (2)From the University of California, San Francisco,
and. (3)University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

OBJECTIVES: Study to date suggests that BCL6 protein expression in B-cell
neoplasia predominates in germinal center-derived tumors, but less is known
regarding its expression in B-lymphoblastic leukemia. Therefore, we designed a
comprehensive study of BCL6 expression in B-lymphoblastic leukemia.
METHODS: BCL6, LMO, and HGAL protein expression in B-lymphoblastic leukemia was
investigated using immunohistochemical staining of paraffin-embedded bone marrow 
specimens. Cryptic TCF3(E2A)-PBX1 rearrangements were investigated using
interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Six (12%) of 52 B-lymphoblastic leukemias demonstrated BCL6 protein
expression, with B-cell lymphoblastic leukemias containing a t(1;19)
translocation demonstrating the strongest staining (three of three). Additional
t(1;19) cases beyond the screening study showed similar results. Public
microarray expression database mining showed that BCL6 messenger RNA expression
levels in B-lymphoblastic leukemia correlated with the protein expression
findings. Finally, other markers of B-cell development correlated with BCL6
expression in t(1;19) B-lymphoblastic leukemia cases, with LMO2 and HGAL proteins
expressed in six (67%) of nine and eight (89%) of nine cases, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: BCL6 expression is present in a subset of B-lymphoblastic leukemias,
especially in cases containing the 1;19 translocation. Investigation for
TCF3(E2A)-PBX1 rearrangements may be useful in BCL6-positive B-lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 25780007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Haematologica. 2015 Jun;100(6):801-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.120048. Epub
2015 Mar 13.

BCL6--regulated by AhR/ARNT and wild-type MEF2B--drives expression of germinal
center markers MYBL1 and LMO2.

Ding J(1), Dirks WG(1), Ehrentraut S(1), Geffers R(2), MacLeod RA(1), Nagel S(1),
Pommerenke C(1), Romani J(1), Scherr M(3), Vaas LA(1), Zaborski M(1), Drexler
HG(1), Quentmeier H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig. (2)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Genome Analysis
Research Group, Braunschweig. (3)Medical School Hannover, Department of
Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Germany.
(4)Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig hqu@dsmz.de.

Genetic heterogeneity is widespread in tumors, but poorly documented in cell
lines. According to immunoglobulin hypermutation analysis, the diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma cell line U-2932 comprises two subpopulations faithfully
representing original tumor subclones. We set out to identify molecular causes
underlying subclone-specific expression affecting 221 genes including surface
markers and the germinal center oncogenes BCL6 and MYC. Genomic copy number
variations explained 58/221 genes differentially expressed in the two U-2932
clones. Subclone-specific expression of the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and
the resulting activity of the AhR/ARNT complex underlaid differential regulation 
of 11 genes including MEF2B. Knock-down and inhibitor experiments confirmed that 
AhR/ARNT regulates MEF2B, a key transcription factor for BCL6. AhR, MEF2B and
BCL6 levels correlated not only in the U-2932 subclones but in the majority of 23
cell lines tested, indicting overexpression of AhR as a novel mechanism behind
BCL6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Enforced modulation of BCL6 affected 48/221
signature genes. Although BCL6 is known as a transcriptional repressor, 28 genes 
were up-regulated, including LMO2 and MYBL1 which, like BCL6, signify germinal
center diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Supporting the notion that BCL6 can induce 
gene expression, BCL6 and the majority of potential targets were co-regulated in 
a series of B-cell lines. In conclusion, genomic copy number aberrations,
activation of AhR/ARNT, and overexpression of BCL6 are collectively responsible
for differential expression of more than 100 genes in subclones of the U-2932
cell line. It is particularly interesting that BCL6 - regulated by AhR/ARNT and
wild-type MEF2B - may drive expression of germinal center markers in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4450626
PMID: 25769544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1685-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-01-622191.

Heat-shock proteins: a c-Myc lymphoma target?

Briones J(1).

Author information: 
(1)HOSPITAL SANTA CREU I SANT PAU.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1768-71.

PMID: 25766562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):409-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.02.003.

Self-enforcing feedback activation between BCL6 and pre-B cell receptor signaling
defines a distinct subtype of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Geng H(1), Hurtz C(1), Lenz KB(2), Chen Z(1), Baumjohann D(3), Thompson S(2),
Goloviznina NA(4), Chen WY(5), Huan J(4), LaTocha D(6), Ballabio E(7), Xiao G(1),
Lee JW(1), Deucher A(1), Qi Z(1), Park E(1), Huang C(8), Nahar R(1), Kweon SM(1),
Shojaee S(1), Chan LN(1), Yu J(1), Kornblau SM(9), Bijl JJ(10), Ye BH(11), Ansel 
KM(3), Paietta E(12), Melnick A(8), Hunger SP(13), Kurre P(4), Tyner JW(14), Loh 
ML(15), Roeder RG(16), Druker BJ(17), Burger JA(9), Milne TA(7), Chang BH(2),
Müschen M(18).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
OR 97239, USA; Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA. (3)Microbiology and Immunology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (4)Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute,
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA. (5)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065,
USA; Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan. (6)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA. (7)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3
9DS, UK. (8)Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (9)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (10)Hôpital
Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montreal, QC H1T 2M4, Canada. (11)Department of Cell
Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(12)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461,
USA. (13)Division of Pediatric Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (14)Knight
Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA;
Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA. (15)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (16)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (17)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
OR 97239, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(18)Departments of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address: markus.muschen@ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):321-3.

Studying 830 pre-B ALL cases from four clinical trials, we found that human ALL
can be divided into two fundamentally distinct subtypes based on pre-BCR
function. While absent in the majority of ALL cases, tonic pre-BCR signaling was 
found in 112 cases (13.5%). In these cases, tonic pre-BCR signaling induced
activation of BCL6, which in turn increased pre-BCR signaling output at the
transcriptional level. Interestingly, inhibition of pre-BCR-related tyrosine
kinases reduced constitutive BCL6 expression and selectively killed
patient-derived pre-BCR(+) ALL cells. These findings identify a genetically and
phenotypically distinct subset of human ALL that critically depends on tonic
pre-BCR signaling. In vivo treatment studies suggested that pre-BCR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors are useful for the treatment of patients with pre-BCR(+) ALL.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4618684
PMID: 25759025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):321-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.02.012.

The pre-BCR to the rescue: therapeutic targeting of pre-B cell ALL.

Trimarchi T(1), Aifantis I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, NYU School of
Medicine New York, NY 10016, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, NYU School of Medicine New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic
address: iannis.aifantis@nyumc.org.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):409-25.

Pre B-ALL is an aggressive cancer of the blood for which treatment of patients
with relapsed and refractory disease remains a challenge. In this issue of Cancer
Cell, Geng and colleagues surveyed the activation status of the pre-B cell
receptor and comprehensively investigated downstream signaling mechanisms
currently targetable with small molecule inhibitors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4532279
PMID: 25759017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Neurol India. 2015 Jan-Feb;63(1):77-82. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.152658.

Clinicopathological correlates of primary central nervous system lymphoma:
experience from a tertiary care center in South India.

Patel B, Chacko G(1), Nair S, Anandan J, Chacko AG, Rajshekhar V, Turel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pathology, Section of Neuropathology, Christian Medical 
College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India.

BACKGROUND: Primary central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSL) constitute a rare
group of extranodal non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs).
AIM: To study the clinical and immunophenotypic profile of patients with a PCNSL 
who presented between the years 2000 and 2013 in a tertiary care center in South 
India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective study. Demographic and clinical
data were obtained from the clinical case records.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: Cases of PCNSL involving brain.
EXCLUSION CRITERIA: Cases of PCNSL involving the spinal cord, meninges and orbit 
as well as intravascular large B-cell lymphoma, lymphomas with evidence of
systemic disease or secondary lymphomas. Archived slides and tissue blocks were
retrieved. All cases had hematoxylin and eosin stained sections and
immunohistochemistry for CD20, CD3, and MIB-1. Additional immunohistochemistry
was performed for CD10, BCL6, and MUM1 on paraffin blocks with sufficient tissue.
RESULTS: There were a total of 73 cases with the mean age of presentation being
45.9 years (range 8-71 years) and with a male predominance (male: female (M:F) = 
2.3:1). Headache was the commonest presenting complaint. The mean duration of
symptoms was 10.6 weeks. All patients were immunocompetent. Most tumors were
supratentorial in location. Out of 73 cases, 70 presented with a diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), two with a Burkitt's lymphoma, and one with a
lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Only 51 of the DLBCL cases had sufficient tissue for
additional studies. Non-germinal center was the most common phenotype seen in
65.7% (33/51) of cases. Germinal center B-cell (GCB) phenotype was seen in 18/51 
cases (34.3%).
CONCLUSION: DLBCL constituted the majority of PCNSLs and although non-germinal
center was the predominant phenotype, more than a third of the cases were of the 
GCB phenotype. As the germinal center phenotype is known to have a better
prognosis, further studies to explore its relevance in the Asian population are
indicated.

PMID: 25751474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Mar 2;16(3):4744-58. doi: 10.3390/ijms16034744.

Transcriptome analysis in rat kidneys: importance of genes involved in programmed
hypertension.

Tain YL(1,)(2), Huang LT(3,)(4), Chan JY(5), Lee CT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan. tainyl@hotmail.com.
(2)Center for Translational Research in Biomedical Sciences, Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833,
Taiwan. tainyl@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833,
Taiwan. litung.huang@gmail.com. (4)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Chang Gung University, Linkow 244, Taiwan. litung.huang@gmail.com. (5)Center for 
Translational Research in Biomedical Sciences, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
jchan@adm.cgmh.org.tw. (6)Division of Nephrology, Departments of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan. ctlee33@adm.cgmh.org.tw.

Suboptimal conditions in pregnancy can elicit long-term effects on the health of 
offspring. The most common outcome is programmed hypertension. We examined
whether there are common genes and pathways in the kidney are responsible for
generating programmed hypertension among three different models using next
generation RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) technology. Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats
received dexamethasone (DEX, 0.1 mg/kg) from gestational day 16 to 22, 60%
high-fructose (HF) diet, or NG-nitro-l-arginine-methyester (l-NAME, 60 mg/kg/day)
to conduct DEX, HF, or l-NAME model respectively. All three models elicited
programmed hypertension in adult male offspring. We observed five shared genes
(Bcl6, Dmrtc1c, Egr1, Inmt, and Olr1668) among three different models. The
identified differential genes (DEGs) that are related to regulation of blood
pressure included Aqp2, Ptgs1, Eph2x, Hba-a2, Apln, Guca2b, Hmox1, and Npy.
RNA-Seq identified genes in arachidonic acid metabolism are potentially
gatekeeper genes contributing to programmed hypertension. In addition, HF and DEX
increased expression and activity of soluble epoxide hydrolase (Ephx2 gene
encoding protein). Conclusively, the DEGs in arachidonic acid metabolism are
potentially gatekeeper genes in programmed hypertension. The roles of DEGs
identified by the RNA-Seq in this study deserve further clarification, to develop
the potential interventions in the prevention of programmed hypertension.

PMCID: PMC4394446
PMID: 25739086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nat Immunol. 2015 Apr;16(4):397-405. doi: 10.1038/ni.3122. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

IL-7 coordinates proliferation, differentiation and Tcra recombination during
thymocyte ß-selection.

Boudil A(1), Matei IR(2), Shih HY(3), Bogdanoski G(2), Yuan JS(2), Chang SG(2),
Montpellier B(1), Kowalski PE(2), Voisin V(4), Bashir S(4), Bader GD(5), Krangel 
MS(3), Guidos CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children 
Research Institute, Toronto, Canada. [2] Department of Immunology, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (2)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology,
Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, Toronto, Canada. (3)Department of 
Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (4)The
Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (5)1] The Donnelly
Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. [2] Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Apr;16(4):337-8.

Signaling via the pre-T cell antigen receptor (pre-TCR) and the receptor Notch1
induces transient self-renewal (ß-selection) of TCRß(+) CD4(-)CD8(-)
double-negative stage 3 (DN3) and DN4 progenitor cells that differentiate into
CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) thymocytes, which then rearrange the locus
encoding the TCR a-chain (Tcra). Interleukin 7 (IL-7) promotes the survival of
TCRß(-) DN thymocytes by inducing expression of the pro-survival molecule Bcl-2, 
but the functions of IL-7 during ß-selection have remained unclear. Here we found
that IL-7 signaled TCRß(+) DN3 and DN4 thymocytes to upregulate genes encoding
molecules involved in cell growth and repressed the gene encoding the
transcriptional repressor Bcl-6. Accordingly, IL-7-deficient DN4 cells lacked
trophic receptors and did not proliferate but rearranged Tcra prematurely and
differentiated rapidly. Deletion of Bcl6 partially restored the self-renewal of
DN4 cells in the absence of IL-7, but overexpression of BCL2 did not. Thus, IL-7 
critically acts cooperatively with signaling via the pre-TCR and Notch1 to
coordinate proliferation, differentiation and Tcra recombination during
ß-selection.

PMCID: PMC4368453
PMID: 25729925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Pathol. 2015 Jul;236(3):302-14. doi: 10.1002/path.4524. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Paediatric nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphadenopathy of the neck: a Haemophilus 
influenzae-driven immune disorder?

Kluin PM(1), Langerak AW(2), Beverdam-Vincent J(3,)(4), Geurts-Giele WR(5),
Visser L(1), Rutgers B(1), Schuuring E(1), Van Baarlen J(6), Lam KH(5),
Seldenrijk K(7), Kibbelaar RE(8), de Wit P(9), Diepstra A(1), Rosati S(1), van
Noesel MM(10), Zwaan CM(10), Hunting JC(11), Hoogendoorn M(12), van der Gaag
EJ(13), van Esser JW(14), de Bont E(15), Kluin-Nelemans HC(16), Winter RH(17), Lo
Ten Foe JR(17), van der Zanden AG(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical Centre
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of 
Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Microbiology and Infection Control, Zorggroep Twente, Hengelo,
The Netherlands. (4)Laboratory for Microbiology, Twente Achterhoek, Hengelo, The 
Netherlands. (5)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam, EMCR, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Pathology, LABPON, Hengelo, The
Netherlands. (7)Department of Pathology, St Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, The
Netherlands. (8)Department of Pathology, Pathologie Friesland, Leeuwarden, The
Netherlands. (9)Department of Pathology, Amphia Hospital, Breda, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Sophia Children Hospital, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. (11)Department of Internal Medicine, St Antonius Ziekenhuis,
Nieuwegein, The Netherlands. (12)Department of Internal Medicine, Medisch Centrum
Leeuwarden, The Netherlands. (13)Department of Pediatrics, Zorggroep Twente,
Hengelo, The Netherlands. (14)Department of Internal Medicine, Amphia Hospital,
Breda, The Netherlands. (15)Department of Pediatric Oncology & Hematology,
University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (16)Department of Hematology, University Medical Centre Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (17)Department of Medical
Microbiology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.

Many hyperplasias and lymphomas of marginal zone B-cells are associated with
infection. We identified six children and one adolescent with cervical
lymphadenopathy showing prominent polyclonal nodal marginal zone hyperplasia
(pNMZH) and four adolescents with monoclonal paediatric nodal marginal zone
lymphoma (pNMZL). The clonality status was assessed using BIOMED-2-IG PCR
analysis. Haemophilus influenzae was identified in all six cases of pNMZH that
could be tested by direct culture (N = 3) or a very sensitive PCR for the H.
influenzae gyrase gene in frozen materials (N = 5). H. influenzae was not
detected in three pNMZLs and 28 non-specific reactive cervical lymph nodes of
age-matched controls, except for a single control node that was obtained during
oropharyngeal surgery for a cleft palate showing very low copy numbers of H.
influenzae. pNMZH patients were younger than pNMZL patients (median age 12 versus
21 years). pNMZH showed a prominent nodular appearance with variable fibrosis
without acute inflammation. Within the nodules, the expanded germinal centres and
variably sized marginal zones were colonized by activated B-cells with weak
expression of IgD and lack of CD10 and/or BCL6 expression. Some areas showed
skewed light chain expression in plasma cells (4/5 cases lambda). In four cases
tested, this was confirmed by flow cytometry for surface Ig (3/4 cases lambda).
In contrast, pNMZL showed more extensive expansion of marginal zones by
centrocytoid cells and often expression of BCL2 protein. Several H. influenzae
strains are known to interact with the constant part of IgD on human B-cells,
leading to their polyclonal proliferation and activation. We speculate that in
vivo stimulation of IgD+ marginal zone B-cells by this bacterium may be
implicated in this particular lymphadenopathy that should be distinguished from
monoclonal pNMZL.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25722108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int Immunol. 2015 May;27(5):253-63. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxv007. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

CD1d-dependent expansion of NKT follicular helper cells in vivo and in vitro is a
product of cellular proliferation and differentiation.

Rampuria P(1), Lang ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. (2)Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, USA mark-lang@ouhsc.edu.

NKT follicular helper cells (NKTfh cells) are a recently discovered functional
subset of CD1d-restricted NKT cells. Given the potential for NKTfh cells to
promote specific antibody responses and germinal center reactions, there is much 
interest in determining the conditions under which NKTfh cells proliferate and/or
differentiate in vivo and in vitro. We confirm that NKTfh cells expressing the
canonical semi-invariant Va14 TCR were CXCR5(+)/ICOS(+)/PD-1(+)/Bcl6(+) and
increased in number following administration of the CD1d-binding glycolipid
a-galactosylceramide (a-GC) to C57Bl/6 mice. We show that the a-GC-stimulated
increase in NKTfh cells was CD1d-dependent since the effect was diminished by
reduced CD1d expression. In vivo and in vitro treatment with a-GC, singly or in
combination with IL-2, showed that NKTfh cells increased in number to a greater
extent than total NKT cells, but proliferation was near-identical in both
populations. Acquisition of the NKTfh phenotype from an adoptively transferred
PD-1-depleted cell population was a<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd"> 
<html>
<head>
<title>NCBI/eutils310 - WWW Error 500 Diagnostic</title>
<style type="text/css"> 
h1.error {color: red; font-size: 40pt}
div.diags {text-indent: 0.5in }
</style> 
</head>
<body>
<h1>Server Error</h1>


<p>Your request could not be processed due to a problem on
our Web server.  This could be a transient problem, please
try the query again.  If it doesn't clear up within a
reasonable period of time, e-mail a short description of your
query and the diagnostic information shown below to:</p>

<p>
pubmed@nlm.nih.gov - for problems with PubMed<br/>
webadmin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov - for problems with other services<br/>
</p>

<p>Thank you for your assistance.  We will try to fix the
problem as soon as possible.
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
Diagnostic Information:</p>

<div class="diags">Error: 500</div>

<div class="diags">URL:  h t t p : / / e u t i l s . n c b i . n l m . n i h . g o v / e n t r e z / e u t i l s / e f e t c h . f c g i ? = e f e t c h & a m p ; d b = p u b m e d & a m p ; q u e r y _ k e y = 1 & a m p ; W e b E n v = N C I D _ 1 _ 1 4 1 3 8 0 7 4 _ 1 6 5 . 1 1 2 . 9 . 2 8 _ 9 0 0 1 _ 1 4 5 9 7 0 2 7 5 6 _ 1 1 4 5 3 8 0 1 5 2 _ 0 M e t A 0 _ S _ M e g a S t o r e _ F _ 1 & a m p ; r e t m o d e = t e x t & a m p ; r e t t y p e = a b s t r a c t & a m p ; r e t s t a r t = 0 & a m p ; r e t m a x = 5 0 0 & a m p ; e m a i l = g s c h o f l  4 0 y a h o o . d e & a m p ; t o o l = r e u t i l s </div>

<div class="diags">Client: 165.112.9.141</div>

<div class="diags">Server: eutils310</div>

<div class="diags">Time: Sun Apr  3 12:59:48 EDT 2016</div>

 
<p>
NOTE: The above is an internal URL which may differ from the one you used to address the page.</p>
<hr/>
<p>Rev. 01/04/08</p>

</body>
</html>


1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Nov;36(11):1636-46. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318268d9ff.

Follicular peripheral T-cell lymphoma expands the spectrum of classical Hodgkin
lymphoma mimics.

Moroch J(1), Copie-Bergman C, de Leval L, Plonquet A, Martin-Garcia N,
Delfau-Larue MH, Molinier-Frenkel V, Belhadj K, Haioun C, Audouin J, Swerdlow SH,
Marafioti T, Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie, APHP, Groupe Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected B cells with Reed-Sternberg-like cell (RS)
features may occur in peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs), especially in
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma. Here, we report 5 patients presenting with
lymphadenopathy whose first biopsies demonstrated nodular lymphoid proliferations
containing scattered CD30+, CD15+, EBV+ Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg-like cells,
which led to an initial diagnosis of lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin lymphoma. 
However, the uncommon clinical features and/or the occurrence of relapse as PTCL 
prompted review of the biopsies with expanded immunohistologic and molecular
studies and revision of the diagnoses to follicular variant of PTCL (F-PTCL). All
cases had atypical small to medium-sized CD3+ T cells that expressed CD10 (4/5)
and the follicular helper T-cell (TFH) antigens BCL6, PD1, CXCL13, and ICOS. All 
demonstrated clonal T cells with a similar pattern in multiple samples from 4
patients. In 2 cases, flow cytometry demonstrated circulating lymphocytes with an
abnormal sCD3+, CD4+, ICOS+ immunophenotype. Two patients had a skin rash at
presentation, and 1 had B symptoms. Two of the 4 patients treated with
polychemotherapy are alive at 3 and 6 years after first diagnosis. These cases
highlight how some F-PTCLs may closely mimic lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin
lymphoma requiring careful assessment of the T cells before rendering the latter 
diagnosis. The functional properties of TFH cells might lead to the presence of
EBV-positive B blasts with RS-like features in TFH-derived PTCL such as
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and F-PTCL.

PMID: 23073322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Genomics. 2012 Oct 16;13:557. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-557.

Marek's disease virus infection induces widespread differential chromatin marks
in inbred chicken lines.

Mitra A(1), Luo J, Zhang H, Cui K, Zhao K, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal & Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Marek's disease (MD) is a neoplastic disease in chickens caused by
the MD virus (MDV). Successful vaccine development against MD has resulted in
increased virulence of MDV and the understanding of genetic resistance to the
disease is, therefore, crucial to long-term control strategies. Also, epigenetic 
factors are believed to be one of the major determinants of disease response.
RESULTS: Here, we carried out comprehensive analyses of the epigenetic landscape 
induced by MDV, utilizing genome-wide histone H3 lysine 4 and lysine 27
trimethylation maps from chicken lines with varying resistance to MD.
Differential chromatin marks were observed on genes previously implicated in the 
disease such as MX1 and CTLA-4 and also on genes reported in other cancers
including IGF2BP1 and GAL. We detected bivalent domains on immune-related
transcriptional regulators BCL6, CITED2 and EGR1, which underwent dynamic changes
in both lines as a result of MDV infection. In addition, putative roles for GAL
in the mechanism of MD progression were revealed.
CONCLUSION: Our results confirm the presence of widespread epigenetic differences
induced by MD in chicken lines with different levels of genetic resistance. A
majority of observed epigenetic changes were indicative of increased levels of
viral infection in the susceptible line symptomatic of lowered immunocompetence
in these birds caused by early cytolytic infection. The GAL system that has known
anti-proliferative effects in other cancers is also revealed to be potentially
involved in MD progression. Our study provides further insight into the
mechanisms of MD progression while revealing a complex landscape of epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms that varies depending on host factors.

PMCID: PMC3505159
PMID: 23072359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Neoplasma. 2013;60(1):68-73. doi: 10.4149/neo_2013_010.

The Hans algorithm failed to predict outcome in patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma treated with rituximab.

Benesova K(1), Forsterova K, Votavova H, Campr V, Stritesky J, Velenska Z,
Prochazka B, Pytlik R, Trneny M.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Medicine, Charles University, Prague.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) consists of at least two biologically and
pathogenetically different subtypes, the germinal centre B-cell (GCB) and the
activated B cell type (ABC). It has been suggested that immunohistochemistry can 
discriminate these subtypes as well. The aim of this study was to verify the
validity of the most commonly used Hans algorithm in patients with DLBCL treated 
with anthracycline- based chemotherapy with rituximab. Immunohistochemical
staining using standard protocols was performed on formalin fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues. CD20, CD5, CD23, BCL2, CD10, BCL6, MUM1 and Ki67
antibodies were applied. Out of 120 examined cases 52 patients were evaluated as 
GCB type and 68 patients as having non-GCB, out of a set of 99 patients treated
with immunochemotherapy 45 patients with GCB and 54 patients with non-GCB DLBCL
were identified. In this set of patients, there was no statistically significant 
difference neither in overall survival (OS) (HR 1.47 95% CI 0.51-2.63; p=0.45)
nor in progression free survival (PFS) (HR 1.57, 95 % CI 0.76-3.22; p=0.731)
between both groups.

PMID: 23067219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 May;54(5):1079-86. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2012.739687. Epub
2012 Nov 15.

Mutation mismatch repair gene deletions in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Couronné L(1), Ruminy P, Waultier-Rascalou A, Rainville V, Cornic M, Picquenot
JM, Figeac M, Bastard C, Tilly H, Jardin F.

Author information: 
(1)UMR INSERM U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France.
lucile.couronne@inserm.fr

To further unravel the molecular pathogenesis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), we performed high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization on lymph 
node biopsies from 70 patients. With this strategy, we identified microdeletions 
of genes involved in the mutation mismatch repair (MMR) pathway in two samples.
The first patient presented with a homozygous deletion of MSH2-MSH6 due to
duplication of an unbalanced pericentric inversion of chromosome 2. The other
case showed a PMS2 heterozygous deletion. PMS2 and MSH2-MSH6 abnormalities,
respectively, resulted in a decrease and complete loss of gene expression.
However, unlike tumors associated with the hereditary non-polyposis colorectal
cancer syndrome or immunodeficiency-related lymphomas, no microsatellite
instability was detected. Mutational profiles revealed especially in one patient 
an aberrant hypermutation without a clear activation-induced cytidine deaminase
signature, indicating a breakdown of the high-fidelity repair in favor of the
error-prone repair pathway. Our findings suggest that in a rare subset of
patients, inactivation of the genes of the MMR pathway is likely an important
step in the molecular pathogenesis of DLBCL and does not involve the same
molecular mechanisms as other common neoplasms with MMR deficiency.

PMID: 23066952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Feb;94(1):98-102. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.10.003. Epub
2012 Oct 10.

Cytogenetic abnormalities precede morphological abnormalities in developing
malignant conditions: report of 2 cases.

Symons WA(1), Flynt FL, Mendiola C, Ortega V, Higgins RA, Velagaleti GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, United States.

We previously hypothesized that cytogenetic abnormalities precede morphological
abnormalities in developing malignant conditions. In this context we evaluated
additional cases to further confirm that hypothesis. We report on 2 additional
cases in which clonal cytogenetic abnormalities were observed in otherwise
morphologically normal samples. Case 1 is a bone marrow from a 73 year old male
with transformed follicular lymphoma (FL), while case 2 is a lymph node from a
53-year-old with lymphadenopathy, both referred to the cytogenetics laboratory
for evaluation. A 73-year-old male presented with an enlarging left inguinal mass
surrounding and obliterating the left iliac vein. A tissue core biopsy of the
mass revealed recurrent high grade FL with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
Examination of a random bone marrow biopsy of the adjacent left posterior iliac
crest showed only mild hypercellularity (50%) and no evidence of malignancy, and 
the results were confirmed by flow cytometry. Cytogenetic evaluation revealed an 
interstitial deletion, del (9)(q13q32). In case 2, morphologically the lymph node
showed extensive paracortical hyperplasia with numerous eosinophils and no clear 
indication of a neoplastic process with no abnormal lymphoid population observed 
by flow. PCR studies for TCR gamma and IgH gene rearrangements were negative for 
clonality. Chromosome analysis demonstrated
47,XY,+add(1)(p22),t(3;14)(q27;q11.2)[13]/46,XY[7]. FISH studies showed a BCL6
gene rearrangement but no TCRAD rearrangement. A subsequent inguinal lymph node
biopsy showed DLBCL. These cases along with the other cases in the literature
provide further evidence of genetic abnormalities preceding morphological
abnormalities in developing malignant conditions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23064050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Nov;12(11):799-804. doi: 10.1038/nri3321. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Master regulators or lineage-specifying? Changing views on CD4+ T cell
transcription factors.

Oestreich KJ(1), Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Box 357650, 1959 NE
Pacific Street, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

There is an emerging body of research demonstrating that the co-expression of key
lineage-specifying transcription factors, commonly referred to as 'master
regulators', affects the functional capabilities and flexibility of CD4(+) T cell
subsets. Here, we discuss how the natural co-expression of these
lineage-specifying transcription factors has challenged the concept that the
expression of a single 'master regulator' strictly establishes an absolute CD4(+)
T cell phenotype. Instead, it is becoming clear that the interplay between the
lineage-specifying (or lineage-defining) transcription factors, including T-bet, 
GATA3, ROR<U+03B3>t, BCL-6 and FOXP3, contributes to the fate and flexibility of CD4(+) 
T cell subtypes. This in turn has led to the realization that CD4(+) T cell
phenotypes are more diverse than previously recognized.

PMCID: PMC3584691
PMID: 23059426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 15;189(10):4759-69. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201794. Epub 2012 
Oct 10.

Bcl6 controls the Th2 inflammatory activity of regulatory T cells by repressing
Gata3 function.

Sawant DV(1), Sehra S, Nguyen ET, Jadhav R, Englert K, Shinnakasu R, Hangoc G,
Broxmeyer HE, Nakayama T, Perumal NB, Kaplan MH, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. adent2@iupui.edu

The transcriptional repressor Bcl6 is a critical arbiter of Th cell fate,
promoting the follicular Th lineage while repressing other Th cell lineages.
Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6(-/-)) mice develop a spontaneous and severe Th2-type
inflammatory disease, thus warranting assessment of Bcl6 in regulatory T cell
(Treg) function. Bcl6(-/-) Tregs were competent at suppressing T cell
proliferation in vitro and Th1-type colitogenic T cell responses in vivo. In
contrast, Bcl6(-/-) Tregs strongly exacerbated lung inflammation in a model of
allergic airway disease and promoted higher Th2 responses, including systemic
upregulation of microRNA-21. Further, Bcl6(-/-) Tregs were selectively impaired
at controlling Th2 responses, but not Th1 and Th17 responses, in mixed chimeras
of Bcl6(-/-) bone marrow with Foxp3(-/-) bone marrow. Bcl6(-/-) Tregs displayed
increased levels of the Th2 transcription factor Gata3 and other Th2 and Treg
genes. Bcl6 potently repressed Gata3 transcriptional transactivation, providing a
mechanism for the increased expression of Th2 genes by Bcl6(-/-) Tregs. Gata3 has
a critical role in regulating Foxp3 expression and functional fitness of Tregs;
however, the signal that regulates Gata3 and restricts its transactivation of Th2
cytokines in Tregs has remained unexplored. Our results identify Bcl6 as an
essential transcription factor regulating Gata3 activity in Tregs. Thus, Bcl6
represents a crucial regulatory layer in the Treg functional program that is
required for specific suppression of Gata3 and Th2 effector responses by Tregs.

PMCID: PMC3490013
PMID: 23053511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Tumori. 2012 Jul-Aug;98(4):e111-4. doi: 10.1700/1146.12655.

A unique case of blastoid variant of mantle cell lymphoma with an aberrant
CD5-/CD10+/Bcl-6+/CD56+ immunophenotype: a case report.

Park S(1), Ko YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. americandoc@hanmail.net

The neural adhesion molecule CD56 is normally expressed on natural killer cells
and subsets of T cells and is commonly found in hematolymphoid neoplasms.
Expression of CD56 is very rare in B-cell lymphoma and most reported
CD56-positive cases were diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Cases of CD56-positive
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) have not previously been described in the literature. 
We present a case of CD56-positive MCL. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first case report of MCL expressing CD56.

PMID: 23052175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46126. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046126. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Inhibition of doxorubicin-induced senescence by PPARd activation agonists in
cardiac muscle cells: cooperation between PPARd and Bcl6.

Altieri P(1), Spallarossa P, Barisione C, Garibaldi S, Garuti A, Fabbi P,
Ghigliotti G, Brunelli C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre of Cardiovascular Biology, University of Genova, Genova,
Italy. Paola.Altieri@unige.it

Senescence and apoptosis are two distinct cellular programs that are activated in
response to a variety of stresses. Low or high doses of the same stressor, i.e., 
the anticancer drug doxorubicin, may either induce apoptosis or senescence,
respectively, in cardiac muscle cells. We have demonstrated that PPARd, a
ligand-activated transcriptional factor that controls lipid metabolism, insulin
sensitivity and inflammation, is also involved in the doxorubicin-induced
senescence program. This occurs through its interference with the transcriptional
repressor protein B cell lymphoma-6 (Bcl6). Low doses of doxorubicin increase the
expression of PPARd that sequesters Bcl6, thus preventing it from exerting its
anti-senescent effects. We also found that L-165041, a specific PPARd activator, 
is highly effective in protecting cardiomyocytes from doxorubicin-induced
senescence through a Bcl6 related mechanism. In fact, L-165041 increases Bcl6
expression via p38, JNK and Akt activation, and at the same time it induces the
release of Bcl6 from PPARd, thereby enabling Bcl6 to bind to its target genes.
L-165041 also prevented apoptosis induced by higher doses of doxorubicin.
However, while experiments performed with siRNA analysis techniques very clearly 
showed the weight of Bcl6 in the cellular senescence program, no role was found
for Bcl6 in the anti-apoptotic effects of L-165041, thus confirming that
senescence and apoptosis are two very distinct stress response cellular programs.
This study increases our understanding of the molecular mechanism of
anthracycline cardiotoxicity and suggests a potential role for PPARd agonists as 
cardioprotective agents.

PMCID: PMC3458009
PMID: 23049957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Case Rep Med. 2012;2012:369264. doi: 10.1155/2012/369264. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Burkitt lymphoma presenting as unilateral deafness in an immunocompetent patient.

Pinto A(1), Ikpatt OF, Chapman-Fredericks J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jackson Health System, University of Miami, Miami, FL
33131, USA.

A 55-year-old HIV-negative white male presented with right ear deafness, right
axillary lymphadenopathy, and weight loss. Laboratory findings included anemia,
marked leukocytosis, and thrombocytopenia. Examination of the peripheral smear
demonstrated the presence of increased circulating blast-like cells of
intermediate size, with basophilic cytoplasm and nuclei with open chromatin. MRI 
of the brain was compatible with hemorrhagic labyrinthitis. Excisional biopsy of 
the axillary mass revealed an enlarged lymph node with effaced architecture and
"starry sky" appearance. The cells expressed CD20, CD10, BCL6, and surface kappa 
immunoglobulin light chain, with a high proliferative index by
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. Subsequent bone marrow biopsy was
hypercellular (approximately 95%), with blast-like cells virtually replacing all 
hematopoietic elements. Routine karyotype as well as FISH analysis of bone marrow
cells demonstrated rearrangement of the MYC gene at chromosome 8q24 region,
IGH/MYC fusion, and additional signal for IGH gene. We present herein a case of
sporadic Burkitt lymphoma occurring in a previously healthy HIV-negative male.
The unusual clinical findings in this case include the relatively older age at
presentation (55 years), an immunocompetent patient who had nodal involvement and
leukemic phase of Burkitt, coupled with partial deafness. A brief educational
review of this neoplasm is made.

PMCID: PMC3462415
PMID: 23049564  [PubMed]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 23;109(43):17615-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206432109. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Therapeutic inhibition of the miR-34 family attenuates pathological cardiac
remodeling and improves heart function.

Bernardo BC(1), Gao XM, Winbanks CE, Boey EJ, Tham YK, Kiriazis H, Gregorevic P, 
Obad S, Kauppinen S, Du XJ, Lin RC, McMullen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, VIC 8008, Australia.

MicroRNAs are dysregulated in a setting of heart disease and have emerged as
promising therapeutic targets. MicroRNA-34 family members (miR-34a, -34b, and
-34c) are up-regulated in the heart in response to stress. In this study, we
assessed whether inhibition of the miR-34 family using an s.c.-delivered
seed-targeting 8-mer locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified antimiR (LNA-antimiR-34) 
can provide therapeutic benefit in mice with preexisting pathological cardiac
remodeling and dysfunction due to myocardial infarction (MI) or pressure overload
via transverse aortic constriction (TAC). An additional cohort of mice subjected 
to MI was given LNA-antimiR-34a (15-mer) to inhibit miR-34a alone as a comparison
for LNA-antimiR-34. LNA-antimiR-34 (8-mer) efficiently silenced all three miR-34 
family members in both cardiac stress models and attenuated cardiac remodeling
and atrial enlargement. In contrast, inhibition of miR-34a alone with
LNA-antimiR-34a (15-mer) provided no benefit in the MI model. In mice subjected
to pressure overload, LNA-antimiR-34 improved systolic function and attenuated
lung congestion, associated with reduced cardiac fibrosis, increased
angiogenesis, increased Akt activity, decreased atrial natriuretic peptide gene
expression, and maintenance of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase gene
expression. Improved outcome in LNA-antimiR-34-treated MI and TAC mice was
accompanied by up-regulation of several direct miR-34 targets, including vascular
endothelial growth factors, vinculin, protein O-fucosyltranferase 1, Notch1, and 
semaphorin 4B. Our results provide evidence that silencing of the entire miR-34
family can protect the heart against pathological cardiac remodeling and improve 
function. Furthermore, these data underscore the utility of seed-targeting 8-mer 
LNA-antimiRs in the development of new therapeutic approaches for pharmacologic
inhibition of disease-implicated miRNA seed families.

PMCID: PMC3491509
PMID: 23047694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;29(5):576-81. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.05.017.

[Correlation of BCL-6, MYC and p53 gene abnormalities with immunological subtypes
and prognosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun GX(1), Cao XS, Li Q, Wang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate BCL-6, MYC and p53 genes abnormalities in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and correlate the result with immunosubtypes and
prognosis.
METHODS: Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (I-FISH) was performed to 
detect the BCL-6, MYC and p53 genes. Immunohistochemistry (Envision method) was
used to measure the expressions of CD3, CD10, CD20, BCL-6, MUM -1, BCL-2 and
Ki-67 genes in DLBCL. The patients were classified into germinal center B
cell-like (GCB) and non-GCB subtypes according to Hans' algorithm.
RESULTS: BCL-6 rearrangement was detected in 10 of 46 DLBCL cases. The presence
of gene rearrangement had no correlation with BCL-6 protein expression (P=
0.245). Overall survival (OS, P= 0.138) and progression-free survival (PFS, P=
0.095) were not influenced by BCL-6 rearrangement. All MYC rearrangements were
detected in GCB type DLBCL. Deletion of p53 gene was detected in 14 cases and was
significantly associated with shorter OS (P= 0.046) and PFS (P= 0.043).
CONCLUSION: I-FISH is a rapid, accurate and sensitive method for detecting BCL-6,
MYC and p53 abnormalities. No correlation was found between BCL-6 gene
rearrangement and BCL-6 protein expression. MYC translocation was more common in 
GCB type DLBCL compared with non-GCB type ones. Patients with p53 deletion had a 
poorer prognosis. The p53 gene may provide a useful indicator for the prognosis
of DLBCL.

PMID: 23042398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Clin Invest. 2012 Nov;122(11):4190-202. doi: 10.1172/JCI61716. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

MicroRNA-155 promotes atherosclerosis by repressing Bcl6 in macrophages.

Nazari-Jahantigh M(1), Wei Y, Noels H, Akhtar S, Zhou Z, Koenen RR, Heyll K,
Gremse F, Kiessling F, Grommes J, Weber C, Schober A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany.

Macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques drive inflammatory responses, degrade
lipoproteins, and phagocytose dead cells. MicroRNAs (miRs) control the
differentiation and activity of macrophages by regulating the signaling of key
transcription factors. However, the functional role of macrophage-related miRs in
the immune response during atherogenesis is unknown. Here, we report that miR-155
is specifically expressed in atherosclerotic plaques and proinflammatory
macrophages, where it was induced by treatment with mildly oxidized LDL (moxLDL) 
and IFN-<U+03B3>. Leukocyte-specific Mir155 deficiency reduced plaque size and number of
lesional macrophages after partial carotid ligation in atherosclerotic (Apoe-/-) 
mice. In macrophages stimulated with moxLDL/IFN-<U+03B3> in vitro, and in lesional
macrophages, loss of Mir155 reduced the expression of the chemokine CCL2, which
promotes the recruitment of monocytes to atherosclerotic plaques. Additionally,
we found that miR-155 directly repressed expression of BCL6, a transcription
factor that attenuates proinflammatory NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Silencing of Bcl6 in mice
harboring Mir155-/- macrophages enhanced plaque formation and CCL2 expression.
Taken together, these data demonstrated that miR-155 plays a key role in
atherogenic programming of macrophages to sustain and enhance vascular
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3484435
PMID: 23041630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 15;189(10):4740-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200956. Epub 2012
Oct 5.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> B cell-specific-deficient mice have 
an impaired antibody response.

Ramon S(1), Bancos S, Thatcher TH, Murant TI, Moshkani S, Sahler JM, Bottaro A,
Sime PJ, Phipps RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are members of the nuclear
hormone receptor superfamily. PPAR<U+03B3>, a ligand-activated transcription factor, has
important anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative functions, and it has been
associated with diseases including diabetes, scarring, and atherosclerosis, among
others. PPAR<U+03B3> is expressed in most bone marrow-derived cells and influences their
function. PPAR<U+03B3> ligands can stimulate human B cell differentiation and promote Ab
production. A knowledge gap is that the role of PPAR<U+03B3> in B cells under
physiological conditions is not known. We developed a new B cell-specific PPAR<U+03B3>
(B-PPAR<U+03B3>) knockout mouse and explored the role of PPAR<U+03B3> during both the primary
and secondary immune response. In this article, we show that PPAR<U+03B3> deficiency in 
B cells decreases germinal center B cells and plasma cell development, as well as
the levels of circulating Ag-specific Abs during a primary challenge. Inability
to generate germinal center B cells and plasma cells is correlated to decreased
MHC class II expression and decreased Bcl-6 and Blimp-1 levels. Furthermore,
B-PPAR<U+03B3>-deficient mice have an impaired memory response, characterized by low
titers of Ag-specific Abs and low numbers of Ag-experienced, Ab-secreting cells. 
However, B-PPAR<U+03B3>-deficient mice have no differences in B cell population
distribution within primary or secondary lymphoid organs during development. This
is the first report, to our knowledge, to show that, under physiological
conditions, PPAR<U+03B3> expression in B cells is required for an efficient B
cell-mediated immune response as it regulates B cell differentiation and Ab
production.

PMCID: PMC3490033
PMID: 23041568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 2012 Sep 20;37(3):75-6.

Random skin biopsy of intravascular large B-cell lymphoma: a case report.

Ikoma N(1), Manabe Y, Yamaoka H, Akasaka E, Mabuchi T, Ozawa A, Nakamura N,
Kojima M, Ando K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tokai University School of Medicine, 143
Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan. n-ikoma@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

A 72-year-old woman visited our clinic with fever of unknown origin above 38°C
and arthralgia from 7 months before. Her symptoms recurred as oral steroid was
reduced. Random skin biopsy was carried out from five points. One of the five
specimens taken from abdomen revealed large atypical lymphoid cells in the
vascular space of subcutaneous fat. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that
these cells were positive for CD20, CD79a, bcl-2, bcl-6 and MUM-1. From these
findings, a diagnosis of intravascular large B cell lymphoma was made.

PMID: 23032248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Exp Med. 2012 Oct 22;209(11):2079-97. doi: 10.1084/jem.20120127. Epub 2012 Oct 
1.

Distinct cellular pathways select germline-encoded and somatically mutated
antibodies into immunological memory.

Kaji T(1), Ishige A, Hikida M, Taka J, Hijikata A, Kubo M, Nagashima T, Takahashi
Y, Kurosaki T, Okada M, Ohara O, Rajewsky K, Takemori T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunological Memory, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

One component of memory in the antibody system is long-lived memory B cells
selected for the expression of somatically mutated, high-affinity antibodies in
the T cell-dependent germinal center (GC) reaction. A puzzling observation has
been that the memory B cell compartment also contains cells expressing unmutated,
low-affinity antibodies. Using conditional Bcl6 ablation, we demonstrate that
these cells are generated through proliferative expansion early after
immunization in a T cell-dependent but GC-independent manner. They soon become
resting and long-lived and display a novel distinct gene expression signature
which distinguishes memory B cells from other classes of B cells. GC-independent 
memory B cells are later joined by somatically mutated GC descendants at roughly 
equal proportions and these two types of memory cells efficiently generate
adoptive secondary antibody responses. Deletion of T follicular helper (Tfh)
cells significantly reduces the generation of mutated, but not unmutated, memory 
cells early on in the response. Thus, B cell memory is generated along two
fundamentally distinct cellular differentiation pathways. One pathway is
dedicated to the generation of high-affinity somatic antibody mutants, whereas
the other preserves germ line antibody specificities and may prepare the organism
for rapid responses to antigenic variants of the invading pathogen.

PMCID: PMC3478929
PMID: 23027924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Leuk Res. 2013 Jan;37(1):21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.09.009. Epub 2012 Sep 
29.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma mice model.

Sato F(1), Ishida T, Ito A, Mori F, Masaki A, Takino H, Narita T, Ri M, Kusumoto 
S, Suzuki S, Komatsu H, Niimi A, Ueda R, Inagaki H, Iida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-chou, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi
467-8601, Japan.

We established an angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) mouse model using
NOD/Shi-scid, IL-2R<U+03B3>(null) mice as recipients. The immunohistological findings of
the AITL mice were almost identical to those of patients with AITL. In addition, 
substantial amounts of human immunoglobulin G/A/M were detected in the sera of
the AITL mice. This result indicates that AITL tumor cells helped antibody
production by B cells or plasma cells. This is the first report of reconstituting
follicular helper T (TFH) function in AITL cells in an experimental model, and
this is consistent with the theory that TFH cell is the cell of origin of AITL
tumor cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23026775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 May;54(5):967-72. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2012.733881. Epub
2012 Nov 1.

Clinicopathological analysis of mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma and classical
Hodgkin lymphoma of the mediastinum.

Yamamoto W(1), Nakamura N, Tomita N, Ishii Y, Takasaki H, Hashimoto C, Motomura
S, Yamazaki E, Ohshima R, Numata A, Ishigatsubo Y, Sakai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kanagawa Cancer Center, Asahi-ku, Yokohama,
Japan. watadesu@yahoo.co.jp

Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma (PMLBCL) and nodular
sclerosing classical Hodgkin lymphoma (NSCHL) are the major histological types of
lymphoma affecting the mediastinum. We reviewed 27 patients with PMLBCL and 14
patients with NSCHL. A poor performance status, high serum lactate dehydrogenase 
level and strong positivity for PAX5 were all significantly more common in
patients with PMLBCL than in those with NSCHL. Severe fibrosis was frequent in
NSCHL, but not in PMLBCL. PDL1 was expressed by 11/25 PMLBCLs (44.0%) vs. 1/9
NSCHLs (11.1%). Expression of BCL6 was significantly more frequent in
PDL1-positive PMLBCL than in PDL1-negative PMLBCL, but there were no clinical
differences between these two groups. Two patients with PMLBCL with a poor
prognosis had CD20(-), CD79a(+), CD15(-), and CD30(-), possibly representing a
subtype of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma.

PMID: 23020783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 May;54(5):959-66. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2012.733875. Epub
2012 Oct 16.

Prognostic significance of hypoxia inducible factor-1a and vascular endothelial
growth factor expression in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated
with rituximab.

Powell JR(1), Dojcinov S, King L, Wosniak S, Gerry S, Casbard A, Bailey H,
Gallop-Evans E, Maughan T.

Author information: 
(1)Velindre Cancer Centre, Cardiff, Wales, UK. PowellJR2@cardiff .ac.uk

We evaluated hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) expression and their prognostic significance in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Expression of HIF-1a and VEGF was studied in 78 patients
and results correlated with clinicopathological and prognostic data. HIF-1a and
VEGF were expressed in 67% and 84% of patients, respectively, and a significant
correlation was demonstrated between them (p < 0.001). Outcome was analyzed
according to treatment. HIF-1a positive patients given rituximab demonstrated
improved outcome, with 5-year overall survival of 72% for those receiving
rituximab versus 65% for those not receiving rituximab, and 5-year
progression-free survival (PFS) 76% versus 57%. No correlation was demonstrated
between HIF-1a and other prognostic biomarkers including BCL6, CD10 and MUM-1. We
demonstrated significantly improved PFS (p = 0.003) in patients receiving
rituximab and showing BCL6 overexpression. The results confirm the significant
association between HIF-1a and VEGF expression and suggest that HIF-1a expression
is a favorable prognostic factor in patients with DLBCL treated with rituximab.

PMID: 23020605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Dec;93(3):294-301. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.09.011. Epub
2012 Sep 24.

Induction of antigen-specific human T suppressor cells by membrane and soluble
ILT3.

Vlad G(1), Suciu-Foca N.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University, Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, 630 West 168
Street, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Antigen-specific CD8 suppressor T cells (CD8(+) Ts) are adaptive regulatory T
cells that are induced in vivo and in vitro by chronic antigenic stimulation of
human T cells. CD8(+) Ts induce the upregulation of the inhibitory receptors ILT3
and ILT4 on monocytes and dendritic cells rendering these antigen presenting
cells (APCs) tolerogenic. Tolerogenic APCs induce CD4(+) T helper anergy and
elicit the differentiation of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T regulatory/suppressor cells.
Overexpression of membrane ILT3 in APC results in inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B activation,
transcription of inflammatory cytokines and costimulatory molecules. Soluble
ILT3-Fc which contains only the extracellular, Ig-like domain linked to mutated
IgG1 Fc, is strongly immunosuppressive. ILT3-Fc, induces the differentiation of
human CD8(+) Ts which inhibit CD4(+) Th and CD8(+) CTL effector function both in 
vitro and in vivo. The acquisition of Ts' function by primed CD8(+) T cells
treated with ILT3-Fc was demonstrated to be the effect of the significant
upregulation of BCL6, a transcriptional repressor of IL-2, IFN-gamma, IL-5 and
granzyme B. The upregulated expression of BCL6, SOCS1 and DUSP10 is integral to
the signature of ILT3-Fc-induced CD8(+) Ts. These genes are known inhibitors of
cytokine production and TCR signaling and are targeted by miRNAs which are
suppressed by ILT3-Fc. ILT3-Fc induces tolerance to allogeneic human islets and
reverses rejection after its onset in a humanized NOD/SCID mouse model. Based on 
these findings we postulate that ILT3-Fc may become an important new agent for
treatment of autoimmunity and transplant rejection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23018130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. APMIS. 2012 Nov;120(11):872-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02915.x. Epub 2012 
May 28.

Expression of Toll-like receptor9 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: further
exploring CpG oligodeoxynucleotide in NF<U+03BA>B pathway.

Huang WT(1), Weng SW, Huang CC, Lin HC, Tsai PC, Chuang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College
of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Human Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that recognize a variety of pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns are associated with activation and immunogenic response in
lymphoid neoplasms, but rarely explored in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
We conducted this study to evaluate the expression of TLR9 in and potential
treatment of DLBCL with TLR9 agonist - CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN). The
real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was
carried out to detect TLR9 expression in 41 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
samples. The transformation of immunophenotype and NF<U+03BA>B pathway of DLBCL upon CpG
ODN stimulation were investigated by a DLBCL cell line. TLR9 was commonly
detected in DLBCL with relative mRNA levels above 1.0 × 10(-2) in 35 of 41 cases 
(85.36%). It was suspected that a high proportion of DLBCL to be activated by CpG
stimulation. In vitro study with a DLBCL cell line revealed an increased CD20,
but decreased BCL-6 and MUM1/IRF4 expression after treatment with CpG ODN. The
NF<U+03BA>B pathway was initially activated, but finally suppressed upon CpG ODN
stimulation. The proliferation of tumor cells was also inhibited by long time
incubation. These findings provide new insights into the role of TLR9 in DLBCL
and potential implication of TLR9 agonist in the treatment of DLBCL.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 23009111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(7):3037-46.

Evaluation of BCL-6, CD10, CD138 and MUM-1 expression in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma patients: CD138 is a marker of poor prognosis.

Bodoor K(1), Matalka I, Hayajneh R, Haddad Y, Gharaibeh W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science and Arts, Jordan University of
Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. khaldon_bodoor@just.edu.jo

The diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) encompasses two major groups of tumors 
with uneven survival outcomes--germinal center B-cell (GCB) and non-germinal
center B-cell (non-GCB). In the present study, we investigated the expression of 
GCB markers (BCL-6 and CD10) and non-GCB markers (CD138 and MUM-1) in an effort
to evaluate their prognostic value. Paraffin-embedded tumor biopsies of 46
Jordanian DLBCL patients were analyzed, retrospectively, by immunohistochemistry 
to investigate the expression of BCL-6, CD10, CD138 and MUM-1. In addition,
survival curves were calculated with reference to marker expression, age, sex and
nodal involvement. Positive expression of BCL-6, CD10, CD138 and MUM-1 was shown 
in 78%, 61%, 39% and 91% of the cases, respectively, that of BCL-6 being
associated with better overall survival (p = 0.02), whereas positive CD138 was
linked with poor overall survival (p = 0.01). The expression of CD10 and MUM-1
had no impact on the overall survival. Among the clinical characteristics
studied, diagnosis at an early age, nodal involvement and maleness were
associated with a higher overall survival for DLBCL patients. Our results
underline the importance of BCL-6 as a marker of better prognosis and CD138 as a 
marker of poor prognosis for DLBCL patients.

PMID: 22994707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Exp Med. 2012 Sep 24;209(10):1841-52, S1-24. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Bcl6 expression specifies the T follicular helper cell program in vivo.

Liu X(1), Yan X, Zhong B, Nurieva RI, Wang A, Wang X, Martin-Orozco N, Wang Y,
Chang SH, Esplugues E, Flavell RA, Tian Q, Dong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

T follicular helper cells (Tfh cells) play a pivotal role in germinal center
reactions, which require B cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) transcription factor. To
analyze their relationships with other effector T cell lineages and their
stability in vivo, we developed and analyzed a new Bcl6 reporter mouse alone or
together with other lineage reporter systems. Assisted with genome-wide
transcriptome analysis, we show substantial plasticity of T cell differentiation 
in the early phase of immune response. At this stage, CXCR5 appears to be
expressed in a Bcl6-independent manner. Once Bcl6 is highly expressed, Tfh cells 
can persist in vivo and some of them develop into memory cells. Together, our
results indicate Bcl6 as a bona fide marker for Tfh polarized program.

PMCID: PMC3457730
PMID: 22987803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Arch Dermatol. 2012 Sep;148(9):1040-4. doi: 10.1001/archdermatol.2012.1545.

Intertriginous mycosis fungoides: a distinct presentation of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma that may be caused by malignant follicular helper T cells.

Gammon B(1), Guitart J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611,
USA. bryan.gammon@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Follicular helper T cells are a subset of helper T cells that
facilitate B-cell recruitment and maturation. Rare cases of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma manifesting as de novo tumor lesions in intertriginous skin contain an
infiltrate rich in B cells. These cases may represent malignant counterparts of
skin-homing follicular helper T cells.
OBSERVATIONS: Two men and 1 woman (age range, 35-58 years) were seen with
predominantly intertriginous tumor-stage cutaneous T-cell lymphoma lesions
characterized by the absence of epidermotropism and the presence of a mixed
infiltrate rich in B cells. Two of the patients died of the disease less than 3
years from the initial diagnosis. The surviving patient has aggressive disease
and underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Two of the patients had a 
prominent CXCL13+, Bcl6/CD3+, and programmed death protein 1-positive follicular 
helper T-cell population.
CONCLUSIONS: The intertriginous tumor variant of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma is
heterogeneous but may be associated in some cases with a follicular helper T-cell
immunophenotype. These patients may follow an aggressive clinical course. Tumor
progression in sanctuary sites on patients receiving phototherapy may manifest as
a similar clinical phenotype. Further characterization of the disease process is 
needed to confirm this observation.

PMID: 22986857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2012 Nov;42(11):1035-42. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hys148. Epub 2012
Sep 14.

Double-hit lymphomas constitute a highly aggressive subgroup in diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas in the era of rituximab.

Kobayashi T(1), Tsutsumi Y, Sakamoto N, Nagoshi H, Yamamoto-Sugitani M, Shimura
Y, Mizutani S, Matsumoto Y, Nishida K, Horiike S, Asano N, Nakamura S, Kuroda J, 
Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, and Department of Hematology, Kyoto First Red
Cross Hospital, 465 Kajii-cho, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The incorporation of rituximab in immunochemotherapy has improved
treatment outcomes for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, but the prognosis for some 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas remains dismal. Identification of adverse
prognostic subgroups is essential for the choice of appropriate therapeutic
strategy.
METHODS: We retrospectively investigated the impact of so-called 'double-hit'
cytogenetic abnormalities, i.e. cytogenetic abnormalities involving c-MYC
co-existing with other poor prognostic cytogenetic abnormalities involving BCL2, 
BCL6 or BACH2, on treatment outcomes for 93 consecutive diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma patients.
RESULTS: According to the revised international prognostic index, no patients
were cytogenetically diagnosed with double-hit lymphomas in the 'very good' risk 
group or in the 'good' risk group, while 5 of 33 patients had double-hit
lymphomas in the 'poor' risk group. All the double-hit lymphoma patients
possessed both nodal and extranodal involvement. The overall complete response
rate was 89.3%, overall survival 87.1% and progression-free survival 75.8% over 2
years (median observation period: 644 days). The complete response rates were
93.2% for the non-double-hit lymphoma patients and 40.0% for the double-hit
lymphoma patients. Significantly longer progression-free survival and overall
survival were observed for the 'very good' and the 'good' risk patients than for 
the 'poor' risk patients. Moreover, the progression-free survival of double-hit
lymphoma was significantly shorter than that of the non-double-hit lymphoma
'poor' risk patients (P = 0.016). In addition, the overall survival of the
double-hit lymphoma patients also tended to be shorter than that of the
non-double-hit lymphoma 'poor' risk group.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of double-hit lymphoma can help discriminate a
subgroup of highly aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and indicate the
need for the development of novel therapeutic strategies for double-hit lymphoma.

PMID: 22984125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2012 Dec;45(12):1315-9. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

Oculo-facio-cardio-dental syndrome in three succeeding generations: genotypic
data and phenotypic features.

Lozic B(1), Ljubkovic J, Panduric DG, Saltvig I, Kutsche K, Krelj V, Zemunik T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Split, Split, Croatia.

Oculo-facio-cardio-dental (OFCD) syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder mainly
manifesting in females. Patients show ocular, facial, cardiac, and dental
abnormalities. OFCD syndrome is caused by heterozygous mutations in the BCOR
gene, located in Xp11.4, encoding the BCL6 co-repressor. We report a Croatian
family with four female members (grandmother, mother and monozygotic female
twins) diagnosed with OFCD syndrome who carry the novel BCOR mutation c.4438C>T
(p.R1480*). They present high intrafamilial phenotypic variability with special
regard to cardiac defect and cataract that showed more severe disease expression 
in successive generations. Clinical and radiographic examination of the mother of
the twins revealed a talon cusp involving the permanent maxillary right central
incisor. This is the first known report of a talon cusp in OFCD syndrome with a
novel mutation in the BCOR gene.

PMCID: PMC3854205
PMID: 22983184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2012 Dec;21(4):234-40. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e3182585c3c.

Frequencies of BCL2 and BCL6 translocations in representative Chinese follicular 
lymphoma patients: morphologic, immunohistochemical, and FISH analyses.

Pan Y(1), Meng B, Sun B, Guan B, Liang Y, Wang H, Hao X, Fu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute, Tianjin,
China.

The most common genetic aberration in follicular lymphoma (FL) is the
t(14;18)(q32;q21) translocation that juxtaposes the antiapoptotic BCL2 gene with 
the promoter of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) gene, which is the molecular
hallmark of FL, whereas a subset of cases harbor translocations involving the
BCL6 gene locus. To date, there has been no integrated analysis based on grade,
phenotype, and genotype from large numbers of FL cases in a representative
Chinese population. In this study, we graded 98 FL cases; fluorescence in situ
hybridization was used to determine the BCL2 and BCL6 translocation statuses, and
these were compared with morphologic and immunohistochemical parameters. The
expressions of the 4 antigens were B-cell leukemia/lymphoma (BCL)-2(88.8%),
BCL-6(80.6%), CD10(62.2%), and Ki67(50.0%), respectively. The frequencies of BCL2
and BCL6 translocations were 58.5% and 16.3%. In conclusion, the incidence of
IgH/BCL2-positive FL in Chinese patients is relatively lower compared with that
in western countries. BCL2 translocation strongly correlated with CD10 and Ki67
expression. Our data confirm the presence of a relationship between the
translocation status and the FL histologic grade. All BCL6 translocations
occurred in high-grade FL, and this suggests that FL carrying BCL6 translocation 
probably constitute a special biological subtype.

PMID: 22968395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4611-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00886-12. Epub 2012 Sep 
10.

Impact of CUX2 on the female mouse liver transcriptome: activation of
female-biased genes and repression of male-biased genes.

Conforto TL(1), Zhang Y, Sherman J, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The growth hormone-regulated transcription factors STAT5 and BCL6 coordinately
regulate sex differences in mouse liver, primarily through effects in male liver,
where male-biased genes are upregulated and many female-biased genes are actively
repressed. Here we investigated whether CUX2, a highly female-specific liver
transcription factor, contributes to an analogous regulatory network in female
liver. Adenoviral overexpression of CUX2 in male liver induced 36% of
female-biased genes and repressed 35% of male-biased genes. In female liver, CUX2
small interfering RNA (siRNA) preferentially induced genes repressed by
adenovirus expressing CUX2 (adeno-CUX2) in male liver, and it preferentially
repressed genes induced by adeno-CUX2 in male liver. CUX2 binding in female liver
chromatin was enriched at sites of male-biased DNase hypersensitivity and at
genomic regions showing male-enriched STAT5 binding. CUX2 binding was also
enriched near genes repressed by adeno-CUX2 in male liver or induced by CUX2
siRNA in female liver but not at genes induced by adeno-CUX2, indicating that
CUX2 binding is preferentially associated with gene repression. Nevertheless,
direct CUX2 binding was seen at several highly female-specific genes that were
positively regulated by CUX2, including A1bg, Cyp2b9, Cyp3a44, Tox, and Trim24.
CUX2 expression and chromatin binding were high in immature male liver, where
repression of adult male-biased genes and expression of adult female-biased genes
are common, suggesting that the downregulation of CUX2 in male liver at puberty
contributes to the developmental changes establishing adult patterns of
sex-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3486175
PMID: 22966202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Jan;52(1):33-43. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22004. Epub 2012
Sep 11.

t(11;14)(q23;q32) involving IGH and DDX6 in nodal marginal zone lymphoma.

Stary S(1), Vinatzer U, Müllauer L, Raderer M, Birner P, Streubel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Nodal marginal zone lymphoma (NMZL) is a primary nodal B-cell lymphoma that
shares morphological and immunophenotypic characteristics with extranodal and
splenic marginal zone lymphoma. Data on altered genes and signaling pathways are 
scarce in this rare tumor entity. To gain further insights into the genetic
background of NMZL, seven cases were investigated by microarray analysis,
G-banding, and FISH. Chromosomal imbalances were observed in 3/7 cases (43%) with
gains of chromosome arms 1q, 8q, and 12q being the most frequent findings.
Furthermore, we identified a translocation t(11;14)(q23;q32) involving IGH and
DDX6. Chromosomal walking, expression analysis, siRNA-mediated gene knockdown and
a yeast two hybrid screen were performed for further characterization of the
translocation in vitro. In siRNA experiments, DDX6 appeared not to be involved in
NF-<U+03BA>B activation as frequently observed for genes promoting lymphomagenesis but
was found to interfere with the expression of BCL6 and BCL2 in an NF-<U+03BA>B
independent manner. In conclusion, we identified several unbalanced aberrations
and a t(11;14) involving IGH and DDX6 providing evidence for a contribution of
DDX6 to lymphomagenesis by deregulation of BCL6 in NMZL.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22965301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 15;189(8):3970-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200416. Epub 2012
Sep 7.

Target DNA sequence directly regulates the frequency of activation-induced
deaminase-dependent mutations.

Chen Z(1), Viboolsittiseri SS, O'Connor BP, Wang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, University of Colorado School of Medicine
and National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Activation-induced deaminase (AID) catalyses class switch recombination (CSR) and
somatic hypermutation (SHM) in B lymphocytes to enhance Ab diversity. CSR
involves breaking and rejoining highly repetitive switch (S) regions in the IgH
(Igh) locus. S regions appear to be preferential targets of AID. To determine
whether S region sequence per se, independent of Igh cis regulatory elements, can
influence AID targeting efficiency and mutation frequency, we established a
knock-in mouse model by inserting a core S<U+03B3>1 region into the first intron of
proto-oncogene Bcl6, which is a non-Ig target of SHM. We found that the mutation 
frequency of the inserted S<U+03B3>1 region was dramatically higher than that of the
adjacent Bcl6 endogenous sequence. Mechanistically, S region-enhanced SHM was
associated with increased recruitment of AID and RNA polymerase II, together with
Spt5, albeit to a lesser extent. Our studies demonstrate that target DNA
sequences influence mutation frequency via regulating AID recruitment. We propose
that the nucleotide sequence preference may serve as an additional layer of AID
regulation by restricting its mutagenic activity to specific sequences despite
the observation that AID has the potential to access the genome widely.

PMID: 22962683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 2012 Dec 13;120(25):5021-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-424648. Epub 2012 
Sep 6.

Splenic proliferative lymphoid nodules distinct from germinal centers are sites
of autoantigen stimulation in immune thrombocytopenia.

Daridon C(1), Loddenkemper C, Spieckermann S, Kühl AA, Salama A, Burmester GR,
Lipsky PE, Dörner T.

Author information: 
(1)CC12 Department of Medicine, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charite´University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

To understand more specific abnormalities of humoral autoimmunity, we studied 31 
spleens from immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) patients and 36 control spleens.
Detailed analysis identified at least 2 different splenic structures
accommodating proliferating B cells, classic germinal centers (GCs), and
proliferative lymphoid nodules (PLNs). PLNs were characterized by proliferating
Ki67(+) B cells close to follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) and lacked
polarization into dark and light zones. As opposed to cells in GCs, proliferating
B cells in PLN lacked expression of Bcl6. In both PLNs and GCs of ITP spleens,
the density of T cells was significantly reduced. Both T follicular helper cells 
(T(FH)) and regulatory T cells were reduced within PLNs of ITP spleens suggesting
a defect of tolerance related to a loss of T-cell control. Within PLNs of ITP,
but not controls, abundant platelet glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa autoantigens was
found in IgM containing immune complexes tightly bound to FDCs and closely
approximated to proliferating B cells. GPIV was found less often, but not in the 
same PLNs as GPIIb/IIIa. Autoantigens were not found in the GCs of ITP or
controls indicating that PLNs are the sites of autoantigen stimulation in ITP
potentially related to a lack of control by T cells and/or the present
autoantigen.

PMID: 22955923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3271-80. doi: 10.1172/JCI64314. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Expansion of HIV-specific T follicular helper cells in chronic HIV infection.

Lindqvist M(1), van Lunzen J, Soghoian DZ, Kuhl BD, Ranasinghe S, Kranias G,
Flanders MD, Cutler S, Yudanin N, Muller MI, Davis I, Farber D, Hartjen P, Haag
F, Alter G, Schulze zur Wiesch J, Streeck H.

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3059-62.

HIV targets CD4 T cells, which are required for the induction of high-affinity
antibody responses and the formation of long-lived B cell memory. The depletion
of antigen-specific CD4 T cells during HIV infection is therefore believed to
impede the development of protective B cell immunity. Although several different 
HIV-related B cell dysfunctions have been described, the role of CD4 T follicular
helper (TFH) cells in HIV infection remains unknown. Here, we assessed
HIV-specific TFH responses in the lymph nodes of treatment-naive and
antiretroviral-treated HIV-infected individuals. Strikingly, both the bulk TFH
and HIV-specific TFH cell populations were significantly expanded in chronic HIV 
infection and were highly associated with viremia. In particular, GAG-specific
TFH cells were detected at significantly higher levels in the lymph nodes
compared with those of GP120-specific TFH cells and showed preferential secretion
of the helper cytokine IL-21. In addition, TFH cell expansion was associated with
an increase of germinal center B cells and plasma cells as well as IgG1
hypersecretion. Thus, our study suggests that high levels of HIV viremia drive
the expansion of TFH cells, which in turn leads to perturbations of B cell
differentiation, resulting in dysregulated antibody production.

PMCID: PMC3428098
PMID: 22922259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Jan;28(1):135-49. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1739.

Negative regulation of osteoclast precursor differentiation by CD11b and ß2
integrin-B-cell lymphoma 6 signaling.

Park-Min KH(1), Lee EY, Moskowitz NK, Lim E, Lee SK, Lorenzo JA, Huang C, Melnick
AM, Purdue PE, Goldring SR, Ivashkiv LB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, NY, USA.

Negative regulation of osteoclastogenesis is important for bone homeostasis and
prevention of excessive bone resorption in inflammatory and other diseases.
Mechanisms that directly suppress osteoclastogenesis are not well understood. In 
this study we investigated regulation of osteoclast differentiation by the ß2
integrin CD11b/CD18 that is expressed on myeloid lineage osteoclast precursors.
CD11b-deficient mice exhibited decreased bone mass that was associated with
increased osteoclast numbers and decreased bone formation. Accordingly, CD11b and
ß2 integrin signaling suppressed osteoclast differentiation by preventing
receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL)-induced induction of the master
regulator of osteoclastogenesis nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic 
1 (NFATc1) and of downstream osteoclast-related NFATc1 target genes. CD11b
suppressed induction of NFATc1 by the complementary mechanisms of downregulation 
of RANK expression and induction of recruitment of the transcriptional repressor 
B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) to the NFATC1 gene. These findings identify CD11b as a
negative regulator of the earliest stages of osteoclast differentiation, and
provide an inducible mechanism by which environmental cues suppress
osteoclastogenesis by activating a transcriptional repressor that makes genes
refractory to osteoclastogenic signaling.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3522783
PMID: 22893614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 Sep;9(5):380-5. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2012.26. Epub 2012 Aug
13.

The darker side of follicular helper T cells: from autoimmunity to
immunodeficiency.

Shekhar S(1), Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Infection and Immunity, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Follicular helper T (T(FH)) cells represent a distinct subset of CD4<U+207A> helper T
(T(H)) cells specialized in providing help to B cells. They are characterized by 
their unique transcriptional profile (Bcl6), surface marker expression (CXCR5,
PD-1, ICOS and CD40L) and cytokine production pattern (IL-21 and IL-6). T(FH)
cells provide help to B cells both to form germinal centers (GCs) and to
differentiate into memory B cells and plasma cells for generation of humoral
responses. However, there is emerging evidence that implicates T(FH) cells in the
development of various human pathologies, such as autoimmune diseases,
immunodeficiency and lymphoma. This review focuses on the current progress in
this area including mouse and human studies. A clearer understanding of the
mechanisms of T(FH) cell-mediated immunity and pathology may be exploited for
rational development of therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4002332
PMID: 22885524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042694. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

ADAM10 regulates transcription factor expression required for plasma cell
function.

Chaimowitz NS(1), Kang DJ, Dean LM, Conrad DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, United States of America.

A disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) is a key regulator of cellular
processes by shedding extracellular domains of transmembrane proteins. We have
previously demonstrated that deletion of B cell expressed ADAM10 results in
changes in lymphoid tissue architecture and impaired germinal center (GC)
formation. In this study, mice were generated in which ADAM10 is deleted in B
cells following class switch recombination (ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice).
Despite normal GC formation, antibody responses were impaired in
ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice, implicating ADAM10 in post-GC and extrafollicular 
B cell terminal differentiation. Surprisingly, plasma cell (PC) numbers were
normal in ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice when compared to controls. However, PCs
isolated from ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice exhibited decreased expression of
transcription factors important for PC function: Prdm1, Xbp1 and Irf4. Bcl6 is a 
GC transcriptional repressor that inhibits the PC transcriptional program and
thus must be downregulated for PC differentiation to occur. Bcl6 expression was
increased in PCs isolated from ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice at both the mRNA and
protein level. These results demonstrate that ADAM10 is required for proper
transcription factor expression in PCs and thus, for normal PC function.

PMCID: PMC3411801
PMID: 22880085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042193. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

MicroRNA profiling of Epstein-Barr virus-associated NK/T-cell lymphomas by deep
sequencing.

Motsch N(1), Alles J, Imig J, Zhu J, Barth S, Reineke T, Tinguely M, Cogliatti S,
Dueck A, Meister G, Renner C, Grässer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Hygiene, Department of Virology, University
Hospital of Saarland University, Homburg/Saar, Germany.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is an oncogenic human Herpes virus involved in the
pathogenesis of nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma. EBV encodes microRNAs (miRNAs) and
induces changes in the host cellular miRNA profile. MiRNAs are short non-coding
RNAs of about 19-25 nt length that regulate gene expression by
post-transcriptional mechanisms and are frequently deregulated in human
malignancies including cancer. The microRNA profiles of EBV-positive NK/T-cell
lymphoma, non-infected T-cell lymphoma and normal thymus were established by deep
sequencing of small RNA libraries. The comparison of the EBV-positive NK/T-cell
vs. EBV-negative T-cell lymphoma revealed 15 up- und 16 down-regulated miRNAs. In
contrast, the majority of miRNAs was repressed in the lymphomas compared to
normal tissue. We also identified 10 novel miRNAs from known precursors and two
so far unknown miRNAs. The sequencing results were confirmed for selected miRNAs 
by quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR). We show that the proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin 1 alpha (IL1A) is a target for miR-142-3p and the oncogenic 
BCL6 for miR-205. MiR-142-3p is down-regulated in the EBV-positive vs.
EBV-negative lymphomas. MiR-205 was undetectable in EBV-negative lymphoma and
strongly down-regulated in EBV-positive NK/T-cell lymphoma as compared to thymus.
The targets were confirmed by reporter assays and by down-regulation of the
proteins by ectopic expression of the cognate miRNAs. Taken together, our
findings demonstrate the relevance of deregulated miRNAs for the
post-transcriptional gene regulation in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC3411711
PMID: 22870299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Leuk Res. 2012 Dec;36(12):e218-21. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.07.011. Epub 2012 
Aug 4.

IGH@/BCL6 rearrangement on the der(3)t(3;14)(q27;q32) in primary mediastinal
large B-cell lymphoma.

Yamamoto K, Okamura A, Inui Y, Yakushijin K, Kawakami F, Itoh T, Matsuoka H,
Minami H.

PMID: 22867898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Rheumatol. 2012 Sep;39(9):1819-28. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.120468. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Interleukin 21 correlates with T cell and B cell subset alterations in systemic
lupus erythematosus.

Terrier B(1), Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Garrido M, Geri G, Rosenzwajg M, Musset L,
Klatzmann D, Saadoun D, Cacoub P.

Author information: 
(1)UPMC Université Paris, CNRS, UMR 7211, INSERM, UMRS959, and Department of
Internal Medicine, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, 47 boulevard de
l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France. benj.terrier@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease
characterized by alterations of the B cell subset, global regulatory T cell
(Treg) depletion, and an increase in Th17 cells. Interleukin 21 (IL-21) plays a
critical role in T cell and B cell homeostasis. Our objective was to determine
the implication of IL-21 and IL-21-producing CD4+ T cells in the pathogenesis of 
SLE.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients with SLE and 25 healthy donor controls were
included. Analysis of CD4+ T cells producing IL-21, Th1, Th2, Th17, Treg,
follicular helper T (TFH) cells, and B cells was performed in peripheral blood,
and levels of cytokines were measured in culture supernatants.
RESULTS: Circulating CD4+ T cells producing IL-21 were markedly expanded in
patients with SLE compared to controls and were correlated with increased Th17,
decreased Treg, and increased memory B cells. CD4+ T cells producing IL-21 were
composed of CXCR5+ and CXCR5-CD4+ T cell subsets. Both IL-21-producing CXCR5+CD4+
T cells and CXCR5-CD4+ T cells were increased in patients with SLE, the
CXCR5-CD4+ subset correlating with Th17 cells and Treg, while the CXCR5+CD4+
subset was correlated with alterations of the B cell subset. The CXCR5+CD4+
subset comprised mainly circulating Bcl6+CXCR5+CD4+ TFH cells that were markedly 
expanded in patients with SLE and were correlated with increased circulating
Bcl6+CXCR5+ germinal center B cells.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that IL-21, produced by distinct cellular CD4+
T cells, correlates with alterations of T cell and B cell subsets in SLE, and
that targeting IL-21 could provide beneficial effects on both T cell and B cell
alterations.

PMID: 22859347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041940. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

IL-21 regulates the differentiation of a human <U+03B3>d T cell subset equipped with B
cell helper activity.

Caccamo N(1), Todaro M, La Manna MP, Sireci G, Stassi G, Dieli F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Biotecnologie Mediche e Forensi, Università
degli Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

V<U+03B3>9Vd2 T lymphocytes recognize nonpeptidic antigens without presentation by MHC
molecules and display pleiotropic features. Here we report that coculture of
V<U+03B3>9Vd2 cells with phosphoantigen and IL-21 leads to selective expression of the
transcription repressor Bcl-6 and polarization toward a lymphocyte subset
displaying features of follicular B-helper T (T(FH)) cells. T(FH)-like V<U+03B3>9Vd2
cells have a predominant central memory (CD27(+)CD45RA(-)) phenotype and express 
ICOS, CD40L and CXCR5. Upon antigen activation, they secrete IL-4, IL-10 and
CXCL13, and provide B-cell help for antibody production in vitro. Our findings
delineate a subset of human V<U+03B3>9Vd2 lymphocytes, which, upon interaction with
IL-21-producing CD4 T(FH) cells and B cells in secondary lymphoid organs, is
implicated in the production of high affinity antibodies against microbial
pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3405033
PMID: 22848667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Sep;23(18):3511-21. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-10-0869. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Placenta to cartilage: direct conversion of human placenta to chondrocytes with
transformation by defined factors.

Ishii R(1), Kami D, Toyoda M, Makino H, Gojo S, Ishii T, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology and Pathology, National Research Institute 
for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

Cellular differentiation and lineage commitment are considered to be robust and
irreversible processes during development. Recent work has shown that mouse and
human fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to a pluripotent state with a combination
of four transcription factors. We hypothesized that combinatorial expression of
chondrocyte-specific transcription factors could directly convert human placental
cells into chondrocytes. Starting from a pool of candidate genes, we identified a
combination of only five genes (5F pool)-BCL6, T (also called BRACHYURY), c-MYC, 
MITF, and BAF60C (also called SMARCD3)-that rapidly and efficiently convert
postnatal human chorion and decidual cells into chondrocytes. The cells generated
expressed multiple cartilage-specific genes, such as Collagen type II a1, LINK
PROTEIN-1, and AGGRECAN, and exhibited characteristics of cartilage both in vivo 
and in vitro. Expression of the endogenous genes for T and MITF was initiated,
implying that the cell conversion is due to not only the forced expression of the
transgenes, but also to cellular reprogramming by the transgenes. This direct
conversion system from noncartilage tissue to cartilaginous tissue is a
substantial advance toward understanding cartilage development, cell-based
therapy, and oncogenesis of chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3442400
PMID: 22833560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Feb;54(2):298-303. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2012.715347. Epub
2012 Aug 13.

Low incidence of Epstein-Barr virus-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the
elderly in Tianjin, northern China.

Pan Y(1), Meng B, Zhang H, Cao W, Wang H, Bi C, Liu F, Sun B, Hao X, Ai WZ, Fu K.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital and Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin, China.

The purpose of this study was to examine the incidence of Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly in a representative
northern Chinese population. Overall, 212 cases of primary diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma were analyzed for EBV-positive status by detection of EBV-encoded RNA
using in situ hybridization. Immunophenotypic identity was verified by a
streptavidin-biotin peroxidase detection system using the markers CD20, CD3,
CD10, BCL6 and MUM1. The prevalence of EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
in elderly northern Chinese patients was 3.8% (eight of 212). All eight cases
were negative for CD10 and BCL6 immunostaining. The incidence is less frequent
than that of southern China and other East-Asian countries. Patients tend to be
older, present with a non-germinal center B-cell-like immunophenotype and have a 
poor outcome.

PMID: 22830615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2012 Aug;22(4):283-8. doi: 10.1089/nat.2012.0343. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

The over-expression of miR-34a fails to block DoHH2 lymphoma cell proliferation
by reducing p53 via c-MYC down-regulation.

Rizzo M(1), Mariani L, Cavallini S, Simili M, Rainaldi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene and Molecular Therapy, Institute of Clinical Physiology,
CNR, Pisa, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) might behave as tumor suppressors and for that they are under 
consideration as novel therapeutic drugs. We tested the tumor suppressor activity
of miRNA-34a (miR-34a) by measuring cell proliferation of the follicular lymphoma
cell line DoHH2 transfected with this miRNA. We report that miR-34a did not
inhibit cell proliferation notwithstanding a marked down-regulation of c-MYC.
Interestingly, DoHH2 transfected cells showed a significant p53 down-regulation, 
suggesting that c-MYC positively controls p53 and the failed inhibition of cell
proliferation is probably due to the down-regulation of the c-MYC/p53 axis. In
keeping with this, c-MYC silencing also down-regulated p53 and had no effect on
cell proliferation. In accordance with this hypothesis, etoposide or nutlin-3
treatment or a small interfering RNA (siRNA) against BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6)
inhibited the proliferation of DoHH2 cells by up-regulating p53 without affecting
either miR-34a or c-MYC levels. These results indicate that the proliferation is 
controlled by the regulatory axis c-MYC/p53 and suggest that paradoxically
miR-34a behaves as a pro-proliferative rather than an anti-proliferative miRNA in
DoHH2 cells.

PMID: 22830357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040332. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Genome-wide detection of genes targeted by non-Ig somatic hypermutation in
lymphoma.

Jiang Y(1), Soong TD, Wang L, Melnick AM, Elemento O.

Author information: 
(1)HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational
Biomedicine and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, United States of America.

The processes of somatic hypermutation (SHM) and class switch recombination
introduced by activation-induced cytosine deaminase (AICDA) at the Immunoglobulin
(Ig) loci are key steps for creating a pool of diversified antibodies in germinal
center B cells (GCBs). Unfortunately, AICDA can also accidentally introduce
mutations at bystander loci, particularly within the 5' regulatory regions of
proto-oncogenes relevant to diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Since current
methods for genomewide sequencing such as Exon Capture and RNAseq only target
mutations in coding regions, to date non-Ig promoter SHMs have been studied only 
in a handful genes. We designed a novel approach integrating bioinformatics tools
with next generation sequencing technology to identify regulatory loci targeted
by SHM genome-wide. We observed increased numbers of SHM associated sequence
variant hotspots in lymphoma cells as compared to primary normal germinal center 
B cells. Many of these SHM hotspots map to genes that have not been reported
before as mutated, including BACH2, BTG2, CXCR4, CIITA, EBF1, PIM2, and TCL1A,
etc., all of which have potential roles in B cell survival, differentiation, and 
malignant transformation. In addition, using BCL6 and BACH2 as examples, we
demonstrated that SHM sites identified in these 5' regulatory regions greatly
altered their transcription activities in a reporter assay. Our approach provides
a first cost-efficient, genome-wide method to identify regulatory mutations and
non-Ig SHM hotspots.

PMCID: PMC3395700
PMID: 22808135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(4):1341-7.

Prognostic sub-grouping of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas into germinal centre
and post germinal centre groups by immunohistochemistry after 6 cycles of
chemotherapy.

Hassan U(1), Mushtaq S, Mamoon N, Asghar AH, Ishtiaq S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Lahore
Pakistan. usman_hassan256@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) can be divided into germinal
centre (GC-DLBCL) and post germinal centre (post GC-DLBCL) groups by applying
immunohistochemical antibodies. As these subgroups respond differently to
chemotherapy, it is possible at diagnosis to select a poor prognostic subgroup
for aggressive treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequencies of GC-DLBCL and post GC-DLBCL in patients
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and the clinical response after six cycles of
chemotherapy.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In this descriptive study conducted in AFIP and CMH,
Rawalpindi and NORI, Islamabad, from September 2010 to September 2011, a total of
75 pretreatment cases of DLBCL diagnosed during the study period were included.
Cases were segregated in to GC-DLBCL and post GC-DLBCL groups according to
results of immunohistochemistry markers CD10, BCL6 and MUM1. Immediate clinical
response was assessed after 6 cycles of chemotherapy. Response was divided into
complete response, partial response, stable disease or relapse or progression.
RESULTS: The mean age was 54.2 ± 15. Males were 53 (70.7%). Forty (53.3%) cases
comprised the GC-DLBCL group; 25(62.5%) of them showed a complete response. Most 
patients of the post GC-DLBCL 19(54%) showed relapse/progression. Results of
immediate clinical response in both prognostic subgroups were significant
(p<0.05). Results regarding positivity with immunohistochemical antibodies CD10
(p 0.011), BCL6 (p 0.013) and MUM1 (p 0.000) regarding immediate clinical
response were also significant.
CONCLUSION: GC-DLBCL group shows better response to CHOP chemotherapy regimen.
Immunohistochemistry should be used to further classify DLBCL as this can enable 
us to select aggressive group for aggressive treatment. This manuscript is
important because the study is the first to becarried out exclusively in Pakistan
or our part of the world.

PMID: 22799329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Sci. 2012 Oct;103(10):1898-904. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02382.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Bcl-2, Bcl-6, and the International Prognostic Index are prognostic indicators in
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with rituximab-containing
chemotherapy.

Maeshima AM(1), Taniguchi H, Fukuhara S, Morikawa N, Munakata W, Maruyama D, Kim 
SW, Watanabe T, Kobayashi Y, Tobinai K, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. akmaeshi@ncc.go.jp

This study aimed to clarify the clinicopathological prognostic parameters of de
novo diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in the rituximab era. We examined the 
correlation of 22 clinicopathological parameters with progression-free survival
(PFS), overall survival (OS), and primary refractory disease in 285 DLBCL
patients treated with rituximab-containing chemotherapy. Complete response rate
was 87%, overall response rate was 91%, 5-year PFS rate was 72%, and 5-year OS
rate was 91%. By log-rank test, higher International Prognostic Index (IPI) (P < 
0.0001), Bcl-2 positivity (P = 0.0013), Bcl-6 negativity (P = 0.0112), and no
irradiation (P = 0.0371) were significantly correlated with shorter PFS; higher
IPI (P = 0.0107), starry sky pattern (P = 0.0466), and no irradiation (P =
0.0264) correlated with shorter OS. In multivariate analyses, higher IPI (P =
0.0006), Bcl-2 positivity (P = 0.0015), and Bcl-6 negativity (P = 0.04) were
significantly correlated with shorter PFS; higher IPI (P = 0.0045) correlated
with shorter OS. Bcl-2 (P = 0.0029), Bcl-6 (P = 0.002), and IPI (P < 0.0001) were
significantly correlated with primary refractory disease. In conclusion, Bcl-2
positivity, Bcl-6 negativity, and higher IPI were indicators of shorter PFS and
OS plus primary refractory disease in patients with DLBCL in the rituximab era.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22783941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 May;33(5):388-91.

[Clinicopathologic analysis of nodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XY(1), Li M, Huang X, He YX, Xue XM, Sun L, Lai YM, Wang JW, Gao ZF, Liu CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinicopathologic features of primary nodal
marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (NMZL).
METHODS: Hematoxylin-Eosin staining and immunohistochemistry were used to
evaluate the histological and immunophenotypic characteristics of lymph node (LN)
tissue in 22 NMZL cases. Additionally, interphase fluorescence in-situ
hybridization (FISH) was carried out to detect the presence of t(11;18)
(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1 and/or t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IGH-MALT1 in 9 cases.
RESULTS: The median age of the 22 patients was 62 (16 - 77) ys. The
male-to-female ratio was 1.2:1. All patients exhibited asymptomatic
lymphadenopathy with the cervical region as the most often site to be involved (n
= 11), followed by axillary (n = 9), inguinal (n = 7), submandibular (n = 6),
mediastinal (n = 4), supraclavicular (n = 2) and retroperitoneal lymph nodes (n =
1). The Ann Arbor stages were I/II in 13 (59%) cases and III/IV in 9 (41%).
Immunohistochemical study showed a consistently strong expression of CD20 and an 
absence in the expression of CD3e, CD10, CD21, CD23, CyclinD1 and BCL6 by the
tumor cells in all the cases. Frequency of expression of CD5 and BCL2 were 39%
(7/18) and 30% (3/14) respectively. Among the 9 cases performed with FISH, 2
cases harbored t(14;18)and another 1 case positive for t(11;18) and t(14;18).
Complete follow-up data were available for 13 cases. The follow-up time was 6 to 
44 months. 3 of them died. 3-year cumulative survival rate was 67%.
CONCLUSIONS: NMZL patients are often elderly, which mainly present with multiple 
lymphadenopathy, rare involvement of extranodal organ and early stage. The
diagnosis must be based on a combination of clinicopathologic features,
especially those patients detected t(11;18) and/or t(14;18).

PMID: 22781798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Mar;34(3):209-11. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2012.03.011.

[Clinicopathological and molecular genetic characteristics of childhood diffuse
large B cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang H, Yang WP, Xu HY.

PMID: 22780976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Feb;34(2):136-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2012.02.012.

[Clinical characterization of 61 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with
different prognosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Q, Wei XD, Yin QS.

PMID: 22780933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Egypt Natl Canc Inst. 2011 Dec;23(4):147-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jnci.2011.10.006.
Epub 2011 Dec 9.

High expression of LMO2 in Hodgkin, Burkitt and germinal center diffuse large B
cell lymphomas.

Shams TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Suez Canal University,
Ismailia 001145, Egypt. tahanishams@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The LMO2 gene encodes a transcription factor that regulates
key events in erythropoiesis, angiogenesis, and embryogenesis and is highly
expressed at the most immature stages of lymphopoiesis. Its implication in
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) is limited in the literature.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: An immunohistochemical study was performed on 68 lymphoma
specimens showing different types including Hodgkin lymphoma (23), Burkitt
lymphoma (10) and diffuse large B cell lymphoma (35). Also, seven specimens of
the reactive nodal tissue were included as control. A monoclonal anti-human
antibody has been used to detect LMO2.
RESULTS: LMO2 was detected in all cases of HL (100%), in nine cases of BL (90%)
and in all cases of DLBCL of germinal center (GC) subtype 20/35 (57.1%) but is
completely negative in non-germinal center (NGC) DLBCL. In normal control of
reactive nodes, LMO2 was expressed in germinal center area but not expressed in
other areas including mantle, marginal, or T cell zones. In DLBCL; there was no
statistically significant relation between LMO2 positive cases and the studied
clinicopathological parameters including patient's age, sex and tumor site, stage
and histological subtype. On the other hand, it was statistically significant
regarding immunophenotyping of GC versus NGC.
CONCLUSIONS: LMO2 expression is a special feature of GC DLBCL which can be used
as a diagnostic marker and therapeutic target. Further studies regarding its
prognostic role in patients are recommended.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22776842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):876-84. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1545. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Multiple myeloma cells expressing low levels of CD138 have an immature phenotype 
and reduced sensitivity to lenalidomide.

Kawano Y(1), Fujiwara S, Wada N, Izaki M, Yuki H, Okuno Y, Iyama K, Yamasaki H,
Sakai A, Mitsuya H, Hata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kumamoto,
Japan.

CD138 expression is a hallmark of plasma cells and multiple myeloma cells.
However, decreased expression of CD138 is frequently observed in plasma cells of 
myeloma patients, although the clinical significance of this is unclear. To
evaluate the significance of low expression of CD138 in MM, we examined the
phenotypes of MM cells expressing low levels of CD138. Flow cytometric analysis
of primary MM cells revealed a significant decrease in CD138 expression in
patients with relapsed/progressive disease compared with untreated MM patients.
Patients with low levels of CD138 had a worse overall survival compared with
patients with high levels of CD138, in newly diagnosed patients and patients
receiving high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem-cell
transplantation. Two MM cell lines, KYMM-1 (CD138- low) and KYMM-2 (CD138- high),
were established from a single MM patient with decreased CD138 expression. High
expression of BCL6 and PAX5, and downregulation of IRF4, PRDM1 and XBP1 was
observed in KYMM-1 compared with KYMM-2 cells, indicative of the immature
phenotype of KYMM-1. KYMM-1 was less sensitive to lenalidomide than KYMM-2, while
no difference in sensitivity to bortezomib was observed. KYMM-2 cells were
further divided in CD138+ and CD138- fractions using anti-CD138-coated magnetic
beads. CD138- cells sorted from the KYMM-2 cell line also showed high BCL6, low
IRF4 expression and decreased sensitivity to lenalidomide compared with CD138+
cells. Our observations suggest that low CD138 expression relates to i) poor
prognosis, ii) immature phenotype and iii) low sensitivity to lenalidomide. The
observed distinct characteristics of CD138 low MM cells, suggest this should be
recognized as a new clinical entity. Establishment of a treatment strategy for MM
cells expressing low levels of CD138 is needed to improve their poor outcome.

PMCID: PMC3582943
PMID: 22766978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Medicina (B Aires). 2012;72(3):251-4.

[Unusual presentation of plasma cell myeloma].

[Article in Spanish]

Bürgesser MV(1), Basquiera AL, Diller A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Patología, Hospital Privado de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
virburgesser@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Medicina (B Aires). 2012;72(4):314.

A 41 year-old woman consulted because of facial pain. A magnetic resonance
imaging showed a mass in the right petrous apex. A biopsy revealed a diffuse
proliferation of large atypical cells with plasmablastic appearance, positive for
CD138, BCL6, CD56 and p53. The proliferation factor was 80%. Monoclonal kappa
light chain expression was observed. Because the unusual clinicopathological
features the patient was studied to rule out systemic plasma cell myeloma. Bone
scan disclosed multiple cranium osteolytic lesions; proteinogram showed
hypogammaglobulinemia and immunofixation in serum and urine were negative.
Afterwards, bone marrow biopsy was performed and it presented a 30% infiltration 
of the bone cylinder by mature plasma cells. These were monoclonal for kappa
light chain with focal expression of p53 and without expression of CD56. These
findings suggested the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. This case proposes a
morphological spectrum of plasma cell neoplasms, showing a continuous clonal
evolution of tumor cells, with an acquired plasticity of dedifferentiate, become 
immature and infiltrate extramedullary tissues, a fact possibly determined by
accumulation of multiple genetic alterations. These findings confirm the
difficulty of the differential diagnosis from histopathology study between
plasmablastic lymphoma and plasmablastic transformation of plasma cell myeloma
because of the nearly identical immunohistochemical profiles.

PMID: 22763165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Blood Res. 2012;2(2):113-8. Epub 2012 Apr 15.

Subtle bone marrow involvement by large B-cell lymphoma with pronormoblast-like
morphology and prominent but not exclusive sinusoidal distribution.

Roth CG, Reichard KK.

Primary bone marrow presentation of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is
unusual, and appreciation of the diffuse growth pattern may be difficult in cases
with low-level involvement. In particular, subtle sinusoidal and interstitial
bone marrow involvement and morphologic overlap of the tumor cells with
pronormoblasts may result initially in a missed diagnosis. We describe the
clinicopathologic features of 13 cases of morphologically subtle DLBCL involving 
the bone marrow, which were only identified with the aid of immunohistochemistry.
The overwhelming majority of cases (12/13, 92%) presented with cytopenias, and 5 
of 7 cases, with available information, had splenomegaly. The morphology of the
tumor cells in the aspirate smears overlapped with pronormoblasts (immature
erythroid precursors) in 12 of 13 cases. Similarly, in histologic sections, the
tumor cells in virtually all cases (12/13) demonstrated round nuclear contours
and oblong nucleoli, mimicking pronormoblasts. A CD20 immunohistochemical stain
was essential in identifying the neoplastic infiltrate in all cases. The majority
of cases (73%, 10/13) showed low-level bone marrow involvement by lymphoma, 10%
or less. CD20 immunohistochemistry highlighted individually dispersed and small
clusters of large lymphoid cells in a sinusoidal and/or interstitial growth
pattern. Most of the cases that were assessed showed a non-germinal center
phenotype (CD10-, BCL6-/+, IRF4/MUM1+). There was an aggressive disease course
with a median overall survival of 6 months. We would recommend performing a CD20 
immunostain in patients who present with unexplained cytopenias and/or
splenomegaly. Further investigation is warranted to better describe the features 
of this unique and aggressive variant of DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC3384402
PMID: 22762030  [PubMed]


53. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Dec;71(12):2011-19. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201477.
Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Interleukin-21 contributes to germinal centre formation and immunoglobulin G4
production in IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis, so-called Mikulicz's
disease.

Maehara T(1), Moriyama M, Nakashima H, Miyake K, Hayashida JN, Tanaka A,
Shinozaki S, Kubo Y, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Comment in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Dec;71(12):1919-20.

OBJECTIVES: Interleukin (IL)-21 is mainly produced by CD4 T helper (Th) cells
including Th2, Th17 and follicular helper T (Tfh) cells. Recent studies have
reported that IL-21 is involved in the formation of germinal centres (GCs) and
class switching of IgG4. It has been suggested that IgG4-related dacryoadenitis
and sialoadenitis (IgG4-DS), so-called Mikulicz's disease (MD), is distinct from 
Sjögren's syndrome (SS) and shows a high frequency of GC formation in salivary
glands. In this study the expression of IL-21 in IgG4-DS and SS patients was
examined.
METHODS: Twelve patients with IgG4-DS, 15 with SS and 15 healthy subjects were
screened for (1) ectopic GC formation in formalin-fixed labial salivary gland
(LSG) biopsy samples; (2) expression of IL-21, Th2-, Th17- and Tfh-related
molecules (cytokines, chemokine receptors and transcription factors) in LSGs; (3)
relationship between IgG4/IgG ratio and mRNA expression of IL-21 in LSGs.
RESULTS: mRNA expression of IL-21 and Bcl-6 in LSGs from patients with IgG4-DS
was significantly higher than in patients with SS and controls. IL-21 and CXCR5
were detected by immunohistochemistry in or around GC in patients with SS and
those with IgG4-DS. IL-21 was detected in infiltrating lymphocytes outside GC
only in patients with IgG4-DS. Expression of IL-21 was consistent with that of
Th2-related molecules while IL-17 was rarely seen in IgG4-DS. Furthermore, the
expression of IL-21 in LSGs was correlated with the number of GC formations and
the IgG4/IgG ratio in patients with IgG4-DS.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that overexpression of IL-21 by Th2 cells
might play a key role in GC formation and IgG4 production in IgG4-DS.

PMID: 22753386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;18(17):4538-48. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0217.
Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Promising personalized therapeutic options for diffuse large B-cell Lymphoma
Subtypes with oncogene addictions.

Steinhardt JJ(1), Gartenhaus RB.

Author information: 
(1)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of
Medicine and Veterans Administration Medical Center, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Currently, two major classification systems segregate diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) into subtypes based on gene expression profiles and provide
great insights about the oncogenic mechanisms that may be crucial for
lymphomagenesis as well as prognostic information regarding response to current
therapies. However, these current classification systems primarily look at
expression and not dependency and are thus limited to inductive or probabilistic 
reasoning when evaluating alternative therapeutic options. The development of a
deductive classification system that identifies subtypes in which all patients
with a given phenotype require the same oncogenic drivers, and would therefore
have a similar response to a rational therapy targeting the essential drivers,
would significantly advance the treatment of DLBCL. This review highlights the
putative drivers identified as well as the work done to identify potentially
dependent populations. These studies integrated genomic analysis and functional
screens to provide a rationale for targeted therapies within defined populations.
Personalizing treatments by identifying patients with oncogenic dependencies via 
genotyping and specifically targeting the responsible drivers may constitute a
novel approach for the treatment of DLBCL.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3432648
PMID: 22745106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Haematol. 2012 Oct;89(4):302-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2012.01826.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 22.

A spindle cell variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is characterized by
T-cell/myofibrohistio-rich stromal alterations: analysis of 10 cases and a review
of the literature.

Kimura Y(1), Arakawa F, Kiyasu J, Miyoshi H, Yoshida M, Ichikawa A, Nakashima S, 
Ishibashi Y, Niino D, Sugita Y, Ishiyama K, Higuchi M, Takasaki Y, Shimomura T,
Koike C, Kuwahara N, Fujikawa K, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan.
kimura_yoshizou@kurume-u.ac.jp

Spindle-shaped diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (Sp-DLBCL) has been recognized as a 
rare morphologic variant of DLBCL. However, the biological processes that
contribute to the specific features of Sp-DLBCL remain poorly understood. In this
study, a combined immunophenotypic and genetic analysis was performed in 10
Sp-DLBCL. First, we investigated several unique markers for anaplasia (CD30, ALK,
CD68, and EBER-ISH), mesenchyma (SMA, desmin, and vimentin), and B-cell
differentiation (CD10, BCL6, and MUM1). We also performed conventional
cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies to look for common
chromosomal break points (BCL2, BCL6, and MYC). We found that most Sp-DLBCLs were
germinal center B cell-like and that none had any other specific phenotypes or
any karyotypic abnormalities. Instead, T cells, CD68-positive macrophages and
SMA-positive myofibroblasts were significantly increased in Sp-DLBCL when
compared with conventional GCB origin DLBCL cases (n = 10) (P = 0.012, P < 0.001,
and P < 0.0001, respectively). To further characterize Sp-DLBCL, we next compared
the expression of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and transforming growth
factor-ß1 (TGFß1) between the two types of DLBCL. Finally, we confirmed that the 
number of FGF2- and TGFß1-positive stromal cells was markedly increased in
Sp-DLBCL and that the difference between these and conventional GCB origin DLBCLs
was significant (P < 0.0001 and P = 0.0017, respectively). Thus,
T-cell/myofibrohistio-rich stromal alterations in Sp-DLBCL, especially those
mediated by TGFß1 and FGF2, may play a role in the transition of lymphoma cells
into those with spindle-shaped features.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22738254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039151. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Down-regulation of MiR-127 facilitates hepatocyte proliferation during rat liver 
regeneration.

Pan C(1), Chen H, Wang L, Yang S, Fu H, Zheng Y, Miao M, Jiao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

Liver regeneration (LR) after partial hepatectomy (PH) involves the proliferation
and apoptosis of hepatocytes, and microRNAs have been shown to
post-transcriptionally regulate genes involved in the regulation of these
processes. To explore the role of miR-127 during LR, the expression patterns of
miR-127 and its related proteins were investigated. MiR-127 was introduced into a
rat liver cell line to examine its effects on the potential target genes Bcl6 and
Setd8, and functional studies were undertaken. We discovered that miR-127 was
down-regulated and inversely correlated with the expression of Bcl6 and Setd8 at 
24 hours after PH, a time at which hypermethylation of the promoter region of the
miR-127 gene was detected. Furthermore, in BRL-3A rat liver cells, we observed
that overexpression of miR-127 significantly suppressed cell growth and directly 
inhibited the expression of Bcl6 and Setd8. The results suggest that
down-regulation of miR-127 may be due to the rapid methylation of its promoter
during the first 24 h after PH, and this event facilitates hepatocyte
proliferation by releasing Bcl6 and Setd8. These findings support a
miRNA-mediated negative regulation pattern in LR and implicate an
anti-proliferative role for miR-127 in liver cells.

PMCID: PMC3376093
PMID: 22720056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;18(17):4702-12. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Epstein-Barr virus infection and expression of B-cell oncogenic markers in
HIV-related diffuse large B-cell Lymphoma.

Chao C(1), Silverberg MJ, Martínez-Maza O, Chi M, Abrams DI, Haque R, Zha HD,
McGuire M, Xu L, Said J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 
100 S. Los Robles Ave, 2nd Floor, Los Angeles, CA 91101, USA. chun.r.chao@kp.org

PURPOSE: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-mediated lymphomagenesis in the setting of HIV 
infection has been widely accepted. However, little is known about how EBV
impacts prognosis. We investigated the hypothesis that EBV infection is
associated with expression of specific B-cell oncogenic markers in HIV-related
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and examined the prognostic use of
detecting EBV infection.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: HIV-related DLBCL cases diagnosed between 1996 and 2007
within Kaiser Permanente California were identified. Immunohistochemical staining
was used to analyze the expression of selected markers that are cell-cycle
regulators, B-cell activators, and antiapoptotic proteins among others. EBV
infection was determined by in situ hybridization of EBV RNA. Correlations
between EBV and marker expression were examined using Spearman correlation
coefficient. The prognostic use of EBV status was examined in multivariable Cox
model adjusting for International Prognostic Index (IPI). Receiver-operating
characteristics (ROC) analysis was used to evaluate improvement in model
discrimination.
RESULTS: Seventy HIV-related DLBCL cases were included (31% EBV±). EBV+ tumor was
associated with increased expression of BLIMP1 and CD30 and reduced expression of
BCL6 and LMO2. EBV+ tumor was independently associated with elevated 2-year
overall mortality [HR, 3.3; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.6-6.6]. Area under
the ROC curve showed improved model discrimination when incorporating tumor EBV
status with IPI in the prediction model [0.65 vs. 0.74 (IPI only)].
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that EBV infection was associated with expression
of several tumor markers that are involved in the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and that
detecting tumor EBV status may have prognostic use in HIV-related DLBCLs.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3846529
PMID: 22711707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ann Oncol. 2012 Dec;23(12):3143-51. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds150. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of Waldeyer's ring has distinct clinicopathologic
features: a GELA study.

de Leval L(1), Bonnet C, Copie-Bergman C, Seidel L, Baia M, Brière J, Molina TJ, 
Fabiani B, Petrella T, Bosq J, Gisselbrecht C, Siebert R, Tilly H, Haioun C,
Fillet G, Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratories, Institute of Pathology, C.H.U.V. Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland. laurence.deleval@chuv.ch

BACKGROUND: Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) arising in specific
extranodal sites have peculiar clinicopathologic features.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed a cohort of 187 primary Waldeyer's ring (WR)
DLBCLs retrieved from GELA protocols using anthracyclin-based polychemotherapy.
RESULTS: Most patients (92%) had stage I-II disease. A germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB) immunophenotype was observed in 61%, and BCL2 expression in
55%, of WR DLBCLs. BCL2, BCL6, IRF4 and MYC breakpoints were observed in,
respectively, 3 of 42 (7%), 9 of 36 (25%), 2 of 26 (8%) and 4 of 40 (10%)
contributive cases. A variable follicular pattern was evidenced in 30 of 68 (44%)
large biopsy specimens. The 5-year progression-free survival (PFS) and the
overall survival (OS) of 153 WR DLBCL patients with survival information were
69.5% and 77.8%, respectively. The GCB immunophenotype correlated with a better
OS (P = 0.0015), while BCL2 expression predicted a worse OS (P = 0.037), an
effect overcome by the GCB/non-GCB classification. Compared with matched nodal
DLBCLs, WR DLBCLs with no age-adjusted international prognostic index factor
disclosed a better 5-year PFS rate (77.5% versus 70.7%; P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: WR DLBCLs display distinct clinicopathologic features compared with 
conventional DLBCLs, with usual localized-stage disease, common follicular
features and a high frequency of GCB immunophenotype contrasting with a low rate 
of BCL2 rearrangements. In addition, they seem to be associated with a better
outcome than their nodal counterpart.

PMID: 22700993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Br J Haematol. 2012 Aug;158(4):489-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2012.09178.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 12.

In non-follicular lymphoproliferative disorders, IGH/BCL2-fusion is not
restricted to chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.

Baseggio L(1), Geay MO, Gazzo S, Berger F, Traverse-Glehen A, Ffrench M, Hayette 
S, Callet-Bauchu E, Verney A, Morel D, Jallades L, Magaud JP, Salles G, Felman P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, UMR5239 Pathologies des cellules lymphoïdes,
Université Claude Bernard, Lyon, France.

The translocation t(14;18) and its t(2;18) and t(18,22) variants, which involve
the BCL2 genetic hallmark for follicular lymphoma (FL), have been reported in
several cases of chronic B-cell lymphoproliferative disease (CLPD) and frequently
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). We describe here the clinical,
morphological, immunological, cytogenetic and molecular findings from 37 cases of
t(14;18)-positive CLPD, identified from our series of non-FL B-cell neoplasms
(n=993) that were routinely analysed in peripheral blood by conventional
cytogenetics analyses. The FL diagnosis was excluded by morphology and immunology
(the samples were CD10 negative in all cases). The BCL2 translocations were
observed in 22 CLL cases, including 7 monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) cases
re-classified according to the new International Workshop on CLL criteria, six
small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) cases, 1 splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL)
case and eight cases of unclassifiable CLPD with overlapping CLL/MZL features. In
the CLL cases, the IGH/BCL2 fusion was remarkably associated with trisomy 12
(13/22) and mutated IGHV status (20/21) and did not affect the outcome. Moreover,
most of these CLLs harboured a low mutation load of BCL6 gene and unmutated FAS
(CD95) loci, which points to a post-germinal-centre cellular origin.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22686190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biochem. 2012 Sep;152(3):241-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs065. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Mediator CDK subunits are platforms for interactions with various chromatin
regulatory complexes.

Fukasawa R(1), Tsutsui T, Hirose Y, Tanaka A, Ohkuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

The Mediator complex consists of more than 20 subunits. This is composed of four 
modules: head, middle, tail and CDK/Cyclin. Importantly, Mediator complex is
known to play pivotal roles in transcriptional regulation, but its molecular
mechanisms are still elusive. Many studies, including our own, have revealed that
CDK8, a kinase subunit of the CDK/Cyclin module, is one of the key subunits
involved in these roles. Additionally, we previously demonstrated that a novel
CDK component, CDK19, played similar roles. It is assumed that various factors
that directly affect transcriptional regulation target these two CDKs; thus, we
conducted yeast two-hybrid screenings to isolate the CDK19-interacting proteins. 
From a screening of 40 million colonies, we obtained 287 clones that provided
positive results encoded mRNAs, and it turned out that 59 clones of them encoded 
nuclear proteins. We checked the reading frames of the candidate clones and
obtained three positive clones, all of which encoded the transcriptional
cofactors, Brahma-related gene 1, B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 and suppressor of zeste
12 homolog. Intriguingly, these three cofactors are also related to chromatin
regulation. Further studies demonstrated that those could bind not only to CDK19 
but also to CDK8. These results help elucidate the functional mechanism for the
mutual regulations between transcription and chromatin.

PMID: 22668559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Oct 1;30(28):3460-7. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Immunohistochemical double-hit score is a strong predictor of outcome in patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, 
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone.

Green TM(1), Young KH, Visco C, Xu-Monette ZY, Orazi A, Go RS, Nielsen O,
Gadeberg OV, Mourits-Andersen T, Frederiksen M, Pedersen LM, Møller MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, J.B. Winsløws Vej 15,
DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark. tina.green@ouh.regionsyddanmark.dk

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Oct 1;30(28):3433-5.

PURPOSE: Approximately 5% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) are
double-hit lymphomas (DHLs) with translocations of both MYC and BCL2. DHLs are
characterized by poor outcome. We tested whether DLBCLs with high expression of
MYC protein and BCL2 protein share the clinical features and poor prognosis of
DHLs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Paraffin-embedded lymphoma samples from 193 patients with
de novo DLBCL who were uniformly treated with rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) were studied using
immunohistochemistry for MYC, BCL2, CD10, BCL6, and MUM1/interferon regulatory
factor 4, and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for MYC and BCL2.
RESULTS: FISH analysis identified DHL in 6% of patients, who showed the expected 
poor overall survival (OS; P = .002). On the basis of immunohistochemical MYC and
BCL2 expression, a double-hit score (DHS) was assigned to all patients with
DLBCL. The DHS-2 group, defined by high expression of both MYC and BCL2 protein, 
comprised 29% of the patients. DHS 2 was significantly associated with lower
complete response rate (P = .004), shorter OS (P < .001), and shorter
progression-free survival (PFS; P < .001). The highly significant correlation
with OS and PFS was maintained in multivariate models that controlled for the
International Prognostic Index and the cell-of-origin subtype (OS, P < .001; PFS,
P < .001). DHS was validated in an independent cohort of 116 patients who were
treated with R-CHOP.
CONCLUSION: The immunohistochemical DHS defined a large subset of DLBCLs with
double-hit biology and was strongly associated with poor outcome in patients
treated with R-CHOP.

PMID: 22665537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:827480. doi: 10.1155/2012/827480. Epub 2012 May 10.

Increased frequency of circulating follicular helper T cells in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis.

Ma J(1), Zhu C, Ma B, Tian J, Baidoo SE, Mao C, Wu W, Chen J, Tong J, Yang M,
Jiao Z, Xu H, Lu L, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Affiliated People's Hospital, and
School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 
212013, China.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells are recognized as a distinct CD4(+) helper T-cell
subset, which provides for B-cell activation and production of specific antibody 
responses, and play a critical role in the development of autoimmune disease. So 
far, only one study investigated the circulating Tfh cells increased in a subset 
of SLE patients. Since relatively little is known about the Tfh cells in
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, in this study, Tfh-cell frequency, related
cytokine IL-21, and transcription factor Bcl-6 were investigated in 53 patients
with RA and 31 health controls. Firstly, we found that the frequency of
CD4(+)CXCR5(+)ICOS(high) Tfh cells was increased significantly in the peripheral 
blood of RA patients, compared with that in healthy controls. It is known that
Tfh cells are critical for directing the development of an antibody response by
germinal centers B cells; secondly, we observed that the Tfh-cell frequency is
accompanied by the level of anti-CCP antibody in RA patients. Furthermore,
expression of Bcl-6 mRNA and plasma IL-21 concentrations in RA patients was
increased. Taken together, these findings have shown that the increased frequency
of circulating Tfh cells is correlated with elevated levels of anti-CCP antibody,
indicating the possible involvement of Tfh cells in the disease progression of
RA.

PMCID: PMC3357937
PMID: 22649468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Histopathology. 2012 Oct;61(4):685-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04260.x.

SOX11 is useful in differentiating cyclin D1-positive diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma from mantle cell lymphoma.

Hsiao SC(1), Cortada IR, Colomo L, Ye H, Liu H, Kuo SY, Lin SH, Chang ST, Kuo TU,
Campo E, Chuang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hemato-Oncology, St Martin de Porres Hospital, Chia-Yi,
TaiwanDepartment of Pathology, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, SpainDepartment of Histopathology, Royal National Orthopaedic
Hospital, University College London, LondonMolecular Malignancy Laboratory and
Department of Histopathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UKDepartment of Pathology, Chi-Mei
Medical Centre, TainanDepartment of Pathology, St Martin de Porres Hospital,
Chia-YiDepartment of Pathology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: To characterize the frequency and clinicopathological features of cyclin
D1-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and the usefulness of SOX11 in 
the differential diagnosis from mantle cell lymphoma (MCL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We retrospectively stained 206 consecutive DLBCLs for cyclin
D1, and identified three (1.5%) positive cases, comprising two in the elderly
with necrosis, and a third with a starry-sky pattern. All three cases shared the 
same non-germinal centre B-cell (non-GCB) phenotype
[CD5-/CD10-/bcl-6+/MUM1+/SOX11-], Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) negativity, and
absence of CCND1 aberrations by fluorescence in-situ hybridization. The third
case showed both BCL6 and MYC rearrangements: a double-hit lymphoma. In the same 
period there were 22 MCLs, all expressing cyclin D1, with 89% cases expressing
SOX11, a frequency that is statistically different from cyclin D1-positive DLBCL.
Notably, we identified a pleomorphic MCL initially misdiagnosed as DLBCL. A
separate cohort of 98 DLBCL cases was negative for SOX11, with only one case
expressing cyclin D1 with a GCB phenotype (CD10+/bcl-6+/MUM1-). The two patients 
with tumour necrosis rapidly died of disease. The other two were in complete
remission after immunochemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Cyclin D1-positive DLBCLs are rare, and they are negative for SOX11
or CCND1 aberration. SOX11 is useful in differentiating cyclin D1-positive DLBCL 
from MCL.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22642745  [PubMed - in process]


64. Diagn Cytopathol. 2012 Jun;40(6):542-55. doi: 10.1002/dc.22819.

Molecular genetic characterization of lymphoma: application to cytology
diagnosis.

Ochs RC(1), Bagg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Mature B- and T-cell lymphomas are increasingly being associated with specific
genetic alterations; characterization of these changes can sometimes be crucial
to both diagnosis and prognosis. Molecular testing encompasses fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assays, as
well as classical cytogenetics. FISH and PCR-based assays can be performed on
cytology material without the need for advanced planning for testing with fresh
tissue. As many lymphoproliferations are amenable to fine needle aspiration
diagnosis, it is important for the cytopathologist to be aware of what testing is
feasible in these (sometimes limited) specimens. Here, we review pertinent
genetic changes in mature B- and T-cell lymphomas with a focus on those that may 
be encountered more commonly in cytology specimens.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22619129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):2001-11. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.02.009. Epub
2012 May 18.

Follicular lymphoma with prominent Dutcher body formation: a pathologic study of 
3 cases in comparison with nodal or splenic lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and
marginal zone lymphoma.

Wang E(1), Stoecker M, Burchette J, Rehder C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center Box 3712, Duke
Hospital South, Durham, NC 27710, USA. endi.wang@duke.edu

Dutcher bodies have been described in lymphoid neoplasms with plasmacytic
differentiation, including plasma cell myeloma, lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, and
marginal zone lymphoma. We report a pathologic study of 3 cases of follicular
lymphoma with extensive Dutcher body formation in comparison with
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and marginal zone lymphoma. Of 3 cases, 1 showed a
follicular growth pattern, whereas the other 2 cases demonstrated only a vague
nodular appearance highlighted by immunohistochemical analysis. Cells containing 
Dutcher bodies were counted at 25, 90, or 110 per high-power field in each case, 
respectively. In 2 cases, cells with Dutcher bodies were clustered in an
intrafollicular distribution, a possible histopathologic clue for follicular
lymphoma. Immunoglobulin M <U+03BA> was identified as the component of Dutcher bodies in
all 3 cases, implying a possible molecular basis for the formation of Dutcher
bodies in B-cell lymphomas. All 3 cases had cytogenetic changes supporting the
diagnosis of follicular lymphoma, including dual rearrangement of BCL2 and BCL6, 
rearrangement of BCL2 with trisomy 3 (BCL6), and isolated BCL6 rearrangement. We 
emphasize immunohistochemical analyses with anti-<U+03BA>/<U+03BB> and anti-immunoglobulin
heavy-chain isotypes to characterize Dutcher bodies and document clonality in
addition to the routine lymphoma workup and indicated cytogenetic studies in
B-cell lymphomas with prominent Dutcher bodies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22607703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 Dec;21(6):572-6. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182582bd8.

Follicular and mantle cell lymphoma characteristics present simultaneously in the
same lymph node.

Korac P(1), Horvat T, Kardum Paro MM, Ajdukovic R, Debro S, Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)*Medical School Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science,
University of Zagreb Institute of Pathology and Cytology §Institute of Clinical 
Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital Merkur <U+2225>Department of
Medicine, Dubrava University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia.

Follicular lymphoma is composed of clonal germinal center B cells. It shows a
follicular pattern lacking mantle zones, with a network of interfollicular
dendritic cells. Transformation to more aggressive lymphomas is documented, but
the only connections to mantle cell lymphoma are described cases of composite
lymphoma consisting of these 2 entities. We discuss here a case of a lymph node
harboring CD20, CD10, BCL2, BCL6, cyclin D1, CD5, Ki67, and SOX11 with CD21,
showing an almost intact network of dendritic cells in one part of a lymph node, 
and CD20, CD5, SOX11, BCL6, cyclin D1, CD10, Ki67, and CD21 cells restricted to
the mantle area in another part of the same lymph node. Both parts of the lymph
node had BCL2 rearrangement, a lack of t(11:14)(q13;q32), the presence of SOX11
expression, and the same clonal band. The described case suggests heterogenous
development of small cell lymphomas and indicates the possibility of
differentiation regression.

PMID: 22595950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Jun;137(6):879-89. doi: 10.1309/AJCPBPNV86VZENGV.

Clinicopathologic analysis of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, follicular variant, and
comparison with angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma: Bcl-6 expression might affect
progression between these disorders.

Miyoshi H(1), Sato K, Niino D, Arakawa F, Kimura Y, Kiyasu J, Takeuchi M, Yoshida
M, Okada Y, Nakamura Y, Sugita Y, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kurume University, 67 Asahimachi,
Kurume, Fukuoka, 830 0011, Japan. miyoshi_hiroaki@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

We examined clinicopathologic findings in 17 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
follicular variant (f-PTCL), and compared these findings with angioimmunoblastic 
T-cell lymphoma (AITL) to determine whether they were identical to the spectrum
of changes seen in AITL and how each of the findings in f-PTCL were related to
the characteristics of AITL. Almost all f-PTCL cases showed pathologic
characteristics of AITL and immunohistochemical positivities in lymphoma cells
for CD4, CD10, Bcl-6, PD-1, and CXCL13. Except for pathologic characteristics,
clinicopathologic findings in f-PTCL had few significant differences from AITL.
The positive rate for Bcl-6 expression in neoplastic cells was significantly
associated with the frequency of polymorphic infiltrates, vascular proliferation,
B-immunoblasts, clear cells, Epstein-Barr virus-positive lymphocytes,
hepatosplenomegaly, and skin rash. Our study confirmed the continuity between
f-PTCL and AITL. Moreover, Bcl-6 expression in f-PTCL was statistically
associated with the characteristics of AITL.

PMID: 22586046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Aug;42(8):2100-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142203.

miR-9 enhances IL-2 production in activated human CD4(+) T cells by repressing
Blimp-1.

Thiele S(1), Wittmann J, Jäck HM, Pahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine III,
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The fast production of effector cytokines, such as IL-2, is essential for the
autocrine function in the rapid activation of naive CD4(+) T cells. Here, we show
that the microRNA (miRNA) pathway plays an important role in the
posttranscriptional regulation of proinflammatory cytokines in human CD4(+) T
cells. miRNAs are small noncoding molecules that act as posttranscriptional
regulators of gene expression by binding to the 3' untranslated region of target 
mRNAs. Using microarray and deep sequencing approaches, we detected an increase
in the abundance of miR-9 in activated human CD4(+) T cells. To determine the
impact of miR-9 on immune responses, we analyzed its effect on two putative
target genes, PRDM1, which encodes for the transcription factor Blimp-1 (B
lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1), and Bcl-6 (B cell lymphoma-6 protein). 
Suppression of miR-9 led to increased expression of PRDM1 and Bcl-6, which
subsequently resulted in diminished secretion of IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3>. Our data provide
evidence that the abundance of Blimp-1, and consequently the secretion of
proinflammatory cytokines, is regulated in two ways: (i) transcriptional
regulation by activation of CD4(+) T cells and (ii) posttranscriptional
regulation by enhanced miR-9 expression.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22585398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 15;368(2):181-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.04.034. Epub 2012 
May 8.

The Drosophila BCL6 homolog Ken and Barbie promotes somatic stem cell
self-renewal in the testis niche.

Issigonis M(1), Matunis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Stem cells sustain tissue regeneration by their remarkable ability to replenish
the stem cell pool and to generate differentiating progeny. Signals from local
microenvironments, or niches, control stem cell behavior. In the Drosophila
testis, a group of somatic support cells called the hub creates a stem cell niche
by locally activating the Janus Kinase-Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway in two adjacent types of stem cells: germline
stem cells (GSCs) and somatic cyst stem cells (CySCs). Here, we find that ken and
barbie (ken) is autonomously required for the self-renewal of CySCs but not GSCs.
Furthermore, Ken misexpression in the CySC lineage induces the cell-autonomous
self-renewal of somatic cells as well as the nonautonomous self-renewal of germ
cells outside the niche. Thus, Ken, like Stat92E and its targets ZFH1 (Leatherman
and Dinardo, 2008) and Chinmo (Flaherty et al., 2010), is necessary and
sufficient for CySC renewal. However, ken is not a JAK-STAT target in the testis,
but instead acts in parallel to Stat92E to ensure CySC self-renewal. Ken
represses a subset of Stat92E targets in the embryo (Arbouzova et al., 2006)
suggesting that Ken maintains CySCs by repressing differentiation factors. In
support of this hypothesis, we find that the global JAK-STAT inhibitor Protein
tyrosine phosphatase 61F (Ptp61F) is a JAK-STAT target in the testis that is
repressed by Ken. Together, our work demonstrates that Ken has an important role 
in the inhibition of CySC differentiation. Studies of ken may inform our
understanding of its vertebrate orthologue B-Cell Lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and how
misregulation of this oncogene leads to human lymphomas.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3402624
PMID: 22580161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 1;422(2):238-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.133. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Role of the frequency of blood CD4(+) CXCR5(+) CCR6(+) T cells in autoimmunity in
patients with Sjögren's syndrome.

Li XY(1), Wu ZB, Ding J, Zheng ZH, Li XY, Chen LN, Zhu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, State key Discipline of Cell Biology,
Xi-jing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Shaanxi Province, PR China.

The blood CD4(+) CXCR5(+) T cells, known as "circulating" Tfh, have been shown to
efficiently induce naïve B cells to produce immunoglobulin. They play an
important role in certain autoimmune diseases. In the present study, we show for 
the first time that the frequency of CD4(+) CXCR5(+) T cells is increased in pSS 
patients and positively correlated with autoantibodies in the blood. The
concentration of Th17-like subsets (CD4(+) CXCR5(+) CCR6(+)) in pSS patients was 
found to be significantly higher than in healthy controls. Functional assays
showed that activated Th17-like subtypes in the blood display the key features of
Tfh cells, including invariably coexpressed PD-1, ICOS, CD40L and IL-21. Th17
subsets were found to highly express Bcl-6 protein and Th1 and Th2 were not.
Bcl-6 is believed to be a master transforming factor for Tfh cell differentiation
and facilitate B cell proliferation and somatic hypermutation within the germinal
center. These data indicate that Th17 subsets of CD4(+) CXCR5(+) T cells in the
blood may participate in the antibody-related immune responses and that high
frequency of CD4(+) CXCR5(+) CCR6(+) Tfh cells in blood may be suitable
biomarkers for the evaluation of the active immune stage of pSS patients. It
might provide insights into the pathogenesis and perhaps help researchers
identify novel therapeutic targets for pSS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Oncol. 2012;2012:752860. doi: 10.1155/2012/752860. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Malignant and nonmalignant gene signatures in squamous head and neck cancer.

Worsham MJ(1), Lu M, Chen KM, Stephen JK, Havard S, Schweitzer VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Health System,
Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

Genetic events specific to the pathogenesis of malignancy can offer clues to the 
tumorigenesis process. The objective of this study was to identify gene
alterations that differentiate tumor and nontumor lesions in squamous head and
neck cancer (HNSCC). DNA from 220 primary HNSCC with concurrently present tumor
and nontumor lesions from the same patient was interrogated for genomic
alterations of loss or gain of copy. Conditional logistic regression dealt with
tumor and non-tumor records within a patient. Of 113 genes, 53 had univariate
effects (P < 0.01), of which 16 genes remained in the multivariable model with P 
< 0.01. The model had a C-index (ROC) of 0.93. Loss of CDKN2B and gain of BCL6,
FGF3, and PTP4A3 predicted tumor. Loss of BAK1 and CCND1 and gain of STCH
predicted nontumor. This highly powered model assigned alterations in 16 genes
specific for malignant versus nonmalignant lesions, supporting their contribution
to the pathogenesis of HNSCC as well as their potential utility as relevant
targets for further evaluation as markers of early detection and progression.

PMCID: PMC3335248
PMID: 22570652  [PubMed]


72. Mod Pathol. 2012 Jul;25(7):968-82. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.52. Epub 2012 Apr 
27.

EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly is an aggressive
post-germinal center B-cell neoplasm characterized by prominent nuclear factor-kB
activation.

Montes-Moreno S(1), Odqvist L, Diaz-Perez JA, Lopez AB, de Villambrosía SG,
Mazorra F, Castillo ME, Lopez M, Pajares R, García JF, Mollejo M, Camacho FI,
Ruiz-Marcellán C, Adrados M, Ortiz N, Franco R, Ortiz-Hidalgo C, Suarez-Gauthier 
A, Young KH, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, IFIMAV,
Santander, Spain. smontes@humv.es

Here, we report a retrospective series of 47 EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma associated with advanced age. Histopathology allowed to the
identification of different histological patterns: cases with polymorphic diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (29 cases), Hodgkin-like (8 cases) and polymorphic
lymphoproliferative disorder-like (9 cases) patterns. One case was purely
monomorphic diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. We show that this lymphoma type is a
neoplasm with prominent classical and alternative nuclear factor-kB pathway
activation in neoplastic cells (79% of the cases showed nuclear staining for
p105/p50, 74% for p100/p52 and 63% for both proteins), with higher frequency than
that observed in a control series of EBV-negative diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(<U+03C7>(2) <0.001). Most cases showed an activated phenotype (95% non-germinal center 
(Hans algorithm); 78% activated B cell (Choi algorithm)). Clonality testing
demonstrated IgH and/or K/Kde/L monoclonal rearrangements in 64% of cases and
clonal T-cell populations in 24% of cases. C-MYC (1 case), BCL6 (2 cases) or IgH 
(3 cases) translocations were detected by FISH in 18% cases. These tumors had a
poor overall survival and progression-free survival (the estimated 2-year overall
survival was 40 ± 10% and the estimated 2-year progression-free survival was 36 ±
9%). Thus, alternative therapies, based on the tumor biology, need to be tested
in patients with EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly.

PMID: 22538516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035556. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Male-dominant activation of rat renal organic anion transporter 1 (Oat1) and 3
(Oat3) expression by transcription factor BCL6.

Wegner W(1), Burckhardt BC, Burckhardt G, Henjakovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systemic Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical
Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Organic anion transporters 1 (Oat1) and 3 (Oat3) mediate the
transport of organic anions, including frequently prescribed drugs, across cell
membranes in kidney proximal tubule cells. In rats, these transporters are known 
to be male-dominant and testosterone-dependently expressed. The molecular
mechanisms that are involved in the sex-dependent expression are unknown. Our aim
was to identify genes that show a sex-dependent expression and could be involved 
in male-dominant regulation of Oat1 and Oat3.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Promoter activities of Oat1 and Oat3 were
analyzed using luciferase assays. Expression profiling was done using a SurePrint
G3 rat GE 8 × 60K microarray. RNA was isolated from renal cortical slices of four
adult rats per sex. To filter the achieved microarray data for genes expressed in
proximal tubule cells, transcription database alignment was carried out. We
demonstrate that predicted androgen response elements in the promoters of Oat1
and Oat3 are not functional when the promoters were expressed in OK cells. Using 
microarray analyses we analyzed 17,406 different genes. Out of these genes, 56
exhibit a sex-dependent expression in rat proximal tubule cells. As genes
potentially involved in the regulation of Oat1 and Oat3 expression, we
identified, amongst others, the male-dominant hydroxysteroid (17-beta)
dehydrogenase 1 (Hsd17b1), B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6), and polymerase (RNA) III
(DNA directed) polypeptide G (Polr3g). Moreover, our results revealed that the
transcription factor BCL6 activates promoter constructs of Oat1 and Oat3.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that the male-dominant expression of both
transporters, Oat1 and Oat3, is possibly not directly regulated by the classical 
androgen receptor mediated transcriptional pathway but appears to be regulated by
the transcription factor BCL6.

PMCID: PMC3329484
PMID: 22530049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Curr Opin Hematol. 2012 Jul;19(4):299-304. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328353bbbd.

Biology of double-hit B-cell lymphomas.

Lindsley RC(1), LaCasce AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Mature B-cell lymphomas bearing concurrent chromosomal
rearrangement of MYC/8q24 and BCL2/18q21 are associated with an aggressive
clinical course and resistance to conventional chemotherapy. This review
summarizes the recent literature regarding the clinical and pathologic features
of double-hit lymphomas and outlines current questions about the most accurate
and inclusive definition of the disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Comprehensive evaluation of large series of aggressive mature
B-cell neoplasms reveals recurrent chromosomal aberrations in the majority of
cases. A subset of these lymphomas harbors multiple rearrangements, including
MYC/8q24 in combination with BCL2/18q21 and/or BCL6/3q27, and displays a
particularly aggressive clinical course. Recent data suggest that consideration
of additional features, such as copy number alteration, quantitative protein
expression, and biologic pathway activation may be important in deriving a more
accurate definition of double-hit lymphoma. Despite the poor prognosis associated
with this subset of lymphomas, there remains no evidence for a risk-adapted
treatment strategy and no clinical, pathologic, or genetic factors that predict
response to therapy.
SUMMARY: Double-hit lymphoma remains an incompletely characterized disease
entity. Large, multicenter studies are needed to define relevant clinical,
genetic, and pathologic variables and to characterize appropriate risk-adapted
treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC3389520
PMID: 22504522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Immunol Rev. 2012 May;247(1):172-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2012.01112.x.

Roles of BCL6 in normal and transformed germinal center B cells.

Basso K(1), Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Genetics, the
Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor required in mature B cells during the
germinal center (GC) reaction. Multiple mechanisms act coordinately to timely
modulate BCL6 expression at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. BCL6
prevents premature activation and differentiation of GC B cells and provides an
environment tolerant of the DNA breaks associated with immunoglobulin gene
remodeling mechanisms involved in the production of high-affinity antibodies of
different isotypes. The critical functions exerted by BCL6 during normal B-cell
development can be hijacked by the malignant transformation process. Indeed, BCL6
is targeted by genetic aberrations and acts as an oncogene in GC-derived
lymphomas. The aberrations affecting BCL6 interfere with the multiple levels of
regulation that grant a fine tuning of BCL6 expression and activity in
physiologic conditions. This review summarizes the current knowledge on BCL6
function and its role in lymphomagenesis.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22500840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Immunol Rev. 2012 May;247(1):133-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2012.01117.x.

The 1-1-1 fallacy.

Crotty S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. shane@liai.org

T-cell help to B cells is a fundamental aspect of adaptive immunity and the
generation of B-cell memory (memory B cells and plasma cells). Follicular helper 
CD4(+) T (Tfh) cells are the specialized providers of B-cell help, and Tfh cells 
depend on Bcl6 for their differentiation. This review discusses Tfh cell
functions, transcription factors, and induction signals, with particular focus on
the richness of the underlying biology and assessing the simplicity or complexity
of each of these processes.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22500837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Immunol Rev. 2012 May;247(1):120-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2012.01120.x.

Differentiation of germinal center B cells and follicular helper T cells as
viewed by tracking Bcl6 expression dynamics.

Okada T(1), Moriyama S, Kitano M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Immunodynamics, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. tokada@rcai.riken.jp

Development of germinal center (GC) B cells and follicular helper T (Tfh) cells
requires the transcription factor B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6). Expression of Bcl6 in
B cells and helper T cells is regulated by complex signals including those
generated through their antigen-specific interactions, which take place in
various microenvironments depending on their activation/differentiation states.
In the last several years, it has become possible to detect Bcl6 protein in
individual B cells and T cells by intracellular staining with the newly developed
antibodies or by using the reporter mice. Experiments using these reagents have
started to clarify microanatomical location of early Bcl6 upregulation in B cells
and T cells, and contributed to reveal the dispensability and indispensability of
B cells in the early and late phase of Tfh differentiation. They also started to 
reveal the diversity, plasticity, and/or instability of Tfh cells. We summarize
the recent findings made by tracking Bcl6 expression together with the updated
knowledge about dynamics of antigen-engaged B cells and helper T cells and
discuss them in relation to possible signaling requirements for the development
of GC B cells and Tfh cells.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22500836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Immunol Rev. 2012 May;247(1):107-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2012.01116.x.

POK/ZBTB proteins: an emerging family of proteins that regulate lymphoid
development and function.

Lee SU(1), Maeda T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoietic Stem Cell and Leukemia Research, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, CA, USA.

The germinal center (GC) is a unique histological structure found in peripheral
lymphoid organs. GCs provide an important source of humoral immunity by
generating high affinity antibodies against a pathogen. The GC response is
tightly regulated during clonal expansion, immunoglobulin modification, and
affinity maturation, whereas its deregulation has a detrimental effect on immune 
function, leading to development of diseases, such as lymphoma and autoimmunity. 
LRF (lymphoma/leukemia-related factor), encoded by the ZBTB7A gene, is a
transcriptional repressor belonging to the POK (POZ and Krüppel)/ZBTB (zing
finger and BTB) protein family. LRF was originally identified as a PLZF
(promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger) homolog that physically interacts with BCL6 
(B-cell lymphoma 6), whose expression is required for GC formation and associated
with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Recently, our group demonstrated that LRF plays
critical roles in regulating lymphoid lineage commitment, mature B-cell
development, and the GC response via distinct mechanisms. Herein, we review
POK/ZBTB protein function in lymphoid development, with particular emphasis on
the role of LRF in GC B cells.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3334328
PMID: 22500835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2012 May;31(3):236-41. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31823b6f6a.

An unusual uterine tumor with signet ring cell features.

Sarro R(1), Fiche M, Bisig B, Ketterer N, Benhattar J, Achtari C, de Leval L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Multidisciplinary Oncology Centre, Lausanne,
Switzerland. rossella.sarro@chuv.ch

In 2004, a 56-year-old woman was diagnosed with Stage IA follicular lymphoma in a
cervical lymph node biopsy. The patient experienced total remission after local
radiation therapy. In 2009, a control computed tomography scan evidenced a pelvic
mass, prompting total hysterectomy. The latter harbored a 4.8-cm intramural
uterine tumor corresponding to a mostly diffuse and focally nodular proliferation
of medium to large cells, with extensive, periodic acid-Schiff negative, signet
ring cell changes, and a pan-keratin negative, CD20+, CD10+, Bcl2+, Bcl6+
immunophenotype. Molecular genetic studies showed the same clonal IGH gene
rearrangement in the lymph node and the uterus, establishing the uterine tumor as
a relapse of the preceding follicular lymphoma, although no signet ring cells
were evidenced at presentation. Uterine localization of lymphomas is rare, and
lymphomas with signet ring cell features are uncommon. This exceptional case
exemplifies a diagnostically challenging situation and expands the differential
diagnosis of uterine neoplasms displaying signet ring cell morphology.

PMID: 22498940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 25;287(22):18308-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346270. Epub
2012 Apr 9.

POZ-, AT-hook-, and zinc finger-containing protein (PATZ) interacts with human
oncogene B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and is required for its negative
autoregulation.

Pero R(1), Palmieri D, Angrisano T, Valentino T, Federico A, Franco R, Lembo F,
Klein-Szanto AJ, Del Vecchio L, Montanaro D, Keller S, Arra C, Papadopoulou V,
Wagner SD, Croce CM, Fusco A, Chiariotti L, Fedele M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di
Napoli Federico II and Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Naples, Italy.

The PATZ1 gene encoding a POZ/AT-hook/Kruppel zinc finger (PATZ) transcription
factor, is considered a cancer-related gene because of its loss or misexpression 
in human neoplasias. As for other POZ/domain and Kruppel zinc finger (POK) family
members, the transcriptional activity of PATZ is due to the POZ-mediated oligomer
formation, suggesting that it might be not a typical transactivator but an
architectural transcription factor, thus functioning either as activator or as
repressor depending on the presence of proteins able to interact with it.
Therefore, to better elucidate PATZ function, we searched for its molecular
partners. By yeast two-hybrid screenings, we found a specific interaction between
PATZ and BCL6, a human oncogene that plays a key role in germinal center (GC)
derived neoplasias. We demonstrate that PATZ and BCL6 interact in germinal
center-derived B lymphoma cells, through the POZ domain of PATZ. Moreover, we
show that PATZ is able to bind the BCL6 regulatory region, where BCL6 itself acts
as a negative regulator, and to contribute to negatively modulate its activity.
Consistently, disruption of one or both Patz1 alleles in mice causes focal
expansion of thymus B cells, in which BCL6 is up-regulated. This phenotype was
almost completely rescued by crossing Patz1(+/-) with Bcl6(+/-) mice, indicating 
a key role for Bcl6 expression in its development. Finally, a significant number 
of Patz1 knock-out mice (both heterozygous and homozygous) also develop
BCL6-expressing lymphomas. Therefore, the disruption of one or both Patz1 alleles
may favor lymphomagenesis by activating the BCL6 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3365702
PMID: 22493480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Anticancer Res. 2012 Apr;32(4):1367-73.

Expression and function of FRA2/JUND in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.

Nakayama T(1), Higuchi T, Oiso N, Kawada A, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan.

Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) are 
known to frequently express CC chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4). Previously, we
investigated the transcriptional control of CCR4 expression in ATLL and have
found that an activating protein 1 (AP1) family member, FBJ murine osteosarcoma
viral oncogene homolog (FOS)-related antigen 2 (FRA2), is consistently expressed 
at high levels in ATLL and, together with v-JUN avian sarcoma virus 17 oncogene
homolog D (JUND), up-regulates the expression of CCR4 as well as that of several 
proto-oncogenes such as v-MYB myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (MYB), murine
double minute 2 homolog (MDM2), and B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6). Here, we examined
the expression of these genes in clinical samples of CTCLs. We detected the
transcripts of FRA2, JUND, CCR4, MYB, MDM2, and BCL6 at high levels in CTCL skin 
lesions. Except for BCL6, we confirmed protein expression of FRA2, JUND, CCR4,
MYB, and MDM2 in CTCL skin lesions. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of FRA2
or JUND suppressed cell growth and the expression of CCR4, MYB, MDM2, and BCL6 in
CTCL cell lines. Our results, thus, demonstrate the presence of a common
oncogenic cascade initiated by FRA2/JUND in CCR4-expressing mature T-cell
malignancies such as ATLL and CTCLs.

PMID: 22493372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;90(8):802-11. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.17. Epub 2012 Apr
10.

IL-6 triggers IL-21 production by human CD4+ T cells to drive STAT3-dependent
plasma cell differentiation in B cells.

Diehl SA(1), Schmidlin H, Nagasawa M, Blom B, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine-Immunobiology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT
05405, USA. sean.diehl@uvm.edu

Interleukin (IL)-21-producing CD4(+)T cells are central to humoral immunity.
Deciphering the signals that induce IL-21 production in CD4(+) T cells and those 
triggered by IL-21 in B cells are, therefore, of importance for understanding the
generation of antibody (Ab) responses. Here, we show that IL-6 increased IL-21
production by human CD4(+) T cells, particularly in those that express the
transcriptional regulator B cell lymphoma (BCL)6, which is required in mice for
the development of C-X-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CXCR5(+)) IL-21-producing T
follicular helper (T(FH)) cells. However, retroviral overexpression of BCL6 in
total human CD4(+) T cells only transiently increased CXCR5, the canonical
T(FH)-defining surface marker. We show here that IL-21 was required for the
induction of Ab production by IL-6. In IL-21-treated B cells, signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT)3 was required for optimal immunoglobulin
production and upregulation of PR domain containing 1 (PRDM1(+)), the master
plasma cell factor. These results, therefore, demonstrate the critical importance
of STAT3 activation in B cells during IL-21-driven humoral immunity and suggest
that BCL6 expression, although not sufficient, may serve as a platform for the
acquisition of a T(FH)-like phenotype by human CD4(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC3396759
PMID: 22491065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Epigenetics. 2012 May;7(5):502-13. doi: 10.4161/epi.19801. Epub 2012 May 1.

Genetic and epigenetic analysis of non-small cell lung cancer with
NotI-microarrays.

Dmitriev AA(1), Kashuba VI, Haraldson K, Senchenko VN, Pavlova TV, Kudryavtseva
AV, Anedchenko EA, Krasnov GS, Pronina IV, Loginov VI, Kondratieva TT, Kazubskaya
TP, Braga EA, Yenamandra SP, Ignatjev I, Ernberg I, Klein G, Lerman MI,
Zabarovsky ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

This study aimed to clarify genetic and epigenetic alterations that occur during 
lung carcinogenesis and to design perspective sets of newly identified
biomarkers. The original method includes chromosome 3 specific NotI-microarrays
containing 180 NotI clones associated with genes for hybridization with 40 paired
normal/tumor DNA samples of primary lung tumors: 28 squamous cell carcinomas
(SCC) and 12 adenocarcinomas (ADC). The NotI-microarray data were confirmed by
qPCR and bisulfite sequencing analyses. Forty-four genes showed methylation
and/or deletions in more than 15% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples. 
In general, SCC samples were more frequently methylated/deleted than ADC.
Moreover, the SCC alterations were observed already at stage I of tumor
development, whereas in ADC many genes showed tumor progression specific
methylation/deletions. Among genes frequently methylated/deleted in NSCLC, only a
few were already known tumor suppressor genes: RBSP3 (CTDSPL), VHL and THRB. The 
RPL32, LOC285205, FGD5 and other genes were previously not shown to be involved
in lung carcinogenesis. Ten methylated genes, i.e., IQSEC1, RBSP3, ITGA 9, FOXP1,
LRRN1, GNAI2, VHL, FGD5, ALDH1L1 and BCL6 were tested for expression by qPCR and 
were found downregulated in the majority of cases. Three genes (RBSP3, FBLN2 and 
ITGA9) demonstrated strong cell growth inhibition activity. A comprehensive
statistical analysis suggested the set of 19 gene markers, ANKRD28, BHLHE40,
CGGBP1, RBSP3, EPHB1, FGD5, FOXP1, GORASP1/TTC21, IQSEC1, ITGA9, LOC285375,
LRRC3B, LRRN1, MITF, NKIRAS1/RPL15, TRH, UBE2E2, VHL, WNT7A, to allow early
detection, tumor progression, metastases and to discriminate between SCC and ADC 
with sensitivity and specificity of 80-100%.

PMID: 22491060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Viral Immunol. 2012 Apr;25(2):131-40. doi: 10.1089/vim.2011.0073.

Interleukin-21 inhibits humoral response to an HIV DNA vaccine by enhancing Bcl-6
and Pax-5 expression.

Feng C(1), Jin J, Zou Q, Chen X, Zhou C, Wu B, Weiner DB, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratories of Agro-biotechnology, College of Biological Science,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a T-cell-derived cytokine that modulates T-cell,
B-cell, and natural killer cell responses. It is not known if it could be used as
an adjuvant for HIV DNA vaccination. In our study, we investigated if a DNA
construct expressing IL-21 (designated as pVAX-IL-21) as a molecule adjuvant
could enhance antigen-specific immune responses to an HIV DNA vaccine (pGX-EnvC).
We found that a higher level of antigen-specific cytotoxic responses was induced 
in BALB/C mice immunized with pGX-EnvC with the pVAX-IL-21 via electroporation.
The increased response was associated with higher expression of IFN-<U+03B3> in CD8<U+207A> T
cells. In contrast, the administration of pVAX-IL-21 inhibited the antibody
responses to HIV induced by the pGX-EnvC. The plasma cell inhibitory
transcription factors B-cell lymphoma 6 protein (Bcl-6) and Pax-5 were increased 
in B cells from mice that had been immunized by HIV DNA vaccine plus pVAX-IL-21, 
suggesting that the expressed IL-21 may inhibit the differentiation from B cells 
to plasma cells. These results indicate that IL-21 could enhance CD8<U+207A> T-cell
immunity, but inhibit humoral responses during HIV DNA vaccination.

PMID: 22486304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Metab. 2012 Apr 4;15(4):554-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.02.012. Epub 2012
Mar 29.

The Bcl6-SMRT/NCoR cistrome represses inflammation to attenuate atherosclerosis.

Barish GD(1), Yu RT, Karunasiri MS, Becerra D, Kim J, Tseng TW, Tai LJ, Leblanc
M, Diehl C, Cerchietti L, Miller YI, Witztum JL, Melnick AM, Dent AL, Tangirala
RK, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Chronic inflammation is a hallmark of atherosclerosis, but its transcriptional
underpinnings are poorly understood. We show that the transcriptional repressor
Bcl6 is an anti-inflammatory regulator whose loss in bone marrow of Ldlr(-/-)
mice results in severe atherosclerosis and xanthomatous tendonitis, a virtually
pathognomonic complication in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia.
Disruption of the interaction between Bcl6 and SMRT or NCoR with a peptide
inhibitor in vitro recapitulated atherogenic gene changes in mice transplanted
with Bcl6-deficient bone marrow, pointing to these cofactors as key mediators of 
Bcl6 inflammatory suppression. Using ChIP-seq, we reveal the SMRT and NCoR
corepressor cistromes, each consisting of over 30,000 binding sites with a nearly
50% overlap. While the complete cistromes identify a diversity of signaling
pathways, the Bcl6-bound subcistromes for each corepressor are highly enriched
for NF-<U+03BA>B-driven inflammatory and tissue remodeling genes. These results reveal
that Bcl6-SMRT/NCoR complexes constrain immune responses and contribute to the
prevention of atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3367511
PMID: 22465074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Immunity. 2012 May 25;36(5):847-56. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.02.012. Epub 2012 
Mar 29.

Interleukin-2 inhibits germinal center formation by limiting T follicular helper 
cell differentiation.

Ballesteros-Tato A(1), León B, Graf BA, Moquin A, Adams PS, Lund FE, Randall TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 May 25;36(5):702-4.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells promote T cell-dependent humoral immune responses
by providing T cell help to B cells and by promoting germinal center (GC)
formation and long-lived antibody responses. However, the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms that control Tfh cell differentiation in vivo are incompletely
understood. Here we show that interleukin-2 (IL-2) administration impaired
influenza-specific GCs, long-lived IgG responses, and Tfh cells. IL-2 did not
directly inhibit GC formation, but instead suppressed the differentiation of Tfh 
cells, thereby hindering the maintenance of influenza-specific GC B cells. Our
data demonstrate that IL-2 is a critical factor that regulates successful Tfh and
B cell responses in vivo and regulates Tfh cell development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3361521
PMID: 22464171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 10;109(15):5735-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1201168109. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

PIM1 gene cooperates with human BCL6 gene to promote the development of
lymphomas.

Baron BW(1), Anastasi J, Hyjek EM, Bies J, Reddy PL, Dong J, Joseph L, Thirman
MJ, Wroblewski K, Wolff L, Baron JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
erly.baron@uchospitals.edu

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas in humans are associated with chromosomal
rearrangements (~40%) and/or mutations disrupting autoregulation (~16%) involving
the BCL6 gene. Studies of lymphoma development in humans and mouse models have
indicated that lymphomagenesis evolves through the accumulation of multiple
genetic alterations. Based on our prior studies, which indicated that
carcinogen-induced DNA mutations enhance the incidence of lymphomas in our mouse 
model expressing a human BCL6 transgene, we hypothesized that mutated genes are
likely to play an important cooperative role in BCL6-associated lymphoma
development. We used retroviral insertional mutagenesis in an effort to identify 
which genes cooperate with BCL6 in lymphomagenesis in our BCL6 transgenic mice.
We identified PIM1 as the most frequently recurring cooperating gene in our
murine BCL6-associated lymphomas (T- and B-cell types), and we observed elevated 
levels of PIM1 mRNA and protein expression in these neoplasms. Further,
immunohistochemical staining, which was performed in 20 randomly selected
BCL6-positive human B- and T-cell lymphomas, revealed concurrent expression of
BCL6 and PIM1 in these neoplasms. As PIM1 encodes a serine/threonine kinase, PIM1
kinase inhibition may be a promising therapy for BCL6/PIM1-positive human
lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC3326467
PMID: 22451912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Intern Med. 2012;51(6):643-6. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma arising primarily at the stoma after bladder
reconstruction using ileal conduit.

Muta T(1), Nakaike T, Fujisaki T, Shiraishi T, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chihaya Hospital, Japan. muta0621@gmail.com

A 76-year-old man suffered from swelling stoma for several weeks. A biopsy sample
revealed the diffuse infiltration of large lymphoid cells which were positive for
CD20, bcl-6, and MUM1. The patient was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, with a non-germinal center B-cell pattern. A whole-body PET-CT scan
revealed that the lymphoma was restricted to the stomal site. Bladder
reconstruction was undertaken using the ileal conduit: this is the first reported
case of lymphoma that developed primarily at the stoma. During the long-term
maintenance after bladder reconstruction, clinicians should consider the
possibility of lymphoma at the stomal site.

PMID: 22449676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Leukemia. 2012 Sep;26(9):2103-13. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.83. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Comprehensive gene expression profiling and immunohistochemical studies support
application of immunophenotypic algorithm for molecular subtype classification in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a report from the International DLBCL
Rituximab-CHOP Consortium Program Study.

Visco C(1), Li Y, Xu-Monette ZY, Miranda RN, Green TM, Li Y, Tzankov A, Wen W,
Liu WM, Kahl BS, d'Amore ES, Montes-Moreno S, Dybkær K, Chiu A, Tam W, Orazi A,
Zu Y, Bhagat G, Winter JN, Wang HY, O'Neill S, Dunphy CH, Hsi ED, Zhao XF, Go RS,
Choi WW, Zhou F, Czader M, Tong J, Zhao X, van Krieken JH, Huang Q, Ai W, Etzell 
J, Ponzoni M, Ferreri AJ, Piris MA, Møller MB, Bueso-Ramos CE, Medeiros LJ, Wu L,
Young KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Erratum in
    Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):980.

Gene expression profiling (GEP) has stratified diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) into molecular subgroups that correspond to different stages of
lymphocyte development-namely germinal center B-cell like and activated B-cell
like. This classification has prognostic significance, but GEP is expensive and
not readily applicable into daily practice, which has lead to immunohistochemical
algorithms proposed as a surrogate for GEP analysis. We assembled tissue
microarrays from 475 de novo DLBCL patients who were treated with rituximab-CHOP 
chemotherapy. All cases were successfully profiled by GEP on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue samples. Sections were stained with antibodies reactive 
with CD10, GCET1, FOXP1, MUM1 and BCL6 and cases were classified following a
rationale of sequential steps of differentiation of B cells. Cutoffs for each
marker were obtained using receiver-operating characteristic curves, obviating
the need for any arbitrary method. An algorithm based on the expression of CD10, 
FOXP1 and BCL6 was developed that had a simpler structure than other recently
proposed algorithms and 92.6% concordance with GEP. In multivariate analysis,
both the International Prognostic Index and our proposed algorithm were
significant independent predictors of progression-free and overall survival. In
conclusion, this algorithm effectively predicts prognosis of DLBCL patients
matching GEP subgroups in the era of rituximab therapy.

PMCID: PMC3637886
PMID: 22437443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3734-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103246. Epub 2012
Mar 16.

Bcl6 and Maf cooperate to instruct human follicular helper CD4 T cell
differentiation.

Kroenke MA(1), Eto D, Locci M, Cho M, Davidson T, Haddad EK, Crotty S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Follicular helper CD4 T (Tfh) cells provide B cells with signals that are
important for the generation of high-affinity Abs and immunological memory and,
therefore, are critical for the protective immunity elicited by most human
vaccines. Transcriptional regulators of human Tfh cell differentiation are poorly
understood. In this article, we demonstrate that Bcl6 controls specific gene
modules for human Tfh cell differentiation. The introduction of Bcl6 expression
in primary human CD4 T cells resulted in the regulation of a core set of
migration genes that enable trafficking to germinal centers: CXCR4, CXCR5, CCR7, 
and EBI2. Bcl6 expression also induced a module of protein expression critical
for T-B interactions, including SAP, CD40L, PD-1, ICOS, and CXCL13. This
constitutes direct evidence for Bcl6 control of most of these functions and
includes three genes known to be loci of severe human genetic immunodeficiencies 
(CD40L, SH2D1A, and ICOS). Introduction of Bcl6 did not alter the expression of
IL-21 or IL-4, the primary cytokines of human Tfh cells. We show in this article 
that introduction of Maf (c-Maf) does induce the capacity to express IL-21.
Surprisingly, Maf also induced CXCR5 expression. Coexpression of Bcl6 and Maf
revealed that Bcl6 and Maf cooperate in the induction of CXCR4, PD-1, and ICOS.
Altogether, these findings reveal that Bcl6 and Maf collaborate to orchestrate a 
suite of genes that define core characteristics of human Tfh cell biology.

PMCID: PMC3324673
PMID: 22427637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3700-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103302. Epub 2012
Mar 14.

p110d phosphoinositide 3-kinase represses IgE switch by potentiating BCL6
expression.

Zhang TT(1), Makondo KJ, Marshall AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0T5, 
Canada.

PI3Ks are key signaling enzymes required for triggering many immunological
functions. In B lymphocytes, PI3K signaling is required for Ag-induced
proliferation and robust production of most Ab isotypes. Paradoxically, PI3K was 
found to have a negatively regulatory function regarding Ab class switch
recombination, and blockade of PI3K can strongly potentiate IgE switch. In this
article, we explore the mechanisms of this unexpected negative regulatory
function of PI3K regarding IgE. We demonstrate that p110d PI3K selectively
regulates IgE switch in a B cell-intrinsic manner by controlling germline
transcription of the IgE promoter (eGLT). Although p110d can regulate
transcription of activation-induced cytidine deaminase via Akt, repression of
eGLT and IgE switch is not dependent on Akt signaling. Inhibition of p110d, but
not Akt, leads to reduced expression of transcriptional repressor B cell lymphoma
6 (BCL6) and concomitant upregulation of eGLT and other BCL6-target genes. p110d 
inhibitor treatment strikingly alters the balance between BCL6 and IRF4 (a
transcription factor that antagonizes BCL6), leading to increased IRF4 and
decreased BCL6 expression levels in germinal center B cells. Ectopic expression
of BCL6 can partially overcome the elevated eGLTs and potentiated IgE switching
in p110d-inhibited B cells. To our knowledge, these results provide the first
evidence that p110d PI3K signaling regulates BCL6 expression and indicate that
PI3K promotes the germinal center B cell program and selectively represses IgE
switch by maintaining sufficient levels of BCL6.

PMID: 22422878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Bioessays. 2012 Jul;34(7):569-75. doi: 10.1002/bies.201100180. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Immune tolerance: are regulatory T cell subsets needed to explain suppression of 
autoimmunity?

Tian L(1), Humblet-Baron S, Liston A.

Author information: 
(1)VIB Autoimmune Genetics Laboratory, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The potential for self-reactive T cells to cause autoimmune disease is held in
check by Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs), essential mediators of peripheral
immunological tolerance. Tregs have the capacity to suppress multiple branches of
the immune system, tightly controlling the different subsets of effector T cells 
across multiple different tissue environments. Recent genetic experiments have
found mutations that disrupt specific Treg: effector T cell relationships,
leading to the possibility that subsets of Tregs are required to suppress each
subset of effector T cells. Here we review the environmental factors and
mechanisms that allow Tregs to suppress specific subsets of effector T cells, and
find that a parsimonious explanation of the genetic data can be made without
invoking Treg subsets. Instead, Tregs show a functional and chemotactic
plasticity based on microenvironmental influences that allows the common pool of 
cells to suppress multiple distinct immune responses.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22419393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Future Med Chem. 2012 Mar;4(4):395-424. doi: 10.4155/fmc.12.12.

The impact of CDK inhibition in human malignancies associated with pronounced
defects in apoptosis: advantages of multi-targeting small molecules.

Wesierska-Gadek J(1), Kramer MP.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle Regulation Group, Division: Institute of Cancer Research, Dept of
Medicine I, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. jozefa.gadek-wesierski@meduniwien.ac.at

Malignant cells in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and related diseases are
heterogeneous and consist primarily of long-lived resting cells in the periphery 
and a minor subset of dividing cells in proliferating centers. Both cell
populations have different molecular signatures that play a major role in
determining their sensitivity to therapy. Contemporary approaches to treating CLL
are heavily reliant on cytotoxic chemotherapeutics. However, none of the current 
treatment regimens can be considered curative. Pharmacological CDK inhibitors
have extended the repertoire of potential drugs for CLL. Multi-targeted CDK
inhibitors affect CDKs involved in regulating both cell cycle progression and
transcription. Their interference with transcriptional elongation represses
anti-apoptotic proteins and, thus, promotes the induction of apoptosis.
Importantly, there is evidence that treatment with CDK inhibitors can overcome
resistance to therapy. The pharmacological CDK inhibitors have great potential
for use in combination with other therapeutics and represent promising tools for 
the development of new curative treatments for CLL.

PMID: 22416772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Blood. 2012 May 17;119(20):4619-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-406033. Epub 2012 
Mar 9.

MYC+ diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is not salvaged by classical R-ICE or R-DHAP
followed by BEAM plus autologous stem cell transplantation.

Cuccuini W(1), Briere J, Mounier N, Voelker HU, Rosenwald A, Sundstrom C,
Cogliatti S, Hirchaud E, Ysebaert L, Bron D, Soulier J, Gaulard P, Houlgatte R,
Gisselbrecht C, Thieblemont C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematologie biologique, Hôpital Saint Louis, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris (AP-HP), 1 Ave. Claude Vellefaux, Paris, France.

Approximately 5-10% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) harbor a 8q24/MYC
rearrangement (MYC(+)). We determined the prognostic significance of MYC
rearrangement in patients with relapsed/refractory DLBCL prospectively treated by
R-ICE or R-DHAP followed by high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation. Twenty-eight (17%) of the 161 patients analyzed presented a
MYC(+) rearrangement, targeted as either simple hit (25%) or complex hits (n=75%)
including MYC/BCL2, MYC/BCL6, and MYC/BCL2/BCL6. Results were statistically
highly concordant in matched primary and relapsed biopsies (n = 45). Compared to 
the MYC(-) DLBCL patients, the MYC(+) DLBCL patients presented with a more
elevated lactico-deshydrogenase level (P = .0006) and a more advanced age
adjusted international prognostic index (P = .0039). The 4-year PFS and OS were
significantly lower in the MYC(+) DLBCL patients than those in the MYC(-) DLBCL
patients, with rates of 18% vs 42% (P = .0322), and of 29% vs 62% (P = .0113),
respectively. Type of treatment, R-DHAP or R-ICE, had no impact on survivals,
with 4-year PFS rates of 17% vs 19% and 4-year OS rates of 26% vs 31%. In
conclusion, MYC rearrangement is an early event in DLBCL. MYC(+) DLBCL patients
have a significant inferior prognosis than MYC(-) DLBCL patients. Their outcome
was not influenced by the proposed salvage therapy.

PMCID: PMC3815438
PMID: 22408263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2012 Apr 26;119(17):3997-4008. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-11-392985. Epub
2012 Mar 8.

Functional STAT3 deficiency compromises the generation of human T follicular
helper cells.

Ma CS(1), Avery DT, Chan A, Batten M, Bustamante J, Boisson-Dupuis S, Arkwright
PD, Kreins AY, Averbuch D, Engelhard D, Magdorf K, Kilic SS, Minegishi Y,
Nonoyama S, French MA, Choo S, Smart JM, Peake J, Wong M, Gray P, Cook MC,
Fulcher DA, Casanova JL, Deenick EK, Tangye SG.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 384
Victoria St, Darlinghurst, 2010 NSW, Australia. c.ma@garvan.org.au

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are critical for providing the necessary signals 
to induce differentiation of B cells into memory and Ab-secreting cells.
Accordingly, it is important to identify the molecular requirements for Tfh cell 
development and function. We previously found that IL-12 mediates the
differentiation of human CD4(+) T cells to the Tfh lineage, because IL-12 induces
naive human CD4(+) T cells to acquire expression of IL-21, BCL6, ICOS, and CXCR5,
which typify Tfh cells. We have now examined CD4(+) T cells from patients
deficient in IL-12Rß1, TYK2, STAT1, and STAT3 to further explore the pathways
involved in human Tfh cell differentiation. Although STAT1 was dispensable,
mutations in IL12RB1, TYK2, or STAT3 compromised IL-12-induced expression of
IL-21 by human CD4(+) T cells. Defective expression of IL-21 by STAT3-deficient
CD4(+) T cells resulted in diminished B-cell helper activity in vitro.
Importantly, mutations in STAT3, but not IL12RB1 or TYK2, also reduced Tfh cell
generation in vivo, evidenced by decreased circulating CD4(+)CXCR5(+) T cells.
These results highlight the nonredundant role of STAT3 in human Tfh cell
differentiation and suggest that defective Tfh cell development and/or function
contributes to the humoral defects observed in STAT3-deficient patients.

PMCID: PMC3355712
PMID: 22403255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Virchows Arch. 2012 Apr;460(4):379-87. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1199-x. Epub 2012 
Mar 7.

Etiological factors in primary hepatic B-cell lymphoma.

Kikuma K(1), Watanabe J, Oshiro Y, Shimogama T, Honda Y, Okamura S, Higaki K,
Uike N, Soda T, Momosaki S, Yokota T, Toyoshima S, Takeshita M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka
University, Nanakuma 7-45-1, Johnan-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Sixty-four cases of malignant lymphoma involving the liver were examined. Of
these, 20 cases were histologically confirmed to be primary hepatic B-cell
lymphoma. Twelve of these 20 cases were diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and
eight cases were mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma. Of the 12
cases of DLBCL, six were immunohistologically positive for CD10 and/or Bcl6
(indicating a germinal center phenotype), six were positive for Bcl2, and five
were positive for CD25. Eight of the 12 DLBCL cases (66.7%) and two of the eight 
MALT lymphoma cases (25%) had serum anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies and
HCV RNA. The incidence of HCV infection was significantly higher in the hepatic
DLBCL cases than in systemic intravascular large B-cell cases with liver
involvement (one of 11 cases, 9.1%) and T/NK-cell lymphoma cases (one of 19
cases, 5.3%) (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 for both). Two hepatic DLBCL cases (16.7%) had rheumatoid 
arthritis treated with methotrexate, and four MALT lymphoma cases (50%) had
Sjögren's syndrome, primary biliary cirrhosis, or autoimmune hepatitis; one case 
in each of these two groups was complicated by chronic HCV-seropositive
hepatitis. Although primary hepatic lymphoma is rare, persistent inflammatory
processes associated with HCV infection or autoimmune disease may play
independent roles in the lymphomagenesis of hepatic B cells.

PMCID: PMC3320708
PMID: 22395482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Ann Lab Med. 2012 Mar;32(2):162-6. doi: 10.3343/alm.2012.32.2.162. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

A case of B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma in a Korean child.

Ahn JY(1), Seo YH, Park PW, Kim KH, Park MJ, Jeong JH, Park SH, Song YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Gachon University Gil Hospital, Incheon,
Korea. jyahn@gilhospital.com

B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma (BL) (intermediate DLBCL/BL), is a
heterogeneous group with some features resembling DLBCL and others resembling BL.
Here, we report a case of intermediate DLBCL/BL in a Korean child. A 2-yr-old
male was admitted for evaluation and management of left hip pain.
Immunohistochemistry of a biopsy of the femur neck revealed tumor cells positive 
for CD20, CD10, BCL2, BCL6, and Ki67. A bone marrow (BM) aspirate smear revealed 
that 49.3% of all nucleated cells were abnormal lymphoid cells, composed of
large- and medium-sized cells. Immunophenotyping of the neoplastic cells revealed
positivity for CD19, CD10, CD20, and sIg lambda and negativity for CD34, Tdt, and
myeloperoxidase (MPO). Cytogenetic and FISH analyses showed a complex karyotype, 
including t(8;14)(q24.1;q32) and IGH-MYC fusion. Intensive chemotherapy was
initiated, including prednisone, vincristine, L-asparaginase, daunorubicin, and
central nervous system prophylaxis with intrathecal methotrexate (MTX) and
cytarabine. One month after the initial diagnosis, BM examination revealed the
persistent of abnormal lymphoid cells; cerebrospinal fluid cytology, including
cytospin, showed atypical lymphoid cells. The patient was treated again with
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, adriamycin, MTX, and intrathecal MTX
and cytarabine. The patient died of sepsis 5 months after the second round of
chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3289783
PMID: 22389885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nat Genet. 2012 Mar 4;44(4):461-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.1107.

A new subtype of bone sarcoma defined by BCOR-CCNB3 gene fusion.

Pierron G(1), Tirode F, Lucchesi C, Reynaud S, Ballet S, Cohen-Gogo S, Perrin V, 
Coindre JM, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Unité de Génétique Somatique-Centre Hospitalier, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    Bull Cancer. 2012 May;99(5):512.

The identification of subtype-specific translocations has revolutionized the
diagnostics of sarcoma and has provided new insight into oncogenesis. We used
RNA-seq to investigate samples from individuals diagnosed with small round cell
tumors of bone, possibly Ewing sarcoma, but which lacked the canonical EWSR1-ETS 
translocation. A new fusion was observed between BCOR (encoding the BCL6
co-repressor) and CCNB3 (encoding the testis-specific cyclin B3) on the X
chromosome. RNA-seq results were confirmed by RT-PCR and through cloning of the
tumor-specific genomic translocation breakpoints. In total, 24
BCOR-CCNB3-positive tumors were identified among a series of 594 sarcoma cases.
Gene profiling experiments indicated that BCOR-CCNB3-positive cases are
biologically distinct from other sarcomas, particularly Ewing sarcoma. Finally,
we show that CCNB3 immunohistochemistry is a powerful diagnostic marker for this 
subgroup of sarcoma and that overexpression of BCOR-CCNB3 or of truncated CCNB3
activates S phase in NIH3T3 cells. Thus, the intrachromosomal X-chromosome fusion
described here represents a new subtype of bone sarcoma caused by a newly
identified gene fusion mechanism.

PMID: 22387997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 1;188(7):3042-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102899. Epub 2012
Mar 2.

Downregulation of inflammatory microRNAs by Ig-like transcript 3 is essential for
the differentiation of human CD8(+) T suppressor cells.

Chang CC(1), Zhang QY, Liu Z, Clynes RA, Suciu-Foca N, Vlad G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunogenetics and Cellular Immunology, Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We have investigated the mechanism underlying the immunoregulatory function of
membrane Ig-like transcript 3 (ILT3) and soluble ILT3Fc. microRNA (miRNA)
expression profile identified genes that were downregulated in ILT3-induced human
CD8(+) T suppressor cells (Ts) while upregulated in T cells primed in the absence
of ILT3. We found that miR-21, miR-30b, and miR-155 target the 3'-untranslated
region of genes whose expression was strongly increased in ILT3Fc-induced Ts,
such as dual specificity phosphatase 10, B cell CLL/lymphoma 6, and suppressor of
cytokine signaling 1, respectively. Transfection of miRNA mimics or inhibitors
and site-specific mutagenesis of their 3'-untranslated region binding sites
indicated that B cell CLL/lymphoma 6, dual specificity phosphatase 10, and
suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 are direct targets of miR-30b, miR-21, and
miR-155. Primed CD8(+) T cells transfected with miR-21&30b, miR-21&155, or
miR-21&30b&155 inhibitors displayed suppressor activity when added to autologous 
CD3-triggered CD4 T cells. Luciferase reporter assays of miR-21 and miR-155
indicated that their transcription is highly dependent on AP-1. Analysis of
activated T cells showed that ILT3Fc inhibited the translocation to the nucleus
of the AP-1 subunits, FOSB and c-FOS, and the phosphorylation of ZAP70 and
phospholipase C-<U+03B3> 1. In conclusion, ILT3Fc inhibits T cell activation and induces
the generation of Ts targeting multiple inflammatory miRNA pathways.

PMID: 22387553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Nov;227(11):3678-92. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24076.

Nanog regulates molecules involved in stemness and cell cycle-signaling pathway
for maintenance of pluripotency of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells.

Choi SC(1), Choi JH, Park CY, Ahn CM, Hong SJ, Lim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Department of Cardiology, Korea University Anam
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

To identify potential downstream targets of Nanog, a key transcription factor in 
the maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) and embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cells, global gene expression profiles in Nanog small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-transfected P19 EC stem cells were performed using cDNA, 60-mer, and
30-mer microarray platforms. The putative Nanog target genes identified by Nanog 
silencing were verified using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
after Nanog overexpression. Downregulation of Nanog in P19 cells resulted in
reduction of pluripotency markers, such as Fgf4, Klf2, Mtf2, Oct-4, Rex1, Sox1,
Yes, and Zfp143, whereas overexpression of Nanog in P19 cells reversely
upregulated their expression. However, expressions of pluripotency markers
Cripto, germ cell nuclear factor, Sox2, and Zfp57 as well as leukemia inhibitory 
factor (LIF)/Stat3 pathway molecules LIF, IL6st, and Stat3 were not affected
after 48 h transfection with Nanog siRNA or construct. Nanog silencing also
downregulated expression of molecules involved in the p53- and cell
cycle-signaling pathway (Atf3, Jdp2, Cul3, Hist1hic, and Bcl6), whereas
expression of E2f1, Tob1, Lyn, and Smarcc1 was upregulated by Nanog silencing.
Expressions of cyclins D1, D2, D3, and E1 as well as cyclin-dependent kinase
(Cdk) 1 and Cdk6 were downregulated by Nanog silencing in P19 cells, whereas
Nanog overexpression reversely increased their expressions. Taken together,
examination of global transcriptional changes after Nanog silencing followed by
verification by Nanog overexpression has revealed new molecules involved in the
maintenance of self-renewal and in the regulation of the p53- and cell
cycle-pathway of P19 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22378194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Exp Med. 2012 Mar 12;209(3):597-606. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111696. Epub 2012 Feb
27.

A germinal center-independent pathway generates unswitched memory B cells early
in the primary response.

Taylor JJ(1), Pape KA, Jenkins MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. TAYL0611@umn.edu

Comment in
    Am J Transplant. 2013 May;13(5):1117.

Memory B cells can be produced from the classical germinal center (GC) pathway or
a less understood GC-independent route. We used antigen-based cell enrichment to 
assess the relative contributions of these pathways to the polyclonal memory B
cell pool. We identified a CD38(+) GL7(+) B cell precursor population that
differentiated directly into IgM(+) or isotype-switched (sw) Ig(+) memory B cells
in a GC-independent fashion in response to strong CD40 stimulation.
Alternatively, CD38(+) GL7(+) B cell precursors had the potential to become
Bcl-6(+) GC cells that then generated primarily swIg(+) memory B cells. These
results demonstrate that early IgM(+) and swIg(+) memory B cells are products of 
a GC-independent pathway, whereas later switched Ig(+) memory B cells are
products of GC cells.

PMCID: PMC3302224
PMID: 22370719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Immunity. 2012 Feb 24;36(2):188-200. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.02.002.

The 3' enhancer CNS2 is a critical regulator of interleukin-4-mediated humoral
immunity in follicular helper T cells.

Harada Y(1), Tanaka S, Motomura Y, Harada Y, Ohno S, Ohno S, Yanagi Y, Inoue H,
Kubo M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Research Institute for Biological Science,
Tokyo University of Science, 2669 Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba, 278-0022, Japan.

A main role for interleukin-4 (IL-4) is in humoral immunity, and follicular
helper CD4(+) T (Tfh) cells may be an intrinsic IL-4 source. Here we demonstrate 
that conserved noncoding sequence 2 (CNS2) is an essential enhancer element for
IL-4 expression in Tfh cells but not in Th2 cells. Mice with a CNS2 deletion had 
a reduction in IgG1 and IgE production and in IL-4 expression in Tfh cells.
Tracking of CNS2 activity via a GFP reporter mouse demonstrated that CNS2-active 
cells expressed several markers of Tfh cells: CXCR5, PD-1, and ICOS; the
transcriptional master regulator Bcl6; and the cytokines IL-21 and IL-4. These
CNS2-active cells were mainly localized in B cell follicles and germinal centers.
The GFP(+) Tfh cells were derived from GFP(-) naive T cells after in vivo
systemic immunization. These results indicate that CNS2 is an essential enhancer 
element required for IL-4 expression in Tfh cells controlling humoral immunity.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. APMIS. 2012 Mar;120(3):253-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02837.x. Epub 2011
Nov 11.

Evidence of the intersection of Epstein-Barr virus with germinal center.

Martín P, Coronado MJ, Bellas C.

PMID: 22339684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 15;188(6):2677-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101455. Epub 2012
Feb 10.

JAB1 is essential for B cell development and germinal center formation and
inversely regulates Fas ligand and Bcl6 expression.

Sitte S(1), Gläsner J, Jellusova J, Weisel F, Panattoni M, Pardi R, Gessner A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Institute-Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene,
University Hospital Erlangen, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Jun activation domain-binding protein 1 (JAB1) regulates ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation by deneddylation of cullin-based ubiquitin ligases and,
therefore, plays a central role in regulating proliferation and apoptosis.
Because these processes are decisive for B cell development, we investigated JAB1
functions in B cells by establishing a mouse strain with a B cell-specific JAB1
deletion. We show that JAB1 is essential for early B cell development, because
the ablation of JAB1 expression blocks B cell development between the pro-B and
pre-B cell stages. Furthermore, JAB1 deletion leads to aberrant expression of the
apoptosis-triggering protein Fas ligand in pro-B cells. Concomitant B
cell-specific overexpression of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl2 partially reverses
the block in B cell development; rescued JAB1-deficient B cells reach the
periphery and produce protective class-switched Abs after Borrelia burgdorferi
infection. Interestingly, B cell-rescued mice exhibit no germinal centers but a
striking extrafollicular plasma cell accumulation. In addition, JAB1 is essential
for Bcl6 expression, a transcriptional repressor required for germinal center
formation. These findings identify JAB1 as an important factor in checkpoint
control during early B cell development, as well as in fate decisions in mature
Ag-primed B cells.

PMID: 22327073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):11234-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.324046. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

STAT5 protein negatively regulates T follicular helper (Tfh) cell generation and 
function.

Nurieva RI(1), Podd A, Chen Y, Alekseev AM, Yu M, Qi X, Huang H, Wen R, Wang J,
Li HS, Watowich SS, Qi H, Dong C, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

Recent work has identified a new subset of CD4(+) T cells named as Tfh cells that
are localized in germinal centers and critical in germinal center formation. Tfh 
cell differentiation is regulated by IL-6 and IL-21, possibly via STAT3 factor,
and B cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) is specifically expressed in Tfh cells and required 
for their lineage specification. In the current study, we characterized the role 
of STAT5 in Tfh cell development. We found that a constitutively active form of
STAT5 effectively inhibited Tfh differentiation by suppressing the expression of 
Tfh-associated factors (CXC motif) receptor 5 (CXCR5), musculoaponeurotic
fibrosarcoma (c-Maf), Bcl6, basic leucine zipper transcription factor ATF-like
(Batf), and IL-21, and STAT5 deficiency greatly enhanced Tfh gene expression.
Importantly, STAT5 regulated the expression of Tfh cell suppressor factor B
lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp-1); STAT5 deficiency impaired
Blimp-1 expression and resulted in elevated expression of Tfh-specific genes.
Similarly, inhibition of IL-2 potentiated Tfh generation, associated with
dampened Blimp-1 expression; Blimp-1 overexpression inhibited Tfh gene expression
in Stat5-deficient T cells, suggesting that the IL-2/STAT5 axis functions to
regulate Blimp-1 expression. In vivo, deletion of STAT5 in CD4(+) T cells
resulted in enhanced development of Tfh cells and germinal center B cells and led
to an impairment of B cell tolerance in a well defined mouse tolerance model.
Taken together, this study demonstrates that STAT5 controls Tfh differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3322890
PMID: 22318729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 14;109(7):2672-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113019109. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Quantitative modeling of the terminal differentiation of B cells and mechanisms
of lymphomagenesis.

Martínez MR(1), Corradin A, Klein U, Álvarez MJ, Toffolo GM, di Camillo B,
Califano A, Stolovitzky GA.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Center for Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032,
USA.

Mature B-cell exit from germinal centers is controlled by a transcriptional
regulatory module that integrates antigen and T-cell signals and, ultimately,
leads to terminal differentiation into memory B cells or plasma cells. Despite a 
compact structure, the module dynamics are highly complex because of the presence
of several feedback loops and self-regulatory interactions, and understanding its
dysregulation, frequently associated with lymphomagenesis, requires robust
dynamical modeling techniques. We present a quantitative kinetic model of three
key gene regulators, BCL6, IRF4, and BLIMP, and use gene expression profile data 
from mature human B cells to determine appropriate model parameters. The model
predicts the existence of two different hysteresis cycles that direct B cells
through an irreversible transition toward a differentiated cellular state. By
synthetically perturbing the interactions in this network, we can elucidate known
mechanisms of lymphomagenesis and suggest candidate tumorigenic alterations,
indicating that the model is a valuable quantitative tool to simulate B-cell exit
from the germinal center under a variety of physiological and pathological
conditions.

PMCID: PMC3289327
PMID: 22308355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Histopathology. 2012 Feb;60(3):452-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04098.x.

Flow cytometric detection and quantification of CD56 (neural cell adhesion
molecule, NCAM) expression in diffuse large B cell lymphomas and review of the
literature.

Stacchini A(1), Barreca A, Demurtas A, Aliberti S, di Celle PF, Novero D.

Author information: 
(1)Flow Cytometry Unit, Molinette Hospital, Turin, Italy.
astacchini@molinette.piemonte.it

AIM: To report unusual CD56 (neural cell adhesion molecule, NCAM) expression on
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: CD56 expression was first detected and quantified on tissues
obtained from five cases of DLBCL by flow cytometry (FC), then confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. The CD56 expression pattern was heterogeneous among the
cases [the molecular equivalent of soluble fluorochrome (MESF) level ranged from 
2214 to 133 466]. All were CD10 and Bcl-6 positive, suggesting their germinal
centre origin; one was also CD5 positive. An extranodal presentation occurred in 
three of five cases.
CONCLUSIONS: CD56 expression in B cell lymphoma is a rare occurrence. FC is able 
to identify aberrant immunophenotypes that can be useful in the identification
and monitoring of B cell lymphoma subtypes. The presence of CD56 reported by the 
literature on certain DLBCL with extranodal presentation might be related to
mechanisms involved in growth and expansion.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22276608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Exp Med. 2012 Feb 13;209(2):243-50. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111174. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

STAT5 is a potent negative regulator of TFH cell differentiation.

Johnston RJ(1), Choi YS, Diamond JA, Yang JA, Crotty S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Mar;12(3):152.

Follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) constitute the CD4(+) T cell subset that 
is specialized to provide help to germinal center (GC) B cells and, consequently,
mediate the development of long-lived humoral immunity. T(FH) cell
differentiation is driven by the transcription factor Bcl6, and recent studies
have identified cytokine and cell-cell signals that drive Bcl6 expression.
However, although T(FH) dysregulation is associated with several major autoimmune
diseases, the mechanisms underlying the negative regulation of T(FH) cell
differentiation are poorly understood. In this study, we show that STAT5 inhibits
T(FH) cell differentiation and function. Constitutive STAT5 signaling in
activated CD4(+) T cells selectively blocked T(FH) cell differentiation and GCs, 
and IL-2 signaling was a primary inducer of this pathway. Conversely,
STAT5-deficient CD4(+) T cells (mature STAT5(fl/fl) CD4(+) T cells transduced
with a Cre-expressing vector) rapidly up-regulated Bcl6 expression and
preferentially differentiated into T(FH) cells during T cell priming in vivo.
STAT5 signaling failed to inhibit T(FH) cell differentiation in the absence of
the transcription factor Blimp-1, a direct repressor of Bcl6 expression and T(FH)
cell differentiation. These results demonstrate that IL-2, STAT5, and Blimp-1
collaborate to negatively regulate T(FH) cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3281266
PMID: 22271576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Antivir Ther. 2012;17(1):111-8. doi: 10.3851/IMP1957.

Liver follicular helper T-cells predict the achievement of virological response
following interferon-based treatment in HCV-infected patients.

Tripodo C(1), Petta S, Guarnotta C, Pipitone R, Cabibi D, Colombo MP, Craxì A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Anatomia Patologica, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Here, we assessed the presence of intrahepatic follicular helper
T-cells (T(FH)) in a cohort of consecutive genotype 1 (G1) chronic hepatitis C
(CHC) patients comprising non-responders (NRs), relapsers (RRs) or those with
sustained virological response (SVR) to pegylated interferon and ribavirin, and
tested their relation with the response to antiviral treatment.
METHODS: A total of 78 patients with G1 CHC (30 SVR, 15 RR and 33 NR), comparable
for sex, age, viral load and fibrosis were evaluated by immunohistochemistry for 
liver content of PD1+Bcl6+ T(FH) cells. The number of T(FH) cells in the
immunostained sections was counted out of five representative high-power
microscopic fields (400×) relative to areas involved by the inflammatory
infiltrate. IL28B rs12979860 and rs8099917 polymorphisms were also evaluated.
RESULTS: The absolute number of liver T(FH) progressively increased from NR to RR
to a maximum in SVR patients (14.2 ±12.5 versus 24.5 ±12.5 versus 59.2 ±27.1;
P<0.001). The mean absolute number of liver T(FH) was 24.3 ±21.1 in 18 TT
polymorphism patients, 31.7 ±29.5 in 43 TC and 47.8 ±27.8 in 17 CC (P=0.01). SVR 
was achieved in 27/35 (77.1%) of patients with T(FH)=28 and in only 3/43 (6.9%)
of those with T(FH)<28. Similarly, 15/17 (88.2%) CC patients achieved SVR,
compared with 15/61 (24.6%) TT/TC subjects. With the combination of T(FH) at the 
threshold of 28 and the rs12979860 polymorphism, the ability to predict SVR
strongly increased.
CONCLUSIONS: In G1 CHC patients, T(FH) cells are present in the hepatic
inflammatory infiltrate. Their amount is proportional to the ultimate likelihood 
of SVR, with a progressive increase from NR to RR to SVR. Quantification of T(FH)
cells in the liver biopsy of these patients adds useful prognostic information.

PMID: 22267475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Curr Opin Hematol. 2012 Mar;19(2):110-6. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e32834ff4f7.

Genetic mutations in chronic myelogenous leukemia: when to check and what to do?

Berman E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Weil Cornell
Medical College, New York, USA. bermane@mskcc.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The review will appraise the literature concerning ABL kinase 
domain mutations that has appeared over the last year and identify new questions,
answers to old questions, and discuss new trends in clinical and laboratory based
research.
RECENT FINDINGS: A concise summary of European LeukemiaNet guidelines for kinase 
domain mutation studies was published this year. A new controversial topic
emerged: the relevance of IC50 data to guide second-line tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) therapy. Although flaws in the methodology have been
acknowledged, one group summarily rejected IC50 data and recommended that
clinicians use individual patient comorbidities and drug safety profiles. The
influence of kinase domain mutations on response to second-line and third-line
TKI therapy was also published this year; unexpectedly, kinase domain mutations
were found to have no effect on response or survival. However, the presence of a 
kinase domain mutation did influence survival following hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Lastly, new findings from laboratories identified transcription 
factors BCL6 and STAT5 as potential new treatment targets.
SUMMARY: The last 12 months has brought much attention to clinical management of 
patients with kinase domain mutations and identified a new controversy concerning
IC50 data use in the clinic. Kinase domain mutations do not appear to influence
response to second-line and third-line response to TKI therapy. New targets that 
do not directly involve BCR-ABL added potential new therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 22248877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2012 Feb 23;119(8):1882-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388470. Epub 2012
Jan 11.

Patient age at diagnosis is associated with the molecular characteristics of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Klapper W(1), Kreuz M, Kohler CW, Burkhardt B, Szczepanowski M, Salaverria I,
Hummel M, Loeffler M, Pellissery S, Woessmann W, Schwänen C, Trümper L,
Wessendorf S, Spang R, Hasenclever D, Siebert R; Molecular Mechanisms in
Malignant Lymphomas Network Project of the Deutsche Krebshilfe.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hematopathology Section and Lymph Node Registry,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel/University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany. wklapper@path.uni-kiel.de

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most frequent type of B-cell lymphoma in
adult patients but also occurs in children. Patients are currently assigned to
therapy regimens based on arbitrarily chosen age limits only (eg, 18 or 60 years)
and not biologically justified limits. A total of 364 diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas and related mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas other than Burkitt
lymphoma from all age groups were analyzed by comprehensive molecular profiling. 
The probability of several biologic features previously reported to be associated
with poor prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, such as ABC subtype, BCL2
expression, or cytogenetic complexity, increases with age at diagnosis.
Similarly, various genetic features, such as IRF4 translocations, gains in 1q21, 
18q21, 7p22, and 7q21, as well as changes in 3q27, including gains and
translocations affecting the BCL6 locus, are significantly associated with
patient age, but no cut-offs between age groups could be defined. If age was
incorporated in multivariate analyses, genetic complexity lost its prognostic
significance, whereas the prognostic impact of ABC subtype and age were additive.
Our data indicate that aging is a major determinant of lymphoma biology. They
challenge current concepts regarding both prognostic biomarkers and treatment
stratification based on strict age cut-offs.

PMID: 22238326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer. 2012 Sep 1;118(17):4173-83. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27396. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Prognostic significance of MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 rearrangements in patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone plus rituximab.

Akyurek N(1), Uner A, Benekli M, Barista I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.
akyurek@gazi.edu.tr

BACKGROUND: Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) are a biologically
heterogeneous group in which various gene alterations have been reported. The aim
of this study was to investigate the frequency and prognostic impact of BCL2,
BCL6, and MYC rearrangements in cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and
prednisone plus rituximab (R-CHOP)-treated DLBCL cases.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays were constructed from 239 cases of DLBCL, and the
expressions of CD10, BCL6, MUM1/IRF4, and BCL2 were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 rearrangements were investigated by
interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization on tissue microarrays. Survival
analysis was constructed from 145 R-CHOP-treated patients.
RESULTS: MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 rearrangements were detected in 14 (6%), 36 (15%),
and 69 (29%) of 239 DLBCL patients. Double or triple rearrangements were detected
in 7 (3%) of 239 DLBCL cases. Of these, 4 had BCL2 and MYC, 2 had BCL6 and MYC,
and 1 had BCL2, BCL6, and MYC rearrangements. The prognosis of these cases was
extremely poor, with a median survival of 9 months. MYC rearrangement was
associated with significantly worse overall survival (P = .01), especially for
the cases with GC phenotype (P = .009). BCL6 rearrangement also predicted
significantly shorter overall survival (P = .04), especially for the non-GC
phenotype (P = .03). BCL2 rearrangement had no prognostic impact on outcome.
International Prognostic Index (P = .004) and MYC rearrangement (P = .009) were
independent poor prognostic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of MYC gene rearrangement along with BCL2 and BCL6 is
critical in identifying high-risk patients with poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 22213394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hum Pathol. 2012 May;43(5):619-28. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.09.002. Epub 2011 
Dec 29.

"Intrafollicular neoplasia" of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma:
description of a hypothetic early step of the disease.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico Aviano, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, IRCCS, 33081 Aviano, Italy. acarbone@cro.it

The 2008 WHO Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues has
addressed the problem of intrafollicular neoplasia/"in situ" lesion for
follicular lymphoma. The concept of intrafollicular neoplasia has also been
proposed for other lymphomas in which the putative normal counterpart of the
tumor cell is located in the germinal center or the mantle zone or the marginal
zone of the follicle. However, unlike in situ follicular lymphoma, the precise
histologic definition of this early lesion for other lymphomas is still lacking. 
When applied to nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, another germinal
center-derived lymphoma, "intrafollicular neoplasia" may be regarded as a
neoplasia at an early stage of development, such as in situ follicular lymphoma. 
Interestingly, this early lesion can be observed in lymph nodes that otherwise
show the most common nodular involvement by nodular lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin lymphoma. The recognition of intrafollicular neoplasia is based on the
identification of typical, strongly stained BCL6+, lymphocyte predominant tumor
cells located within altered follicles with a recognizable germinal center.
Lymphocyte predominant tumor cells, surrounded by rosetting PD1+ T cells, reside 
in an environment reminiscent of a secondary follicle. Intrafollicular neoplasia 
in nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma is correctly identifiable
based on immunohistochemical recognition of the CD23+ meshwork of follicular
dendritic cells surrounded by an outer zone containing immunoglobulin D+ B cells.
This immunoarchitectural pattern, highlighting the intrafollicular involvement by
the neoplasia, is of great utility for diagnosis. An appropriate
immunohistochemical characterization for diagnosis should include lymphocyte
predominant (BCL6 and CD20) and microenvironmental (CD23, immunoglobulin D, and
PD1) cell markers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22209342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012 Sep;70(9):2229-37. doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2011.09.026. 
Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Spindle cell lymphoma of the oral cavity: a case report and review of the
literature.

Chi AC(1), Coles RL, Ledford CL, Neville BW, Lazarchick J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Pathology, College of Dental Medicine, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. chi@musc.edu

PMID: 22209098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cytokine. 2012 Mar;57(3):360-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.12.001. Epub 2011 Dec
26.

Type I interferons directly down-regulate BCL-6 in primary and transformed
germinal center B cells: differential regulation in B cell lines derived from
endemic or sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma.

Salamon D(1), Adori M, He M, Bönelt P, Severinson E, Kis LL, Wu L, Ujvari D,
Leveau B, Nagy N, Klein G, Klein E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Nobels vag 16, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. Daniel.Salamon@ki.se

Type I interferons (IFN) exert multiple effects on both the innate and adaptive
immune system in addition to their antiviral and antiproliferative activities.
Little is known, however about the direct effects of type I IFNs on germinal
center (GC) B cells, the central components of adaptive B cell responses. We used
Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) lines, as a model system of normal human GC B cells, to
examine the effect of type I IFNs on the expression of BCL-6, the major regulator
of the GC reaction. We show that type I IFNs, but not IFN<U+03B3>, IL-2 and TNFa rapidly
down-regulate BCL-6 protein and mRNA expression, in cell lines derived from
endemic, but not from sporadic BL. IFNa-induced down-regulation is specific for
BCL-6, independent of Epstein-Barr virus and is not accompanied by IRF-4
up-regulation. IFNa-induced BCL-6 mRNA down-regulation does not require de novo
protein synthesis and is specifically inhibited by piceatannol. The proteasome
inhibitor MG132 non-specifically prevents, while inhibitors of alternate type I
IFN signaling pathways do not inhibit IFNa-induced BCL-6 protein downregulation. 
We validate our results with showing that IFNa rapidly down-regulates BCL-6 mRNA 
in purified mouse normal GC B cells. Our results identify type I IFNs as the
first group of cytokines that can down-regulate BCL-6 expression directly in GC B
cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22204827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Keio J Med. 2011;60(4):101-5.

Regulators of osteoclast differentiation and cell-cell fusion.

Miyamoto T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, 
Japan. miyamoto@z5.keio.jp

Osteoclasts are multinuclear giant cells derived from
osteoclast/macrophage/dendritic cell common progenitor cells. The most
characteristic feature of osteoclasts is multinucleation resulting from cell-cell
fusion of mononuclear osteoclasts. Osteoclast cell-cell fusion is considered
essential for re-organization of the cytoskeleton, such as the actin-ring and
ruffled boarder to seal the resorbing area and to secret protons, respectively,
to resorb bone; the fusion process is thus critical for osteoclast function.
Various molecules, such as E-cadherin and macrophage fusion receptor (MFR), have 
been identified as regulators of osteoclast or macrophage cell-cell fusion.
Laboratory production of osteoclasts used to be performed in a co-culture of
osteoclast progenitors with osteoblastic cells, but recent advances in the
identification of nuclear factor of kappa B ligand (RANKL) enabled the isolation 
of osteoclast-specific molecules involving osteoclast cell-cell fusion and
differentiation regulators from purified osteoclast mRNA, since osteoclasts can
be formed without osteoblasts. The essential cell-cell fusion regulator,
dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP), was isolated by a cDNA 
subtractive screen between mononuclear macrophages and RANKL-induced multinuclear
osteoclasts. The cell-cell fusion of osteoclasts and foreign body giant cells
(FBGCs) was completely abrogated in DC-STAMP-deficient mice in vivo and in vitro.
Bone resorbing activity was significantly reduced but was still detected in
DC-STAMP-deficient osteoclasts. DC-STAMP expression is positively regulated by
two transcriptional factors: nuclear factor of activated T cells 1 (NFATc1) and
c-Fos, both of which are essential for osteoclast differentiation. Furthermore, a
novel osteoclastogenesis-regulating pathway involving two transcriptional
repressors [B cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) and B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 
1 (Blimp1)] under RANKL stimulation has been discovered. The expression of
osteoclastic genes such as DC-STAMP, NFATc1, and Cathepsin K, as well as
osteoclast differentiation, was inhibited by Bcl6. Bcl6-deficient mice showed
enhanced osteoclastogenesis and reduced bone mass, whereas osteoclast-specific
Blimp1-conditional knockout mice showed elevated Bcl6 expression, osteoclastic
gene expression, and osteoclast differentiation and increased bone mass. In this 
review, recent advances in our understanding of the regulators of osteoclast
differentiation and cell-cell fusion are discussed.

PMID: 22200633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2012 Feb 1;188(3):1036-48. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102500. Epub 2011
Dec 23.

Regulatory B10 cells differentiate into antibody-secreting cells after transient 
IL-10 production in vivo.

Maseda D(1), Smith SH, DiLillo DJ, Bryant JM, Candando KM, Weaver CT, Tedder TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Regulatory B cells that are functionally defined by their capacity to express
IL-10 (B10 cells) downregulate inflammation and autoimmunity. In studies using
well-defined IL-10 reporter mice, this rare B10 cell subset was also found to
maintain a capacity for plasma cell differentiation. During a transient period of
il10 transcription, the blimp1 and irf4 transcription factors were induced in B10
cells, whereas pax5 and bcl6 were downregulated as a significant fraction of B10 
cells completed the genetic and phenotypic program leading to Ab-secreting cell
differentiation in vitro and in vivo. B10 cell-derived IgM reacted with both
self- and foreign Ags, whereas B10 cells generated Ag-specific IgG in response to
immunizations. Moreover, B10 cells represented a significant source of serum IgM 
and IgG during adoptive-transfer experiments and produced Ag-specific,
polyreactive and autoreactive Ab specificities that were consistent with their
expression of a diverse AgR repertoire. Thereby, B10 cells limit inflammation and
immune responses by the transient production of IL-10, and may facilitate
clearance of their eliciting Ags through an inherent capacity to quickly generate
polyreactive and/or Ag-specific Abs during humoral immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3262922
PMID: 22198952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Immunity. 2011 Dec 23;35(6):919-31. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.11.012.

Early Th1 cell differentiation is marked by a Tfh cell-like transition.

Nakayamada S(1), Kanno Y, Takahashi H, Jankovic D, Lu KT, Johnson TA, Sun HW,
Vahedi G, Hakim O, Handon R, Schwartzberg PL, Hager GL, O'Shea JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. nakayamadas@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Feb;12(2):74.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells comprise an important subset of helper T cells;
however, their relationship with other helper lineages is incompletely
understood. Herein, we showed interleukin-12 acting via the transcription factor 
STAT4 induced both Il21 and Bcl6 genes, generating cells with features of both
Tfh and Th1 cells. However, STAT4 also induced the transcription factor T-bet.
With ChIP-seq, we defined the genome-wide targets of T-bet and found that it
repressed Bcl6 and other markers of Tfh cells, thereby attenuating the nascent
Tfh cell-like phenotype in the late phase of Th1 cell specification. Tfh-like
cells were rapidly generated after Toxoplasma gondii infection in mice, but T-bet
constrained Tfh cell expansion and consequent germinal center formation and
antibody production. Our data argue that Tfh and Th1 cells share a transitional
stage through the signal mediated by STAT4, which promotes both phenotypes.
However, T-bet represses Tfh cell functionalities, promoting full Th1 cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3244883
PMID: 22195747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Histopathology. 2011 Dec;59(6):1194-203. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04054.x.

Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a study of six cases concurrently involving the same site.

Cotta CV(1), Coleman JF, Li S, Hsi ED.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.

AIMS: Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is a slowly
progressing neoplasm with a favourable prognosis. However, in a minority of cases
(3-12%) it progresses to a clonally related diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), diagnosed between 6 months and 24 years after NLPHL. This study
investigated six cases of NLPHL and DLBCL at the same location.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The patients were five men and one woman. In four cases, the
site was an axillary lymph node, and in two it was inguinal. In all cases, NLPHL 
areas had typical morphological and immunophenotypic features. DLBCL involvement 
was multifocal, diffuse, and characterized by large centroblastic and anaplastic 
cells. Immunohistochemical studies showed DLBCL cells to be positive for CD20,
CD45, and BCL6. In one case, DLBCL cells were positive for BCL2, and in two cases
they were positive for MUM-1. There were no networks of follicular dendritic
cells (FDC) associated with DLBCL. Rosettes of PD-1-positive and CD57-positive
cells surrounding malignant cells in NLPHL were absent in DLBCL. All the cases
were negative for Epstein-Barr virus. No translocations involving MYC were
identified in DLBCL. Treatment and outcome were known in four cases. All of these
patients were treated with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine,
and prednisone (R-CHOP), and this was followed by clinical remission (CR).
CONCLUSIONS: In adequately sampled tumors, DLBCL can be associated with NLPHL at 
diagnosis. Diffuse architecture, loss of FDC networks, sometimes immunophenotype 
shift are characteristics of DLBCL associated with NLPHL. Treatment with R-CHOP
usually leads to CR.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22175899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Indian J Med Paediatr Oncol. 2011 Apr;32(2):92-5. doi: 10.4103/0971-5851.89786.

Primary pediatric gastrointestinal lymphoma.

Bandyopadhyay R(1), Sinha SK, Chatterjee U, Nag D, Mukhopadhyay S, Chowdhury SR, 
Biswas PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Burdwan Medical College, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) of the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract is the most common extranodal lymphoma in pediatric age group. Yet, the
overall incidence is very low. The rarity of the disease as well as variable
clinical presentation prevents early detection when the possibility of cure
exists.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied six cases of primary GI NHL in pediatric age
group with reference to their clinical presentation, anatomic distribution and
histopathologic characteristics.
RESULTS: All were males except one. Intestinal obstruction was the presenting
feature in 50%. Half the cases showed ileocaecal involvement, while large bowel
was involved in 16%. Histology showed four cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), one case of Burkitt lymphoma, and one Burkitt-like lymphoma.
Immunohistochemistry for Tdt, CD20, CD3, CD30, bcl2, bcl6 confirmed the
morphological diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Pediatric GI lymphoma commonly involves the ileocaecal region and
presents with intestinal obstruction. A higher prevalence of DLBCL is found
compared to other series. A high proliferative index is useful in differentiating
Burkitt-like lymphoma from DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC3237187
PMID: 22174497  [PubMed]


121. Science. 2012 Jan 20;335(6066):342-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1213495. Epub 2011 Dec
15.

Asymmetric B cell division in the germinal center reaction.

Barnett BE(1), Ciocca ML, Goenka R, Barnett LG, Wu J, Laufer TM, Burkhardt JK,
Cancro MP, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Lifelong antibody responses to vaccination require reorganization of lymphoid
tissue and dynamic intercellular communication called the germinal center
reaction. B lymphocytes undergo cellular polarization during antigen stimulation,
acquisition, and presentation, which are critical steps for initiating humoral
immunity. Here, we show that germinal center B lymphocytes asymmetrically
segregate the transcriptional regulator Bcl6, the receptor for interleukin-21,
and the ancestral polarity protein atypical protein kinase C to one side of the
plane of division, generating unequal inheritance of fate-altering molecules by
daughter cells. Germinal center B lymphocytes from mice with a defect in
leukocyte adhesion fail to divide asymmetrically. These results suggest that
motile cells lacking constitutive attachment can receive provisional polarity
cues from the microenvironment to generate daughter cell diversity and
self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC3282111
PMID: 22174128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;40(8):528-31.

[Significance of MUM-1/IRF4 protein expression in follicular lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huo YY(1), Pan Y, Guan BX, Fang AJ, Sun BC, Zhou GY, Fu K, Meng B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of MUM-1/IRF4 and its significance in
follicular lymphoma.
METHODS: Ninety-eight cases of follicular lymphoma were enrolled into the study. 
They were graded according to the 2008 WHO criteria. The expression of MUM-1/IRF4
protein and other markers (CD10, bcl-6, bcl-2 and Ki-67) was studied using tissue
microarray and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Amongst the 98 cases studied, there were 24 grade 1 cases, 30 grade 2
cases, 26 grade 3A cases and 18 were grade 3B cases. The rates of expression of
MUM-1/IRF4, CD10, bcl-6, bcl-2 and Ki-67 (= 25%) were 39.8% (39/98), 62.2%
(61/98), 80.6% (79/98), 87.8% (86/98) and 50.0% (49/98), respectively. MUM-1/IRF4
predominantly expressed in high-grade follicular lymphoma and showed a
significantly positive correlation with lymphoma grade (r = 0.628, P = 0.000) and
Ki-67 index (r = 0.473, P = 0.000). MUM-1/IRF4 expression had a significantly
negative correlation with CD10 expression (r = -0.597, P = 0.000), but no
correlation with bcl-6 and bcl-2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: MUM-1/IRF4 expression is significantly higher in high-grade
follicular lymphoma, indicating that these cases have a high proliferative
activity, more aggressive behavior and poorer prognosis. MUM-1/IRF4, when
strongly expressed, is another helpful marker for the diagnosis of high-grade
follicular lymphoma.

PMID: 22169641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;32(4):880-96. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06312-11. Epub 2011 Dec
12.

Dynamic, sex-differential STAT5 and BCL6 binding to sex-biased, growth
hormone-regulated genes in adult mouse liver.

Zhang Y(1), Laz EV, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Sex-dependent pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretory patterns determine the
sex-biased expression of >1,000 genes in mouse and rat liver, affecting lipid and
drug metabolism, inflammation, and disease. A fundamental biological question is 
how robust differential expression can be achieved for hundreds of sex-biased
genes simply based on the GH input signal pattern: pulsatile GH stimulation in
males versus near-continuous GH exposure in females. STAT5 is an essential
transcriptional mediator of the sex-dependent effects of GH in the liver, but the
mechanisms that underlie its sex-dependent actions are obscure. Here we elucidate
the dynamic, sex-dependent binding of STAT5 and the GH/STAT5-regulated repressor 
BCL6 to mouse liver chromatin genome wide, revealing a counteractive interplay
between these two regulators of sex differences in liver gene expression. Our
findings establish a close correlation between sex-dependent STAT5 binding and
sex-biased target gene expression. Moreover, sex-dependent STAT5 binding
correlated positively with sex-biased DNase hypersensitivity and H3-K4me1 and
H3-K4me3 (activating) marks, correlated negatively with sex-biased H3-K27me3
(repressive) marks, and was associated with sex-differentially enriched motifs
for HNF6/CDP factors. Importantly, BCL6 binding was preferentially associated
with repression of female-biased STAT5 targets in male liver. Furthermore, BCL6
and STAT5 common targets but not BCL6 unique targets showed strong enrichment for
lipid and drug metabolism. These findings provide a comprehensive, genome-wide
view of the mechanisms whereby these two GH-regulated transcription factors
establish and maintain sex differences affecting liver physiology and disease.
The approaches used here to characterize sex-dependent STAT5 and BCL6 binding can
be applied to other condition-specific regulatory factors and binding sites and
their interplay with cooperative chromatin binding factors.

PMCID: PMC3272977
PMID: 22158971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Tumori. 2011 Sep-Oct;97(5):634-8. doi: 10.1700/989.10724.

Immunohistochemical expression of Mum-1, Oct-2 and Bcl-6 in systemic anaplastic
large cell lymphomas.

Saglam A(1), Uner AH.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Sihhiye,
Ankara, Turkey.

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Several transcription factors predominantly used for B-cell 
lineage identification are also expressed in a small percentage of T cells within
germinal centers and interfollicular areas. The aim of the study was to evaluate 
the expression of Mum-1, Oct-2 and Bcl-6 in systemic anaplastic large cell
lymphoma.
METHODS: Thirty cases of anaplastic large cell lymphoma were retrieved from our
archives and tissue microarray constructed. Immunohistochemistry was carried out 
using an avidin-biotin peroxidase complex method.
RESULTS: A predominance of nuclear staining was observed for all transcription
factors. Mum-1 was positive in all but one case (96.7%). Half of the cases
displayed Oct-2 expression (15/30 cases). A considerable number of cases also had
Bcl-6 expression (9/30). Bcl-6 staining was noted to be more common in ALK
positive cases.
CONCLUSION: Our findings emphasize that these markers are not restricted to
B-cell lineage and that extensive expression can be observed in anaplastic large 
cell lymphoma of T/null cell phenotype.

PMID: 22158496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 Dec;26(12):1556-62. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.12.1556.
Epub 2011 Nov 29.

Prognostic value of immunohistochemical biomarkers at different cut-off values in
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with CHOP chemotherapy.

Oh S(1), Koo DH, Suh C, Kim S, Park BH, Kang J, Huh J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kangbuk
Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Many predictive models have been proposed for better stratification of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Hans' algorithm has been widely used as standard
to sub-classify DLBCL into germinal center B-cell (GCB) and non-GCB origins.
However, there have been disagreements in the literature regarding its prognostic
significance. Here, we retrospectively analyzed Hans' algorithm and the
individual immunohistochemical biomarkers at different cut-off values (5%, 30%,
50% or 75%) in 94 Korean patients with DLBCL treated with combination
chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, daunorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone. No
significant differences were observed between the GCB (18 patients, 19.1%) and
non-GCB (76, 80.9%) groups. Among individual biomarkers, CD10 negativity (cut
point: 30%) and bcl-6 positivity (cut point: 5%) were independent good prognostic
markers in progression-free survival (PFS), whereas bcl-6 (cut point: 5%)
positivity was an independent good prognostic marker in overall survival
irrelevant of international prognostic index. The present study showed the lack
of predictability of Hans' algorithm in DLBCL patients, and that CD10, Bcl-6 may 
have diverse prognostic significance at different cut-off values. Our results
suggest that the proposed cut-off value may not be applied universally, and that 
the optimal cut-off value may need to be optimized for individual laboratory.

PMCID: PMC3230014
PMID: 22147991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Immunol. 2012 Jan 1;188(1):182-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102297. Epub 2011 Nov 
28.

Wnt5a is secreted by follicular dendritic cells to protect germinal center B
cells via Wnt/Ca2+/NFAT/NF-<U+03BA>B-B cell lymphoma 6 signaling.

Kim J(1), Kim DW, Chang W, Choe J, Kim J, Park CS, Song K, Lee I.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) protect germinal center (GC) B cells from rapid
apoptosis to allow their survival and maturation. In this article, we show that
FDCs normally produce and secrete Wnt5a to protect GC B cells. Wnt5a production
is upregulated by polyI:C. Purified Wnt5a protects GC B cells from apoptosis in a
dose-dependent manner. GC B cells are protected by FDC coculture or conditioned
medium, and the protection is inhibited significantly by anti-Wnt5a Ab,
suggesting a major role of Wnt5a in the FDC-mediated GC B cell protection. A
calcium chelator BAPTA-AM blocks the Wnt5a-mediated GC B cell protection,
implying a role of Wnt/Ca(2+) signaling in the GC B cell survival. Wnt5a and
calcium ionophore activate NFATc1, NFATc2, NF-<U+03BA>B, and B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL-6)
promptly and upregulate CD40 expression in GC B and Ramos cells, whereas p53 and 
JNK are not upregulated or activated. Cyclosporine A inhibits the Wnt5a and
calcium-induced activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and BCL-6 in Ramos cells, supporting a role
of ß-catenin-independent Wnt/Ca(2+)/NFAT/NF-<U+03BA>B-BCL-6 signaling. Our data support 
that Wnt5a is a novel survival factor for GC B cells and might be a potential
target for the regulation of B cell immunity.

PMID: 22124122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):806-18. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.09.016.

A critical role for STAT3 transcription factor signaling in the development and
maintenance of human T cell memory.

Siegel AM(1), Heimall J, Freeman AF, Hsu AP, Brittain E, Brenchley JM, Douek DC, 
Fahle GH, Cohen JI, Holland SM, Milner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):663-5.

STAT3 transcription factor signaling in specific T helper cell differentiation
has been well described, although the broader roles for STAT3 in lymphocyte
memory are less clear. Patients with autosomal-dominant hyper-IgE syndrome
(AD-HIES) carry dominant-negative STAT3 mutations and are susceptible to a
variety of bacterial and fungal infections. We found that AD-HIES patients have a
cell-intrinsic defect in the number of central memory CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells
compared to healthy controls. Naive T cells from AD-HIES patients had lower
expression of memory-related transcription factors BCL6 and SOCS3, a primary
proliferation defect, and they failed to acquire central memory-like surface
phenotypes in vitro. AD-HIES patients showed a decreased ability to control
varicella zoster virus (VZV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latency, and T cell
memory to both of these viruses was compromised. These data point to a specific
role for STAT3 in human central memory T cell formation and in control of certain
chronic viruses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3228524
PMID: 22118528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nature. 2012 Jan 5;481(7379):90-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10688.

FBXO11 targets BCL6 for degradation and is inactivated in diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas.

Duan S(1), Cermak L, Pagan JK, Rossi M, Martinengo C, di Celle PF, Chapuy B,
Shipp M, Chiarle R, Pagano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

BCL6 is the product of a proto-oncogene implicated in the pathogenesis of human
B-cell lymphomas. By binding specific DNA sequences, BCL6 controls the
transcription of a variety of genes involved in B-cell development,
differentiation and activation. BCL6 is overexpressed in the majority of patients
with aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common lymphoma
in adulthood, and transgenic mice constitutively expressing BCL6 in B cells
develop DLBCLs similar to the human disease. In many DLBCL patients, BCL6
overexpression is achieved through translocation (~40%) or hypermutation of its
promoter (~15%). However, many other DLBCLs overexpress BCL6 through an unknown
mechanism. Here we show that BCL6 is targeted for ubiquitylation and proteasomal 
degradation by a SKP1CUL1F-box protein (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex that
contains the orphan F-box protein FBXO11 (refs 5, 6). The gene encoding FBXO11
was found to be deleted or mutated in multiple DLBCL cell lines, and this
inactivation of FBXO11 correlated with increased levels and stability of BCL6.
Similarly, FBXO11 was either deleted or mutated in primary DLBCLs. Notably,
tumour-derived FBXO11 mutants displayed an impaired ability to induce BCL6
degradation. Reconstitution of FBXO11 expression in FBXO11-deleted DLBCL cells
promoted BCL6 ubiquitylation and degradation, inhibited cell proliferation, and
induced cell death. FBXO11-deleted DLBCL cells generated tumours in
immunodeficient mice, and the tumorigenicity was suppressed by FBXO11
reconstitution. We reveal a molecular mechanism controlling BCL6 stability and
propose that mutations and deletions in FBXO11 contribute to lymphomagenesis
through BCL6 stabilization. The deletions/mutations found in DLBCLs are largely
monoallelic, indicating that FBXO11 is a haplo-insufficient tumour suppressor
gene.

PMCID: PMC3344385
PMID: 22113614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Blood. 2012 Jan 19;119(3):e9-e21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-339556. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Nodal marginal zone lymphoma: gene expression and miRNA profiling identify
diagnostic markers and potential therapeutic targets.

Arribas AJ(1), Campos-Martín Y, Gómez-Abad C, Algara P, Sánchez-Beato M,
Rodriguez-Pinilla MS, Montes-Moreno S, Martinez N, Alves-Ferreira J, Piris MA,
Mollejo M.

Author information: 
(1)Virgen de la Salud Hospital, Toledo, Spain.

Nodal marginal zone lymphoma (NMZL) is a small B-cell neoplasm whose molecular
pathogenesis is still essentially unknown and whose differentiation from other
small B-cell lymphomas is hampered by the lack of specific markers. We have
analyzed gene expression, miRNA profile, and copy number data from 15 NMZL cases.
For comparison, 16 follicular lymphomas (FLs), 9 extranodal marginal zone
lymphomas, and 8 reactive lymph nodes and B-cell subtypes were included. The
results were validated by quantitative RT-PCR in an independent series, including
61 paraffin-embedded NMZLs. NMZL signature showed an enriched expression of gene 
sets identifying interleukins, integrins, CD40, PI3K, NF-<U+03BA>B, and TGF-ß, and
included genes expressed by normal marginal zone cells and memory B cells. The
most highly overexpressed genes were SYK, TACI, CD74, CD82, and CDC42EP5. Genes
linked to G(2)/M and germinal center were down-regulated. Comparison of the gene 
expression profiles of NMZL and FL showed enriched expression of CHIT1, TGFB1,
and TACI in NMZL, and BCL6, LMO2, and CD10 in FL. NMZL displayed increased
expression of miR-221, miR-223, and let-7f, whereas FL strongly expressed
miR-494. Our study identifies new candidate diagnostic molecules for NMZL and
reveals survival pathways activated in NMZL.

PMID: 22110251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Dec;136(6):960-9. doi: 10.1309/AJCPDQNP2U5DZHVV.

Multiparametric flow cytometry for identification and fluorescence activated cell
sorting of five distinct B-cell subpopulations in normal tonsil tissue.

Kjeldsen MK(1), Perez-Andres M, Schmitz A, Johansen P, Boegsted M, Nyegaard M,
Gaihede M, Bukh A, Johnsen HE, Orfao A, Dybkaer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark.

The purpose of this study was to establish a procedure capable of isolating
distinct B-cell subpopulations from human tonsils as a basis for subsequent
molecular analyses. Overall, 5 distinct B-cell subpopulations were purified from 
fresh tonsils based on their fluorescence surface marker expression: naive B
cells, centroblasts, centrocytes, memory B cells, and plasmablasts. The
immunophenotypic identity of the subpopulations was verified by quantitative
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using the proliferation
marker MKI-67 and 6 B-cell-associated differentiation markers (BACH2, BCL6, PAX5,
IRF4, PRDM1, and XBP1). Furthermore, within the centroblast compartment, large
and small centroblasts could be distinguished and large centroblasts were shown
to proliferate with a morphologic appearance of a "centroblast"-like cell but
with lower gene expression of the germinal center markers BCL6 and BACH2 vs small
centroblasts. This study has established a detailed and fast procedure for
simultaneous sorting of up to 5 distinct maturation-associated B-cell
subpopulations from human tonsils.

PMID: 22095383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Dermatol. 2012 Aug;39(8):748-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2011.01375.x. Epub
2011 Nov 13.

Primary cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma with atypical morphological features
on hematoxylin-eosin stained images.

Koga M, Koga K, Imafuku S, Nakayama J.

PMID: 22077424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Mar;51(3):219-28. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20946. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

Neoplastic MiR-17~92 deregulation at a DNA fragility motif (SIDD).

Schneider B(1), Nagel S, Ehrentraut S, Kaufmann M, Meyer C, Geffers R, Drexler
HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Cultures, DSMZ-German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr. 7b, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
bjoern.schneider@med.uni-rostock.de

Chromosomal or mutational activation of BCL6 (at 3q27) typifies diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) which in the germinal center subtype may be accompanied
by focal amplification of chromosome band 13q31 effecting upregulation of
miR-17~92. Using long distance inverse-polymerase chain reaction, we mapped and
sequenced six breakpoints of a complex BCL6 rearrangement
t(3;13)(q27;q31)t(12;13)(p11;q31) in DLBCL cells, which places miR-17~92
antisense within the resulting ITPR2-BCL6 chimeric fusion gene rearrangement.
MiR-17~92 members were upregulated ~15-fold over controls in a copy number
independent manner consistent with structural deregulation. MIR17HG and
ITPR2-BCL6 were, despite their close configuration, independently expressed,
discounting antisense regulation. MIR17HG in t(3;13)t(12;13) cells proved highly 
responsive to treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors implicating
epigenetic deregulation, consistent with which increased histone-H3 acetylation
was detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation near the upstream MIR17HG
breakpoint. Remarkably, 5/6 DNA breaks in the t(3;13)t(12;13) precisely cut at
stress-induced DNA duplex destabilization (SIDD) peaks reminiscent of chromosomal
fragile sites, while the sixth lay 150 bp distant. Extended SIDD profiling showed
that additional oncomiRs also map to SIDD peaks. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis showed that 11 of 52 (21%) leukemia-lymphoma (L-L) cell
lines with 13q31 involvement bore structural rearrangements at/near MIR17HG
associated with upregulation. As well as fueling genome instability, SIDD peaks
mark regulatory nuclear-scaffold matrix attachment regions open to nucleosomal
acetylation. Collectively, our data indict a specific DNA instability motif
(SIDD) in chromosome rearrangement, specifically alterations activating miR-17~92
epigenetically via promoter hyperacetylation, and supply a model for the
clustering of oncomiRs near cancer breakpoints.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 22072491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Horm Metab Res. 2011 Dec;43(13):919-30. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1291285. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

Identification of novel GH-regulated genes in C2C12 cells.

Resmini E(1), Morte B, Sorianello E, Gallardo E, de Luna N, Illa I, Zorzano A,
Bernal J, Webb SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology,Hospital de Sant Pau,Barcelona,Spain.
eresmini@santpau.cat

Growth hormone (GH) is the main regulator of longitudinal growth before puberty, 
and treatment with human recombinant (rh) GH can increase muscle strength.
Nevertheless, molecular mechanisms responsible remain mostly unknown. Many
physiological effects of GH require hormone-mediated changes in gene expression. 
In an attempt to gain insight into the mechanism of GH action in muscle cells we 
evaluated the effects of rhGH on gene expression profile in a murine skeletal
muscle cell line C2C12. The objective of the work was to identify changes in gene
expression in the murine skeletal muscle cell line C2C12 after rGH treatment
using microarray assays. C2C12 murine skeletal muscle cell cultures were
differentiated during 4 days. After 16<U+2009>h growing in serum-free medium, C2C12
myotubes were stimulated during 6<U+2009>h with 500<U+2009>ng/ml rhGH. Four independent sets of
experiments were performed to identify GH-regulated genes. Total RNA was isolated
and subjected to analysis. To validate changes candidate genes were analyzed by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. One hundred and fifty-four
differentially expressed genes were identified; 90 upregulated and 64
downregulated. Many had not been previously identified as GH-responsive.
Real-time PCR in biological replicates confirmed the effect of rGH on 15 genes:
Cish, Serpina3g, Socs2, Bmp4, Tnfrsf11b, Rgs2, Tgfbr3, Ugdh, Npy1r, Gbp6, Tgfbi, 
Tgtp, Btc, Clec3b, and Bcl6. This study shows modifications in the gene
expression profile of the C2C12 cell line after rhGH exposure. In vitro and gene 
function analysis revealed genes involved in skeletal and muscle system as well
as cardiovascular system development and function.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22072432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2011 Jun;11 Suppl 1:S87-90. doi:
10.1016/j.clml.2011.03.029. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: the old and the new.

Cabanillas F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Auxilio Cancer Center, San Juan, PR, USA. fcabanil@mdanderson.org

During the past decade we have witnessed a number of changes in the field of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), including new entities added to the classification as
well as a better understanding of the biology of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL). An understanding of the epigenetics of NHL is also contributing new
agents for the management of this disorder. It has become increasingly clear that
DLBCL is a biologically and clinically heterogeneous cell type. Two major
categories are now recognized: germinal center B cell and activated B-cell (ABC) 
types. The former is associated with a good prognosis while the latter is known
to have a more adverse outcome. With the use of routine immunohistochemical
stains, these two types can be identified. The ABC type is known to be NFK-B
dependent. NFK-B is a therapeutic target for bortezomib which is being
investigated as treatment for this subtype of DLBCL. Several major changes in the
classification will be discussed among which the most important are the
recognition of so-called borderline entities. One of the two most common of these
is the borderline DLBCL/Burkitt tumor (DLBCL/BL) which has features of both DLBCL
and Burkitt's lymphoma. Many of the cases in this DLBCL/BL category contain a
translocation of MYC as well as BCL2, so-called "double-hit lymphomas" which have
a very aggressive clinical behavior. The second common borderline entity is the
mediastinal grey zone NHL (MGZL) which has pathological features intermediate
between primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma and nodular sclerosing Hodgkin
lymphoma (NSHL). Overlapping clinical features include young age, male
predominance, and localized mediastinal presentation. Anecdotal reports suggest
MGZL is relatively resistant to Hodgkin-based chemotherapy. Epigenetic therapy
represents a new concept. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi)and DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors constitute a promising new class of antineoplastic
agents. They modify the expression of genes related to cancer development. In
this review, we discuss the role of HDACi in lymphomagenesis as well as in
treatment. To understand the benefits of HDACi in lymphoma treatment, we must
appreciate the crucial interplay between BCL6, p53, and STAT3. The STAT3 oncogene
is involved in the ABC type of DLBCL, an unfavorable and frequently
therapy-refractory lymphoma. STAT3 can be effectively suppressed by several
HDACi. We will summarize the results of recent trials with HDACi such as
romidepsin, panobinostat and valproic acid that have shown significant
preliminary activity in recurrent and refractory lymphomas. Their future role in 
front-line management remains to be determined.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22035756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 May;31(5):777-82. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1314. Epub 2011 Nov
2.

Analysis of p53 tumor suppressor pathway genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Isin M(1), Yenerel M, Aktan M, Buyru N, Dalay N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Oncology, Oncology Institute, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

The p53 tumor suppressor gene plays an important role in preventing tumor
development. The p53 protein interacts with other p53 signal pathway members to
control cell proliferation. In this study, expression of the p53, Human homolog
of murine Double Minute 2 (HDM2), p14Alternating Reading Frame (ARF), Zinc Finger
and BTB domain containing 7A (ZBTB7A), and B-Cell Lymphoma 6 (BCL6) genes was
quantitatively investigated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the
peripheral blood of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and healthy 
controls. Plasma fibronectin levels were determined by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. Expression of the p53, p14, and HDM2 genes were
significantly higher in the patients. However, ZBTB7A and BCL6 gene expression
was not detectable in both groups. A positive correlation between p14ARF and HDM2
expression and a negative correlation between p53 and p14ARF expression was
observed. Expression of the p14ARF and HDM2 genes were inversely correlated in
the control group. Neither HDM2 nor p14ARF gene expression was correlated with
p53 expression. The p53 gene was also analyzed for the presence of mutations. A
splice-site mutation was found in a single patient. Our findings indicate that
expression of the p53, p14ARF, and HDM2 genes are associated with CLL.
Elucidation of the mutual interactions at the protein level warrants further
studies.

PMID: 22047081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Intern Med. 2011;50(21):2659-62. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Double-hit lymphoma with t(8;14)(q24;q32) and t(12;14)(q24;q32) chromosomal
translocations.

Yamazaki T(1), Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hyogo Prefectural Amagasaki Hospital, Japan.

A 50-year-old man presented with an ileocecal tumor and a large amount of
ascites. Lymphoma cells obtained from the ascitic fluid were CD10(+), CD20(+),
CD38(+), HLA-DR(+), BCL6(-), MUM1/IRF4(+), BCL2(+), and immunoglobulin µ/<U+03B3>(+).
The karyotype determined by G-banding and spectral karyotyping was 46, XY,
der(3)t(1;3)(q12;p12), -4, +7, t(8;14)(q24;q32), t(12;14)(q24;q32),
der(17)t(4;17)(q21;p11). Fluorescence in situ hybridization disclosed that 93% of
interphase cells were positive for the c-MYC and immunoglobulin heavy chain gene 
fusion. The patient was treated with intensive chemo-immunotherapy, resulting in 
a complete response. The t(8;14)-t(12;14) double-hit may have generated molecular
abnormalities analogous to those of a previously cloned three-way translocation
t(8;12;14).

PMID: 22041376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Exp Med. 2011 Oct 24;208(11):2155-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112087.

Assembling defenses against therapy-resistant leukemic stem cells: Bcl6 joins the
ranks.

Pellicano F(1), Holyoake TL.

Author information: 
(1)Paul O'Gorman Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, University of Glasgow,
Gartnavel General Hospital, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

The resistance of leukemic stem cells in response to targeted therapies such as
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) relies on the cooperative activity of multiple 
signaling pathways and molecules, including TGFß, AKT, and FOXO transcription
factors (TFs). B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is a transcriptional repressor whose
translocation or mutation is associated with diffuse large BCL. New data now show
that BCL6 is critical for the maintenance of leukemias driven by the BCR-ABL
translocation (Philadelphia chromosome), suggesting that BCL6 is a novel,
targetable member of the complex signaling pathways critical for leukemic stem
cell survival.

PMCID: PMC3201197
PMID: 22025499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;135(2):84-92. doi: 10.1159/000332005. Epub 2011 Oct
24.

Human BRCA1-associated breast cancer: no increase in numerical chromosomal
instability compared to sporadic tumors.

Focken T(1), Steinemann D, Skawran B, Hofmann W, Ahrens P, Arnold N, Kroll P,
Kreipe H, Schlegelberger B, Gadzicki D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

BRCA1 is a major gatekeeper of genomic stability. Acting in multiple central
processes like double-strand break repair, centrosome replication, and checkpoint
control, BRCA1 participates in maintaining genomic integrity and protects the
cell against genomic instability. Chromosomal instability (CIN) as part of
genomic instability is an inherent characteristic of most solid tumors and is
also involved in breast cancer development. In this study, we determined the
extent of CIN in 32 breast cancer tumors of women with a BRCA1 germline mutation 
compared to 62 unselected breast cancers. We applied fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) with centromere-specific probes for the chromosomes 1, 7, 8,
10, 17, and X and locus-specific probes for 3q27 (BCL6), 5p15.2 (D5S23), 5q31
(EGR1), 10q23.3 (PTEN), and 14q32 (IGH@) on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue microarray sections. Our hypothesis of an increased level of CIN in
BRCA1-associated breast cancer could not be confirmed by this approach.
Surprisingly, we detected no significant difference in the extent of CIN in
BRCA1-mutated versus sporadic tumors. The only exception was the CIN value for
chromosome 1. Here, the extent of CIN was slightly higher in the group of
sporadic tumors.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22024613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):622-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.07.015. Epub 2011 
Oct 20.

Functional and epigenetic studies reveal multistep differentiation and plasticity
of in vitro-generated and in vivo-derived follicular T helper cells.

Lu KT(1), Kanno Y, Cannons JL, Handon R, Bible P, Elkahloun AG, Anderson SM, Wei 
L, Sun H, O'Shea JJ, Schwartzberg PL.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Follicular T helper (Tfh) cells provide critical help to B cells for germinal
center (GC) formation. Mutations affecting SLAM-associated protein (SAP) prevent 
GC formation because of defective T cell-B cell interactions, yet effects on Tfh 
cell differentiation remain unclear. We describe the in vitro differentiation of 
functionally competent "Tfh-like" cells that expressed interleukin-21, Tfh cell
markers, and Bcl6 and rescued GC formation in SAP-deficient hosts better than
other T helper (Th) cells. SAP-deficient Tfh-like cells appeared virtually
indistinguishable from wild-type, yet failed to support GCs in vivo.
Interestingly, both Tfh-like and in vivo-derived Tfh cells could produce effector
cytokines in response to polarizing conditions. Moreover, Th1, Th2, and Th17
cells could be reprogrammed to obtain Tfh cell characteristics. ChIP-Seq analyses
revealed positive epigenetic markings on Tbx21, Gata3, and Rorc in Tfh-like and
ex vivo Tfh cells and on Bcl6 in non-Tfh cells, supporting the concept of
plasticity between Tfh and other Th cell populations.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3235706
PMID: 22018472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):583-95. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.09.009. Epub 2011 
Oct 20.

Opposing signals from the Bcl6 transcription factor and the interleukin-2
receptor generate T helper 1 central and effector memory cells.

Pepper M(1), Pagán AJ, Igyártó BZ, Taylor JJ, Jenkins MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Oct 28;35(4):496-8.

Listeria monocytogenes infection generates T helper 1 (Th1) effector memory cells
and CC chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7)(+) cells resembling central memory cells. We
tracked endogenous L. monocytogenes-specific CD4(+) T cells to determine how
these memory cells are formed. Two effector cell populations were already present
several days after infection. One highly expressed the T-bet transcription factor
and produced Th1 memory cells in an interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor-dependent
fashion. The other resided in the T cell areas, expressed CCR7 and CXC chemokine 
receptor 5 (CXCR5), and like follicular helper cells depended on the Bcl6
transcription factor and inducible costimulator ligand on B cells. The
CCR7(+)CXCR5(+) effector cells produced similar memory cells that generated
diverse effector cell populations in a secondary response. Thus, Th1 effector
memory and follicular helper-like central memory cells are produced from early
effector cell populations that diverge in response to signals from the IL-2
receptor, Bcl6, and B cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3208313
PMID: 22018468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 12;13(5):220. doi: 10.1186/bcr2921.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 as a key signaling pathway in 
normal mammary gland developmental biology and breast cancer.

Furth PA(1), Nakles RE, Millman S, Diaz-Cruz ES, Cabrera MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd NW, Research Building, Room 520A, Washington DC
20057, USA. paf3@georgetown.edu

STAT5 consists of two proteins, STAT5A/B, that impact mammary cell
differentiation, proliferation, and survival. In normal development, STAT5
expression and activity are regulated by prolactin signaling with JAK2/ELF5, EGF 
signaling networks that include c-Src, and growth hormone, insulin growth factor,
estrogen, and progesterone signaling pathways. In cancer, erythropoietin
signaling can also regulate STAT5. Activation levels are influenced by AKT,
caveolin, PIKE-A, Pak1, c-Myb, Brk, beta-integrin, dystroglycan, other STATs, and
STAT pathway molecules JAK1, Shp2, and SOCS. TGF-ß and PTPN9 can downregulate
prolactin- and EGF-mediated STAT5 activation, respectively. IGF, AKT, RANKL,
cyclin D1, BCL6, and HSP90A lie downstream of STAT5.

PMCID: PMC3262193
PMID: 22018398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Genet. 2011 Sep;204(9):501-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.08.017.

A novel five-way translocation, t(3;9;13;8;14)(q27;p13;q32;q24;q32), with
concurrent MYC and BCL6 rearrangements in a primary bone marrow B-cell lymphoma.

Yamamoto K(1), Matsuoka H, Yakushijin K, Funakoshi Y, Okamura A, Hayashi Y,
Minami H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology/Hematology, Department of Medicine, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan. kyamamo@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

Chromosomal translocations involving MYC at 8q24 are found in Burkitt lymphoma
(BL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable,
with features intermediate between DLBCL and BL (BCLU). Here, we describe a novel
five-way translocation, t(3;9;13;8;14)(q27;p13;q32;q24;q32), involving MYC, BCL6,
and the immunoglobulin heavy locus (IGH@) in a 73-year-old man with BCLU. The
bone marrow was massively infiltrated with 95.6% abnormal medium- to large-sized 
lymphoid cells without vacuoles. Flow cytometric analyses indicated that the
infiltrating cells were positive for CD10, CD19, CD20, CD25, HLA-DR, and <U+03BA> chain.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that they were also positive for BCL2 and CD10, and
weakly positive for BCL6. The MIB1 index was approximately 99%. G-banding and
spectral karyotyping demonstrated the presence of a
t(3;9;13;8;14)(q27;p13;q32;q24;q32). Fluorescence in situ hybridization detected 
an IGH/MYC fusion signal on the der(14)t(8;14)(q24;q32). In addition, 5' and
3'BCL6 signals were separated onto the der(9)t(3;9)(q27;p13) and the
der(3)t(3;14)(q27;q32), respectively. Unexpectedly, no BCL6 signal was found on
the non-translocated chromosome 3. Finally, the revised karyotype was as follows:
49,XY,del(3)(q27q27),t(3;9;13;8;14)(q27;p13;q32;q24;q32),
+der(6)t(6;13)(q13;q32)t(9;13)(p13;q32),+7,+12,i(18)(q10)[2]/50,sl,+7[2]/50,sl,+2
[1]. These results suggest that this five-way translocation could bring about the
deregulated expression of MYC on the der(14)t(8;14) and BCL6 on the der(3)t(3;14)
by the IGH@ enhancer/promoter in a single event and may have contributed to the
development of this BCLU.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2011 Dec 1;118(23):6153-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-365320. Epub 2011
Oct 19.

Whole-exome sequencing identifies somatic mutations of BCOR in acute myeloid
leukemia with normal karyotype.

Grossmann V(1), Tiacci E, Holmes AB, Kohlmann A, Martelli MP, Kern W,
Spanhol-Rosseto A, Klein HU, Dugas M, Schindela S, Trifonov V, Schnittger S,
Haferlach C, Bassan R, Wells VA, Spinelli O, Chan J, Rossi R, Baldoni S, De
Carolis L, Goetze K, Serve H, Peceny R, Kreuzer KA, Oruzio D, Specchia G, Di
Raimondo F, Fabbiano F, Sborgia M, Liso A, Farinelli L, Rambaldi A, Pasqualucci
L, Rabadan R, Haferlach T, Falini B.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

Among acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients with a normal karyotype (CN-AML),
NPM1 and CEBPA mutations define World Health Organization 2008 provisional
entities accounting for approximately 60% of patients, but the remaining 40% are 
molecularly poorly characterized. Using whole-exome sequencing of one CN-AML
patient lacking mutations in NPM1, CEBPA, FLT3-ITD, IDH1, and MLL-PTD, we newly
identified a clonal somatic mutation in BCOR (BCL6 corepressor), a gene located
on chromosome Xp11.4. Further analyses of 553 AML patients showed that BCOR
mutations occurred in 3.8% of unselected CN-AML patients and represented a
substantial fraction (17.1%) of CN-AML patients showing the same genotype as the 
AML index patient subjected to whole-exome sequencing. BCOR somatic mutations
were: (1) disruptive events similar to the germline BCOR mutations causing the
oculo-facio-cardio-dental genetic syndrome; (2) associated with decreased BCOR
mRNA levels, absence of full-length BCOR, and absent or low expression of a
truncated BCOR protein; (3) virtually mutually exclusive with NPM1 mutations; and
(4) frequently associated with DNMT3A mutations, suggesting cooperativity among
these genetic alterations. Finally, BCOR mutations tended to be associated with
an inferior outcome in a cohort of 422 CN-AML patients (25.6% vs 56.7% overall
survival at 2 years; P = .032). Our results for the first time implicate BCOR in 
CN-AML pathogenesis.

PMID: 22012066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hematol Oncol. 2012 Sep;30(3):143-9. doi: 10.1002/hon.1017. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Cell of origin fails to predict survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma treated with autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Gu K(1), Weisenburger DD, Fu K, Chan WC, Greiner TC, Aoun P, Smith LM, Bast M,
Liu Z, Bociek RG, Bierman PJ, Armitage JO, Vose JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) includes two prognostically important
subtypes, the germinal center B-cell (GCB) and the non-GCB types. The aim of this
study was to evaluate immunohistochemical approaches for predicting the survival 
of patients with DLBCL following autologous hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (AHSCT). We identified 62 patients with DLBCL who either had an
initial complete remission (17 patients) or received salvage chemotherapy for
relapsed or refractory disease (45 patients), followed by AHSCT. Tissue
microarrays were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies against GCET1, CD10,
BCL6, MUM1, FOXP1 and LMO2. Using the Hans algorithm, we classified 50% of the
cases as GCB type, whereas the Choi algorithm classified 58% as GCB type and LMO2
was positive in 69%. However, no significant differences were found in the 5-year
overall or event-free survivals using any of these approaches. In conclusion,
cell of origin fails to predict survival of DLBCL patients treated with AHSCT.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4524810
PMID: 22009820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Virchows Arch. 2011 Nov;459(5):495-502. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1153-3. Epub 2011
Oct 15.

Aggressive B cell lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract: clinicopathologic and 
genetic analysis.

Choi SY(1), Kim SJ, Kim WS, Kim K, Ko YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chungbuk National University Hospital, Cheongju,
South Korea.

Aggressive B cell lymphomas of the gastrointestinal tract include Burkitt
lymphoma (BL), diffuse large B cell lymphoma, and B cell lymphoma,
unclassifiable, with features intermediate between DLBCL and BL. To investigate
the clinical characters of DLBCL/BL of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 101 cases
of aggressive B cell lymphoma of the GI tract were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using break
apart probe for c-MYC gene. For cases with c-MYC rearrangement, additional FISH
studies with MYC/IgH fusion probe, BCL2 break apart probe, and BCL6 break apart
probe were performed. MYC rearrangement was detected in 23 of 101 cases of
aggressive B cell lymphomas (22.5%). The cases with MYC rearrangement were
divided into 14 BL, three DLBCL/BL, and six DLBCL. One of the three DLBCL/BL had 
double translocation for MYC and BCL6 gene. Clinically, DLBCL/BL of the GI tract 
was more akin to Burkitt lymphoma than it is to GI tract DLBCL with c-MYC
rearrangement. The overall prognosis of patients with DLBCL/BL was the worst
among aggressive B cell lymphomas. DLBCL/BL is uncommon category of B cell
lymphoma in the GI tract with aggressive clinical course despite of intensive
chemotherapy.

PMID: 22002677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Semin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):379-87. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2011.09.001. Epub 2011 
Oct 13.

The role of the transcription factor Miz-1 in lymphocyte development and
lymphomagenesis-Binding Myc makes the difference.

Möröy T(1), Saba I, Kosan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - IRCM, 110 Avenue des Pins
Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada. Tarik.Moroy@ircm.qc.ca

The Myc interacting zinc finger protein 1 (Miz-1) is a BTB/POZ domain containing 
transcription factor that can function as an activator or repressor depending on 
its binding partners. In a complex with co-factors such as nuclophosmin or p300, 
Miz-1 stimulates transcription of genes that encode regulators of cell cycle
progression such as p21(Cip1) or p15(Ink4b) or inhibitors of apoptosis such as
Bcl-2. In contrast, Miz-1 becomes a transcriptional repressor when it binds to
c-Myc or Bcl-6, which replace nucleophosmin or p300. During lymphocyte
development, Miz-1 functions as a regulator of the IL-7 signaling pathway at very
early steps in the bone marrow and thymus. When the IL-7 receptor (IL-7R)
recognizes its cognate cytokine, a cascade of events is initiated that involves
the recruitment of janus kinases (JAK) to the cytoplasmic part of the IL-7R, the 
phosphorylation of Stat5, its dimerization and relocation to the nucleus,
enabling a transcriptional programming that governs commitment, survival and
proliferation of lymphoid lineage cells. Miz-1 is critical in this signal
transduction pathway, since it controls the expression of Socs1, an inhibitor of 
JAKs and thus of Stat5 activation and Bcl-2 expression. A lack of Miz-1 blocks
IL-7 mediated signaling, which is detrimental for early B- and T-lymphoid
development. These functions of Miz-1 during early lymphocyte development are
c-Myc-independent. In contrast, when c-Myc is constitutively over-expressed, for 
instance during c-Myc induced lymphomagenesis, the interaction between Miz-1 and 
c-Myc becomes important and critical for the initiation and maintenance of
c-Myc-dependent lymphoid malignancies.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22000024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Nov;35(11):1691-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31822bd8a8.

Clinicopathologic and genetic characterization of follicular lymphomas presenting
in the ovary reveals 2 distinct subgroups.

Ozsan N(1), Bedke BJ, Law ME, Inwards DJ, Ketterling RP, Knudson RA, Keeney GL,
Dogan A, Feldman AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.

Most lymphomas arising in the ovary are diffuse large B-cell or Burkitt
lymphomas. Follicular lymphomas of the ovary are rare, and their
clinicopathologic features are incompletely understood. We investigated clinical,
morphologic, immunophenotypic, and genetic features of follicular lymphomas
initially diagnosed in the ovary in 16 women. We performed immunohistochemistry
for CD20, CD3, CD10, BCL6, IRF4/MUM1, and BCL2 and interphase fluorescence in
situ hybridization for translocations involving BCL2, BCL6, and IRF4. Clustering 
was performed on the basis of clinicopathologic and genetic variables using
Cluster 3.0. Ages ranged from 42 to 73 years. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering analysis revealed 2 distinct groups of patients. One group (group A)
included 7 cases, which were negative or weakly positive for BCL2 protein and
lacked IGH@/BCL2 translocations (6 cases evaluable). Four patients were of grade 
3A, and 3 patients were of grade 2. Four had stage IE disease with unilateral
ovarian involvement (subgroup A(1)), and the stage was unknown in 3 patients
(subgroup A(2)). The second group (group B) included 9 cases of low histologic
grade, which strongly expressed BCL2 protein and had IGH@/BCL2 translocations (7 
cases evaluable). Six patients had stage III/IV disease, 2 had stage II disease, 
and the stage was unknown in 1 patient. Although follow-up intervals were
limited, patients with higher-grade/low-stage disease tended to have favorable
outcomes. These data indicate 2 distinct types of follicular lymphomas presenting
in the ovary: a low-grade/high-stage/BCL2-positive group and a
higher-grade/low-stage/BCL2-negative group. This latter group likely has distinct
biological and immunologic characteristics, as has been suggested for
higher-grade/low-stage follicular lymphomas presenting at other extranodal sites.

PMID: 21997689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jan;36(1):109-16. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318230df87.

Expression of programmed death-1 in primary cutaneous CD4-positive
small/medium-sized pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma, cutaneous pseudo-T-cell lymphoma,
and other types of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Cetinözman F(1), Jansen PM, Willemze R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, RC Leiden, The
Netherlands. f.cetinoezman@lumc.nl

In this study we investigated whether programmed death-1 (PD-1) could serve as a 
useful diagnostic marker to differentiate between primary cutaneous CD4
small/medium-sized pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma (PCSM-TCL) and cutaneous
pseudo-T-cell lymphomas on the one hand and other types of cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas (CTCLs) on the other. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin biopsies
from 26 patients with PCSM-TCL or pseudo-T-cell lymphoma, including 1 patient
with a lymphomatoid drug eruption, and 52 skin biopsies from other types of CTCLs
were stained for PD-1. In addition, PD-1-positive cases were stained with
antibodies against BCL6, CXCL13, and CD10 to determine a possible relationship
with follicular helper T (TFH) cells. In all 26 cases of PCSM-TCL or
pseudo-T-cell lymphoma, the medium-sized to large-sized atypical T cells
consistently expressed PD-1, BCL6, and CXCL13 but not CD10. PD-1 expression was
found in only 2 of 21 cases of mycosis fungoides and in only 2 of 16 cases of
cutaneous peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified. All 4 patients with an
aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic CD8 CTCL and all 11 cases with a primary
cutaneous CD30 lymphoproliferative disorder were negative for PD-1. In
conclusion, PD-1 is typically expressed by atypical cells in PCSM-TCL and
pseudo-T-cell lymphoma but is not expressed or is rarely expressed in other types
of CTCLs. Therefore, it may serve as a suitable adjunct in differential
diagnosis. Our results demonstrate that the atypical cells in PCSM-TCL and
pseudo-T-cell lymphomas share a common TFH phenotype and support the view that
most cases classified nowadays as PCSM-TCL are identical to cutaneous
pseudo-T-cell lymphomas described previously.

PMID: 21989349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diagn Pathol. 2011 Oct 11;6:97. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-6-97.

Comparison of germinal center markers CD10, BCL6 and human germinal
center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) in follicular lymphomas.

Goteri G(1), Lucarini G, Zizzi A, Costagliola A, Giantomassi F, Stramazzotti D,
Rubini C, Leoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, Pathological Anatomy,
Polytechnic University of Marche Region, Ancona Hospital, Ancona, Italy.
gaiagoteri@virgilio.it

BACKGROUND: Recently, human germinal center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) gene
protein has been proposed as an adjunctive follicular marker to CD10 and BCL6.
METHODS: Our aim was to evaluate immunoreactivity for HGAL in 82 cases of
follicular lymphomas (FLs)--67 nodal, 5 cutaneous and 10 transformed--which were 
all analysed histologically, by immunohistochemistry and PCR.
RESULTS: Immunostaining for HGAL was more frequently positive (97.6%) than that
for BCL6 (92.7%) and CD10 (90.2%) in FLs; the cases negative for bcl6 and/or for 
CD10 were all positive for HGAL, whereas the two cases negative for HGAL were
positive with BCL6; no difference in HGAL immunostaining was found among
different malignant subtypes or grades.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, HGAL can be used in the immunostaining of FLs as the most
sensitive germinal center (GC)-marker; when applied alone, it would half the
immunostaining costs, reserving the use of the other two markers only to
HGAL-negative cases.

© 2011 Goteri et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3201901
PMID: 21988858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Adv Immunol. 2011;111:1-46. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385991-4.00001-5.

Early steps of follicular lymphoma pathogenesis.

Roulland S(1), Faroudi M, Mamessier E, Sungalee S, Salles G, Nadel B.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Immunology of Marseille-Luminy (CIML), Université de la
Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) pathogenesis is a complex and fascinating multi-hit
process, escalating along successive derailments of the distinctive molecular and
cellular mechanisms paving B-cell differentiation and activation. This
progressive subversion of B-cell receptor diversification mechanisms and B-cell
homeostasis likely occurs during a protracted preclinical phase of asymptomatic
growth, in which premalignant clones already disseminate and establish "niches"
in secondary lymphoid organs. Following FL diagnosis, a parallel indolent
behavior is observed in most patients, slowly progressing over a period of many
years, to eventually generate a highly refractory (and in some case transform
into an aggressive subtype of) lymphoma. Novel insights in human germinal center 
B-cell biology recently allowed a more comprehensive understanding of the various
illegitimate events sequentially involved in the premalignant progression phases.
In this review, we will discuss how these new data have modified our perception
of early FL pathogenesis, the new questions and challenges it opened up, and how 
this knowledge could impact on innovative programs of early detection, follow-up,
and patient management.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21970951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Infect Chemother. 2012 Apr;18(2):258-64. doi: 10.1007/s10156-011-0308-0. Epub
2011 Oct 4.

Mantle cell lymphoma involvement of the pleura and tuberculous pleurisy with
pulmonary tuberculosis: a case report and literature review.

Anai S(1), Hashisako M, Ikegame S, Wakamatsu K, Nagata N, Nakanishi Y, Kajiki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization Omuta
National Hospital, 1044-1 Tachibana, Omuta, Fukuoka 837-0911, Japan.
anai-s@kokyu.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

A 78-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital for fever, dry cough,
and right pleural effusion. She was diagnosed with mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) at 
73 years of age and was treated with carcinostatics, but MCL was refractory.
Chest computed tomography (CT) on admission revealed a localized trabecular
shadow in the middle lobe of the right lung and right pleural effusion with
thickened visceral pleura. Right pleural effusion was exudative, lymphocytes were
dominant, and adenosine deaminase isoenzymes were elevated.
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT revealed positive
findings in the right thickened visceral pleura and right middle lobe. We
suspected tuberculosis, but bronchoscopy revealed that the washing fluid was
negative for Ziehl-Neelsen staining. Thoracoscopy under local anesthesia revealed
redness on the parietal and visceral pleura and fibrin network. Pathological
findings from pleural biopsy included granulomas, Langhans-type giant cells, and 
diffuse invasion of lymphocytes with atypical nuclei. Immunophenotypes were
CD5(+), CD10(-), CD19(+), CD20(+), <U+03BB>(+), CD25(+) by flow cytometry and CD20(+),
CD45RO(-), cyclin D1(+), bcl2(+), bcl6(-) by immunohistochemistry. We diagnosed
MCL involvement of the pleura, and highly suspected tuberculous pleurisy. The
patient received antituberculosis therapy with rifampicin, isoniazid,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. After 4 weeks, culture of bronchoscopy washing
fluid was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We diagnosed pulmonary
tuberculosis. Patients with malignant lymphoma are vulnerable to tuberculosis. In
addition to diagnosing MCL involvement of the pleura, it is important to consider
the possibility of complication with tuberculosis.

PMID: 21968964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Clin Mol Allergy. 2011 Sep 30;9:12. doi: 10.1186/1476-7961-9-12.

Early gene expression changes with rush immunotherapy.

Davis LS(1), Bhutani S, Barnett SR, Khan DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatic Diseases, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390-8884, USA.
laurie.davis@utsouthwestern.edu.

BACKGROUND: To examine whether whole genome expression profiling could reveal
changes in mRNA expression of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from
allergic patients undergoing rush immunotherapy (RIT) that might be manifest
within the first few months of treatment.
METHODS: For this study, PBMC from three allergic patients undergoing RIT were
assessed at four timepoints: prior to RIT, at 1 week and 7 week post-RIT, during 
build-up and at 4 months, after establishment of a maintenance dose. PBMC mRNA
gene expression changes over time were determined by oligonucleotide microarrays 
using the Illumina Human-6 BeadChip Platform, which simultaneously interrogates
expression profiles of > 47,000 transcripts. Differentially expressed genes were 
identified using well-established statistical analysis for microarrays. In
addition, we analyzed peripheral blood basophil high-affinity IgE receptor (Fc
epsilon RI) expression and T-regulatory cell frequency as detected by expression 
of CD3+CD4+CD25bright cells at each timepoint using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: In comparing the initial 2 timepoints with the final 2 timepoints and
analyzing for genes with =1.5-fold expression change (p less than or equal to
0.05, BH-FDR), we identified 507 transcripts. At a 2-fold change (p less than or 
equal to 0.05, BH-FDR), we found 44 transcripts. Of these, 28 were up-regulated
and 16 were down-regulated genes. From these datasets, we have identified changes
in immunologically relevant genes from both the innate and adaptive response with
upregulation of expressed genes for molecules including IL-1ß, IL-8, CD40L, BTK
and BCL6. At the 4 month timepoint, we noted a downward trend in Fc epsilon RI
expression in each of the three patients and increased allergen-specific IgG4
levels. No change was seen in the frequency of peripheral T-regulatory cells
expressed over the four timepoints.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed significant changes in gene expression early in
peripheral blood samples from allergic patients undergoing RIT. Moreover, serum
levels for allergen specific IgG4 also increased over the course of treatment.
These studies suggest that RIT induces rapid and dynamic alterations in both
innate and adaptive immunity which can be observed in the periphery of allergic
patients. These alterations could be directly related to the therapeutic shift in
the allergen-specific class of immunoglobulin.

PMCID: PMC3195724
PMID: 21961521  [PubMed]


153. Science. 2011 Nov 11;334(6057):825-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1208421. Epub 2011 Sep
29.

Late interleukin-6 escalates T follicular helper cell responses and controls a
chronic viral infection.

Harker JA(1), Lewis GM, Mack L, Zuniga EI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA.

Multiple inhibitory molecules create a profoundly immunuosuppressive environment 
during chronic viral infections in humans and mice. Therefore, eliciting
effective immunity in this context represents a challenge. Here, we report that
during a murine chronic viral infection, interleukin-6 (IL-6) was produced by
irradiation-resistant cells in a biphasic manner, with late IL-6 being absolutely
essential for viral control. The underlying mechanism involved IL-6 signaling on 
virus-specific CD4 T cells that caused up-regulation of the transcription factor 
Bcl6 and enhanced T follicular helper cell responses at late, but not early,
stages of chronic viral infection. This resulted in escalation of germinal center
reactions and improved antibody responses. Our results uncover an antiviral
strategy that helps to safely resolve a persistent infection in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3388900
PMID: 21960530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Oct 31;52(11):8520-6. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7664.

Activation of OX40 prolongs and exacerbates autoimmune experimental uveitis.

Wu X(1), Rosenbaum JT, Adamus G, Zhang GL, Duan J, Weinberg A, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR
97239, USA.

PURPOSE: T cells are essential for the development of autoimmune uveitis.
Although the costimulatory molecule OX40 promotes T-cell function and expansion, 
it is unclear whether OX40 is implicated in ocular inflammation. The purpose of
this study was to examine the role of OX40 in uveitis.
METHODS: Experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU) was induced in B10.RIII mice by
subcutaneous injection of interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein peptide
161-180 (IRBP(161-180)). Some mice received an intravenous administration of
OX40-activating antibody on days 0 and 4 after IRBP(161-180) sensitization or on 
days 10 and 14 of uveitis onset. The severity of EAU was evaluated by histology
at different time points. In addition, ocular inflammatory cytokine expression
was determined by real time-PCR, and peripheral activated CD4(+)CD44(+)CD62L(-) T
cells and IL-7Ra expression were analyzed by flow cytometry. The activated
CD4(+)CD44(+) lymphocytes were rechallenged with IRBP(161-180) in vitro to assess
their antigen recall response.
RESULTS: The authors demonstrated a marked OX40 expression by infiltrating
lymphocytes in enucleated human eyes with end-stage inflammation. In addition,
the administration of OX40-activating antibody prolonged and exacerbated the
disease course of EAU. Moreover, activation of OX40 not only increased
CD4(+)CD44(+)CD62L(-) lymphocyte number, it upregulated IL-7Ra expression in the 
activated T-cell population. Lastly, these cells exhibited a stronger
interferon-<U+03B3> response to IRBP(161-180) restimulation in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: The results reveal a pathogenic role of OX40 in uveitis.
Furthermore, the upregulation of IL-7R in CD4(+)CD44(+) lymphocytes suggests that
the activation of OX40 promotes the generation or expansion of uveitogenic memory
T cells.

PMCID: PMC3208192
PMID: 21948545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov 1;29(31):4079-87. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.4423. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

The germinal center/activated B-cell subclassification has a prognostic impact
for response to salvage therapy in relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a bio-CORAL study.

Thieblemont C(1), Briere J, Mounier N, Voelker HU, Cuccuini W, Hirchaud E,
Rosenwald A, Jack A, Sundstrom C, Cogliatti S, Trougouboff P, Boudova L, Ysebaert
L, Soulier J, Chevalier C, Bron D, Schmitz N, Gaulard P, Houlgatte R,
Gisselbrecht C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, APHP, Hôpital Saint Louis, INSERM U728, IUH, Paris, France.
catherine.thieblemont@sls.aphp.fr

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov 1;29(31):4065-6.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the prognostic value of the cell of origin (COO) in patients
with relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBLC), prospectively
treated by rituximab, dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, and cisplatin (R-DHAP)
versus rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide and followed by
intensive therapy plus autologous stem-cell transplantation on the Collaborative 
Trial in Relapsed Aggressive Lymphoma (CORAL) trial.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Among the 396 patients included on the trial, histologic
material was available for a total of 249 patients at diagnosis (n = 189
patients) and/or at relapse (n = 147 patients), which included 87 matched pairs. 
The patient data were analyzed by immunochemistry for CD10, BCL6, MUM1, FOXP1,
and BCL2 expression and by fluorescent in situ hybridization for BCL2, BCL6 and
c-MYC breakpoints. The correlation with survival data was performed by using the 
log-rank test and the Cox model.
RESULTS: Characteristics of immunophenotype and chromosomal abnormalities were
statistically highly concordant in the matched biopsies. In univariate analysis, 
the presence of c-MYC gene rearrangement was the only parameter to be
significantly correlated with a worse progression-free survival (PFS; P = .02)
and a worse overall survival (P = .04). When treatment interaction was tested,
the germinal center B (GCB) -like DLBCL that was based on the algorithm by Hans
was significantly associated with a better PFS in the R-DHAP arm. In multivariate
analysis, independent prognostic relevance was found for the GCB/non-GCB the Hans
phenotype interaction treatment (P = .04), prior rituximab exposure (P = .0052), 
secondary age-adjusted International Prognostic Index (P = .039), and FoxP1
expression (P = .047). Confirmation was obtained by gene expression profiling in 
a subset of 39 patients.
CONCLUSION: COO remains a major and independent factor in relapsed/refractory
DLBCL, with a better response to R-DHAP in GCB-like DLBCL. This needs
confirmation by a prospective study.

PMID: 21947824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nat Immunol. 2011 Sep 20;12(10):933-40. doi: 10.1038/ni.2094.

Malignant pirates of the immune system.

Rui L(1), Schmitz R, Ceribelli M, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

At great human cost, cancer is the largest genetic experiment ever conducted.
This review highlights how lymphoid malignancies have genetically perverted
normal immune signaling and regulatory mechanisms for their selfish oncogenic
goals of unlimited proliferation, perpetual survival and evasion of the immune
response.

PMID: 21934679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Semin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):341-9. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2011.08.010. Epub 2011
Sep 15.

The genetic network controlling plasma cell differentiation.

Nutt SL(1), Taubenheim N, Hasbold J, Corcoran LM, Hodgkin PD.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria, 3050, Australia.

Upon activation by antigen, mature B cells undergo immunoglobulin class switch
recombination and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells, the
endpoint of the B cell developmental lineage. Careful quantitation of these
processes, which are stochastic, independent and strongly linked to the division 
history of the cell, has revealed that populations of B cells behave in a highly 
predictable manner. Considerable progress has also been made in the last few
years in understanding the gene regulatory network that controls the B cell to
plasma cell transition. The mutually exclusive transcriptomes of B cells and
plasma cells are maintained by the antagonistic influences of two groups of
transcription factors, those that maintain the B cell program, including Pax5,
Bach2 and Bcl6, and those that promote and facilitate plasma cell
differentiation, notably Irf4, Blimp1 and Xbp1. In this review, we discuss
progress in the definition of both the transcriptional and cellular events
occurring during late B cell differentiation, as integrating these two approaches
is crucial to defining a regulatory network that faithfully reflects the
stochastic features and complexity of the humoral immune response.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2011 Aug 30;2(3):245-52. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

Immunostaining to identify molecular subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in
a population-based epidemiologic study in the pre-rituximab era.

Morton LM, Cerhan JR, Hartge P, Vasef MA, Neppalli VT, Natkunam Y, Dogan A, Dave 
BJ, Jain S, Levy R, Lossos IS, Cozen W, Davis S, Schenk MJ, Maurer MJ, Lynch CF, 
Rothman N, Chatterjee N, Yu K, Staudt LM, Weisenburger DD, Wang SS.

Gene expression profiling studies have distinguished diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCLs) by cell of origin, with distinct pathogenetic mechanisms and
prognosis. We attempted to identify DLBCL molecular subtypes in an epidemiologic 
study of 214 DLBCL patients diagnosed during 1998-2000 with archival tissues to
investigate etiology. Immunohistochemical staining for CD10, BCL6, LMO2,
MUM1/IRF4, and BCL2 and fluorescence in situ hybridization for t(14;18) were
conducted, with =93% blinded duplicate agreement. CD10, LMO2, and BCL2 expression
was similar to previous reports (32%, 44%, and 44% of DLBCLs, respectively), but 
BCL6 and MUM1/IRF4 expression was lower than expected (29% and 5%, respectively).
We classified 112/214 (52%) cases as germinal center B-cell-like DLBCL
(GCB-DLBCL; Hans et al., Blood 2004; CD10+ or CD10-/BCL6+/MUM1-), with no
difference in prognosis compared with non-GCB-DLBCL (Cox regression, P=0.48).
Comparing other GCB correlates, LMO2 expression and t(14;18) were more common but
not exclusive to GCB-DLBCL as defined in our study, whereas BCL2 expression did
not differ between DLBCL molecular subtypes. We could not confidently identify
patients with GCB-DLBCL using these immunohistochemistry-based markers on
archival tissues.

PMCID: PMC3166152
PMID: 21915363  [PubMed]


159. J Exp Med. 2011 Oct 24;208(11):2163-74. doi: 10.1084/jem.20110304. Epub 2011 Sep 
12.

BCL6-mediated repression of p53 is critical for leukemia stem cell survival in
chronic myeloid leukemia.

Hurtz C(1), Hatzi K, Cerchietti L, Braig M, Park E, Kim YM, Herzog S,
Ramezani-Rad P, Jumaa H, Müller MC, Hofmann WK, Hochhaus A, Ye BH, Agarwal A,
Druker BJ, Shah NP, Melnick AM, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California-San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA.

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is induced by the oncogenic BCR-ABL1 tyrosine
kinase and can be effectively treated for many years with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). However, unless CML patients receive life-long TKI treatment, 
leukemia will eventually recur; this is attributed to the failure of TKI
treatment to eradicate leukemia-initiating cells (LICs). Recent work demonstrated
that FoxO factors are critical for maintenance of CML-initiating cells; however, 
the mechanism of FoxO-dependent leukemia initiation remained elusive. Here, we
identified the BCL6 protooncogene as a critical effector downstream of FoxO in
self-renewal signaling of CML-initiating cells. BCL6 represses Arf and p53 in CML
cells and is required for colony formation and initiation of leukemia.
Importantly, peptide inhibition of BCL6 in human CML cells compromises colony
formation and leukemia initiation in transplant recipients and selectively
eradicates CD34(+) CD38(-) LICs in patient-derived CML samples. These findings
suggest that pharmacological inhibition of BCL6 may represent a novel strategy to
eradicate LICs in CML. Clinical validation of this concept could limit the
duration of TKI treatment in CML patients, which is currently life-long, and
substantially decrease the risk of blast crisis transformation.

PMCID: PMC3201200
PMID: 21911423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cesk Patol. 2011 Jul;47(3):106-14.

Burkitt lymphoma (BL): reclassification of 39 lymphomas diagnosed as BL or
Burkitt-like lymphoma in the past based on immunohistochemistry and fluorescence 
in situ hybridization.

Kodet R(1), Mrhalová M, Stejskalová E, Kabícková E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Charles University, 2nd
Faculty of Medicine and Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
roman.kodet@lfmotol.cuni.cz

Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is a well characterized entity. For atypical findings a
term Burkitt-like lymphoma (B-LL) was applied in the past, but the interpretation
of the morphological appearances was subjective and poorly reproducible. We used 
a combined approach (morphology using classical histological staining;
immunohistochemistry-IHC; fluorescence in situ hybridization-FISH on interphase
nuclei; cytogenetics) to perform a retrospective study on 39 patients diagnosed
as BL and B-LL at our department in the years 1982 to 2002. By FISH we
demonstrated t(8;14)(q24;q32) in 31 patients; in further two we found a break at 
8q24, suggestive of a variant translocation. In three patients with the
cytogenetic investigation available we confirmed the findings of FISH--two
lymphomas had the t(8;14)(q24;q32), one had t(2;8)(p12;q24). IHC showed CD20,
CD10, BCL-6, p53 expression, and Ki-67 antigen in > 95% of the tumor cell
population in a majority of the patients. There was a group of 4 patients in whom
the t(8;14)(q24;q32) or a break at 8q24 were not found (FISH). These cases were
reclassified within the WHO defined grey zone subgroup of B-cell lymphoma
unclassifiable with features intermediate between diffuse large cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma--I-DLBCL/BL. Two further cases were reclassified as 
DLBCL based on a combined IHC and FISH findings. A lymphoma of one of these
patients had breaks at 3q27 (BCL6) and at 14q32 (IGH) suggestive of
t(3;14)(q27;q32). The overall survival estimate of 33 patients with the diagnosis
of BL was 54%. Most of deaths occurred within 6 months after the tumor diagnosis.
The unfavorable clinical outcome appears to be associated with a strong
expression of the p53 protein in the tumor cell population. Individually utilized
methods in the diagnosis of BL may lead to false diagnostic conclusions. A
combined approach helps to establish a more reliable diagnosis of BL and to
separate grey zone lymphomas I-DLBCL/BL and DLBCL with morphological mimics of BL
to start adequate treatment. I-DLBCL/BL is a non-homogenous group of lymphomas
necessitating further analysis in a prospective study.

PMID: 21887927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Nov;28(8):661-8. doi: 10.3109/08880018.2011.594866.
Epub 2011 Aug 29.

Pediatric follicular lymphoma: a report of the first 3 cases from Taiwan and
literature review.

Yang SF(1), Chuang WY, Chang ST, Liu H, Chen RL, Chuang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common lymphoma entity in adults but is rare in
children. As opposed to adult cases, pediatric FL is characterized by a
high-grade histology, low-stage disease, a lower frequency of both bcl-2 protein 
expression and BCL2 gene rearrangement, and a more favorable prognosis. During
the authors' previous study of pediatric Burkitt lymphoma, they identified 3
cases of pediatric FL. Here the authors present the first series of pediatric FL 
from Taiwan. The patients were 2 boys and 1 girl, aged from 7 to 14. The
presentation sites were cervical lymph node in 2 and tonsil in 1. All cases
showed large neoplastic nodules comprising sheets of centroblasts, corresponding 
to grade 3b FL. Two of the 3 tumors weakly expressed bcl-2 protein. Fluorescence 
in situ hybridization for IGH, BCL2, BCL6, CCND1, and MYC loci showed that the
only chromosomal translocation was rearranged IGH in 1 case. Two patients were at
stage I, and 1 at stage III. All were treated with combination chemotherapy and
achieved long-term complete remission. Literature review including the current
cases showed that 45% cases of pediatric FL expressed bcl-2 protein and 9% cases 
carried BCL2 gene rearrangement, suggesting an alternate molecular pathogenesis
of pediatric FL as compared to their adult counterparts.

PMID: 21875318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Blood. 2011 Oct 13;118(15):4174-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-331181. Epub 2011
Aug 19.

Pre-B cell receptor-mediated activation of BCL6 induces pre-B cell quiescence
through transcriptional repression of MYC.

Nahar R(1), Ramezani-Rad P, Mossner M, Duy C, Cerchietti L, Geng H, Dovat S,
Jumaa H, Ye BH, Melnick A, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

Initial cell surface expression of the pre-B cell receptor induces proliferation.
After 2 to 5 divisions, however, large pre-BII (Fraction C') cells exit cell
cycle to become resting, small pre-BII cells (Fraction D). The mechanism by which
pre-BII cells exit cell cycle, however, is currently unclear. The checkpoint at
the Fraction C'-D transition is critical for immunoglobulin light chain gene
recombination and to prevent malignant transformation into acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Here we demonstrate that inducible activation of pre-B cell receptor
signaling induces cell-cycle exit through up-regulation of the transcriptional
repressor BCL6. Inducible activation of BCL6 downstream of the pre-B cell
receptor results in transcriptional repression of MYC and CCND2. Hence, pre-B
cell receptor-mediated activation of BCL6 limits pre-B cell proliferation and
induces cellular quiescence at the small pre-BII (Fraction D) stage.

PMCID: PMC3204735
PMID: 21856866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2011 Aug;28(3):202-13.

Follicular helper T cells: implications in neoplastic hematopathology.

Gaulard P(1), de Leval L.

Author information: 
(1)Dèpartement de Pathologie, AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.
philippe.gaulard@hmn.aphp.fr

A distinct subset of T helper cells, named follicular T helper cells (T(FH), has 
been recently described. T(FH) cells are characterized by their homing capacities
in the germinal centers of B-cell follicles where they interact with B cells,
supporting B-cell survival and antibody responses. T(FH) cells can be identified 
by the expression of several markers including the chemokine CXCL13, the
costimulatory molecules PD1 and inducible costimulator, and the transcription
factor BCL6. They appear to be relevant markers for the diagnosis of
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and have helped to recognize subsets of
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified, with nodal or cutaneous
presentation expressing T(FH) antigens that might be related to AITL. In B-cell
neoplasms, T(FH) cells are present within the microenvironment of nodular
lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and follicular lymphoma, where they
likely support the growth of neoplastic germinal center-derived B cells.
Interestingly, the amount of PD1+ cells in the neoplastic follicles might have a 
favorable impact on the outcome of follicular lymphoma patients. Altogether, the 
availability of antibodies directed to T(FH)-associated molecules has important
diagnostic and prognostic implications in hematopathology. In addition, T(FH)
cells could represent interesting targets in T(FH)-derived lymphomas such as
AITL, or in some B-cell neoplasms where they act as part of the tumor
microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4019516
PMID: 21850986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Blood. 2011 Nov 17;118(20):5528-39. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-347112. Epub 2011 
Aug 17.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress causes EBV lytic replication.

Taylor GM(1), Raghuwanshi SK, Rowe DT, Wadowsky RM, Rosendorff A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh and Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggers a homeostatic cellular response in
mammalian cells to ensure efficient folding, sorting, and processing of client
proteins. In lytic-permissive lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), pulse exposure to
the chemical ER-stress inducer thapsigargin (TG) followed by recovery resulted in
the activation of the EBV immediate-early (BRLF1, BZLF1), early (BMRF1), and late
(gp350) genes, gp350 surface expression, and virus release. The protein
phosphatase 1 a (PP1a)-specific phosphatase inhibitor Salubrinal (SAL) synergized
with TG to induce EBV lytic genes; however, TG treatment alone was sufficient to 
activate EBV lytic replication. SAL showed ER-stress-dependent and -independent
antiviral effects, preventing virus release in human LCLs and abrogating gp350
expression in 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-treated B95-8 cells. TG 
resulted in sustained BCL6 but not BLIMP1 or CD138 expression, which is
consistent with maintenance of a germinal center B-cell, rather than plasma-cell,
phenotype. Microarray analysis identified candidate genes governing lytic
replication in LCLs undergoing ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3217354
PMID: 21849482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Histochem Cytochem. 2011 Oct;59(10):918-31. doi: 10.1369/0022155411417309. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Genotypic and phenotypic differences between nodal and extranodal diffuse large
B-Cell lymphomas.

Al-Humood SA(1), Al-Qallaf AS, Alshemmari SH, Francis IM, Junaid TA, Marouf RA,
Al-Mulla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Safat,
Kuwait.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous group of diseases that
have diverse clinical, pathological, and biological features. Here, it is shown
that primary nodal and extranodal DLBCLs differ genomically and phenotypically.
Using conventional comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), the authors assessed 
the chromosomal aberrations in 18 nodal, 13 extranodal, and 5 mixed DLBCLs. The
results demonstrate significantly distinct chromosomal aberrations exemplified by
gains of chromosomal arms 1p, 7p, 12q24.21-12q24.31, and 22q and chromosome X and
loss of chromosome 4, 6q, and 18q22.3-23 in extranodal compared with nodal
DLBCLs. Nodal DLBCLs showed an increased tendency for 18q amplification and BCL2 
protein overexpression compared with extranodal and mixed tumors. Using a panel
of five antibodies against GCET1, MUM1, CD10, BCL6, and FOXP1 proteins to
subclassify DLBCLs according to the recent Choi algorithm, the authors showed
that the genomic profiles observed between the nodal and extranodal DLBCLs were
not due to the different proportions of GCB vs ABC in the two groups. Further
delineation of these genomic differences was illuminated by the use of
high-resolution 21K BAC array CGH performed on 12 independent new cases of
extranodal DLBCL. The authors demonstrated for the first time a novel genome and 
proteome-based signatures that may differentiate the two lymphoma types.

PMCID: PMC3201129
PMID: 21832150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Blood. 2011 Sep 29;118(13):3591-602. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-340646. Epub 2011
Aug 5.

Follicular lymphoma tumor-infiltrating T-helper (T(H)) cells have the same
polyfunctional potential as normal nodal T(H) cells despite skewed
differentiation.

Hilchey SP(1), Rosenberg AF, Hyrien O, Secor-Socha S, Cochran MR, Brady MT, Wang 
JC, Sanz I, Burack WR, Quataert SA, Bernstein SH.

Author information: 
(1)James P. Wilmot Cancer Center, Lymphoma Biology Program, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

The follicular lymphoma (FL) T-cell microenvironment plays a critical role in the
biology of this disease. We therefore determined the lineage, differentiation
state, and functional potential of FL-infiltrating CD4(+) T-helper cells (T(H))
compared with reactive and normal lymph node (NLN) T(H) cells. Relative to NLNs, 
FL cells have decreased proportions of naive and central memory but increased
proportions of effector memory T(H) cells. We further show differences in the
distribution and anatomical localization of CXCR5(+) T(H) populations that, on
the basis of transcription factor analysis, include both regulatory and
follicular helper T cells. On Staphylococcus enterotoxin-B stimulation, which
stimulates T cells through the T-cell receptor, requires no processing by APCs,
and can overcome regulator T cell-mediated suppression, the proportion of
uncommitted primed precursor cells, as well as T(H)2 and T(H)17 cells is higher
in FL cells than in reactive lymph nodes or NLNs. However, the proportion of
T(H)1 and polyfunctional T(H) cells (producing multiple cytokines simultaneously)
is similar in FL cells and NLNs. These data suggest that, although T(H)-cell
differentiation in FL is skewed compared with NLNs, FL T(H) cells should have the
same intrinsic ability to elicit antitumor effector responses as NLN T(H) cells
when tumor suppressive mechanisms are attenuated.

PMCID: PMC3186335
PMID: 21821704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nat Med. 2011 Aug 4;17(8):929-30. doi: 10.1038/nm.2433.

Treg cells: patrolling a dangerous neighborhood.

Campbell DJ, Koch MA.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2011 Aug;17(8):975-82.
    Nat Med. 2011 Aug;17(8):983-8.

PMID: 21818088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Calcium. 2011 Aug;21(8):1141-7. doi: CliCa110811411147.

[Suppressive effects for osteoclastogenesis regulated by RANKL signal].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyauchi Y(1), Miyamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Japan.

RANKL signal promotes osteoclast differentiation through a transcriptional
activation of responsible genes for osteoclast formation and functions. Recent
works revealed that RANKL signal plays a role to repress transcription of
suppressive factors for osteoclastogenesis. Some transcriptional repressors
actively inhibit expressions of osteoclast-specific genes in the precursors
through canceling the functions of transcription activators to prevent
uncontrollable osteoclast formation and pathological bone resorption. The mouse
models lacking those transcriptional repressors exhibited accelerated osteoclast 
differentiation and bone loss. Although the suppressive factors are important for
maintaining bone homeostasis, they have to be removed for osteoclast formation in
the presence of RANKL. The transcriptional repressor Blimp1 was identified as a
new target of RANKL signal and strongly attenuated expressions of various
suppressive factors including Bcl6. The osteoclast-specific Blimp1 knockout mice 
exhibited defect of osteclast formation and loss of bone resorption. Thus, RANKL 
signal regulates osteoclast differentiation by inducing transcriptional
activators such as NFATc1 as well as transcriptional repressors such as
Blimp1.The former is essential for expressions of osteclast-specific genes, while
the latter is required for terminating suppressions of osteoclast
differentiation.

PMID: 21814018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 2;9:107. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-9-107.

Comparative gene expression profiling of placentas from patients with severe
pre-eclampsia and unexplained fetal growth restriction.

Nishizawa H(1), Ota S, Suzuki M, Kato T, Sekiya T, Kurahashi H, Udagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fujita Health University School of
Medicine, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan. nharuki@fujita-hu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: It has been well documented that pre-eclampsia and unexplained fetal 
growth restriction (FGR) have a common etiological background, but little is
known about their linkage at the molecular level. The aim of this study was to
further investigate the mechanisms underlying pre-eclampsia and unexplained FGR.
METHODS: We analyzed differentially expressed genes in placental tissue from
severe pre-eclamptic pregnancies (n = 8) and normotensive pregnancies with or (n 
= 8) without FGR (n = 8) using a microarray method.
RESULTS: A subset of the FGR samples showed a high correlation coefficient
overall in the microarray data from the pre-eclampsia samples. Many genes that
are known to be up-regulated in pre-eclampsia are also up-regulated in FGR,
including the anti-angiogenic factors, FLT1 and ENG, believed to be associated
with the onset of maternal symptoms of pre-eclampsia. A total of 62 genes were
found to be differentially expressed in both disorders. However, gene set
enrichment analysis for these differentially expressed genes further revealed
higher expression of TP53-downstream genes in pre-eclampsia compared with FGR.
TP53-downstream apoptosis-related genes, such as BCL6 and BAX, were found to be
significantly more up-regulated in pre-eclampsia than in FGR, although the
caspases are expressed at equivalent levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our current data indicate a common pathophysiology for FGR and
pre-eclampsia, leading to an up-regulation of placental anti-angiogenic factors. 
However, our findings also suggest that it may possibly be the excretion of these
factors into the maternal circulation through the TP53-mediated early-stage
apoptosis of trophoblasts that leads to the maternal symptoms of pre-eclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3199758
PMID: 21810232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 16;108(33):E488-97. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1100898108. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Human tonsil B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6)-expressing CD4+ T-cell subset specialized
for B-cell help outside germinal centers.

Bentebibel SE(1), Schmitt N, Banchereau J, Ueno H.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX 75204, USA.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells represent a Th subset engaged in the help of
B-cell responses in germinal centers (GCs). Tfh cells abundantly express the
transcription repressor B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6), a factor that is necessary and 
sufficient for their development in vivo. Whether Tfh or Tfh-committed cells are 
involved in the help of B cells outside GCs remains unclear, particularly in
humans. In this study, we identified a previously undefined BCL6-expressing
CD4(+) T-cell subset in human tonsils. This subset expressed IL-7 receptor and
chemokine receptor 5 (CXCR5) and inducible costimulator (ICOS) at low levels
(CXCR5(lo)ICOS(lo)), and it was found exclusively outside GCs. CXCR5(lo)ICOS(lo) 
CD4(+) T cells secreted larger amounts of IL-21 and IL-10 than CXCR5(hi)ICOS(hi) 
GC-Tfh cells upon activation, and they induced proliferation and differentiation 
of naïve B cells into Ig-producing cells more efficiently than GC-Tfh cells.
However, this subset lacked the capacity to help GC-B cells because of the
induction of apoptosis of GC-B cells through the FAS/FAS-ligand interaction.
CXCR5(lo)ICOS(lo) CD4(+) T cells expressed equivalent amounts of BCL6 transcript 
with CXCR5(hi)ICOS(hi) GC-Tfh cells, but they expressed less Bcl6 protein.
Collectively, our study indicates that CXCR5(lo)ICOS(lo) CD4(+) T cells in human 
tonsils represent Tfh lineage-committed cells that provide help to naïve and
memory B cells outside GCs.

PMCID: PMC3158181
PMID: 21808017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2089-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101393. Epub 2011
Jul 29.

Cutting Edge: Distinct waves of BCL6 expression during T follicular helper cell
development.

Baumjohann D(1), Okada T, Ansel KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sandler Asthma Basic Research
Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

T follicular helper (T(FH)) cells are central to the development and regulation
of T cell-dependent humoral immune responses. The transcriptional repressor BCL6 
is required for T(FH) responses, but the kinetics of BCL6 protein expression in
activated CD4(+) T cells have not been established. We measured BCL6 expression
during T(FH) cell development at the single-cell level using intracellular
staining and YFP-BCL6 fusion protein reporter mice. BCL6 was immediately
upregulated in all dividing T cells during dendritic cell-T cell interactions. A 
second wave of early BCL6 expression coincided with the induction of CXCR5,
resulting in a distinct and stable T(FH) cell population. Cognate B cells were
not required for the induction of BCL6, but supported the expansion of T(FH)
cells. These data suggest that BCL6 participates in very early events in T(FH)
cell development, and that repeated encounters with APCs reinforce BCL6
expression, thereby establishing the T(FH) cell phenotype.

PMID: 21804014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Clin Exp Allergy. 2011 Nov;41(11):1568-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03836.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Bcl6 in pulmonary epithelium coordinately controls the expression of the CC-type 
chemokine genes and attenuates allergic airway inflammation.

Seto T(1), Yoshitake M, Ogasawara T, Ikari J, Sakamoto A, Hatano M, Hirata H,
Fukuda T, Kuriyama T, Tatsumi K, Tokuhisa T, Arima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There is synteny in the CC-type chemokine gene clusters between
humans (CCL2/MCP-1, CCL7MCP-3, CCL11/eotaxin, CCL8/MCP-2, CCL13/MCP-4, and
CCL1/I-309) and mice (CCL2, CCL7, CCL11, CCL12/MCP-5, CCL8, and CCL1).
OBJECTIVE: As many putative Bcl6/STAT-binding sequences are observed in the
clusters, we examined the roles of a transcriptional repressor Bcl6 and the
regional histone modification in the expression of these chemokine genes in
pulmonary epithelium.
METHODS: We generated transgenic (Tg) mice carrying the Bcl6 or the
dominant-negative (DN)-Bcl6 gene under the control of the surfactant protein C
(SPC) promoter that induces the exogenous gene expression in the distal lung
epithelium. For in vitro studies, A549, alveolar type II-like epithelial cell
line transfected with the SPC-DN-Bcl6 gene were stimulated with IL-4+TNF-a, and
Bcl6 or STAT6 binding to and histone modification of the cluster in the
transfectants were analysed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Tg mice
sensitized with ovalbumin (OVA) were challenged with OVA inhalation. The amounts 
of mRNAs in each sample were analysed by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The amount of Bcl6 bound to the cluster decreased in A549 cells
stimulated with IL-4 and TNF-a, whereas STAT6 binding increased in association
with regional histone H3-K9/14 acetylation and H3-K4 methylation. The expression 
of all chemokine genes in the gene cluster was augmented in activated A549 cells 
transfected with the DN-Bcl6 gene. We also induced allergic airway inflammation
in Tg mice. Expression of the chemokine genes and infiltrated cell numbers in the
lungs of these Tg mice with allergic airway inflammation were inversely
correlated with the amount of Bcl6 in the lungs.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Expression of the pulmonary epithelium-derived
CC-type chemokine genes in the cluster is orchestrated by the conserved machinery
related to Bcl6. Thus, Bcl6 in pulmonary epithelium may be a critical regulator
for pathogenesis of various pulmonary inflammatory diseases.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21801248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2148-51. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141891.

Bcl6: where too much complexity is barely enough.

Tarlinton DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia.
Tarlinton@wehi.edu.au

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2404-13.

Appropriate B-cell differentiation in response to antigen is fundamental to
health. Central to the regulation of this process in circumstances of
T-cell-dependent immune responses is the transcriptional repressor Bcl6, which is
required for germinal centre (GC) formation and function. Within GCs, Bcl6 is
already known to regulate many functions including proliferation, assessing DNA
damage and terminal differentiation. Targets of Bcl6 repression in B cells have
been identified in a variety of systems with some, such as the reciprocal
regulation of the Prdm1 gene encoding Blimp1, being particularly well studied and
in effect becoming a model for the counter-regulation of Bcl6 and Blimp1 in a
variety of cell types. A study in this issue of the European Journal of
Immunology examines the regulatory network of Bcl6 in DT40, a chicken lymphoma,
and reproduces some of the complexity of other species but also adds new targets 
for Bcl6 regulation, genes involved in class switch recombination and somatic
hypermutation. While this increasing complexity may be daunting, it emphasises
the critical importance of understanding how Bcl6 may integrate the multitude of 
processes occurring in GCs.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21792874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Leukemia. 2012 Jan;26(1):180-3. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.189. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Epstein-Barr virus microRNAs repress BCL6 expression in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Martín-Pérez D, Vargiu P, Montes-Moreno S, León EA, Rodríguez-Pinilla SM, Lisio
LD, Martínez N, Rodríguez R, Mollejo M, Castellvi J, Pisano DG, Sánchez-Beato M, 
Piris MA.

PMID: 21788950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nat Med. 2011 Jul 24;17(8):975-82. doi: 10.1038/nm.2425.

Foxp3+ follicular regulatory T cells control the germinal center response.

Linterman MA(1), Pierson W, Lee SK, Kallies A, Kawamoto S, Rayner TF, Srivastava 
M, Divekar DP, Beaton L, Hogan JJ, Fagarasan S, Liston A, Smith KG, Vinuesa CG.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and the Department of Medicine,
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Aug;17(8):929-30.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):572.

Follicular helper (T(FH)) cells provide crucial signals to germinal center B
cells undergoing somatic hypermutation and selection that results in affinity
maturation. Tight control of T(FH) numbers maintains self tolerance. We describe 
a population of Foxp3(+)Blimp-1(+)CD4(+) T cells constituting 10-25% of the
CXCR5(high)PD-1(high)CD4(+) T cells found in the germinal center after
immunization with protein antigens. These follicular regulatory T (T(FR)) cells
share phenotypic characteristics with T(FH) and conventional Foxp3(+) regulatory 
T (T(reg)) cells yet are distinct from both. Similar to T(FH) cells, T(FR) cell
development depends on Bcl-6, SLAM-associated protein (SAP), CD28 and B cells;
however, T(FR) cells originate from thymic-derived Foxp3(+) precursors, not naive
or T(FH) cells. T(FR) cells are suppressive in vitro and limit T(FH) cell and
germinal center B cell numbers in vivo. In the absence of T(FR) cells, an
outgrowth of non-antigen-specific B cells in germinal centers leads to fewer
antigen-specific cells. Thus, the T(FH) differentiation pathway is co-opted by
T(reg) cells to control the germinal center response.

PMCID: PMC3182542
PMID: 21785433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Nat Med. 2011 Jul 24;17(8):983-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.2426.

Follicular regulatory T cells expressing Foxp3 and Bcl-6 suppress germinal center
reactions.

Chung Y(1), Tanaka S, Chu F, Nurieva RI, Martinez GJ, Rawal S, Wang YH, Lim H,
Reynolds JM, Zhou XH, Fan HM, Liu ZM, Neelapu SS, Dong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Cancer Immunology Research, The
University of Texas-MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
yeonseok.chung@uth.tmc.edu

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Aug;17(8):929-30.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):572.

Foxp3(+) regulatory T (T(reg)) cells suppress different types of immune responses
to help maintain homeostasis in the body. How T(reg) cells regulate humoral
immunity, including germinal center reactions, is unclear. Here we identify a
subset of T(reg) cells expressing CXCR5 and Bcl-6 that localize to the germinal
centers in mice and humans. The expression of CXCR5 on T(reg) cells depends on
Bcl-6. These CXCR5(+)Bcl-6(+) T(reg) cells are absent in the thymus but can be
generated de novo from CXCR5(-)Foxp3(+) natural T(reg) precursors. A lack of
CXCR5(+) T(reg) cells leads to greater germinal center reactions including
germinal center B cells, affinity maturation of antibodies and the
differentiation of plasma cells. These results unveil a Bcl-6-CXCR5 axis in
T(reg) cells that drives the development of follicular regulatory T (T(FR)) cells
that function to inhibit the germinal center reactions.

PMCID: PMC3151340
PMID: 21785430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oral Oncol. 2011 Sep;47(9):883-7. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.06.506. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Dominant genetic aberrations and coexistent EBV infection in HIV-related oral
plasmablastic lymphomas.

Boy SC(1), van Heerden MB, Babb C, van Heerden WF, Willem P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
sonja.boy@up.ac.za

We present common cytogenetic features in the largest cohort of plasmablastic
lymphoma (PBL) of the oral cavity published to date. This cohort included 45
patients, 32 of whom had a known HIV status, of which 31 were HIV positive.
Ninety eight per cent of all PBL cases were known to be EBV positive. In line
with previous studies, we found that rearrangements of the MYC gene was the most 
common genetic abnormality seen in 60% of cases with the immunoglobulin heavy
chain (IGH) locus as a partner in 51% of cases. Additional complex genetic
aberrations were frequent, in particular, an increased copy number of the CCND1
gene was seen in 41% of cases with true amplification of CCND1 in 15% of cases.
Aneuploidy was also observed for the BCL6 gene in 28% of cases. Interestingly,
rearrangements of both IGH genes were detected in 16% of cases with t(14;18) and 
t(11;14) respectively involved in conjunction with a t(8;14) in two cases. These 
bi-allelic IGH rearrangements have not been described before in oral PBL. Our
results reinforce the notion that EBV infection and MYC rearrangements are
important events in the pathogenesis of oral PBL. The genetic diversity and
complexity observed in these cases, underlines the importance to genetically
characterise PBL patients at presentation as this may inform the choice of more
effective treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21783402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Adv Immunol. 2011;110:1-26. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387663-8.00005-3.

AID targeting in antibody diversity.

Pavri R(1), Nussenzweig MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, USA.

Antibody maturation requires class switch recombination (CSR) and somatic
hypermutation (SHM), both of which are initiated by activation-induced cytidine
deaminase (AID). AID deaminates cytosine residues resulting in mismatches that
are differentially processed to produce double-strand breaks in Ig switch (S)
regions that lead to CSR, or to point mutations in variable (V) exons resulting
in SHM. Although AID was first thought to be Ig-specific, recent work indicates
that it also targets a diverse group of non-Ig loci, including genes such as Bcl6
and c-myc, whose modification by AID results in lymphoma-associated mutations and
translocations. Here, we review the recent literature on AID targeting and the
role for transcriptional stalling in recruitment of this enzyme to Ig and non-Ig 
loci. We propose a model for AID recruitment based on transcriptional stalling,
which reconciles several of the key features of SHM, CSR, and lymphoma-associated
translocation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21762814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Cell. 2011 Jul 12;20(1):3-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.06.021.

BCL6: a novel target for therapy of Ph+ B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Van Etten RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Tufts 
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA. rvanetten@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

Comment on
    Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):384-8.

BCL6 is a zinc-finger transcriptional repressor known for its oncogenic role in B
cell lymphoma. In a recent issue of Nature, Duy et al. describe a novel role for 
BCL6 at the center of a transcriptional network in Ph(+) acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells that modulates their leukemogenicity and response to kinase
inhibitors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741592  [PubMed]


180. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Dec;52(12):2356-64. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.602772. Epub
2011 Aug 18.

Morphological, immunophenotypic and molecular characterization of mature
aggressive B-cell lymphomas in Chinese pediatric patients.

Lu B(1), Zhou C, Yang W, Huang H, Gao Z, He Y, Liu H, Zhou X, Gong L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Basic Medical College, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China.

Differential diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma (BL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) and B cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between
BL and DLBCL (intermediate BL/DLBCL) can be difficult. We studied 97 Chinese
pediatric mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas including 81 BL cases, eight DLBCL
cases and eight intermediate BL/DLBCL cases using immunohistochemistry,
interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
in situ hybridization. Our results showed that there were no significant
differences in the expression of CD10 and BCL6 among cases of BL (91% and 86%,
respectively), DLBCL (75% and 63%, respectively) and intermediate BL/DLBCL (75%
and 63%, respectively) (p > 0.05). The expression of BCL2 (3% in BL, 50% in
DLBCL, 50% in intermediate BL/DLBCL), expression of MUM1 (17% in BL, 63% in
DLBCL, 63% in intermediate BL/DLBCL) and mean Ki-67 proliferation index (PI) (93%
in BL, 83% in DLBCL, 80% in intermediate BL/DLBCL) were significantly different
between BL and DLBCL and between BL and intermediate BL/DLBCL. The frequency of
an extra copy of BCL6 (0% in BL, 37.5% in DLBCL, 25% in intermediate BL/DLBCL)
and EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) positivity (48% in BL, 0% in DLBCL and intermediate
BL/DLBCL) were also significantly different between BL and DLBCL and between BL
and intermediate BL/DLBCL. The frequency of C-MYC rearrangement in BL (98%) was
much higher than in DLBCL (37.5%) and intermediate BL/DLBCL (50%). Our findings
suggest that diagnosis of the mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas in pediatrics
should be based on the comprehensive review and integration of morphological,
immunohistochemical and molecular genetic features. The expression of CD10 and
BCL6 but not BCL2, a high Ki-67 PI (>90%) and a C-MYC rearrangement but not BCL2 
or BCL6 rearrangement are the features of BL. MUM1 is not an exclusionary
diagnostic marker for BL. As the immunophenotype and molecular genetic features
of DLBCL and intermediate BL/DLBCL are similar, intermediate BL/DLBCL is more
likely a subgroup of DLBCL in the pediatric population. Regardless of the
expression of CD10 and BCL6, strong staining for BCL2, Ki-67 PI below 90% and the
presence of extra copies of BCL6 favor a diagnosis of DLBCL or intermediate
BL/DLBCL.

PMID: 21740296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Oct;64(10):866-9. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200185. Epub
2011 Jul 1.

BCL-6 expression in mesenchymal tumours: an immunohistochemical and fluorescence 
in situ hybridisation study.

Walters MP(1), McPhail ED, Law ME, Folpe AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The BCL-6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor protein. Among
normal tissues, BCL-6 expression is confined to germinal center B-cells and a
subpopulation of T-helper cells. Little is known about BCL-6 expression in
mesenchymal tissues. We examined a series of solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) and
other mesenchymal tumors for BCL-6 expression. Immunohistochemistry for BCL-6 was
performed on 64 mesenchymal tumors [26 SFT (19 benign/uncertain, 7 malignant), 6 
synovial sarcomas (SS), 5 gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), 5 malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST), 5 leiomyosarcomas (LMS), 9 leiomyomas
(LM) 4 desmoid tumors (DT), 4 perineuriomas (PN)]. Nuclear immunoreactivity was
considered positive. Six BCL-6 positive SFT were also tested for BCL-6 gene
rearrangement/amplification by FISH. Nuclear expression of BCL-6 was seen in
13/26 SFT, 5/5 LMS, 1/9 LM, 5/6 SS, 1/5 GIST, 1/5 MPNST, 1/4 PN, and 0/5 DT.
BCL-6 expression was significantly more frequent in malignant (6/7) as compared
with benign/uncertain SFT (6/19) (p=0.02) and in LMS (5/5) as compared with LM
(1/9) (p=0.003). FISH for BCL-6 rearrangement/amplification was negative in all
tested cases. We have observed BCL-6 expression in 50% or more of SFT, SS, and
LMS, and in a lesser percentage of LM, GIST, MPNST and PN. Significantly more
frequent expression of BCL-6 in malignant compared with benign/uncertain SFT and 
in LMS compared with LM suggests abnormalities in the BCL-6 signaling pathway may
contribute to malignant transformation in at least some mesenchymal tumors. It is
unlikely that BCL-6 expression in mesenchymal tumors is due to BCL-6 gene
amplification or rearrangement.

PMID: 21725042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Br J Haematol. 2011 Sep;154(6):770-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08771.x. Epub
2011 Jul 1.

Diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma using an algorithmic approach--applicable in both
resource-poor and resource-rich countries.

Naresh KN(1), Ibrahim HA, Lazzi S, Rince P, Onorati M, Ambrosio MR, Bilhou-Nabera
C, Amen F, Reid A, Mawanda M, Calbi V, Ogwang M, Rogena E, Byakika B, Sayed S,
Moshi E, Mwakigonja A, Raphael M, Magrath I, Leoncini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Imperial College,
London, UKDepartment of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Siena,
ItalyUniv Paris-Sud, F-94270, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre; AP-HP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Service
d'Hématologie et Immunologie Biologiques, Cytogénétique, F-94270, Le Kremlin
Bicêtre, FranceDepartment of Haematology, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Imperial
College, London, UKSaint Mary Hospital, Lacor, Gulu, UgandaUniversity of
NairobiNairobi HospitalAga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi, KenyaMuhimbili
National HospitalMuhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences, Dar Es
Salam, TanzaniaInternational Network for Cancer Treatment and Research, Brussels,
BelgiumDepartment of Histopathology, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University,
Egypt.

Distinguishing Burkitt lymphoma (BL) from B cell lymphoma, unclassifiable with
features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and BL
(DLBCL/BL), and DLBCL is challenging. We propose an immunohistochemistry and
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) based scoring system that is employed in
three phases - Phase 1 (morphology with CD10 and BCL2 immunostains), Phase 2
(CD38, CD44 and Ki-67 immunostains) and Phase 3 (FISH on paraffin sections for
MYC, BCL2, BCL6 and immunoglobulin family genes). The system was evaluated on 252
aggressive B-cell lymphomas from Europe and from sub-Saharan Africa. Using the
algorithm, we determined a specific diagnosis of BL or not-BL in 82%, 92% and 95%
cases at Phases 1, 2 and 3, respectively. In 3·4% cases, the algorithm was not
completely applicable due to technical reasons. Overall, this approach led to a
specific diagnosis of BL in 122 cases and to a specific diagnosis of either DLBCL
or DLBCL/BL in 94% of cases that were not diagnosed as BL. We also evaluated the 
scoring system on 27 cases of BL confirmed on gene expression/microRNA expression
profiling. Phase 1 of our scoring system led to a diagnosis of BL in 100% of
these cases.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21718280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Immunol. 2011 Aug 1;187(3):1091-5. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100853. Epub 2011 Jun
29.

Cutting edge: dendritic cell-restricted antigen presentation initiates the
follicular helper T cell program but cannot complete ultimate effector
differentiation.

Goenka R(1), Barnett LG, Silver JS, O'Neill PJ, Hunter CA, Cancro MP, Laufer TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Follicular helper T (T(FH)) cells are critical for germinal center (GC)
formation. The processes that drive their generation and effector potential
remain unclear. In this study, we define requirements for MHC class II APCs in
murine T(FH) cell formation by either transiently ablating or restricting Ag
presentation to dendritic cells (DCs). We find that cognate interactions with DCs
are necessary and sufficient to prime CD4(+) T cells toward a
CXCR5(+)ICOS(+)Bcl6(+) T(FH) cell intermediate. However, in the absence of
additional APCs, these T(FH) cells fail to produce IL-21. Furthermore, in vitro
priming of naive T cells by B cells engenders optimal production of IL-21, which 
induces a GC B cell transcriptional profile. These results support a multistep
model for effector T(FH) cell priming and GC initiation, in which DCs are
necessary and sufficient to induce a T(FH) cell intermediate that requires
additional interactions with distinct APCs for full effector function.

PMCID: PMC3171798
PMID: 21715693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):28833-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.233932. Epub
2011 Jun 27.

Histone deacetylase 9 deficiency protects against effector T cell-mediated
systemic autoimmunity.

Yan K(1), Cao Q, Reilly CM, Young NL, Garcia BA, Mishra N.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, UAS.

Co-repressor histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9) plays a key role in the development
and differentiation of many types of cells, including regulatory T cells.
However, the biological function of HDAC9 in T effector cells is unknown.
Systemic autoimmune diseases like lupus, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis have 
dysfunctional effector T cells. To determine the role of HDAC9 in systemic
autoimmunity, we created MRL/lpr mice with HDAC9 deficiency that have aberrant
effector T cell function. HDAC9 deficiency led to decreased lympho-proliferation,
inflammation, autoantibody production, and increased survival in MRL/lpr mice.
HDAC9-deficient mice manifested Th2 polarization, decreased T effector follicular
cells positive for inducible co-stimulator, and activated T cells in vivo
compared with HDAC9-intact MRL/lpr mice. HDAC9 deficiency also resulted in
increased GATA3 and roquin and decreased BCL6 gene expression. HDAC9 deficiency
was associated with increased site-specific lysine histone acetylation at H3
(H3K9, H3K14, and H3K18) globally that was localized to IL-4, roquin, and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> promoters with increased gene
expression, respectively. In kidney and spleen, HDAC9 deficiency decreased
inflammation and cytokine and chemokine production due to peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> overexpression. These findings suggest that
HDAC9 acts as an epigenetic switch in effector T cell-mediated systemic
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3190691
PMID: 21708950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Exp Med. 2011 Jul 4;208(7):1377-88. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102065. Epub 2011 Jun
27.

B cell priming for extrafollicular antibody responses requires Bcl-6 expression
by T cells.

Lee SK(1), Rigby RJ, Zotos D, Tsai LM, Kawamoto S, Marshall JL, Ramiscal RR, Chan
TD, Gatto D, Brink R, Yu D, Fagarasan S, Tarlinton DM, Cunningham AF, Vinuesa CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogens and Immunity, John Curtin School of Medical Research, 
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 2601,
Australia.

T follicular helper cells (Tfh cells) localize to follicles where they provide
growth and selection signals to mutated germinal center (GC) B cells, thus
promoting their differentiation into high affinity long-lived plasma cells and
memory B cells. T-dependent B cell differentiation also occurs extrafollicularly,
giving rise to unmutated plasma cells that are important for early protection
against microbial infections. Bcl-6 expression in T cells has been shown to be
essential for the formation of Tfh cells and GC B cells, but little is known
about its requirement in physiological extrafollicular antibody responses. We use
several mouse models in which extrafollicular plasma cells can be unequivocally
distinguished from those of GC origin, combined with antigen-specific T and B
cells, to show that the absence of T cell-expressed Bcl-6 significantly reduces
T-dependent extrafollicular antibody responses. Bcl-6(+) T cells appear at the
T-B border soon after T cell priming and before GC formation, and these cells
express low amounts of PD-1. Their appearance precedes that of Bcl-6(+) PD-1(hi) 
T cells, which are found within the GC. IL-21 acts early to promote both
follicular and extrafollicular antibody responses. In conclusion, Bcl-6(+) T
cells are necessary at B cell priming to form extrafollicular antibody responses,
and these pre-GC Tfh cells can be distinguished phenotypically from GC Tfh cells.

PMCID: PMC3135363
PMID: 21708925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Arkh Patol. 2011 Mar-Apr;73(2):25-32.

[The first experience of external quality control of immunohistochemical studies 
in the diagnosis of lymphoproliferative diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Krivolapov IuA, Peshkov MV, Leenman EE, Matsionis AE, Kovrigina AM.

The paper presents the results of estimating the quality of immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining in 36 pathologic laboratories of the Russian Federation. The
results of IHC stains were assessed in 17 markers (CD3, CD5, CDIO, CD15, CD20,
CD23, CD30, Bcl2, Bcl6, Pax5, TdT, Mum1, Cyclin D1, Ki-67, Kappa, Lambda, ALK),
which are frequently used in the diagnosis of lymphoproliferative diseases, in
the sections of specially formed tissue matrices. The study conducted in most
participating laboratories has revealed the considerable IHC staining technology 
flaws that can critically affect the quality of diagnosis of lymphoproliferative 
diseases; the diagnostic capacities of some participating laboratories are
inconsistent with the solved problems for a number of key antibodies being
unavailable.

PMID: 21695985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Bioinformatics. 2011 Aug 15;27(16):2231-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr363.
Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Genomic data integration using guided clustering.

Maneck M(1), Schrader A, Kube D, Spang R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für funktionelle Genomik, Universität Regensburg, Germany.

MOTIVATION: In biomedical research transcriptomic, proteomic or metabolomic
profiles of patient samples are often combined with genomic profiles from
experiments in cell lines or animal models. Integrating experimental data with
patient data is still a challenging task due to the lack of tailored statistical 
tools.
RESULTS: Here we introduce guided clustering, a new data integration strategy
that combines experimental and clinical high-throughput data. Guided clustering
identifies sets of genes that stand out in experimental data while at the same
time display coherent expression in clinical data. We report on two potential
applications: The integration of clinical microarray data with (i) genome-wide
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and (ii) with cell perturbation assays.
Unlike other analysis strategies, guided clustering does not analyze the two
datasets sequentially but instead in a single joint analysis. In a simulation
study and in several biological applications, guided clustering performs
favorably when compared with sequential analysis approaches.
AVAILABILITY: Guided clustering is available as a R-package from
http://compdiag.uni-regensburg.de/software/guidedClustering.shtml. Documented R
code of all our analysis is included in the Supplementary Materials. All newly
generated data are available at the GEO database (GSE29700).
CONTACT: rainer.spang@klinik.uni-regensburg.de
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMID: 21685050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2404-13. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141553. Epub 2011 Jul 
6.

Alternate pathways for Bcl6-mediated regulation of B cell to plasma cell
differentiation.

Alinikula J(1), Nera KP, Junttila S, Lassila O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland. jukka.alinikula@utu.fi

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2148-51.

The transcription factor Bcl6 regulates germinal center formation and
differentiation of B cells into high-affinity antibody-producing plasma cells.
The direct double-negative regulatory circuit between Bcl6 and Blimp-1 is well
established. We now reveal alternative mechanisms for Bcl6-mediated regulation of
B-cell differentiation to plasma cells and show with DT40 cells that Bcl6
directly promotes the expression of Bach2, a known suppressor of Blimp-1.
Moreover, Bcl6 suppresses Blimp-1 expression through direct binding to the IRF4
gene, as well as by promoting the expression of MITF, a known suppressor of IRF4.
We also provide evidence that Bcl6 is needed for the expression of AID and UNG,
the indispensable proteins for somatic hypermutation and class-switch
recombination, and UNG appears to be a direct Bcl6 target. Our findings reveal a 
complex regulatory network in which Bcl6 acts as a key element dictating the
transition of DT40 B cells to plasma cells.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21674482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Int Immunopharmacol. 2011 Nov;11(11):1685-90. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.05.027. 
Epub 2011 Jun 12.

Cholecystokinin octapeptide inhibits immunoglobulin G1 production of
lipopolysaccharide-activated B cells.

Zhang JG(1), Cong B, Jia XX, Li H, Li QX, Ma CL, Feng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical College, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, People's
Republic of China.

Cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK-8) is a typical brain-gut peptide that exerts a 
variety of physiological actions in both the peripheral and central nervous
systems. Our laboratory has previously reported that CCK-8 produces
immunoregulatory action through activating CCK receptor (CCK1R/CCK2R) expression 
on immune cell surfaces. In the present study, we investigated the effect of
CCK-8 on immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) production in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-activated B cells in vitro. CCK-8 inhibited the proliferation and IgG1 mRNA
expression of LPS-activated B cells and therefore inhibited IgG1 production. The 
mechanism may be associated with the regulation of CCK-8 on transcription factors
Blimp1, Pax5, Xbp1 and Bcl6. CCK-8 inhibited the expression of Blimp1, while the 
effect on Pax5, Xbp1 and Bcl6 varied with time, suggesting that CCK-8 acted as a 
complex regulator of LPS-activated B cells. The inhibitory action of CCK-8 was
mainly mediated through the CCK2R pathway. These studies indicate that CCK-8
attenuates humoral immune responses and acts as endogenous immune deactivators in
autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21664492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Haematologica. 2011 Sep;96(9):1327-34. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.042531. Epub
2011 Jun 9.

Follicular lymphoma grade 3B is a distinct neoplasm according to cytogenetic and 
immunohistochemical profiles.

Horn H(1), Schmelter C, Leich E, Salaverria I, Katzenberger T, Ott MM, Kalla J,
Romero M, Siebert R, Rosenwald A, Ott G.

Author information: 
(1)Departement of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2011 Sep;96(9):1244-6.

BACKGROUND: According to the current World Health Organization Classification of 
Lymphoid Tumours, follicular lymphoma is subclassified into three grades
according to the number of centroblasts. Follicular lymphoma grade 3 can be
further divided into types A and B. Almost all available genetic data on grade 3B
follicular lymphomas have been generated from tumors with an additional diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma component. The purely follicular type of follicular
lymphoma grade 3B is a rare neoplasm.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a detailed immunohistochemical (CD10, IRF4/MUM1,
BCL2, Ig light chains) and genetic (translocations of BCL2, BCL6, MYC, IRF4)
characterization of the largest series of purely follicular cases of grade 3B
follicular lymphoma available to date, comprising 23 tumor samples. We also
included 25 typical grade 1 or 2 follicular lymphomas, 9 follicular lymphomas
with large centrocytes and/or high proliferation indices (FL/LCC), 12 cases of
follicular lymphoma grade 3A, 16 cases of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma/follicular lymphoma grade 3B and 15 follicular lymphomas in which a
straightforward distinction between grades 3A and 3B was not possible.
RESULTS: Translocations affecting BCL2 and BCL6 genes are rare in grade 3B
follicular lymphomas (2/23, 9% and 4/23, 17%) when compared with grade 1 or 2
follicular lymphomas (22/25, 88%, P<0.001 and 0/25, P<0.05), FL/LCC (7/9, 78%,
P<0.001 and 2/9, 22%), grade 3A follicular lymphomas (7/12, 58%, P<0.01 and 2/12,
17%), unclassified grade 3 follicular lymphomas (6/15, 40% and 2/15, 13%) and
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma/follicular lymphoma grade 3B (2/16, 13% and 8/16,
50%, P<0.05). MYC translocations were detected occasionally in FL/LCC, follicular
lymphoma grade 3B, and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma/follicular lymphoma grade 3B
(13%-22%), but not in grade 1, 2 or 3A follicular lymphomas (P<0.05 when compared
with follicular lymphoma grade 3B). Both follicular lymphoma grade 3B and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma/follicular lymphoma grade 3B were enriched in samples with 
a CD10(-)IRF4/MUM1(+) immunophenotype (8/19, 42% and 7/16, 44%), with the vast
majority of them lacking BCL2 translocations. In contrast, 42/46 grade 1 or 2
follicular lymphomas, FL/LCC and grade 3A follicular lymphomas were CD10(+) (91%)
while 0/46 expressed IRF4/MUM1. None of the tumor samples tested with increased
IRF4/MUM1-expression harbored a translocation of the IRF4 gene locus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that grade 3B follicular lymphomas form a distinct 
category of follicular lymphomas with infrequent BCL2 and BCL6 translocations,
while grades 1, 2 and 3A follicular lymphomas and FL/LCC display homogeneous
features with frequent BCL2 translocations and a CD10(+)IRF4/MUM1(-)
immunophenotype.

PMCID: PMC3166103
PMID: 21659362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2011 Jun;24(2):111-9. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2011.02.002. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Follicular lymphoma grade 3B.

Salaverria I(1), Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus
Kiel, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Schwanenweg 24, D-24105 Kiel, Germany.
isalaverria@medgen.uni-kiel.de

Follicular lymphoma (FL) grade 3B (FL3B) is defined as FL with more than 15%
centroblasts per high resolution field present as solid sheets. Coexistence with 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is frequent. In contrast to other FL, FL3B 
frequently lack CD10 expression (approximately 50% of cases), show lower
probability of BCL2 expression (69% positive) and increased TP53 expression (31% 
positive). The t(14;18) hallmark translocation of FL is present in only around
13% of FL3B. In contrast, translocations affecting the BCL6 locus in 3q27 are
frequent (44%). Overall, FL3B in many features resembles DLBCL. The presence of a
diffuse component in FL3B has been related to an unfavorable outcome except for
pediatric FL3B that presents in 60% of the cases this DLBCL component. In this
chapter we sought to review the present knowledge on morphological, cytogenetic
and molecular features in FL3B.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21658612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2011;52(2):719-22.

The unexpected evolution of a case of diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Gaman A(1), Bold A, Gaman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy of Craiova, Romania. gamanamelia@yahoo.com

The diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) represents the most common type of
aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with a heterogeneous morphology, biology and
clinical presentation. Gene expression profiling studies identified three
distinct molecular subtypes of DLCBL arisen from B-cells at different stages of
differentiation: germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) DLBCL, activated B-cell-like
(ABC) DLBCL, primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL). The most relevant
oncogenic pathways in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma are: deregulated B-cell
receptor/proliferation signaling, BCL6 and NF-kB constitutive expression, defects
in apoptosis and neoangiogenesis. The treatment of DLBCL has been completely
modified in the last ten years by combination of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody
(rituximab) and CHOP chemotherapy, which is now the first line therapy. In the
last years, there have been reported several cases of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML) at patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with
rituximab. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is possible as an adverse
reaction to rituximab at patients treated with R-CHOP for diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

PMID: 21655667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Dec;64(12):1132-5. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200118. Epub
2011 Sep 21.

Sporadic Burkitt lymphoma in southern China: 12 years' experience in a single
institution in Guangzhou.

Ye Z(1), Xiao Y, Shi H, Ke Z, Liu Y, Liang Y, Han A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital and Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

AIM: To analyse the clinicopathological features of sporadic Burkitt lymphoma
(sBL).
METHODS: In a review of 1682 cases of non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed in the First
Affiliated Hospital and Zhongshan School of Medicine, from 1998 to 2010, 20 cases
(1.2%) of sBL were identified. Histopathological examination,
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridisation were used to analyse the
clinicopathological features of these cases.
RESULTS: Of the 20 cases of sBL, 18 patients were male and two were female. The
mean age was 18 years (range 2-67 years). Extranodal presentation was more common
than nodal presentation (55% vs 15%). Histopathologically, 18 cases (90%) showed 
monotonous medium-sized tumour cells, and two cases showed cells that were
slightly pleomorphic in nuclear size and shape. Immunophenotypically, MUM1 was
positive in three of 17 cases (17.6%). EBER expression was shown in five of 17
cases (29.4%), and all EBER-positive sBLs were Bcl-6+/MUM1-.
CONCLUSION: sBL is rare and mainly affects male children, with predominantly
extranodal presentation. MUM1 expression was found in some sBLs. EBER expression 
was found in 29.4% of sBLs from southern China, an area with a well-known high
incidence of nasopharyngeal carcinoma, which is closely associated with
Epstein-Barr virus infection.

PMID: 21653657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Immunity. 2011 Jun 24;34(6):932-46. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.023.

ICOS receptor instructs T follicular helper cell versus effector cell
differentiation via induction of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6.

Choi YS(1), Kageyama R, Eto D, Escobar TC, Johnston RJ, Monticelli L, Lao C,
Crotty S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Jun 24;34(6):827-9.

The nature of follicular helper CD4(+) T (Tfh) cell differentiation remains
controversial, including the minimal signals required for Tfh cell
differentiation and the time at which Tfh cell differentiation occurs. Here we
determine that Tfh cell development initiates immediately during dendritic cell
(DC) priming in vivo. We demonstrate that inducible costimulator (ICOS) provides 
a critical early signal to induce the transcription factor Bcl6, and Bcl6 then
induces CXCR5, the canonical feature of Tfh cells. Strikingly, a bifurcation
between Tfh and effector Th cells was measurable by the second cell division of
CD4(+) T cells, at day 2 after an acute viral infection: IL2Ra(int) cells
expressed Bcl6 and CXCR5 (Tfh cell program), whereas IL2Ra(hi) cells exhibited
strong Blimp1 expression that repressed Bcl6 (effector Th cell program).
Virtually complete polarization between Bcl6(+) Tfh cells and Blimp1(+) effector 
Th cell populations developed by 72 hr, even without B cells. Tfh cells were
subsequently lost in the absence of B cells, demonstrating a B cell requirement
for maintenance of Bcl6 and Tfh cell commitment via sequential ICOS signals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3124577
PMID: 21636296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Immunity. 2011 Jun 24;34(6):947-60. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.024.

Germinal center B cell and T follicular helper cell development initiates in the 
interfollicular zone.

Kerfoot SM(1), Yaari G, Patel JR, Johnson KL, Gonzalez DG, Kleinstein SH,
Haberman AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06519, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Jun 24;34(6):827-9.

We identify the interfollicular (IF) zone as the site where germinal center B
cell and T follicular helper (Tfh) cell differentiation initiates. For the first 
2 days postimmunization, antigen-specific T and B cells remained confined within 
the IF zone, formed long-lived interactions, and upregulated the transcriptional 
repressor Bcl6. T cells also acquired the Tfh cell markers CXCR5, PD-1, and GL7. 
Responding B and T cells migrated to the follicle interior directly from the IF
zone, T cell immigration preceding B cells by 1 day. Notably, in the absence of
cognate B cells, Tfh cells still formed and migrated to the follicle. However,
without such B cells, PD-1, ICOS, and GL7 were no longer expressed on follicular 
Bcl6(hi) T cells that nevertheless persisted in the follicle. Thus, Ag-specific B
cells are required for the maintenance of the PD-1(hi)ICOS(hi)GL7(hi) Tfh cell
phenotype within the follicle, but not for their initial differentiation in the
IF zone.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3280079
PMID: 21636295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Immunity. 2011 Jun 24;34(6):961-72. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.025.

Bcl6 protein expression shapes pre-germinal center B cell dynamics and follicular
helper T cell heterogeneity.

Kitano M(1), Moriyama S, Ando Y, Hikida M, Mori Y, Kurosaki T, Okada T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Immunodynamics, RIKEN, Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Jun 24;34(6):827-9.

The transcription factor Bcl6 is essential for the development of germinal center
(GC) B cells and follicular helper T (Tfh) cells. However, little is known about 
in vivo dynamics of Bcl6 protein expression during and after development of these
cells. By using a Bcl6 reporter mouse strain, we found that antigen-engaged B
cells upregulated Bcl6 before clustering in GCs. Two-photon microscopic analysis 
indicated that Bcl6 upregulation in pre-GC B cells contributed to sustaining
their interactions with helper T cells and was required for their entry to GC
clusters. Our data also suggested that Tfh cells gradually downmodulated Bcl6
protein over weeks after development. The Bcl6-low Tfh cells rapidly terminated
proliferation and upregulated IL-7 receptor. These results clarify the role of
Bcl6 in pre-GC B cell dynamics and highlight the modulation of Bcl6 expression in
Tfh cells that persist in the late phase of the antibody response.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21636294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Aug;52(8):1495-503. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.573032. Epub
2011 May 31.

Prognostic impact of MUM1 expression by immunohistochemistry on primary
mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma.

De Mello CA(1), De Andrade VP, De Lima VC, Carvalho AL, Soares FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital AC Camargo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
celso.almello@gmail.com

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma can be classified into two prognostically distinct 
subgroups with germinal center B-cell-like (CG) and activated B-cell-like
(post-CG) characteristics, based on CD10, BCL-6, and MUM1 expression. We
performed a retrospective analysis of the clinical variables of 37 patients with 
primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma and the expression of BCL-6 and MUM1 in
22 patients with available tissue. The median age was 30 years, and 70% of the
patients were female. BCL-6 and MUM1 were expressed in 64% and 45% of cases,
respectively. Five-year overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS)
were 47% and 81%, respectively. In univariate analysis, complete response
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0001), radiation therapy (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01), International Prognostic Index
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001), and MUM1 expression (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002) correlated with OS. For this group
of patients with homogeneous clinical characteristics, response to initial
chemotherapy and MUM1 expression were associated with prognosis.

PMID: 21623692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Arerugi. 2011 May;60(5):566-74.

[A multipotential role of the transcriptional repressor BCL6 in the pathogenesis 
of allergic inflammation].

[Article in Japanese]

Arima M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Deveopmental Denetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine. masaarima@faculty.chiba-u.jp

PMID: 21617359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Regul Pept. 2011 Oct 10;170(1-3):18-23. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2011.05.001. Epub
2011 May 24.

Expression of inflammation-related genes in mouse spleen under tuftsin analog
Selank.

Kolomin T(1), Shadrina M, Andreeva L, Slominsky P, Limborska S, Myasoedov N.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hereditary Diseases, Department of
Molecular Basis of Human Genetics, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 2 Kurchatov Sq., Moscow 123182, Russia. kotimur@img.ras.ru

Previous studies have shown that synthetic tuftsin analogue Selank causes a
transcriptomic response in the rat hippocampus and in spleen cells and may
participate in the regulation of inflammatory processes in the body. In this work
we studied the effect of Selank and two of its fragments on the expression of
genes involved in processes of inflammation. We analyzed the expression of 84
genes involved in processes of inflammation (e.g., chemokines, cytokines, and its
receptors) in mouse spleen 6 and 24 h after Selank single intraperitoneal
injection (100 µg/kg) using real-time PCR method. We found significant changes in
the expression of 34 genes involved in inflammation processes. The detailed
analysis of quantitative data showed that the Bcl6 gene, which plays a main role 
in the formation and development of the immune system, exhibited significant
changes in its expression levels in response to injection of each of the
peptides. Also, we observed expression changes for Bcl6 target and corepressor
genes under the influence of Selank and its fragments. Our results showed that
Selank and its fragments caused a number of alterations in the expression of
genes involved in inflammation. The data obtained confirmed the participation of 
Selank in the processes of regulation of inflammation in the body. The complex
biological effect of Selank may be partially determined by the systematic effect 
of this peptide on genomic expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21609736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jun 10;88(6):796-804. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.018. Epub 
2011 May 19.

Mutations in ZBTB24 are associated with immunodeficiency, centromeric
instability, and facial anomalies syndrome type 2.

de Greef JC(1), Wang J, Balog J, den Dunnen JT, Frants RR, Straasheijm KR,
Aytekin C, van der Burg M, Duprez L, Ferster A, Gennery AR, Gimelli G, Reisli I, 
Schuetz C, Schulz A, Smeets DF, Sznajer Y, Wijmenga C, van Eggermond MC, van
Ostaijen-Ten Dam MM, Lankester AC, van Tol MJ, van den Elsen PJ, Weemaes CM, van 
der Maarel SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Autosomal-recessive immunodeficiency, centromeric instability, and facial
anomalies (ICF) syndrome is mainly characterized by recurrent, often fatal,
respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. About 50% of patients carry
mutations in the DNA methyltransferase 3B gene (DNMT3B) (ICF1). The remaining
patients carry unknown genetic defects (ICF2) but share with ICF1 patients the
same immunological and epigenetic features, including hypomethylation of
juxtacentromeric repeat sequences. We performed homozygosity mapping in five
unrelated ICF2 patients with consanguineous parents and then performed
whole-exome sequencing in one of these patients and Sanger sequencing in all to
identify mutations in the zinc-finger- and BTB (bric-a-bric, tramtrack, broad
complex)-domain-containing 24 (ZBTB24) gene in four consanguineously descended
ICF2 patients. Additionally, we found ZBTB24 mutations in an affected sibling
pair and in one patient for whom it was not known whether his parents were
consanguineous. ZBTB24 belongs to a large family of transcriptional repressors
that include members, such as BCL6 and PATZ1, with prominent regulatory roles in 
hematopoietic development and malignancy. These data thus indicate that ZBTB24 is
involved in DNA methylation of juxtacentromeric DNA and in B cell development
and/or B and T cell interactions. Because ZBTB24 is a putative DNA-binding
protein highly expressed in the lymphoid lineage, we predict that by studying the
molecular function of ZBTB24, we will improve our understanding of the molecular 
pathophysiology of ICF syndrome and of lymphocyte biology in general.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3113345
PMID: 21596365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):384-8. doi: 10.1038/nature09883.

BCL6 enables Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells to survive BCR-ABL1 kinase
inhibition.

Duy C(1), Hurtz C, Shojaee S, Cerchietti L, Geng H, Swaminathan S, Klemm L, Kweon
SM, Nahar R, Braig M, Park E, Kim YM, Hofmann WK, Herzog S, Jumaa H, Koeffler HP,
Yu JJ, Heisterkamp N, Graeber TG, Wu H, Ye BH, Melnick A, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2011 Jul 12;20(1):3-5.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Jul;11(7):460.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are widely used to treat patients with
leukaemia driven by BCR-ABL1 (ref. 1) and other oncogenic tyrosine kinases.
Recent efforts have focused on developing more potent TKIs that also inhibit
mutant tyrosine kinases. However, even effective TKIs typically fail to eradicate
leukaemia-initiating cells (LICs), which often cause recurrence of leukaemia
after initially successful treatment. Here we report the discovery of a novel
mechanism of drug resistance, which is based on protective feedback signalling of
leukaemia cells in response to treatment with TKI. We identify BCL6 as a central 
component of this drug-resistance pathway and demonstrate that targeted
inhibition of BCL6 leads to eradication of drug-resistant and
leukaemia-initiating subclones.

PMCID: PMC3597744
PMID: 21593872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Sep;64(9):802-8. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200015. Epub
2011 May 18.

Fluorescence in situ hybridisation analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue sections in the diagnostic work-up of non-Burkitt high grade B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: a single centre's experience.

Foot NJ(1), Dunn RG, Geoghegan H, Wilkins BS, Neat MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, GSTS Pathology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK.

AIMS: In recent years the genetic aberrations associated with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma and the new subtype described in the 2008 revision of the WHO
classification, 'B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate
between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma' have been
increasingly well defined. Recurrent genetic abnormalities include rearrangements
involving MYC (8q24), BCL2 (18q21) and BCL6 (3q27); as the prognostic and
therapeutic implications associated with these abnormalities are clarified their 
accurate identification at diagnosis is becoming increasingly critical. We
describe our experience of using a panel of fluorescence in situ hybridisation
(FISH) probes on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections in the
diagnostic work-up of 162 patients with non-Burkitt high grade B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (HG-BNHL).
METHODS: BCL6, IGH-BCL2 and MYC status were determined prospectively in
sequential patients presenting with HG-BNHL, with respect to the presence of
rearrangements and copy number changes. Small numbers of samples were analysed
retrospectively or were studied at relapse in previously untested patients.
RESULTS: FISH analysis was successful in 160/162 (99%) cases, with abnormalities 
detected in 118/160 (74%).
CONCLUSIONS: FISH analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections is
a highly reproducible technique with an excellent success rate for the detection 
of genetic abnormalities which will play an increasingly important role in
improving risk stratification of patients with HG-BNHL.

PMID: 21593346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Clin Ophthalmol. 2011;5:509-15. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S16751. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

Orbital sporadic Burkitt lymphoma in an adult diabetic African American female
and a review of adult orbital cases.

Carmody J(1), Misra RP, Langford MP, Byrd WA, Ditta L, Vekovius B, Texada DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology.

A case of sporadic Burkitt lymphoma (sBL) presenting with jaw and lid involvement
in a diabetic adult African American female and a review of adult orbital Burkitt
lymphoma cases are presented. Lid edema, visual loss, ophthalmoparesis,
proptosis, and sinusitis progressed over 4 weeks despite antibiotic and steroid
treatment. Upper lid biopsy histopathological evaluation and immunophenotyping
revealed a homogenous mass of atypical CD10 and CD20-negative B-cells and
tingible body macrophages yielding a "starry sky" appearance. Cytogenetic
analysis detected a minor variant c-MYC translocation, but no Epstein-Barr virus 
RNA. Detection of multiple lesions prompted a diagnosis of stage IV disease that 
totally regressed following radiation and chemotherapy. Review results of the six
adult orbital sBL cases support a poor prognosis and a heightened suspicion of
variant CD10, CD20 and BCL6 positive sBL in adults presenting with jaw pain and
rapidly progressive orbital symptoms, particularly in female, African American,
and diabetic patients.

PMCID: PMC3090307
PMID: 21573040  [PubMed]


204. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;32(4):236-40.

[Correlation between the expressions of CARMA1 gene and MUM1 and its significance
in diffuse large B cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YM(1), Yang WX, Meng Q, Zhong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Guiyang Medical College, Guiyang 550004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the correlation between the expression of CARMA1 mRNA and
MUM1 protein, as well as its effects on clinicopathological features and
prognosis of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
METHODS: The immunophenotype (CD20, CD79a, CD10, MUM1, Bcl6) and proliferation
index of DLBCL cells were examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC). CARMA1 mRNA was
detected by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: CARMA1 mRNA was detected in 76 of 89 (85.40%) cases with DLBCL. The
level of CARMA1 mRNA was higher in MUM1-postive group than in MUM1-negative
group. No correlation was found in the expression intensity between the two
molecules (P = 0.084). Ki67 positive rate was higher in MUM1(+) cases than in
MUM1(-) ones (P = 0.030). There was no difference between MUM1(+) and MUM1(-)
cases in sex, median age, staging, primary site and other clinicopathological
features. In 58 CARMA1 mRNA positive cases, low expression cases showed more in
earlier stage and more males. No difference in survival status was identified
between cases with and without MUM1 expression, over- and low-expression of
CARMA1 mRNA, as well as over- and low-expression of CARMA1 mRNA among 58 cases
with MUM1 expression.
CONCLUSION: The expression of CARMA1 mRNA is likely associated with the
expression of MUM1 and shows male predominance in DLBCL. The expression of CARMA1
may be involved with pathogenesis and progression of ABC-like DLBCL. The two
molecules correlated somewhat with some clinicopathological features, but not
with survival of DLBCL.

PMID: 21569705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Apr;52(4):198-203.

[Molecular heterogeneity of follicular lymphomas and its clinical implications].

[Article in Japanese]

Karube K, Ohshima K.

PMID: 21566405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Hematol Oncol. 2012 Mar;30(1):1-7. doi: 10.1002/hon.993. Epub 2011 May 11.

In situ follicular lymphoma: pathologic characteristics and diagnostic features.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A, Santoro A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico Aviano, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, IRCCS, Aviano, Italy. acarbone@cro.it

The diagnosis of in situ follicular lymphoma (FL) is feasible when
immunohistochemical characterization is carried out and genetic abnormalities are
assessed. We usually use a selected diagnostic panel of antibodies (CD10, CD20,
CD23, BCL2, BCL6, and Ki67) in lymph nodes with follicular hyperplasia only when 
we analyze an unexplained lymphadenopathy. Molecular studies, for example,
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis for t(14;18), are restricted to
doubtful cases in which immunohistochemistry data are ambiguous.
Immunohistochemically, the involved follicles show strongly positive staining for
BCL2 and CD10. The BCL2+ cells are confined only to germinal centers and are not 
seen in the interfollicular region or elsewhere in the lymph node. The BCL2
staining in the abnormal follicles is notable for its high-level and uniform
intensity. In situ FL may be associated with overt FL or with lymphomas other
than FL or with other malignancies. The crucial point relies on distinguishing in
situ FL arising in asymptomatic patients from cases with presence of lymphoma at 
the same or other sites. Other open questions remain on the frequency with which 
in situ FLs occur and the frequency of concomitant systemic disease.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21560142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Aug;68(15):2555-67. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0695-5. Epub 
2011 May 5.

The multiple roles of Notch signaling during left-right patterning.

Kato Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of
Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA. yoichi.kato@med.fsu.edu

The establishment of left-right (LR) asymmetry is regulated by intricate
signaling mechanisms during embryogenesis and this asymmetry is critical for
morphogenesis as well as the positioning of internal organs within the organism. 
Recent progress including elucidation of ion transporters, leftward nodal flow,
and regulation of asymmetric gene expression contributes to our understanding of 
how the breaking of the symmetry is initiated and how this laterality information
is subsequently transmitted to the organ primordium. A number of developmental
signaling pathways have been implicated in this complex process. In this review, 
we will focus on the roles of the Notch signaling pathway during development of
LR asymmetry. The Notch signaling pathway is a short-range communication system
between neighboring cells. While Notch signaling plays essential roles in
regulating the morphogenesis of the node and left-specific expression of Nodal in
the lateral plate mesoderm, a hallmark gene in LR patterning, Notch signaling
also suppresses the expression of Pitx2 that is a direct downstream target of
Nodal during later stages of development. This negative activity of Notch
signaling towards left-specific activity was recently shown to be inhibited by
the B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6)/BCL6 co-repressor (BcoR) transcriptional repressor
complex in a target-specific manner. The complex regulation of Notch-dependent
gene expression for LR asymmetry will be highlighted in this review.

PMID: 21544546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7070-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-345256. Epub 2011
May 2.

Prognostic significance of immunohistochemical biomarkers in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a study from the Lunenburg Lymphoma Biomarker Consortium.

Salles G(1), de Jong D, Xie W, Rosenwald A, Chhanabhai M, Gaulard P, Klapper W,
Calaminici M, Sander B, Thorns C, Campo E, Molina T, Lee A, Pfreundschuh M,
Horning S, Lister A, Sehn LH, Raemaekers J, Hagenbeek A, Gascoyne RD, Weller E.

Author information: 
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon and Université Claude Bernard Lyon-1, Lyon, France.
gilles.salles@chu-lyon.fr

The Lunenburg Lymphoma Biomarker Consortium (LLBC) evaluated the prognostic value
of IHC biomarkers in a large series of patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL). Clinical data and tumor samples were retrieved from 12 studies 
from Europe and North America, with patients treated before or after the
rituximab era. Using tissue microarrays from 1514 patients, IHC for BCL2, BCL6,
CD5, CD10, MUM1, Ki67, and HLA-DR was performed and scored according to
previously validated protocols. Optimal cut points predicting overall survival of
patients treated in the rituximab era could only be determined for CD5 (P = .003)
and Ki67 (P = .02), whereas such cut points for BCL2, BCL6, HLA-DR, and MUM1
could only be defined in patients not receiving rituximab. A prognostic model for
patients treated in the rituximab era identified 4 risk groups using BCL2, Ki67, 
and International Prognostic Index (IPI) with improved discrimination of low-risk
patients. Newly recognized correlations between specific biomarkers and IPI
highlight the importance of carefully controlling for clinical and biologic
factors in prognostic models. These data demonstrate that the IPI remains the
best available index in patients with DLBCL treated with rituximab and
chemotherapy.

PMID: 21536860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Immunity. 2011 Apr 22;34(4):602-15. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.01.021.

A subset of interleukin-21+ chemokine receptor CCR9+ T helper cells target
accessory organs of the digestive system in autoimmunity.

McGuire HM(1), Vogelzang A, Ma CS, Hughes WE, Silveira PA, Tangye SG, Christ D,
Fulcher D, Falcone M, King C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 384
Victoria Street, Darlinghurst, NSW 2010, Australia.

This study describes a CD4+ T helper (Th) cell subset marked by coexpression of
the cytokine interleukin 21 (IL-21) and the gut-homing chemokine receptor CCR9.
Although CCR9+ Th cells were observed in healthy mice and humans, they were
enriched in the inflamed pancreas and salivary glands of NOD mice and in the
circulation of Sjögren's syndrome patients. CCR9+ Th cells expressed large
amounts of IL-21, inducible T cell costimulator (ICOS), and the transcription
factors Bcl6 and Maf, and also supported antibody production from B cells,
thereby resembling T follicular B helper (Tfh) cells. However, in contrast to Tfh
cells, CCR9+ Th cells displayed limited expression of CXCR5 and the targets of
CCR9+ Th cells were CD8+ T cells whose responsiveness to IL-21 was necessary for 
the development of diabetes. Thus, CCR9+ Th cells are a subset of IL-21-producing
T helper cells that influence regional specification of autoimmune diseases that 
affect accessory organs of the digestive system.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21511186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Hematol. 2011 Jun;93(6):795-801. doi: 10.1007/s12185-011-0849-0. Epub 2011 
Apr 21.

Lymph node-based disease and HHV-8/KSHV infection in HIV seronegative patients:
report of three new cases of a heterogeneous group of diseases.

D'Antonio A(1), Addesso M, Memoli D, Liguori P, Cuomo R, Boscaino A, Nappi O.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pathologic Anatomy and Oncology, AO San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi
d'Aragona, via S. Leonardo, Salerno, Italy. ada66@inwind.it

We describe three cases of lymph proliferative diseases characterized by the
presence of lymphoma cells expressing the KSHV/HHV-8 antigen with or without EBV 
expression. The patients were HIV seronegative without serous effusions. One case
was diagnosed as KSHV-germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorder due to the
presence of atypical plasmablasts involving germinal centers. These plasmablasts 
were positive for MUM1 and vIL6, co-expressed EBV and LNA-1 of HHV-8/KSHV, and
showed a polyclonal pattern of Ig gene rearrangements on PCR. The disease was
localized and the prognosis was good. In two other cases, a diagnosis of
KSHV/HHV-8-related diffuse large cell B-lymphoma morphology was made. The
lymphoma cells were anaplastic or frankly pleomorphic, expressed KSHV but not
EBV, and were positive for CD20, MUM1, PAX-5, and vIL6. In both cases the
prognosis was poor. On the basis of the features observed, we raise three
considerations: (1) KSHV-related lymphoproliferative disorders represent a
distinctive and heterogeneous group of diseases with variable clinico-pathologic 
findings and immunophenotypes (BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138- and BCL6+/MUM1+/CD138- or
BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138+). (2) Although the pathogenic mechanism of HHV8 in
lymphomagenesis is unclear, the presence the viral DNA in lymph nodes of HIV-
patients is not a simply opportunistic infection, but is directly implicated in
the pathogenesis of KSHV-related diseases; the activation of IL-6 receptor
signalling may play an important role in most cases. (3) The different prognoses 
among different diseases with KSHV etiology may be related to the fact that the
pathogenic potential appears to be constrained by a competent immune system.

PMID: 21509436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 May;135(5):697-708. doi: 10.1309/AJCP7Z2BIBUNQPLZ.

The efficacy of HGAL and LMO2 in the separation of lymphomas derived from small B
cells in nodal and extranodal sites, including the bone marrow.

Younes SF(1), Beck AH, Ohgami RS, Lossos IS, Levy R, Warnke RA, Natkunam Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pathology, Division of Oncology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, CA 94305, USA.

We studied the efficacy of 2 germinal center B-cell markers, HGAL and LMO2, in
the separation of lymphomas derived from small B cells, particularly follicular
lymphoma (FL) and marginal zone lymphoma occurring in nodal, extranodal, splenic,
and bone marrow sites using immunohistochemical analysis for CD10, BCL6, BCL2,
HGAL, and LMO2. Our results showed that HGAL and LMO2 are sensitive and specific 
markers for detecting FL in nodal and extranodal sites. In contrast, all markers 
were down-regulated in FL infiltrates in the bone marrow. CD10 and HGAL were
expressed in a subset of FLs in the bone marrow and were highly correlated with
each other and with CD21, a marker of follicular dendritic cells. We conclude
that HGAL and LMO2 should be considered in immunohistochemical panels used for
the routine workup of lymphomas derived from small B cells. In the bone marrow,
staining for HGAL or CD10 can be helpful in making a diagnosis of FL, although
they are absent in a subset of cases.

PMID: 21502424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Pathol Int. 2011 May;61(5):326-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02656.x. Epub
2011 Mar 30.

Follicular variant of peripheral T-cell lymphoma mimicking follicular lymphoma: a
case report with a review of the Literature.

Goto N(1), Tsurumi H, Sawada M, Kanemura N, Hara T, Kasahara S, Kito Y, Takada K,
Sato Y, Yoshino T, Moriwaki H, Takami T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Japan. naoegoto@gifu-u.ac.jp

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) with a follicular growth pattern is very rare. 
Herein, a case of follicular variant of PTCL in a 50-year-old man who complained 
of tonsillar and generalized lymph node swelling is reported. The resected tonsil
revealed a vague nodular growth pattern of atypical cells, medium to large in
size, with abundant pale cytoplasm. The lymphoma cells were CD3(+) CD4(+) CD5(+) 
CD8(-) CD10(+) CD56(-) CD57(-) BCL6(+) PD-1(+) CXCL13(+) and were associated with
a meshwork of CD21(+) follicular dendritic cells. Molecular studies revealed
clonal rearrangement of the T-cell receptor gamma chain gene but not of the
immunoglobulin gene. Cytogenetic analysis disclosed a complex abnormality in 18
of 20 cells with the exclusion of t(5; 9). These findings suggest that the
present case is a follicular variant of PTCL derived from follicular T-helper
cells.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21501301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Intern Med. 2011;50(8):905-8. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma carrying both t(3 ; 7)(q27 ; p12) and t(8 ; 14)(q24
; q32).

Katsura Y(1), Ohta I, Yoshida C, Ohtani H, Komeno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Mito Medical Center, National Hospital Organization,
Japan.

We report a 60-year-old man with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma harboring both t(3
; 7)(q27 ; p12) and t(8 ; 14)(q24 ; q32). Although he received six courses of
conventional combination chemotherapy plus rituximab, early relapse occurred.
Four courses of an intensive salvage regimen and high-dose chemotherapy with
autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation were performed. The patient
has remained in complete remission for over 24 months. This case is noteworthy
because both genetic abnormalities are implicated in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 21498940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Blood. 2011 Jul 7;118(1):139-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-330795. Epub 2011 Apr
12.

Translocations activating IRF4 identify a subtype of germinal center-derived
B-cell lymphoma affecting predominantly children and young adults.

Salaverria I(1), Philipp C, Oschlies I, Kohler CW, Kreuz M, Szczepanowski M,
Burkhardt B, Trautmann H, Gesk S, Andrusiewicz M, Berger H, Fey M, Harder L,
Hasenclever D, Hummel M, Loeffler M, Mahn F, Martin-Guerrero I, Pellissery S,
Pott C, Pfreundschuh M, Reiter A, Richter J, Rosolowski M, Schwaenen C, Stein H, 
Trümper L, Wessendorf S, Spang R, Küppers R, Klapper W, Siebert R; Molecular
Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphomas Network Project of the Deutsche Krebshilfe;
German High-Grade Lymphoma Study Group; Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster-NHL trial group.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus
Kiel/Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

The prognosis of germinal center-derived B-cell (GCB) lymphomas, including
follicular lymphoma and diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), strongly depends
on age. Children have a more favorable outcome than adults. It is not known
whether this is because of differences in host characteristics, treatment
protocols, or tumor biology, including the presence of chromosomal alterations.
By screening for novel IGH translocation partners in pediatric and adult
lymphomas, we identified chromosomal translocations juxtaposing the IRF4 oncogene
next to one of the immunoglobulin (IG) loci as a novel recurrent aberration in
mature B-cell lymphoma. FISH revealed 20 of 427 lymphomas to carry an
IG/IRF4-fusion. Those were predominantly GCB-type DLBCL or follicular lymphoma
grade 3, shared strong expression of IRF4/MUM1 and BCL6, and lacked PRDM1/BLIMP1 
expression and t(14;18)/BCL2 breaks. BCL6 aberrations were common. The gene
expression profile of IG/IRF4-positive lymphomas differed from other subtypes of 
DLBCL. A classifier for IG/IRF4 positivity containing 27 genes allowed accurate
prediction. IG/IRF4 positivity was associated with young age and a favorable
outcome. Our results suggest IRF4 translocations to be primary alterations in a
molecularly defined subset of GCB-derived lymphomas. The probability for this
subtype of lymphoma significantly decreases with age, suggesting that diversity
in tumor biology might contribute to the age-dependent differences in prognosis
of lymphoma.

PMID: 21487109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Blood. 2011 Jun 9;117(23):6277-86. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-326637. Epub 2011
Apr 8.

Circulating human B lymphocytes are deficient in nucleotide excision repair and
accumulate mutations upon proliferation.

Hyka-Nouspikel N(1), Lemonidis K, Lu WT, Nouspikel T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Faithful repair of DNA lesions is a crucial task that dividing cells must
actively perform to maintain genome integrity. Strikingly, nucleotide excision
repair (NER), the most versatile DNA repair system, is specifically
down-regulated in terminally differentiated cells. This prompted us to examine
whether NER attenuation might be a common feature of all G0-arrested cells, and
in particular of those that retain the capacity to reenter cell cycle and might
thus convert unrepaired DNA lesions into mutations, a prerequisite for malignant 
transformation. Here we report that quiescent primary human B lymphocytes
down-regulate NER at the global genome level while maintaining proficient repair 
of constitutively expressed genes. Quiescent B cells exposed to an environment
that causes both DNA damage and proliferation accumulate point mutations in
silent and inducible genes crucial for cell replication and differentiation, such
as BCL6 and Cyclin D2. Similar to differentiated cells, NER attenuation in
quiescent cells is associated with incomplete phosphorylation of the ubiquitin
activating enzyme Ube1, which is required for proficient NER. Our data establish 
a mechanistic link between NER attenuation during quiescence and cell mutagenesis
and also support the concept that oncogenic events targeting cell cycle- or
activation-induced genes might initiate genomic instability and lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 21478426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2011 May;19(3):266-72. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181f89a4d.

HGAL protein expression persists in disorders of germinal center dissolution:
potential role of HGAL in the germinal center microenvironment.

Temmins C(1), Zhao S, Lossos IS, Natkunam Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA.

Human Germinal Center-associated Lymphoma (HGAL) is a germinal center (GC) B-cell
marker associated with a favorable outcome in diffuse large B-cell and classic
Hodgkin lymphomas (CHL). To test its potential role in GC function, 75 cases
involving GC disruption including 23 progressive transformation of germinal
centers (PTGC), 25 follicle lysis and 27 Castleman disease (CD) were studied.
HGAL protein expression uniformly correlated with GC B-cells in all except a
subset of hyaline-vascular CD that showed severe regression of GCs. HGAL staining
highlighted dismantled GCs in PTGC, in contrast to weak or absent CD10 and BCL6
staining. In follicle lysis, HGAL staining was comparable to that of CD10, BCL6, 
and CD21 in highlighting lysed follicles. Our findings show that HGAL protein
expression effectively discriminates clusters of GC B-cells in disrupted
follicles. Its persistence in disrupted GCs, suggests that it may be necessary
for GC maintenance and supports its proposed role of confining B-cells to the GC 
microenvironment.

PMID: 21475040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jun;41(6):1573-82. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041126. Epub 2011 May 
25.

Selective effects of NF-<U+03BA>B1 deficiency in CD4<U+207A> T cells on Th2 and TFh induction
by alum-precipitated protein vaccines.

Serre K(1), Mohr E, Bénézech C, Bird R, Khan M, Caamaño JH, Cunningham AF,
Maclennan IC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, IBR, School of Immunity and Infection,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. karine@kserre.net

NF-<U+03BA>B1-dependent signaling directs the development of CD4(+) Th2 cells during
allergic airway inflammation and protective responses to helminth infection.
Here, we show that IL-4 and IL-13 production is NF-<U+03BA>B1-dependent in mouse
OVA-specific CD4(+) (OTII) T cells responding to alum-precipitated OVA (alumOVA) 
immunization. More surprisingly, we found that NF-<U+03BA>B1 deficiency in OTII cells
also selectively impairs their CXCR5 induction by alumOVA without affecting
upregulation of BCL6, IL-21, OX40 and CXCR4 mRNA and PD-1 protein. This results
in functional impairment of follicular helper T cells. Thus, fewer germinal
center B cells develop in LN responses to alumOVA in T-cell-deficient mice
reconstituted with NF-<U+03BA>B1(-/-) OTII cells as opposed to NF-<U+03BA>B1(+/+) OTII cells,
while plasma cell numbers are comparable. Unlike CXCR5 induction in CD4(+) T
cells, NF-<U+03BA>B1-deficient recirculating follicular B cells are shown to express
normal levels of CXCR5. The selective effects of NF-<U+03BA>B1-deficiency on Th2 and
follicular helper T cell induction do not appear to be due to altered expression 
of the Th2-associated transcription factors - GATA-3, c-Maf and Ikaros.
Altogether, these results suggest that NF-<U+03BA>B1 regulates the expression of CXCR5
on CD4(+) T cells primed in vivo, and thus selectively controls the
T-cell-dependent germinal center component of B-cell response to alumOVA.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21469117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Eur J Haematol. 2011 Jun;86(6):466-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01596.x.
Epub 2011 Apr 1.

The expression of the peripheral cannabinoid receptor CB2 has no effect on
clinical outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Rayman N(1), Lam KH, van der Holt B, Koss C, van Leeuwen J, Budel LM, Mulder AH, 
Sonneveld P, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
n.rayman@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: The peripheral cannabinoid receptor (CB2) is mainly detected on B
cells in the germinal centers (GCs) of the immune system, using an antibody
directed against the extra cellular N-terminal domain of the receptor. We
retrospectively investigated the CB2 receptor expression in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas (DLBCL) and its clinical relevance for treatment outcome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We have constructed a tissue micro-array (TMA) using
lymphoma tissue of a large cohort of patients with DLBCL (N = 104) who were
treated with CHOP.
RESULTS:   Forty-five out of 79 evaluable cases (57%) were CB2 positive. The
expression of CB2 receptors was variably present in both the germinal center B
cell (GCB) (n = 31) and the non-GCB/activated B-cell (ABC) (n = 43) DLBCL
subtypes. CB2 positivity was not associated with a different outcome in this
patient cohort (CR; P = 0.87, EFS; P = 0.32, DFS; P = 0.06 and OS; P = 0.18).
Implementation of CB2 expression in the Hans algorithm using the markers CD10,
BCL6, and MUM1 did not result in added prognostic value (all P-values >0.1).
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that although CB2 is normally expressed in GCs, the
expression in one of the malignant counterparts such as DLBCL is aberrant. This
may be an explanation for the absence of prognostic relevance for the expression 
of this protein.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21457344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2011 Feb;11(1):23-32. doi: 10.3816/CLML.2011.n.003.

Prognostic relevance of immunohistochemical subclassification of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma in two prospective phase III clinical trials.

Rayman N(1), Lam KH, van der Holt B, Koss C, Veldhuizen D, Budel LM, Mulder AH,
Verdonck LF, Delwel R, de Jong D, van Imhoff GW, Sonneveld P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. n.rayman@erasmusmc.nl

PURPOSE: Until now molecular biologic techniques have not been easily used in
daily clinical practice to stratify patients for therapeutic purposes. Therefore,
we have investigated the prognostic relevance of the immunohistochemical (IHC)
germinal center B-cell (GCB) versus non-GCB diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
subtypes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We have analyzed tumor samples from patients treated in 2
prospective multicenter phase III trials, ie HOVON 25 (patients=65 years, n=153) 
and HOVON 26 (patients<65 years, n=144) using whole sections (WS) or tissue
microarray (TMA). CD10, BCL6, and MUM1 were applied in a specific IHC algorithm. 
The effect on clinical outcome using WS or TMA and variations in cut-off levels
of these markers was also investigated.
RESULTS: The GCB subtype was not associated with a better OS in either trial.
Small differences were observed in the HOVON 25 trial between techniques, with
TMA showing a better outcome for GCB than did WS. Variation of cut-off levels in 
the specific algorithm did not improve the prediction of clinical outcome.
CONCLUSION: We did not observe a consistent predictive power of the GCB and
non-GCB classification by IHC in this large series of DLBCL patients treated with
CHOP. This underscores the need to determine the biologic variation and the
standardization of the protein expression levels and to further study the
relevance of prognostic IHC classifications, preferably in phase III clinical
trials.

PMID: 21454187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Head Neck Pathol. 2011 Dec;5(4):389-94. doi: 10.1007/s12105-011-0257-z. Epub 2011
Mar 26.

EBV-positive plasmacytoma of the submandibular gland--report of a rare case with 
molecular genetic characterization.

Yan B(1), Tan SY, Yau EX, Ng SB, Petersson F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Health System, 5 Lower Kent Ridge
Road, Singapore 119074, Singapore.

Plasmacytomas are differentiated plasma cell tumors that present as a mass lesion
in osseous or extraosseous sites. Although the most common site for
extramedullary plasmacytomas (EMP) is in the upper respiratory tract,
plasmacytomas initially presenting as salivary gland masses are very uncommon. We
describe a case of an EBV-positive plasmacytoma presenting as a 7.7 cm
submandibular mass in an elderly immunocompetent man which displayed an abundance
of "naked nuclei" on fine needle aspiration cytology. The tumor showed lambda
light chain restriction and positive expression for CD38, MUM1 and EBER.
Subsequent investigation for myeloma revealed absence of M-protein and end-organ 
damage, except for a lytic lesion in the radial bone. An extensive fluorescent in
situ hybridization analysis showed the tumor to be negative for the t(4;14)
FGFR3/IGH translocation as well as translocations involving the IGH, IGL, IGK,
CCND1, BCL2, BCL6 and C-MYC genes. KRAS genetic analysis did not reveal any
mutations of codons 12, 13 and 61.

PMCID: PMC3210227
PMID: 21442194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4836-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-322362. Epub 2011
Mar 25.

Gene-expression profiling and not immunophenotypic algorithms predicts prognosis 
in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with immunochemotherapy.

Gutiérrez-García G(1), Cardesa-Salzmann T, Climent F, González-Barca E, Mercadal 
S, Mate JL, Sancho JM, Arenillas L, Serrano S, Escoda L, Martínez S, Valera A,
Martínez A, Jares P, Pinyol M, García-Herrera A, Martínez-Trillos A, Giné E,
Villamor N, Campo E, Colomo L, López-Guillermo A; Grup per l'Estudi dels Limfomes
de Catalunya I Balears (GELCAB).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Pathology, Hospital Clínic, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) can be divided into germinal-center B
cell-like (GCB) and activated-B cell-like (ABC) subtypes by gene-expression
profiling (GEP), with the latter showing a poorer outcome. Although this
classification can be mimicked by different immunostaining algorithms, their
reliability is the object of controversy. We constructed tissue microarrays with 
samples of 157 DLBCL patients homogeneously treated with immunochemotherapy to
apply the following algorithms: Colomo (MUM1/IRF4, CD10, and BCL6 antigens), Hans
(CD10, BCL6, and MUM1/IRF4), Muris (CD10 and MUM1/IRF4 plus BCL2), Choi (GCET1,
MUM1/IRF4, CD10, FOXP1, and BCL6), and Tally (CD10, GCET1, MUM1/IRF4, FOXP1, and 
LMO2). GEP information was available in 62 cases. The proportion of misclassified
cases by immunohistochemistry compared with GEP was higher when defining the GCB 
subset: 41%, 48%, 30%, 60%, and 40% for Colomo, Hans, Muris, Choi, and Tally,
respectively. Whereas the GEP groups showed significantly different 5-year
progression-free survival (76% vs 31% for GCB and activated DLBCL) and overall
survival (80% vs 45%), none of the immunostaining algorithms was able to retain
the prognostic impact of the groups (GCB vs non-GCB). In conclusion,
stratification based on immunostaining algorithms should be used with caution in 
guiding therapy, even in clinical trials.

PMID: 21441466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2011;52(1):69-74.

B-cell transcription factors Pax-5, Oct-2, BOB.1, Bcl-6, and MUM1 are useful
markers for the diagnosis of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma.

Herbeck R(1), Teodorescu Brînzeu D, Giubelan M, Lazar E, Dema A, Ionita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emergency County Hospital, Timisoara, Romania.
roseherbeck@yahoo.com

In some instances, the overlap in morphologic features and antigen expression
between nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) and classical
Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) can cause confusion in the diagnosis. In these cases, the 
transcription factors (TFs) B-cell specific activator protein (BSAP)/Pax-5,
octamer binding protein-2 (Oct-2), B-lymphocyte-specific co-activator
BOB.1/OBF.1, Bcl-6 protein and multiple myeloma-1/interferon regulatory factor-4 
(MUM1/IRF-4) may aid in clarifying the diagnosis. Twenty-two cases of NLPHL were 
studied for the immunohistochemical expression of Pax-5, Oct-2, BOB.1, Bcl-6
protein and MUM1/IRF-4. Our results sustain the usefulness of the selected set of
TFs to diagnose and distinguish NLPHL from cHL since Pax-5, Oct-2, BOB.1 and
Bcl-6 are consistently expressed by lymphocyte predominant (LP) cells and
reported by others to be often unexpressed in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells.
By contrast, MUM1/IRF-4 protein scored negative in the majority of LP cells, but 
is reported to be expressed in almost all cases of cHL. Thus, although the
expression of transcription factors is very heterogeneous, their simultaneous
implementation for positive and differential diagnosis may be useful.

PMID: 21424034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 14;6(3):e17739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017739.

IL-21 and IL-6 are critical for different aspects of B cell immunity and
redundantly induce optimal follicular helper CD4 T cell (Tfh) differentiation.

Eto D(1), Lao C, DiToro D, Barnett B, Escobar TC, Kageyama R, Yusuf I, Crotty S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Cytokines are important modulators of lymphocytes, and both interleukin-21
(IL-21) and IL-6 have proposed roles in T follicular helper (Tfh)
differentiation, and directly act on B cells. Here we investigated the absence of
IL-6 alone, IL-21 alone, or the combined lack of IL-6 and IL-21 on Tfh
differentiation and the development of B cell immunity in vivo. C57BL/6 or
IL-21(-/-) mice were treated with a neutralizing monoclonal antibody against IL-6
throughout the course of an acute viral infection (lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus, LCMV). The combined absence of IL-6 and IL-21 resulted in reduced Tfh
differentiation and reduced Bcl6 protein expression. In addition, we observed
that these cytokines had a large impact on antigen-specific B cell responses.
IL-6 and IL-21 collaborate in the acute T-dependent antiviral antibody response
(90% loss of circulating antiviral IgG in the absence of both cytokines). In
contrast, we observed reduced germinal center formation only in the absence of
IL-21. Absence of IL-6 had no impact on germinal centers, and combined absence of
both IL-21 and IL-6 revealed no synergistic effect on germinal center B cell
development. Studying CD4 T cells in vitro, we found that high IL-21 production
was not associated with high Bcl6 or CXCR5 expression. TCR stimulation of
purified naïve CD4 T cells in the presence of IL-6 also did not result in Tfh
differentiation, as determined by Bcl6 or CXCR5 protein expression. Cumulatively,
our data indicates that optimal Tfh formation requires IL-21 and IL-6, and that
cytokines alone are insufficient to drive Tfh differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3056724
PMID: 21423809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Mar 16;3(74):74ra22. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001620.

CD40 pathway activation status predicts response to CD40 therapy in diffuse large
B cell lymphoma.

Burington B(1), Yue P, Shi X, Advani R, Lau JT, Tan J, Stinson S, Stinson J,
Januario T, de Vos S, Ansell S, Forero-Torres A, Fedorowicz G, Yang TT, Elkins K,
Du C, Mohan S, Yu N, Modrusan Z, Seshagiri S, Yu SF, Pandita A, Koeppen H, French
D, Polson AG, Offringa R, Whiting N, Ebens A, Dornan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA.

The primary function of B cells, critical components of the adaptive immune
response, is to produce antibodies against foreign antigens, as well as to
perform isotype class switching, which changes the heavy chain of an antibody so 
that it can interact with different repertoires of effector cells. CD40 is a
member of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily of cell surface receptors that
transmits survival signals to B cells. In contrast, in B cell cancers,
stimulation of CD40 signaling results in a heterogeneous response in which cells 
can sometimes undergo cell death in response to treatment, depending on the
system studied. We found an association between sensitivity to CD40 stimulation
and mutation of the tumor suppressor p53 in a panel of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
cell lines. Consistent with p53's tumor suppressor role, we found that higher
levels of intrinsic DNA damage and increased proliferation rates, as well as
higher levels of BCL6, a transcriptional repressor proto-oncogene, were
associated with sensitivity to CD40 stimulation. In addition, CD40
treatment-resistant cell lines were sensitized to CD40 stimulation after the
introduction of DNA-damaging agents. Using gene expression analysis, we also
showed that resistant cell lines exhibited a preexisting activated CD40 pathway
and that an mRNA expression signature comprising CD40 target genes predicted
sensitivity and resistance to CD40-activating agents in cell lines and mouse
xenograft models. Finally, the gene signature predicted tumor shrinkage and
progression-free survival in patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated 
with dacetuzumab, a monoclonal antibody with partial CD40 agonist activity. These
data show that CD40 pathway activation status may be useful in predicting the
antitumor activity of CD40-stimulating therapeutic drugs.

PMID: 21411738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Seikagaku. 2011 Feb;83(2):110-4.

[Regulatory systems responsible for osteoclast differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Takami M(1), Kamijo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Showa University, 1-5-8
Hatanodai, Shinagawa, Tokyo 142-8555, Japan.

PMID: 21404642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nature. 2011 Mar 10;471(7337):189-95. doi: 10.1038/nature09730.

Inactivating mutations of acetyltransferase genes in B-cell lymphoma.

Pasqualucci L(1), Dominguez-Sola D, Chiarenza A, Fabbri G, Grunn A, Trifonov V,
Kasper LH, Lerach S, Tang H, Ma J, Rossi D, Chadburn A, Murty VV, Mullighan CG,
Gaidano G, Rabadan R, Brindle PK, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA. lp171@columbia.edu

B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma comprises biologically and clinically distinct
diseases the pathogenesis of which is associated with genetic lesions affecting
oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes. We report here that the two most common
types--follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma--harbour frequent
structural alterations inactivating CREBBP and, more rarely, EP300, two highly
related histone and non-histone acetyltransferases (HATs) that act as
transcriptional co-activators in multiple signalling pathways. Overall, about 39%
of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 41% of follicular lymphoma cases display
genomic deletions and/or somatic mutations that remove or inactivate the HAT
coding domain of these two genes. These lesions usually affect one allele,
suggesting that reduction in HAT dosage is important for lymphomagenesis. We
demonstrate specific defects in acetylation-mediated inactivation of the BCL6
oncoprotein and activation of the p53 tumour suppressor. These results identify
CREBBP/EP300 mutations as a major pathogenetic mechanism shared by common forms
of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, with direct implications for the use of drugs
targeting acetylation/deacetylation mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3271441
PMID: 21390126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Scand J Immunol. 2011 Jun;73(6):512-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02556.x.

Gene interaction network regulates plasma cell differentiation.

Alinikula J(1), Lassila O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland. jukka.alinikula@utu.fi

Effective humoral immunity depends on B cells, plasma cells and follicular helper
T cells (TFH) and secreted high-affinity antibodies. The differentiation of
mature B cell into plasma cells is ultimately hardwired in a regulatory network
of transcription factors. This circuitry is responding to extracellular stimuli, 
which leads to production of higher-affinity antibodies after germinal centre
(GC) reaction. The understanding of the transcriptional regulation of GCs and the
initiation of plasma cell differentiation is becoming increasingly clear. It is
evident that transcriptional repressor Blimp-1 can drive the plasma cell
differentiation, but the initiation of plasma cell differentiation in GCs is
likely coupled to the loss of B cell characteristics maintained by transcription 
factors Pax5 and Bcl6.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21388429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Neurooncol. 2011 Sep;104(3):825-31. doi: 10.1007/s11060-011-0555-z. Epub 2011
Mar 6.

Clinical importance of Bcl-6-positive non-deep-site involvement in
non-HIV-related primary central nervous system diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Song MK(1), Chung JS, Joo YD, Lee SM, Oh SY, Shin DH, Yun EY, Kim SG, Seol YM,
Shin HJ, Choi YJ, Cho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Busan Cancer Center, Pusan National
University Hospital Medical Research Institute, Busan, Korea.

Erratum in
    J Neurooncol. 2011 Sep;104(3):833.

In several studies of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL), deep-site 
involvement of the brain, as well as age and performance status (PS), were found 
to be independent prognostic factors. In immunocompetent patients, most primary
central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSL) are diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
(DLBCL), and recent studies have shown that Bcl-6 would be a favorable prognostic
biomarker in PCNS-DLBCL. The objective of this study is to evaluate the clinical 
importance of the central nervous system (CNS) involvement pattern combined with 
Bcl-6 expression in PCNS-DLBCL patients. This study included 65 immunocompetent
patients with PCNS-DLBCL who underwent treatment with high-dose methotrexate with
whole-brain radiotherapy. Immunochemistry was performed for the Bcl-6 and Ki-67
antigens. Forty-four patients were male and 21 patients were female, with median 
age of 59 years. During the median follow-up period of 26 months,
progression-free survival (PFS) was 25% and overall survival (OS) was 31%. Of 65 
cases that could be subclassified, 31 patients were Bcl-6 positive and 34
patients were negative. Deep-site involvement of the brain was observed in 31
patients. The Bcl-6-positive group and the group having non-deep-site involvement
of the brain were associated with favorable progression-free survival (PFS)
(P < 0.001; P < 0.001) and overall survival (OS) (P = 0.001; P < 0.001). Results 
of univariate analysis showed that age above 60 years, Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group (ECOG) PS above 2, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) state,
complete response (CR), and Bcl-6-positive and deep-site involvement were
prognostic factors associated with PFS and OS. Results of multivariate analysis
revealed that age above 60 years, ECOG above 2, elevated LDH state, Bcl-6
positivity, and deep-site involvement were independent prognostic factors for
prediction of outcome. According to the combined prognostic value of Bcl-6
expression and the deep-site involvement pattern, the subgroup having
Bcl-6-positive non-deep-site involvement of the brain showed more favorable PFS
and OS than the other subgroups (P < 0.001, P < 0.001), whereas differences of
survival among the other three subgroups were not significant (P = 0.054,
P = 0.056). Bcl-6 positivity was found to be an independent prognostic factor for
survival. Bcl-6 expression was associated with higher PFS and OS in patients
having non-deep-site involvement. However, this was counteracted in the group of 
patients having deep-site involvement of the brain.

PMID: 21380743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cancer Genet. 2011 Jan;204(1):26-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.10.007.

Implementation of high resolution single nucleotide polymorphism array analysis
as a clinical test for patients with hematologic malignancies.

Dougherty MJ(1), Wilmoth DM, Tooke LS, Shaikh TH, Gai X, Hakonarson H, Biegel JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Single nucleotide polymorphism-based oligonucleotide arrays have been used as a
research tool to detect genomic copy number changes and allelic imbalance in a
variety of hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. The high resolution,
genome-wide coverage, minimal DNA requirements, and relatively short turnaround
time are advantageous for use in a clinical setting. We validated the Illumina
HumanHap550 BeadChip array for clinical use by analyzing 127 pediatric leukemia
and lymphoma samples that had previously been characterized by means of standard 
cytogenetic analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization. A higher resolution 
Illumina HumanHap610 BeadChip array was ultimately used for clinical testing. To 
date, 180 samples from children with a suspected or confirmed hematologic
malignancy have been analyzed. Of the 180 clinical samples, 130 (72%) bone marrow
or lymphoma specimens had aberrations revealed by the array that were not seen in
the karyotypes. These typically included deletions in genes associated with B- or
T-cell malignancies, such as CDKN2A/B, PAX5, and IKZF1. There were also 75
regions of copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity (>5 Mb threshold) detected 
in 49 samples in this cohort, which could be categorized as constitutional or
acquired abnormalities. On the basis of our experience in the last 2 years, we
suggest that single nucleotide polymorphism arrays are a valuable addition to,
but not a replacement for, standard cytogenetic approaches for hematologic
malignancies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21356189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biol Direct. 2011 Feb 28;6:15. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-6-15.

Assessing quality and completeness of human transcriptional regulatory pathways
on a genome-wide scale.

Shmelkov E(1), Tang Z, Aifantis I, Statnikov A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pathway databases are becoming increasingly important and almost
omnipresent in most types of biological and translational research. However,
little is known about the quality and completeness of pathways stored in these
databases. The present study conducts a comprehensive assessment of
transcriptional regulatory pathways in humans for seven well-studied
transcription factors: MYC, NOTCH1, BCL6, TP53, AR, STAT1, and RELA. The employed
benchmarking methodology first involves integrating genome-wide binding with
functional gene expression data to derive direct targets of transcription
factors. Then the lists of experimentally obtained direct targets are compared
with relevant lists of transcriptional targets from 10 commonly used pathway
databases.
RESULTS: The results of this study show that for the majority of pathway
databases, the overlap between experimentally obtained target genes and targets
reported in transcriptional regulatory pathway databases is surprisingly small
and often is not statistically significant. The only exception is MetaCore
pathway database which yields statistically significant intersection with
experimental results in 84% cases. Additionally, we suggest that the lists of
experimentally derived direct targets obtained in this study can be used to
reveal new biological insight in transcriptional regulation and suggest novel
putative therapeutic targets in cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study opens a debate on validity of using many popular pathway
databases to obtain transcriptional regulatory targets. We conclude that the
choice of pathway databases should be informed by solid scientific evidence and
rigorous empirical evaluation.
REVIEWERS: This article was reviewed by Prof. Wing Hung Wong, Dr. Thiago Motta
Venancio (nominated by Dr. L Aravind), and Prof. Geoff J McLachlan.

PMCID: PMC3055855
PMID: 21356087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Apr;64(4):319-24. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.084459. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Expression of follicular helper T cell markers in nodal peripheral T cell
lymphomas: a tissue microarray analysis of 162 cases.

Zhan HQ(1), Li XQ, Zhu XZ, Lu HF, Zhou XY, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, PR
China.

AIMS: To evaluate the role of the follicular helper T (T(FH)) cell markers, CD10,
BCL6, programmed death-1 (PD-1) and CXCL13, in the differential diagnosis of
nodal peripheral T cell lymphomas (PTCLs) and to determine whether PTCL subtypes 
other than angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma (AITL) express T(FH) cell markers.
METHODS: 162 nodal PTCL specimens and 53 other lymphoid pathology specimens were 
collected. Immunohistochemistry for CD10, BCL6, PD-1 and CXCL13 was performed on 
tissue microarray sections. Morphological feature analysis and double labelling
assay were also performed.
RESULTS: For AITL cases, the rate of CD10, BCL6, PD-1 and CXCL13 expression was
75.0% (36/48), 66.7% (32/48), 93.8% (45/48) and 97.9% (47/48), respectively.
Expression of CD10, PD-1 and CXCL13 in the AITL group was significantly higher
than in other nodal PTCLs and the control group (p<0.05). The rate of
coexpression of three or four (=3) markers was 83.3% for AITL cases, which was
significantly higher than that for any of the non-AITL cases (0-4.9%; p<0.05).
The rate of coexpression of PD-1 and CXCL13 (91.7%, 44/48) was significantly
higher than that of CD10 and BCL6 (56.3%, 27/48) (p=0.000) in the AITL group.
Seventeen cases of PTCL not otherwise specified (PTCL, NOS) expressed CXCL13,
including both cases of the follicular variant of PTCL, NOS (FVPTCL, NOS), three 
of the four cases of the lymphoepithelioid variant of PTCL, NOS (LVPTCL, NOS),
and the remaining 12 cases which displayed one or more features of AITL.
CONCLUSIONS: The combined detection of CD10, BCL6, PD-1 and CXCL13 has high
specificity and sensitivity for the differential diagnosis of AITL. PD-1 and
CXCL13 are more sensitive, superior diagnostic markers for AITL than CD10 and
BCL6. Currently, T(FH) cell markers are the only available markers that show high
specificity for AITL. LVPTCL, NOS and/or FVPTCL, NOS may also arise from T(FH)
cells and fall within the spectrum of AITL.

PMID: 21330314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Annu Rev Immunol. 2011;29:621-63. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-031210-101400.

Follicular helper CD4 T cells (TFH).

Crotty S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
California 92037, USA. shane@liai.org

T cell help to B cells is a fundamental aspect of adaptive immunity and the
generation of immunological memory. Follicular helper CD4 T (T(FH)) cells are the
specialized providers of B cell help. T(FH) cells depend on expression of the
master regulator transcription factor Bcl6. Distinguishing features of T(FH)
cells are the expression of CXCR5, PD-1, SAP (SH2D1A), IL-21, and ICOS, among
other molecules, and the absence of Blimp-1 (prdm1). T(FH) cells are important
for the formation of germinal centers. Once germinal centers are formed, T(FH)
cells are needed to maintain them and to regulate germinal center B cell
differentiation into plasma cells and memory B cells. This review covers T(FH)
differentiation, T(FH) functions, and human T(FH) cells, discussing recent
progress and areas of uncertainty or disagreement in the literature, and it
debates the developmental relationship between T(FH) cells and other CD4 T cell
subsets (Th1, Th2, Th17, iTreg).

PMID: 21314428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Mar;52(3):458-66. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.540361. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Cyclin D1 positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is a post-germinal center-type
lymphoma without alterations in the CCND1 gene locus.

Vela-Chávez T(1), Adam P, Kremer M, Bink K, Bacon CM, Menon G, Ferry JA, Fend F, 
Jaffe ES, Quintanilla-Martínez L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Tübingen, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Tübingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Mar;52(3):358-9.

The aims of this study were to analyze the incidence and morphology of cyclin D1+
DLBCL and cases of Richter transformation (RT), and to elucidate possible
molecular mechanisms of cyclin D1 overexpression. Seventy-two cases of de novo
DLBCL and 12 cases of RT were included in this study. Cyclin D1 positivity was
found in 10/66 (15%) cases of unselected de novo DLBCL and in 2/11 (18%) cases of
RT. Seven independently identified cases of cyclin D1+ DLBCL, including one RT,
were added to the study. Centroblastic morphology was found in 17/19 (89%) cases 
of cyclin D1+, most with a post-germinal center phenotype (CD10-, BCL6+, MUM1+). 
No alterations in the CCND1 gene indicative for a translocation t(11;14) were
identified by FISH. Analysis of the MYC locus yielded gene copy alterations in
five cases and no disruption of the gene locus in any case, suggesting an
alternative mechanism of cyclin D1 deregulation.

PMID: 21281227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Vet J. 2012 Jan;191(1):108-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2010.12.006. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Evaluation of the prognostic significance of BCL6 gene expression in canine
high-grade B-cell lymphoma.

Sato M(1), Kanemoto H, Kagawa Y, Kobayashi T, Goto-Koshino Y, Mochizuki H,
Takahashi M, Fujino Y, Ohno K, Tsujimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Science, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

The clinical usefulness of BCL6 gene expression was evaluated as a prognostic
indicator in dogs with high-grade B-cell lymphoma. Forty-four dogs were diagnosed
with centroblastic or B-cell immunoblastic type lymphoma according to the updated
Kiel classification. BCL6 mRNA expression was measured by real-time PCR and its
relationship with prognosis was analyzed. Progression-free and overall survival
was not significantly different between the high BCL6 expression group (higher
than the median) and the low BCL6 expression group (lower than the median)
(P=0.99 and P=0.61, respectively). No correlation between BCL6 and prognosis was 
observed in this study, which is inconsistent with findings reported for human
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. BCL6 protein expression was not detected in the 11
dogs evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, BCL6 protein expression was 
assessed in 13 archived paraffin-embedded high-grade canine lymphoma tissues and 
all were also negative. The results suggest that most canine high-grade B-cell
lymphomas correspond to human diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with no
immunohistochemical expression of BCL6.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21277811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Immunol. 2011 Mar 1;186(5):2800-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003401. Epub 2011 Jan
26.

CXCR4 expression on activated B cells is downregulated by CD63 and IL-21.

Yoshida N(1), Kitayama D, Arima M, Sakamoto A, Inamine A, Watanabe-Takano H,
Hatano M, Koike T, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, H2, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

CXCR4 expression is critical for localization of centroblasts in the dark zone of
germinal centers (GCs), and centrocytes downregulate CXCR4 and thus leave the
dark zone to reside in the light zone. However, mechanisms governing CXCR4
downregulation on centrocytes are not known. In this study, we show that the
amount of intracellular CXCR4 in centroblasts was similar to that in centrocytes,
suggesting differential control of CXCR4 protein expression in these GC B cells. 
Restimulation of activated B cells with IL-21, which is a major cytokine produced
by T follicular helper cells, accelerated CXCR4 internalization by inducing
endocytosis-related GRK6 expression. Although CXCR4 expression was downregulated 
on GC B cells by IL-21 stimulation, CXCR4(low) centrocytes developed in the
spleens of IL-21R-deficient mice, suggesting other mechanisms for downregulation.
The level of CD63 (which recruits CXCR4 to late endosome in CD4 T cells) in
centrocytes was more than that in centroblasts and was strikingly elevated in
activated Bcl6-deficient B cells. Bcl6, a transcriptional repressor, was detected
on the chromatin of the CD63 gene in resting B cells, therefore CD63 is a
molecular target of Bcl6. Downregulation of CD63 mRNA in activated Bcl6-deficient
B cells by small interfering RNA upregulated CXCR4 expression on the B cells.
Furthermore, addition of Bcl6 inhibitor to activated B cell cultures increased
CD63 mRNA expression in (and downregulated CXCR4 expression on) those activated B
cells. Thus, CXCR4 can be downregulated on activated B cells by IL-21-induced
endocytosis and CD63-mediated endosomal recruitment, and these mechanisms may
contribute to downregulation of CXCR4 on centrocytes.

PMID: 21270405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Oligonucleotides. 2011 Feb;21(1):39-45. doi: 10.1089/oli.2010.0249. Epub 2011 Jan
17.

The RNA activator ds-p21 potentiates the cytotoxicity induced by fludarabine in
Dohh2 cells.

Patella F(1), Lucotti S, Rizzo M, Evangelista M, Rainaldi G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene and Molecular Therapy, Institute of Clinical Physiology,
CNR, Pisa, Italy.

Recently, it has been reported that, in several tumor cell lines, short
double-stranded RNAs tailored for promoter regions of specific genes are able to 
activate their transcription. Such molecules (named RNA activators) act opposite 
to other double-stranded RNA molecules (named RNA inhibitors) in that the
overexpression instead of underexpression of a given gene is triggered. In Dohh2 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells, the transcriptional repressor BCL6, which negatively 
controls both p53 and p21, is overexpressed, so that the cells can escape the
check point governed by p53 and proliferate. The aim of this work was to
investigate whether the RNA activator p21 can represent a tool to circumvent the 
transcriptional control of BCL6 and induce the blockage of cell proliferation in 
Dohh2 non-Hodgkin lymphoma cells. For that, Dohh2 cells were transfected with
either a control RNA activator (ds-NC) or an RNA activator specific for human p21
promoter (ds-p21). At various time points after transfection, the cells were
collected and p21 was measured. Dohh2 cells transfected with ds-p21 showed a
slight but significant overexpression of p21 at both mRNA and protein levels.
Nonetheless, cell proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptosis were not significantly
modified. In contrast, the exposure of Dohh2 cells transfected with ds-p21 to
fludarabine potentiates the cytotoxicity of the drug, suggesting the RNA
activator p21 complements the fludarabine-dependent cell death pathways.

PMID: 21241187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gastroenterology. 2011 Apr;140(4):1322-1333.e1-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.01.002. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Dysregulated generation of follicular helper T cells in the spleen triggers fatal
autoimmune hepatitis in mice.

Aoki N(1), Kido M, Iwamoto S, Nishiura H, Maruoka R, Tanaka J, Watanabe T, Tanaka
Y, Okazaki T, Chiba T, Watanabe N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovation in Immunoregulative Technology and Therapeutics,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
norihiko@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: To clarify mechanisms involved in the development of
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), we recently developed a mouse model of spontaneous
AIH by inducing a concurrent loss of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells and programmed
cell death 1 (PD-1)-mediated signaling. Fatal AIH in these mice was characterized
by severe T-cell infiltration and huge production of antinuclear antibodies
(Abs). This study aims to identify induction sites, responsible T-cell subsets,
and key molecules for induction of AIH.
METHODS: To develop the mouse model of AIH, neonatal thymectomy (NTx) was
performed on PD-1-deficient (PD-1(-/-)) mice. We then conducted neonatal
splenectomy or in vivo administration of Abs to cytokines, chemokines, or
cell-surface molecules.
RESULTS: In NTx-PD-1(-/-) mice, either neonatal splenectomy or in vivo CD4(+)
T-cell depletion suppressed CD4(+) and CD8(+) T-cell infiltration in the liver.
In the induction phase of AIH, splenic CD4(+) T cells were localized in B-cell
follicles with huge germinal centers and showed the Bcl6(+) inducible
costimulator (ICOS)(+) interleukin (IL)-21(+) IL-21 receptor (IL-21R)(+)
follicular helper T (T(FH)) cell phenotype. Blocking Abs to ICOS or IL-21
suppressed T(FH)-cell generation and induction of AIH. In addition, IL-21
produced by T(FH) cells drove CD8(+) T-cell activation. Splenic T(FH) cells and
CD8(+) T cells expressed CCR6, and CCL20 expression was elevated in the liver.
Administration of anti-CCL20 suppressed migration of these T cells to the liver
and induction of AIH.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysregulated T(FH) cells in the spleen are responsible for the
induction of fatal AIH, and CCR6-CCL20 axis-dependent migration of splenic T
cells is crucial to induce AIH in NTx-PD-1(-/-) mice.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2011 Mar 15;140(1-2):166-9. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2010.08.009. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Characterization of canine BCL6 cDNA and detection systems for its protein
expression.

Sato M(1), Goto-Koshino Y, Kanemoto H, Mochizuki H, Fujino Y, Ohno K, Tsujimoto
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan.

BCL6 is known to be a key molecule in germinal center (GC) formation of lymph
nodes, and its expression profiles have been implicated in the prognosis of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in humans. The present study was carried out to
characterize canine BCL6 cDNA and to indicate the technical methods for detection
of the BCL6 protein in dog tissues. The deduced amino acid sequence of canine
BCL6 showed close homology to that of human BCL6 (96.3%), especially in the
zinc-finger motifs and POZ (poxvirus and zinc finger) domain with complete
identity. Immunoblot analysis of a canine lymph node with an anti-human BCL6
monoclonal antibody revealed a band of 80 kDa. Immunohistochemical staining using
the same antibody produced positive reactions in the cells exclusively localized 
in the GC of a canine lymph node. This study will be useful for the molecular
classification of canine B-cell lymphomas with different prognoses.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21216477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Immunol. 2011 Mar;48(6-7):818-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.10.018. Epub
2011 Jan 8.

Functional analysis of fish BCL-6 and Blimp-1 in vitro: transcriptional
repressors for B-cell terminal differentiation in fugu (Takifugu rubripes).

Ohtani M(1), Miyadai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology, Faculty of Marine Bioscience, Fukui
Prefectural University, 1-1 Gakuen-Chou, Obama, Fukui 917-0003, Japan.

The transcriptional repressors BCL-6 and Blimp-1 are key regulators of B-cell
terminal differentiation in mammals. We have previously identified the BCL-6 gene
and Blimp-1 gene in fugu (Takifugu rubripes). In the present report, we conducted
a functional analysis of fugu BCL-6 and Blimp-1 by using a one-hybrid reporter
assay with Gal4 fusion proteins and Gal4DBD luciferase reporter gene. Results
from the reporter assays in mammalian cell lines (HeLa, HEK-293, CV-1 and NIH3T3)
and the fish cell line EPC show that Gal4-BCL6 and Gal4-Blimp1 strongly repress
the transcription of the luciferase gene in all cell lines. Furthermore, deletion
analyses show that the N-terminal region of BCL-6 has transcriptional repression 
activity; the BTB/POZ domain is an especially potent repression domain. In
contrast to BCL-6, although the N-acidic domain and PR domain are insufficient
for repression, most functional motifs of Blimp-1 are associated with
transcriptional repression. These results suggest that BCL-6 and Blimp-1 are
functional transcriptional repressors in fugu and that they regulate B-cell
terminal differentiation in fugu.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21216469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;39(12):814-8.

[Gastrointestinal B-cell lymphoma: a morphologic and immunohistochemical study of
194 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

He S(1), Guo Y, Bei CF, Dai YZ, Zhu DB, Li CS, Zhu XH, LE MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nantong Cancer Hospital, Nantong 226361, China.
hesong515@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the morphologic and immunohistochemical features of
gastrointestinal B-cell lymphomas.
METHODS: One hundred and ninety-four cases of gastrointestinal B-cell lymphoma
were retrieved from the archival file. The clinical features and pathologic
findings were reviewed. Immunohistochemical study for B-cell markers, T-cell
markers, bcl-6, CD10, bcl-10, cyclin D1, TdT, MUM1 and Ki-67 was carried out.
RESULTS: The male-to-female ratio was 1.4:1. The age of patients ranged from 8 to
85 years. Amongst the 194 cases studied, 128 (66.0%) were diagnosed as diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, including 16 cases of large cell lymphoma associated with 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma component. There were also 40
cases (20.6%) of MALT lymphoma, 8 cases (4.1%) of follicular lymphoma, 5 cases of
(2.6%) of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, 3 cases (1.6%) of mantle cell lymphoma, 1
case of (0.5%) of B-lymphoblastic lymphoma and 9 cases (4.6%) of indefinite type 
(including 5 biopsy cases). The site of involvement included stomach (100 cases, 
51.5%), small intestine (43 cases, 22.2%), ileocecal junction (26 cases, 13.4%), 
appendix (1 case, 0.5%), colon (21 cases, 10.8%) and rectum (3 cases, 1.6%).
Amongst the 163 cases which had undergone surgical resection, 20 cases (12.3%)
cases had invasion down to the mucosa, 20 cases (12.3%) down to the superficial
muscular layer, 19 cases (11.6%) down to the deep muscular layer and 104 cases
(63.8%) with full-thickness involvement. Histologic examination showed
lymphoepithelial lesions in 52 cases, residual lymphoid follicles in 29 cases,
coagulative necrosis in 66 cases and nodular growth pattern in 30 cases. The
lymphoma cells in all cases were immunoreactive for B-cell marker CD20. There was
also various degrees of positivity for bcl-6, CD10, bcl-10, cyclin D1, TdT, MUM1 
and Ki-67.
CONCLUSIONS: Gastrointestinal B-cell lymphomas can be subdivided into two main
groups: large B-cell lymphomas and small B-cell lymphomas. The latter group often
poses diagnostic pitfalls. Accurate pathologic typing requires correlation with
histologic and immunohistochemical findings.

PMID: 21215096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Cell. 2010 Dec 14;18(6):568-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.030.

BLIMP1 is a tumor suppressor gene frequently disrupted in activated B cell-like
diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Mandelbaum J(1), Bhagat G, Tang H, Mo T, Brahmachary M, Shen Q, Chadburn A,
Rajewsky K, Tarakhovsky A, Pasqualucci L, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Dec 14;18(6):537-9.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous disease composed of at
least two distinct subtypes: germinal center B cell-like (GCB) and activated B
cell-like (ABC) DLBCL. These phenotypic subtypes segregate with largely unique
genetic lesions, suggesting the involvement of different pathogenetic mechanisms.
In this report we show that the BLIMP1/PRDM1 gene is inactivated by multiple
mechanisms, including homozygous deletions, truncating or missense mutations, and
transcriptional repression by constitutively active BCL6, in ~53% of ABC-DLBCL.
In vivo, conditional deletion of Blimp1 in mouse B cells promotes the development
of lymphoproliferative disorders recapitulating critical features of the human
ABC-DLBCL. These results demonstrate that BLIMP1 is a bona fide tumor-suppressor 
gene whose loss contributes to lymphomagenesis by blocking plasma cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3030476
PMID: 21156281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Dec;203(2):328-32. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.08.018.

Translocation (3;8)(q27;q24) in two cases of triple hit lymphoma.

Motlló C(1), Grau J, Juncà J, Ruiz N, Mate JL, Orna E, Navarro JT, Vives S,
Sancho JM, Esteban D, Granada I, Feliu E, Ribera JM, Millá F.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Service, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona,
Spain. krysmotllo@hotmail.com

Unclassifiable lymphoma with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma is a new category of B-cell lymphoma appearing in
the new World Health Organization Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and
Lymphoid Tissues. This lymphoma usually shows MYC rearrangements with non-IGH
genes in the setting of a complex karyotype possibly involving BCL2 and, less
frequently, BCL6 rearrangements. According to the presence of two or three
rearrangements, these lymphomas are called double-hit lymphomas or triple-hit
lymphomas (THL), respectively. Here we report two cases of THL with MYC, BCL2,
and BCL6 rearrangements and t(3;8)(q27;q24) diagnosed in one center in the last
two years.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21156254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1869-79. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-303123. Epub 2010
Dec 3.

A role for Blimp1 in the transcriptional network controlling natural killer cell 
maturation.

Kallies A(1), Carotta S, Huntington ND, Bernard NJ, Tarlinton DM, Smyth MJ, Nutt 
SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. kallies@wehi.edu.au

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes capable of immediate effector
functions including cytokine production and cytotoxicity. Compared with B and T
cells, the factors that control the peripheral maturation of NK cells are poorly 
understood. We show that Blimp1, a transcriptional repressor required for the
differentiation of plasma cells and short-lived effector T cells, is expressed by
NK cells throughout their development. Interleukin 15 (IL-15) is required for the
early induction of Blimp1 in NK cells, with expression increasing in the most
mature subsets of mouse and human NK cells. We show that Blimp1 is required for
NK-cell maturation and homeostasis and for regulating their proliferative
potential. It is also essential for high granzyme B expression, but not for most 
cytokine production and cytotoxicity. Surprisingly, interferon regulatory factor 
4 (IRF4) and B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6), 2 transcription factors crucial for the
regulation of Blimp1 in B and T cells, are largely dispensable for Blimp1
expression in NK cells. T-bet deficiency, however, leads to attenuated Blimp1
expression. We have identified NK cells as the first hematopoietic cell type in
which the IRF4-Blimp1-Bcl6 regulatory axis is not in operation, highlighting the 
distinct nature of the NK-cell gene-regulatory network.

PMID: 21131593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 1;186(1):255-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903714. Epub 2010 Dec
3.

Bcl6 is required for the development of mouse CD4+ and CD8a+ dendritic cells.

Ohtsuka H(1), Sakamoto A, Pan J, Inage S, Horigome S, Ichii H, Arima M, Hatano M,
Okada S, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

Th2-type inflammation spontaneously shown in Bcl6-knockout (KO) mice is mainly
caused by bone marrow (BM)-derived nonlymphoid cells. However, the function of
dendritic cells (DCs) in Bcl6-KO mice has not been reported. We show in this
article that the numbers of CD4(+) conventional DCs (cDCs) and CD8a(+) cDCs, but 
not of plasmacytoid DCs, were markedly reduced in the spleen of Bcl6-KO mice.
Generation of cDCs from DC progenitors in BM cells was perturbed in the spleen of
irradiated wild-type (WT) mice transferred with Bcl6-KO BM cells, indicating an
intrinsic effect of Bcl6 in cDC precursors. Although cDC precursors were
developed in a Bcl6-KO BM culture with Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand, the cDC
precursors were more apoptotic than WT ones. Also p53, one of the molecular
targets of Bcl6, was overexpressed in the precursors. The addition of a p53
inhibitor to Bcl6-KO BM culture protected apoptosis, suggesting that Bcl6 is
required by cDC precursors for survival by controlling p53 expression.
Furthermore, large numbers of T1/ST2(+) Th2 cells were naturally developed in the
spleen of Bcl6-KO mice. Th2 skewing was accelerated in the culture of WT CD4 T
cells stimulated with Ags and LPS-activated Bcl6-KO BM-derived DCs, which
produced more IL-6 and less IL-12 than did WT DCs; the addition of anti-IL-6 Abs 
to the culture partially abrogated the Th2 skewing. These results suggest that
Bcl6 is required in cDC precursors for survival and in activated DCs for
modulating the cytokine profile.

PMID: 21131418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Ann Hematol. 2011 Jun;90(6):701-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1124-9. Epub 2010 Dec 
1.

FOXP1 expression and its clinicopathologic significance in nodal and extranodal
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Yu B(1), Zhou X, Li B, Xiao X, Yan S, Shi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200032, China.

The aims of this study were to investigate FOXP1 expression in nodal and
extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and its association with the
subclassification and other clinicopathologic parameters of DLBCL. Expression of 
FOXP1, CD10, Bcl6, MUM1, and Bcl2 was detected by immunohistochemistry on tissue 
microarray sections. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the overall
survival of patients, and the log-rank test was used to compare survival
differences between groups with different FOXP1 protein expressions. Expression
of FOXP1 was detected in 67.4% (95/141) of DLBCLs. FOXP1 expression in non-GCB
(67/90, 74.4%) was significantly higher than that in GCB (28/51, 54.9%)
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). FOXP1 expression in MUM1-positive cases (62/81, 76.5%) was
significantly higher than that in MUM1-negative cases (33/60, 55%) (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
FOXP1 expression was positively correlated with Bcl2 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in non-GCB among 
nodal DLBCL cases. Among the extranodal group, patients with FOXP1 expression had
a significantly inferior OS compared to those with negative FOXP1 expression
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), which was not seen in nodal group. In conclusion, FOXP1 expression
might be involved in the tumorigenesis of both nodal and extranodal DLBCL. The
most striking finding of this study was that FOXP1 expression had an adverse
effect on survival of patients with extranodal DLBCL, which indicated that FOXP1 
function might be mediated by different mechanisms in nodal and extranodal
DLBCLs. FOXP1 might play a role in the pathogenesis of nodal non-GCB DLBCL
through the pathways in which Bcl2 was involved, and it might be a second
important biomarker for non-GCB.

PMID: 21120478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Blood. 2011 Feb 24;117(8):2319-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-297879. Epub 2010
Nov 30.

Double-hit B-cell lymphomas.

Aukema SM(1), Siebert R, Schuuring E, van Imhoff GW, Kluin-Nelemans HC, Boerma
EJ, Kluin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, Groningen, The Netherlands.
s.m.aukema@student.rug.nl

In many B-cell lymphomas, chromosomal translocations are biologic and diagnostic 
hallmarks of disease. An intriguing subset is formed by the so-called double- hit
(DH) lymphomas that are defined by a chromosomal breakpoint affecting the
MYC/8q24 locus in combination with another recurrent breakpoint, mainly a
t(14;18)(q32;q21) involving BCL2. Recently, these lymphomas have received
increased attention, which contributed to the introduction of a novel category of
lymphomas in the 2008 WHO classification, "B cell lymphoma unclassifiable with
features intermediate between DLBCL and BL." In this review we explore the
existing literature for the most recurrent types of DH B-cell lymphomas and the
involved genes with their functions, as well as their pathology and clinical
aspects including therapy and prognosis. The incidence of aggressive B-cell
lymphomas other than Burkitt lymphoma with a MYC breakpoint and in particular a
double hit is difficult to assess, because screening by methods like FISH has not
been applied on large, unselected series, and the published cytogenetic data may 
be biased to specific categories of lymphomas. DH lymphomas have been classified 
heterogeneously but mostly as DLBCL, the majority having a germinal center
phenotype and expression of BCL2. Patients with DH lymphomas often present with
poor prognostic parameters, including elevated LDH, bone marrow and CNS
involvement, and a high IPI score. All studies on larger series of patients
suggest a poor prognosis, also if treated with RCHOP or high-intensity treatment 
modalities. Importantly, this poor outcome cannot be accounted for by the mere
presence of a MYC/8q24 breakpoint. Likely, the combination of MYC and BCL2
expression and/or a related high genomic complexity are more important. Compared 
to these DH lymphomas, BCL6(+)/MYC(+) DH lymphomas are far less common, and in
fact most of these cases represent BCL2(+)/BCL6(+)/MYC(+) triple-hit lymphomas
with involvement of BCL2 as well. CCND1(+)/MYC(+) DH lymphomas with involvement
of 11q13 may also be relatively frequent, the great majority being classified as 
aggressive variants of mantle cell lymphoma. This suggests that activation of MYC
might be an important progression pathway in mantle cell lymphoma as well. Based 
on clinical significance and the fact that no other solid diagnostic tools are
available to identify DH lymphomas, it seems advisable to test all diffuse large 
B-cell and related lymphomas for MYC and other breakpoints.

PMID: 21119107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genes Dev. 2010 Dec 15;24(24):2760-5. doi: 10.1101/gad.1998010. Epub 2010 Nov 24.

Bcl-6 and NF-kappaB cistromes mediate opposing regulation of the innate immune
response.

Barish GD(1), Yu RT, Karunasiri M, Ocampo CB, Dixon J, Benner C, Dent AL,
Tangirala RK, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

In the macrophage, toll-like receptors (TLRs) are key sensors that trigger
signaling cascades to activate inflammatory programs via the NF-<U+03BA>B gene network. 
However, the genomic network targeted by TLR/NF-<U+03BA>B activation and the molecular
basis by which it is restrained to terminate activation and re-establish
quiescence is poorly understood. Here, using chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing (ChIP-seq), we define the NF-<U+03BA>B cistrome, which is comprised of 31,070
cis-acting binding sites responsive to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced
signaling. In addition, we demonstrate that the transcriptional repressor B-cell 
lymphoma 6 (Bcl-6) regulates nearly a third of the Tlr4-regulated transcriptome, 
and that 90% of the Bcl-6 cistrome is collapsed following Tlr4 activation.
Bcl-6-deficient macrophages are acutely hypersensitive to LPS and, using
comparative ChIP-seq analyses, we found that the Bcl-6 and NF-<U+03BA>B cistromes
intersect, within nucleosomal distance, at nearly half of Bcl-6-binding sites in 
stimulated macrophages to promote opposing epigenetic modifications of the local 
chromatin. These results reveal a genomic strategy for controlling the innate
immune response in which repressive and inductive cistromes establish a dynamic
balance between macrophage quiescence and activation via epigenetically marked
cis-regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3003193
PMID: 21106671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;39(9):595-9.

[Acquired somatic mutations in non-coding region of bcl-6 gene in germinal
center-type diffuse large B-cell lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao J(1), Zhao J, Cai YY, Mao J, Yang KY, Chen GR, Zhou R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Department of Pathology and
Patho-physiology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mutation of 5' non-coding region of bcl-6 gene in
germinal center B-cell (GCB) subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
METHODS: t(14;18) detection and immunohistochemical staining (EnVision method)
were performed in 60 cases of DLBCL, which were divided into GCB and non-GCB
subtypes. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), single-strand conformation
polymorphism and direct DNA sequencing were used to identify mutations in the 5' 
non-coding region of the bcl-6 gene.
RESULTS: Seven of 60 cases showed t(14;18) translocation in the major breakpoint 
region. Using minimally acceptable criteria, 18 of 60 cases were probably to be
germinal centre derived. Bcl-6 mutations were detected in 12 of 60 cases (20.0%) 
of DLBCL, with a significantly higher frequency in the GCB subgroups (7/18) than 
in the non-GCB subgroups (11.9%, 5/42). Bcl-6 mutations occurred most frequently 
in +363 and +469 sites. An association of bcl-6 mutation and GCB subgroup was
obtained.
CONCLUSIONS: The 5' regulatory region of the bcl-6 gene underwent less frequent
somatic hypermutation during lymphomagenesis than the results of previous
reports. Bcl-6 mutation occurred mostly in the GCB subtype and detection of
t(14;18) seems helpful in the classification of DLBCL.

PMID: 21092586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Bull Cancer. 2010 Nov;97(11):1347-64. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2010.1214.

[Molecular abnormalities in lymphomas].

[Article in French]

Delsol G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paul-Sabatier,CHU de Toulouse-Purpan, Toulouse, France.
georges.delsol@inserm.fr

Numerous molecular abnormalities have been described in lymphomas. They are of
diagnostic and prognostic value and are taken into account for the WHO
classification of these tumors. They also shed some light on the underlying
molecular mechanisms involved in lymphomas. Overall, four types of molecular
abnormalities are involved: mutations, translocations, amplifications and
deletions of tumor suppressor genes. Several techniques are available to detect
these molecular anomalies: conventional cytogenetic analysis, multicolor FISH,
CGH array or gene expression profiling using DNA microarrays. In some lymphomas, 
genetic abnormalities are responsible for the expression of an abnormal protein
(e.g. tyrosine-kinase, transcription factor) detectable by immunohistochemistry. 
In the present review, molecular abnormalities observed in the most frequent B, T
or NK cell lymphomas are discussed. In the broad spectrum of diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas microarray analysis shows mostly two subgroups of tumors, one with gene
expression signature corresponding to germinal center B-cell-like (GCB: CD10+,
BCL6 [B-Cell Lymphoma 6]+, centerine+, MUM1-) and a subgroup expressing an
activated B-cell-like signature (ABC: CD10-, BCL6-, centerine-, MUM1+). Among
other B-cell lymphomas with well characterized molecular abnormalies are
follicular lymphoma (BCL2 deregulation), MALT lymphoma (Mucosa Associated
Lymphoid Tissue) [API2-MALT1
(mucosa-associated-lymphoid-tissue-lymphoma-translocation-gene1) fusion protein
or deregulation BCL10, MALT1, FOXP1. MALT1 transcription factors], mantle cell
lymphoma (cycline D1 [CCND1] overexpression) and Burkitt lymphoma (c-Myc
expression). Except for ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase)-positive anaplastic
large cell lymphoma, well characterized molecular anomalies are rare in lymphomas
developed from T or NK cells. Peripheral T cell lymphomas not otherwise specified
are a heterogeneous group of tumors with frequent but not recurrent molecular
abnormalities. Gene profiling analysis shows that the expression of several genes
is deregulated including PDGFRA (platelet-derived growth factor receptor) gene,
encoding a receptor with tyrosine kinase activity. In angio-immunoblastic T-cell 
lymphomas molecular abnormalities are found in follicular helper T-cell (TFH)
that express some distinctive markers such as CD10, PD-1, CXCR5 and the CXCL13
chemokine. ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a paradigme of T-cell
lymphoma since it is associated with an X-ALK oncogenic fusion protein due to a
translocation involving ALK gene at 2p23. ALK tyrosine kinase activates
downstream pathways (Stat3/5b, Src kinases, PLC<U+03B3>, PI3 kinase) implicated in
lymphomagenesis, proliferation and protection against apoptosis. Specific ALK
inhibitors are currently in clinical evaluation. Lastly several lymphomas are
associated with infectious agents that play a direct (EB virus, HTLV1) or
indirect role (e.g. Helicobacter pylori in MALT lymphoma) in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 21084243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Br J Haematol. 2011 Jan;152(1):3-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08420.x. Epub 
2010 Nov 18.

The role of BCL6 in lymphomas and routes to therapy.

Wagner SD(1), Ahearne M, Ko Ferrigno P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine and MRC Toxicology Unit,
University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester, UK. sw227@le.ac.uk

BCL6 is a transcription factor that has essential B-cell and T-cell roles in
normal antibody responses. It is involved in chromosomal translocations in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DBCL; including primary mediastinal B-cell
lymphoma) and nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, and is expressed
in follicular lymphoma and Burkitt's lymphoma. The neoplastic T-cells of
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma also express BCL6. BCL6 prevents terminal
B-cell differentiation largely through repression of PRDM1. In the "cell of
origin" classification of DLBCL BCL6 is associated with the germinal centre
subtype, which carries a good response to modern treatments. More recently,
specific BCL6 antagonists, including small molecule inhibitors, have been
developed. These antagonists have demonstrated that DLBCL cells, in which BCL6 is
transcriptionally active, are dependent on this gene for survival. BCL6
antagonists are active against primary DLBCL and may find future application in
the treatment of lymphomas.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21083654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Expert Rev Hematol. 2010 Apr;3(2):157-9. doi: 10.1586/ehm.10.11.

Targeted therapy of BCL6-dependent diffuse large B-cell lymphomas by heat-shock
protein 90 inhibition.

Briones J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Service, Hospital Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Mas Casanovas 90,
Barcelona, Spain. jbriones@santpau.cat

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2009 Dec;15(12):1369-76.

Heat-shock protein (HSP)90 is a molecular chaperone involved in the proper
folding and cellular transportation of many signaling proteins that are
deregulated in lymphoma. HSP90 inhibition results in proteasomal degradation of
these proteins, leading to antitumoral activity. Recent studies have focused on
the use of HSP90 inhibitors as potential therapies for non-Hodgkin lymphoma. BCL6
plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of most diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), the most frequent non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The current study demonstrates
that HSP90 forms a complex with BCL6, and inhibition of HSP90 with the drug
PU-H71 selectively kills BCL6-positive DLBCL in animal models. These data support
the use of HSP90 inhibitor PU-H71 for treating patients with BCL6-positive DLBCL.

PMID: 21083459  [PubMed]


252. Expert Rev Hematol. 2009 Oct;2(5):533-47. doi: 10.1586/ehm.09.49.

Biology and treatment of follicular lymphoma.

Piccaluga PP(1), Sapienza MR, Agostinelli C, Sagramoso C, Mannu C, Sabattini E,
Zinzani PL, Pileri SA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Hematopathology Unit, Department of Hematology
and Oncological Sciences L and A Seràgnoli, S Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
University of Bologna, Via Massarenti 9, Bologna, Italy.
pierpaolo.piccaluga@unibo.it

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is the second most common lymphoid tumor. It is composed
of elements resembling those of normal germinal centers. In particular, it is
constituted by small centrocytes and large centroblasts, typically CD10+, CD19+, 
CD20+, CD79a+ and BCL6+, with follicular growth pattern. The molecular hallmark
of FL is the t(14;18)(q32;q21) translocation, which leads to inappropriate BCL2
expression. This feature, other than representing a pathogenetic primary event,
constitutes a suitable diagnostic marker, as well as a target for minimal
residual disease monitoring and, hopefully, future therapies. Clinically, FL
presents with indolent behavior, characterized by prompt response to initial
therapy but almost invariably subsequent relapses. Novel approaches, including
stem cell transplantation, monoclonal antibodies and innovative agents, should be
then considered for improving long-term results.

PMID: 21083019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Mar;9(3):e23-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2010.10.028. 
Epub 2010 Nov 9.

Primary esophageal B-cell lymphoma.

Basseri RJ(1), Cole J, Jamil LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

PMID: 21070877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3117-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040690. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

B7-H1 expression on non-B and non-T cells promotes distinct effects on T- and
B-cell responses in autoimmune arthritis.

Hamel KM(1), Cao Y, Wang Y, Rodeghero R, Kobezda T, Chen L, Finnegan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology and Section of Rheumatology, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

The immune system has developed several regulatory mechanisms to maintain
homeostasis of adaptive immune responses. T-cell programmed death (PD)-1
recognition of B7-H1 (PD-L1) expressed on APC and non-lymphoid tissue regulates
T-cell activation. We show that B7-H1(-/-) mice exhibit exacerbated proteoglycan 
(PG)-induced arthritis and increased Th-1 CD4(+) T-cell responses. Unexpectedly, 
the PG-specific antibody response in B7-H1(-/-) mice was diminished. A reduction 
in the number of peanut agglutinin(+) GC coincided with a decrease in CD19(+)
GL-7(+) CD95(+) GC B cells that was a result of increased caspase-induced
apoptosis. The percent of CD38(+) CD138(+) emerging plasma cells was decreased.
B7-H1(-/-) mice exhibited an increased frequency of CD4(+) PD-1(hi) CXCR5(hi)
ICOS(hi) CD62L(lo) T follicular helper cells that displayed a hyperactive
phenotype with increased expression of mRNA transcripts for Bcl6, IL-21, and the 
apoptosis-inducer molecule FasL. In cell transfer of B7-H1(-/-) cells into SCID
mice, non-B and non-T cells were sufficient to normalize the antibody response,
T-cell hyperactivity, and the development of PG-induced arthritis. These findings
indicate that B7-H1 on non-B and non-T cells signals through PD-1 on T effector
cells to prevent excessive activation and reduce autoimmune arthritis.
Furthermore, these findings demonstrate a novel role for B7-H1 expression in
promoting B-cell survival by regulating the activation of T follicular helper
cell.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3638795
PMID: 21061440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13740. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013740.

Epitope density influences CD8+ memory T cell differentiation.

Leignadier J(1), Labrecque N.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The generation of long-lived memory T cells is critical for
successful vaccination but the factors controlling their differentiation are
still poorly defined. We tested the hypothesis that the strength of T cell
receptor (TCR) signaling contributed to memory CD8(+) T cell generation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We manipulated the density of antigenic epitope
presented by dendritic cells to mouse naïve CD8(+) T cells, without varying TCR
affinity. Our results show that a two-fold decrease in antigen dose selectively
affects memory CD8(+) T cell generation without influencing T cell expansion and 
acquisition of effector functions. Moreover, we show that low antigen dose alters
the duration of the interaction between T cells and dendritic cells and finely
tunes the expression level of the transcription factors Eomes and Bcl6.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that priming with higher epitope density results in a
2-fold decrease in the expression of Neuron-derived orphan nuclear receptor 1
(Nor-1) and this correlates with a lower level of conversion of Bcl-2 into a
pro-apoptotic molecule and an increased number of memory T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the amount of antigen encountered by naïve
CD8(+) T cells following immunization with dendritic cells does not influence the
generation of functional effector CD8(+) T cells but rather the number of CD8(+) 
memory T cells that persist in the host. Our data support a model where antigenic
epitope density sensed by CD8(+) T cells at priming influences memory generation 
by modulating Bcl6, Eomes and Nor-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2966420
PMID: 21060788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;39(8):513-7.

[Study on genetic aberrations of ocular mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphomas occurring in southern China].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XM(1), Zhang WY, Zhou YP, Mo XL, Li YP, Wang GQ, Zhou YQ, Zeng SE, Li GD,
Ye HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Liuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the genetic aberrations of ocular extranodal marginal zone
B-cell lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type occurring in
patients from southern China.
METHODS: Fifty seven paraffin-embedded ocular MALT lymphoma specimens from
patients in southern China were studied by interphase fluorescence-in-situ
hybridization (FISH) for genetic aberrations including
t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)(p22;q32)/IgH-bcl-10, t(14;18)
(q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1 and bcl-6/FOXP1 gene translocations.
RESULTS: Amongst the 57 cases studied, 9 cases (15.8%) showed chromosome
translocations, including 4 cases (7.0%) of t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1, 1 case 
(1.8%) of t(14;18) (q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1, 1 case (1.8%) of bcl-6 gene-related
chromosome translocation and 3 cases (5.3%) of IgH-unknown translocation partner.
FISH revealed 17 cases (29.8%) with 3 copies of bcl-6 gene, 21 cases (36.8%) with
3 copies of MALT1 gene and 12 cases (21.1%) with 3 copies of both genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The MALT lymphoma-associated chromosome translocations
t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1 and t(14;18) (q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1 are demonstrated in
ocular MALT lymphomas of southern Chinese patients. The prevalence is
significantly different from that reported in northern Chinese and northern
American patients, indicating a geographic heterogeneity in the MALT
lymphoma-associated genetic aberrations. The presence of 3 copies of bcl-6 and
MALT1 genes is the commonest genetic abnormalities observed in ocular MALT
lymphomas, suggesting a possible role in MALT lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 21055028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Clin Invest. 2010 Dec 1;120(12):4569-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI42869. Epub 2010 Nov
1.

BCL6 repression of EP300 in human diffuse large B cell lymphoma cells provides a 
basis for rational combinatorial therapy.

Cerchietti LC(1), Hatzi K(1), Caldas-Lopes E(1), Yang SN(1), Figueroa ME(1),
Morin RD(1), Hirst M(1), Mendez L(1), Shaknovich R(1), Cole PA(1), Bhalla K(1),
Gascoyne RD(1), Marra M(1), Chiosis G(1), Melnick A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Oncology Division, and Department of Pharmacology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Chemistry, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, USA.
Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, New York, USA. Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. The University
of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas,
USA. Centre for Lymphoid Cancers and the Departments of Pathology and
Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Agency, British Columbia
Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), which encodes a transcriptional repressor, is a
critical oncogene in diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). Although a
retro-inverted BCL6 peptide inhibitor (RI-BPI) was recently shown to potently
kill DLBCL cells, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we show that
RI-BPI induces a particular gene expression signature in human DLBCL cell lines
that included genes associated with the actions of histone deacetylase (HDAC) and
Hsp90 inhibitors. BCL6 directly repressed the expression of p300 lysine
acetyltransferase (EP300) and its cofactor HLA-B-associated transcript 3 (BAT3). 
RI-BPI induced expression of p300 and BAT3, resulting in acetylation of p300
targets including p53 and Hsp90. Induction of p300 and BAT3 was required for the 
antilymphoma effects of RI-BPI, since specific blockade of either protein rescued
human DLBCL cell lines from the BCL6 inhibitor. Consistent with this, combination
of RI-BPI with either an HDAC inhibitor (HDI) or an Hsp90 inhibitor potently
suppressed or even eradicated established human DLBCL xenografts in mice.
Furthermore, HDAC and Hsp90 inhibitors independently enhanced RI-BPI killing of
primary human DLBCL cells in vitro. We also show that p300-inactivating mutations
occur naturally in human DLBCL patients and may confer resistance to BCL6
inhibitors. Thus, BCL6 repression of EP300 provides a basis for rational targeted
combinatorial therapy for patients with DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC2993589
PMID: 21041953  [PubMed - in process]


258. Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012 Mar;16(1):69-74. doi: 10.1007/s10006-010-0254-5. Epub 
2010 Oct 28.

Diffuse swelling of the buccal mucosa and palate as first and only manifestation 
of an extranodal non-Hodgkin 'double-hit' lymphoma: report of a case.

Frei M(1), Dubach P, Reichart PA, Schmitt AM, Mueller-Garamvölgyi E, Bornstein
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Stomatology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Bern, Freiburgstrasse 7, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Most of the lymphomas arising in the oral cavity are of B-cell
origin. Among these, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas are the most common. Diffuse 
large B-cell lymphomas may exhibit more than one chromosomal rearrangement and
are then referred to as 'double-hit' or 'triple-hit' lymphomas.
CASE REPORT: We present a case of an intraoral 'double-hit' lymphoma in a
76-year-old male who had been referred by an oral surgeon in private practice.
Intraoral examination exhibited a firm, exophytic lesion in the region of the
right hard palate and buccal mucosa with extension to the soft palate.
Radiographic examination exhibited a massive thickening of the right sinus
membrane, and arrosion of the lateral and basal cortical sinus walls in the right
maxilla. After diagnosis of the lesion, the patient was treated with six cycles
of chemotherapy.
DISCUSSION: Lymphomas arising within the oral cavity account for less than 5% of 
all oral malignancies and typically affect the palatine tonsils and the palate.
'Double-hit' lymphomas are associated with older age, usually present with an
advanced stage of disease, and show an aggressive clinical behaviour. They
normally have a poor prognosis, even when treated with intensive chemotherapy
regimens. Nevertheless, in the case presented, the patient was free of symptoms
1 year after initial diagnosis.

PMID: 20981461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hum Immunol. 2011 Feb;72(2):107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.10.012. Epub 2010 
Nov 4.

Gene profile analysis of CD8(+) ILT3-Fc induced T suppressor cells.

Vlad G(1), King J, Chang CC, Liu Z, Friedman RA, Torkamani AA, Suciu-Foca N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.

Gene profile analysis of ILT3-Fc-induced Ts revealed a significant upregulation
of Zink finger proteins, most of which act as transcriptional repressors.
Included among these repressors is BCL6, which was shown to play a critical role 
in the differentiation of ILT3-Fc-induced T suppressor (Ts) cells. Genes
implicated in cell cycle progression were downregulated. Genes encoding numerous 
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines were also downregulated. In contrast,
antiapoptotic genes, as well as members of the WNT and transforming growth
factor-ß pathways, were upregulated. This study elucidates certain important
aspects of Ts differentiation and function.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20974207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Leukemia. 2011 Jan;25(1):145-52. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.230. Epub 2010 Oct 22.

Follicular dendritic cell-induced microRNA-mediated upregulation of PRDM1 and
downregulation of BCL-6 in non-Hodgkin's B-cell lymphomas.

Lin J(1), Lwin T, Zhao JJ, Tam W, Choi YS, Moscinski LC, Dalton WS, Sotomayor EM,
Wright KL, Tao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Malignant Hematology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33613, USA.

B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and PR domain containing 1 (PRDM1) are considered as
master regulators for germinal center (GC) formation and terminal B-cell
differentiation. Dysregulation of BCL6 and PRDM1 has been associated with
lymphomagenesis. Here, we show for the first time that direct cell-cell contact
between follicular dendritic cells (FDC) and B-lymphocytes, by influencing the
expression of a set of microRNAs (miRNAs), regulates the expression of BCL6 and
PRDM1. We identify that, on cell adhesion to FDC, FDC induces upregulation of
PRDM1 expression through downregulation of miR-9 and let-7 families and induces
downregulation of BCL-6 through upregulation of miR-30 family in B-lymphocytes
and lymphoma cells. We further demonstrate that the miR-30 family directly
controls BCL-6 expression and miR-9-1 and let-7a directly control PRDM-1
expression through targeting their 3'UTR, mediating the FDC effect. Our studies
define a novel regulatory mechanism in which the FDC, through induction of miRNAs
in B-lymphocytes, orchestrates the regulation of transcription factors, promotes 
germinal center B-cell survival and differentiation. Dysregulation of miRNAs may 
interfere with B-cell survival and maturation, thus representing a novel
molecular mechanism, as well as a potential therapeutic target in B-cell
lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC3083119
PMID: 20966935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Nov;34(11):1686-94. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f3e29f.

IG/MYC rearrangements are the main cytogenetic alteration in plasmablastic
lymphomas.

Valera A(1), Balagué O, Colomo L, Martínez A, Delabie J, Taddesse-Heath L, Jaffe 
ES, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is an aggressive lymphoma characterized by a
terminally differentiated B-cell phenotype that usually occurs in the
immunocompromised or elderly patients. Although the clinical and pathologic
characteristics of these tumors have been defined, the genetic alterations
involved in their pathogenesis are not well known. In this study, we have
investigated the chromosomal alterations of MYC, BCL2, BCL6, MALT1, PAX5, and IGH
loci using fluorescence in situ hybridization in 42 PBL and 3 extracavitary
primary effusion lymphomas. MYC rearrangements were identified in 20 of 41 (49%) 
PBL and the immunoglobulin (IG) genes were the partners in most tumors. MYC
rearrangements were more common in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive (14 of 19,
74%) than EBV-negative (9 of 21, 43%) tumors (P<0.05). No rearrangements of BCL2,
BCL6, MALT1, or PAX5 were detected in any PBL but gains of these loci were
observed in 31% to 41% of the cases examined. Twelve of the 40 PBL in which 3 or 
more loci could be investigated had multiple simultaneous gains in 3 or more
loci. No differences in the survival of the patients according to MYC were
observed but the 4 patients with the longest survival (>50<U+2009>mo) had no or low
number of gains (<3). No rearrangements of any of these loci were seen in the
primary effusion lymphomas. In conclusion, PBL are genetically characterized by
frequent IG/MYC translocations and gains in multiple chromosomal loci. The
oncogenic activation of MYC in these lymphomas may be an important pathogenetic
element associated with EBV infection.

PMCID: PMC2982261
PMID: 20962620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jan;50(1):43-50. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20831.

Several lymphoma-specific genetic events in parallel can be found in mature
B-cell neoplasms.

Bacher U(1), Haferlach T, Alpermann T, Kern W, Schnittger S, Haferlach C.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Stem Cell Transplantation, University Cancer Center, Hamburg,
Germany.

The mature B-cell neoplasms frequently result from translocations involving the
IGH gene localized on 14q32. In rare instances, combinations of different IGH
rearrangements were described, and even coincidence of three genetic
lymphoma-specific events has been rarely reported. We here present eight patients
with triple hit lymphoma, and two with four different lymphoma specific events
detected by chromosome banding analysis and interphase FISH (seven males, three
females, 47-82 years). All showed bone marrow involvement (Burkitt's lymphoma: n 
= 5, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: n = 2; features intermediate between
BL/DLBCL: n = 1; secondary aggressive B-cell lymphoma: n = 1; follicular
lymphoma: n = 1). Eight patients had triple hit lymphoma combining
IGH-BCL2/t(14;18)(q32;q21), MYC/8q24, and BCL6/3q27 rearrangements. Two showed an
additional IGH-CCND1/t(11;14)(q13;q32) as fourth genetic event (according to
research of the Mitelman database, the first reports on four genetic hits in
lymphomas). All cases had complex aberrant karyotypes (median, 11 cytogenetic
alterations per patient). Interphase FISH revealed a high rate of CDKN2A
deletions (five of nine cases investigated; 56%), being homozygous in two of
these cases. At the time of study, four of nine patients with follow-up data were
alive (44%), one of these in remission. The two patients with four genetic hits
died 6 and 9 days from diagnosis. Additional cases of lymphomas with three or
four genetic hits should be collected to evaluate whether their clinical course
differs from dual hit lymphomas.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20960563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Pancreas. 2010 Nov;39(8):1299-302. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181dc694e.

Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration with liquid-based cytologic
preparation in the diagnosis of primary pancreatic lymphoma.

Rossi ED(1), Larghi A, Verna EC, Martini M, Galasso D, Carnuccio A, Larocca LM,
Costamagna G, Fadda G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The diagnosis subtyping of lymphoma on specimens collected by
endoscopic ultrasound fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) can be extremely
difficult. When a cytopathologist is available for the on-site evaluation, the
diagnosis may be achieved by applying flow cytometric techniques. We describe our
experience with immunocytochemistry (ICC) and molecular biology studies applied
on EUS-FNA specimens processed with a liquid-based cytologic (LBC) preparation
for the diagnosis of primary pancreatic lymphoma (PPL).
METHODS: Three patients with a pancreatic mass underwent EUS-FNA. The collected
specimens were processed with the ThinPrep method for the cytologic diagnosis and
eventual additional investigations.
RESULTS: A morphologic picture consistent with PPL was found on the LBC specimens
of the 3 patients. Subsequent ICC and molecular biology studies for
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement established the diagnosis of
pancreatic large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma in 2 patients and a non-Hodgkin
lymphoma with plasmoblastic/immunoblastic differentiation in the remaining one.
CONCLUSIONS: An LBC preparation can be used to diagnose and subtype PPL by
applying ICC and molecular biology techniques to specimens collected with
EUS-FNA. This method can be an additional processing method for EUS-FNA specimens
in centers where on-site cytopathologist expertise is not available.

PMID: 20944491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 15;185(10):5714-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001732. Epub 2010 
Oct 8.

BCL6 is required for differentiation of Ig-like transcript 3-Fc-induced CD8+ T
suppressor cells.

Chang CC(1), Vlad G, D'Agati VD, Liu Z, Zhang QY, Witkowski P, Torkamani AA,
Stokes MB, Ho EK, Cortesini R, Suciu-Foca N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Ig-like transcript 3 (ILT3) is an inhibitory receptor expressed by tolerogenic
dendritic cells. When human CD8(+) T cells are allostimulated in the presence of 
recombinant ILT3-Fc protein, they differentiate into antigenic specific T
suppressor (Ts) cells that inhibit CD4 and CD8 T cell effector function both in
vitro and in vivo. ILT3-Fc-induced CD8(+) Ts cells express high amounts of BCL6
that are crucial to their function. Knockdown of BCL6 from unprimed human T cells
prevents their differentiation into Ts cells, whereas ex vivo overexpression of
BCL6 converts CD8(+) T cells into Ts cells. NOD/SCID mice transplanted with human
pancreatic islets and humanized by injection of human PBMCs tolerate the graft
and develop BCL6(high) CD8(+) Ts cells when treated with ILT3-Fc before or after 
the onset of rejection. This indicates that ILT3-Fc acts through BCL6 and is a
potent immunosuppressive agent for reversing the onset of allo- or possibly
autoimmune attacks against pancreatic islets.

PMID: 20935202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. BMC Cancer. 2010 Oct 9;10:542. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-542.

MiR-339-5p inhibits breast cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro and may be
a potential biomarker for breast cancer prognosis.

Wu ZS(1), Wu Q, Wang CQ, Wang XN, Wang Y, Zhao JJ, Mao SS, Zhang GH, Zhang N, Xu 
XC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in the regulation of cell
growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. Detection of their
expression may lead to identifying novel markers for breast cancer.
METHODS: We profiled miRNA expression in three breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-468) and then focused on one miRNA, miR-339-5p, for its
role in regulation of tumor cell growth, migration, and invasion and target gene 
expression. We then analyzed miR-339-5p expression in benign and cancerous breast
tissue specimens.
RESULTS: A number of miRNAs were differentially expressed in these cancer cell
lines. Real-time PCR indicated that miR-339-5p expression was downregulated in
the aggressive cell lines MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 and in breast cancer tissues 
compared with benign tissues. Transfection of miR-339-5p oligonucleotides reduced
cancer cell growth only slightly but significantly decreased tumor cell migration
and invasion capacity compared with controls. Real-time PCR analysis showed that 
BCL-6, a potential target gene of miR-339-5p, was downregulated in MDA-MB-231
cells by miR-339-5p transfection. Furthermore, the reduced miR-339-5p expression 
was associated with an increase in metastasis to lymph nodes and with high
clinical stages. Kaplan-Meier analyses found that the patients with miR-339-5p
expression had better overall and relapse-free survivals compared with those
without miR-339-5p expression. Cox proportional hazards analyses showed that
miR-339-5p expression was an independent prognostic factor for breast cancer
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-339-5p may play an important role in breast cancer progression, 
suggesting that miR-339-5p should be further evaluated as a biomarker for
predicting the survival of breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2958952
PMID: 20932331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Pathology. 2010;42(6):547-52. doi: 10.3109/00313025.2010.508786.

Primary central nervous system lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 75 cases.

Preusser M(1), Woehrer A, Koperek O, Rottenfusser A, Dieckmann K, Gatterbauer B, 
Roessler K, Slavc I, Jaeger U, Streubel B, Hainfellner JA, Chott A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

AIMS: Pathological and clinical data in a large series of immunocompetent
patients with primary lymphoma of the central nervous system (PCNSL) were
analysed.
METHODS: We immunostained tumour specimens of 75 patients for CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8,
CD10, CD20, CD30, CD79a, Bcl-2, Bcl-6, CD138, MUM1, TDT, PAX5, FOXP1 and Ki-67
and performed in situ hybridisation for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) RNA. Eleven
cases were investigated for rearrangements of BCL6, immunoglobulin heavy chain
(IGH) and FOXP1 genes using fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH).
RESULTS: Histologically, most cases were classified as diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (80.2%) predominantly of centroblastic type. Immunophenotypic profiling 
revealed that 96% and 4% of cases corresponded to non-germinal centre and
germinal centre type, respectively. FISH analysis showed t(3;14)/IGH-BCL6 in 2/11
cases and trisomy 3 in 2/11 cases. FOXP1 rearrangements were not found. At
survival analysis, Karnofsky index<U+2009>>80 and presence of Bcl-6 expression showed
independent significant association with favourable patient outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: PCNSL represents a histologically and immunophenotypically very
homogeneous lymphoma type, probably derived from germinal centre exit B cells.
The frequent overexpression of FOXP1 appears not to be related to FOXP1 gene
rearrangement. Survival analyses disclosed Bcl-6 expression and high Karnofsky
performance score as independent prognostic parameters associated with favourable
outcome.

PMID: 20854073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Pathol Int. 2010 Oct;60(10):690-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2010.02581.x.

Primary appendiceal precursor B lymphoblastic lymphoma with peculiar morphology
mimicking diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Wang RC(1), Jan YJ, Wen MC, Wang J, Hsieh PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taichung Veteran General
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Precursor B lymphoblastic neoplasm usually presented as childhood leukemia. Most 
precursor lymphoblastic lymphoma are T-cell lineage and precursor B lymphoblastic
lymphoma constitutes only about 10% of cases according to the WHO Classification 
of Tumours of Haematologic and Lymphoid Tissues. The most frequent sites of
involvement in precursor B lymphoblastic lymphoma are the skin, soft tissue, bone
and lymph nodes. Primary appendiceal involvement is an uncommon condition. We
present an unusual case of primary appendiceal precursor B lymphoblastic lymphoma
in an 11-year-old boy with peculiar histological morphology mimicking diffuse
large B cell lymphoma. Histologically, the tumor was composed of diffusely
infiltrated large cells from mucosa and extended to the subserosal area. The
tumor cells were positive to CD79a, CD20, PAX5, BCL2, CD10, TdT, p53 but not to
CD3, BCL6 and CD34 by immunohistochemical studies. The response to conventional
treatment regimen for lymphoblastic lymphoma was not good, with early relapse
within three months. Partial remission was achieved by adding rituximab.
Unfortunately, the patient died in ten months due to uncontrolled relapsed
disease with generalized lymphadenopathy and massive pleural effusion. The
special morphologic changes and poor response to chemotherapy may be related to
the overexpression of p53.

© 2010 The Authors. Pathology International © 2010 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 20846268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jul 1;129(1):70-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25663. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

BCL6 gene rearrangement and protein expression are associated with large cell
presentation of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue.

Flossbach L(1), Antoneag E, Buck M, Siebert R, Mattfeldt T, Möller P, Barth TF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT lymphoma) is an indolent B-cell lymphoma, which is often localized in the
stomach. It is characterized by typical morphology, immunology, cytogenetics and 
expression profile. The coexistence of a large B-cell lymphoma and a MALT
lymphoma in the gastrointestinal tract is defined as a composite lymphoma (ComL) 
and, as we have previously shown, is almost always the consequence of secondary
transformation of MALT lymphoma. Here, we have analyzed a panel of seven MALT
lymphomas, seven ComL and thirteen large cell variants of marginal zone B-cell
lymphomas (MZBL) using FISH for the detection of rearrangements of IGH, MALT1,
BCL6, BCL10 and FOXP1 and immunohistochemistry for Bcl6, Bcl10 and FoxP1.
Translocations involving IGH were found in 10/27 lymphomas including two cases
with IGH-BCL6 fusion and one with IGH-BCL10 fusion; in 7/10 cases, the
translocation partner was not identified. Bcl10 and FoxP1 protein expression was 
heterogeneous throughout the series. Genetic rearrangements of BCL6 and Bcl6
protein expression were found almost exclusively in the large cell components of 
the ComL and the large cell extranodal MZBL (p = 0.2093 and p = 0.0261,
respectively). These findings suggest Bcl6 as a marker for transformation of MALT
lymphoma.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20830719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Ann Hematol. 2011 Feb;90(2):185-92. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1060-8. Epub 2010 Sep
1.

A study on nm23-H1 expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that was treated
with CyclOBEAP plus rituximab therapy.

Niitsu N(1), Tamaru J, Yoshino T, Nakamura N, Nakamura S, Ohshima K, Nakamine H, 
Okamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, International Medical
Center, Saitama Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1298,
Japan. nniitsu@saitama-med.ac.jp

In our previous study on nm23-H1 expression with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), we found that patients with positive nm23-H1 had significantly poorer
prognosis than patients with negative nm23-H1. We examined whether nm23-H1 is a
prognostic factor of DLBCL in the rituximab era. The subjects were 101 DLBCL
patients who underwent R-CyclOBEAP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, and prednisolone) therapy and in whom markers 
could be analyzed. We evaluated CD5, CD10, BCL2, BCL6, MUM1, and nm23-H1
expression by immunohistochemistry. Ninety-four DLBCL patients who underwent
CyclOBEAP therapy were assumed as historical controls. Among DLBCL patients who
underwent CyclOBEAP therapy, BCL2 positivity, MUM1 positivity, non-germinal
center B-cell (non-GCB), and nm23-H1 positivity were associated with
significantly shorter overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS). 
On the other hand, among DLBCL patients who underwent R-CyclOBEAP therapy, the
5-year OS rates of the nm23-H1-positive DLBCL (n = 32) and nm23-H1-negative DLBCL
groups (n<U+2009>= 69) were 65% and 97%, respectively (p = 0.001), with 5-year PFS rates
of 51% and 89%, respectively (p = 0.001). In the rituximab era, BCL2, MUM1, and
non-GCB were not prognostic factors. We demonstrated that among patients with
DLBCL who underwent R-CyclOBEAP therapy, patients with nm23-H1 expression had a
significantly poorer prognosis than patients without nm23-H1 expression. These
results suggest an important role for nm23-H1 in malignant progression and a
potential therapeutic target for DLBCL.

PMID: 20809421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4274-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-264432. Epub 2010 
Aug 31.

BCOR as a novel fusion partner of retinoic acid receptor alpha in a
t(X;17)(p11;q12) variant of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Yamamoto Y(1), Tsuzuki S, Tsuzuki M, Handa K, Inaguma Y, Emi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, School of Medicine, Fujita Health University,
Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. yyukiya@fujita-hu.ac.jp

The majority of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cases are characterized by the
presence of a promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha(RARA) fusion
gene. In a small subset, RARA is fused to a different partner, usually involved
in regulating cell growth and differentiation. Here, we identified a novel RARA
fusion transcript, BCOR-RARA, in a t(X;17)(p11;q12) variant of APL with unique
morphologic features, including rectangular and round cytoplasmic inclusion
bodies. Although the patient was clinically responsive to all-trans retinoic
acid, several relapses occurred with standard chemotherapy and all-trans retinoic
acid. BCOR is a transcriptional corepressor through the proto-oncoprotein, BCL6, 
recruiting histone deacetylases and polycomb repressive complex 1 components.
BCOR-RARA was found to possess common features with other RARA fusion proteins.
These included: (1) the same break point in RARA cDNA; (2) self-association; (3) 
retinoid X receptor alpha is necessary for BCOR-RARA to associate with the RARA
responsive element; (4) action in a dominant-negative manner on RARA
transcriptional activation; and (5) aberrant subcellular relocalization. It
should be noted that there was no intact BCOR found in the 45,-Y,t(X;17)(p11;q12)
APL cells because they featured only a rearranged X chromosome. These results
highlight essential features of pathogenesis in APL in more detail. BCOR appears 
to be involved not only in human congenital diseases, but also in a human cancer.

PMID: 20807888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Nov;51(11):2031-8. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.513751. Epub
2010 Aug 31.

Ocular adnexal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma in Northern China: high
frequency of numerical chromosomal changes and no evidence of an association with
Chlamydia psittaci.

Zhang D(1), Dong L, Li H, Jin H, Ye H, Zhou X, Gao Z, Dong G, Zhu J, Liu H, Gong 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Nov;51(11):1951-3.

Studies from different countries showed variations of genetic changes and
association with Chlamydia psittaci in ocular adnexal mucosa-associated lymphoid 
tissue (MALT) lymphoma. A total of 38 ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma cases from
Northern China were studied. Genetic abnormalities were investigated in 28 cases 
by interphase FISH. C. psittaci and other infectious agents that are
commonly-associated with chronic eye disease were screened in 38 cases by PCR.
Genetic abnormalities were detected in 60.7% of cases. Among them, only one
showed a break-apart of the IgH gene and all others showed numerical
abnormalities, including trisomy 18 in 7 cases (25%), 3 copies of BCL6 gene in 12
cases (43%), and 3 copies of C-MYC gene in 2 cases (7%). C. pneumoniae was
positive in two cases (5.3%), and C. psittaci, C. trachomatis, HSV1, HSV2, ADV8, 
and ADV19 were not detected in any cases. In conclusion, numerical abnormalities 
are frequent and the chromosomal translocations commonly associated with MALT
lymphomas are rare in ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma of Northern China. C. psittaci
and other infectious agents are not associated with ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma 
in these patients.

PMID: 20807089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mod Pathol. 2010 Nov;23(11):1507-17. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.139. Epub 2010
Aug 27.

E2A-positive gastric MALT lymphoma has weaker plasmacytoid infiltrates and
stronger expression of the memory B-cell-associated miR-223: possible correlation
with stage and treatment response.

Liu TY(1), Chen SU, Kuo SH, Cheng AL, Lin CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan 
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Extranodal marginal-zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue of the
stomach (gastric MALT lymphoma) is derived from memory B cells of the marginal
zone. Normal memory B cells do not express markers of germinal-center B cells,
such as E2A (immunoglobulin enhancer-binding factor E12/E47), B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma 6 (BCL6), or activation-induced cytidine deaminase 
(AID). E2A is a transcription factor that induces somatic hypermutations and
blocks plasma cell differentiation. In 50 stage-I(E)/II(E1) gastric MALT
lymphomas, we confirmed that all cases were BCL6(-)/AID(-), but a subset (50%,
25/50) was E2A(+). As E2A(-) and E2A(+) gastric MALT lymphomas had similar
numbers of somatic hypermutations without intraclonal variations, which implied
an origin from memory B cells, the expression of E2A was best regarded as a
marker of aberrant follicular differentiation. Although the status of somatic
hypermutation was not affected by E2A, E2A(+) gastric MALT lymphoma showed less
plasmacytoid infiltrates and higher expressions of miRNA-223, a microRNA
associated with memory B cells. Clinically, E2A(+) gastric MALT lymphomas were
more likely to spread to perigastric lymph nodes and were less responsive to
Helicobacter eradication therapy than were E2A(-) gastric MALT lymphomas. Taken
together, aberrant E2A expression is a diagnostic feature of a subtype of gastric
MALT lymphoma with weaker plasmacytoid infiltrates and stronger miR-223
expression. A prospective study would be necessary to verify the association
between E2A expression and a poor response to Helicobacter eradication therapy.

PMID: 20802470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Chin J Cancer. 2010 Sep;29(9):781-6.

Blimp-1 protein and Hans classification on prognosis of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and their interrelation.

Song Y(1), Cao Z, Li L, Zhang HT, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common 
type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), is heterogeneous on molecular and clinical 
levels, therefore, its prognosis is difficult to predict. This study aimed to
evaluate the value of Blimp-1 protein and Hans classification in predicting the
prognosis of DLBCL and their interrelation.
METHODS: The clinical records of 136 patients with DLBCL were reviewed. The
patients were followed up for 5-80 months (median, 39 months).
Immunohistochemical staining for CD10, MUM1, Bcl-6, and Blimp-1 were performed on
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues from the 136 patients. The correlations of
Blimp-1 protein and Hans classification in prognosis of DLBCL and their
interrelation were analyzed.
RESULTS: Blimp-1 was detected in 38 (30.0%) patients, and was associated with a
significantly shorter overall survival (OS) (P = 0.030). Using the Hans
classification based upon the expression of CD10, Bcl-6, and MUM1, 54 patients
had germinal center B-cell (GCB) phenotype and 82 had non-GCB phenotype. The
5-year OS rate was 75% in the GCB group and 52% in the non-GCB group (P = 0.020).
The positive rate of Blimp-1 was 22.2% in the GCB group and 31.7% in the non-GCB 
group (P = 0.329). The Cox regression multivariate analysis showed that
international prognosis index (IPI) and Hans classification had independent
prognostic significance, whereas Blimp-1 was not an independent prognostic
factor.
CONCLUSIONS: The patients with GCB subtype of DLBCL had better prognosis than the
non-GCB subtype. High level of Blimp-1 expression in the patients with DLBCL
implies a shorter survival, but it is not associated with Hans classification.

PMID: 20800019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Blood. 2010 Dec 2;116(23):4916-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-276766. Epub 2010
Aug 24.

Immunoblastic morphology but not the immunohistochemical GCB/nonGCB classifier
predicts outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the RICOVER-60 trial of the 
DSHNHL.

Ott G(1), Ziepert M, Klapper W, Horn H, Szczepanowski M, Bernd HW, Thorns C,
Feller AC, Lenze D, Hummel M, Stein H, Müller-Hermelink HK, Frank M, Hansmann ML,
Barth TF, Möller P, Cogliatti S, Pfreundschuh M, Schmitz N, Trümper L, Loeffler
M, Rosenwald A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
german.ott@rbk.de

The survival of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients varies considerably,
reflecting the molecular diversity of tumors. In view of the controversy whether 
cytologic features, immunohistochemical markers or gene expression signatures may
capture this molecular diversity, we investigated which features provide
prognostic information in a prospective trial in the R-CHOP treatment era. Within
the cohort of DLBCLs patients treated in the RICOVER-60 trial of the German
High-Grade Lymphoma Study Group (DSHNHL), we tested the prognostic impact of IB
morphology in 949 patients. The expression of immunohistochemical markers CD5,
CD10, BCL2, BCL6, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR, interferon regulatory
factor-4/multiple myeloma-1 (IRF4/MUM1), and Ki-67 was assessed in 506 patients. 
Expression of the immunohistochemical markers tested was of modest, if any,
prognostic relevance. Moreover, the Hans algorithm using the expression patterns 
of CD10, BCL6, and interferon regulatory factor-4/multiple myeloma-1 failed to
show prognostic significance in the entire cohort as well as in patient
subgroups. IB morphology, however, emerged as a robust, significantly adverse
prognostic factor in multivariate analysis, and its diagnosis showed a good
reproducibility among expert hematopathologists. We conclude, therefore, that IB 
morphology in DLBCL is likely to capture some of the adverse molecular
alterations that are currently not detectable in a routine diagnostic setting,
and that its recognition has significant prognostic power.

PMID: 20736456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 30;207(9):1939-50. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100204. Epub 2010 Aug
23.

DNA methylation prevents CTCF-mediated silencing of the oncogene BCL6 in B cell
lymphomas.

Lai AY(1), Fatemi M, Dhasarathy A, Malone C, Sobol SE, Geigerman C, Jaye DL, Mav 
D, Shah R, Li L, Wade PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Aberrant DNA methylation commonly occurs in cancer cells where it has been
implicated in the epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Additional
roles for DNA methylation, such as transcriptional activation, have been
predicted but have yet to be clearly demonstrated. The BCL6 oncogene is
implicated in the pathogenesis of germinal center-derived B cell lymphomas. We
demonstrate that the intragenic CpG islands within the first intron of the human 
BCL6 locus were hypermethylated in lymphoma cells that expressed high amounts of 
BCL6 messenger RNA (mRNA). Inhibition of DNA methyltransferases decreased BCL6
mRNA abundance, suggesting a role for these methylated CpGs in positively
regulating BCL6 transcription. The enhancer-blocking transcription factor CTCF
bound to this intronic region in a methylation-sensitive manner. Depletion of
CTCF by short hairpin RNA in neoplastic plasma cells that do not express BCL6
resulted in up-regulation of BCL6 transcription. These data indicate that BCL6
expression is maintained during lymphomagenesis in part through DNA methylation
that prevents CTCF-mediated silencing.

PMCID: PMC2931164
PMID: 20733034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Pathol. 2010 Oct;177(4):1834-47. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091010. Epub 2010 
Aug 13.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor {delta} regulates inflammation via
NF-{kappa}B signaling in polymicrobial sepsis.

Zingarelli B(1), Piraino G, Hake PW, O'Connor M, Denenberg A, Fan H, Cook JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical
Center and College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229,
USA. basilia.zingarelli@cchmc.org

The nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor d (PPARd) is an important 
regulator of lipid metabolism. In contrast to its known effects on energy
homeostasis, its biological role on inflammation is not well understood. We
investigated the role of PPARd in the modulation of the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B)-driven inflammatory response to polymicrobial sepsis in vivo and in
macrophages in vitro. We demonstrated that administration of GW0742, a specific
PPARd ligand, provided beneficial effects to rats subjected to cecal ligation and
puncture, as shown by reduced systemic release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
neutrophil infiltration in lung, liver, and cecum, when compared with vehicle
treatment. Molecular analysis revealed that treatment with GW0742 reduced NF-<U+03BA>B
binding to DNA in lung and liver. In parallel experiments, heterozygous
PPARd-deficient mice suffered exaggerated lethality when subjected to cecal
ligation and puncture and exhibited severe lung injury and higher levels of
circulating tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa) and keratinocyte-derived chemokine
than wild-type mice. Furthermore, in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated J774.A1
macrophages, GW0742 reduced TNFa production by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation. RNA
silencing of PPARd abrogated the inhibitory effects of GW0742 on TNFa production.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that PPARd displaced the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 
subunit from the <U+03BA>B elements of the TNFa promoter, while recruiting the
co-repressor BCL6. These data suggest that PPARd is a crucial anti-inflammatory
regulator, providing a basis for novel sepsis therapies.

PMCID: PMC2947279
PMID: 20709805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;24(10):2038-49. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0234. Epub 2010 Aug
11.

Defining the epigenetic actions of growth hormone: acute chromatin changes
accompany GH-activated gene transcription.

Chia DJ(1), Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland Oregon 
97239-3098, USA.

Many of the long-term physiological effects of GH require hormone-mediated
changes in gene expression. The transcription factor signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b (Stat5b) plays a critical role in the actions of GH
on growth and metabolism by regulating a large number of GH-dependent genes by
incompletely understood mechanisms. Here we have assessed the impact of
GH-initiated and Stat5b-mediated signaling on the chromatin landscape of
hormone-regulated genes in the liver of pituitary-deficient young adult male
rats. In the absence of GH there was minimal ongoing transcription at the Socs2, 
Cish, Igfals, and Spi 2.1 promoters, minimal occupancy of Stat5b at proximal
promoter sites, and relatively closed chromatin, as evidenced by low levels of
core histone acetylation. In contrast, transcriptionally silent Igf1 promoter 1
appeared poised to be activated, based on binding of coactivators p300 and
Med1/Trap220, high levels of histone acetylation, and the presence of RNA
polymerase II. GH treatment led to a 8- to 20-fold rise in transcriptional
activity of all five genes within 30-60 min and was accompanied by binding of
Stat5b to the proximal Socs2, Cish, Igfals, and Spi 2.1 promoters and to seven
distal Igf1 Stat5b elements, by enhanced histone acetylation at all five
promoters, by recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the Socs2, Cish, Igfals, and
Spi 2.1 promoters, and by loss of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6 from Socs2, 
Cish, and Igfals Stat5b sites, but not from two Igf1 Stat5b domains. We conclude 
that GH actions induce rapid and dramatic changes in hepatic chromatin at target 
promoters and propose that the chromatin signature of Igf1 differs from other
GH-and Stat5b-dependent genes.

PMCID: PMC2954634
PMID: 20702579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Sep;34(9):1266-76. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181e9343d.

Immunoarchitectural patterns in follicular lymphoma: efficacy of HGAL and LMO2 in
the detection of the interfollicular and diffuse components.

Younes SF(1), Beck AH, Lossos IS, Levy R, Warnke RA, Natkunam Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Oncology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) can exhibit variant histologic patterns that can lead to
confusion with other B-cell lymphomas and reactive conditions. Diagnostic markers
such as CD10 and BCL2 may be difficult to interpret in variant FL patterns, and
are often diminished or absent in the interfollicular and diffuse components. We 
evaluated 2 recently characterized germinal center B-cell markers, human germinal
center associated lymphoma (HGAL), and LIM-only transcription factor 2 (LMO2), in
127 FL patient biopsies (94 nodal, 33 extranodal), and correlated the findings
with histologic pattern, cellular composition, grade, and additional immunostains
(CD20, CD3, CD21, CD10, BCL2, and BCL6). Architectural patterns included
predominantly follicular (75%) and follicular and diffuse components (25%); 10
cases showed marginal zone differentiation and 3 were floral variants.
Eighty-nine cases were low grade (38 grade 1; 51 grade 2) and 38 were grade 3 (29
grade 3A and 9 grade 3B). HGAL had the highest overall sensitivity of detecting
FL and was superior in detecting the interfollicular and diffuse components
compared with BCL2, LMO2, CD10, and BCL6. All 28 cases that lacked CD10,
expressed HGAL, and the majority also expressed LMO2. Our results show that HGAL 
and LMO2 are sensitive markers for FL diagnosis. The addition of HGAL and LMO2 to
the immunohistologic panel is beneficial in the work-up of nodal and extranodal
B-cell lymphomas and the efficacy of HGAL in detecting the follicular,
interfollicular and diffuse components of FL is of particular value in the
setting of variant immunoarchitectural patterns.

PMCID: PMC2929284
PMID: 20697248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Hematol Oncol. 2011 Jun;29(2):81-90. doi: 10.1002/hon.958. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Cytogenetic abnormalities in reactive lymphoid hyperplasia: byproducts of the
germinal centre reaction or indicators of lymphoma?

Sevilla DW(1), Murty VV, Sun XL, Nandula SV, Mansukhani MM, Alobeid B, Bhagat G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Non-random karyotypic abnormalities associated with non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) 
have been described in cases of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (RLH). However, the
frequency and types of cytogenetic aberrations detected and their clinical
relevance are unknown. To address these questions, we undertook a retrospective
analysis of a large series of RLH diagnosed at our institute over 8 years.
Cytogenetic abnormalities were identified in 20 of 116 (17%) cases with
informative karyotypes, comprising 14 (70%) structural and 11 (55%) numerical
changes. Clonal (n <U+2009>=<U+2009> 14, 70%) and non-clonal (n <U+2009>=<U+2009> 6, 30%) abnormalities were 
observed. Aberrations of chromosome 14 were the most frequent (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8, 42%, 7
represented IgH translocations), followed by chromosome 3 (n<U+2009> =<U+2009> 4, 3 represented
BCL6 translocations), and chromosome 12 (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>4). Abnormal karyotypes were most
often associated with florid follicular hyperplasia. Isolated lymphoid organ
(lymph node, tonsil or spleen) enlargement (12/20, 60%) was more common, no
specific etiology was identified in 10/20 (50%) cases and only 1 of 18 patients
with clinical follow-up (range 2-107 months, median 60 months) developed
lymphoma. In our experience, cytogenetic abnormalities involving loci associated 
with B-cell NHL are not infrequently detected in RLH. Their occurrence portends
low risk for lymphomagenesis, however longer follow-up is prudent to further
evaluate the natural history of such cases.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20687199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Medicina (B Aires). 2010;70(4):333-8.

[Orbital and ocular adnexal lymphomas. Clinico-pathological correlation in 25
cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Rojas Bilbao EA(1), Nesprias M, Pulero C, Giménez L, Zerga M, Chirife AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patología, Instituto de Oncología Angel H. Roffo, Universidad 
de Buenos Aires. ericabilbao_2008@yahoo.com.ar

Clinical, histological features and outcome of a cohort of patients with orbital 
and adnexal lymphoproliferative tumors were evaluated. Twenty-five cases in an
oncologic referral center from 1995 to 2008, were included in the study. Each
case had detailed immunophenotypic analysis using a panel of monoclonal
antibodies (CD45, CD20, CD3, CD5, CD23, BCL2, BCL6, BCL10, Ki67, CD30, CD15,
BCL1, Kappa, Lambda, CD138). Lesions were classified by using WHO (2008)
lymphomas classification. Twenty-three patients were found to have primary and
two secondary lymphomas. Histological subtypes were: 16 patients with marginal
zone B cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, four
diffuse large B cell lymphomas, two mantle cell lymphomas, two follicular
lymphomas, and one Hodgkin lymphoma. Among the 25 patients studied, 22 had
localized stage. Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma was the most frequent type of 
primary orbital and adnexal lymphoma. In this study localized disease was
observed in most cases, and distant spread of the lymphomas was infrequent.

PMID: 20679053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Aug;134(2):278-81. doi: 10.1309/AJCPATUP1D0HGCUG.

Expression of LMO2 is associated with t(14;18)/IGH-BCL2 fusion but not BCL6
translocations in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Durnick DK(1), Law ME, Maurer MJ, Natkunam Y, Levy R, Lossos IS, Kurtin PJ,
McPhail ED.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) can be separated for prognostic purposes
using gene expression profiling (GEP) into 2 subgroups: germinal center B-cell
(GCB) and activated B-cell phenotypes. However, GEP is impractical for routine
clinical use, and immunophenotyping is an imperfect surrogate. Therefore, we
studied the relationship between expression of the purported germinal center
marker LMO2 and the presence of IGH-BCL2 fusions, BCL6 translocations, and LMO2
translocations. In addition, we investigated the usefulness of LMO2 expression as
a marker of GCB subtype in DLBCL. Immunohistochemical and fluorescence in situ
hybridization studies were successfully performed on 101 cases of de novo DLBCL
that had been incorporated into a tissue microarray. There was a statistically
significant association between IGH-BCL2 fusion and LMO2 protein expression (P = 
.02) but not between BCL6 translocations and LMO2 expression. LMO2 translocations
were not identified. Although uncommon, all cases that had both IGH-BCL2 fusion
and BCL6 translocations expressed LMO2. The findings suggest LMO2 as a potential 
marker for the GCB phenotype.

PMID: 20660332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Aug;134(2):258-65. doi: 10.1309/AJCP7YLDTJPLCE5F.

"Double-Hit" mature B-cell lymphomas show a common immunophenotype by flow
cytometry that includes decreased CD20 expression.

Wu D(1), Wood BL, Dorer R, Fromm JR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle Cancer Care Alliance,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Apr;135(4):649-50.

Lymphomas with 2 translocations involving c-MYC and BCL2 or BCL6 are a subset of 
biologically aggressive mature B-cell lymphomas now frequently categorized under 
the entity of B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between
Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. We identified a cohort of
these lymphomas in our databases and retrospectively reviewed corresponding
in-house flow cytometric data to determine whether a common immunophenotype might
be present. Herein we report on our findings on 10 lymphomas, each with
translocations involving c-MYC and BCL2 or BCL6 and show that these cases
frequently showed a common immunophenotype that includes decreased expression of 
CD20. Because these lymphomas often show aggressive biologic behavior and poor
clinical outcome, recognition of this relatively common immunophenotype may be
useful for identifying cases for confirmatory cytogenetic studies, as often, flow
cytometry provides the first assessment of these clinical specimens.

PMID: 20660329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 May;39(5):313-8.

[Prevalence of germinal center B-cell-like and non-germinal center B-cell-like
types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in Shanghai, China].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Y(1), Chen H, Fu K, Zhu XZ, Irons R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital, Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the prevalence of germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) and
non-GCB-like types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in Chinese patients.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical study for CD10, bcl-6, MUM1, GCET1 and FOXP1 was
performed on 124 cases of DLBCL from Shanghai, China. The Hans algorithm and Choi
algorithm were applied to classify DLBCL into GCB and non-GCB-like types.
Fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) for t (14;18) and bcl-6 gene
rearrangement was also carried out on 118 cases.
RESULTS: Of the 124 DLBCL cases studied, 27 cases (22%) showed a GCB-like type
and 97 cases (78%) showed a non-GCB-like type, when using Hans algorithm. On the 
other hand, 34 cases (27%) belonged to GCB-like type and 90 cases (73%) belonged 
to non-GCB-like type when applying Choi algorithm. The prevalence of GCB-like
type was significantly lower than that of non-GCB-like type (P=0.0001). Only four
cases (3%) were positive for t (14;18), and three of them were classified as
GCB-like type. bcl-6 rearrangement was found in 46 cases (39%) and more
frequently encountered in the GCB-like type. There is no relationship between
bcl-6 gene rearrangement and bcl-6 protein expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The GCB-like type of DLBCL is significantly less common than
non-GCB-like type in Chinese population. This phenomenon is possibly related to
the low frequency of t (14;18).

PMID: 20654154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):29760-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.121459. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

A novel mechanism involving coordinated regulation of nuclear levels and
acetylation of NF-YA and Bcl6 activates RGS4 transcription.

Yang J(1), Huang J, Chatterjee TK, Twait E, Fisher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Neuronally enriched RGS4 plays a critical role attenuating G protein signaling in
brain, although the mechanisms regulating RGS4 expression are unknown. Here we
describe a novel mechanism for transcriptional activation of RGS4 in neuron-like 
PC6 cells, where RGS4 is markedly induced during confluence-induced growth
arrest. Transcriptional activation of RGS4 in confluent PC6 cells was accompanied
by impaired G(i/o)-dependent MAPK activation. In the human RGS4 gene promoter, we
identified three phylogenetically conserved cis-elements: an inverted CCAAT box
element (ICE), a cAMP response element, and a B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6)-binding
site. The ICE and the cAMP response element mediate activation, and the Bcl6 site
mediates repression of RGS4 transcription. Activation of RGS4 transcription in
confluent PC6 cells is accompanied by increases in NF-YA and C/EBPß and decreases
in Bcl6 levels in the nucleus. Increases in NF-YA and C/EBPß lead to their
increased binding to the RGS4 promoter in vivo, and dominant negative forms of
these proteins repressed RGS4 promoter activity. Acetylation of NF-YA and Bcl6
were increased in postconfluent cells. Trichostatin A stimulation of RGS4
promoter activity, accompanied by increased binding of NF-YA and decreased
binding of Bcl6 to the promoter, was abolished by mutation of the ICE and
enhanced by mutation of the Bcl6 site. These findings demonstrate a dynamic and
coordinated regulation of nuclear levels and acetylation status of trans-acting
factors critical in determining the off/on state of the RGS4 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2943308
PMID: 20630860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):13129-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002285107. Epub 2010 Jul 6.

Tbr1 regulates regional and laminar identity of postmitotic neurons in developing
neocortex.

Bedogni F(1), Hodge RD, Elsen GE, Nelson BR, Daza RA, Beyer RP, Bammler TK,
Rubenstein JL, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

Areas and layers of the cerebral cortex are specified by genetic programs that
are initiated in progenitor cells and then, implemented in postmitotic neurons.
Here, we report that Tbr1, a transcription factor expressed in postmitotic
projection neurons, exerts positive and negative control over both regional
(areal) and laminar identity. Tbr1 null mice exhibited profound defects of
frontal cortex and layer 6 differentiation, as indicated by down-regulation of
gene-expression markers such as Bcl6 and Cdh9. Conversely, genes that implement
caudal cortex and layer 5 identity, such as Bhlhb5 and Fezf2, were up-regulated
in Tbr1 mutants. Tbr1 implements frontal identity in part by direct promoter
binding and activation of Auts2, a frontal cortex gene implicated in autism. Tbr1
regulates laminar identity in part by downstream activation or maintenance of
Sox5, an important transcription factor controlling neuronal migration and
corticofugal axon projections. Similar to Sox5 mutants, Tbr1 mutants exhibit
ectopic axon projections to the hypothalamus and cerebral peduncle. Together, our
findings show that Tbr1 coordinately regulates regional and laminar identity of
postmitotic cortical neurons.

PMCID: PMC2919950
PMID: 20615956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Aug 15;45(2):169-75. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.04.007.
Epub 2010 Jun 3.

PDCD2, a protein whose expression is repressed by BCL6, induces apoptosis in
human cells by activation of the caspase cascade.

Baron BW(1), Hyjek E, Gladstone B, Thirman MJ, Baron JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Beverly.Baron@uchospitals.edu

We have previously reported that the human programmed cell death-2 gene (PDCD2), 
a target of BCL6 repression, is likely to be important in the pathogenesis of
certain human lymphomas. We now demonstrate that transfection of a construct
expressing PDCD2 induces apoptosis in human cell lines, that this occurs, at
least in part, through activation of the caspase cascade, and, furthermore, that 
caspase inhibitors block this effect. Immunohistochemical studies in human benign
lymphoid and lymphoma tissues support these findings. In addition, transfection
of a VP16-BCL6 zinc fingers fusion protein, which competes with the binding of
endogenous BCL6 in a Burkitt lymphoma cell line, increases PDCD2 protein
expression and apoptosis, and knockdown of the PDCD2 protein in this cell line by
PDCD2-specific small interfering RNA duplexes inhibits apoptosis. These studies
indicate that one function of PDCD2 is to promote apoptosis in several human and 
mammalian cell lines and tissues, including lymphoma. Although the pathways
involved in lymphomagenesis are likely to be multiple and complex, it is
plausible that repression of PDCD2 expression by BCL6, which, in turn, leads to
downregulation of apoptosis, is one mechanism involved in BCL6-associated
lymphomatous transformation. The usefulness of increasing PDCD2 expression in the
treatment of certain lymphomas merits further investigation.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20605493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Ophthalmol. 2010 Sep;150(3):412-426.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2010.04.007.

Unifocal and multifocal reactive lymphoid hyperplasia vs follicular lymphoma of
the ocular adnexa.

Stacy RC(1), Jakobiec FA, Schoenfield L, Singh AD.

Author information: 
(1)David G. Cogan Laboratory of Ophthalmic Pathology, Department of
Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary and Harvard Medical School,
243 Charles Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Ophthalmol. 2010 Dec;159(6):943.

PURPOSE: To characterize the differentiating histopathologic and immunophenotypic
features of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (RLH) and follicular lymphoma of the
ocular adnexa.
DESIGN: Retrospective case study with clinical follow-up and review of the
literature.
METHODS: Clinical records of 9 cases of RLH and 6 cases of follicular lymphoma
from 2 institutions were reviewed. Light microscopic evaluation and
immunohistochemical stains including CD20, CD3, CD5, CD21, CD23, BCL-2, BCL-6,
CD10, kappa, lambda, and Ki67 were used to distinguish the 2 categories.
RESULTS: RLH preferentially involved the conjunctiva, whereas follicular lymphoma
had a propensity to involve the lacrimal gland. Microscopic analysis with
immunohistochemical staining distinguished RLH from follicular lymphoma. BCL-2
was positive in follicular centers of follicular lymphoma but not in RLH. CD10
identified follicular center cells and Ki67 quantified cells in S-phase. CD21 and
CD23 detected dendritic cell scaffoldings of indistinct germinal centers. None of
the patients with RLH developed lymphoma during their clinical courses (up to 18 
years). However, 3 patients with orbital, but not conjunctival, RLH developed
immunohistochemically proven multifocal nonophthalmic supradiaphragmatic adnexal 
RLH (sites included lung, parotid, axillary nodes, and uvea). All 6 patients with
follicular lymphoma had disseminated disease.
CONCLUSIONS: A correct diagnosis of RLH vs follicular lymphoma can be reliably
established employing immunohistochemical methods. A heretofore undescribed
"multifocal RLH" syndrome must be distinguished from follicular lymphoma.
Conjunctival RLH can usually be managed surgically without radiotherapy, but
"multifocal RLH" required systemic treatment in 2 of 3 patients. Follicular
lymphoma requires systemic chemotherapy if discovered beyond stage 1E.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Sep;51(9):1643-8. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.492537.

CD40 is a potential marker of favorable prognosis in patients with diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma treated with immunochemotherapy.

Rydström K(1), Linderoth J, Nyman H, Ehinger M, Joost P, Bendahl PO, Leppä S,
Jerkeman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institution of Clinical Sciences, Lund University and 
Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. karin.rydstrom@skane.se

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Sep;51(9):1588-9.

We have previously shown that expression of CD40 has a favorable prognostic
impact in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) after anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. Here we examined the prognostic value of immunohistochemically
defined CD40 expression in 95 patients with DLBCL treated with both
anthracycline-based chemotherapy and rituximab. Using a 10% cut-off level, 77% of
the patients had CD40-positive tumors and showed a superior overall survival (p =
0.02 log-rank, hazard ratio 0.35, 95% CI 0.14-0.88, p = 0.03 Cox regression).
When adjusted for International Prognostic Index in multivariate analysis, CD40
was not an independent prognostic factor (hazard ratio 0.39, 95% CI 0.15-1.04, p 
= 0.06 Cox regression). However, even after the introduction of
immunochemotherapy, CD40 has a potential prognostic impact in DLBCL. Additional
and larger studies are necessary, regarding the immunohistochemical robustness of
CD40 and the biological mechanisms that contribute to the superior prognosis in
CD40-expressing DLBCL.

PMID: 20593977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Am J Dermatopathol. 2010 Jul;32(5):439-41. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e3181c1195b.

Primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma shows activation of nuclear factor kappa 
B and low incidence of Epstein-Barr virus.

Bhagavathi S(1), Blenc AM, Amin M, Nikitin VD, Patel MC, Warren S, Malhotra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Division of Hematopathology, 
Indiana University, 350 W 11th Street, Indianapolis, IN 46022, USA.
vmsharathkumar@yahoo.com

Primary cutaneous lymphomas are defined as lymphomas, which are present in the
skin without evidence of extracutaneous disease at the time of diagnosis. Primary
cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma (PCLBCL) is a subtype of primary cutaneous B-cell
lymphoma with a female predominance, occurring in elderly patients and known to
have unfavorable prognosis. We evaluated 10 cases of PCLBCL in immunocompetent
patients between 2005 and 2008. A panel of immunoperoxidase stains; CD3, CD10,
CD20, BCL2, BCL6, and MUM1 were performed on all cases. Nuclear factor kappa B
(NF-kappaB) pathway activation was evaluated using an immunostain for P65. The
presence of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was assessed using Epstein-Barr virus
encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization probe. All cases were CD20 positive and 
CD3 negative. CD10, BCL6, BCL2, and MUM1 were positive in 4/10 (40%), 6/10 (60%),
7/10 (70%), and 7/10 (70%) cases, respectively. NF-kappaB activation was detected
in 7/10 (70%) cases. One (10%) case was positive for EBV by in situ
hybridization. Interestingly, the EBV positive case was also positive for MUM1
and negative for CD10, indicating an activated immunophenotype. In conclusion,
majority of PCLBCL shows activation of NF-kappaB pathway with a low incidence of 
EBV.

PMID: 20571344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Hematology. 2010 Jun;15(3):157-61. doi: 10.1179/102453309X12583347113573.

CD56-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: possible association with extranodal
involvement and bcl-6 expression.

Gomyo H(1), Kajimoto K, Miyata Y, Maeda A, Mizuno I, Yamamoto K, Obayashi C,
Hanioka K, Murayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Department of Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Among B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, neural cell adhesion molecule/CD56
expression is exceptional. In this study, seven cases of CD56-positive diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) are described. The frequency of CD56-positive DLBCL
was 7% in our hospital. Four of seven (57.1%) cases expressed both CD10 and bcl-6
suggestive of a germinal center B-cell phenotype. Six of seven (85.7%) cases
expressed bcl-6. Two cases expressed aberrant T cell-associated antigens, one
each of CD7 and CD8. However, none of these seven cases showed CD5 expression. No
significant difference was observed between CD56-positive and CD56-negative DLBCL
in terms of the five international prognostic index risk factors. However, all
seven cases had at least one extranodal involvement and showed a good response to
initial treatment. The predominance of extranodal involvement in our series may
be associated with the adhesion-related function of CD56. A high frequency of
bcl-6 expression may be associated with a more favorable clinical course and
prognosis.

PMID: 20557674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 29;107(26):11930-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004962107. Epub 2010 Jun 14.

BCL6 promoter interacts with far upstream sequences with greatly enhanced
activating histone modifications in germinal center B cells.

Ramachandrareddy H(1), Bouska A, Shen Y, Ji M, Rizzino A, Chan WC, McKeithan TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

BCL6 encodes a transcriptional repressor that is essential for the germinal
center (GC) reaction and important in lymphomagenesis. Although its promoter has 
been well studied, little is known concerning its possible regulation by more
distal elements. To gain such information, we mapped critical histone
modifications associated with active transcription within BCL6 as well as far
upstream sequences at nucleosomal resolution in B-cell lines and in normal naive 
and GC B cells. Promoter-associated and intronic CpG islands (CGIs) in BCL6
showed a reciprocal pattern of histone modifications. Gene expression correlated 
with a paradoxical loss from the intronic CGI of histone H3 lysine-4
trimethylation, normally associated with transcription, suggesting that the
intronic CGI may interfere with transcription. In an approximately 110-kb region 
extending 150-260 kb upstream of BCL6, highly active histone modifications were
present only in normal GC B cells and a GC B-cell line; this region overlaps with
an alternative breakpoint region for chromosomal translocations and contains a
GC-specific noncoding RNA gene. By chromosome conformation capture, we determined
that the BCL6 promoter interacts with this distant upstream region. It is likely 
that transcriptional enhancers in this region activate BCL6 and overcome strong
autorepression in GC B cells.

PMCID: PMC2900701
PMID: 20547840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Clin Transl Oncol. 2010 Jun;12(6):401-9. doi: 10.1007/s12094-010-0527-3.

Epigenetic therapy of lymphoma using histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Cotto M(1), Cabanillas F, Tirado M, García MV, Pacheco E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Puerto Rico, School of Medicine, Hematology-Medical Oncology
Section, San Juan, Puerto Rico. maribel_cotto@yahoo.com

In this study, we reviewed epigenetic therapy of lymphomas using histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), a promising new class of antineoplastic agents.
Epigenetic therapy, a new therapeutic concept, consists of the use of HDACi and
or DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi). We conducted a comprehensive review 
of the literature for antitumour activity of HDACi and its mechanism of action.
HDACi modify the expression of several genes related to cancer development, which
can result in antineoplastic activity. To elucidate the benefits of HDACi in
lymphoma treatment, we discuss the crucial interplay between BCL6, p53 and STAT3.
Activated B-cell (ABC) diffuse large cell lymphoma (DLCL) is increasingly being
recognised as an unfavourable and frequently therapy-refractory lymphoma. We
discuss the fundamental causative role of the STAT3 oncogene in ABC type DLCL.
STAT3 can be effectively suppressed by several HDACi, a promising treatment for
this difficult subtype of DLCL. On the other hand, various HDACi can repress the 
germinal-centre B Cell (GCB) type DLCL by virtue of their inhibition of the BCL6 
oncogene, usually expressed in this particular subtype. We summarise the results 
of recent clinical trials with HDACi such as romidepsin, panobinostat, MGCD-0103,
entinostat, curcumin, JAK2 inhibitor TG101348, and valproic acid that have shown 
preliminary activity in recurrent and refractory lymphomas. The unique mechanism 
of action of HDACi makes them very attractive agents to pursue in combination.
Several ongoing trials are already exploring HDACi combinations in various types 
of cancers. Their role in front-line management remains to be determined.

PMID: 20534395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Head Neck Pathol. 2010 Sep;4(3):181-91. doi: 10.1007/s12105-010-0184-4. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the oral cavity: germinal center
classification.

Bhattacharyya I(1), Chehal HK, Cohen DM, Al-Quran SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Diagnostic Sciences, University of
Florida College of Dentistry, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
ibhattacharyya@dental.ufl.edu

Primary lymphomas of the oral cavity are rare and the most frequent type is
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Recently, several reports have highlighted
the value of classifying DLBCL into prognostically important subgroups, namely
germinal center B-cell like (GCB) and non-germinal center B-cell like (non-GCB)
lymphomas based on gene expression profiles and by immunohistochemical expression
of CD10, BCL6 and MUM-1. GCB lymphomas tend to exhibit a better prognosis than
non-GCB lymphomas. Studies validating this classification have been done for
DLBCL of the breast, CNS, testes and GI tract. Therefore we undertook this study 
to examine if primary oral DLBCLs reflect this trend. We identified 13 cases (age
range 38-91 years) from our archives dating from 2003-09. IHC was performed using
antibodies against germinal center markers (CD10, BCL6), activated B-cell markers
(MUM1, BCL2) and Ki-67 (proliferation marker). Cases were sub-classified as GCB
subgroup if CD10 and/or BCL6 were positive and MUM-1, was negative and as non-GCB
subgroup if CD10 was negative and MUM-1 was positive. Immunoreactivity was noted 
in 2/13 cases for CD10, in 12/13 for BCL6, in 8/13 for MUM-1, and in 6/13 for
BCL2. Therefore, 8/13 (58%) were sub-classified as non-GCB DLBCLs and 5/13 (42%) 
as GCB subgroup. All tumors showed frequent labeling with Ki-67 (range 40-95%).
Four of the 8 patients with non-GCB subgroup succumbed to their disease, with the
mean survival rate of 16 months. Two patients in this group are alive, one with
no evidence of disease and another with disease. No information was available for
the other 3 patients in this group. Four of the 5 patients in the GCB subgroup
were alive with no evidence of disease and one patient succumbed to complications
of therapy and recurrent disease after 18 months. In conclusion, our analysis
shows that primary oral DLBCL predominantly belongs to the non-GCB subgroup,
which tends to exhibit a poorer prognosis. These findings could allow
pathologists to provide a more accurate insight into the potential aggressive
behavior and poorer prognosis of these lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC2923304
PMID: 20533006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 1;185(1):313-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0904023. Epub 2010 Jun
2.

In vivo regulation of Bcl6 and T follicular helper cell development.

Poholek AC(1), Hansen K, Hernandez SG, Eto D, Chandele A, Weinstein JS, Dong X,
Odegard JM, Kaech SM, Dent AL, Crotty S, Craft J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.

Follicular helper T (T(FH)) cells, defined by expression of the surface markers
CXCR5 and programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) and synthesis of IL-21, require
upregulation of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6 for their development and
function in B cell maturation in germinal centers. We have explored the role of B
cells and the cytokines IL-6 and IL-21 in the in vivo regulation of Bcl6
expression and T(FH) cell development. We found that T(FH) cells are
characterized by a Bcl6-dependent downregulation of P-selectin glycoprotein
ligand 1 (PSGL1, a CCL19- and CCL21-binding protein), indicating that, like CXCR5
and PD-1 upregulation, modulation of PSGL1 expression is part of the T(FH) cell
program of differentiation. B cells were neither required for initial
upregulation of Bcl6 nor PSGL1 downregulation, suggesting these events preceded
T-B cell interactions, although they were required for full development of the
T(FH) cell phenotype, including CXCR5 and PD-1 upregulation, and IL-21 synthesis.
Bcl6 upregulation and T(FH) cell differentiation were independent of IL-6 and
IL-21, revealing that either cytokine is not absolutely required for development 
of Bcl6(+) T(FH) cells in vivo. These data increase our understanding of Bcl6
regulation in T(FH) cells and their differentiation in vivo and identifies a new 
surface marker that may be functionally relevant in this subset.

PMCID: PMC2891136
PMID: 20519643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Sao Paulo Med J. 2010 Jan;128(1):14-7.

Bcl-2 protein frequency in patients with high-risk diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Hallack Neto AE(1), Siqueira SA, Dulley FL, Chauobah A, Belesso M, Saboia R, Ruiz
MA, Chamone DA, Pereira J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, 
Brazil. abrahallack@uol.com.br

Comment in
    Sao Paulo Med J. 2011 Jan 6;129(1):54; author reply 54.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Gene expression and immunohistochemical profiling of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) have revealed important prognostic
subgroups: germinal center B-cell-like (GCB-like) DLBCL and activated B cell-like
(ABC-like) DLBCL. Although few reports on high-risk DLBCL are available, the
prognosis for the GCB-like subgroup has been shown to be better than that of the 
ABC-like subgroup. The role of Bcl-2 as a predictor of survival in DLBCL cases is
unclear and its expression varies between the two subgroups of DLBCL. In this
study, we analyzed the frequency and prognostic impact of Bcl-2 protein
expression in high-risk DLBCL cases.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Retrospective cohort study among DLBCL patients treated at
Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo
(HC-FMUSP).
METHODS: The prognostic impact of the expression of the proteins CD10, Bcl-6,
MUM1 (multiple myeloma oncogene-1) and Bcl-2 on high-risk DLBCL cases was
evaluated by means of immunohistochemistry. Seventy-three patients aged 18-60
years were evaluated for all these markers.
RESULTS: Twenty-four cases (32.9%) were GCB-like and 49 (67.1%) were ABC-like,
with no difference regarding complete remission, disease-free survival or overall
survival rates. Twenty-seven patients (37%) showed Bcl-2 expression, which was
the only independent factor predicting a worse prognosis for overall survival
according to multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Bcl-2 protein was expressed in 37% of the high-risk DLBCL patients,
without any difference between the ABC-like DLBCL and GCB-like DLBCL cases.

PMID: 20512275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Adv Immunol. 2010;105:193-210. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2776(10)05007-8.

BCL6: master regulator of the germinal center reaction and key oncogene in B cell
lymphomagenesis.

Basso K(1), Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor which has emerged as a critical regulator of 
germinal centers (GC), the sites where B cells are selected based on the
production of antibodies with high affinity for the antigen. BCL6 is also a
frequently activated oncogene in the pathogenesis of human B cell lymphomas, most
of which derive from the GC B cells. A thorough understanding of the biological
role of BCL6 in normal B cell development and lymphomagenesis depends upon the
identification of the full set of genes that are targets of its transcriptional
regulatory function. Recently, the identification of BCL6 targets has been
implemented with the use of genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation and gene
expression profiling approaches. A large set of promoters have been shown to be
physically bound by BCL6, but only a fraction of them appears to be subjected to 
transcriptional repression in GC B cells. This set of BCL6 targets points to a
number of cellular functions which are likely to be directly controlled by BCL6
during GC development, including activation, survival, DNA-damage response, cell 
cycle arrest, cytokine-, toll-like receptor-, TGFbeta-, WNT-signaling, and
differentiation. Overall, BCL6 is revealing its dual role of "safe-keeper" in
preventing centroblasts from responding to signals leading to a premature exit
from the GC and of contributor to lymphomagenesis by allowing the instauration of
conditions favorable to malignant transformation.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20510734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jul 10;28(20):3360-5. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.26.3947. Epub 2010
May 24.

Rearrangement of MYC is associated with poor prognosis in patients with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma treated in the era of rituximab.

Barrans S(1), Crouch S, Smith A, Turner K, Owen R, Patmore R, Roman E, Jack A.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Malignancy Diagnostic Service (HMDS), St James's Institute of
Oncology, Leeds, United Kingdom. sharonb@hmds.org.uk

PURPOSE: Rearrangement of MYC occurs in a proportion of diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCL), where they may be associated with an adverse clinical outcome.
The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of MYC translocations in
DLBCL and their prognostic impact in the era of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone plus rituximab (CHOP-R) therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three hundred three patients with previously untreated
DLBCL, with no evidence of underlying follicular lymphoma, were investigated
using immunohistochemistry and interphase fluorescent in situ hybridization for
MYC, BCL6, and t(14;18)/BCL2 rearrangements. All patients (median age, 71.1
years; range, 23 to 96 years) were treated when CHOP-R was standard therapy for
DLBCL and observed for a maximum of 4 years. Overall survival (OS) at 3 years was
49% (95% CI, 42% to 56%).
RESULTS: MYC rearrangements were demonstrated in 35 (14%) of 245 biopsies with
data available. Of these, 26 (74%) also had a t(14;18), 10 (26%) were BCL6 and
MYC rearranged, and seven had all three abnormalities. Only age, International
Prognostic Index, and MYC rearrangement retained prognostic significance in the
final model. OS was significantly worse for patients with rearrangement of MYC
(survival probability at 2 years = 0.35 in v 0.61 in the nonrearranged group).
CONCLUSION: The presence of a MYC rearrangement is a strongly adverse prognostic 
factor in CHOP-R-treated patients and can be used in combination with patients'
age and IPI to accurately predict clinical outcome. In DLBCL, rearrangement of
MYC is rarely found as the sole genetic abnormality and the poor prognosis of
these patients is likely to reflect a synergistic effect alongside deregulation
of BCL6 or BCL2.

PMID: 20498406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Exp Med. 2010 Jun 7;207(6):1209-21. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091299. Epub 2010 May
24.

BCL6 is critical for the development of a diverse primary B cell repertoire.

Duy C(1), Yu JJ, Nahar R, Swaminathan S, Kweon SM, Polo JM, Valls E, Klemm L,
Shojaee S, Cerchietti L, Schuh W, Jäck HM, Hurtz C, Ramezani-Rad P, Herzog S,
Jumaa H, Koeffler HP, de Alborán IM, Melnick AM, Ye BH, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles and Leukemia and Lymphoma Program, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90027, USA.

BCL6 protects germinal center (GC) B cells against DNA damage-induced apoptosis
during somatic hypermutation and class-switch recombination. Although expression 
of BCL6 was not found in early IL-7-dependent B cell precursors, we report that
IL-7Ralpha-Stat5 signaling negatively regulates BCL6. Upon productive VH-DJH gene
rearrangement and expression of a mu heavy chain, however, activation of pre-B
cell receptor signaling strongly induces BCL6 expression, whereas
IL-7Ralpha-Stat5 signaling is attenuated. At the transition from IL-7-dependent
to -independent stages of B cell development, BCL6 is activated, reaches
expression levels resembling those in GC B cells, and protects pre-B cells from
DNA damage-induced apoptosis during immunoglobulin (Ig) light chain gene
recombination. In the absence of BCL6, DNA breaks during Ig light chain gene
rearrangement lead to excessive up-regulation of Arf and p53. As a consequence,
the pool of new bone marrow immature B cells is markedly reduced in size and
clonal diversity. We conclude that negative regulation of Arf by BCL6 is required
for pre-B cell self-renewal and the formation of a diverse polyclonal B cell
repertoire.

PMCID: PMC2882829
PMID: 20498019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Jul;51(7):1260-8. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.483749.

High levels of topoisomerase IIalpha protein expression in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma are associated with high proliferation, germinal center immunophenotype,
and response to treatment.

Pentheroudakis G(1), Goussia A, Voulgaris E, Nikolaidis K, Ioannidou E,
Papoudou-Bai A, Grepi K, Kanavaros P, Pavlidis N, Bai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina University Hospital, Ioannina,
Greece.

Gene copy number and protein expression of topoisomerase IIalpha were correlated 
to benefit from anthracyclines in various tumors. A retrospective series of 69
patients with DLBCL managed with CHOP chemotherapy were studied for
immunohistochemical TopoIIalpha expression and numerical gene abnormalities by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). The results were analyzed in relation
to the expression of cell cycle proteins (Ki67, p53, HDM2, p21, p14, pRb, p16,
and cyclins A, B1, D1, D2, D3, and E) and BCL6/CD10/MUM1/CD138 B-cell
differentiation immunophenotype and outcome. High levels of TopoIIalpha protein
were found in 91% of DLBCL cases. No evidence of TopoIIalpha gene amplification
or deletion was found. The TopoIIalpha expression showed significant positive
correlations with the proliferation index Ki67 (p = 0.002), cell cycle proteins
pRb and cyclin D2 (p = 0.018 and p = 0.028, respectively), and the germinal
center proteins bcl6 and CD10 (p = 0.010 and p < 0.0001, respectively).
TopoIIalpha expression was significantly higher in germinal center B-cell like
(GCB) DLBCL than in non-germinal center B-cell like (non-GCB) DLBCL (p = 0.048). 
TopoIIalpha protein was significantly associated with response to chemotherapy
(chi(2), p = 0.024), but not with relapse-free or overall survival (p = 0.5). On 
multivariate analysis, only stage of disease retained independent prognostic
significance (HR 0.33 for early stage, p = 0.008). Although TopoIIa gene copy
number abnormalities were not found in DLBCL, high levels of protein expression
are associated with GCB-cell differentiation immunophenotype, high proliferation,
and response to treatment.

PMID: 20497003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Chem Biodivers. 2010 May;7(5):1051-64. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200900320.

Gene network analysis during early infection of human coronary artery smooth
muscle cells by Trypanosoma cruzi and Its gp83 ligand.

Nde PN(1), Johnson CA, Pratap S, Cardenas TC, Kleshchenko YY, Furtak VA, Simmons 
KJ, Lima MF, Villalta F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Meharry Medical
College, 1005 Dr. D. B. Todd Jr. Blvd., Nashville, TN 37208-3599, USA.

Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas' disease, infects heart and
muscle cells leading to cardiac arrest, followed by death. The genetic
architectures in the early T. cruzi infection process of human cells are unknown.
To understand the genetic architectures of the early invasion process of T.
cruzi, we conducted gene transcription microarray analysis, followed by gene
network construction of the host cell response in primary human coronary artery
smooth muscle (HCASM) cells infected with T. cruzi or exposed to T. cruzi gp83, a
ligand used by the trypanosome to bind host cells. Using seven RT-PCR verified
up-regulated genes (FOSB, ATF5, INPP1, CCND2, THBS1, LAMC1, and APLP2) as the
seed for network construction, we built an interaction network of the early T.
cruzi infection process containing 165 genes, connected by 598 biological
interactions. This interactome network is centered on the BCL6 gene as a hub.
Silencing the expression of two seed genes (THBS1 and LAMC1) by RNAi reduced T.
cruzi infection. Overall, our results elucidate the significant and complex
process involved in T. cruzi infection of HCASM cells at the transcriptome level.
This is the first elucidation into the interactome network in human cells caused 
by T. cruzi and its gp83 ligand.

PMCID: PMC2910116
PMID: 20491065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2010 May;134(5):759-65. doi: 10.1043/1543-2165-134.5.759.

Immunohistochemical profile and fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in northern China.

Li T(1), Medeiros LJ, Lin P, Yin H, Littlejohn M, Im W, Lennon PA, Hu P,
Jorgensen JL, Liang M, Guo H, Yin CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Hospital of Peking University, Beijing, China.

CONTEXT: Gene expression profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma using
complementary DNA microarrays has revealed 2 major prognostic groups in Western
countries: germinal center B-cell-like and nongerminal center B-cell-like
lymphomas. Immunohistochemical analysis using antibodies specific for CD10, BCL6,
and MUM1 has been proposed as a surrogate for gene expression profiling.
OBJECTIVE: To study the immunohistochemical features of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma cases from northern China because geographic differences for this
disease are known to exist.
DESIGN: Morphologic, immunohistochemical, and fluorescence in situ hybridization 
analyses of 63 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma from northern China.
RESULTS: There were 38 men and 25 women with a median age of 57 years (range,
12-87 years). CD10 was positive in 19 cases (30%), BCL6 was positive in 22 cases 
(35%), and MUM1 was positive in 32 cases (51%). Twenty-one (33%) cases were
germinal center B-cell-like lymphoma, and 42 (67%) were nongerminal center
B-cell-like lymphoma. BCL2 was expressed more often in nongerminal center
B-cell-like disease versus germinal center B-cell-like disease (60% versus 24%, P
= .01) and in nodal versus extranodal (64% versus 30%, P = .01) cases.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis showed BCL6, MYC , and BCL2
rearrangements in 11 of 32 (34%), 8 of 27 (30%), and 11 of 50 (22%) cases,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These results add to what is known about the geographic variation of
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. In northern China, the frequency of the germinal 
center B-cell-like type and BCL6 expression and/or BCL6 rearrangement is less and
the frequency of MYC rearrangement is greater than have been reported in Western 
countries.

PMID: 20441508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cell Res. 2010 Jun;20(6):631-46. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.55. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

Requirement for cyclin D3 in germinal center formation and function.

Peled JU(1), Yu JJ, Venkatesh J, Bi E, Ding BB, Krupski-Downs M, Shaknovich R,
Sicinski P, Diamond B, Scharff MD, Ye BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Germinal centers (GC) of secondary lymphoid tissues are critical to mounting a
high-affinity humoral immune response. B cells within the GC undergo rapid clonal
expansion and selection while diversifying their antibody genes. Although it is
generally believed that GC B cells employ a unique proliferative program to
accommodate these processes, little is known about how the GC-associated cell
cycle is orchestrated. The D-type cyclins constitute an important component of
the cell cycle engine that enables the cells to respond to physiological changes.
Cell type- and developmental stage-specific roles of D-type cyclins have been
described but the cyclin D requirement during GC reaction has not been addressed.
In this study, we report that cyclin D3 is largely dispensable for proliferation 
and Ig class switching of in vitro activated B cells. In contrast, GC development
in Ccnd3(-/-) mice is markedly impaired, as is the T cell-dependent antibody
response. Within the GC, although both switched and unswitched B cells are
affected by cyclin D3 inactivation, the IgM(-) pool is more severely reduced.
Interestingly, despite a compensatory increase in cyclin D2 expression, a
significant number of Ccnd3(-/-) GC B cells accumulate in quiescent G0 state.
Lastly, although cyclin D3 inactivation did not disrupt BCL6 expression in GC B
cells, it completely blocked the GC promoting effect of BCL6 overexpression,
suggesting that cyclin D3 acts downstream of BCL6 to regulate GC formation. This 
is the first demonstration that cyclin D3 plays an important and unique role at
the GC stage of B cell development.

PMCID: PMC2997820
PMID: 20404856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Hum Pathol. 2010 May;41(5):621-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.10.027.

B-cell lymphomas with features intermediate between distinct pathologic entities.
From pathogenesis to pathology.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A, Aiello A, Testi A, Cabras A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
20133 Milano, Italy. antonino.carbone@istitutotumori.mi.it

Published in September 2008, the updated World Health Organization Classification
of Tumors of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues introduces provisional borderline
categories for lymphoma cases that demonstrate overlapping clinical,
morphological, and/or immunophenotypic features between well-established
entities. These overlapping features pose real diagnostic challenges especially
in identifying atypical cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma,
and Burkitt lymphoma. Lymphoma cases showing borderline features between
T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma and nodular lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin lymphoma are not included within the borderline categories provisionally 
recognized by the updated classification. Within the borderline categories, there
are cases combining features of primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma and
classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Many of these cases resemble classical Hodgkin
lymphoma but have a large number of tumor cells expressing CD20, CD45, and B-cell
transcription factors. Alternatively, these cases may resemble primary
mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma but contain tumor cells resembling
Reed-Sternberg cells and displaying an aberrant phenotype such as CD20(-),
CD15(-/+) CD45(+), CD30(+), Pax5(+), OCT2(+/-), and BOB1(+/-). Another new
borderline category defining B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features
intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma,
represents a biologically heterogeneous group. Cases with morphologic features
intermediate and with CD10/BCL6 coexpression should be placed in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma/Burkitt lymphoma category if tumor cells also show strong BCL2
staining and/or a Ki67 proliferation index of less than 90%. When MYC
rearrangements are present in these cases, the lymphomas often have atypical
features, including concurrent rearrangements of BCL2 and/or BCL6 genes
(so-called double/triple-hit lymphomas) and more aggressive behavior. For the
provisional borderline categories, unresolved issues include understanding
molecular pathogenesis and defining an effective treatment.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20398809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cancer Cell. 2010 Apr 13;17(4):400-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.12.050.

A small-molecule inhibitor of BCL6 kills DLBCL cells in vitro and in vivo.

Cerchietti LC(1), Ghetu AF, Zhu X, Da Silva GF, Zhong S, Matthews M, Bunting KL, 
Polo JM, Farès C, Arrowsmith CH, Yang SN, Garcia M, Coop A, Mackerell AD Jr,
Privé GG, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Apr 13;17(4):315-6.

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor is the most frequently involved oncogene in
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). We combined computer-aided drug design
with functional assays to identify low-molecular-weight compounds that bind to
the corepressor binding groove of the BCL6 BTB domain. One such compound
disrupted BCL6/corepressor complexes in vitro and in vivo, and was observed by
X-ray crystallography and NMR to bind the critical site within the BTB groove.
This compound could induce expression of BCL6 target genes and kill BCL6-positive
DLBCL cell lines. In xenotransplantation experiments, the compound was nontoxic
and potently suppressed DLBCL tumors in vivo. The compound also killed primary
DLBCLs from human patients.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2858395
PMID: 20385364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cancer Cell. 2010 Apr 13;17(4):315-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.03.012.

Anticancer therapy SMRT-ens up: targeting the BCL6-SMRT interaction in B cell
lymphoma.

Compton LA(1), Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Apr 13;17(4):400-11.

Transcription factors have proven to be difficult targets for the development of 
small-molecule drugs. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Cerchietti et al. identify
and characterize a specific, small-molecule inhibitor of BCL6, an oncogenic
transcriptional repressor, that has high clinical promise for treating diffuse
large B cell lymphoma.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20385356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Exp Med. 2010 Apr 12;207(4):751-62. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091957. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

The Blimp1-Bcl6 axis is critical to regulate osteoclast differentiation and bone 
homeostasis.

Miyauchi Y(1), Ninomiya K, Miyamoto H, Sakamoto A, Iwasaki R, Hoshi H, Miyamoto
K, Hao W, Yoshida S, Morioka H, Chiba K, Kato S, Tokuhisa T, Saitou M, Toyama Y, 
Suda T, Miyamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Controlling osteoclastogenesis is critical to maintain physiological bone
homeostasis and prevent skeletal disorders. Although signaling activating nuclear
factor of activated T cells 1 (NFATc1), a transcription factor essential for
osteoclastogenesis, has been intensively investigated, factors antagonistic to
NFATc1 in osteoclasts have not been characterized. Here, we describe a novel
pathway that maintains bone homeostasis via two transcriptional repressors, B
cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) and B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp1). We
show that Bcl6 directly targets 'osteoclastic' molecules such as NFATc1,
cathepsin K, and dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP), all of
which are targets of NFATc1. Bcl6-overexpression inhibited osteoclastogenesis in 
vitro, whereas Bcl6-deficient mice showed accelerated osteoclast differentiation 
and severe osteoporosis. We report that Bcl6 is a direct target of Blimp1 and
that mice lacking Blimp1 in osteoclasts exhibit osteopetrosis caused by impaired 
osteoclastogenesis resulting from Bcl6 up-regulation. Indeed, mice doubly mutant 
in Blimp1 and Bcl6 in osteoclasts exhibited decreased bone mass with increased
osteoclastogenesis relative to osteoclast-specific Blimp1-deficient mice. These
results reveal a Blimp1-Bcl6-osteoclastic molecule axis, which critically
regulates bone homeostasis by controlling osteoclastogenesis and may provide a
molecular basis for novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2856022
PMID: 20368579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Cell Mol Immunol. 2010 May;7(3):198-203. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2010.18. Epub 2010 Apr 
5.

Multiple checkpoints keep follicular helper T cells under control to prevent
autoimmunity.

Yu D(1), Vinuesa CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia. d.yu@garvan.org.au

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells select mutated B cells in germinal centres, which
can then differentiate into long-lived high affinity memory B cells and plasma
cells. Tfh cells are regulated by a unique molecular programme orchestrated by
the transcriptional repressor Bcl6. This transcription factor turns down
expression of multiple genes, including transcriptional regulators of other T
helper lineages and a vast amount of microRNAs. This enables Tfh cells to express
a suite of chemokine receptors, stimulatory ligands and cytokines that enable
migration into B-cell follicles, and provision of effective help to B cells. Not 
surprisingly, dysregulation of this powerful helper subset can lead to a range of
autoantibody-mediated diseases; indeed, aberrant accumulation of Tfh cells has
been linked with systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren's disease and autoimmune
arthritis. Here we dissect multiple checkpoints that operate throughout Tfh cell 
development and maturation to maintain immunological tolerance while mounting
robust and long-lasting antibody responses.

PMCID: PMC4002912
PMID: 20364160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 26;5(3):e9878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009878.

A systems biology approach to transcription factor binding site prediction.

Zhou X(1), Sumazin P, Rajbhandari P, Califano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics (DBMI), Columbia University, New York,
New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The elucidation of mammalian transcriptional regulatory networks
holds great promise for both basic and translational research and remains one the
greatest challenges to systems biology. Recent reverse engineering methods deduce
regulatory interactions from large-scale mRNA expression profiles and
cross-species conserved regulatory regions in DNA. Technical challenges faced by 
these methods include distinguishing between direct and indirect interactions,
associating transcription regulators with predicted transcription factor binding 
sites (TFBSs), identifying non-linearly conserved binding sites across species,
and providing realistic accuracy estimates.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We address these challenges by closely
integrating proven methods for regulatory network reverse engineering from mRNA
expression data, linearly and non-linearly conserved regulatory region discovery,
and TFBS evaluation and discovery. Using an extensive test set of high-likelihood
interactions, which we collected in order to provide realistic
prediction-accuracy estimates, we show that a careful integration of these
methods leads to significant improvements in prediction accuracy. To verify our
methods, we biochemically validated TFBS predictions made for both transcription 
factors (TFs) and co-factors; we validated binding site predictions made using a 
known E2F1 DNA-binding motif on E2F1 predicted promoter targets, known E2F1 and
JUND motifs on JUND predicted promoter targets, and a de novo discovered motif
for BCL6 on BCL6 predicted promoter targets. Finally, to demonstrate accuracy of 
prediction using an external dataset, we showed that sites matching predicted
motifs for ZNF263 are significantly enriched in recent ZNF263 ChIP-seq data.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Using an integrative framework, we were able to address
technical challenges faced by state of the art network reverse engineering
methods, leading to significant improvement in direct-interaction detection and
TFBS-discovery accuracy. We estimated the accuracy of our framework on a human
B-cell specific test set, which may help guide future methodological development.

PMCID: PMC2845628
PMID: 20360861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jul;23(7):909-20. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.76. Epub 2010 Mar 
26.

Simple karyotype and bcl-6 expression predict a diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma and
better survival in IG-MYC rearranged high-grade B-cell lymphomas.

Seegmiller AC(1), Garcia R, Huang R, Maleki A, Karandikar NJ, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390-9072, USA.

Rearrangement of MYC with immunoglobulin genes is a hallmark of Burkitt lymphoma.
However, this rearrangement is not entirely specific and is often accompanied by 
varying numbers of additional cytogenetic abnormalities. This study aimed to
assess the impact of karyotypic complexity, in correlation with comprehensive
immunophenotypic analyses on the diagnosis and clinical outcomes of 34 cases of
MYC-IG rearranged lymphomas that included Burkitt lymphoma (twenty-two cases),
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (three cases), unclassifiable B-cell lymphoma with 
features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma 
(six cases), and plasmablastic lymphoma (three cases). Additional cytogenetic
abnormalities were observed in 26 of 34 cases (76%), including four cases (12%)
that harbored dual translocations involving BCL-2 or BCl-6. Burkitt lymphoma
cases had a significantly lower number of additional abnormalities (mean of 1.7),
compared with unclassified B-cell lymphoma (3.3), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(21.7), and plasmablastic lymphoma (6.7). Cases with simple karyotype (< or =2
additional abnormalities) were more likely to have a diagnosis of Burkitt
lymphoma (89 versus 33% in patients with >2 additional abnormalities, P<0.01) and
express bcl-6 (95 versus 47%, P<0.01). In addition, Burkitt lymphoma, bcl-6
expression, and simple karyotype were individual predictors of better overall
survival. However, in multivariate analyses, only bcl-6 expression remained an
independent predictor, although survival could be further stratified by
karyotypic complexity in bcl-6(+) patients. We conclude that simple karyotype and
bcl-6 expression suggest a diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma and may portend better
overall survival. These results may be very useful in the diagnosis and
stratification of MYC-IG rearranged high-grade B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 20348878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 May;51(5):802-12. doi: 10.3109/10428191003699845.

Histiocytic sarcoma arising in indolent small B-cell lymphoma: report of two
cases with molecular/genetic evidence suggestive of a 'transdifferentiation'
during the clonal evolution.

Wang E(1), Hutchinson CB, Huang Q, Sebastian S, Rehder C, Kanaly A, Moore J,
Datto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, DUMC Box 3712, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA. endi.wang@duke.edu

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 May;51(5):739-40.

The biologic relationship between small B-cell lymphoma and histiocytic sarcoma
(HS) when occurring in the same patient remains unclear, though recent data
suggest a possible 'transdifferentiation' from follicular lymphoma (FL) to HS. We
investigated the clonal relationship in two cases of small B-cell lymphoma with
subsequent HS. Case 1: A 62-year-old female with splenic marginal zone lymphoma
(SMZL) developed HS in a groin lymph node 1 year after the primary diagnosis.
PCR/sequence analysis of the IGH gene showed a monoclonal rearrangement carrying 
an identical nucleotide sequence of PCR products from the spleen with SMZL and
the lymph node with HS. Case 2: A 61-year-old female with a remote history of FL 
developed supraclavicular lymphadenopathy, which was confirmed to be HS. PCR
analysis of the HS detected a monoclonal rearrangement of the IGH gene and FISH
analysis revealed IGH/BCL2 fusion, a genetic hallmark for FL. The transformed HSs
showed partial retention of their prior B-cell lymphomas' signatures, including
expression of OCT2 in both cases and expression of BCL6 and enhanced expression
of BCL2 in case 2. Both HSs demonstrated hypermutated IGH variable regions,
arguing against a common progenitor mechanism of the transformation process. The 
data suggest a common clonal origin of B-cell lymphoma and subsequent HS
occurring in the same patient, indicating that 'transdifferentiation' occurs in
other small B-cell lymphomas, in addition to the previously reported FL or B-cell
lymphoma with IGH/BCL2.

PMID: 20331331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Jul 1;316(11):1816-28. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.03.013. Epub 
2010 Mar 20.

Bone marrow stromal cell interaction reduces syndecan-1 expression and induces
kinomic changes in myeloma cells.

Fuhler GM(1), Baanstra M, Chesik D, Somasundaram R, Seckinger A, Hose D,
Peppelenbosch MP, Bos NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gasteroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. g.fuhler@erasmusmc.nl <g.fuhler@erasmusmc.nl>

CD138 (Syndecan 1) is a heparan sulfate proteoglycan that concentrates heparan
sulfate-binding growth factors on the surface of normal and malignant plasma
cells (multiple myeloma, MMC). Recent studies have shown the presence of a
CD138-negative fraction of MMC within myelomatous bone marrow (BM). We employed
kinome array technology to characterize this fraction at a molecular level, using
a myeloma cell line model. Compared to CD138-positive cells, CD138-negative MMC
showed (i) a reduced activity of kinases involved in cell cycle progression, in
agreement with a decreased labeling index and (ii) reduced Rho signaling to
F-actin. Interestingly, CD138 mRNA and protein expression was reduced upon
interaction of MM cells with stromal cell lines and primary mesenchymal cultures,
which was accompanied by the acquisition of an increased Bcl6/Blimp1 ratio.
Co-culture induced an increased activity of kinases involved in adhesion and a
decreased S-phase transition in both CD138-positive and -negative fractions. In
addition, CD138-negative MMC demonstrated an increased STAT3 and ERK1/2
activation compared to CD138+ MMC, in agreement with a lower sensitivity to
compound exposure. The presence of a less mature, more resistant CD138-negative
myeloma cell fraction within bone marrow microniches might contribute to high
incidence of relapse of Myeloma patients.

PMID: 20307537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. AIDS. 2010 Apr 24;24(7):1025-33. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328332d5b1.

Cytokine signaling pathway polymorphisms and AIDS-related non-Hodgkin lymphoma
risk in the multicenter AIDS cohort study.

Wong HL(1), Breen EC, Pfeiffer RM, Aissani B, Martinson JJ, Margolick JB, Kaslow 
RA, Jacobson LP, Ambinder RF, Chanock S, Martínez-Maza O, Rabkin CS.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA. huilee.wong@fda.hhs.gov

Erratum in
    AIDS. 2010 Jul 31;24(12):1973.

BACKGROUND: Cytokine stimulation of B-cell proliferation may be an important
causative mechanism for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) may be a co-factor,
particularly for primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors, which are uniformly
EBV-positive in the setting of AIDS. Thus, we examined associations of genetic
variation in IL10 and related cytokine-signaling molecules (IL10RA, CXCL12, IL13,
IL4, IL4R, CCL5 and BCL6) with AIDS-related NHL risk and evaluated differences
between primary CNS and systemic tumors.
PATIENTS AND MATERIALS: We compared 160 Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS)
participants with incident lymphomas, of which 90 followed another AIDS
diagnosis, to HIV-1-seropositive controls matched on duration of lymphoma-free
survival post-HIV-1 infection (N = 160) or post-AIDS diagnosis (N = 90). We fit
conditional logistic regression models to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: Carriage of at least one copy of the T allele for the IL10 rs1800871 (as
compared to no copies) was associated with decreased AIDS-NHL risk specific to
lymphomas arising from the CNS (CC vs. CT/TT: OR = 0.3; 95% CI 0.1, 0.7) but not 
systemically (CC vs. CT/TT: OR = 1.0; 95% CI 0.5, 1.9) (Pheterogeneity = 0.03).
Carriage of two copies of the 'low IL10' haplotype
rs1800896_A/rs1800871_T/rs1800872_A was associated with decreased lymphoma risk
that varied by number of copies (Ptrend = 0.02). None of the ORs for the other
studied polymorphisms was significantly different from 1.0.
CONCLUSION: Excessive IL10 response to HIV-1 infection may be associated with
increased risk of NHL, particularly in the CNS. IL10 dysregulation may be an
important causative pathway for EBV-related lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3950937
PMID: 20299965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Dev Cell. 2010 Mar 16;18(3):450-62. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.12.023.

BCL6 canalizes Notch-dependent transcription, excluding Mastermind-like1 from
selected target genes during left-right patterning.

Sakano D(1), Kato A, Parikh N, McKnight K, Terry D, Stefanovic B, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University, College of
Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Mar 16;18(3):338-40.

Although the Notch signaling pathway is one of the most intensely studied
intracellular signaling pathways, the mechanisms by which Notch signaling
regulates transcription remain incompletely understood. Here, we report that B
cell leukemia/lymphoma 6 (BCL6), a transcriptional repressor, is a
Notch-associated factor. BCL6 is necessary to maintain the expression of Pitx2 in
the left lateral plate mesoderm during the patterning of left-right asymmetry in 
Xenopus embryos. For this process, BCL6 forms a complex with BCL6 corepressor
(BCoR) on the promoters of selected Notch target genes such as enhancer of split 
related 1. BCL6 also inhibits the transcription of these genes by competing for
the Notch1 intracellular domain, preventing the coactivator Mastermind-like1
(MAM1) from binding. These results define a mechanism restricting Notch-activated
transcription to cell-type-appropriate subsets of target genes, and elucidate its
relevance in vivo during left-right asymmetric development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2841049
PMID: 20230751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Dev Cell. 2010 Mar 16;18(3):338-40. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.03.001.

BCL6 and BCoR gang up on Notch to regulate left-right patterning.

Koch U(1), Radtke F.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Swiss Institute for Experimental
Cancer Research, Station 19, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2010 Mar 16;18(3):450-62.

In this issue of Developmental Cell, Sakano et al. describe a novel mechanism of 
how a key lymphocyte transcription factor crosstalks to Notch signaling during
embryonic development and thereby selectively inhibits Notch-activated target
genes to allow proper left-right patterning.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20230742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Blood. 2010 May 6;115(18):3772-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-270082. Epub 2010
Mar 12.

A proto-oncogene BCL6 is up-regulated in the bone marrow microenvironment in
multiple myeloma cells.

Hideshima T(1), Mitsiades C, Ikeda H, Chauhan D, Raje N, Gorgun G, Hideshima H,
Munshi NC, Richardson PG, Carrasco DR, Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome Lipper Myeloma Center, Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Constitutive B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl-6) expression was undetectable in multiple
myeloma (MM) cell lines, except U266 cells. However, it was up-regulated by
coculture with bone marrow (BM) stromal cell-culture supernatant (SCCS). Bcl-6
expression in patient MM cells in the BM was positive. Anti-interleukin-6
(IL-6)-neutralizing antibody significantly blocked SCCS-induced Bcl-6 in MM
cells. Indeed, IL-6 strongly triggered Bcl-6 expression in MM cells, whereas
Janus kinase inhibitor and STAT3 siRNA down-regulated Bcl-6. Tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) also triggered Bcl-6, but independently of STAT3,
whereas IkappaB kinasebeta inhibitor down-regulated TNF-alpha-induced Bcl-6,
indicating that the canonical nuclear factor-kappaB pathway mediates
TNF-alpha-induced Bcl-6 expression. Importantly, down-regulation of Bcl-6 by
shRNA significantly inhibited MM cell growth in the presence of SCCS. Our results
therefore suggest that Bcl-6 expression in MM cells is modulated, at least in
part, via Janus kinase/STAT3 and canonical nuclear factor-kappaB pathways and
that targeting Bcl-6, either directly or via these cascades, inhibits MM cell
growth in the BM milieu.

PMCID: PMC2865869
PMID: 20228272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 May;34(5):645-55. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d5d903.

Class III beta-tubulin shows unique expression patterns in a variety of
neoplastic and non-neoplastic lymphoproliferative disorders.

Yoon SO(1), Kim WY, Go H, Paik JH, Kim JE, Kim YA, Huh JR, Jeon YK, Kim CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Class III beta-tubulin (TUBB3) expression in carcinoma is associated with
resistance to tubulin-binding chemotherapeutic agents. Recently, follicular
dendritic cells (FDCs) were reported to express TUBB3 under physiologic
conditions. We investigated TUBB3 expression in a wide range of
lymphoproliferative disorders using immunohistochemistry. Dual immunostaining for
Bcl-6 and TUBB3 revealed that some germinal center B cells also express TUBB3 in 
addition to FDCs. In Hodgkin lymphomas (HLs), 47.1% (40/85) expressed TUBB3 in
the tumor cells with an all-or-none pattern. TUBB3 expression in HL was more
common in mixed cellularity type than nodular sclerosis type (P=0.032). Among
non-HLs, 79.3% (23/29) of anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), 8% (2/25) of
extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma, and 75% (21/28) of Burkitt lymphoma
showed TUBB3 expression with an all-or-none pattern. Of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, 15.2% (32/210) expressed TUBB3 in a heterogeneous pattern. In ALCL,
TUBB3 expression was more common in systemic ALCL than in primary cutaneous ALCL 
(P=0.046). Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas with a germinal center B-like subgroup 
exhibited TUBB3 expression more frequently than non-GCB-like subgroup (P=0.01).
Otherwise, none of the 18 angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas; 18 peripheral
T-cell lymphomas, not otherwise specified; 12 follicular lymphomas; 62 marginal
zone lymphomas; 7 mantle cell lymphomas; 8 small lymphocytic lymphomas; or 2 FDC 
sarcomas expressed TUBB3. In angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and Castleman
disease, TUBB3 was positive in immunoblasts corresponding to Epstein-Barr
virus-infected or Kaposi sarcoma herpes virus-infected cells. A variety of
neoplastic and non-neoplastic lymphoproliferative disorders exhibited
characteristic TUBB3 expression patterns; these results suggest potential for
diagnostic utility, some insight into the pathobiology of TUBB3 expression, and
potential therapeutic implications.

PMID: 20220512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Haematologica. 2010 Jul;95(7):1122-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.013714. Epub
2010 Mar 10.

Splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma: revision of a series of cases
reveals characteristic clinico-pathological features.

Kanellis G(1), Mollejo M, Montes-Moreno S, Rodriguez-Pinilla SM, Cigudosa JC,
Algara P, Montalban C, Matutes E, Wotherspoon A, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma is an uncommon B-cell 
lymphoma, now recognized as a provisional entity in the 2008 update of the WHO
Classification. Additional work is required to review this entity and establish
its diagnostic features.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We have retrospectively analyzed the disease features in a
highly selected series of 17 patients diagnosed as splenic diffuse red pulp small
B-cell lymphoma.
RESULTS: The median age was 65.5 years (range 40-79 years) and there was a
predominance of males (male/female ratio: 2.4). Clinical manifestations were
mainly derived from splenomegaly. Splenectomy was the front-line treatment in 11 
symptomatic patients; the remaining 6 received chemotherapy initially followed by
splenectomy. After a mean follow-up of 72 months, the five-year overall survival 
was 93%. All cases showed a purely diffuse pattern of splenic infiltration by
monomorphous small cells with small round nuclei and pale cytoplasm. All bone
marrow biopsies showed tumoral infiltration, with intrasinusoidal infiltration.
Peripheral blood cells were small to medium-sized, with clumped chromatin and
round nuclear outline and villous cytoplasm. Neoplastic cells had a CD20(+),
CD23(-), bcl6(-), Annexin A1- phenotype, with frequent expression of DBA44+
(15/17) and IgG (10/15). FCM data had a B-cell phenotype (CD19(+), CD20(+),
CD22(+)) with FMC7 (10/11) and CD11c (5/8) expression. Clonal IgH rearrangement
studies in 4 cases showed IgVH mutations in all cases, without VH1.2 usage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that splenic diffuse red pulp small B-cell lymphoma
is a distinct entity with morphological and immunophenotypical features that
differ from those of other splenic lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC2895036
PMID: 20220064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 15;184(8):4123-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901242. Epub 2010
Mar 8.

Transcriptional repressor BCL6 controls Th17 responses by controlling gene
expression in both T cells and macrophages.

Mondal A(1), Sawant D, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The transcriptional repressor protein BCL6 regulates T cell differentiation by
repressing Th2 responses and promoting follicular Th cell responses. However,
little is known about the role of BCL6 in Th17 responses. We found that memory T 
cells from BCL6-deficient mice had increased IL-17 production. Additionally, BCL6
expression is upregulated in CD4 T cells cultured under Th17 conditions. T cells 
from BCL6-deficient mice showed defective Th17 differentiation and enhanced IL-4 
production in vitro; however, normal Th17 differentiation was obtained with
BCL6-deficient T cells under culture conditions when highly pure naive CD4 T
cells were used, when IL-4 production was inhibited, or when TGF-beta levels were
increased. Retrovirus-mediated expression of BCL6 in CD4 T cells repressed IL-4
and augmented basal IL-17 mRNA expression. These data support the idea that BCL6 
promotes Th17 differentiation through suppression of Th2 differentiation.
BCL6-deficient T cells transplanted into Rag1(-/-) mice produced wild-type levels
of IL-17, indicating that, in vivo, BCL6-deficient T cells develop relatively
normal Th17 responses. Macrophages from BCL6-deficient mice showed strikingly
increased expression of the Th17-promoting cytokines IL-6, IL-23, and TGF-beta,
and conditioned media from BCL6-deficient macrophages promoted augmented IL-17
expression by T cells. We propose that the increased Th17 activity in
BCL6-deficient mice is due, in part, to BCL6-deficient macrophages promoting
increased Th17 differentiation in vivo. T cells may require BCL6 for optimal Th17
differentiation; however, BCL6 function in macrophages critically regulates Th17 
differentiation in vivo. We hypothesize that increased Th17 differentiation
aggravates the severe Th2-type inflammatory disease in BCL6-deficient mice.

PMID: 20212093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cancer Sci. 2010 May;101(5):1309-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01517.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 28.

Clinicopathologic correlations of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in rheumatoid
arthritis patients treated with methotrexate.

Niitsu N(1), Okamoto M, Nakamine H, Hirano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, International Medical
Center, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan. nniitsu@saitama-med.ac.jp

Among methotrexate (MTX)-related lymphoproliferative disorders (MTX-LPD), diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) accounts for about half. We studied the
clinicopathological characteristics and prognosis of patients with DLBCL in
MTX-LPD. This study included 29 patients who developed DLBCL after receiving MTX 
for rheumatoid arthritis. MTX was discontinued in all patients. Their median age 
was 62 years. Elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was observed in 97% of
the patients, bone marrow involvement in 17%, and involvement of extranodal sites
in 41%. As for the cellular immunophenotype, CD20 was positive in 93%, CD5 in 3%,
CD10 in 31%, BCL2 in 21%, BCL6 in 69%, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small
non-polyadenylated RNA (EBER) in 24%. Chemotherapy was started within 2 months
after MTX withdrawal in 23 patients, of whom 12 patients received combination
with rituximab. Spontaneous remission occurred in the remaining six patients. The
EEBV-positive rate was 67% (4/6), and the four EBV-positive patients achieved
complete response. Among the 23 DLBCL patients treated with chemotherapy, 20
patients achieved complete response. The 5-year overall survival was 74% and the 
5-year progression-free survival was 65%. After the development of DLBCL,
withdrawal of MTX was the first choice of treatment. Germinal center B-cell type 
and EBER-positive patients tended to show spontaneous remission. The utility of
rituximab should be examined in future studies.

PMID: 20210795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):541-50. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091578.

ZEB1 and CtBP form a repressive complex at a distal promoter element of the BCL6 
locus.

Papadopoulou V(1), Postigo A, Sánchez-Tilló E, Porter AC, Wagner SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, UK.

BCL6 is essential for normal antibody responses and is highly expressed in
germinal centre B-cells. Constitutive expression due to chromosomal
translocations or mutations of cis-acting regulatory elements contributes to
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. BCL6 expression is therefore tightly regulated in 
a lineage- and developmental-stage-specific manner, and disruption of normal
controls can contribute to lymphomagenesis. In order to discover potential
cis-acting control regions we carried out DNase I-hypersensitive site mapping.
Gel-shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation of the core region of a
hypersensitive site 4.4 kb upstream of BCL6 transcription initiation (HSS-4.4)
showed an E-box element-binding ZEB1 (zinc finger E-boxbinding homeobox 1) and
the co-repressor CtBP (C-terminal binding protein). As compared with peripheral
blood B-cells, ZEB1, a two-handed zinc finger transcriptional repressor, is
expressed at relatively low levels in germinal centre cells, whereas BCL6 has the
opposite pattern of expression. Transfection of ZEB1 cDNA caused a reduction in
BCL6 expression and a mutated ZEB1, incapable of binding CtBP, lacked this
effect. siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated knockdown of ZEB1 or CtBP produced
an increase in BCL6 mRNA. We propose that HSS-4.4 is a distal promoter element
binding a repressive complex consisting of ZEB1 and CtBP. CtBP is ubiquitously
expressed and the results of the present study suggest that regulation of ZEB1 is
required for control of BCL6 expression.

PMID: 20175752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Med Oncol. 2011 Mar;28(1):241-8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9433-3. Epub 2010 Feb
18.

Prognostic evaluation of immunohistochemical profiles in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a Chinese study.

Chen Z(1), Du Z, Chen J, Chen Z, Bao Y, Tang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 200040 Shanghai,
China. drchenzi@tom.com

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has been classified into different
prognostic subgroups using immunohistochemistry in Western populations. However, 
the applicability in Chinese patients of these subgroups was unclear. We
collected 116 specimens and performed immunohistochemical staining for CD10,
BCL-6, MUM1, CD138, and CD5, and the results were classified into subgroups
according to 3 different algorithms. We then analyzed the subgroups' correlation 
to patient survival. Expression of CD10 and BCL-6 predicted favorable 5-year OS
(70 and 62.5%, respectively) and PFS (64.3 and 61.5%, respectively) rates. In
contrast, the expression of MUM1 predicted unfavorable 5-year OS (23.1%) and PFS 
(17.9%) rates and was also independent of other markers. All algorithms led to
useful subclassifications. Using Hans' algorithm based on CD10, BCL-6, and MUM1, 
the non-germinal center (GC) subgroup (66.4%) had worse 5-year OS (29.8%) and PFS
(26.7%) rates than did the GC subgroup. Likewise, using Muris' algorithm based on
CD10 and MUM1, fewer non-GC cases (27%) showed poorer OS (20.3%) and PFS (16.2%) 
rates than did GC cases, an effect that was independent of both the International
Prognostic Index, a clinical indicator, and treatment. It identified a subgroup
with a high-risk of death and seemed to be applicable in our series. In
conclusion, these algorithms can be used effectively in Chinese patients with
DLBCL.

PMID: 20165991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Cancer Res Ther. 2009 Oct-Dec;5(4):254-62. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.59901.

Characterization of genetic lesions in apoptosis-regulating and proliferation
control genes in diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Pervez S(1), Nasir MI, Moatter T, Ahsan A, Haq A, Siddiqui T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Aga Khan University Medical Centre, 
Karachi, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: This study was conducted to analyze the frequency, expression
patterns, and the impact of individual proteins BCL2, BCL6, and p53 on overall
survival (OS) in adult, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) patients. BCL2 gene
was further investigated for potential alterations at the DNA level and
correlated with OS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 117 adult well-characterized DLBCL cases were
included. The panel of antibodies comprised CD45, CD20, CD79a, CD3, BCL2, BCL6,
and p53. PCR was also employed to correlate the events at the DNA level in BCL2.
RESULTS: The mean and median ages were 47.74 and 49 with a M:F ratio of 2.07:1.
The incidence of BCL2, BCL6, and p53 expression was observed in 64.10%, 37.60%,
and 52.13% of cases, respectively. Amplifiable quality DNA was available from 90 
cases. BCL2/IGH translocation was found in 35/90 patients (38.88%) with 24 cases 
showing BCL2 (MBR)/IGH and 11 cases BCL2 (mcr)/IGH translocation. No association 
between BCL2 overexpression and BCL2 /IGH translocation was seen. Clinical data
were available for 52 patients treated by CHOP therapy. It was found that
patients with p53 overexpression had decreased overall survival (P = 0.0004)
whereas BCL2, BCL6 expression, and BCL2/IGH translocation had no impact on
overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that simple p53 protein expression by IHC at the
time of diagnosis may help to identify high-risk patients, who may benefit with
more aggressive and newer treatments in addition to standard CHOP.

PMID: 20160358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Dev Neurobiol. 2010 May;70(6):424-35. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20786.

The proto-oncogene BCL6 promotes survival of olfactory sensory neurons.

Otaki JM(1), Hatano M, Matayoshi R, Tokuhisa T, Yamamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)The BCPH Unit of Molecular Physiology, Department of Chemistry, Biology and
Marine Science, Faculty of Science, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara,
Okinawa, Japan. otaki@sci.u-ryukyu.ac.jp

For the mammalian olfactory epithelium to continually detect odorant, neuronal
survival, apoptosis, and regeneration must be coordinated. Here, we showed that
the proto-oncogene BCL6, which encodes a transcriptional repressor required for
lymphocyte terminal differentiation, contributes to the survival of olfactory
sensory neurons (OSNs). In the olfactory epithelia of the BCL6 null mutant mice, 
many OSNs were positive for both OMP and GAP43. The epithelium was relatively
thinner, showing many apoptotic signals. These characters were phenotypically
similar to those of the wild-type mice treated with nasal lectin irrigation,
which acutely induces apoptosis of OSNs. Odorant receptors were expressed
normally in the epithelia of the mutant mice, and their overall expression
profile based on DNA microarray analyses was roughly similar to that of the
apoptosis-induced olfactory epithelia of the wild-type mice. Experimental
increase of BCL6 together with green fluorescent protein in OSNs using
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer made the epifluorescence last longer than the
control fluorescence without exogenous BCL6 after the nasal lectin irrigation,
indicating that BCL6 made the infected neurons survive longer. We conclude that
BCL6 plays an active role in the survival of OSNs as an anti-apoptotic factor and
confers immature OSNs enough time to fully differentiate into mature ones.

PMID: 20151461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):365-78. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091777. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

IL-21 regulates germinal center B cell differentiation and proliferation through 
a B cell-intrinsic mechanism.

Zotos D(1), Coquet JM, Zhang Y, Light A, D'Costa K, Kallies A, Corcoran LM,
Godfrey DI, Toellner KM, Smyth MJ, Nutt SL, Tarlinton DM.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville 3052,
Australia.

Germinal centers (GCs) are sites of B cell proliferation, somatic hypermutation, 
and selection of variants with improved affinity for antigen. Long-lived memory B
cells and plasma cells are also generated in GCs, although how B cell
differentiation in GCs is regulated is unclear. IL-21, secreted by T follicular
helper cells, is important for adaptive immune responses, although there are
conflicting reports on its target cells and mode of action in vivo. We show that 
the absence of IL-21 signaling profoundly affects the B cell response to protein 
antigen, reducing splenic and bone marrow plasma cell formation and GC
persistence and function, influencing their proliferation, transition into memory
B cells, and affinity maturation. Using bone marrow chimeras, we show that these 
activities are primarily a result of CD3-expressing cells producing IL-21 that
acts directly on B cells. Molecularly, IL-21 maintains expression of Bcl-6 in GC 
B cells. The absence of IL-21 or IL-21 receptor does not abrogate the appearance 
of T cells in GCs or the appearance of CD4 T cells with a follicular helper
phenotype. IL-21 thus controls fate choices of GC B cells directly.

PMCID: PMC2822601
PMID: 20142430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):353-63. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091738. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

IL-21 acts directly on B cells to regulate Bcl-6 expression and germinal center
responses.

Linterman MA(1), Beaton L, Yu D, Ramiscal RR, Srivastava M, Hogan JJ, Verma NK,
Smyth MJ, Rigby RJ, Vinuesa CG.

Author information: 
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

During T cell-dependent responses, B cells can either differentiate
extrafollicularly into short-lived plasma cells or enter follicles to form
germinal centers (GCs). Interactions with T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are
required for GC formation and for selection of somatically mutated GC B cells.
Interleukin (IL)-21 has been reported to play a role in Tfh cell formation and in
B cell growth, survival, and isotype switching. To date, it is unclear whether
the effect of IL-21 on GC formation is predominantly a consequence of this
cytokine acting directly on the Tfh cells or if IL-21 directly influences GC B
cells. We show that IL-21 acts in a B cell-intrinsic fashion to control GC B cell
formation. Mixed bone marrow chimeras identified a significant B cell-autonomous 
effect of IL-21 receptor (R) signaling throughout all stages of the GC response. 
IL-21 deficiency profoundly impaired affinity maturation and reduced the
proportion of IgG1(+) GC B cells but did not affect formation of early memory B
cells. IL-21R was required on GC B cells for maximal expression of Bcl-6. In
contrast to the requirement for IL-21 in the follicular response to sheep red
blood cells, a purely extrafollicular antibody response to Salmonella dominated
by IgG2a was intact in the absence of IL-21.

PMCID: PMC2822609
PMID: 20142429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1711-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2314. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Prolactin inhibits BCL6 expression in breast cancer through a Stat5a-dependent
mechanism.

Tran TH(1), Utama FE, Lin J, Yang N, Sjolund AB, Ryder A, Johnson KJ, Neilson LM,
Liu C, Brill KL, Rosenberg AL, Witkiewicz AK, Rui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor that recognizes DNA target sequences similar 
to those recognized by signal transducer and activator of transcriptions 5
(Stat5). BCL6 disrupts differentiation of breast epithelia, is downregulated
during lactation, and is upregulated in poorly differentiated breast cancer. In
contrast, Stat5a mediates prolactin-induced differentiation of mammary epithelia,
and loss of Stat5 signaling in human breast cancer is associated with
undifferentiated histology and poor prognosis. Here, we identify the mammary cell
growth factor prolactin as a potent suppressor of BCL6 protein expression in
human breast cancer through a mechanism that requires Stat5a, but not
prolactin-activated Stat5b, MEK-ERK, or PI3K-AKT pathways. Prolactin rapidly
suppressed BCL6 mRNA in T47D, MCF7, ZR75.1, and SKBr3 breast cancer cell lines,
followed by prolonged reduction of BCL6 protein levels within 3 hours. Prolactin 
suppression of BCL6 was enhanced by overexpression of Stat5a but not Stat5b, was 
mimicked by constitutively active Stat5a, but did not require the transactivation
domain of Stat5a. Stat5 chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated physical
interaction with a BCL6 gene regulatory region, and BCL6 transcript repression
required histone deacetylase activity based on sensitivity to trichostatin A.
Functionally, BCL6 overexpression disrupted prolactin induction of Stat5 reporter
genes. Prolactin suppression of BCL6 was extended to xenotransplant tumors in
nude mice in vivo and to freshly isolated human breast cancer explants ex vivo.
Quantitative immunohistochemistry revealed elevated BCL6 in high-grade and
metastatic breast cancer compared with ductal carcinoma in situ and nonmalignant 
breast, and cellular BCL6 protein levels correlated negatively with nuclear
Stat5a (r = -0.52; P < 0.001) but not with Stat5b. Loss of prolactin-Stat5a
signaling and concomitant upregulation of BCL6 may represent a regulatory switch 
facilitating undifferentiated histology and poor prognosis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2822876
PMID: 20124477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Toxicol Sci. 2010 May;115(1):51-65. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq035. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

A bistable switch underlying B-cell differentiation and its disruption by the
environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Bhattacharya S(1), Conolly RB, Kaminski NE, Thomas RS, Andersen ME, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Computational Biology, The Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA. sbhattacharya@thehamner.org

The differentiation of B cells into antibody-secreting plasma cells upon antigen 
stimulation, a crucial step in the humoral immune response, is disrupted by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Several key regulatory proteins in
the B-cell transcriptional network have been identified, with two coupled
mutually repressive feedback loops among the three transcription factors B-cell
lymphoma 6 (Bcl-6), B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1(Blimp-1), and
paired box 5 (Pax5) forming the core of the network. However, the precise
mechanisms underlying B-cell differentiation and its disruption by TCDD are not
fully understood. Here we show with a computational systems biology model that
coupling of the two feedback loops at the Blimp-1 node, through parallel
inhibition of Blimp-1 gene activation by Bcl-6 and repression of Blimp-1 gene
deactivation by Pax5, can generate a bistable switch capable of directing B cells
to differentiate into plasma cells. We also use bifurcation analysis to propose
that TCDD may suppress the B-cell to plasma cell differentiation process by
raising the threshold dose of antigens such as lipopolysaccharide required to
trigger the bistable switch. Our model further predicts that high doses of TCDD
may render the switch reversible, thus causing plasma cells to lose immune
function and dedifferentiate to a B cell-like state. The immunotoxic implications
of these predictions are twofold. First, TCDD and related compounds would disrupt
the initiation of the humoral immune response by reducing the proportion of B
cells that respond to antigen and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma
cells. Second, TCDD may also disrupt the maintenance of the immune response by
depleting the pool of available plasma cells through dedifferentiation.

PMCID: PMC2855357
PMID: 20123757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):79-90. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.11.012. Epub 2010
Jan 21.

Interleukin-2 and inflammation induce distinct transcriptional programs that
promote the differentiation of effector cytolytic T cells.

Pipkin ME(1), Sacks JA, Cruz-Guilloty F, Lichtenheld MG, Bevan MJ, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Immune Disease Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Interleukin(IL)-2 and inflammation regulate effector and memory cytolytic
T-lymphocyte (CTL) generation during infection. We demonstrate a complex
interplay between IL-2 and inflammatory signals during CTL differentiation. IL-2 
stimulation induced the transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes), upregulated
perforin (Prf1) transcription, and repressed re-expression of memory CTL markers 
Bcl6 and IL-7Ralpha. Binding of Eomes and STAT5 to Prf1 cis-regulatory regions
correlated with transcriptional initiation (increased recruitment of RNA
polymerase II to the Prf1 promoter). Inflammation (CpG, IL-12) enhanced
expression of IL-2Ralpha and the transcription factor T-bet, but countered late
Eomes and perforin induction while preventing IL-7Ralpha repression by IL-2.
After infection of mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus,
IL-2Ralpha-deficient effector CD8(+) T cells expressed more Bcl6 but less
perforin and granzyme B, formed fewer KLRG-1(+) and T-bet-expressing CTL, and
killed poorly. Thus, inflammation influences both effector and memory CTL
differentiation, whereas persistent IL-2 stimulation promotes effector at the
expense of memory CTL development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2906224
PMID: 20096607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Feb;133(2):281-90. doi: 10.1309/AJCP0SBHYVLY5EML.

Expression of master regulators of helper T-cell differentiation in peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified, by immunohistochemical analysis.

Matsumoto Y(1), Horiike S, Ohshiro M, Yamamoto M, Sasaki N, Tsutsumi Y, Kobayashi
T, Shimizu D, Uchiyama H, Kuroda J, Nomura K, Shimazaki C, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology and Oncology, Kyoto Prefectural University 
of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kawaramachi Hirokoji,
Kamigyo-ku, 602-8566, Kyoto, Japan.

The normal counterparts of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
(PTCL-NOS) have not been accurately identified. We immunohistochemically analyzed
10 PTCL-NOS cases to examine the expression of the master regulators of T-cell
differentiation and of surface antigens, including chemokine receptors. All cases
were positive for the master regulator of helper T cells (Th-POK) and the marker 
of effector T cells (CD45RO). Three cases each were positive for T-Bet and GATA3,
which are master regulators of helper T cells (T(H) ) type 1 (T(H)1) and 2
(T(H)2), respectively. Two cases were positive for the surface antigens of
central memory (Tcm) (CCR7 and CD62L), and 1 case was positive for follicular
helper T-cell (TFH) phenotype (BCL6, CXCL13, and PD-1). The remaining case was
negative for all markers of effector T(H) subtypes. These results suggest the
postulated normal counterparts of PTCL-NOS identified in 9 of the 10 cases
consist of T(H)1, T(H)2, TCM, and TFH.

PMID: 20093238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Nat Immunol. 2010 Feb;11(2):114-20. doi: 10.1038/ni.1837. Epub 2010 Jan 19.

Effectors and memories: Bcl-6 and Blimp-1 in T and B lymphocyte differentiation.

Crotty S(1), Johnston RJ, Schoenberger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, California, USA. shane@liai.org

Bcl-6 and Blimp-1 have recently been identified as key transcriptional regulators
of effector and memory differentiation in CD4(+) T cells and CD8(+) T cells.
Bcl-6 and Blimp-1 were previously known to be critical regulators of effector and
memory differentiation of B lymphocytes. The new findings unexpectedly point to
the Bcl-6 and Blimp-1 regulatory axis as a ubiquitous mechanism for controlling
effector and memory lymphocyte differentiation and function. Bcl-6 and Blimp-1
are antagonistic transcription factors and can function as a self-reinforcing
genetic switch for cell-fate decisions. However, their influences in different
lymphocytes are complex. Here we review and examine the commonalities and
differences in the functions of these transcription factors in CD4(+) follicular 
helper T(FH) lymphocytes, effector CD8(+) T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2864556
PMID: 20084069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 12;107(2):872-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912920107.
Epub 2009 Dec 22.

IL-21 imposes a type II EBV gene expression on type III and type I B cells by the
repression of C- and activation of LMP-1-promoter.

Kis LL(1), Salamon D, Persson EK, Nagy N, Scheeren FA, Spits H, Klein G, Klein E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with a variety of human tumors. Although
the EBV-infected normal B cells in vitro and the EBV-carrying B cell lymphomas in
immunodeficient patients express the full set of latent proteins (type III
latency), the majority of EBV-associated malignancies express the restricted type
I (EBNA-1 only) or type II (EBNA-1 and LMPs) viral program. The mechanisms
responsible for these different latent viral gene expression patterns are only
partially known. IL-21 is a potent B cell activator and plasma cell
differentiation-inducer cytokine produced by CD4(+) T cells. We studied its
effect on EBV-carrying B cells. In type I Burkitt lymphoma (BL) cell lines and in
the conditional lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) ER/EB2-5, IL-21 potently activated
STAT3 and induced the expression of LMP-1, but not EBNA-2. The IL-21-treated type
I Jijoye M13 BL line ceased to proliferate, and this was paralleled by the
induction of IRF4 and the down-regulation of BCL6 expression. In the type III
LCLs and BL lines, IL-21 repressed the C-promoter-derived and LMP-2A mRNAs,
whereas it up-regulated the expression of LMP-1 mRNAs. The IL-21-treated type III
cells underwent plasma cell differentiation with the induction of Blimp-1, and
high levels of Ig and Oct-2. IL-21 might be involved in the EBNA-2-independent
expression of LMP-1 in EBV-carrying type II cells. In light of the fact that
IL-21 is already in clinical trials for the treatment of multiple malignancies,
the in vivo modulation of EBV gene expression by IL-21 might have therapeutic
benefits for the EBV-carrying malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2818931
PMID: 20080768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 2;107(5):2177-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909797107. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Stromal genes discriminate preinvasive from invasive disease, predict outcome,
and highlight inflammatory pathways in digestive cancers.

Saadi A(1), Shannon NB, Lao-Sirieix P, O'Donovan M, Walker E, Clemons NJ,
Hardwick JS, Zhang C, Das M, Save V, Novelli M, Balkwill F, Fitzgerald RC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison Medical Research Council 
Research Centre, Cambridge CB22 0XZ, United Kingdom.

The stromal compartment is increasingly recognized to play a role in cancer.
However, its role in the transition from preinvasive to invasive disease is
unknown. Most gastrointestinal tumors have clearly defined premalignant stages,
and Barrett's esophagus (BE) is an ideal research model. Supervised clustering of
gene expression profiles from microdissected stroma identified a gene signature
that could distinguish between BE metaplasia, dysplasia, and esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). EAC patients overexpressing any of the five genes (TMEPAI, 
JMY, TSP1, FAPalpha, and BCL6) identified from this stromal signature had a
significantly poorer outcome. Gene ontology analysis identified a strong
inflammatory component in BE disease progression, and key pathways included
cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions and TGF-beta. Increased protein levels of
inflammatory-related genes significantly up-regulated in EAC compared with
preinvasive stages were confirmed in the stroma of independent samples, and in
vitro assays confirmed functional relevance of these genes. Gene set enrichment
analysis of external datasets demonstrated that the stromal signature was also
relevant in the preinvasive to invasive transition of the stomach, colon, and
pancreas. These data implicate inflammatory pathways in the genesis of
gastrointestinal tract cancers, which can affect prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2836667
PMID: 20080664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Hematol. 2010 Mar;85(3):218-9. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21612.

Prominent Dutcher body formation in a case of follicular lymphoma with BCL6 gene 
rearrangement and intact BCL2 gene.

Kulbacki E, Rehder C, Wang E.

PMID: 20069653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Neurooncol. 2010 Aug;99(1):95-101. doi: 10.1007/s11060-010-0112-1. Epub 2010
Jan 13.

Immunohistological profiling by B-cell differentiation status of primary central 
nervous system lymphoma treated by high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy.

Kinoshita M(1), Hashimoto N, Izumoto S, Okita Y, Kagawa N, Maruno M, Ohnishi T,
Arita N, Yoshimine T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Gradate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. m-kinoshita@nsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) remains a devastating disease
with poor prognosis, despite the improvement offered by methotrexate (MTX)-based 
chemotherapy. Several studies have attempted to identify biomarkers predictive of
prognosis, which are expected to be both clinically useful and biologically
important for understanding PCNSL. The present study attempts to classify human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-unrelated PCNSL patients treated with radiation
combined with rapid high-dose MTX chemotherapy according to B-cell
differentiation status, and retrospectively examines the prognostic impact.
Initial response to MTX was a strong predictor of favorable prognosis in terms of
both progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Thirteen out of
29 cases were CD10(-)/BCL-6(+)/MUM-1(+), being more frequent compared with
systemic peripheral nodal lymphoma. Although post-germinal-center
B-cell-originating PCNSLs (CD10(-)/BCL-6(-)/MUM-1(+)) showed a trend towards
better response to MTX and progression-free survival than did
germinal-center-related B-cell-originating PCNSLs (CD10(+) OR
CD10(-)/BCL-6(+)/MUM-1(+)), the difference was only marginal (P = 0.04
Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon, P = 0.17 log-rank). Our results imply that different
B-cell stages in PCNSL have significant relevance in terms of biological
behavior. However, clinical use as a prognostic marker requires further
investigation.

PMID: 20069343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mod Pathol. 2010 Apr;23(4):493-501. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.168. Epub 2010
Jan 8.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation as an
incidental finding and new clinical scenarios.

Loong F(1), Chan AC, Ho BC, Chau YP, Lee HY, Cheuk W, Yuen WK, Ng WS, Cheung HL, 
Chan JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
floong@pathology.hku.hk

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that develops in the setting of long-standing
chronic inflammation is typically associated with Epstein-Barr virus, and usually
presents as tumor mass involving body cavities, as in pyothorax-associated
lymphoma. It is listed as a distinct entity in the latest World Health
Organization lymphoma classification. We report four cases that were incidentally
discovered on histologic examination, one each in a splenic false cyst, a
long-standing hydrocele, an atrial myxoma, and metallic-implant wear debris.
Microscopic foci of atypical (neoplastic) large lymphoid cells were found within 
the contents of the cysts or curettage material, or within the stroma of the
atrial myxoma. Despite the diverse clinical scenarios, all cases showed a
homogeneous phenotype: positivity for B-lineage markers (CD20+, CD79a+, PAX5+),
non-germinal center immunophenotype (CD10-, BCL6-/+, MUM-1+), and positivity for 
Epstein-Barr virus with type III latency (LMP1+, EBNA2+). The last feature
supports the hypothesis that the lymphoma has arisen in a setting of 'local
immunodeficiency' as a result of long-standing chronic inflammation in an
enclosed space, a characteristic pathogenetic mechanism of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation. These cases therefore expand the
spectrum of this entity to include new clinical scenarios for the development of 
this lymphoma type.

PMID: 20062008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Feb 20;28(6):1017-24. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.24.1893. Epub 2010
Jan 4.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 {alpha} expression predicts superior survival in
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP.

Evens AM(1), Sehn LH, Farinha P, Nelson BP, Raji A, Lu Y, Brakman A, Parimi V,
Winter JN, Schumacker PT, Gascoyne RD, Gordon LI.

Author information: 
(1)DO, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 676 N St Clair St, Suite 850, Chicago, IL
60611, USA. a-evens@northwestern.edu

PURPOSE Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) controls the expression of genes in
response to hypoxia, as well as a wide range of other cellular processes. We
previously showed constitutive stabilization of HIF-1alpha in the majority of
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). To our knowledge, the
prognostic significance of HIF in lymphoma has never been investigated. PATIENTS 
AND METHODS We studied the immunohistochemical protein expression of HIF-1alpha
on tissue microarrays from 153 patients with DLBCL treated in sequential cohorts 
with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, oncovin, and prednisone (CHOP) or
rituximab-CHOP (R-CHOP) from 1999 to 2002. Results were correlated with patient
outcome. Results Median follow-up for all patients was 80 months. Among all
patients, HIF-1alpha was expressed in 62% of germinal center and 59% of
non-germinal center patients. With HIF-1alpha analyzed as a dependent variable,
there were no survival differences in CHOP-treated patients. In the R-CHOP group,
however, HIF-1alpha protein expression correlated with significantly improved
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Five-year PFS for
HIF-1alpha-positive patients was 71% v 43% for HIF-1alpha-negative patients (P = 
.0187), whereas 5-year OS was 75% and 54%, respectively (P = .025). In
multivariate analysis with International Prognostic Index criteria, HIF-1alpha
remained a significant predictor for PFS (P = .026) and OS (P = .043). Compared
with other biomarkers, HIF-1alpha correlated only with BCL6 (P = .004). In terms 
of gene expression, we found several common gene associations of HIF-1alpha and
the stromal-1 signature with genes predominantly involved in regulation of the
extracellular matrix (eg, BGN, COL1A2, COL5A1, and PLOD2). CONCLUSION The
expression of HIF-1alpha protein is an important independent favorable prognostic
factor for survival in patients with DLBCL treated with R-CHOP.

PMCID: PMC2834428
PMID: 20048181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Anticancer Res. 2009 Nov;29(11):4649-55.

BCL6-translocations affect the phenotype of follicular lymphomas only in the
absence of t(14;18)IgH/BCL2.

Gollub W(1), Stassek B, Huckhagel T, Bernd HW, Krokowski M, Merz H, Feller AC,
Thorns C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Clinic Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Luebeck,
Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538 Luebeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The translocation t(14;18)IgH/BCL2 is the molecular hallmark of
follicular lymphomas (FL). A subset of cases harbours translocations involving
the BCL6-gene locus. This study aimed to determine the frequency of BCL2- and
BCL6-translocations in FL and to identify morphological and immuno-histochemical 
features with respect to the presence of BCL2- and BCL6-translocations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fluorescence-in-situ-hybridisation (FISH) was used to
determine the BCL2- and BCL6-translocation status of 102 FL and these were
compared to morphological and immunohistochemical parameters.
RESULTS: Lymphomas with BCL6- and BCL2-translocations were very similar to
t(14;18)-positive lymphomas without BCL6-translocations. In contrast,
t(14;18)-negative lymphomas with BCL6-translocations were amongst others of
higher grade, less often CD10-positive, involved the bone marrow less frequently 
and did not infiltrate the lymph node capsule.
CONCLUSION: BCL2- and BCL6-translocations correlate with particular phenotypes of
follicular lymphomas. BCL6-translocations seem to affect the phenotype only when 
they are not accompanied by BCL2-translocations.

PMID: 20032416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Dermatology. 2010;220(2):176-9. doi: 10.1159/000269845. Epub 2009 Dec 23.

Disseminated cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia of 12 years' duration triggered by
vaccination.

Pham-Ledard A(1), Vergier B, Doutre MS, Beylot-Barry M.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital du Haut-Lévêque, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Bordeaux, Pessac, France.

Vaccine-induced cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia (CLH) is rare. Its natural
evolution is not well known, nor is its treatment. We report a case of B-cell CLH
with secondary dissemination that occurred following vaccination. The symptoms
lasted 12 years and were efficiently treated by thalidomide. A 17-year-old girl
presented CLH which had begun at the age of 8 at the site of hepatitis B
vaccination. The lesions progressively enlarged and disseminated far from the
injection sites. There was no spontaneous remission. Cyclins and
hydroxychloroquine were inefficient. Thalidomide treatment finally led to
complete remission. Aluminium hydroxide is used as adjuvant in the majority of
vaccinations. In this case, occurrence of lesions far from the injection site of 
the vaccine suggested that it was not the only cause and that CLH may occur in
other localizations after a vaccination. Furthermore, the diagnosis of CLH should
not be excluded in front of such a prolonged course, and we underline the
potential efficacy of thalidomide.

PMID: 20029164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Nat Med. 2010 Jan;16(1):123-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.2071. Epub 2009 Dec 20.

Generation of stable monoclonal antibody-producing B cell receptor-positive human
memory B cells by genetic programming.

Kwakkenbos MJ(1), Diehl SA, Yasuda E, Bakker AQ, van Geelen CM, Lukens MV, van
Bleek GM, Widjojoatmodjo MN, Bogers WM, Mei H, Radbruch A, Scheeren FA, Spits H, 
Beaumont T.

Author information: 
(1)AIMM Therapeutics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The B cell lymphoma-6 (Bcl-6) and Bcl-xL proteins are expressed in germinal
center B cells and enable them to endure the proliferative and mutagenic
environment of the germinal center. By introducing these genes into peripheral
blood memory B cells and culturing these cells with two factors produced by
follicular helper T cells, CD40 ligand (CD40L) and interleukin-21 (IL-21), we
convert them to highly proliferating, cell surface B cell receptor
(BCR)-positive, immunoglobulin-secreting B cells with features of germinal center
B cells, including expression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). We 
generated cloned lines of B cells specific for respiratory syncytial virus and
used these cells as a source of antibodies that effectively neutralized this
virus in vivo. This method provides a new tool to study B cell biology and signal
transduction through antigen-specific B cell receptors and for the rapid
generation of high-affinity human monoclonal antibodies.

PMCID: PMC2861345
PMID: 20023635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 15;4(12):e8173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008173.

Extracellular tumor-related mRNA in plasma of lymphoma patients and survival
implications.

Garcia V(1), Garcia JM, Silva J, Martin P, Peña C, Dominguez G, Diaz R, Herrera
M, Maximiano C, Sabin P, Rueda A, Cruz MA, Rodriguez J, Canales MA, Bonilla F,
Provencio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Puerta de Hierro University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.

BACKGROUND: We studied anomalous extracellular mRNAs in plasma from patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and their survival implications. mRNAs
studied have been reported in the literature as markers of poor (BCL2, CCND2,
MYC) and favorable outcome (LMO2, BCL6, FN1) in tumors. These markers were also
analyzed in lymphoma tissues to test possible associations with their presence in
plasma.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: mRNA from 42 plasma samples and 12 tumors from
patients with DLBCL was analyzed by real-time PCR. Samples post-treatment were
studied. The immunohistochemistry of BCL2 and BCL6 was defined. Presence of
circulating tumor cells was determined by analyzing the clonality of the
immunoglobulin heavy-chain genes by PCR. In DLBCL, MYC mRNA was associated with
short overall survival. mRNA targets with unfavorable outcome in tumors were
associated with characteristics indicative of poor prognosis, with partial
treatment response and with short progression-free survival in patients with
complete response. In patients with low IPI score, unfavorable mRNA targets were 
related to shorter overall survival, partial response, high LDH levels and death.
mRNA disappeared in post-treatment samples of patients with complete response,
and persisted in those with partial response or death. No associations were found
between circulating tumor cells and plasma mRNA. Absence of BCL6 protein in
tumors was associated with presence of unfavorable plasma mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Through a non-invasive procedure, tumor-derived mRNAs
can be obtained in plasma. mRNA detected in plasma did not proceed from
circulating tumor cells. In our study, unfavorable targets in plasma were
associated with poor prognosis in B-cell lymphomas, mainly MYC mRNA. Moreover,
the unfavorable targets in plasma could help us to classify patients with poor
outcome within the good prognosis group according to IPI.

PMCID: PMC2788245
PMID: 20016842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Neurooncol. 2010 Jul;98(3):341-8. doi: 10.1007/s11060-009-0078-z. Epub 2009 Dec
13.

Prognostic value of immunohistochemical profile and response to high-dose
methotrexate therapy in primary CNS lymphoma.

Momota H(1), Narita Y, Maeshima AM, Miyakita Y, Shinomiya A, Maruyama T, Muragaki
Y, Shibui S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University, Graduate School of Medicine,
65, Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. momota-nsu@umin.ac.jp

Several biomarkers have been identified as prognostic factors in primary central 
nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL). However, the correlation between the
histogenetic origin of PCNSL and the response to therapy is still unclear. To
elucidate the utility of immunophenotypic markers in predicting clinical
outcomes, we investigated 27 immunocompetent patients with PCNSL treated with
high-dose methotrexate therapy. Of the 27 patients, 25 received whole-brain
radiotherapy after high-dose methotrexate. Immunostaining for CD5, CD10, BCL-6,
and MUM-1 was used to determine the immunophenotypic profile of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma of PCNSL. We then evaluated whether immunophenotypic markers were
associated with the response to therapy or patients' survival. The response to
induction high-dose methotrexate therapy was determined by magnetic resonance
imaging after three courses of i.v. high-dose methotrexate. We categorized B-cell
lymphomas into three known subtypes: germinal center B-cell (GCB), activated-GCB,
and post-GCB subtypes according to immunohistochemical profile. All the
BCL-6-positive samples were co-positive for MUM-1 and therefore classified into
activated-GCB subtype. BCL-6 expression in this study was associated with poor
progression-free survival (P = 0.038). No immunophenotypic markers or subtypes
had a significant effect on the response to high-dose methotrexate therapy.
However, the response itself was a significant predictor for both
progression-free survival (P < 0.001) and overall survival (P = 0.003). Further
investigation is needed to assess BCL-6 as a potential prognostic factor in
PCNSL.

PMID: 20012911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Nat Med. 2009 Dec;15(12):1369-76. doi: 10.1038/nm.2059. Epub 2009 Nov 22.

A purine scaffold Hsp90 inhibitor destabilizes BCL-6 and has specific antitumor
activity in BCL-6-dependent B cell lymphomas.

Cerchietti LC(1), Lopes EC, Yang SN, Hatzi K, Bunting KL, Tsikitas LA, Mallik A, 
Robles AI, Walling J, Varticovski L, Shaknovich R, Bhalla KN, Chiosis G, Melnick 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell 
University, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Hematol. 2010 Apr;3(2):157-9.

We report that heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibitors selectively kill diffuse 
large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) that depend on the BCL-6 transcriptional
repressor. We found that endogenous Hsp90 interacts with BCL-6 in DLBCL cells and
can stabilize BCL-6 mRNA and protein. Hsp90 formed a complex with BCL-6 at its
target promoters, and Hsp90 inhibitors derepressed BCL-6 target genes. A stable
mutant of BCL-6 rescued DLBCL cells from Hsp90 inhibitor-induced apoptosis. BCL-6
and Hsp90 were almost invariantly coexpressed in the nuclei of primary DLBCL
cells, suggesting that their interaction is relevant in this disease. We examined
the pharmacokinetics, toxicity and efficacy of PU-H71, a recently developed
purine-derived Hsp90 inhibitor. PU-H71 preferentially accumulated in lymphomas
compared to normal tissues and selectively suppressed BCL-6-dependent DLBCLs in
vivo, inducing reactivation of key BCL-6 target genes and apoptosis. PU-H71 also 
induced cell death in primary human DLBCL specimens.

PMCID: PMC2805915
PMID: 19966776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Blood. 2010 Feb 4;115(5):1006-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-235408. Epub 2009
Nov 24.

Down syndrome acute lymphoblastic leukemia, a highly heterogeneous disease in
which aberrant expression of CRLF2 is associated with mutated JAK2: a report from
the International BFM Study Group.

Hertzberg L(1), Vendramini E, Ganmore I, Cazzaniga G, Schmitz M, Chalker J,
Shiloh R, Iacobucci I, Shochat C, Zeligson S, Cario G, Stanulla M, Strehl S,
Russell LJ, Harrison CJ, Bornhauser B, Yoda A, Rechavi G, Bercovich D, Borkhardt 
A, Kempski H, te Kronnie G, Bourquin JP, Domany E, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

We report gene expression and other analyses to elucidate the molecular
characteristics of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in children with Down
syndrome (DS). We find that by gene expression DS-ALL is a highly heterogeneous
disease not definable as a unique entity. Nevertheless, 62% (33/53) of the DS-ALL
samples analyzed were characterized by high expression of the type I cytokine
receptor CRLF2 caused by either immunoglobulin heavy locus (IgH@) translocations 
or by interstitial deletions creating chimeric transcripts P2RY8-CRLF2. In 3 of
these 33 patients, a novel activating somatic mutation, F232C in CRLF2, was
identified. Consistent with our previous research, mutations in R683 of JAK2 were
identified in 10 specimens (19% of the patients) and, interestingly, all 10 had
high CRLF2 expression. Cytokine receptor-like factor 2 (CRLF2) and mutated Janus 
kinase 2 (Jak2) cooperated in conferring cytokine-independent growth to BaF3
pro-B cells. Intriguingly, the gene expression signature of DS-ALL is enriched
with DNA damage and BCL6 responsive genes, suggesting the possibility of B-cell
lymphocytic genomic instability. Thus, DS confers increased risk for genetically 
highly diverse ALLs with frequent overexpression of CRLF2, associated with
activating mutations in the receptor itself or in JAK2. Our data also suggest
that the majority of DS children with ALL may benefit from therapy blocking the
CRLF2/JAK2 pathways.

PMID: 19965641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Blood. 2010 Feb 4;115(5):975-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227017. Epub 2009 Dec
3.

Integrated biochemical and computational approach identifies BCL6 direct target
genes controlling multiple pathways in normal germinal center B cells.

Basso K(1), Saito M, Sumazin P, Margolin AA, Wang K, Lim WK, Kitagawa Y,
Schneider C, Alvarez MJ, Califano A, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics and H. Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor required for mature B-cell germinal center
(GC) formation and implicated in lymphomagenesis. BCL6's physiologic function is 
only partially known because the complete set of its targets in GC B cells has
not been identified. To address this issue, we used an integrated
biochemical-computational-functional approach to identify BCL6 direct targets in 
normal GC B cells. This approach includes (1) identification of BCL6-bound
promoters by genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation, (2) inference of
transcriptional relationships by the use of a regulatory network reverse
engineering approach (ARACNe), and (3) validation of physiologic relevance of the
candidate targets down-regulated in GC B cells. Our approach demonstrated that a 
large set of promoters (> 4000) is physically bound by BCL6 but that only a
fraction of them is repressed in GC B cells. This set of 1207 targets identifies 
several cellular functions directly controlled by BCL6 during GC development,
including activation, survival, DNA-damage response, cell cycle arrest, cytokine 
signaling, Toll-like receptor signaling, and differentiation. These results
define a broad role of BCL6 in preventing centroblasts from responding to signals
leading to exit from the GC before they complete the phase of proliferative
expansion and of antibody affinity maturation.

PMCID: PMC2817639
PMID: 19965633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. World J Gastroenterol. 2009 Dec 7;15(45):5746-50.

Complete remission of gastric Burkitt's lymphoma after eradication of
Helicobacter pylori.

Baumgaertner I(1), Copie-Bergman C, Levy M, Haioun C, Charachon A, Baia M,
Sobhani I, Delchier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, AP-HP, Henri Mondor Hospital, Paris 12
University, Créteil, France. jean-charles.delchier@hmn.aphp.fr

Burkitt's lymphoma is a highly aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma, often presenting 
in extra-nodal sites. It generally has a poor spontaneous outcome and needs
aggressive treatment with systemic and intrathecal chemotherapy. Occurrence at
the gastric site is rare. We report the case of a 39-year old woman who presented
with a prominent ulcerated lesion of the antrum corresponding histologically to a
Burkitt's lymphoma associated with Helicobacter pylori (H pylori) infection.
Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated c-MYC gene
rearrangement in tumour cells without BCL2 or BCL6 gene translocations. Ulcer
healing and tumour regression with a complete histological response were obtained
8 wk after H pylori eradication. In spite of this complete remission, taking into
account the high risk of recurrence, the patient received systemic and
intrathecal chemotherapy. Two years later, the patient remained in complete
remission. This is the first report of a gastric Burkitt's lymphoma responding to
H pylori eradication. These findings raise the question of the potential role of 
H pylori in the pathogenesis of some gastric Burkitt's lymphomas, and show the
importance of searching for and eradicating the bacteria in combination with
conventional chemotherapy regimens.

PMCID: PMC2789231
PMID: 19960575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2010 Mar;18(2):185-9. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181c0692b.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma of cytotoxic T-cell phenotype containing a
large B-cell proliferation with an undersized B-cell clonal product.

Liao YL(1), Chang ST, Kuo SY, Lin SH, Chen CK, Chang KM, Chuang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is a nodal peripheral T-cell lymphoma
considered to be derived from CD4 follicular helper T cells. It is characterized 
by the proliferation of arborizing vessels, hyperplastic follicular dendritic
cells, and a polymorphous lymphoid infiltrate including large B immunoblasts,
which could be polyclonal, oligoclonal, or monoclonal. The polymerase chain
reaction-based clonality study of lymphoproliferations is increasingly popular in
the diagnostic workup. With the commercially available Biomed-2 protocols,
lymphoproliferations with amplicons in the expected size ranges are considered
clonal, whereas clonal products outside the expected ranges are extremely rare.
We presented the case of a 60-year-old male patient with angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma, in which the neoplastic T cells expressed CD8, bcl-6, and
programmed death-1. Furthermore, there was a proliferation of large B cells in
this tumor. The results of T-cell receptor gene rearrangement study using the
Biomed-2 protocols showed clonal rearrangement with amplicons falling within the 
expected size ranges. Interestingly, the size of the amplicons detected by the
Biomed-2 immunoglobulin heavy chain gene (IgH) rearrangement using FR2/JH primers
was around 240 bp, slightly smaller than the expected size ranges. Through
cloning, sequencing, and BLAST searches, we confirmed that the FR2/JH amplicon
was derived from the IgH rearrangement with a deletion of a short segment. Our
case illustrates that polymerase chain reaction amplicons outside the expected
size ranges may still be clonal products.

PMID: 19956067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Int Immunol. 2010 Jan;22(1):7-12. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp112. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

IL-21 and T follicular helper cells.

Spolski R(1), Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1674, USA.

Upon encounter with antigen, CD4(+) T cells differentiate into effector T(h)
subsets with distinctive functions that are related to their unique cytokine
profiles and anatomical locations. One of the most important T(h) functions is to
provide signals to developing B cells that induce specific and appropriate
antibody responses. The major CD4(+) T cell subset that helps B cells is the T
follicular helper (T(FH)) cell, whose expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR5 
[chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 5] serves to localize this cell to developing
germinal centers (GCs) where it provides instructive signals leading to Ig class 
switching and somatic mutation. T(FH) cells produce high levels of IL-21, a
cytokine that is critical for GC formation and also for the generation of T(FH)
cells. Although T(FH) cells have been found to produce cytokines characteristic
of other T(h) subsets, they represent a distinct lineage whose development is
driven by the transcription factor B-cell CLL lymphoma-6 (BCL6). Consistent with 
their critical role in the generation of antibody responses, dysregulated T(FH)
function has been associated with the development of systemic autoimmunity. Here,
we review the role of IL-21 in the regulation of normal T(FH) development and
function as well as in progression of autoimmune responses.

PMCID: PMC2795365
PMID: 19933709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2009 Dec;29(6):293-8. doi:
10.3109/10799890903241824.

The FoxO/Bcl-6/cyclin D2 pathway mediates metabolic and growth factor stimulation
of proliferation in Min6 pancreatic beta-cells.

Glauser DA(1), Schlegel W.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Lack of nutrients and growth factors activates FoxO transcription factors in
pancreatic beta-cells, whereas PI3K/Akt-dependent inactivation of FoxO favors
proliferation. To address the link between FoxO and cell cycle control, we
deprived Min6 cells of serum and glucose which activated FoxO and inhibited
proliferation. Concomitantly, expression of the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6
was stimulated, whereas cyclin D2 was lowered. Gain of function approaches
indicated that FoxO activation was sufficient to activate bcl-6 transcription,
while Bcl-6 repressed cyclin D2 transcription and proliferation. Thus, in
pancreatic beta-cells, the FoxO/Bcl6/cyclin D2 pathway connects nutrient and
growth factor status to cell cycle control, and may therefore be considered for
its therapeutic potential in diabetes.

PMID: 19929250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Neuropathology. 2010 Jun;30(3):232-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2009.01074.x.
Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Primary central nervous system lymphoma: immunohistochemical profile and
prognostic significance.

Raoux D(1), Duband S, Forest F, Trombert B, Chambonnière ML, Dumollard JM,
Khaddage A, Gentil-Perret A, Péoc'h M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre, Hospitalier Universitaire de Saint-Etienne,
Saint Etienne 42055 Cedex 2, France.

Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is a rare subtype of non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma (NHL) with extranodal location affecting only the CNS, meninges and eye,
without visceral or lymph node involvement. Its incidence has increased sharply
over the past three decades, especially in immunocompetent subjects. Most PCNSL
cases are diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). However, it differs from nodal
DLBCL in that it has a worse prognosis. DLBCLs are a heterogeneous entity and
according to new genomic discoveries, classifications into prognostic subgroups
have been embarked upon. Two prognostic algorithms were then prepared using a
panel of immunohistochemical markers (CD10, Bcl6, MUM1/IRF-4, and Bcl2), thus
categorizing DLBCL into two subgroups, GCB (germinal centre B-cell-like) or
non-GCB, and into Group 1 or Group 2. Our goal is to apply both of these two
sub-classifications to 39 PCNSLs, in order to assess their usefulness and
prognostic relevance. 74.3% of our PCNSLs were of a non-GCB phenotype,
corresponding to an activated postgerminal origin. They were evenly distributed
across G1 and G2. Two- and 5-year overall survival rates were 34.8% and 19.6%,
respectively. Younger age (<65) and a therapeutic combination of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy significantly improved our patients' survival rates. The other
clinical or biological markers tested had no prognostic impact. The two
classifications did not reveal any significant survival difference. The recent
discovery of a specific "transcriptional signature" of PCNSL, marking them out of
DLBCL could account for the irrelevance of such prognostic classifications to
PCNSL.

PMID: 19925562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Exp Med. 2009 Nov 23;206(12):2659-69. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091087. Epub 2009 Nov 
16.

Molecular footprints of a germinal center derivation of human IgM+(IgD+)CD27+ B
cells and the dynamics of memory B cell generation.

Seifert M(1), Küppers R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
Medical School, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The origin of IgM(+)CD27(+) B lymphocytes with mutated IgV genes, which account
for approximately 20% of human peripheral blood (PB) B cells, is controversially 
discussed. A generation in a primary diversification pathway, in T
cell-independent immune responses, or in T cell-dependent germinal center (GC)
reactions has been proposed. We show here that IgM(+)IgD(+)CD27(+) and
IgM(+)IgD(-/low)CD27(+) B cell subsets carry, like class-switched memory B cells,
mutations in the Bcl6 gene as a genetic trait of a GC experience. Moreover, the
identification of PB IgM(+)IgD(+)CD27(+) B cells clonally related to GC-derived
IgG(+) memory B cells with shared and distinct IgV gene mutations demonstrates
the GC origin also of the former subset. These findings provide genetic evidence 
for a GC derivation of somatically mutated IgM(+) B cells and indicate that adult
humans harbor a large population of IgM(+)IgD(+) post-GC memory B cells.
Furthermore, the analysis revealed that a highly diverse and often very large
population of memory B cells is generated from a given GC B cell clone, and that 
(preferentially IgM) memory B cells are generated already early in the GC
reaction. This provides novel insights into the dynamics of GC reactions and the 
generation of a memory B cell repertoire.

PMCID: PMC2806629
PMID: 19917772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2009 Nov;136(11):791-4. doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2009.02.005.
Epub 2009 Jun 26.

[Cutaneous large B-cell leg-type lymphoma occurring on a leg burn].

[Article in French]

Meziane M(1), Hesse S, Chetaille B, Bien-Aimée A, Grob JJ, Richard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Service de dermatologie, CHU de La Timone, 264, rue Saint-Pierre, 13385
Marseille cedex 5, France. mariame.meziane@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas form a heterogeneous group of
lymphoid proliferations found on the skin. We report a case of primary leg-type
cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma occurring on the site a previous leg burn. A few 
rare cases of cutaneous lymphoma forming on burn scars have been described, but
these concern primary cutaneous lymphomas of the T-cell phenotype.
CASE REPORT: An 85-year-old man with a history of a burn to the left leg 17 years
ago, previously treated with several skin grafts, presented numerous ulcerative
budding lesions on the scar area. Histological examination of the skin biopsy
revealed the existence in the skin ulcers of atypical large lymphoid cells having
an immunoblastic or centroblastic morphology and shown by immunohistochemistry to
be of the B-cell phenotype, thereby evoking a diagnosis of large B-cell lymphoma.
The lymphoma cells were positive for MUM1/IRF4 and BCL2, and more weakly for
BCL6, but negative for CD10. The staging examination revealed only cortical lysis
of the left tibia. Temporary initial regression was achieved by polychemotherapy 
comprising cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisone in combination with
rituximab.
DISCUSSION: This case is novel in that it involves primary large B-cell lymphoma,
leg type, occurring on burn scar tissue. Venous insufficiency and lymphatic
stasis have already been incriminated in the genesis of this type of lymphoma;
the prior injury and resulting immune dysregulation at the burn site may have
also contributed to the development of this neoplasia.

PMID: 19917431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Am J Pathol. 2009 Dec;175(6):2609-17. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.090542. Epub 2009 
Nov 5.

Expression of the brain transcription factor OTX1 occurs in a subset of normal
germinal-center B cells and in aggressive Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma.

Omodei D(1), Acampora D, Russo F, De Filippi R, Severino V, Di Francia R, Frigeri
F, Mancuso P, De Chiara A, Pinto A, Casola S, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Ingegneria Genetica (CEINGE) Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.

The roles in brain development. Previous studies have shown the association
between OTX2 and OTX1 with anaplastic and desmoplastic medulloblastomas,
respectively. Here, we investigated OTX1 and OTX2 expression in Non-Hodgkin
Lymphoma (NHL) and multiple myeloma. A combination of semiquantitative RT-PCR,
Western blot, and immunohistochemical analyses was used to measure OTX1 and OTX2 
levels in normal lymphoid tissues and in 184 tumor specimens representative of
various forms of NHL and multiple myeloma. OTX1 expression was activated in 94%
of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, in all Burkitt lymphomas, and in 90% of
high-grade follicular lymphomas. OTX1 was undetectable in precursor-B
lymphoblastic lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and in most marginal zone
and mantle cell lymphomas and multiple myeloma. OTX2 was undetectable in all
analyzed malignancies. Analysis of OTX1 expression in normal lymphoid tissues
identified a subset of resting germinal center (GC) B cells lacking PAX5 and BCL6
and expressing cytoplasmic IgG and syndecan. About 50% of OTX1(+) GC B cells
co-expressed CD10 and CD20. This study identifies OTX1 as a molecular marker for 
high-grade GC-derived NHL and suggests an involvement of this transcription
factor in B-cell lymphomagenesis. Furthermore, OTX1 expression in a subset of
normal GC B cells carrying plasma cell markers suggests its possible contribution
to terminal B-cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2789631
PMID: 19893048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncogene. 2010 Feb 11;29(6):888-97. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.377. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

c-Myc overexpression promotes a germinal center-like program in Burkitt's
lymphoma.

Scheller H(1), Tobollik S, Kutzera A, Eder M, Unterlehberg J, Pfeil I, Jungnickel
B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German
Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.

The germinal center (GC) reaction has a pivotal function in human B-cell
lymphomagenesis. Genetic aberrations occurring during somatic hypermutation and
class switch recombination deregulate key factors controlling B-cell physiology
and proliferation. Several human lymphoma entities are characterized by a
constitutive GC phenotype and ongoing somatic hypermutation, but the molecular
basis for this phenomenon is only partly understood. We have investigated the
reasons for a constitutive GC-like program in Burkitt's lymphoma cells. Here,
overexpression of c-Myc leads to a centroblast phenotype, promotes high
constitutive expression of the key GC factors Bcl-6, E2A and activation-induced
cytidine deaminase and contributes to proliferation and somatic hypermutation.
Our findings elucidate how the activity of a pivotal transcription factor may
freeze B-cell lymphoma cells in a constitutive GC-like state that is even
maintained at an extrafollicular location.

PMID: 19881537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Haematologica. 2009 Nov;94(11):1569-80. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.008862.

Loss of HLA-DR expression and immunoblastic morphology predict adverse outcome in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma - analyses of cases from two prospective randomized
clinical trials.

Bernd HW(1), Ziepert M, Thorns C, Klapper W, Wacker HH, Hummel M, Stein H,
Hansmann ML, Ott G, Rosenwald A, Müller-Hermelink HK, Barth TF, Möller P,
Cogliatti SB, Pfreundschuh M, Schmitz N, Trümper L, Höller S, Löffler M, Feller
AC; German High Grade Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Study Group (DSHNHL).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus
Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160 D-23538 Lübeck, Germany.
bernd@patho.uni-lue-beck.de

BACKGROUND: Research on prognostically relevant immunohistochemical markers in
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas has mostly been performed on retrospectively
collected clinical data. This is also true for immunohistochemical classifiers
that are thought to reflect the cell-of-origin subclassification of gene
expression studies. In order to obtain deeper insight into the heterogeneous
prognosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and to validate a previously
published immunohistochemical classifier, we analyzed data from a large set of
cases from prospective clinical trials with long-term follow-up.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed morphological and extensive immunohistochemical 
analyses in 414 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma from two prospective
randomized clinical trials (NHL-B1/B2, Germany). Classification into germinal
center and non-germinal center subtypes of B-cell lymphoma was based on the
expression pattern of CD10, BCL6, and IRF4. Multivariate analyses were performed 
adjusting for the factors in the International Prognostic Index.
RESULTS: Analyzing 20 different epitopes on tissue microarrays, expression of
HLA-DR, presence of CD23(+) follicular dendritic cell meshworks, and monotypic
light chain expression emerged as International Prognostic Index-independent
markers of superior overall survival. Immunoblastic morphology was found to be
related to poor event-free survival. The non-germinal center subtype, according
to the three-epitope classifier (CD10, BCL6, and IRF4) did not have prognostic
relevance when adjusted for International Prognostic Index factors (relative
risk=1.2, p=0.328 for overall survival; and relative risk=1.1, p=0.644 for
event-free survival).
CONCLUSIONS: The previously reported International Prognostic Index-independent
prognostic value of stratification into germinal center/non-germinal center
B-cell lymphoma using the expression pattern of CD10, BCL6, and IRF4 was not
reproducible in our series. However, other markers and the morphological subtype 
appear to be of prognostic value.

PMCID: PMC2770968
PMID: 19880780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009 Jul;132(1):39-49. doi: 10.1309/AJCPZQ1GXBBNG8OG.

Immunoarchitectural patterns in nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma: a study of
51 cases.

Salama ME(1), Lossos IS, Warnke RA, Natkunam Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Nodal marginal zone lymphoma (NMZL) represents a rare and heterogeneous group
that lacks markers specific for the diagnosis. We evaluated morphologic and
immunoarchitectural features of 51 NMZLs, and the following immunostains were
performed: CD20, CD21, CD23, CD5, CD3, CD43, CD10, Ki-67, BCL1, BCL2, BCL6, HGAL,
and LMO2. Four immunoarchitectural patterns were evident: diffuse (38 [75%]),
well-formed nodular/follicular (5 [10%]), interfollicular (7 [14%]), and
perifollicular (1 [2%]). Additional features included a monocytoid component (36 
[71%]), admixed large cells (20 [39%]), plasma cells (24 [47%]),
compartmentalizing stromal sclerosis (13 [25%]), and prominent blood vessel
sclerosis (10 [20%]). CD21 highlighted disrupted follicular dendritic cell
meshwork in 35 (71%) of 49 cases, and CD43 coexpression was present in 10 (24%)
of 42 cases. A panel of germinal center-associated markers was helpful in
eliminating cases of diffuse follicle center lymphoma. Our results highlight the 
histologic and immunoarchitectural spectrum of NMZL and the usefulness of
immunohistochemical analysis for CD43, CD23, CD21, BCL6, HGAL, and LMO2 in the
diagnosis of NMZL.

PMCID: PMC2894708
PMID: 19864232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Nov;141(5):559-63. doi:
10.1016/j.otohns.2009.08.022.

Pepsin as a causal agent of inflammation during nonacidic reflux.

Samuels TL(1), Johnston N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Sciences, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the contribution of pepsin to inflammation attributed
to nonacidic gastric reflux via analysis of inflammatory cytokine and cytokine
receptor gene expression in pepsin-treated human hypopharyngeal epithelial cells 
in vitro.
STUDY DESIGN: Translational research.
SETTING: This study was performed in an academic research laboratory.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Human hypopharyngeal epithelial cells were incubated with
or without pepsin (0.1 mg/mL) at pH 7.4, 37 degrees C, overnight. Expression of
84 inflammatory cytokines and cytokine receptors was analyzed via RT(2) qPCR
array.
RESULTS: Expression of a number of inflammatory cytokines and receptors was
altered in human hypopharyngeal epithelial cells following overnight treatment
with pepsin at neutral pH. Greater than 1.5-fold change in gene expression was
detected for CCL20, CCL26, IL8, IL1F10, IL1A, IL5, BCL6, CCR6, and CXCL14 (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Exposure of hypopharyngeal cells to pepsin in a nonacidic environment
induces the expression of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and receptors,
including those known to be involved in inflammation of esophageal epithelium in 
response to reflux and which contribute to the pathophysiology of reflux
esophagitis. These data indicate that refluxed pepsin may contribute to laryngeal
inflammation associated with nonacidic gastric reflux, including that experienced
by patients despite maximal acid suppression therapy.

PMID: 19861190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Blood. 2009 Dec 17;114(26):5315-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-02-204362. Epub 2009 
Oct 23.

BCL6 modulates tonic BCR signaling in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas by
repressing the SYK phosphatase, PTPROt.

Juszczynski P(1), Chen L, O'Donnell E, Polo JM, Ranuncolo SM, Dalla-Favera R,
Melnick A, Shipp MA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tonic B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is a key survival pathway during normal
B-cell ontogenesis and in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). We
previously demonstrated that BCR-dependent DLBCL cell lines and primary tumors
underwent apoptosis after treatment with an ATP-competitive inhibitor of the
BCR-associated spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK). These "BCR-type" tumors also have
more abundant expression of the transcriptional repressor, BCL6, and increased
sensitivity to BCL6 inhibition. Herein, we evaluated potential connections
between BCL6-mediated transcriptional repression and SYK-dependent BCR signaling.
In transcriptionally profiled normal B-cell subsets (naive, germinal center, and 
memory B cells) and in primary DLBCLs, there were reciprocal patterns of
expression of BCL6 and the SYK tyrosine phosphatase PTPROt. BCL6 repressed PTPROt
transcription via a direct interaction with functional BCL6 binding sites in the 
PTPROt promoter. Enforced expression of BCL6 in normal naive B cells and
RNAi-mediated depletion of BCL6 in germinal center B cells directly modulated
PTPROt expression. In "BCR-type" DLBCLs, BCL6 depletion increased PTPROt
expression and decreased phosphorylation of SYK and the downstream adaptor
protein BLNK. Because BCL6 augments BCR signaling and BCL6 and SYK are both
promising therapeutic targets in many DLBCLs, combined inhibition of these
functionally related pathways warrants further study.

PMCID: PMC2796136
PMID: 19855081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Blood. 2009 Dec 10;114(25):5173-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-235960.

An in vitro model of differentiation of memory B cells into plasmablasts and
plasma cells including detailed phenotypic and molecular characterization.

Jourdan M(1), Caraux A, De Vos J, Fiol G, Larroque M, Cognot C, Bret C, Duperray 
C, Hose D, Klein B.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U847, Montpellier, France.

Human plasma cells (PCs) and their precursors play an essential role in humoral
immune response but are rare and difficult to harvest. We report the generation
of human syndecan-1(+) and immunoglobulin secreting PCs starting from memory B
cells in a 3-step and 10-day (D) culture, including a 6-fold cell amplification. 
We report the detailed phenotypic and Affymetrix gene expression profiles of
these in vitro PCs as well as of intermediate cells (activated B cells and
plasmablasts) compared with memory B cells and bone marrow PCs, which is
accessible through an open web ATLAS (http://amazonia.transcriptome.eu/). We show
this B cell-to-PC differentiation to involve IRF4 and AICDA expressions in D4
activated B cells, decrease of PAX5 and BCL6 expressions, and increase in PRDM1
and XBP1 expressions in D7 plasmablasts and D10 PCs. It involves down-regulation 
of genes controlled by Pax5 and induction of genes controlled by Blimp-1 and XBP1
(unfold protein response). The detailed phenotype of D10 PCs resembles that of
peripheral blood PCs detected after immunization of healthy donors. This in vitro
model will facilitate further studies in PC biology. It will likewise be helpful 
to study PC dyscrasias, including multiple myeloma.

PMCID: PMC2834398
PMID: 19846886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jan;23(1):71-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.146. Epub 2009 Oct
16.

Follicular lymphomas with plasmacytic differentiation include two subtypes.

Gradowski JF(1), Jaffe ES, Warnke RA, Pittaluga S, Surti U, Gole LA, Swerdlow SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Follicular lymphomas with plasmacytic differentiation were described more than
two decades ago. However, the possibility that some of these reported cases are
marginal zone lymphomas or composite lymphomas must be considered. In addition,
it is also uncertain whether follicular lymphomas with plasmacytic
differentiation have any unique cytogenetic or other features. Therefore,
fluorescence immunophenotypic and interphase cytogenetic analysis of 14
well-characterized follicular lymphomas with plasmacytic differentiation was
performed using a CD138 antibody to identify the plasma cells and with BCL2,
BCL6, IGH@ and MALT1 break-apart probes and a chromosome 12 centromeric probe.
CD10 was expressed in 12/14 cases, BCL6 in 12/12 cases and BCL2 in 12/14 cases.
At least one cytogenetic abnormality was identified in 12/14 cases. The same
abnormality was present in both the plasmacytic (CD138+) and non-plasmacytic
(CD138-) component in all 10 evaluable cases. BCL2 rearrangements were present in
seven cases (5 IGH@ rearranged, 1 IGH@-not rearranged, 1 IGH@-not evaluable),
BCL6 rearrangement in two (1 also with BCL2/IGH@ rearrangement), +12 in 1, +MALT1
without +18 in 1, IGH@ rearrangement without other abnormalities in 1 and IGH@
rearranged or partially deleted in 1 case. No cases showed +BCL6 (3q27) or a
MALT1 rearrangement. All six cases with an isolated BCL2 rearrangement had
predominantly interfollicular plasmacytic cells whereas, 6/7 cases without the
translocation had concentrations of intrafollicular or perifollicular plasmacytic
cells (P<0.005), as did the case with BCL2 and BCL6 translocations. These results
support the existence of bona fide follicular lymphomas with plasmacytic
differentiation and support the clonal relationship of the neoplastic lymphoid
and plasma cells in at least most of these cases. The differential distribution
of the plasma cells, specifically in relation to the presence or absence of an
isolated BCL2 rearrangement suggests that the latter cases may be distinctive,
sharing some features with marginal zone lymphomas.

PMID: 19838161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2010 Mar;18(2):103-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181bb9edf.

BCL6, MUM1, and CD10 expression in mantle cell lymphoma.

Gualco G(1), Weiss LM, Harrington WJ Jr, Bacchi CE.

Author information: 
(1)Consultoria em Patologia, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) characteristically express CD20, CD5, and cyclin-D1,
carries the translocation t(11;14) (q13;q32) and typically has no expression of
germinal center cell markers. So-called aberrant phenotypes such as CD5 negative 
and cyclin-D1-negative MCL have been described. Also few cases with CD10 and/or
BCL-6 protein expression have been reported. We analyzed 127 MCL looking for the 
frequency of aberrant immunophenotype, CD10, BCL-6, and MUM1 expression. All
cases were CD20 and cyclin-D1 positive, 96% expressed CD5, and 98% showed the
t(11;14). BCL-6 expression was observed in 12% of the cases and MUM1 in 35%. No
one case showed CD10 positivity in 30% or more neoplastic cells. Only 3 cases
showed 10% to 20% of tumoral cells positive for CD10. MUM1 expression was
observed in 67% of the BCL-6 positive cases. Thirty-two percent of the cases
showed a MUM1+/BCL-6-/CD10- phenotype and 56% had a triple-negative-pattern.
Aberrant phenotype is infrequent but not rare, and does not rule out a diagnosis 
of MCL in an otherwise typical case.

PMCID: PMC2828511
PMID: 19826251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Jan 15;44(1):55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.09.002.
Epub 2009 Oct 9.

Clinical characteristics and prognostic analysis of Chinese patients with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Ke X(1), Wang J, Gao Z, Zhao L, Li M, Jing H, Wang J, Zhao W, Gilbert H, Yang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Lymphoma Research Center, Peking University Third
Hospital, Beijing 100191, PR China. xiaoyank@yahoo.com

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common type of lymphoma in
adults. As it is a highly heterogenous disease, many studies have focused on
finding useful prognostic factors to help guide therapy. In this report, we
examine several biological markers in 83 patients with DLBCL enrolled in our
hospital, including cell origin, serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, and
international prognostic index (IPI), in order to find the best combination of
prognostic factors. We also examined whether DLBCL has a significant geographic
difference, since several studies have suggested that the prevalence and
potential etiological factors of lymphomas in China may be different from those
in other countries. Our results demonstrate that: (1) patients in China have
higher extranodal tissue involvement and different extranodal organ distribution 
than patients reported from other countries; (2) Chinese patients have higher
rates of germinal center (GC) cell origin; and (3) among nine prognostic
variables, lower IPI scores, GC cell origin determined by immunohistochemical
staining, and no more than 1.5 times of normal levels of LDH are statistically
significant good prognostic factors in Chinese patients with DLBCL, whereas age
at the time of diagnosis, clinical stage, beta(2)-microglobulin levels,
extranodal tissue involvement, and expression levels of Bcl-6 protein were not
useful in determining prognosis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19819170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Dec;33(12):1815-22. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181bb9a18.

Nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphomas in children and adolescents:
immunohistochemical expression patterns and c-MYC translocation in relation to
clinical outcome.

Gualco G(1), Weiss LM, Harrington WJ Jr, Bacchi CE.

Author information: 
(1)Consultoria em Patologia, Botucatu, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a very infrequent neoplasm in the
pediatric age group; therefore there are very few studies on the immunophenotype 
or genetics of these cases. We studied a series of 16 patients with nodal DLBCL
occurring in patients between 10 and 18 years of age. The cases were classified
according to the 2008 World Health Organization classification criteria, with
application of immunohistochemistry for the detection of CD10, BCL-6, and MUM1
proteins to divide the lymphomas into germinal center and nongerminal center
types. In addition, TCL1, BCL-2 expression, and the Ki-67 proliferation index
were evaluated by immunohistochemistry, and c-MYC and BCL2 translocations were
evaluated by fluorescence in situ hybridization. All these parameters were
correlated with clinical features and outcome. Our study revealed that
centroblastic morphology and the germinal center type of DLBCL are more prevalent
in these young patients (63%), with 37% containing a c-MYC translocation. Only 1 
case showed a BCL2 translocation, reflecting a double-hit case with features
intermediate between DLBCL and Burkitt lymphoma. We found a higher frequency of
BCL-2 expression than previously reported, with no direct influence on the
outcome of the disease in univariate or multivariate analysis. The expression of 
TCL1 has not been specifically studied in nodal pediatric DLBCL before; we found 
a 31% incidence of TCL1 expression. MUM1 expression was observed in 44% of the
cases and these positive cases showed a significant negative impact on clinical
outcome. TCL1 is directly and significantly associated with the presence of c-MYC
and a high proliferative index. The germinal center and nongerminal center
subtypes showed significant differences for both overall survival and
disease-free interval. c-MYC translocation was found in 37% of patients, and had 
a favorable impact on clinical outcome. We conclude that nodal pediatric and
adolescent DLBCL are mainly of the germinal center type, with a generally good
outcome despite the frequent expression of BCL-2 and the presence of c-MYC
translocation. TCL1 expression seems to be associated with a good clinical
outcome, whereas MUM1 expression predicts a poor clinical outcome.

PMCID: PMC2788112
PMID: 19816150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Pathobiology. 2009;76(5):235-42. doi: 10.1159/000228899. Epub 2009 Oct 2.

BCL-6 oncoprotein in breast cancer: loss of expression in disease progression.

Pinto AE(1), André S, Silva G, Vieira S, Santos AC, Dias S, Soares J.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa,
E.P.E., Lisboa, Portugal. aepinto@ipolisboa.min-saude.pt

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the biological role of BCL-6 oncoprotein in breast
cancer disease progression (recurrence and metastasis).
METHODS: The series consisted of 93 consecutive female patients with primary
breast cancer and median follow-up of 10 years. BCL-6 expression was assessed in 
vivo by immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR. Breast cancer cell lines and some
metastasis-related genes (CXCR4, Itgbeta-3 and FLT-1) were also analysed by
molecular techniques. Prognostic evaluation was performed by fitting a
multivariate Cox regression model.
RESULTS: BCL-6 immunoexpression was positive in 22 (23.7%) tumours and negative
in 71 (76.3%). All axillary lymph node metastases of 47 node-positive patients
were negative, including 12 cases showing BCL-6-positive primary tumours.
Likewise, in 9 recurrence cases, BCL-6 expression was similar or decreased
compared with primary tumours. No correlation between immunoexpression and gene
expression of BCL-6 was observed. BCL-6 was significantly reduced both in derived
metastases of a breast cancer cell line (M435) and when the latter was treated
with a demethylation agent (5-azacytidine). However, BCL-6-transfected breast
cancer cell lines expressed significantly higher levels of CXCR4, Itgbeta-3 and
FLT-1. Co-expression of the 4 genes was found in 4 of 17 tumours evaluated, but
lacking prognostic significance. BCL-6 oncoprotein revealed no significant
influence on outcome.
CONCLUSION: The results strongly suggest the loss of BCL-6 expression in breast
cancer progression, which might be related with methylation status alterations of
still unknown partner gene(s).

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19816083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):96-101. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.007203. Epub
2009 Oct 1.

Correlations between BCL6 rearrangement and outcome in patients with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma treated with CHOP or R-CHOP.

Shustik J(1), Han G, Farinha P, Johnson NA, Ben Neriah S, Connors JM, Sehn LH,
Horsman DE, Gascoyne RD, Steidl C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Laboratory Medicine, BC Cancer Agency,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

BACKGROUND: BCL6 gene rearrangement is the most frequent chromosomal abnormality 
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, a malignancy characterized by genetic
heterogeneity and wide variability in clinical outcome. The prognostic
significance of BCL6 rearrangement has not been evaluated in the context of
rituximab therapy for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. We analyzed the effect of
the BCL6 rearrangement on survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
treated with CHOP and CHOP plus rituximab (R-CHOP).
DESIGN AND METHODS: BCL6 rearrangement status was analyzed by fluorescence in
situ hybridization with break-apart probes in 164 patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma treated with CHOP (n=65) or R-CHOP (n=99). Cell-of-origin
immunophenotype including BCL6 protein expression were determined by
immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray.
RESULTS: BCL6 rearrangement was detected in 19.5% of cases. The presence of the
gene rearrangement was associated with a non-germinal center B-cell
immunophenotype (P=0.006), and showed no correlation with BCL6 protein
expression. A trend toward inferior overall survival was observed in association 
with the BCL6 rearrangement among patients treated with R-CHOP (P=0.08), but not 
among patients treated with CHOP (P=0.64). However, BCL6 rearrangement also
correlated with a high International Prognostic Index score (P=0.02), and did not
demonstrate independent prognostic value by multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of rituximab may have altered the prognostic impact
of BCL6 gene rearrangement in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
However, prospective analysis within large randomized clinical trials will be
needed to clarify the prognostic significance of this biomarker in the rituximab 
era.

PMCID: PMC2805749
PMID: 19797725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;23(11):1914-26. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0242. Epub 2009 Oct
1.

Male-specific hepatic Bcl6: growth hormone-induced block of transcription
elongation in females and binding to target genes inversely coordinated with
STAT5.

Meyer RD(1), Laz EV, Su T, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The transcriptional repressor Bcl6 is a male-specific rat liver gene product and 
one of 24 early GH-response genes encoding DNA-binding proteins. Presently, the
sex specificity of Bcl6 was shown to emerge at puberty, when hepatic Bcl6 mRNA
was induced in males and repressed in females by the female plasma GH profile.
Hepatic Bcl6 mRNA was increased to near-normal male levels in hypophysectomized
females and was extinguished in intact males given a continuous GH infusion
(female-like GH pattern). Bcl6 was also repressed in adult male
somatostatin-deficient mice, where plasma GH profiles are female like. Hepatic
Bcl6 RNA was rapidly down-regulated by GH pulse treatment, both in
hypophysectomized male rats and in primary rat hepatocytes. Bcl6 was
substantially induced in female mice deficient in hepatic signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)5a/STAT5b, suggesting that these STAT
transcriptional mediators of GH signaling repress Bcl6. Indeed, STAT5 was bound
to Bcl6 STAT5-binding region-B, previously associated with Bcl6 repression, in
both male and female liver chromatin. STAT5 also bound to Bcl6 region-A in male
chromatin but only during a plasma GH pulse. Analysis of primary transcripts
(heterogeneous nuclear RNA) across the Bcl6 gene revealed a novel mechanism of
GH-dependent sex specificity, with two apparent blocks in Bcl6 transcription
elongation seen in female liver and in continuous GH-treated male liver, one
early in intron 4 and one in exon 5, which together reduced transcription beyond 
exon 5 more than 300-fold. Finally, Bcl6 was bound to a subset of STAT5-binding
sites in male liver chromatin, including a Socs2 STAT5-binding site where Bcl6
binding increased substantially between plasma GH pulses, i.e. when STAT5 binding
was low. Bcl6 and STAT5 binding are thus inversely coordinated by the endogenous 
pulses of pituitary GH release, suggesting this male-specific transcriptional
repressor modulates hepatic GH signaling to select STAT5 target genes.

PMCID: PMC2775936
PMID: 19797429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;2(1):5-7. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjp032. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

An expanding job description for bcl6.

Bi E(1), Ye BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

B cell lymphoma/leukemia gene 6 (Bcl6) is well known as a master regulator of
germinal center (GC) B cell differentiation. Now, three new publications
demonstrate that Bcl6 also plays a second role in GC response, in that it is both
required and sufficient to drive the differentiation of T follicular helper
cells.

PMCID: PMC4415075
PMID: 19797315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Clin Neuropathol. 2009 Sep-Oct;28(5):395-9.

Diffuse follicle center lymphoma of the spine: a primary epidural lymphoma?

Mesfin FB(1), Drazin D, Berry S, Homan S, Nazeer T, German JW.

Author information: 
(1)The Neurosciences Institute, Division of Neurosurgery, Albany Medical Center, 
New York 12208, USA. mesfinfb@mail.amc.edu

A 72-year-old right-handed woman presented with a 6-month history of right
thoracic wall discomfort. An MRI of the thoracic spine showed a small
dumbbell-shaped mass centered within the right T7-8 foramen. The patient was
asked to return to clinic for reevaluation to include a new MRI of the thoracic
spine in 6 months. She did not comply with this recommendation and 1 year later, 
she presented with increasing difficulty ambulating and spastic paraparesis. A
follow-up MRI of the thoracic spine now demonstrated significant interval growth 
of the mass with an extra-foraminal component extending into the thoracic cavity.
She was taken to the operating room for resection of the epidural tumor. The
pathology was consistent with diffuse follicle center lymphoma as cells were
immunohistologically positive for CD20, CD 10, BCL-2 and BCL-6. Primary spinal
follicle center lymphomas of the spine are rare with the current case being the
first diffuse follicle center type reported in the literature.

PMID: 19788057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Int J Oncol. 2009 Nov;35(5):961-71.

Immunophenotyping of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) defines multiple
sub-groups of germinal centre-like tumours displaying different survival
characteristics.

Anderson JJ(1), Fordham S, Overman L, Dignum H, Wood K, Proctor SJ, Crosier S,
Angus B, Culpin RE, Mainou-Fowler T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Academic Haematology, Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
The University of Newcastle, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
j.j.anderson@ncl.ac.uk

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) forms a heterogeneous collection of
aggressive non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma in which three principle classes of neoplasia
have been defined according to gene expression and immunophenotyping studies. The
present investigation sought to examine the immunophenotype of proposed subgroups
and relate these to patient survival. A series of 155 DLBCL treated uniformly
with anthracycline therapy in clinical trials, were stratified upon the basis of 
common biomarker expression with combination immunophenotype being related to
patient overall survival. Stratification of tumours with respect to combined
expression profiles of the three biological markers (CD10, Bcl-6 and MUM-1)
revealed six groups showing significant differences in survival (p=0.014). The
greatest difference resided between distinct populations of germinal centre (GC) 
cell tumours; the first being CD10-, Bcl-6+, MUM-1- and the second CD10+ Bcl-6+
MUM-1+ (p=0.002). The former group displayed median survival time of 143 months, 
the latter only 11 months. A third population of GC tumours (CD10+ Bcl-6+ and
MUM-1-) also displayed a relative short median survival (32 months). Of the three
groups presenting a non-GC or activated B cell (NGC/ABC) phenotype, only one
(CD10-, Bcl-6+ and MUM-1+) presented short-term median survival (27 months)
comparable with poor prognosis GC sub-populations. Within the remaining ABC
tumour groups (CD10- Bcl-6- MUM-1- and CD10- Bcl-6- MUM-1+) patients presented
intermediate median survival times of 54 and 58 months, respectively. Thus, the
GC phenotype did not act as a universal indicator of good clinical prognosis, but
rather multiple groups of GC tumours were associated with distinct overall
survival profiles. Ultimately, the data allowed definition of a predictive
algorithm defining three groups predicting poor, intermediate and good clinical
prognosis. The first of these comprised two patient sub-populations with GC-like 
tumours together with one sub-population of NGC/ABC, the second two
sub-populations of ABC-like tumours, and the final a single group of GC-like
tumours associated with optimal long-term survival.

PMID: 19787248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Nov 20;27(33):5573-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.22.7058. Epub 2009
Sep 28.

Immuno-fluorescence in situ hybridization index predicts survival in patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP: a GELA study.

Copie-Bergman C(1), Gaulard P, Leroy K, Briere J, Baia M, Jais JP, Salles GA,
Berger F, Haioun C, Tilly H, Emile JF, Banham AH, Mounier N, Gisselbrecht C,
Feugier P, Coiffier B, Molina TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier,
L'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 955, Institut 
Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale; Université Paris 12, Faculté de médecine,
Créteil. christiane.copie@hmn.aphp.fr

PURPOSE: To evaluate the prognostic value of cell of origin immunohistochemical
markers and BCL2, BCL6, and c-MYC translocations in a homogeneous cohort of
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) treated with rituximab plus
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with CD20+ DLBCL were enrolled in the randomized
LNH98-5 and 01-5B Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte trials.
Paraffin-embedded tumor samples of 119 patients treated with R-CHOP were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry for CD10, BCL6, MUM1/IRF4, LMO2, and forkhead box protein
P1 (FOXP1) expression and for BCL2, BCL6, and c-MYC breakpoints by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) on tissue microarray.
RESULTS: LMO2 expression and BCL2 breakpoint were associated with the germinal
center (GC) subtype defined by Hans' algorithm, respectively (P < .0001; P =
.0002) whereas FOXP1 expression and BCL6 breakpoint were associated with the
non-germinal center (non-GC) subtype (P = .008 and P = .0001, respectively). The 
immunohistochemical markers analyzed independently, GC/non-GC phenotype and BCL2 
breakpoint did not predict overall survival (OS). BCL6 breakpoint was
significantly associated with an unfavorable impact on OS (P = .04).
Interestingly, an immunoFISH index, defined by positivity for at least two of
three non-GC markers (FOXP1, MUM1/IRF4, BCL6 breakpoint) was significantly
associated with a shorter 5-year OS rate (44%; 95% CI, 28 to 60 v 78%; 95% CI, 59
to 89; P = .01) which was independent (P = .04) of the age-adjusted International
Prognostic Index (P = .04) in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that combining immunohistochemistry with FISH 
allows construction of an immunoFISH index that significantly predicts survival
in elderly DLBCL patients treated with R-CHOP.

PMID: 19786664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Immunity. 2009 Sep 18;31(3):450-2. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.08.017.

Establishing the follicular helper identity.

Kassiotis G(1), O'Garra A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunoregulation, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2009 Sep 18;31(3):457-68.

Among other genes, expression of the Bcl-6 transcriptional repressor
distinguishes follicular helper T (Tfh) cells from other helper T cell subsets.
In this issue of Immunity, Yu et al. (2009) demonstrate that Bcl-6 directs Tfh
cell differentiation.

PMID: 19766087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Hum Pathol. 2010 Jan;41(1):79-87. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.06.016. Epub 2009
Sep 8.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma in bone marrow: a morphologic and
immunophenotypic study.

Khokhar FA(1), Payne WD, Talwalkar SS, Jorgensen JL, Bueso-Ramos CE, Medeiros LJ,
Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. fvegava@mdanderson.org

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is known to frequently involve bone marrow.
However, the histologic and immunophenotypic features of angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma at this site are poorly defined. We assessed 27 bone marrow
specimens involved by angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma from 20 patients.
Histologically, bone marrow involvement was predominantly multifocal (74%) and
exhibited a nodular pattern (78%), often associated with other patterns. Using
immunohistochemistry, programed death-1 and CD10 were expressed by atypical
lymphocytes in 17 (85%) of 20 and 5 (18.5%) of 27 specimens, respectively. CXCL13
was not expressed by atypical lymphocytes in all cases but did stain stromal
cells consistent with follicular dendritic cells in 1 case. BCL-6 as a single
antibody was difficult to interpret because many normal bone marrow cells are
dimly positive, but BCL-6/CD3 dual staining highlighted BCL-6+ T-cells in all
cases assessed. Antibodies specific for CD21 and CD35 did not highlight
follicular dendritic cells in any biopsy specimens. Flow cytometry
immunophenotyping revealed a CD3+CD10+ T-cell population in 2 (25%) of 8 cases
assessed. We conclude that the recognition and classification of
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma in bone marrow are made difficult by the
uncommon expression of CD10 (25%), rarity of follicular dendritic cells, and lack
of CXCL13 expression at this site. This is most likely attributable to the very
different microenvironment of the bone marrow relative to lymph nodes and, in
particular, the absence of follicles in bone marrow. By contrast, programed
death-1 immunohistochemical staining and double labeling using antibodies
specific for BCL-6 and CD3 were helpful in appreciating the follicular T-helper
cell immunophenotype of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 19740519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5291-3. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1444.
Epub 2009 Aug 25.

Complexity made simple in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Aster J(1), Kutok J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA. jaster@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5494-502.

PMCID: PMC2737086
PMID: 19706818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5494-502. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0113. 
Epub 2009 Aug 25.

A new immunostain algorithm classifies diffuse large B-cell lymphoma into
molecular subtypes with high accuracy.

Choi WW(1), Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC, Piris MA, Banham AH, Delabie J, Braziel 
RM, Geng H, Iqbal J, Lenz G, Vose JM, Hans CP, Fu K, Smith LM, Li M, Liu Z,
Gascoyne RD, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Rimsza LM, Campo E, Jaffe ES, Jaye DL, Staudt
LM, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-3135, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5291-3.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 15;16(14):3805-6.

PURPOSE: Hans and coworkers previously developed an immunohistochemical algorithm
with approximately 80% concordance with the gene expression profiling (GEP)
classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) into the germinal center 
B-cell-like (GCB) and activated B-cell-like (ABC) subtypes. Since then, new
antibodies specific to germinal center B-cells have been developed, which might
improve the performance of an immunostain algorithm.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We studied 84 cases of
cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-vincristine-prednisone (CHOP)-treated DLBCL (47 GCB,
37 ABC) with GCET1, CD10, BCL6, MUM1, FOXP1, BCL2, MTA3, and cyclin D2
immunostains, and compared different combinations of the immunostaining results
with the GEP classification. A perturbation analysis was also applied to
eliminate the possible effects of interobserver or intraobserver variations. A
separate set of 63 DLBCL cases treated with rituximab plus CHOP (37 GCB, 26 ABC) 
was used to validate the new algorithm.
RESULTS: A new algorithm using GCET1, CD10, BCL6, MUM1, and FOXP1 was derived
that closely approximated the GEP classification with 93% concordance.
Perturbation analysis indicated that the algorithm was robust within the range of
observer variance. The new algorithm predicted 3-year overall survival of the
validation set [GCB (87%) versus ABC (44%); P < 0.001], simulating the predictive
power of the GEP classification. For a group of seven primary mediastinal large
B-cell lymphoma, the new algorithm is a better prognostic classifier (all "GCB") 
than the Hans' algorithm (two GCB, five non-GCB).
CONCLUSION: Our new algorithm is significantly more accurate than the Hans'
algorithm and will facilitate risk stratification of DLBCL patients and future
DLBCL research using archival materials.

PMID: 19706817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Transl Oncol. 2009 Aug 18;2(3):128-37.

Bcl6 is expressed in neuroblastoma: tumor cell type-specific expression predicts 
outcome.

Chamdin A(1), Jarzembowski JA, Subramanian C, Kuick R, Lee JS, Kwok RP, Castle
VP, Opipari AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid neoplasm of infancy and 
childhood. Whereas most low-risk patients do well, children with high-risk tumors
often fail intensive treatment. Identification of novel biomarkers is critical to
improve prognostication, tailor therapy, and develop new therapeutic targets.
Differential RNA-level expression between tumor cells with neuroblastic (N-type) 
and Schwannian stromal (S-type) phenotypes was used to identify genes of
potential interest based on tumor cell type-specific regulation. Gene expression 
microarray analysis revealed marked differences between N-type and S-type cells
in their levels of BCL6 messenger RNA, a transcriptional regulator overexpressed 
in a variety of hematopoietic malignancies. S-type cells express higher levels of
Bcl6 RNA and protein than N-type, and protein levels are significantly limited by
proteasome function. An NB tumor tissue microarray linked to clinicopathologic
data was immunohistochemically stained to measure Bcl6 protein levels. Bcl6 was
detected in both the neuroblastic and Schwannian stromal regions, as
distinguished histologically, and correlated with outcome. We found that
expression in neuroblastic regions differentiates outcomes, in that Bcl6
expression in neuroblastic regions is associated with increased time to relapse
and increased overall survival compared with absent expression in neuroblastic
regions, regardless of Schwannian stromal expression. Thus, our findings suggest 
that Bcl6 may be useful as a prognostic marker and might represent a potential
therapeutic target for high-risk NB.

PMCID: PMC2730138
PMID: 19701497  [PubMed]


375. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 22;28(42):3723-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.230. Epub 2009 Aug
24.

Functional interaction of HTLV-1 tax protein with the POZ domain of the
transcriptional repressor BCL6.

Dean J(1), Hashimoto K, Tsuji T, Gautier V, Hall WW, Sheehy N.

Author information: 
(1)UCD Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine and Medical
Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The Tax protein encoded by human T-cell leukaemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) has a
pivotal role in T-cell transformation by deregulating cellular signalling
pathways. Using the yeast two-hybrid system to screen a human leukocyte cDNA
library, we identified BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6) as a cellular protein, which
interacts with Tax 1. The BCL6 gene encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional
repressor that contains a conserved N-terminal poxvirus and zinc finger (POZ)
repressor domain and a C-terminal Kruppel-like zinc finger DNA binding domain.
Using both in vivo and in vitro methods, we demonstrate that the POZ domain of
BCL6 is sufficient for its interaction with Tax 1. Using functional assays, we
demonstrate that Tax 1 enhanced the repressive activity of BCL6 and increased the
levels of apoptosis induced by BCL6 in osteosarcoma cells indicating that both
proteins cooperate in vivo to cause a physiological affect. Furthermore, BCL6
recruited Tax 1 into punctate nuclear structures, which suggests that Tax 1
colocalizes with BCL6 in repressor complexes in vivo. BCL6 expression
significantly downregulated both basal and Tax-induced nuclear factor-kappaB and 
long terminal repeat activation. This suggests that the expression of BCL6 in
HTLV infected cells may contribute to the silencing of viral gene expression and 
to the long clinical latency associated with HTLV infection.

PMID: 19701248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):953-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1178752.

Immunology. The yin and yang of follicular helper T cells.

Awasthi A(1), Kuchroo VK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):1001-5.
    Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):1006-10.

PMID: 19696339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Haematologica. 2010 Feb;95(2):253-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.013177. Epub 2009
Aug 13.

Pediatric follicular lymphoma--a clinico-pathological study of a population-based
series of patients treated within the Non-Hodgkin's
Lymphoma--Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster (NHL-BFM) multicenter trials.

Oschlies I(1), Salaverria I, Mahn F, Meinhardt A, Zimmermann M, Woessmann W,
Burkhardt B, Gesk S, Krams M, Reiter A, Siebert R, Klapper W.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, Hematopathology Section and Lymph Node Registry,
Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany.

Background Pediatric follicular lymphoma has recently been recognized as a novel 
variant of follicular lymphoma in the World Health Organization classification of
lymphomas. Given the rarity of the disease, histopathological and genetic data on
this type of lymphoma are still scarce.DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 25 cases
of pediatric follicular lymphoma (patients aged <or=18 years) by morphology,
immunohistochemistry and interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization. All
patients analyzed were treated within Non-Hodgkin's
Lymphoma--Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster (NHL-BFM) multicenter trials, and the cohort
was representative of the German population.
RESULTS: The genetic hallmark of adult follicular lymphoma, t(14;18)(q32;q21),
was not detectable in any of the pediatric cases, although BCL2 protein was
expressed in 55% of the latter cases. No correlation was found between BCL2
protein expression and outcome. Chromosomal breaks in the immunoglobulin heavy
chain gene (IGH) and the BCL6 locus were detected in 5 of 17 and 1 of 18 cases,
respectively. Patients with pediatric follicular lymphoma had long event-free
survival and, in contrast to adult follicular lymphoma, the clinical course was
not dominated by relapses. A simultaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was
frequently detected at initial diagnosis in children but did not indicate an
aggressive clinical course. Conclusions Our data suggest that pediatric
follicular lymphoma is a disease that differs from its adult counterpart both
genetically and clinically.

PMCID: PMC2817028
PMID: 19679882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Oct;33(10):1463-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b314ce.

Primary bone diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: clinicopathologic study of 21 cases
and review of literature.

Bhagavathi S(1), Micale MA, Les K, Wilson JD, Wiggins ML, Fu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Primary bone diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (PB-DLBCL) are uncommon extranodal
lymphomas. Herein, we report the clinical, pathologic, immunohistochemical, and
molecular features of 21 cases of PB-DLBCL. The mean age of the patients was 54
years (range: 13 to 85 y). The male and female ratio was 1.6:1. The tumors
consisted of diffuse sheets of large atypical cells or a polymorphous mixture of 
small-to-large cells with large multilobated nuclei, fine chromatin, and
inconspicuous to prominent nucleoli. Twelve (57%) cases were non-germinal center 
B (GCB) and 9 (43%) were GCB subtype based on immunohistochemical classification.
B-cell lymphomas (BCL)-2 was positive in 17/21 (81%), TP53 in 11/21 (52%)
positive and the mean MIB-1 index was 57%. Polymerase chain reaction showed 10
cases with immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IGH) and 4 cases with IGH/BCL-2 gene
rearrangement. The fluorescence in-situ hybridization analyses showed 14% of
cases with BCL-6, 19% of cases with BCL-2, and 9% of cases with C-MYC gene
rearrangement. Age <60 years and complete response to initial treatment were
significant predictors of survival outcome (P< or =0.05). Even though no
association was observed between the subtype of PB-DLBCL (GCB vs. non-GCB), BCL2,
TP53, MIB1 index and overall survival (P>0.05), due to small sample size, and
variability in treatment received, this analysis may be interpreted with caution.

PMID: 19675454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Oct;50(10):1625-31. doi: 10.1080/10428190903128652.

High rate of survival in transformed lymphoma after autologous stem cell
transplant: pathologic analysis and comparison with de novo diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma.

Smith SD(1), Bolwell BJ, Advani AS, Andresen SW, Chan JL, Dean RM, Hsi ED,
Kalaycio ME, Pohlman BL, Rybicki LA, Sweetenham JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematologic Oncology and Blood Disorders, Cleveland Clinic
Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA. smiths11@ccf.org

Transformed lymphoma (TL) is historically associated with a poor prognosis,
though autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) has been applied successfully.
Better patient selection is needed for this intensive therapy. We analyzed the
outcomes between de novo and transformed large B-cell lymphoma in patients
undergoing ASCT, with regard to the immunohistochemical (IHC) features of
potential prognostic utility including CD10, BCL6, MUM-1, Ki67, and BCL2. Of all 
patients undergoing ASCT for large B-cell lymphoma at the Cleveland Clinic
Taussig Cancer Institute between 2003 and 2008, 56 patients (31 de novo and 25
TL) had undergone detailed IHC analysis. Three-year relapse-free-survival (RFS)
and overall survival (OS) for TL vs. patients with de novo large B-cell lymphoma 
were 64%vs. 59% and 63%vs. 59%, respectively. More patients with TL were
characterized as germinal-center B cell-of-origin (92%) than patients with de
novo large B-cell lymphoma (71%). Immunohistochemistry did not predict
relapse-free or overall survival, and ASCT afforded a high rate of PFS in
patients with TL.

PMID: 19672775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Hematop. 2008 Sep;1(2):77-84. doi: 10.1007/s12308-008-0007-7. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma: detection of BCL2 gene rearrangements by PCR
analysis and FISH.

Dunphy CH(1), O'Malley DP, Cheng L, Fodrie TY, Perkins SL, Kaiser-Rogers K.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Hematopathology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA, cdunphy@unch.unc.edu.

Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBCL) has a characteristic clinical
presentation, morphology, and immunophenotype, representing a clinically
favorable subgroup of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). By gene expression
profiling (GEP), PMBCL shares features with classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL). Of 
further interest, BCL6 gene mutations and BCL6 and/or MUM1 expression in a number
of PMBCLs have supported an activated B-cell (ABC) origin. Several studies,
including GEP, have failed to detect BCL2 gene rearrangements (GRs) in PMBCL. An 
index case of t(14; 18)+ PMBCL prompted our study of the incidence of BCL2 GRs in
PMBCL by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)/fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) analyses and its possible clinical impact. Twenty-five retrospectively
identified, well-defined PMBCLs (five with cytogenetics) from three institutions 
were analyzed for a BCL2 GR by PCR/FISH analyses. The formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue blocks of 24 available cases were also analyzed by BCL2 
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Of the five with cytogenetics, two had a t(14; 18)
(q32; q21). Of the 25 analyzed by PCR, 2 had no amplifiable DNA (aDNA), including
1 t(14; 18)+ case. Of those with aDNA, two showed a BCL2 GR; by FISH analysis,
three demonstrated a BCL2 GR. BCL2 protein expression by IHC analysis was
variably detected in 21 out of 24 (strongly, uniformly expressed: 6, including
all with a t(14; 18) or a BCL2 gene rearrangement; moderately weakly expressed in
a subset of the malignant cells: 15). Available clinical follow-up of this BCL2+ 
subset showed a similar course to the other PMBCL cases. Our results imply that a
subset of PMBCL [(4 out of 24 analyzed) in our series] may be of GC origin. A
larger study is necessary to determine any clinical significance.

PMCID: PMC2713480
PMID: 19669206  [PubMed]


381. J Hematop. 2009 Jul;2(2):89-95. doi: 10.1007/s12308-009-0039-7. Epub 2009 Jun 27.

Commentary on the WHO classification of tumors of lymphoid tissues (2008): "Gray 
zone" lymphomas overlapping with Burkitt lymphoma or classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

Hasserjian RP, Ott G, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Balague-Ponz O, de Jong D, de Leval
L.

The 2008 WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues has 
introduced two new categories of high-grade B-cell lymphomas: entities in which
features of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) overlap with Burkitt lymphoma
(DLBCL/BL) or classical Hodgkin lymphoma (DLBCL/HL). The DLBCL/BL category
encompasses cases that resemble Burkitt lymphoma morphologically, but have one or
more immunophenotypic or molecular genetic deviations that would exclude it from 
the BL category; conversely, some cases have immunophenotypic and/or genetic
features of BL, but display cytologic variability unacceptable for BL. Many of
the cases in the DLBCL/BL category contain a translocation of MYC as well as
either BCL2 or BCL6 (so-called double-hit lymphomas) and have a very aggressive
clinical behavior. The DLBCL/HL category encompasses lymphomas that exhibit the
morphology of classical Hodgkin lymphoma but the immunophenotype of DLBCL, or
vice versa. Most DLBCL/HL cases described present as mediastinal masses, but this
category is not limited to mediastinal lymphomas. These new categories
acknowledge the increasing recognition of cases that display mixed features of
two well-established diseases. Whether the existence of such cases reflects
shortcomings of our current diagnostic armamentarium or a true disease continuum 
in which such hybrid or intermediate neoplasms actually exist remains to be
determined.

PMCID: PMC2725285
PMID: 19669187  [PubMed]


382. Ai Zheng. 2009 Aug;28(8):805-12.

Clinicopathologic features and Epstein-Barr virus infection status of Burkitt's
lymphoma in Guangzhou district.

Huang YH(1), Wu QL, Zong YS, Feng YF, Liang JZ, Hou JH, Shao Q, Fu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060,
P.R. China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma (sBL) is uncommon and its
relation to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is unknown in China. This study was to
investigate the clinical presentation, morphologic features, immunophenotype and 
EBV infection status of sBL in Guangzhou district, a prevalent area of EBV
infection.
METHODS: The clinical data of 21 sBL patients were reviewed. A panel of
immunohistochemical staining was performed and EBV-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) in 
situ hybridization was applied to identify EBV infection.
RESULTS: From January 2000 to October 2007, 21 cases(0.87%) of sBL were confirmed
among 2416 cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma(NHL) in Sun Yat-sen University Cancer 
Center. Male to female ratio was 4.25 (17/4). The median age was 23 years. Of the
21 patients, 19 (90.48%) had lymph node(s) involvement; 16 (76.19%) had multiple 
sites involvement; 12 (57.14%) were at advanced stages (III/IV). The 2-year
survival rate of 15 patients who received chemotherapy or resection plus
chemotherapy was 56.00%. Twenty cases showed the prototypic morphology of sBL,
and one was the variant of sBL with plasmacytoid differentiation. The main
immunophenotype of these 21 sBLs was sIgM+/CD20+/CD10+/Bcl-6+/Bcl-2-[or
Bcl-6+(>95%)/Bcl-2+(<10%)]/TdT-/Ki-67+ 100%. Of 20 detectable cases, 11 showed
CD5 expression in a few (3%-20%) tumor cells. P53 was overexpressed in ten cases 
(47.62%). Six cases (28.57%) had EBV infection, with EBNA1 and EBERs expression, 
but not LMP1. There were no significant differences in morphology and
immunophenotype between EBV-positive and EBV-negative cases.
CONCLUSIONS: sBL is uncommon in Guangzhou district, mainly seen in boys and young
men. Most patients had lymph node(s) involvement, showing similar morphology and 
immunophenotype as that of endemic BL. Type I EBV latent infection is associated 
with 28.57% of cases.

PMID: 19664325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Int J Surg Pathol. 2011 Oct;19(5):685-91. doi: 10.1177/1066896909341803. Epub
2009 Aug 5.

Synchronous follicular lymphoma, kaposi sarcoma, and castleman's disease in a
HIV-negative patient with EBV and HHV-8 coinfection.

Koreishi AF(1), Saenz AJ, Arcila ME, Hedvat C, Fleming S, Teruya-Feldstein J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Radiology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, USA.

The authors describe the case of a 65-year-old woman who was HIV negative and had
a lymph node biopsy that showed concurrent follicular lymphoma (FL; grade 3A),
Kaposi sarcoma (KS), and Castleman's disease (CD) with coinfection by human
herpes virus-8 (HHV-8) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). The lymphoma was positive
for CD20, CD10, and BCL6 and negative for BCL2. Flow cytometry showed a clonal
lambda B-cell population, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) showed a clonal
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement, confirming a neoplastic B-cell
process. Focally, the FL component showed numerous EBER1-positive cells, with
rare HHV-8-positive cells. The KS component showed strong HHV-8 expression with
rare EBER1-positive cells. The CD component showed scattered HHV-8, viral
interleukin-6, and EBER1-positive cells. The simultaneous occurrence of a FL, KS,
and CD in an HIV-negative patient expands the spectrum of HHV-8-positive
neoplasms and suggests the possibility of HHV-8 rendering mature B-cells
hyperresponsive to antigenic stimulation, providing an expanded target for second
site mutations or cytokine-driven hyperplasia, culminating in lymphoma.

PMID: 19661098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Cancer Sci. 2009 Oct;100(10):1842-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01268.x. Epub 
2009 Jul 1.

Prognostic impact of immunohistochemical biomarkers in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma in the rituximab era.

Seki R(1), Ohshima K, Fujisaki T, Uike N, Kawano F, Gondo H, Makino S, Eto T,
Moriuchi Y, Taguchi F, Kamimura T, Tsuda H, Ogawa R, Shimoda K, Yamashita K,
Suzuki K, Suzushima H, Tsukazaki K, Higuchi M, Utsunomiya A, Iwahashi M, Imamura 
Y, Tamura K, Suzumiya J, Yoshida M, Abe Y, Matsumoto T, Okamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of
Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

We evaluated the usefulness of prognostic markers in patients with diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) treated with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, 
and prednisolone (CHOP) +/- rituximab (R-CHOP) in Japan. We studied 730 patients 
with DLBCL; 451 received CHOP and 279 R-CHOP. We analyzed biopsy samples
immunohistochemically for markers of germinal center B cells (CD10, Bcl-6),
postgerminal center B cells (Multiple myeloma-1), and apoptosis (Bcl-2). The
median follow-up period for surviving patients was 56.4 months for the CHOP group
and 25.2 months for the R-CHOP group. DLBCL were categorized as germinal center B
(GCB) subtype (352/730; 48.2%) or non-GCB subtype (378/730; 51.8%). In the CHOP
group, the high expression of CD10 (P = 0.022) or Bcl-6 (P = 0.021), or GCB
subtype (P = 0.05) was associated with better overall survival, whereas the high 
expression of Bcl-2 (P = 0.001) or MUM1 (P = 0.011), or non-GCB subtype (P =
0.05) was associated with worse overall survival. In the R-CHOP group, however,
these biomarkers except Bcl-6 were not significant prognostic factors. The
patients with non-GCB subtype showed improved survival in the R-CHOP group (P =
0.756). The International Prognostic Index was a useful clinical marker of
survival in the CHOP group (P < 0.001) and also in the R-CHOP group (P < 0.001). 
Results of improved survival with rituximab addition indicate that the relevance 
of previously recognized prognostic factors should be re-evaluated.

PMID: 19656156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 1;183(5):3188-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803693. Epub 2009
Jul 31.

IFN regulatory factor 8 regulates MDM2 in germinal center B cells.

Zhou JX(1), Lee CH, Qi CF, Wang H, Naghashfar Z, Abbasi S, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
jeffxzhou@gmail.com

IFN regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) is a transcription factor that affects the
differentiation and function of myeloid, dendritic, and B cells. Herein we report
that IRF8 regulates the expression of Mdm2, a suppressor of p53-dependent and
-independent apoptosis pathways, in germinal center (GC) B cells. In GC B cells
of IRF8-deficient mice, Mdm2 transcripts were greatly down-regulated, and MDM2
protein was poorly expressed in GC of Irf8(-/-) mice. Small interfering
RNA-induced repression of IRF8 in a GC-derived B cell line resulted in decreased 
expression of MDM2 at the protein level but increased expression of p53 and p21. 
We found that IRF8 binds to the Mdm2 P2 promoter, and that cotransfection of an
IRF8 expression vector with an Mdm2 reporter construct stimulated significant
increases in reporter activity. Additionally, transcripts of the p53 target
Pmaip1 (Noxa) were significantly increased in IRF8-deficient GC B cells as well
as in the IRF8 knockdown B cell line. Finally, cells deficient in IRF8 exhibited 
growth suppression and increased sensitivity to apoptosis induced by etoposide or
IL-21. These results suggest that by regulating MDM2, IRF8 might allow GC B cells
to tolerate physiological DNA breaks that otherwise would trigger apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2759298
PMID: 19648273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mod Pathol. 2009 Nov;22(11):1507-17. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.106. Epub 2009
Jul 24.

Diffuse blastoid B-cell lymphoma: a histologically aggressive variant of
t(14;18)-negative follicular lymphoma.

Chiu A(1), Frizzera G, Mathew S, Hyjek EM, Chadburn A, Tam W, Knowles DM, Orazi
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Among the diffuse lymphomas of B-cell origin, we have encountered one variant
displaying blastoid features that morphologically mimic lymphoblastic lymphoma,
the blastoid variant of mantle cell lymphoma, and the so-called blastoid
transformation of follicular lymphoma. To better characterize this entity, we
studied eight cases morphologically, immunohistochemically, and by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) for cytogenetic abnormalities commonly associated
with follicular lymphoma and B-cell lymphomas exhibiting high-grade histological 
features. All eight cases were presented as de novo neoplasms, and displayed an
entirely diffuse (five cases) or only minimal follicular (three cases) growth
pattern. The neoplastic lymphoid cells were of medium size with round nuclei,
fine chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and high mitotic rate; they expressed
CD10, BCL6, and BCL2-a phenotype consistent with follicle center cell origin. A
proportion of cases expressed MUM1. Their lack of TdT and CYCLIN D1 distinguished
them from lymphoblastic lymphoma and the blastoid mantle cell lymphoma,
respectively. The neoplastic lymphoid cells consistently expressed CD43 (seven of
eight cases) and occasionally other T-cell-associated antigens, including CD5,
CD7, CD8, and CD57. Although all cases overexpressed BCL2, t(14;18) was not
detected in any of the five cases examined by FISH; instead, extra copies of
chromosome 18 were found in four of five cases. Finally, other cytogenetic
abnormalities, including structural abnormalities of BCL6 (allelic loss/gain,
rearrangement), monosomy 7, del(13)(q14), and MYC allelic loss, were frequently
detected. The combination of a B-cell CD10+ BCL6+ BCL2+ phenotype in the presence
of structural abnormalities of BCL6 is consistent with a follicular center cell
derivation for our cases. The lack of t(14;18) seen in our cases, although rare
in most cases of follicular lymphoma, has been nevertheless reported in cases of 
follicular lymphoma with a predominantly diffuse growth pattern. The molecular
pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, and prognostic significance of these
lesions remain to be elucidated.

PMID: 19633642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Immunity. 2009 Sep 18;31(3):457-68. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.07.002. Epub 2009 
Jul 23.

The transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 directs T follicular helper cell lineage
commitment.

Yu D(1), Rao S, Tsai LM, Lee SK, He Y, Sutcliffe EL, Srivastava M, Linterman M,
Zheng L, Simpson N, Ellyard JI, Parish IA, Ma CS, Li QJ, Parish CR, Mackay CR,
Vinuesa CG.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and inflammation, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW
2010, Australia.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 Sep 18;31(3):450-2.

Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells provide selection signals to germinal center B
cells, which is essential for long-lived antibody responses. High CXCR5 and low
CCR7 expression facilitates their homing to B cell follicles and distinguishes
them from T helper 1 (Th1), Th2, and Th17 cells. Here, we showed that Bcl-6
directs Tfh cell differentiation: Bcl-6-deficient T cells failed to develop into 
Tfh cells and could not sustain germinal center responses, whereas forced
expression of Bcl-6 in CD4(+) T cells promoted expression of the hallmark Tfh
cell molecules CXCR5, CXCR4, and PD-1. Bcl-6 bound to the promoters of the Th1
and Th17 cell transcriptional regulators T-bet and RORgammat and repressed
IFN-gamma and IL-17 production. Bcl-6 also repressed expression of many microRNAs
(miRNAs) predicted to control the Tfh cell signature, including miR-17-92, which 
repressed CXCR5 expression. Thus, Bcl-6 positively directs Tfh cell
differentiation, through combined repression of miRNAs and transcription factors.

PMID: 19631565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):1001-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1176676. Epub 2009
Jul 23.

Bcl6 mediates the development of T follicular helper cells.

Nurieva RI(1), Chung Y, Martinez GJ, Yang XO, Tanaka S, Matskevitch TD, Wang YH, 
Dong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. rnurieva@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):953-5.

A fundamental function of CD4+ helper T (T(H)) cells is the regulation of B
cell-mediated humoral immunity. Development of T follicular helper (T(FH)) cells 
that provide help to B cells is mediated by the cytokines interleukin-6 and
interleukin-21 but is independent of TH1, TH2, and TH17 effector cell lineages.
Here, we characterize the function of Bcl6, a transcription factor selectively
expressed in T(FH) cells. Bcl6 expression is regulated by interleukin-6 and
interleukin-21. Bcl6 overexpression induced T(FH)-related gene expression and
inhibited other T(H) lineage cell differentiation in a DNA binding-dependent
manner. Moreover, Bcl6 deficiency in T cells resulted in impaired T(FH) cell
development and germinal center reactions, and altered production of other
effector T cell subsets. Our data thus illustrate that Bcl6 is required for
programming of T(FH) cell generation.

PMCID: PMC2857334
PMID: 19628815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):1006-10. doi: 10.1126/science.1175870. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Bcl6 and Blimp-1 are reciprocal and antagonistic regulators of T follicular
helper cell differentiation.

Johnston RJ(1), Poholek AC, DiToro D, Yusuf I, Eto D, Barnett B, Dent AL, Craft
J, Crotty S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology
(LIAI), 9420 Athena Circle, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 Aug 21;325(5943):953-5.

Effective B cell-mediated immunity and antibody responses often require help from
CD4+ T cells. It is thought that a distinct CD4+ effector T cell subset, called T
follicular helper cells (T(FH)), provides this help; however, the molecular
requirements for T(FH) differentiation are unknown. We found that expression of
the transcription factor Bcl6 in CD4+ T cells is both necessary and sufficient
for in vivo T(FH) differentiation and T cell help to B cells in mice. In
contrast, the transcription factor Blimp-1, an antagonist of Bcl6, inhibits T(FH)
differentiation and help, thereby preventing B cell germinal center and antibody 
responses. These findings demonstrate that T(FH) cells are required for proper B 
cell responses in vivo and that Bcl6 and Blimp-1 play central but opposing roles 
in T(FH) differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2766560
PMID: 19608860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Blood. 2009 Sep 10;114(11):2280-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-208215. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Mice deficient for CD137 ligand are predisposed to develop germinal
center-derived B-cell lymphoma.

Middendorp S(1), Xiao Y, Song JY, Peperzak V, Krijger PH, Jacobs H, Borst J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

In the germinal center (GC), B cells proliferate dramatically and diversify their
immunoglobulin genes, which increases the risk of malignant transformation. The
GC B-cell reaction relies on crosstalk with follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), to
which the costimulatory receptor CD137 on FDCs and its ligand on GC B cells
potentially contribute. We report that mice deficient for CD137 ligand (CD137L)
are predisposed to develop B-cell lymphoma, with an incidence of approximately
60% at 12 months of age. Lymphoma membrane markers were characteristic of GC B
cells. Longitudinal histologic analysis identified the GC as site of oncogenic
transformation and classified 85% of the malignancies found in approximately 200 
mice as GC-derived B-cell lymphoma. To delineate the mechanism underlying
lymphomagenesis, gene expression profiles of wild-type and CD137L-deficient GC B 
cells were compared. CD137L deficiency was associated with enhanced expression of
a limited gene set that included Bcl-10 and the GC response regulators Bcl-6,
Spi-B, Elf-1, Bach2, and activation-induced cytidine deaminase. Among these are
proto-oncogenes that mediate GC B-cell lymphoma development in humans. We
conclude that CD137L ordinarily regulates the GC B-cell response and thereby acts
as a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 19608748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000435. Epub
2009 Jul 10.

Computational fragment-based binding site identification by ligand competitive
saturation.

Guvench O(1), MacKerell AD Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Fragment-based drug discovery using NMR and x-ray crystallographic methods has
proven utility but also non-trivial time, materials, and labor costs. Current
computational fragment-based approaches circumvent these issues but suffer from
limited representations of protein flexibility and solvation effects, leading to 
difficulties with rigorous ranking of fragment affinities. To overcome these
limitations we describe an explicit solvent all-atom molecular dynamics
methodology (SILCS: Site Identification by Ligand Competitive Saturation) that
uses small aliphatic and aromatic molecules plus water molecules to map the
affinity pattern of a protein for hydrophobic groups, aromatic groups, hydrogen
bond donors, and hydrogen bond acceptors. By simultaneously incorporating ligands
representative of all these functionalities, the method is an in silico free
energy-based competition assay that generates three-dimensional probability maps 
of fragment binding (FragMaps) indicating favorable fragment:protein
interactions. Applied to the two-fold symmetric oncoprotein BCL-6, the SILCS
method yields two-fold symmetric FragMaps that recapitulate the crystallographic 
binding modes of the SMRT and BCOR peptides. These FragMaps account both for
important sequence and structure differences in the C-terminal halves of the two 
peptides and also the high mobility of the BCL-6 His116 sidechain in the
peptide-binding groove. Such SILCS FragMaps can be used to qualitatively inform
the design of small-molecule inhibitors or as scoring grids for high-throughput
in silico docking that incorporate both an atomic-level description of solvation 
and protein flexibility.

PMCID: PMC2700966
PMID: 19593374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 1;183(3):1667-74. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900056. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule enhances CD40 signaling in B cells and augments
the plasma cell compartment.

Kaku H(1), Rothstein TL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oncology and Cell Biology, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2010 Jul 1;185(1):771.

Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule (FAIM) was cloned as a mediator of Fas
resistance that is highly evolutionarily conserved but contains no known effector
motifs. In this study, we report entirely new functions of FAIM that regulate B
cell signaling and differentiation. FAIM acts to specifically enhance CD40
signaling for NF-kappaB activation, IRF-4 expression, and BCL-6 down-regulation
in vitro, but has no effect on its own or in conjunction with LPS or anti-Ig
stimulation. In keeping with its effects on IRF-4 and BCL-6, FAIM overexpression 
augments the plasma cell compartment in vivo. These results indicate that FAIM is
a new player on the field of B cell differentiation and acts as a force
multiplier for a series of events that begins with CD40 engagement and ends with 
plasma cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2771648
PMID: 19592656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Mar;48(3):181-5.

[A clinical study of chromosome translocations in extranodal marginal zone
lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue in Chinese patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong GH(1), Wang GQ, Gong LP, Wang JF, Mo XL, Liu HG, Dong LN, Zhou YQ, Zhang XM,
Feng ZB, Gao ZF, Ye HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing
100191, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genetic aberrations in extranodal marginal zone
lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas from different
sites of the body in Chinese patients.
METHODS: Two hundred and seventeen paraffin-embedded MALT lymphoma specimens from
11 major sites were studied with interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) to detect t (11; 18) (q21; q21)/API2-MALT1, t (1; 14) (p22;
q32)/IGH-BCL10, (14; 18) (q32; q21)/IGH-MALT1 and BCL6 gene involved chromosome
translocations.
RESULTS: These translocations were mutually exclusive and detected in 21%
(46/217) of the cases, including t (11; 18) (q21; q21) API2-MALT1 13% (29/217), t
(1; 14) (p22; q32) IGH-BCL10 in 1% (3/217), t (14; 18) (q32; q21) IGH-MALT1 1%
(2/217), BCL6 involved translocation in 2% (4/217) and IGH-unknown translocation 
partner in 4% (8/217). t (11; 18) (q21; q21) API2-MALT1 was found with the
highest frequency in MALT lymphoma from lungs (47%, 8/17) and small intestine
(29%, 4/14), followed by salivary gland (17%, 1/6), stomach (14%, 12/84) and
ocular adnexae (6%, 4/68). t (1; 14) (p22; q32) was only detected in lungs (12%, 
2/17) and stomach (1%, 1/84). t (14; 18) (q32; q21) was mainly detected in lungs 
(6%, 1/17) and ocular adnexae (2%, 1/68). BCL6 gene involved translocation was
detected in salivary gland (17%, 1/6) and stomach (4%, 3/84).
CONCLUSIONS: It is demonstrated that the four translocations occur with markedly 
variable frequencies in MALT lymphoma of different sites in Chinese patients. The
distributions of these chromosome translocations in Chinese patients are slightly
different from those reported in western patients.

PMID: 19576081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(17):4612-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00234-09. Epub 2009 Jun 
29.

PU.1 can recruit BCL6 to DNA to repress gene expression in germinal center B
cells.

Wei F(1), Zaprazna K, Wang J, Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology and Mari Lowe Center for Comparative Oncology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor crucial for germinal center formation. BCL6
represses transcription by a variety of mechanisms by binding to specific DNA
sequences or by recruitment to DNA by protein interactions. We found that BCL6
can inhibit activities of the immunoglobulin kappa (Igkappa) intron and 3'
enhancers. At the Igkappa 3' enhancer, BCL6 repressed enhancer activity through
the PU.1 binding site. We found that BCL6 physically interacted with PU.1 in vivo
and in vitro, and the results of sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation assays 
and transient-expression assays suggested that BCL6 recruitment to the Igkappa
and Iglambda 3' enhancers occurred via PU.1 interaction. By computational
studies, we identified genes that are repressed in germinal center cells and
whose promoters contain conserved PU.1 binding sites in mouse and human. We found
that many of these promoters bound to both PU.1 and BCL6 in vivo. In addition,
BCL6 knockdown resulted in increased expression of a subset of these genes,
demonstrating that BCL6 is involved in their repression. The recruitment of BCL6 
to promoter regions by PU.1 represents a new regulatory mechanism that expands
the number of genes regulated by this important transcriptional repressor.

PMCID: PMC2725722
PMID: 19564417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Ai Zheng. 2009 Feb;28(2):146-9. Epub 2009 Feb 15.

Short-term efficacy of rituximab-CHOP and CHOP regimens on two subtypes of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Xia Y(1), Li ZM, Shi YX, Xia ZJ, Jiang WQ, Huang HQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Medical
Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, PR China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) can be divided
into two subgroups as germinal center B-cell like (GCB) and non-GCB DLBCL,
according to the origin of tumor cells. The prognosis of GCB DLBCL is better than
that of non-GCB DLBCL after receiving the CHOP regimen on initial therapy. This
study was to compare the short-term efficacy of rituximab(R)-CHOP and CHOP
regimens on GCB and non-GCB DLBCL, thus to explore the optimal first-line regimen
for the initial treatment of DLBCL patients.
METHODS: In total, eighty-three patients with de novo DLBCL initially treated at 
Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center from November 2006 to February 2008 were
enrolled. Patients were divided into GCB and non-GCB groups. The short-term
efficacy of the CHOP or R-CHOP regimen as the first-line therapy on the two
groups was evaluated according to the revised response criteria for lymphoma.
Bcl-2 expression and its correlation to the short-term efficacy of the two groups
were assessed.
RESULTS: There were 35 cases (42.2%) in the GCB group and 48 cases (57.8%) in the
non-GCB group. The total remission rate was 74.3% in the GCB group and 60.4% in
the non-GCB group (p = 0.006). There was no significant difference in Bcl-2
expression in the two groups. The remission rate was higher in Bcl-2 positive
patients receiving R-CHOP regimen than those receiving CHOP regimen (75.6% vs.
47.8%, p = 0.023). There was no significant difference in the remission rate of
Bcl-2 negative patients, regardless of chemotherapy regimen.
CONCLUSION: The prognosis is better in the GCB group than in the non-GCB group.
Addition of rituximab to CHOP could improve the short-term efficacy of Bcl-2
positive patients.

PMID: 19550126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 7;106(27):11294-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903854106. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

BCL6 suppression of BCL2 via Miz1 and its disruption in diffuse large B cell
lymphoma.

Saito M(1), Novak U, Piovan E, Basso K, Sumazin P, Schneider C, Crespo M, Shen Q,
Bhagat G, Califano A, Chadburn A, Pasqualucci L, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor that is required for 
germinal center (GC) formation and whose deregulation by genomic lesions is
implicated in the pathogenesis of GC-derived diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) and, less frequently, follicular lymphoma (FL). The biological function
of BCL6 is only partially understood because no more than a few genes have been
functionally characterized as direct targets of BCL6 transrepression activity.
Here we report that the anti-apoptotic proto-oncogene BCL2 is a direct target of 
BCL6 in GC B cells. BCL6 binds to the BCL2 promoter region by interacting with
the transcriptional activator Miz1 and suppresses Miz1-induced activation of BCL2
expression. BCL6-mediated suppression of BCL2 is lost in FL and DLBCL, where the 
2 proteins are pathologically coexpressed, because of BCL2 chromosomal
translocations and other mechanisms, including Miz1 deregulation and somatic
mutations in the BCL2 promoter region. These results identify an important
function for BCL6 in facilitating apoptosis of GC B cells via suppression of
BCL2, and suggest that blocking this pathway is critical for lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2708681
PMID: 19549844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Haematologica. 2009 Jul;94(7):935-43. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2008.005355. Epub
2009 Jun 16.

Clinicopathological features of lymphoma/leukemia patients carrying both BCL2 and
MYC translocations.

Tomita N(1), Tokunaka M, Nakamura N, Takeuchi K, Koike J, Motomura S, Miyamoto K,
Kikuchi A, Hyo R, Yakushijin Y, Masaki Y, Fujii S, Hayashi T, Ishigatsubo Y,
Miura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. .

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2009 Jul;94(7):894-6.

BACKGROUND: Lymphoid neoplasm with 18q21.3/BCL2 and 8q24/MYC translocation to
immunoglobulin (IG) genes as dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia is very rare and known to
have a poor clinical outcome.
DESIGN AND METHODS: To clarify the clinicopathological characteristics of this
malignancy, we analyzed 27 cases of cytogenetically proven dual-hit
lymphoma/leukemia.
RESULTS: Dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia was diagnosed at presentation in 22 cases and
at relapse or disease progression in 5 cases. At the time of diagnosis of
dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia, extranodal involvement was found in 25 cases (93%)
and central nervous system involvement occurred in 15 cases (56%). The median
survival and 1-year survival rate of the 27 cases were only 6 months and 22%,
respectively, after diagnosis of the dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia. Seven cases of
triple-hit lymphoma/leukemia (dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia with 3q27/BCL6
translocation) were included; the median survival of these patients was only 4
months from the diagnosis of the dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia. The duration of
survival of the patients with a triple-hit malignancy was shorter than that of
the other 20 cases of dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia (p=0.02). The translocation
partner of MYC subdivided the dual-hit cases into two groups; 14 cases of IGH and
13 cases of IGK/L. The MIB-1 index was investigated in 14 cases with aggressive
B-cell lymphoma, and was higher in the group with MYC-IGH translocation (n=7)
than in the MYC-IGK/L group (n=7) (p=0.02). Overall survival was not different
between the MYC-IGH translocation group (n=14) and the MYC-IGK or MYC-IGL
translocation group (n=13).
CONCLUSIONS: Dual-hit lymphoma/leukemia is a rare but distinct mature B-cell
neoplasm with an extremely poor prognosis characterized by frequent extranodal
involvement and central nervous system progression with either of the
translocation partners of MYC.

PMCID: PMC2704304
PMID: 19535347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Hum Pathol. 2009 Oct;40(10):1504-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.02.018. Epub 2009
Jun 16.

Primary mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma of the gallbladder: report of 
a case harboring API2/MALT1 gene fusion.

Bisig B(1), Copie-Bergman C, Baia M, Gaulard P, Delbecque K, Fassotte MF, Boniver
J, de Leval L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire du Sart Tilman,
Liège, Belgium.

The genetic alterations underlying extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type are heterogeneous and show variation
according to the tumor site. Here, we report a case of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue lymphoma of the gallbladder with genetic characterization. This lymphoma, 
diagnosed in a 75-year-old woman who underwent cholecystectomy for suspected
acute cholecystitis, presented as diffuse thickening of the gallbladder wall. The
morphology was typical of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, and by
immunophenotype, the tumor cells were CD20+ CD5- CD10- CD23- CD43- BCL6- BCL2+
IgM+ IgD- lambda+, with moderate nuclear expression of BCL10. Interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis on paraffin sections, using a fusion 
probe for API2/MALT1, demonstrated 2 fusion signals in most nuclei, bringing the 
first documentation of a t(11;18)(q21;q21) in this exceptional primary disease
location.

PMID: 19535128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1210-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.87. Epub 2009 Jun 
12.

Most primary adrenal lymphomas are diffuse large B-cell lymphomas with
non-germinal center B-cell phenotype, BCL6 gene rearrangement and poor prognosis.

Mozos A(1), Ye H, Chuang WY, Chu JS, Huang WT, Chen HK, Hsu YH, Bacon CM, Du MQ, 
Campo E, Chuang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Primary adrenal lymphoma is extremely rare, accounting for <1% of non-Hodgkin
lymphomas, and lymphoma-associated chromosomal translocations have yet to be
reported in this entity. We performed a retrospective study of 10 cases in
immunocompetent patients including 4 males and 6 females with a median age of 68 
years. The most common presenting symptoms were abdominal pain and fever;
unexpectedly, clinically evident adrenal insufficiency was detected only in one
patient. The mean tumor size at diagnosis was 8.5 cm. Half of the patients had
bilateral involvement. All cases presented with stage IE disease without regional
nodal involvement. Histologically, eight cases were diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, all of which carried a non-germinal center B-cell phenotype.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed BCL6 gene rearrangement in 5 (83%) of
6 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas investigated. The remaining cases were one case 
each of plasmablastic lymphoma and extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, the
first and third case of primary adrenal lymphoma of these particular lymphoma
subtypes in the English literature, respectively. At a median follow-up of 4.5
months, 7 patients died of lymphoma, 1 died of an unrelated disease, 1 was alive 
with disease, and 1 was alive without disease. The prognosis of these patients
was poor as compared with those with nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. We
speculate that the poor outcome of primary adrenal lymphoma might be related to
the bulky tumor size at presentation, non-germinal center B-cell phenotype, and
frequent BCL-6 gene rearrangement.

PMID: 19525926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Hum Pathol. 2009 Jul;40(7):1055-6; author reply 1056. doi:
10.1016/j.humpath.2009.03.008.

Prognostic importance of BCL6 rearrangements in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
with respect to Bcl6 protein levels and primary lymphoma site.

Tzankov A, Schneider A, Hoeller S, Dirnhofer S.

Comment on
    Hum Pathol. 2009 May;40(5):645-52.

PMID: 19524106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Jun;50(6):900-3. doi: 10.1080/10428190902919192.

Does a diffuse growth pattern predict for survival in patients with low-grade
follicular lymphoma?

Bhagavathi S(1), Gu K, Loberiza FR, Bast M, Vose JM, Weisenburger DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Low-grade follicular lymphoma (LGFL) is known to have a good prognosis. However, 
the clinical relevance of the presence and extent of diffuse growth areas within 
LGFL is not clear. Therefore, we studied 457 patients with nodal LGFL seen over a
20-year period (1982-2002). Relevant clinical and survival data were obtained and
the pathology specimens were subclassified into predominantly follicular LGFL
(>or=80% follicular areas), significantly follicular LGFL (30-70% follicular
areas), significantly diffuse LGFL (<30% follicular areas) and pure diffuse
follicle centre lymphoma (DFCL). The majority of the patients were treated with
anthracycline-based regimens. Patients with DFCL were slightly older (median age,
67 years), more likely to have bulky disease (>5 cm), and often had suboptimal
biopsies. However, no association was observed between the extent of diffuse
areas and survival across the four subgroups. We conclude that the
subclassification of LGFL based on the extent of diffuse areas does not have
clinical relevance.

PMID: 19504394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jun;7(6):966-76. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0238. Epub
2009 Jun 2.

Reciprocal effects of STAT5 and STAT3 in breast cancer.

Walker SR(1), Nelson EA, Zou L, Chaudhury M, Signoretti S, Richardson A, Frank
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Breast cancer is often associated with inappropriate activation of transcription 
factors involved in normal mammary development. Two related transcription
factors, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5 and STAT3,
play important and distinct roles in mammary development and both can be
activated in breast cancer. However, the relative contribution of these STATs to 
mammary tumorigenesis is unknown. We have found that primary human breast tumors 
displaying activation of both STATs are more differentiated than those with STAT3
activation alone and display more favorable prognostic characteristics. To
understand this difference, we have analyzed the effect of these STATs on gene
regulation and phenotype of mammary carcinoma cells. STAT5 and STAT3 mediate
opposing effects on several key target genes, with STAT5 exerting a dominant
role. Using a model system of paired breast cancer cell lines, we found that
coactivation of STAT5 and STAT3 leads to decreased proliferation and increased
sensitivity to the chemotherapeutic drugs paclitaxel and vinorelbine compared
with cells that have only STAT3 activation. Thus, STAT5 can modify the effects of
STAT3 from the level of gene expression to cellular phenotype and analysis of the
activation state of both STAT5 and STAT3 may provide important diagnostic and
prognostic information in breast cancer.

PMID: 19491198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;29(15):4156-66. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01813-08. Epub 2009 Jun 
1.

Rac1 signaling modulates BCL-6-mediated repression of gene transcription.

Barros P(1), Jordan P, Matos P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge,
Avenida Padre Cruz, Lisbon, Portugal.

Rac1 is a member of the Rho family of small GTPases that not only regulates
signaling pathways involved in cell adhesion and migration but also regulates
gene transcription. Here we show that the transcriptional repressor BCL-6 is
regulated by Rac1 signaling. Transfection of active Rac1 mutants into colorectal 
DLD-1 cells led to increased expression of a BCL-6-controlled luciferase reporter
construct. Conversely, inhibition of endogenous Rac1 activation by the Rac1
inhibitor NSC23766 decreased reporter activity. Moreover, BCL-6 lost its typical 
localization to nuclear dots upon activation of Rac1 and became predominantly
soluble in a non-chromatin-bound cell fraction. Rac1 signaling also regulated the
expression of endogenous BCL-6-regulated genes, including the p50 precursor
NF-kappaB1/p105 and the cell adhesion molecule CD44. Interestingly, these effects
were not stimulated by the alternative splice variant Rac1b. The mechanism of
BCL-6 inhibition does not involve formation of a stable Rac1/BCL-6 complex and is
independent of Rac-induced reactive oxygen species production or Jun
NH(2)-terminal kinase activation. We show that PAK1 mediates inhibition
downstream of Rac and can directly phosphorylate BCL-6. Together, these data
provide substantial evidence that Rac1 signaling inhibits the transcriptional
repressor BCL-6 in colorectal cells and reveal a novel pathway that links Rac1
signaling to the regulation of gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2715802
PMID: 19487462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Am J Hematol. 2009 Jul;84(7):435-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21434.

Differentiating germinal center-derived lymphomas through their cellular
microenvironment.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A, Cabras A, Elia G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory and Transfusion Medicine, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy. antonino.carbone@istitutotumori.mi.it

Recent studies on normal and malignant B-cells have provided evidence that the
germinal center (GC) of lymphoid follicles exerts a role in B-cell physiology and
malignancy. GC-derived lymphomas include both B-cell and T-cell lymphomas.
Remarkably, tumor cells of GC-derived lymphomas proliferate in close association 
with cellular environment that retains key features of normal GC cellular
microenvironment. Neoplastic follicles in follicular lymphoma contain, in
addition to follicular dendritic cells (FDC) other non-neoplastic cells including
macrophages and GC T-cells. In addition to aggregates of FDCs, the background
infiltrate of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma includes small
B-cells, T-cells, and histiocytes. Typically, most of the lymphocyte predominant 
(LP) cells are ringed by CD3+/CD4+ T-cells expressing CD57, PD1, BCL6, and
MUM1/IRF4. By contrast, Reed-Sternberg cells of classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL)
are surrounded by CD3+/CD4+ T-cells expressing CD40L. Unlike cHL and other
peripheral T-cell lymphomas, the AITL microenvironment characteristically contain
a prominent proliferation of high endothelial venules and FDC. Thus, these
findings shed new light on the characterization of GC-derived lymphomas and may
help in the differential diagnosis and acknowledge several novel pathogenetic
mechanisms on these lymphomas. Am. J. Hematol., 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19484731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Acta Haematol. 2009;121(4):196-201. doi: 10.1159/000220332. Epub 2009 May 26.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma without immunoglobulin light chain restriction by
flow cytometry.

Tomita N(1), Takeuchi K, Hyo R, Hashimoto C, Takemura S, Taguchi J, Fujita H,
Fujisawa S, Ogawa K, Motomura S, Ishigatsubo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
cavalier@ch-yamate.dlenet.com

BACKGROUND: The existence of immunoglobulin light chain restriction (LCR)
strongly indicates B cell monoclonality. Although LCR-deficient B cell
malignancies are often observed, their details are barely known.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed LCR-negative diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) to elucidate their clinical features. Consecutive DLBCL patients (n =
119), whose histological diagnostic specimens were analyzed by flow cytometry
(FCM), were divided into 2 groups: LCR-positive and LCR-negative DLBCL. Cases
wherein FCM did not capture tumor cells were excluded.
RESULTS: There were 91 LCR-positive (76%) and 28 LCR-negative (24%) DLBCL. The 2 
groups did not differ with regard to background, including the International
Prognostic Index (IPI), each factor of IPI, gender, bulky mass and B-symptoms.
FCM analysis showed that CD10-positive cases were less frequent in the
LCR-negative DLBCL group than in the LCR-positive DLBCL group. CD5-positive cases
were absent in the LCR-negative DLBCL group. Chromosomal analysis showed that the
frequency of BCL2, BCL6 and MYC translocations did not differ between the groups.
There was no survival difference in the groups.
CONCLUSION: LCR-negative DLBCL accounts for about one fourth of all DLBCL and
their prognosis is similar to that of LCR-positive DLBCL. CD10-negative status
might characterize LCR-negative DLBCL.

Copyright (c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19468204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mod Pathol. 2009 Aug;22(8):1006-15. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.54. Epub 2009 May
22.

Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma: distinctive tumor and
microenvironment markers.

Nam-Cha SH(1), Montes-Moreno S, Salcedo MT, Sanjuan J, Garcia JF, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)[ Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete,
Albacete, Spain. tnamcha@yahoo.es

The existence, diagnostic features, and the biological and clinical relevance of 
lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma remain controversial. A comparative 
marker analysis of lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma, nodular
lymphocyte-predominance Hodgkin's lymphoma, and of other subtypes of classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma was carried out. Markers were selected focusing on B-cell
lineage and transcription program (OCT.1, OCT.2, BOB.1, BCL6, PAX-5, GCET1,
KLHL6, and BLIMP1), the NF-kappaB signaling pathway (REL-B, C-REL, TRAF-1, p-50, 
and MUM-1) and the T-cell microenvironment (CD3, CD57, PD-1, CXCL-13, and CD10,
BCL-6, CD23). Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma cases displayed
features intermediate between those of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and nodular
lymphocyte-predominance Hodgkin's lymphoma. The expression of B-cell
transcription factors such as OCT.1, OCT.2, BOB.1, and BCL6 was more frequent in 
lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma than in classical Hodgkin's
lymphoma. A follicular T-cell microenvironment was also identified in 50% of
lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma cases. NF-kB markers were expressed 
at frequencies comparable with those observed in classical Hodgkin's lymphoma.
The neoplastic cell immunophenotype and microenvironment in lymphocyte-rich
classical Hodgkin's lymphoma closely mimic that which are observed in the outer
zone of the germinal center, where B-cell blasts with germinal-center markers
co-express CD30 and the B-cell transcription program, surrounded by follicular
T-cell rosettes. Lymphocyte-rich classical Hodgkin's lymphoma seems to be
characterized by a stronger expression of the B-cell transcription program by the
neoplastic cells and by a follicular T-cell background, occupying an intermediate
position between classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and nodular lymphocyte-predominance
Hodgkin's lymphoma.

PMID: 19465900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mod Pathol. 2009 Sep;22(9):1251-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.81. Epub 2009 May 
22.

t(14;18)-negative follicular lymphomas are associated with a high frequency of
BCL6 rearrangement at the alternative breakpoint region.

Gu K(1), Fu K, Jain S, Liu Z, Iqbal J, Li M, Sanger WG, Weisenburger DD, Greiner 
TC, Aoun P, Dave BJ, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA.

A frequent chromosomal translocation in mature B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma
affects band 3q27 and results in the deregulation of the B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6)
gene. Two breakpoint clusters have been described thus far, the major breakpoint 
region (MBR) and an alternative breakpoint region (ABR) that is located 245-285
kb 5' to BCL6. Translocation at the MBR predominates in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, whereas translocation at the ABR is reported to be frequently
associated with grade 3B follicular lymphoma. However, translocation at the ABR
has not been studied in a large series of follicular lymphomas, particularly
t(14;18)-negative follicular lymphomas. Therefore, we studied BLC6 rearrangements
at the MBR and ABR by using break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
probes in 142 cases of follicular lymphomas, including 63 t(14;18)-negative and
79 t(14;18)-positive cases. Conventional cytogenetic (karyotype) analysis was
also performed in 58 of the 63 t(14;18)-negative cases. BCL6 rearrangement was
found in 26% of t(14;18)-negative and 19% of t(14;18)-positive follicular
lymphoma. t(14;18)-negative cases showed a high frequency of rearrangement at the
ABR (12%) with an ABR/MBR ratio of 0.86, compared with only 5% with an ABR/MBR
ratio of 0.36 in the t(14;18)-positive cases. BCL6 rearrangements were found in
all grades of follicular lymphoma but were most frequent in grade 3
t(14;18)-negative follicular lymphoma (60%). FISH analysis had a higher
sensitivity for detecting BCL6 rearrangements than conventional cytogenetics. In 
conclusion, BCL6 rearrangements occur at a similar frequency in t(14;18)-negative
follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. However, t(14;18)-negative
follicular lymphoma appears to have a higher frequency of rearrangement at the
ABR compared with t(14;18)-positive follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma. Therefore, it is important to perform FISH analysis with ABR to
determine possible involvement of BCL6 rearrangement in follicular lymphoma,
especially in t(14;18)-negative cases.

PMCID: PMC2736319
PMID: 19465899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mod Pathol. 2009 Aug;22(8):1094-101. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.73. Epub 2009
May 15.

Prognostic impact of activated B-cell focused classification in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma patients treated with R-CHOP.

Nyman H(1), Jerkeman M, Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML, Banham AH, Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. heidi.nyman@helsinki.fi

Gene expression profiling studies initially enabled diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
to be divided into germinal center and activated B-cell-like subtypes, which
define high- and low-risk patient groups when treated with chemotherapy. Attempts
to reproduce the prognostic classification immunohistochemically have, however,
provided inconsistent results. The aim of this study was to determine whether
modified immunohistochemical classification of cell of origin focusing on
activated B-cell-like markers could be used to predict the outcome of
immunochemotherapy-treated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients. The expression
of CD10, Bcl-6, MUM1/IRF4, Bcl-2, and FOXP1 was determined immunohistochemically 
from 88 samples of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients treated uniformly with 
R-CHOP. When the modified classification using MUM1/IRF4 and FOXP1 positivities
as activated B-cell-like markers was applied to distinguish the patients between 
the activated B-cell-like and other diffuse large B-cell lymphoma subtypes, a
significantly worse outcome was seen for the patients with the activated
B-cell-like phenotype (3-year failure-free survival 63 vs 82%, P=0.048, overall
survival 69 vs 85%, P=0.110). Similarly, according to the Muris algorithm, the
group 2 patients representing Bcl-2-positive post-germinal center patients showed
an inferior outcome in comparison to the group 1 patients (failure-free survival 
59 vs 81%, P=0.041, overall survival 67 vs 82%, P=0.159). In contrast, when the
classification of the same cohort was performed according to the Hans algorithm, 
no significant difference in survival was observed between the germinal center
and non-germinal center patients. In conclusion, the data suggest that both the
modified activated B-cell-like and Muris classifications define the non-germinal 
center phenotype as an adverse risk factor in R-CHOP-treated diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma patients.

PMID: 19448593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Sci. 2009 May;100(5):920-6.

Gain-of-function mutations and copy number increases of Notch2 in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Lee SY(1), Kumano K, Nakazaki K, Sanada M, Matsumoto A, Yamamoto G, Nannya Y,
Suzuki R, Ota S, Ota Y, Izutsu K, Sakata-Yanagimoto M, Hangaishi A, Yagita H,
Fukayama M, Seto M, Kurokawa M, Ogawa S, Chiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Therapy and Transplantation Medicine, University of Tokyo
Hospital, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Signaling through the Notch1 receptor has a pivotal role in early thymocyte
development. Gain of Notch1 function results in the development of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in a number of mouse experimental models, and activating
Notch1 mutations deregulate Notch1 signaling in the majority of human T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemias. Notch2, another member of the Notch gene family,
is preferentially expressed in mature B cells and is essential for marginal zone 
B-cell generation. Here, we report that 5 of 63 (approximately 8%) diffuse large 
B-cell lymphomas, a subtype of mature B-cell lymphomas, have Notch2 mutations.
These mutations lead to partial or complete deletion of the proline-, glutamic
acid-, serine- and threonine-rich (PEST) domain, or a single amino acid
substitution at the C-terminus of Notch2 protein. Furthermore, high-density
oligonucleotide microarray analysis revealed that some diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma cases also have increased copies of the mutated Notch2 allele. In the
Notch activation-sensitive luciferase reporter assay in vitro, mutant Notch2
receptors show increased activity compared with wild-type Notch2. These findings 
implicate Notch2 gain-of-function mutations in the pathogenesis of a subset of
B-cell lymphomas, and suggest broader roles for Notch gene mutations in human
cancers.

PMID: 19445024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cell Biol Int. 2009 Aug;33(8):853-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2009.04.017. Epub
2009 May 7.

P53 negatively regulates the transcriptional activity of FOXO3a under oxidative
stress.

Miyaguchi Y(1), Tsuchiya K, Sakamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tennoudai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan.

Transcription factors P53 and FOXO are both activated in response to stresses via
protein-protein interactions, leading to events such as cell survival or
apoptosis. To clarify the mechanisms that regulate FOXO activity, we analyzed the
intermolecular interaction of FOXO3a and P53. FOXO3a and P53 interacted in COS-7 
cells, and transcriptional activity of FOXO3a was suppressed by P53, but P53 was 
not affected by FOXO3a. RT-PCR revealed that expression of the endogenous
apoptosis-inducible genes Bim and Bcl6 was decreased markedly by co-expression of
P53 with them, but expression of p27 and CyclinG2 was not. In addition, treatment
with 500 microM H2O2 for 30 min to 1h to mimic oxidative stress promoted protein 
binding. Serum deprivation and drug treatment also affected the binding of FOXO3a
and P53. These findings suggest that FOXO3a controls cellular function by
changing its molecular interaction with P53 to mediate transcription factor
activity under stress stimuli.

PMID: 19427386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Endocrinology. 2009 Aug;150(8):3645-54. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0212. Epub 2009 Apr 
30.

Computational and functional analysis of growth hormone (GH)-regulated genes
identifies the transcriptional repressor B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bc16) as a
participant in GH-regulated transcription.

Chen Y(1), Lin G, Huo JS, Barney D, Wang Z, Livshiz T, States DJ, Qin ZS,
Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5622. jeschwar@umich.edu.

For insight into transcriptional mechanisms mediating physiological responses to 
GH, data mining was performed on a profile of GH-regulated genes induced or
inhibited at different times in highly responsive 3T3-F442A adipocytes. Gene set 
enrichment analysis indicated that GH-regulated genes are enriched in pathways
including phosphoinositide and insulin signaling and suggested that suppressor of
cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2) and phosphoinositide 3' kinase regulatory subunit
p85alpha (Pik3r1) are important targets. Model-based Chinese restaurant
clustering identified a group of genes highly regulated by GH at times consistent
with its key physiological actions. This cluster included IGF-I, phosphoinositide
3' kinase p85alpha, SOCS2, and cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein. It also
contains the most strongly repressed gene in the profile, B cell lymphoma 6
(Bcl6), a transcriptional repressor. Quantitative real-time PCR verified the
strong decrease in Bcl6 mRNA after GH treatment and induction of the other genes 
in the cluster. Transcriptional network analysis of the genes implicated signal
transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5 as hub regulating the most
responsive genes, Igf1, Socs2, Cish, and Bcl6. Transcriptional activation
analysis demonstrated that Bcl6 inhibits SOCS2-luciferase and blunts its
stimulation by GH. Occupancy of endogenous Bcl6 on SOCS2 DNA decreased after GH
treatment, whereas occupancy of Stat5 increased concomitantly. Thus, GH-mediated 
inhibition of Bcl6 expression may reverse the repression of SOCS2 and facilitate 
SOCS2 activation by GH. Together these analyses identify Bcl6 as a participant in
GH-regulated gene expression and suggest an interplay between the repressor Bcl6 
and the activator Stat5 in regulating genes, which contribute to GH responses.

PMCID: PMC2717871
PMID: 19406940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int J Cancer. 2009 Aug 15;125(4):977-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24450.

BCL6 cooperates with CD40 stimulation and loss of p53 function to rapidly
transform primary B cells.

Kusam S(1), Munugalavadla V, Sawant D, Dent A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor protein has been shown to promote B-cell
lymphoma in transgenic mouse models. The mechanism by which BCL6 transforms
primary B cells is unclear, although repression of the p53 tumor suppressor is
thought to play a role. Here, we showed that BCL6 has critical oncogene functions
that are independent of p53 repression. We found that BCL6 cooperates with
constitutive CD40 signaling to rapidly transform p53-deficient primary mouse B
cells in vitro. Constitutive CD40 signaling alone does not transform
p53-deficient B cells, indicating that BCL6 acts specifically as an immortalizing
oncogene in this system. The BCL6 transformed B cells are polyclonal and form
polyclonal tumors. At the initiation of the cultures, BCL6 does not significantly
alter cell cycle progression, but it does promote increased cell survival. Early 
cultures of BCL6-expressing B cells exhibited marked repression of ATR and
p27kip1 but not other BCL6 target genes, suggesting that the ATR and p27kip1
genes have key early roles in mediating BCL6 transformation function.
BCL6-transformed cell lines exhibited further decreases of ATR and p27kip1
expression plus strong decreases in Blimp1 and PDCD2 expression. Our study
provides important clues about the critical target genes used by BCL6 to
transform primary B cells and indicates that the CD40 signaling pathway can
collaborate with BCL6 in the transformation of primary B cells. Thus, our study
demonstrates a rapid in vitro system to analyze the transformation function of
BCL6.

PMCID: PMC2746643
PMID: 19405121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Pathol. 2009 Aug;218(4):478-86. doi: 10.1002/path.2555.

Molecular characterization of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders of
donor origin occurring in liver transplant recipients.

Capello D(1), Rasi S, Oreste P, Veronese S, Cerri M, Ravelli E, Rossi D, Minola
E, Colosimo A, Gambacorta M, Muti G, Morra E, Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine &
BRMA, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy.
capello@med.unipmn.it

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs) represent a frequent
complication of solid organ transplantation. Although most PTLDs arise from
recipient lymphoid cells, a considerable fraction of cases may arise from donor
B-cells. In an attempt to clarify the histogenesis and pathogenesis of PTLDs
derived from donor B-cells, monoclonal PTLDs occurring in liver transplant
recipients were chosen as a model to compare donor (D-PTLDs) versus recipient
PTLDs (R-PTLDs). The tumour panel included nine D-PTLDs and six R-PTLDs. D-PTLDs 
were early-onset, EBV-infected lymphoproliferations classified as polymorphic
PTLD (P-PTLD; n = 7) or diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL; n = 2) with tumour 
localization confined to the hepatic hilum. All R-PTLDs were late-onset DLBCLs
and showed extrahepatic localization. A BCL-6(-)/MUM1(+)/CD138(+/-) phenotype,
consistent with a post-germinal centre (GC) stage of pre-terminal B-cell
differentiation, was observed in all D-PTLDs and in 2/6 R-PTLDs, whereas a
BCL6(+)/MUM1(-)/CD138(-) profile, reminiscent of GC B-cells, was detected in 4/6 
R-PTLDs. The presence of somatic IGHV hypermutation was observed in 6/9 D-PTLDs
and in 4/6 R-PTLDs, suggesting derivation from antigen-experienced B-cells.
IGHV4-39 was the IGHV gene most frequently encountered, being rearranged in 3/9
D-PTLDs. Among IGHV-mutated PTLDs, a mutational profile suggesting antigen
stimulation and/or selection was observed in 4/6 D-s and in 2/4 R-PTLDs. The
presence of ongoing IGHV mutations was detected in 2/4 D-PTLDs. Aberrant SHM was 
detected in 10/15 (66.7%) PTLDs, including 6/9 D-PTLDs and 4/6 R-PTLDs. Our
findings suggest that (i) D-PTLDs show a clinical presentation distinct from
R-PTLDs; (ii) immunophenotypic and genetic features of D-PTLDs are consistent
with mature, GC-experienced B-cells; (iii) transformed donor-derived B-cells may 
experience antigen-driven stimulation and selection, and may acquire genetic
lesions during neoplastic expansion in the recipient environment; and (iv) EBV
infection and expression of viral oncoproteins may be relevant in the
pathogenesis of D-PTLDs.

(c) 2009 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19391128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Exp Med. 2009 May 11;206(5):991-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090303. Epub 2009 Apr 20.

T follicular helper cells differentiate from Th2 cells in response to helminth
antigens.

Glatman Zaretsky A(1), Taylor JJ, King IL, Marshall FA, Mohrs M, Pearce EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

The relationship of T follicular helper (TFH) cells to other T helper (Th)
subsets is controversial. We find that after helminth infection, or immunization 
with helminth antigens, reactive lymphoid organs of 4get IL-4/GFP reporter mice
contain populations of IL-4/GFP-expressing CD4(+) T cells that display the TFH
markers CXCR5, PD-1, and ICOS. These TFH cells express the canonical TFH markers 
BCL6 and IL-21, but also GATA3, the master regulator of Th2 cell differentiation.
Consistent with a relationship between Th2 and TFH cells, IL-4 protein
production, reported by expression of huCD2 in IL-4 dual reporter (4get/KN2)
mice, was a robust marker of TFH cells in LNs responding to helminth antigens.
Moreover, the majority of huCD2/IL-4-producing Th cells were found within B cell 
follicles, consistent with their definition as TFH cells. TFH cell development
after immunization failed to occur in mice lacking B cells or CD154. The
relationship of TFH cells to the Th2 lineage was confirmed when TFH cells were
found to develop from CXCR5(-) PD-1(-) IL-4/GFP(+) CD4(+) T cells after their
transfer into naive mice and antigen challenge in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2715032
PMID: 19380637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Apr;17(2):290-3.

[Bcl-6 expression in K562 cells and its role in mechanism underlying induced
differentiation into various myelocytic lineages].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang YQ(1), Huang GS, Chen XQ, Bai QX, Liang R, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xi'jing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, China. zyqlhj@fmmu.edu.cn

This study was purposed to investigate the changes of bcl-6 expression in K562
cells and the mechanism inducing differentiation into different myelocyte
lineages. Models of K562 cells inducing differentiation to lineages of
megakaryocyte, erythrocyte and macrophagocyte were established with inducers TPA 
(tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate), Hu (hydroxyurea) and HMBA (hexamethylene
bisacetamide) respectively. Western blot assay was applied to detect the
expression of bcl-6 in K562 cells before and after the induction. Meanwhile, PCR,
cloning and direct DNA sequencing were used to identify mutations in the 5'
regulatory region of bcl-6 in K562 cells before and after induction with TPA. The
results indicated that up-regulation of bcl-6 expression was found only in K562
cells being induced differentiating into megakaryocyte-lineage, while mutation of
5' regulatory region of bcl-6 gene was not found. It is concluded that expression
of bcl-6 increases only when K562 cells differentiate into megakaryocyte lineage 
and bcl-6 expression may play an important role in K562 cells induced
differentiation into megakaryocyte lineage. The up-regulation of bcl-6 expression
may not be related with the mutation of 5' regulatory regions of the gene.

PMID: 19379553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Apr;50(4):571-81. doi: 10.1080/10428190902785528.

Identification of biological markers of sensitivity to high-clinical-risk-adapted
therapy for patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Saez AI(1), García-Cosío M, Sáez AJ, Hernández JM, Sánchez-Verde L, Alvarez D, de
la Cueva P, Arranz R, Conde E, Grande C, Rodríguez J, Caballero D, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Red de Bancos de Tumores de Andalucia, Granada, Spain.
anai.saez.exts@juntadeandalucia.es

The aim of the project was to identify biological variables in high-clinical-risk
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), treated with risk-adapted
therapies. The study was performed in a series of high-clinical-risk patients
with DLBCL treated with MegaCHOP or MegaCHOP + IFE followed by autologous
stem-cell transplantation (ASCT). An initial reduced set of diagnostic tumoral
samples was studied by gene expression profiling and gene-set-enrichment
analysis. A set of potential biomarkers extracted from this study was then
explored in tissue microarrays containing paraffin-diagnostic tissue from 50
patients. The statistical analysis identified 17 immunohistochemical markers
associated with the clinical endpoints. A subsequent multivariate analysis
identified FoxP3+ T-reg cells as an independent predictor of failure-free
survival. Bcl6 expression, CG/ABC subclasses and IPI were found not to predict
survival in this series. The increased presence of regulatory T-cells as a marker
of adverse outcome highlights specific components of the tumoral microenvironment
in the pathogenesis and treatment response prediction for high-clinical-risk
patients with DLBCL.

PMID: 19373655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009 May;131(5):656-62. doi: 10.1309/AJCPF9V8XRDYWTIR.

Follicular lymphoma of the spleen: multiparameter analysis of 16 cases.

Howard MT(1), Dufresne S, Swerdlow SH, Cook JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Ave,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) involving the spleen must be distinguished from reactive
hyperplasia and from other lymphomas. A prior study reported that splenic FLs
frequently lack BCL2 expression, further complicating diagnosis. We examined 16
cases of splenic FL, including 12 cases initially diagnosed at splenectomy. Two
morphologic patterns were identified: one with architectural abnormalities (AA)
and one with an extensive architectural preservation (AP) pattern. Newly
diagnosed AP cases were associated with older age (P = .051) and grade 1
histologic features (P = .023). All cases displayed a CD10+/BCL2+ phenotype.
Cytogenetics and FISH identified IGH/BCL2 or BCL6 translocations in all tested
cases. Splenic FLs display phenotypic and cytogenetic findings similar to nodal
FLs. However, splenic FLs frequently display an exclusively intrafollicular
growth pattern resembling so-called in situ FL. Recognition of subtle FL with
preserved architecture is important because patients may have overt FL at other
sites or the FL may progress to overt nodal disease.

PMID: 19369624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 May;50(5):773-80. doi: 10.1080/10428190902842626.

BCL6: somatic mutations and expression in early-stage chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.

Jantus Lewintre E(1), Reinoso Martín C, García Ballesteros C, Pendas J, Benet
Campos C, Mayans Ferrer JR, García-Conde J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology Laboratory, Prince Felipe Research Centre, Valencia,
Spain. jantus_elo@gva.es

BCL6 somatic mutations affect normal and tumoral post germinal center
B-lymphocytes. Our objective was to analyse expression, mutations and
polymorphisms in the BCL6 gene and to correlate those variables with the clinical
outcome in early-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). CLL samples were used 
for characterisation of the mutational status of BCL6/ immunoglobulin variable
heavy chain (IGHV) genes, and expression of BCL6 was determined by real time PCR 
and immunoblot. Out of 68 cases, 29% show somatic mutations on BCL6 which occur
exclusively in IGHV mutated cases. They are single nucleotide substitutions
located mainly in two short mutational hot spots. CLL cells express different
levels of BCL6 regardless of the mutational status, the number of mutations and
polymorphisms. CLL cases expressing high levels of BCL6 have significantly
shorter treatment-free interval. In conclusion, in early-stage patients with CLL,
we found no correlation between expression and the mutations or polymorphism in
BCL6, but high levels of BCL6 can discriminate patients with a worse prognosis.

PMID: 19367498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2009 Apr;13(2):177-80. doi: 10.1188/09.CJON.177-180.

Management of patients with primary central nervous system lymphoma treated with 
high-dose methotrexate.

Warnick E(1), Auger D.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical Center Clinic, The West Penn Allegheny Oncology Network,
Kittanning, PA, USA. ewarnick@wpaon.org

Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is a rare, extranodal form of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma that most commonly presents with neurologic changes.
Comprehensive workup to diagnose PCNSL and rule out nodal non-Hodgkin lymphoma is
critical to the development of an appropriate plan for therapy. Past PCNSL
treatments have included whole-brain radiation or steroids, but high-dose
methotrexate (MTX) has emerged as initial therapy. Although high-dose MTX is well
tolerated, special considerations must be taken to administer the drug safely.
Specific interventions include aggressive IV hydration with sodium bicarbonate
fluids, monitoring blood chemistries, and the administration of leucovorin
rescue. Nurses should evaluate and monitor patients closely during treatment to
ensure safety and decrease drug toxicity.

PMID: 19349264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Mar;1158:246-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2008.04099.x.

Inferring gene networks: dream or nightmare?

Baralla A(1), Mentzen WI, de la Fuente A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Laboratorio di ricerca e diagnosi di
proteomica, metabolomica e biologia molecolare clinica, Università degli Studi di
Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Inferring gene networks is a daunting task. We here describe several algorithms
we used in the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM2) 
Reverse Engineering Competition 2007: an algorithm based on first-order partial
correlation for discovering BCL6 targets in Challenge 1 and an algorithm using
nonlinear optimization with winning performance in Challenge 3. After the gold
standards for the challenges were released, the performance of alternative
variants of the algorithms could be evaluated. The DREAM competition taught us
some strong lessons. Amazingly, simpler methods performed in general better than 
more advanced, theoretically motivated approaches. Also, the challenges strongly 
showed that inferring gene networks requires controlled experimentation using a
well-defined experimental design. Analyzing data obtained through merging many
unrelated datasets indeed resulted in weak performances of all algorithms, while 
algorithms that explicitly took the experimental design into account performed
best.

PMID: 19348646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Mar;1158:215-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2008.03759.x.

Inferring direct regulatory targets of a transcription factor in the DREAM2
challenge.

Vega VB(1), Woo XY, Hamidi H, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Bourque G, Clarke ND.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

In the DREAM2 community-wide experiment on regulatory network inference, one of
the challenges was to identify which genes, in a list of 200, are direct
regulatory targets of the transcription factor BCL6. The organizers of the
challenge defined targets based on gene expression and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments (ChIP-chip). The expression data were publicly
available; the ChIP-chip data were not. In order to assess the likelihood that a 
gene is a BCL6 target, we used three classes of information: expression-level
differences, over-representation of sequence motifs in promoter regions, and gene
ontology annotations. A weight was attached to each analysis based on how well it
identified BCL6-bound genes as defined by publicly available ChIP-chip data. By
the organizers' criteria, our group, GenomeSingapore, performed best. However,
our retrospective analysis indicates that this success was dominated by a gene
expression analysis that was predicated on a regulatory model known to be favored
by the organizers. We also noted that the 200-gene test set was enriched only in 
genes that are upregulated, while genes bound by BCL6 are enriched in both
upregulated and downregulated genes. Together, these observations suggest
possible model biases in the selection of the gold-standard gene set and imply
that our success was attained in part by adhering to the same assumptions. We
argue that model biases of this type are unavoidable in the inference of
regulatory networks and, for that reason, we suggest that future community-wide
experiments of this type should focus on the prediction of data, rather than
models.

PMID: 19348643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Mar;1158:205-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2008.03758.x.

A data integration framework for prediction of transcription factor targets.

Nykter M(1), Lähdesmäki H, Rust A, Thorsson V, Shmulevich I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA.

We present a computational framework for predicting targets of transcription
factor regulation. The framework is based on the integration of a number of
sources of evidence, derived from DNA-sequence and gene-expression data, using a 
weighted sum approach. Sources of evidence are prioritized based on a training
set, and their relative contributions are then optimized. The performance of the 
proposed framework is demonstrated in the context of BCL6 target prediction. We
show that this framework is able to uncover BCL6 targets reliably when biological
prior information is utilized effectively, particularly in the case of sequence
analysis. The framework results in a considerable gain in performance over scores
in which sequence information was not incorporated. This analysis shows that with
assessment of the quality and biological relevance of the data, reliable
predictions can be obtained with this computational framework.

PMCID: PMC2771581
PMID: 19348642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Mar;1158:196-204. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2008.03755.x.

DREAM2 challenge.

Lee WH(1), Narang V, Xu H, Lin F, Chin KC, Sung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

In the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods Conference
(DREAM2) BCL6 target identification challenge, we were given a list of 200 genes 
and tasked to identify which ones are the true targets of BCL6 using an
independent panel of gene-expression data. Initial efforts using conventional
motif-scanning approaches to find BCL6 binding sites in the promoters of the 200 
genes as a means of identifying BCL6 true targets proved unsuccessful. Instead,
we performed a large-scale comparative study of multiple expression data under
different conditions. Specifically, we employed a supervised learning approach
that learns and models the expression patterns under different conditions and
controls from a training collection of known BCL6 targets and randomly chosen
decoys. Genes in the given list whose expression matches well with that of the
training set of known BCL6 targets are more likely to be BCL6 targets. Using this
approach, we are able to identify BCL6 targets with high accuracy, making us
joint best performers of the challenge.

PMID: 19348641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. BMC Immunol. 2009 Apr 2;10:18. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-10-18.

Identification of novel transcriptional regulators involved in macrophage
differentiation and activation in U937 cells.

Baek YS(1), Haas S, Hackstein H, Bein G, Hernandez-Santana M, Lehrach H, Sauer S,
Seitz H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany. baek@molgen.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Monocytes and macrophages play essential role in innate immunity.
Understanding the underlying mechanism of macrophage differentiation and the
identification of regulatory mechanisms will help to find new strategies to
prevent their harmful effects in chronic inflammatory diseases and sepsis.
RESULTS: Maturation of blood monocytes into tissue macrophages and subsequent
inflammatory response was mimicked in U937 cells of human histocytic lymphoma
origin. Whole genome array analysis was employed to evaluate gene expression
profile to identify underlying transcriptional networks implicated during the
processes of differentiation and inflammation. In addition to already known
transcription factors (i.e. MAFB, EGR, IRF, BCL6, NFkB, AP1, Nur77), gene
expression analysis further revealed novel genes (i.e. MEF2, BRI, HLX, HDAC5,
H2AV, TCF7L2, NFIL3) previously uncharacterized to be involved in the
differentiation process. A total of 58 selected genes representing cytokines,
chemokines, surface antigens, signaling molecules and transcription factors were 
validated by real time PCR and compared to primary monocyte-derived macrophages. 
Beside the verification of several new genes, the comparison reveals individual
heterogeneity of blood donors.
CONCLUSION: Up regulation of MEF2 family, HDACs, and H2AV during cell
differentiation and inflammation sheds new lights onto regulation events on
transcriptional and epigenetic level controlling these processes. Data generated 
will serve as a source for further investigation of macrophages differentiation
pathways and related biological responses.

PMCID: PMC2674038
PMID: 19341462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Br J Cancer. 2009 Apr 21;100(8):1320-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605010. Epub 2009
Mar 31.

BCL6 degradation caused by the interaction with the C-terminus of pro-HB-EGF
induces cyclin D2 expression in gastric cancers.

Hirata Y(1), Ogasawara N, Sasaki M, Mizushima T, Shimura T, Mizoshita T, Mori Y, 
Kubota E, Wada T, Tanida S, Kataoka H, Kamiya T, Higashiyama S, Joh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor that has important functions in lymphocyte
differentiation and lymphomagenesis, but there have been no reports of BCL6
expression in gastric cancers. In the present study, we investigated the BCL6
function in gastric cancers. Treatment with TPA resulted in BCL6 degradation and 
cyclin D2 upregulation. This phenomenon was inhibited by the suppression of the
nuclear translocation of HB-EGF-CTF (C-terminal fragment of pro-HB-EGF). The
HB-EGF-CTF nuclear translocation leads to the interaction of BCL6 with HB-EGF-CTF
and the nuclear export of BCL6, and after that BCL6 degradation was mediated by
ubiquitin/proteasome pathway. Real-time RT-PCR and siRNA targeting BCL6 revealed 
that BCL6 suppresses cyclin D2 expression. Our data indicate that BCL6 interacts 
with nuclear-translocated HB-EGF-CTF and that the nuclear export and degradation 
of BCL6 induces cyclin D2 upregulation. We performed immunohistochemical analyses
of BCL6, HB-EGF and cyclin D2 in human gastric cancers. The inverse correlation
between BCL6 and cyclin D2 was also found in HB-EGF-positive human gastric
cancers. BCL6 degradation caused by the HB-EGF-CTF also might induce cyclin D2
expression in human gastric cancers. Inhibition of HB-EGF-CTF nuclear
translocation and maintenance of BCL6 function are important for the regulation
of gastric cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2676553
PMID: 19337254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Apr;18(4):1259-70. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-1037. Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma associated with germline variation in genes that
regulate the cell cycle, apoptosis, and lymphocyte development.

Morton LM(1), Purdue MP, Zheng T, Wang SS, Armstrong B, Zhang Y, Menashe I,
Chatterjee N, Davis S, Lan Q, Vajdic CM, Severson RK, Holford TR, Kricker A,
Cerhan JR, Leaderer B, Grulich A, Yeager M, Cozen W, Hoar Zahm S, Chanock SJ,
Rothman N, Hartge P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
mortonli@mail.nih.gov

Chromosomal translocations are the hallmark genetic aberration in non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL), with specific translocations often selectively associated with
specific NHL subtypes. Because many NHL-associated translocations involve cell
cycle, apoptosis, and lymphocyte development regulatory genes, we evaluated NHL
risk associated with common genetic variation in 20 candidate genes in these
pathways. Genotyping of 203 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) was
conducted in 1,946 NHL cases and 1,808 controls pooled from 3 independent
population-based case-control studies. We used logistic regression to compute
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for NHL and four major NHL
subtypes in relation to tag SNP genotypes and haplotypes. We observed the most
striking associations for tag SNPs in the proapoptotic gene BCL2L11 (BIM) and
BCL7A, which is involved in a rare NHL-associated translocation. Variants in
BCL2L11 were strongly related to follicular lymphoma only, particularly rs3789068
(OR(AG), 1.41; 95% CI, 1.10-1.81; OR(GG), 1.65; 95% CI, 1.25-2.19; P(trend) =
0.0004). Variants in BCL7A were strongly related to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
only, particularly rs1880030 (OR(AG), 1.34; 95% CI, 1.08-1.68; OR(AA), 1.60; 95% 
CI, 1.22-2.08; P(trend) = 0.0004). The associations for both variants were
similar in all three studies and supported by haplotype analyses. We also
observed notable associations for variants in BCL6, CCND1, and MYC. Our results
support the role of common genetic variation in cell cycle, apoptosis, and
lymphocyte development regulatory genes in lymphomagenesis, and suggest that
effects may vary by NHL subtype. Replication of our findings and further study to
identify functional SNPs are warranted.

PMCID: PMC2716008
PMID: 19336552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5536-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-193037. Epub 2009 
Mar 23.

The BCL6 transcriptional program features repression of multiple oncogenes in
primary B cells and is deregulated in DLBCL.

Ci W(1), Polo JM, Cerchietti L, Shaknovich R, Wang L, Yang SN, Ye K, Farinha P,
Horsman DE, Gascoyne RD, Elemento O, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor is required for development of germinal center
(GC) B cells and when expressed constitutively causes diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCLs). We examined genome-wide BCL6 promoter binding in GC B cells
versus DLBCLs to better understand its function in these settings. BCL6 bound to 
both distinct and common sets of functionally related gene in normal GC cells
versus DLBCL cells. Certain BCL6 target genes were preferentially repressed in GC
B cells, but not DLBCL cells. Several such genes have prominent oncogenic
functions, such as BCL2, MYC, BMI1, EIF4E, JUNB, and CCND1. BCL6 and BCL2
expression was negatively correlated in primary DLBCLs except in the presence of 
BCL2 translocations. The specific BCL6 inhibitor retro-inverso BCL6
peptidomimetic inhibitor-induced expression of BCL2 and other oncogenes,
consistent with direct repression effects by BCL6. These data are consistent with
a model whereby BCL6 can directly silence oncogenes in GC B cells and
counterbalance its own tumorigenic potential. Finally, a BCL6 consensus sequence 
and binding sites for other physiologically relevant transcription factors were
highly enriched among target genes and distributed in a pathway-dependent manner,
suggesting that BCL6 forms specific regulatory circuits with other B-cell
transcriptional factors.

PMCID: PMC2689052
PMID: 19307668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2009 Apr;13(2):78-81. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2008.12.002.

Primary lymphomas of the breast: a report on 5 cases studied in a period of 5
years at the Hospital General de México.

Romero-Guadarrama MB(1), Hernández-González MM, Durán-Padilla MA, Rivas-Vera S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Unit of the Hospital General de México, School of Medicine,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico City, CP 06726, México.
monicaromero@att.net.mx

Breast lymphomas can be primary or secondary. Among the primary lymphomas, the
most common histologic types are the large B-cell diffuse lymphomas and the
extranodal B mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue lymphomas. We studied 5 cases of 
primary breast lymphoma in female patients. The criteria for the diagnosis were
based on the proposal of Wiseman and Liao: (1) in the biopsy or surgical
specimen, the lymphoma involves the breast parenchyma, and (2) nonsystemic
disease at diagnosis. Clinical data, histologic findings, immunohistochemical
reactions, treatment, and clinical follow-up were reviewed. The 5 patients were
young women with average age of 27 years; the youngest was 20 years old, and the 
oldest was 44 years old. The right breast was the most affected, and 1 patient
was HIV positive. The most common symptoms were the presence of nodes,
progressive increase of volume, collateral venous network, and hemorrhagic
discharge from the nipple. The clinical course was of 1 to 14 months before
diagnosis. Three patients died because of central nervous system infiltration,
one is still alive, and the other was lost during follow-up. Histologically, all 
primary breast lymphomas were large B-cell lymphomas; one had focal starry sky
pattern, and the other 3 were centroblastic. All were positive to CD20 and
CD79(a), 3 expressed bcl2, and 2 expressed bcl6. The proliferation index was
between 60% and 80%. Primary breast lymphomas are rare. The average age of our
patients was 27 years, and their clinical course was aggressive with central
nervous system infiltration. The most common histologic type was the large B-cell
diffuse lymphoma. Differential diagnosis must be established in the presence of
poorly differentiated lobules and ductal carcinoma.

PMID: 19302954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 May;33(5):682-90. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181971591.

Peripheral T-cell lymphomas with a follicular growth pattern are derived from
follicular helper T cells (TFH) and may show overlapping features with
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas.

Huang Y(1), Moreau A, Dupuis J, Streubel B, Petit B, Le Gouill S, Martin-Garcia
N, Copie-Bergman C, Gaillard F, Qubaja M, Fabiani B, Roncador G, Haioun C,
Delfau-Larue MH, Marafioti T, Chott A, Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité 955, Equipe 9, France.

Rare cases of peripheral T-cell lymphomas with follicular growth pattern (PTCL-F)
have been recently reported, and their association with t(5;9)(q33;q22) involving
ITK and SYK has been suggested. However, the clinicopathologic aspects of PTCL-F 
are poorly described and the normal cell counterpart of this subgroup of lymphoma
is still unknown. Therefore, we analyzed the pathologic, phenotypic, and
cytogenetic features of a series of 30 patients (range: 33 to 88 y) that showed
histopathologic features of PTCL-F in at least 1 biopsy (n=30), either at initial
presentation (n=26) or at relapse (n=4). Neoplastic cells were medium-sized clear
cells that were CD4+ (24/27, 89%), CD10+ (21/29, 72%), BCL-6+ (14/19, 74%), and
expressed programed death-1 (27/27, 100%), CXCL13 (23/27, 85%), and ICOS (11/11, 
100%), markers of follicular helper T cells (TFH). Four of 22 patients (18%) had 
t(5;9)(q33;q22) detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Patients with
clinical data available had multiple lymphadenopathies (25/28, 89%), stage III to
IV diseases (17/26, 65%), B symptoms (7/27, 26%), and skin lesions (6/23, 26%).
Three patients with sequential biopsies disclosed clinical and histopathologic
features of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma at initial presentation. Our
results show that this rare form of PTCL-F (1) has an immunophenotype indicative 
of derivation from TFH cells, (2) is associated with t(5;9) in a proportion of
cases, and (3) shows some overlapping features with angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma, raising the question of a possible relationship.

PMID: 19295409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Semin Immunol. 2009 Apr;21(2):92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.02.002. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

Surviving the crash: transitioning from effector to memory CD8+ T cell.

D'Cruz LM(1), Rubinstein MP, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Division of Biological Sciences, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0377, United States.

One outcome of infection is the formation of long-lived immunological memory,
which provides durable protection from symptomatic re-infection. In response to
infection or vaccination, T cells undergo dramatic proliferation and
differentiate into effector T cells that mediate removal of the pathogen.
Following pathogen clearance, the majority of effector cells die, restoring
lymphocyte homeostasis. However, a small number of antigen-specific cells survive
and seed the memory T cell population. Here, we focus on recent advances in
identifying the key proteins and transcription factors that allow a portion of
effector CD8(+) T cells to persist after contraction of the immune response,
forming a memory cell population programmed for long-term self-renewal and
survival. We also examine new findings addressing the role of environmental cues 
such as cytokines and co-stimulatory molecules in CD8(+) memory T cell formation 
and how the cell-extrinsic cues influence the molecular players of intracellular 
pathways important for memory formation.

PMCID: PMC2671236
PMID: 19269192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Mar;50(3):335-40. doi: 10.1080/10428190902725813.

Epstein-Barr virus positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly.

Wong HH(1), Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Loma Linda University Medical
Center, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA. hhwong@llu.edu

Epstein-Barr virus positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (EBV+ DLBCL) of the
elderly is a rare B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder (B-LPD) that occurs in
patients > 50 years with no known history of immunodeficiency or lymphoma.
Patients present with moderate to severe clinical B-symptoms. These lesions show 
complete effacement of normal tissue/nodal architecture by large atypical
lymphoid cells/immunoblasts and Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg-like giant cells with
variable amounts of inflammatory cells in the background. The ratio of neoplastic
to inflammatory cells, degree of mitoses and necrosis can be quite variable;
hence EBV+ DLBCL of the elderly was historically divided into low grade
polymorphic and high grade monomorphic types. Further studies have shown both
types to be different points in the spectrum of disease, and are all high grade
lymphomas. The neoplastic large lymphoid cells show expression of CD20/CD79a and 
PAX-5, with variable expression of CD30, LMP-1 and EBNA-2, but CD15, CD10 and
BCL6 are generally negative. Neoplastic cells show EBER positivity and high Ki-67
expression. Differential diagnoses include EBV+ B-LPD, classical Hodgkin lymphoma
and EBV-DLBCL. EBV+ DLBCL of the elderly is highly aggressive with a median
survival of 2 years. These patients are less responsive to standard chemotherapy 
compared with other B-LPD.

PMID: 19255922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Immunol. 2009 Apr;10(4):375-84. doi: 10.1038/ni.1704. Epub 2009 Mar 1.

The function of follicular helper T cells is regulated by the strength of T cell 
antigen receptor binding.

Fazilleau N(1), McHeyzer-Williams LJ, Rosen H, McHeyzer-Williams MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, La Jolla, California, USA.

How follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) differentiate to regulate B cell
immunity is critical for effective protein vaccination. Here we define three
transcription factor T-bet-expressing antigen-specific effector helper T cell
subsets with distinguishable function, migratory properties and developmental
programming in vivo. Expression of the transcriptional repressor Blimp-1
distinguished T zone 'lymphoid' effector helper T cells (CD62L(hi)CCR7(hi)) from 
CXCR5(lo) 'emigrant' effector helper T cells and CXCR5(hi) 'resident' T(FH) cells
expressing the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 (CD62L(lo)CCR7(lo)). We then show 
by adoptive transfer and intact polyclonal responses that helper T cells with the
highest specific binding of peptide-major histocompatibility complex class II and
the most restricted T cell antigen receptor junctional diversity 'preferentially'
developed into the antigen-specific effector T(FH) compartment. Our studies
demonstrate a central function for differences in the binding strength of the T
cell antigen receptor in the antigen-specific mechanisms that 'program'
specialized effector T(FH) function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2712297
PMID: 19252493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;17(1):83-7.

[Expressions of bcl-6, lpp and miR-28 genes in diffuse large B cell lymphoma cell
lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu W(1), Li JY, Fan L, Qiao C, Yu H, Shen QD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province People Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China.

This study was purposed to explore the expressions of bcl-6, lpp and miR-28 genes
in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines at the levels of gene and
protein, and the relationship between them. Northern blot was used to detect
bcl-6 and lpp mRNA expression in 8 DLBCL cell lines. Solution hybridization was
used to measure miR-28 expression, and Western blot was performed for BCL-6 and
LPP protein determinations. The results showed that the expression of bcl-6 mRNA 
was higher in the cell lines with Ig/BCL-6 translocation (Oc1-ly8, MD903, CTB-1, 
and MD901), and negative in those without Ig/BCL-6 translocation (HRC57 and
K231). The expression of lpp mRNA in CTB-1 cell line was negative. MiR-28 was
positive in all cell lines, and the expression levels from high to low were in
line as follows: K231, CTB-1, MD903, HRC57, MD901, RCK8, OC1-LY8 and BEVA. BCL-6 
protein was also positive in all of cell lines, and the expression levels from
high to low were as follows: RCK8, BEVA, MD901, CTB-1, MD903, OC1-LY8, HRC57 and 
K231. LPP protein was negative in K231 cells, and the expression levels in other 
cells from high to low were line up as follows: HRC57, OC1-LY8, BEVA, RCK8,
CTB-1, MD901 and MD903. The expression levels of bcl-6 and lpp mRNA were not
consistent with expression levels of protein. It is concluded that the gene
expression levels of bcl-6, lpp and miR-28 are different in various DLBCL cell
lines. The expression levels of bcl-6 and lpp mRNA are not parallel with
expression levels of protein. The roles of bcl-6, lpp and miR-28 in initiation
and development of DLBCL need further investigation.

PMID: 19236753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Exp Med. 2009 Mar 16;206(3):561-76. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081886. Epub 2009 Feb
16.

Follicular helper T cells are required for systemic autoimmunity.

Linterman MA(1), Rigby RJ, Wong RK, Yu D, Brink R, Cannons JL, Schwartzberg PL,
Cook MC, Walters GD, Vinuesa CG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Genetics, The John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

Production of high-affinity pathogenic autoantibodies appears to be central to
the pathogenesis of lupus. Because normal high-affinity antibodies arise from
germinal centers (GCs), aberrant selection of GC B cells, caused by either
failure of negative selection or enhanced positive selection by follicular helper
T (T(FH)) cells, is a plausible explanation for these autoantibodies. Mice
homozygous for the san allele of Roquin, which encodes a RING-type ubiquitin
ligase, develop GCs in the absence of foreign antigen, excessive T(FH) cell
numbers, and features of lupus. We postulated a positive selection defect in GCs 
to account for autoantibodies. We first demonstrate that autoimmunity in
Roquin(san/san) (sanroque) mice is GC dependent: deletion of one allele of Bcl6
specifically reduces the number of GC cells, ameliorating pathology. We show that
Roquin(san) acts autonomously to cause accumulation of T(FH) cells. Introduction 
of a null allele of the signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family adaptor
Sap into the sanroque background resulted in a substantial and selective
reduction in sanroque T(FH) cells, and abrogated formation of GCs, autoantibody
formation, and renal pathology. In contrast, adoptive transfer of sanroque T(FH) 
cells led to spontaneous GC formation. These findings identify T(FH) dysfunction 
within GCs and aberrant positive selection as a pathway to systemic autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2699132
PMID: 19221396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Diagn Cytopathol. 2009 Apr;37(4):293-8. doi: 10.1002/dc.21022.

Cytologic and immunocytochemical features of EBV negative primary effusion
lymphoma: report on seven Japanese cases.

Kishimoto K(1), Kitamura T, Hirayama Y, Tate G, Mitsuya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Showa University, Fujigaoka Hospital, Yokohama,
Japan.

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is very rare type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)
usually confined to the body cavities such as the pleural space, pericardium, and
peritoneum. PEL is a human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8)-associated lymphoma and
commonly observed in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients.
However, HIV-infected patients are extremely fewer in Japan in comparison with
those in Western countries; PEL is usually not associated with HIV infection in
Japan. This report presents seven Japanese cases of PEL. In situ hybridization
revealed that the PEL cells were negative for EBV in all cases. An
immunocytological analysis showed that only one case was positive for HHV-8, and 
PEL cells were positive for CD20 in all cases. MUM1 was positive, but CD10 and
CD138 were negative in six cases. One case each was positive for CD30 and BCL-6. 
The phenotypic patterns of HIV-related is BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138+, thus, the
phenotypic findings observed by immunocytochemistry in this study were somehow
different from those reported in Western countries. However, the
cytomorphological features of PEL cells showed large cell size, abundant
basophilic cytoplasm, coarse chromatin, and occasional binucleated or
multinucleated cells, similar to a large cell immunoblastic and anaplastic large 
cell lymphoma, indicating that the cytomorphological characteristics of PE cells 
in Giemsa and Papanicolaou stain were consistent with those reported abroad. The 
prognosis for PEL in these cases was poor, but the survival time was variable
ranging from 1 month to 54 months, and was different from that of Western cases. 
No p16/CDKN2A expression was observed, and one case showed PEL cells with a
BLIMP1 mutation.

PMID: 19217041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3968-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02609-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

The intersection of Epstein-Barr virus with the germinal center.

Roughan JE(1), Thorley-Lawson DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jaharis Building, Tufts University School of
Medicine, 150 Harrison Ave., Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The current model of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and persistence in vivo
proposes that EBV uses the germinal center (the GC model) to establish a
quiescent latent infection in otherwise-normal memory B cells. However, the
evidence linking EBV-infected cells and the GC is only indirect and limited.
Therefore, a key portion of the model, that EBV-infected cells physically reside 
and participate in GCs, has yet to be verified. Furthermore, recent experiments
suggested that upon infection of GC cells the viral growth latency transcription 
program is dominant and GC functionality and phenotype are ablated, i.e., EBV
infection is not consistent with GC function. In this study we show that in vivo,
EBV-infected B cells in the tonsils retain expression of functional and
phenotypic markers of GC cells, including bcl-6 and AID. Furthermore, these cells
are physically located in the GC and express a restricted form of latency, the
default latency program. Thus, the EBV default latency transcription program,
unlike the growth latency program, is consistent with the retention of GC
functionality in vivo. This work verifies key components of the GC model of EBV
persistence and suggests that EBV and the GC can interact to produce the latently
infected memory cells found in the periphery. Furthermore, it identifies latently
infected GC B cells as a potential pathogenic nexus for the development of the
EBV-positive, GC-associated lymphomas Hodgkin's disease and Burkitt's lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC2663245
PMID: 19193789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Hum Pathol. 2009 May;40(5):645-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.06.032. Epub 2009 
Jan 13.

BCL2, BCL6, MYC, MALT 1, and BCL10 rearrangements in nodal diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas: a multicenter evaluation of a new set of fluorescent in situ
hybridization probes and correlation with clinical outcome.

Tibiletti MG(1), Martin V, Bernasconi B, Del Curto B, Pecciarini L, Uccella S,
Pruneri G, Ponzoni M, Mazzucchelli L, Martinelli G, Ferreri AJ, Pinotti G,
Assanelli A, Scandurra M, Doglioni C, Zucca E, Capella C, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Morphology, Unit of Pathology, University of
Insubria-Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy. mgtibiletti@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2009 Jul;40(7):1055-6; author reply 1056.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Although it is a curable disease, fewer than half of patients are cured with
conventional chemotherapy. The highly variable outcome reflects a heterogeneous
group of tumors, with different genetic abnormalities and responses to therapy.
We analyzed 74 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma using interphase
fluorescent in situ hybridization with commercially available probes for
split-signal targeting BCL-2, BCL-6, MYC, BCL-10, and MALT-1. Gene rearrangements
were identified in 48 (65%) of 74 cases. BCL-6 was the most rearranged gene
(45%), followed by BCL-2 (21%), BCL-10 (18%), and MYC (16%). No MALT-1
rearrangements were found. When diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cases were
subdivided into germinal-center B-cell-like and activated B-cell-like groups, an 
inverse pattern of BCL-2 and BCL-6 rearrangements was observed. Of interest, the 
presence of chromosome rearrangements was associated with a worse prognosis. The 
pattern of cytogenetic abnormalities highlighted the fact not only that diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma is a heterogeneous entity but also that even individual
cases may contain subclones bearing different chromosomal rearrangements. The
relevance and the clinical implication of minor clones showing gene
rearrangements are poorly understood; however, this first observation suggests
that different rearrangements may be involved in the progression of the disease. 
The fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis with the panel used in this study 
is useful to detect the heterogeneity of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and
identify alterations with prognostic implications.

PMID: 19144384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Hum Pathol. 2009 Apr;40(4):565-71. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.07.021. Epub 2009 
Jan 13.

Frequent expression of multiple myeloma 1/interferon regulatory factor 4 in
Burkitt lymphoma.

Gualco G(1), Queiroga EM, Weiss LM, Klumb CE, Harrington WJ Jr, Bacchi CE.

Author information: 
(1)Consultoria em Patologia, Botucatu, Sao Paulo18602-010, Brazil.

Burkitt lymphoma is a highly aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma with endemic,
sporadic, and immunodeficiency-associated clinical variants composed of
monomorphic medium-sized B cells with a high proliferation rate and a
translocation involving the C-MYC locus. Classically, the immunophenotype of
Burkitt lymphoma has been considered to be the germinal center type. In most
reports, all cases of Burkitt lymphoma are reported to be multiple myeloma
1-negative. multiple myeloma 1 expression is seen in plasma cells and in a small 
fraction of B cells located in the light zone of germinal centers corresponding
to the final step of intra-germinal center B-cell differentiation, and in
activated T cells. Therefore, multiple myeloma 1 expression may denote the final 
step of intra-germinal center B-cell differentiation at the centrocyte stage, as 
well as the subsequent steps of B-cell maturation toward plasma cells. Unlike
most normal germinal center B cells, in which the expression of multiple myeloma 
1 and bcl-6 are mutually exclusive, the tumor cells in approximately 50% of
multiple myeloma 1-positive DLBCL show coexpression of bcl-6, suggesting that the
expression of these proteins may be deregulated. Twenty-five Burkitt lymphoma
cases, including 19 associated with HIV, were reported in one of the few studies 
in the literature; 2 of these cases showed occasional multiple myeloma 1-positive
cells, less than the 20% cutoff for positivity. We studied 222 cases of
well-characterized Burkitt lymphoma with the classic phenotype and C-MYC
translocation and found 90 cases (40.5%) with multiple myeloma 1 nuclear
expression, suggesting a late germinal center stage of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2741026
PMID: 19144381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2009 Mar;37(2):79-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2008.11.007.
Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Follicular lymphoid hyperplasia of the palate: case report and literature review.

Jham BC(1), Binmadi NO, Scheper MA, Zhao XF, Koterwas GE, Kashyap A, Levy BA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Dental School, Department of Oncology and Diagnostic
Sciences, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. bjham001@umaryland.edu

Follicular lymphoid hyperplasia (FLH) of the palate is a very rare benign,
proliferative process, with only 20 cases published so far in the English
language literature. We describe a case, in a 55-year-old Caucasian female, who
developed a swelling in the left posterior hard palate. Bony involvement was
absent. Importantly, the medical history was positive for a previous non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma. Following incisional biopsy, histological examination revealed a
vaguely nodular lymphoid proliferation composed of small well-differentiated
lymphocytes. The lymphoid follicles were positive for CD20, CD79a, CD10, CD21 and
BCL6, while negative for BCL2. The parafollicular areas revealed positivity for
CD3, CD5, CD30, and CD15. Both areas were CD45 positive. Subsequent
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement analysis revealed a polyclonal
lesion. No further treatment was instituted, and the patient is currently being
followed-up every three months. This report demonstrates that FLHs are especially
important due to their clinical and, occasionally, microscopic resemblance to
follicular lymphomas. Morphologic and immunohistochemical analyses and molecular 
studies are essential to achieve accurate diagnosis and to implement appropriate 
management.

PMID: 19138528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Jan;50(1):68-79. doi: 10.1080/10428190802541807.

Analysis of chronic lymphotic leukemia transcriptomic profile: differences
between molecular subgroups.

Jantus Lewintre E(1), Reinoso Martín C, Montaner D, Marín M, José Terol M, Farrás
R, Benet I, Calvete JJ, Dopazo J, García-Conde J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology Laboratory, Prince Felipe Research Centre, Valencia,
Spain. ejantus@cipf.es

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Jan;50(1):10-1.

B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a lymphoproliferative disorder with 
a variable clinical course. Patients with unmutated IgV(H) gene show a shorter
progression-free and overall survival than patients with immunoglobulin heavy
chain variable regions (IgV(H)) gene mutated. In addition, BCL6 mutations
identify a subgroup of patients with high risk of progression. Gene expression
was analysed in 36 early-stage patients using high-density microarrays. Around
150 genes differentially expressed were found according to IgV(H) mutations,
whereas no difference was found according to BCL6 mutations. Functional profiling
methods allowed us to distinguish KEGG and gene ontology terms showing
coordinated gene expression changes across subgroups of CLL. We validated a set
of differentially expressed genes according to IgV(H) status, scoring them as
putative prognostic markers in CLL. Among them, CRY1, LPL, CD82 and DUSP22 are
the ones with at least equal or superior performance to ZAP70 which is actually
the most used surrogate marker of IgV(H) status.

PMID: 19127482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Neurochem Int. 2009 Mar-Apr;54(3-4):245-52. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2008.12.008.
Epub 2008 Dec 13.

NAC1, a POZ/BTB protein that functions as a corepressor.

Korutla L(1), Wang P, Jackson TG, Mackler SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA.

We now demonstrate that NAC1 acts as a corepressor for other POZ/BTB proteins.
NAC1 is a POZ/BTB motif containing transcriptional repressor protein. In a
mammalian two hybrid assay in neuronal (N2A) cells and non-neuronal (HEK 293T)
cells, VP16 activation domain tagged NAC1 resulted in significant reversal of
transcriptional inhibition with the Gal4-ZID, Gal4-BCL6, Gal4-ZF5, and kelch
proteins Gal4-MAYVEN and Gal4-NRP/B fusion proteins. We also observed similar
results with another corepressor, BCoR Gal4 fusion protein. NAC1 potentiated ZF5 
mediated repression in Gal4-DBD fusion transient assays. GST pulldown assays
further confirmed protein-protein interactions between these proteins and NAC1.
Both the NAC1 isoforms demonstrated selective interaction through the POZ/BTB
domain but not with the non-POZ/BTB region. Endogenous NAC1 and BCL6 physically
associated in CNS regions. Strikingly, NAC1 did not interact with the
pro-myelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF), another POZ/BTB protein that 
is not found in the adult brain. Therefore, we conclude that NAC1 functions as a 
corepressor for POZ/BTB proteins expressed in the mature CNS.

PMID: 19121354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2009 Dec 14;1(2):e2009018. doi:
10.4084/MJHID.2009.018.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders: role of viral infection, genetic
lesions and antigen stimulation in the pathogenesis of the disease.

Capello D(1), Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and
BRMA, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) are a life-threatening
complication of solid organ transplantation or, more rarely, hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. The majority of PTLD is of B-cell origin and associated
with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. PTLD generally display involvement of
extranodal sites, aggressive histology and aggressive clinical behavior. The
molecular pathogenesis of PTLD involves infection by oncogenic viruses, namely
EBV, as well as genetic or epigenetic alterations of several cellular genes. At
variance with lymphoma arising in immunocompetent hosts, whose genome is
relatively stable, a fraction of PTLD are characterized by microsatellite
instability as a consequence of defects in the DNA mismatch repair mechanism.
Apart from microsatellite instability, molecular alterations of cellular genes
recognized in PTLD include alterations of cMYC, BCL6, TP53, DNA hypermethylation,
and aberrant somatic hypermutation of protooncogenes. The occurrence of IGV
mutations in the overwhelming majority of PTLD documents that malignant
transformation targets germinal centre (GC) B-cells and their descendants both in
EBV-positive and EBV-negative cases. Analysis of phenotypic markers of B-cell
histogenesis, namely BCL6, MUM1 and CD138, allows further distinction of PTLD
histogenetic categories. PTLD expressing the BCL6+/MUM1+/-/CD138- profile reflect
B-cells actively experiencing the GC reaction, and comprise diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL) centroblastic and Burkitt lymphoma. PTLD expressing the
BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138- phenotype putatively derive from B-cells that have concluded
the GC reaction, and comprise the majority of polymorphic PTLD and a fraction of 
DLBCL immunoblastic. A third group of PTLD is reminiscent of post-GC and
preterminally differentiated B-cells that show the BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138+ phenotype, 
and are morphologically represented by either polymorphic PTLD or DLBCL
immunoblastic.

PMCID: PMC3033173
PMID: 21416004  [PubMed]


443. Rare Tumors. 2009 Jul 22;1(1):e14. doi: 10.4081/rt.2009.e14.

Primary breast lymphomas.

Julen O(1), Dellacasa I, Pelte MF, Borish B, Bouchardy C, Capanna F, Vlastos G,
Dubuisson JB, Vlastos AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Geneva University Hospital;

The diagnosis, prognostic factors, and optimal management of primary breast
lymphomas (PBL) is difficult. Seven patients recorded at the Geneva Cancer
Registry between 1973-1998 were reviewed. Five patient had diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, one a follicular lymphoma and one a MALT-lymphoma. All patients had
clinical and radiological findings consistent with breast cancer and underwent
mastectomy, which is not indicated in PBL. Diagnosis should be established prior 
to operative interventions, as fine needle aspiration missed the diagnosis for
one patient and intra-operative frozen sections for 3 patients in our study.
Five-year and 10-year overall survivals were 57% and 15%, respectively. Of the 3 
patients who died from PBL, 2 had tumors that were Bcl-2 positive but Bcl-6
negative. All 3 surviving patients have positive Bcl-2 and Bcl-6 immunostaining, 
which could be important prognostic factors if confirmed by a larger study.

PMCID: PMC2994446
PMID: 21139885  [PubMed]


444. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Jan;62(1):77-9. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.059519.

p63 protein expression in high risk diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Hallack Neto AE(1), Siqueira SA, Dulley FL, Ruiz MA, Chamone DA, Pereira J.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Services, Clinical Hospital of São Paulo University, São Paulo,
Brazil. abrahallack@uol.com.br

BACKGROUND: p63 gene is a p53 homologue that encodes proteins with
transactivation, DNA-binding and tetramerisation domains. The isoforms TAp63 and 
TAp73 transactivate p53 target genes and induce apoptosis, whereas the isoforms
DeltaNp63 and DeltaNp73 lack transactivation and might have dominant-negative
effects in p53 family members. p63 is expressed in germinal centre lymphocytes
and can be related to the development of the lymphoma, but the prognostic
significance of its expression in the survival of patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) remains unclear.
AIMS: To determine whether quantitative immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of p63
protein expression correlates with CD10 antigen, Bcl-6 antigen and IRF4 antigen
expression and to determine whether p63 is a surrogate predictor of overall
survival in high-intermediate and high risk DLBCL populations.
METHODS: CD10, Bcl-6 and IRF4 expression were retrospectively evaluated by IHC in
73 samples of high-intermediate and high risk DLBCL and were used to divide the
lymphomas into subgroups of germinal centre B-cell-like (GCB) and activate
B-cell-like (ABC) DLBCL. Similarly, p63 expression was evaluated by IHC and the
results were compared with subgroups of DLBCL origin and with the survival rates 
for these patients.
RESULTS: p63 was expressed in more than 50% of malignant cells in 11 patients and
did not show correlation with subgroups of GCB-like DLBCL or ABC-like DLBCL, but 
p63(+) patients had better disease-free survival (DFS) than those who were
negative (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: p63(+) high-intermediate and high risk DLBCL patients have a better 
DFS than negative cases.

PMID: 19103865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2008 Dec;135(12):848-51. doi:
10.1016/j.annder.2007.11.038. Epub 2008 Aug 29.

[Febrile cellulitis surrounding a scar revealing a large immunoblastic B-cell
lymphoma].

[Article in French]

Charavin-Cocuzza M(1), Templier I, Simon A, Salameire D, Cuchet E, Reymond JL,
Beani JC, Leccia MT.

Author information: 
(1)Pôle pluridisciplinaire de médecine, service de dermatologie, CHU
Albert-Michallon, BP 217, 38043 Grenoble cedex 09, France.

BACKGROUND: Secondary skin sites of lymphoma appear in the advanced stages of the
disease. We report the first case of a pericicatricial skin infiltration,
mimicking febrile dermohypodermitis, revealing diffuse immunoblastic large B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Four months after decompressive cervical laminectomy, a
56-year-old man presented an inflammatory pericicatricial patch evoking
cellulitis in a setting of hyperthermia and lymphadenopathy. Blood cultures and
bacteriological analysis of skin biopsy samples were negative. The images showed 
infiltration of the soft subcutaneous areas and polyadenopathy. Two weeks later, 
several subcutaneous nodules appeared on the trunk. Histological analysis and
immunolabelling pointed to immunoblastic large B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. A
clone of B lymphocytes CD45+, CD20+, CD79a+, Bcl2+, CD5+, MUM1+, CD3-, CD10-,
CD23- and Bcl6- was seen. The remainder of the extension examination was
negative. CHOP-rituximab polychemotherapy resulted in complete regression of all 
lesions, notably the inflammatory cervical plaque.
DISCUSSION: Secondary skin manifestations of lymphoma are generally non-specific 
(pruritus, ichthyosis, purpura, etc.) rather than specific in terms of lymphoid
infiltration. As in our patient, certain cutaneous sites of lymphoma may have a
misleading clinical presentation, histological analysis alone was able to provide
a conclusive diagnosis. In our patient, the highly specific infiltration seen
around the entire scar could either suggest a Koebner phenomenon or point to a
role of the cutaneous aggression within the development of an inflammatory
process contributing to pericicatricial infiltration by lymphoid cells.
Locoregional invasion from the osseous part of the cervical spine and not
macroscopically diagnosed during neurosurgery could also be responsible.

PMID: 19084696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2008 Dec 1;64(Pt 12):1101-4.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309108036063. Epub 2008 Nov 28.

Structure of the wild-type human BCL6 POZ domain.

Stead MA(1), Rosbrook GO, Hadden JM, Trinh CH, Carr SB, Wright SC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Research Group, Garstang/Astbury Buildings, Institute
of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor that is overexpressed in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. The N-terminal POZ domain of BCL6 interacts
with transcriptional corepressors and targeting these associations is a promising
therapeutic strategy. Previous structural studies of the BCL6 POZ domain have
used a mutant form because of the low solubility of the wild-type recombinant
protein. A method for the purification and crystallization of the wild-type BCL6 
POZ domain is described and the crystal structure to 2.1 A resolution is
reported. This will be relevant for the design of therapeutics that target BCL6
POZ-domain interaction interfaces.

PMCID: PMC2593701
PMID: 19052359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Leuk Res. 2009 May;33(5):728-30. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.10.019. Epub 2008
Nov 25.

Renal intravascular large B-cell lymphoma with early diagnosis by renal biopsy: a
case report and review of the literature.

Niitsu N(1), Okamura D, Takahashi N, Tanae K, Hagiwara Y, Kayano H, Bessho M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, International Medical
Center, Saitama Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1298
Japan. nniitsu@saitama-med.ac.jp

Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL) is a rare entity of lymphoma. We
report a case of IVLBCL presenting as renal dysfunction which was diagnosed by
renal biopsy. Histopathological examination of the renal biopsy specimens showed 
dissemination of lymphoma cells throughout the glomerular capillary lumens. The
cells were CD5-, CD10-, CD20+, BCL2+, BCL6+, and MUM-1+. Rituximab-chemotherapy
was performed and complete response was achieved. With the accumulation of cases,
establishment of a treatment strategy for IVLBCL is expected in the future. We
could perform early diagnosis by renal biopsy and were able to achieve long-term 
remission by rituximab combination chemotherapy.

PMID: 19036442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1793(2):418-26. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.011.
Epub 2008 Nov 3.

Uncoupling between Ig somatic hypermutation and oncogene mutation in mouse
lymphoma.

Vincent C(1), Truffinet V, Fiancette R, Petit B, Cogné N, Cogné M, Denizot Y.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 6101, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de
Limoges, France.

Burkitt lymphoma (BL) features translocations linking c-myc to the immunoglobulin
heavy chain (IgH) locus. By inserting a c-myc gene under the control of the 3'IgH
locus control region (LCR) into the mouse genome, we generated c-myc-3'LCR mice
that develop clonal BL or diffuse anaplastic lymphoma. We show in the present
study that while BL from c-myc-3'LCR mice would be classified as pre-germinal
center (GC) cells due to the absence of both BCL-6 expression and somatic
hypermutation (SHM) in V(H) sequences, they show a high level of SHM focused on
the c-myc oncogene itself. This observation suggests that the c-myc-3'IgH LCR
tandem association drives development of lymphoma from naïve B cells by
specifically recruiting AID activity on c-myc in a process that early becomes
independent from antigen selection and where the successive rounds of SHM rather 
rely on the selection of the most efficient mutations for oncogene deregulation. 
Similar to the translocated c-myc gene in human BL, mutations were found in first
exon and 5' flanking sequences of transgenic c-myc and specially focused on
negative regulatory elements, thus leading to high and constitutive oncogene
expression. In conclusion while 3'IgH transcriptional enhancers in c-myc-3'LCR
mice first simply act in cis to slightly stimulate c-myc transcription in
untransformed B cells, the occurrence of lymphoma appears to result from an
additional mechanism necessitating AID-driven mutations within the first exon and
5' flanking sequences which does not occur in parallel but rather circumvents
antigen-driven selection.

PMID: 19026697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Hum Pathol. 2009 Apr;40(4):588-93. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.08.012. Epub 2008 
Nov 7.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with TEL/ETV6 translocation.

Sevilla DW(1), Nandula SV, Colovai AI, Alexander S, Murty VV, Alobeid B, Bhagat
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Cytogenetic abnormalities of chromosome 12p involving the TEL/ETV6 gene are
observed in a variety of hematopoietic neoplasms including acute leukemias,
myelodysplastic syndromes, and myeloproliferative disorders. Karyotypic
aberrations, including rearrangements, deletions, and amplifications of
chromosome 12p, have been documented in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma; however,
rearrangements targeting TEL have rarely been reported. Here we describe a
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that had a complex karyotype including
t(9;12)(q22;p13), which was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization to
represent rearrangement of TEL. Additional cytogenetic abnormalities included
t(3;14)(q27;q32) involving the variant, alternative breakpoint region of the BCL6
gene and del(6)(q13q23), resulting in the loss of 1 allele of BLIMP1. This case
reiterates the importance of correlating morphologic and phenotypic findings with
the results of cytogenetic analysis to avoid errors in diagnosing hematologic
neoplasms and highlights the rare association of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma with
aberrations of TEL.

PMID: 18992913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Jan;33(1):81-90. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31818e52fe.

Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium-sized pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma expresses
follicular T-cell markers.

Rodríguez Pinilla SM(1), Roncador G, Rodríguez-Peralto JL, Mollejo M, García JF, 
Montes-Moreno S, Camacho FI, Ortiz P, Limeres-González MA, Torres A, Campo E,
Navarro-Conde P, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Monoclonal Antibody Unit,
Biotechnology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Hospital
Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. smrodriguez@cnio.es

Cutaneous CD4 small/medium-sized pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma (CSTCL) is a
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma defined by a predominance of small-to-medium-sized CD4 
pleomorphic T cells, with a favorable clinical course. Cases are also
characterized by the presence of a rich infiltrate of reactive B cells. Recently,
it has been reported that follicular helper T cells (TFH cells) display a
distinct gene expression profile, positive for PD-1, CXCL13, and BCL-6. We report
for the first time the expression of PD-1 and other TFH cell markers in CSTCLs
and discuss its biologic significance. Sixteen CSTCLs were included in this
study, and also 20 reactive inflammatory conditions, 10 primary cutaneous
marginal zone, 10 follicular center lymphomas, and 5 primary CD30 cutaneous
lymphomas. They were immunohistochemically analyzed for a large panel of markers.
Double immunoperoxidase labeling of paraffin sections was performed for PD-1,
OCT-2, and BCL-6. Clonal Ig and T-cell receptor rearrangements and Epstein-Barr
virus-encoded RNA expression were also evaluated. Morphologic and clinical data
were reviewed. Histologic examination showed a dense polymorphic lymphoid
infiltrate throughout the dermis. Atypical large CD4 cells were positive for
PD-1, CXCL13, and BCL-6 in all cases, and were attached in small clusters, or
formed rosettes around CD30/OCT-2+ B blast cells. Epstein-Barr virus was not
apparent in any of the cases. A dominant T-cell clone was identified in 14 cases,
whereas polymerase chain reaction IgH gene rearrangement studies showed that all 
cases were polyclonal. None of the patients had lymphadenopathy or showed any
evidence of systemic disease, nor did they have any previous history of mycosis
fungoides or drug reactions. FTH cell markers are not exclusive to
angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy but may also be seen in neoplastic cells of
CSTCLs. Moreover, these findings suggest that B-cell stimulation by FTH could
also take place in some cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 18987541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Histopathology. 2008 Oct;53(4):432-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2008.03140.x.

Perforation predicts poor prognosis in patients with primary intestinal diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Chuang SS(1), Ye H, Yang SF, Huang WT, Chen HK, Hsieh PP, Hwang WS, Chang KY, Lu 
CL, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Centre, Tainan and Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. cmh5301@mail.chimei.org.tw

AIMS: To elucidate the clinicopathological features and prognostic factors of
primary intestinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (PI-DLBL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Archival tissues from 30 tumours were used for tissue
microarray construction, immunohistochemistry and interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridization for chromosomal translocation. The M:F ratio was 1.7:1, with a
median age of 60 years. The ileum and ileocaecum were most frequently involved
(40% each). Fourteen (47%) were at stage I(E) disease, 15 (50%) at stage II(E).
Five (17%) tumours were perforated at presentation. The tumours expressed Bcl-6
(73%), MUM1 (70%), Bcl-2 (67%) and CD10 (23%). Nine (30%) were classified as
germinal centre B-cell (GCB) phenotype and 21 non-GCB. Eight of 30 (27%), 7/30
(23%) and 2/29 (7%) cases were positive for rearrangements involving IGH, BCL6,
and C-MYC loci, respectively, whereas all cases were negative for BCL2 and CCND1 
translocation. Perforation was a poor prognostic indicator, with a hazard ratio
of tumour-related death at 8.75 (P = 0.001). The differentiation antigens, GCB
versus non-GCB phenotype, or lymphoma-associated translocations were of no
prognostic significance.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a higher rate of perforation and lower frequency of GCB
phenotype in PI-DLBL in Taiwan compared with other geographical areas;
perforation is a poor prognostic indicator.

PMID: 18983608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Blood. 2009 Jan 29;113(5):1053-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-168682. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

A distinctive subtype of t(14;18)-negative nodal follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
characterized by a predominantly diffuse growth pattern and deletions in the
chromosomal region 1p36.

Katzenberger T(1), Kalla J, Leich E, Stöcklein H, Hartmann E, Barnickel S,
Wessendorf S, Ott MM, Müller-Hermelink HK, Rosenwald A, Ott G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a morphologically and genetically well-characterized 
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma that can show predominantly follicular, combined
follicular and diffuse, or predominantly diffuse growth patterns. Although
approximately 85% of FLs harbor the translocation t(14;18)(q32;q21) and
consistently display a follicular growth pattern, predominantly diffuse FLs are
less well characterized on the phenotypical, molecular, and clinical level. We
studied 35 predominantly diffuse FL by immunohistochemistry, classical chromosome
banding analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and gene expression 
profiling. A total of 28 of 29 analyzable cases lacked t(14;18), and 27 of 29
cases revealed a unifying chromosomal aberration, a deletion in 1p36.
Morphologically, 12 FLs were grade 1 and 23 were grade 2, and the immunophenotype
with frequent expression of CD10, BCL6, and CD23 was in line with a germinal
center B-cell phenotype. The gene expression profiles of 4 predominantly diffuse 
FLs fell into the spectrum of typical FL, with a unique enrichment of specific
gene signatures. Remarkably, patients with diffuse FL frequently presented with
low clinical stage and large but localized inguinal tumors. These results suggest
that predominantly diffuse FL represent a distinct subtype of t(14;18)-negative
nodal FL with a unifying genetic alteration (deletion of 1p36) and characteristic
clinical features.

PMID: 18978208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Nov;62(11):986-97. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.059063. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

New time-dependent approach to analyse the prognostic significance of
immunohistochemical biomarkers in colon cancer and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Adams H(1), Tzankov A, Lugli A, Zlobec I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

AIMS: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis is a
well-established method to study the accuracies of biological markers. It may,
however, be suboptimal for analysing outcomes over time, such as prognosis. Here,
the clinical value of time-dependent ROC curve analysis for improving the
identification of high-risk patients with colon cancers and diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas (DLBCL) is explored.
METHODS: Using tissue microarrays, immunohistochemistry was performed on two
matched sets (N = 469, each) of colon cancers (p53, CD8(+) tumour infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs), mammalian sterile-like 20 kinase 1 (MST1), mucin 2 (MUC2) and
urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR)) and on 208 DLBCL (Bcl2, Bcl6,
CD10, FOXP1 and Ki67). The area-under-the-curve (AUC)-over-time plots, cut-off
scores for tumour marker positivity and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were
analysed.
RESULTS: With the exception of uPAR, all markers were most accurate within the
first 18 months following diagnosis. Expression of p53 (AUC = 0.75), uPAR (AUC = 
0.64), Bcl2 (AUC = 0.58) and FOXp1 (AUC = 0.68) was linked to more aggressive
tumours, while TILs (AUC = 0.38), MST1 (AUC = 0.39), MUC2 (AUC = 0.38), Bcl6 (AUC
= 0.4), CD10 (AUC = 0.49) and Ki67 (AUC = 0.41) were predictive of improved
survival. Cut-off scores for markers at their peak accuracies as well as survival
time differences were reproducible between colon cancer groups. Only FOXp1 at its
optimal cut-off of 60% had significant effects on survival in DLBCL (p = 0.019).
CONCLUSIONS: Time-dependent ROC curve analysis is a novel tool for identifying
potential immunohistochemical prognostic markers across varying follow-up times. 
Use of this tool could facilitate the identification of high-risk patients not
only with colon cancer and DLBCL but with a range of other tumour types.

PMID: 18977805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Nov;58(11):3377-87. doi: 10.1002/art.23966.

Mature antigen-experienced T helper cells synthesize and secrete the B cell
chemoattractant CXCL13 in the inflammatory environment of the rheumatoid joint.

Manzo A(1), Vitolo B, Humby F, Caporali R, Jarrossay D, Dell'accio F, Ciardelli
L, Uguccioni M, Montecucco C, Pitzalis C.

Author information: 
(1)St. Bartholomew's and Royal London School of Medicine, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Synovial B cells play a critical role in rheumatoid arthritis (RA),
being involved in autoantibody synthesis, T cell activation, and cytokine
production. CXCL13 is a B cell chemoattractant that is instrumental in synovial B
cell organization; the regulatory determinants of CXCL13 in inflammation are
poorly characterized. This study was undertaken to investigate the functional
involvement of synovial T cells in the ectopic expression of CXCL13 in RA.
METHODS: CXCL13 production and regulation were addressed using
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, quantitative polymerase chain
reaction, multicolor flow cytometry, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, by in
situ-ex vivo analysis and in vitro functional assays with rheumatoid synovial
tissue and primary cells.
RESULTS: CXCL13 messenger RNA and protein expression and spontaneous CXCL13
secretion were detected in RA synovial fluid T cells but were not detected (or
were detected only occasionally) in peripheral blood T cells. Analysis of tissue 
expression confirmed cytoplasm localization of CXCL13 in T lymphocytes
infiltrating B cell follicles and small perivascular aggregates. Multicolor
characterizations in synovial fluid demonstrated CXCL13 expression in
antigen-experienced T helper cells, frequently characterized by terminal
differentiation and the lack of the follicular helper T cell markers CXCR5 and
BCL6 protein. In vitro functional assays revealed the enhancing effect of T cell 
receptor-CD28 engagement on CXCL13 production and secretion in primary cells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings define a new functional property of synovial T cells,
demonstrating their active involvement in the local production of B cell
chemoattractants, and support a direct contribution of the adaptive immune system
and antigen-dependent signals in the mechanisms of B cell localization in RA.

PMID: 18975336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Jun;48(6):479-87. doi: 10.1002/mc.20484.

Down-regulation of the microRNAs miR-34a, miR-127, and miR-200b in rat liver
during hepatocarcinogenesis induced by a methyl-deficient diet.

Tryndyak VP(1), Ross SA, Beland FA, Pogribny IP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA.

Altered expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been reported in diverse human
cancers; however, the down-regulation or up-regulation of any particular miRNAs
in cancer is not sufficient to address the role of these changes in
carcinogenesis. In this study, using the rat model of liver carcinogenesis
induced by a methyl-deficient diet, which is relevant to the hepatocarcinogenesis
in humans associated with viral hepatitis C and B infections, alcohol exposure
and metabolic liver diseases, we showed that the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is characterized by prominent early changes in expression of
miRNA genes, specifically by inhibition of expression of microRNAs miR-34a,
miR-127, miR-200b, and miR-16a involved in the regulation of apoptosis, cell
proliferation, cell-to-cell connection, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
The mechanistic link between these alterations in miRNAs expression and the
development of HCC was confirmed by the corresponding changes in the levels of
E2F3, NOTCH1, BCL6, ZFHX1B, and BCL2 proteins targeted by these miRNAs. The
significance of miRNAs expression dysregulation in respect to
hepatocarcinogenesis was confirmed by the persistence of these miRNAs alterations
in the livers of methyl-deficient rats re-fed a methyl-adequate diet. Altogether,
the early occurrence of alterations in miRNAs expression and their persistence
during the entire process of hepatocarcinogenesis indicate that the dysregulation
of microRNAs expression may be an important contributing factor in the
development of HCC.

PMID: 18942116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Oct 15;186(2):110-4. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.06.007.

BCL2 and BCL3 are recurrent translocation partners of the IGH locus.

Szymanowska N(1), Klapper W, Gesk S, Küppers R, Martín-Subero JI, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus
Kiel, Christian-Albrechts University, Schwanenweg 24, 24105 Kiel, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations affecting the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus
in chromosomal band 14q32 are the most frequent cytogenetic changes in B-cell
lymphomas. We studied the presence of IGH translocations in a consecutively
ascertained series of 94 classical Hodgkin lymphomas (cHL) by combined
immunofluorescence for CD30 and interphase cytogenetics (FICTION technique). The 
Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells of a total of 11 of 87 evaluable cases (13%)
showed signal patterns indicative of IGH translocations. To identify the
translocation partners, these cases were further studied with probes for the MYC,
BCL2, BCL6, BCL3, REL/BCL11A, JAK2/PDCD1LG2 (alias PDL2) C14orf43, and C2TA loci.
The IGH translocation partner could be identified in four cHL and involved BCL2
and BCL3 in two cases each. Immunohistochemistry in cases with suitable material 
revealed that tumor cells of the two cHL with IGH/BCL2 fusion and the cHL with
IGH/BCL3 fusion expressed the BCL2 and BCL3 protein, respectively. These data
indicate that BCL2 or BCL3 are recurrent translocation partners of the IGH locus 
in cHL; however, most of the translocation partners of IGH translocations in cHL 
remain to be identified.

PMID: 18940474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood. 2009 Apr 9;113(15):3397-405. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-168773. Epub 2008 
Oct 16.

A peptomimetic inhibitor of BCL6 with potent antilymphoma effects in vitro and in
vivo.

Cerchietti LC(1), Yang SN, Shaknovich R, Hatzi K, Polo JM, Chadburn A, Dowdy SF, 
Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell College of Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Apr 9;113(15):3393-4.

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor is the most commonly involved oncogene in
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). BCL6 lymphomagenic activity is dependent
on its ability to recruit corepressor proteins to a unique binding site on its
N-terminal BTB domain. A recombinant peptide fragment of the SMRT (silencing
mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor) corepressor that blocks this 
site can inhibit BCL6 biologic functions. Shortening and conversion of this
peptide to D-amino acid and retro configuration as well as the addition of a
fusogenic motif yielded a far more potent and stable BCL6 inhibitor that still
retained the specificity of the original SMRT fragment. Like the L-peptide,
retroinverso BCL6 peptide inhibitor (RI-BPI) selectively killed BCR rather than
OxPhos-type DLBCL cells. The RI-BPI could recapitulate the failure to form
germinal centers seen in BCL6 null mice yet was nontoxic and nonimmunogenic even 
when administered for up to 52 weeks. RI-BPI showed superior duration of tissue
penetration and could accordingly powerfully suppress the growth of human DLBCLs 
xenografts in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, RI-BPI could kill primary human
DLBCL cells but had no effect on normal lymphoid tissue or other tumors.

PMCID: PMC2668844
PMID: 18927431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 15;14(20):6426-31. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0702.

Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: novel translocations including
rearrangements of ODZ2, JMJD2C, and CNN3.

Vinatzer U(1), Gollinger M, Müllauer L, Raderer M, Chott A, Streubel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Internal Medicine 1, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

PURPOSE: The well-known translocations identified in MALT lymphomas include
t(11;18)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)/IGH-BCL10, and t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1. Molecular
investigations have suggested that these three disparate translocations affect a 
common pathway, resulting in the constitutive activation of nuclear
factor-kappaB. However, the vast majority of MALT lymphomas are negative for any 
of the above-mentioned translocations and the underlying pathogenesis is unclear.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fresh tissue of 29 gastric and extragastric MALT lymphomas
was studied for genetic aberrations by conventional karyotyping, long-distance
inverse PCR (LDI-PCR), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), and real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR).
RESULTS: Conventional cytogenetics, FISH, and RT-PCR identified aberrations in 26
of 29 MALT lymphoma. Balanced translocations were found in 21 cases. IGH was
rearranged in the majority of cases with balanced translocations (n = 17/21); 3
cases had t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 and 1 case had novel t(6;7)(q25;q11), respectively.
IGH partner genes involved MALT1, FOXP1, BCL6, and four new chromosomal regions
on chromosome arms 1p, 1q, 5q, and 9p. LDI-PCR identified three novel partner
genes on 1p (CNN3), 5q (ODZ2), and 9p (JMJD2C). FISH assays were established and 
confirmed LDI-PCR results. QRT-PCR showed deregulation of the novel genes in the 
translocation-positive cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study expands the knowledge on the genetic heterogeneity of MALT
lymphomas.

PMID: 18927281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Croat Med J. 2008 Oct;49(5):625-35.

Prognostic significance of B-cell differentiation genes encoding proteins in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma grade 3.

Borovecki A(1), Korac P, Nola M, Ivankovic D, Jaksic B, Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology and Cytology, Merkur University Hospital,
Zajceva 19, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia. anaborov@yahoo.com

AIM: To define prognostic significance of B-cell differentiation genes encoding
proteins and BCL2 and BCL6 gene abnormalities in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
and follicular lymphoma grade 3 with >75% follicular growth pattern.
METHODS: In 53 patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 20 patients with
follicular lymphoma grade 3 with >75% follicular growth pattern the following was
performed: 1) determination of protein expression of BCL6, CD10, MUM1/IRF4,
CD138, and BCL2 by immunohistochemistry; 2) subclassification into germinal
center B-cell-like (GCB) and activated B-cell-like (ABC) groups according to the 
results of protein expression; 3) detection of t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IgH-BCL2 and
BCL6 abnormalities by fluorescent in situ hybridization in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and follicular lymphoma grade 3 with >75% follicular growth pattern as
well as in GCB and ABC groups; and 4) assessment of the influence of the analyzed
characteristics and clinical prognostic factors on overall survival.
RESULTS: Only BCL6 expression was more frequently found in follicular lymphoma
grade 3 with >75% follicular growth pattern than in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(P=0.030). There were no differences in BCL2 and BCL6 gene abnormalities between 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma grade 3 with >75%
follicular growth pattern. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma 
grade 3 with >75% follicular growth pattern patients were equally distributed in 
GCB and ABC groups. t(14;18)(q32;q21) was more frequently recorded in GCB group, 
and t(14;18)(q32;q21) with BCL2 additional signals or only BCL2 and IgH
additional signals in ABC group (P=0.004). The GCB and ABC groups showed no
difference in BCL6 gene abnormalities. There was no overall survival difference
between the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma grade 3 with
>75% follicular growth pattern patients, however, GCB group had longer overall
survival than ABC group (P=0.047). Multivariate analysis showed that BCL6, CD10, 
and BCL2 expression, BCL2 and BCL6 abnormalities, and International Prognostic
Index were not significantly related to overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma grade 3 with
>75% follicular growth pattern patients have very similar characteristics and
their prognosis is more influenced by protein expression of B-cell
differentiation stage genes than by tumor cells growth pattern, BCL2 and BCL6
abnormalities, and International Prognostic Index.

PMCID: PMC2582355
PMID: 18925696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Croat Med J. 2008 Oct;49(5):618-24.

Prognostic markers and gene abnormalities in subgroups of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: single center experience.

Korac P(1), Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cytology, Merkur University Hospital, Zagreb,
Croatia.

AIM: To explore the association between FOXP1, BCL2, and BCL6 gene expression in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma tumor cells and their association with the presence
of FOXP3 lymphocytes.
METHODS: Samples of lymph nodes from 53 patients with newly diagnosed diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma were taken at the time of the diagnosis and immunostained
for CD10, MUM1, BCL6, BCL2, FOXP1, and FOXP3. Fluorescent in situ hybridization
analysis was used for the detection of FOXP1, BCL2, and BCL6 gene abnormalities. 
The chi(2) test was used for data analysis.
RESULTS: FOXP1 protein was detected in 28 cases, genetic abnormalities involving 
the FOXP1 locus were found in 19 cases, and both were present in 13 cases
(chi(2)=7.157; P=0.028). FOXP3 positive cells were detected in 37 cases. There
was a significant relationship between BCL2 expression and FOXP1 genetic
abnormalities (chi(2)= 5.858; P=0.016) and between BCL2 expression and BCL2
genetic abnormalities (chi(2)= 6.349; P=0.012). There was also an association
between BCL6 and FOXP1 genetic abnormalities (chi(2)=8.497;P=0.004).
CONCLUSION: There was an association between FOXP1 and BCL2. The presence of
FOXP3 positive cells had no influence on any of the analyzed markers.

PMCID: PMC2582354
PMID: 18925695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Leukemia. 2009 Feb;23(2):225-34. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.281. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Translocations involving 8q24 in Burkitt lymphoma and other malignant lymphomas: 
a historical review of cytogenetics in the light of todays knowledge.

Boerma EG(1), Siebert R, Kluin PM, Baudis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Burkitt lymphoma (BL) has a characteristic clinical presentation, morphology,
immunophenotype and primary chromosomal aberration, that is, the translocation
t(8;14)(q24;q32) or its variants. However, diagnostic dilemmas may arise in daily
practice due to overlap of BL with subsets of other aggressive, mature B-cell
lymphomas such as diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). Recently, two gene
expression studies have described a distinct molecular profile for BL, but also
showed the persistence of some cases intermediate between BL and DLBCL. An
alternative approach to define BL is to consider (cyto)genetic data, in
particular chromosomal abnormalities other than the t(8;14) or its variants. In
this review the 'Mitelman Database of Chromosome Aberrations in Cancer,'
harboring the majority of all published neoplasia-related karyotypes, was
explored to define a cytogenetic profile of 'true' BL. This core subset of BL
showed a very low complexity of chromosomal abnormalities with 40% of the cases
having the IG-MYC fusion as the sole abnormality. In the remaining cases,
additional recurrent but partially exclusive abnormalities included gains at
chromosomes 1q, 7 and 12, and losses of 6q, 13q32-34 and 17p. Within the core
subset, no differences were found between pediatric and adult patients. In
addition, the genetic profile of the core subset was significantly different from
BL with an 8q24 breakpoint not affecting one of the three immunoglobulin loci, BL
with a translocation involving 18q21/BCL2, 3q27/BCL6 or 11q13/BCL1, additionally 
to a breakpoint at 8q24/MYC, and from other morphological types of lymphomas with
an 8q24/MYC breakpoint. These groups showed a higher cytogenetic complexity than 
the core subset of BL. BL without a detectable 8q24/MYC breakpoint might be
heterogeneous and deserves further studies. We suggest that, concordant with the 
WHO classification to be published in 2008, the diagnosis of BL should be
restricted to cases with expression of CD10 and BCL6, absence or very weak
expression of BCL2 protein, a homogeneously very high proliferation index and a
proven IG-MYC translocation without evidence of a chromosomal translocation
typical for other lymphoma entities. In addition, a high number of nonspecific
cytogenetic abnormalities should suggest need for a critical review of the
diagnosis of BL.

PMID: 18923440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Pak Med Assoc. 2008 Sep;58(9):494-7.

BCL-6 prevents mammary epithelial apoptosis and promotes cell survival.

Alenzi FQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: Proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis are essential processes
in the normal functions of the mammary epithelium. The hypothesis examined in
this study is that BCL-6 is critically important not only for regulating B cell
growth and development, but also for influencing mammary epithelial apoptosis.
METHODOLOGY: Full length BCL-6 cDNA was retrovirally transduced into EpH-4 cell
line. We used flow cytometry of BrdUrd-stained cells to investigate the cell
cycle duration of control and transduced cells. TUNEL was used as a marker of
apoptosis to find out differences in the frequencies of apoptotic cells in
control and transduced cells.
RESULTS: Restoration of human BCL-6 into EpH4 cells not only inhibits apoptosis, 
but also prolongs the cell cycle. The results also indicated that the cell cycle 
time of BCL-6-transduced EpH4 cells was prolonged by about 3 hours. We found
differences in the frequencies of viable and apoptotic cells in cultures of the
parent EpH4 cells, control transduced EpH4 cells and BCL-6-transduced EpH4 cells.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that BCL-6 may be involved in mammary growth or
mammary gland cell kinetics, but not in mammary gland development.

PMID: 18846798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 May;17(3):255-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318182d2aa.

CD5 negative, Cyclin D1-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) presenting
as ruptured spleen.

Teruya-Feldstein J(1), Gopalan A, Moskowitz CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA. feldstej@mskcc.org

We present a case of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma CD5 negative, Cyclin D1
positive presenting as ruptured spleen in a 63-year-old man requiring emergent
splenectomy. Tumor cells showed marked pleomorphism, anaplasia, and increased
mitotic figures with positive Cyclin D1, BCL6, MUM1, P53, and a high MIB1
proliferative fraction. The patient received multiple therapies and ultimately
died. This case raises the differential diagnoses of pleomorphic mantle cell
lymphoma and other aggressive lymphomas with pleomorphic, anaplastic, and
Reed-Sternberg-like cells.

PMID: 18838919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cell Commun Signal. 2008 Sep 29;6:6. doi: 10.1186/1478-811X-6-6.

The small GTPase RhoH is an atypical regulator of haematopoietic cells.

Fueller F(1), Kubatzky KF.

Author information: 
(1)Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Hygiene Institut, Abteilung für Hygiene
und Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. katharina.kubatzky@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Rho GTPases are a distinct subfamily of the superfamily of Ras GTPases. The
best-characterised members are RhoA, Rac and Cdc42 that regulate many diverse
actions such as actin cytoskeleton reorganisation, adhesion, motility as well as 
cell proliferation, differentiation and gene transcription. Among the 20 members 
of that family, only Rac2 and RhoH show an expression restricted to the
haematopoietic lineage.RhoH was first discovered in 1995 as a fusion transcript
with the transcriptional repressor LAZ3/BCL6. It was therefore initially named
translation three four (TTF) but later on renamed RhoH due to its close
relationship to the Ras/Rho family of GTPases. Since then, RhoH has been
implicated in human cancer as the gene is subject to somatic hypermutation and by
the detection of RHOH as a translocation partner for LAZ3/BCL6 or other genes in 
human lymphomas. Underexpression of RhoH is found in hairy cell leukaemia and
acute myeloid leukaemia.Some of the amino acids that are crucial for GTPase
activity are mutated in RhoH so that the protein is a GTPase-deficient, so-called
atypical Rho GTPase. Therefore other mechanisms of regulating RhoH activity have 
been described. These include regulation at the mRNA level and tyrosine
phosphorylation of the protein's unique ITAM-like motif. The C-terminal CaaX box 
of RhoH is mainly a target for farnesyl-transferase but can also be modified by
geranylgeranyl-transferase. Isoprenylation of RhoH and changes in subcellular
localisation may be an additional factor to fine-tune signalling.Little is
currently known about its signalling, regulation or interaction partners. Recent 
studies have shown that RhoH negatively influences the proliferation and homing
of murine haematopoietic progenitor cells, presumably by acting as an antagonist 
for Rac1. In leukocytes, RhoH is needed to keep the cells in a resting,
non-adhesive state, but the exact mechanism has yet to be elucidated. RhoH has
also been implicated as a regulatory molecule in the NFkappaB, PI3 kinase and Map
kinase pathways. The recent generation of RhoH knockout mice showed a defect in
thymocyte selection and TCR signalling of thymic and peripheral T-cells. However,
RhoH-deficient mice did not develop lymphomas or showed obvious defects in
haematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2565660
PMID: 18823547  [PubMed]


465. Respirology. 2008 Nov;13(6):788-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2008.01361.x.

Effects of Th2 pulmonary inflammation in mice with bleomycin-induced pulmonary
fibrosis.

Hirata H(1), Arima M, Fukushima Y, Ishii Y, Tokuhisa T, Fukuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Dokkyo University
School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan. hirokuni@dokkyomed.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Leucocytes, especially lymphocytes and neutrophils, as 
well as alveolar macrophages, that infiltrate into the lung are involved in the
development of pulmonary fibrosis. However, the role of T helper (Th)2-type
inflammation, mediated by Th2 cells and eosinophils, in fibrosis remains unknown.
Transgenic mice deficient in the transcriptional repressor, Bcl6, display an
attenuation of Th2 cytokine production. We studied the effects of Th2-type
pulmonary inflammation on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis using Bcl6
transgenic mice.
METHODS: Bleomycin was administered to ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized Bcl6 transgenic
and wild-type mice by intratracheal instillation during sequential OVA antigen
challenge. Concentrations of transforming growth factor-beta1 in the BAL fluid
were measured 2 weeks after bleomycin administration. At the same time lung
tissue was examined histopathologically, and homogenized to assess collagen
levels and Th1/Th2 cytokine mRNA expression.
RESULTS: Although OVA-sensitized, bleomycin-treated Bcl6 transgenic mice had
markedly lower numbers of eosinophils in both BAL and lung tissue compared with
OVA-sensitized, bleomycin-treated wild-type mice, the development of pulmonary
fibrosis in response to bleomycin was similar in Bcl6 transgenic mice and
wild-type mice.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that Th2-dominant inflammation in the lung is
not essential for the development of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis.

PMID: 18811877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Pathol Int. 2008 Sep;58(9):572-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02273.x.

Clinical relevance of CD10, BCL-6 and multiple myeloma-1 expression in diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas in Malaysia.

Peh SC(1), Gan GG, Lee LK, Eow GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. suatcheng_peh@yahoo.com

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, and it is recognized to constitute a heterogenous group of neoplasms.
It can be divided into germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) and non-GCB subgroups.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the utility of immunophenotype
subgrouping of DLBCL in a cohort of multi-ethnic Asian patients. A total of 84
reconfirmed de novo DLBCL were immunostained for the expression of CD10, BCL-2,
BCL-6 and multiple myeloma-1. Thirty-three (39.3%) had the GCB phenotype, and the
remainder (60.7%), the non-GCB phenotype. The results concur with most reports
using a similar method of stratification. Forty-five patients had complete
demographic and phenotype studies and 42 patients did not have rituximab
treatment and had sufficient data for survival rate analysis. Similar to other
studies, patients with combined low and low-intermediate International Prognostic
Index score had better overall survival (P = 0.006). But patients with GCB
phenotype did not have better prognosis, and BCL-2 expression was not associated 
with better prognosis. The expression of BCL-6 was associated with lower overall 
survival rate (P = 0.038). No apparent difference in overall and disease-free
survival was noted between patients with GCB and non-GCB disease. BCL-6
expression by tumor cells appears to be associated with poorer prognosis.

PMID: 18801072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 30;3(7):e2814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002814.

Role of the transcriptional corepressor Bcor in embryonic stem cell
differentiation and early embryonic development.

Wamstad JA(1), Corcoran CM, Keating AM, Bardwell VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, Developmental Biology and Genetics Graduate Program,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

Bcor (BCL6 corepressor) is a widely expressed gene that is mutated in patients
with X-linked Oculofaciocardiodental (OFCD) syndrome. BCOR regulates gene
expression in association with a complex of proteins capable of epigenetic
modification of chromatin. These include Polycomb group (PcG) proteins,
Skp-Cullin-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin ligase components and a Jumonji C (Jmjc) domain 
containing histone demethylase. To model OFCD in mice and dissect the role of
Bcor in development we have characterized two loss of function Bcor alleles. We
find that Bcor loss of function results in a strong parent-of-origin effect, most
likely indicating a requirement for Bcor in extraembryonic development. Using
Bcor loss of function embryonic stem (ES) cells and in vitro differentiation
assays, we demonstrate that Bcor plays a role in the regulation of gene
expression very early in the differentiation of ES cells into ectoderm, mesoderm 
and downstream hematopoietic lineages. Normal expression of affected genes
(Oct3/4, Nanog, Fgf5, Bmp4, Brachyury and Flk1) is restored upon re-expression of
Bcor. Consistent with these ES cell results, chimeric animals generated with the 
same loss of function Bcor alleles show a low contribution to B and T cells and
erythrocytes and have kinked and shortened tails, consistent with reduced
Brachyury expression. Together these results suggest that Bcor plays a role in
differentiation of multiple tissue lineages during early embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2535898
PMID: 18795143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Feb;62(2):128-38. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.057257. Epub 2008 Sep
15.

Immunohistochemical prognostic markers in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma:
validation of tissue microarray as a prerequisite for broad clinical applications
(a study from the Lunenburg Lymphoma Biomarker Consortium).

de Jong D(1), Xie W, Rosenwald A, Chhanabhai M, Gaulard P, Klapper W, Lee A,
Sander B, Thorns C, Campo E, Molina T, Hagenbeek A, Horning S, Lister A,
Raemaekers J, Salles G, Gascoyne RD, Weller E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. d.d.jong@nki.nl

Retraction in
    J Clin Pathol. 2012 Sep;65(9):861-2.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The results of class prediction and the determination of
prognostic markers in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) have been variably
reported. Apart from biological variations, this may be caused by differences in 
laboratory techniques, scoring definitions and inter- and intra-observer
variation. In this study, an international collaboration of clinical lymphoma
research groups has concentrated on validation and standardisation of
immunohistochemistry of the currently potentially interesting prognostic markers 
in DLBCL.
METHODS: Sections of a tissue microarray with 36 cases of DLBCL were stained in
eight laboratories with antibodies to CD20, CD5, bcl-2, bcl-6, CD10, HLA-DR,
MUM-1 and Ki-67 according to local methods. The study was performed in two
rounds, firstly focused on the evaluation of laboratory staining variation, and
secondly on the scoring variation.
RESULTS: Different techniques resulted in highly variable results and poor
reproducibility for almost all markers. Reproducibility of the nuclear markers
was highly sensitive to technical variations, including immunological enhancement
techniques (agreements 34%). With elimination of variation due to staining and
uniformly agreed on scoring criteria, significant improvement was seen; however
less so for bcl-6 and Ki-67 (agreement 53-58%). Absence of internal controls that
preclude scoring, significantly influenced the results for CD10 and bcl-6.
CONCLUSION: Semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry for subclassification of DLBCL
is feasible, but with varying rates of concordance for different markers and only
using optimised techniques and strict scoring criteria. These findings may
explain the wide variation in prognostic impact reported in the literature.
Harmonisation of techniques and centralised consensus review appears mandatory
when using immunohistochemical biomarkers for treatment stratification.

PMID: 18794197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Oct;186(1):1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.04.012.

Investigation of bone marrow involvement in malignant lymphoma using fluorescence
in situ hybridization: possible utility in the detection of micrometastasis.

Huh HJ(1), Min HC, Cho HI, Chae SL, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Dongguk University, College of Medicine,
Siksa-dong, Ilsandong-gu, Goyang, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

We evaluated the usefulness of interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) for the detection of bone marrow involvement of lymphoma, comparing the
results with those of microscopic examination. Bone marrow aspirates obtained for
staging work-up from 150 patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma were used in this
study. Interphase FISH study using four probes and conventional G-banding were
performed on bone marrow aspirates. The four probes included locus specific
identifier (LSI) immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) dual-color break-apart
rearrangement probe, an LSI p16 SpectrumOrange/CEP 9 SpectrumGreen probe, an LSI 
BCL6 dual-color break-apart rearrangement probe. Among 150 cases, 29 cases
(19.3%) showed infiltration of neoplastic lymphoid cells by microscopic
examination. Chromosomal aberrations were detected by FISH in eight patients and 
by conventional cytogenetic study in three patients. FISH study showed 14q32
rearrangement in four patients (4/126, 3.2%), 9q21 rearrangement in no patients
(0/144, 0%), 3q27 rearrangement in four patients (4/131. 3.1%), and a gain of
1q21q32 in two patients (2/115, 1.7%). Among eight patients with abnormal FISH
patterns, six had normal karyotypes or no analyzable metaphase according to the
conventional cytogenetic study. Seven patients with FISH abnormality showed bone 
marrow involvement of lymphoma by microscopic examination. One patient, who was
defined as having no evidence of bone marrow involvement by microscopic
examination, showed a 3q27 aberration in the FISH study. Although the number of
patients with BM involvement that was detected by FISH was low, abnormal FISH
patterns were detected in six patients who did not have abnormal karyotypes.
Therefore, FISH analysis would be beneficial in cytogenetic diagnosis and
follow-up study of minimal residual diseases, once the cytogenetic changes are
detected at initial diagnosis.

PMID: 18786435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2008 Jan 1;1(1):65-74.

C-MYC rearrangements are frequent in aggressive mature B-Cell lymphoma with
atypical morphology.

Zhao XF(1), Hassan A, Perry A, Ning Y, Stass SA, Dehner LP.

Author information: 
(1). Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. xzhao@umm.edu.

Diagnosis and classification of aggressive mature B-cell lymphoma with atypical
morphology remains a challenge. To identify factors that may contribute to the
atypical morphology, we selected eight such cases and evaluated their
morphologic, immunophenotypic and cytogenetic features and clinical outcomes. The
neoplastic cells showed a diffuse monotonous infiltrating pattern with a spectrum
of morphology including: 1) L1 lymphoblastic; 2) centroblastic; 3) immunoblastic;
and 4) mixed centroblastic and immunoblastic. The lymphoma cells in most cases
were positive for CD10 and/or BCL6, and showed BCL2 expression. 6 of 8 cases
showed C-MYC rearrangements, and interestingly, all 6 cases demonstrated a
proliferation index of < or =90%. 3 of the 6 cases also demonstrated t(14;18).
Clinical follow-up indicated that aggressive mature B-cell lymphoma may benefit
from more intensified chemotherapeutic regimens used for BL. Our study suggests
that aggressive mature B-cell lymphoma with atypical morphology may be another
"grey zone lymphoma" lying in the spectrum between Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC2480535
PMID: 18784824  [PubMed]


471. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Dec;32(12):1787-99. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31817f123e.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma with follicular T-cell markers.

Rodríguez-Pinilla SM(1), Atienza L, Murillo C, Pérez-Rodríguez A, Montes-Moreno
S, Roncador G, Pérez-Seoane C, Domínguez P, Camacho FI, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. smrodriguez@cnio.es

INTRODUCTION: Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) in western countries are
uncommon tumors with unfavorable prognosis. They may be subclassified as
anaplastic large-cell lymphomas (ALCLs), angioimmunoblastic-T-cell lymphomas
(AITLs), or unspecified peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs-U). It has recently
been demonstrated that AITLs originate from germinal center follicular helper T
cells (TFH), whereas the normal counterparts of other PTCLs remain essentially
unknown. The aim of this study was to establish whether other PTCL subgroups also
express TFH cell markers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred forty-six PTCLs were analyzed for programmed
death-1 (PD-1) expression in tissue microarrays using a new monoclonal antibody
called NAT-105. PD-1-positive cases, which did not fulfill all the criteria for
AITL, were further evaluated in whole-tissue sections for another 12
immunohistochemical markers, including the TFH cell markers CXCL13, CD10, and
BCL6. Clonal Ig and T-cell receptor rearrangements and Epstein-Barr virus-encoded
RNA expression were also evaluated. Morphologic, clinical, and follow-up data
were reviewed.
RESULTS: Twenty-five out of 87 non-AITL cases (28.75%) showed PD-1
immunostaining. CXCL13, BCL6, and CD10 expression was found in 24/25 (96%), 16/25
(64%), and 6/25 (24%) cases, respectively. All cases expressed at least 2 TFH
cell markers. Moreover, 5 cases were positive for all 4 markers. Most cases
(17/25, 68%) displayed some AITL-like features. Of the remainder, 1 was
considered to be early AITL, 1 was diagnosed as ALCL-anaplastic lymphoma
kinase-negative, and 4 of the other 6 PTCLs-U had morphology consistent with
lymphoepithelioid (Lennert's) lymphoma. Three AITL-like cases showed IgH clonal
rearrangement, 2 of which were associated with Epstein-Barr virus expression. Our
series of patients did not differ significantly in their clinical presentation
from most reported PTCL cases in the literature: 55% of them were alive and 35%
were in complete remission after a median follow-up of 15 months after
cyclophosphamide, dexorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone-based chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: TFH cell markers, especially PD-1, were expressed in a subset of
PTCLs not classified as AITL, although most of them shared some morphologic
features with AITL. This suggests that the spectrum of AITL may be wider than
previously thought, possibly including cases of lymphoepithelioid (Lennert's)
lymphoma. Additionally, the results suggest that a subgroup of PTCLs-U, distinct 
from AITL and including some cases denominated as ALCL, may also be derived from 
TFH cells, although they develop along a distinct pathogenic pathway.

PMID: 18779728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008 Sep;30(9):684-8. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e31817eb7ca.

BCL6 expression correlates with monomorphic histology in children with
posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disease.

Porter CC(1), Liang X, Gralla J, McGavran L, Albano EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, The
Children's Hospital and University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.

Posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) is a complication of organ
transplantation with high mortality. Predicting response to first-line therapy,
reduction of immune suppression, is difficult because of the heterogeneity of
lesions and disease behavior. We sought to determine if BCL6 protein expression
in PTLD cells is associated with poor outcome. In a cohort of 25 children with
PTLD, 9 of the patients' tumor specimens were positive for BCL6 protein
expression. Eight of 13 monomorphic lesions were BCL6 positive, compared with 1
of 11 evaluable polymorphic lesions (P=0.01). Only 1 of the patients with BCL6
expression responded to reduced immune suppression (P=0.19). Recipients of heart 
transplants who developed PTLD had reduced overall survival rates compared with
recipients of other organ transplants who developed PTLD (P=0.04).

PMCID: PMC2652168
PMID: 18776761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Nov;72(11):1609-18. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2008.07.010. Epub 2008 Sep 2.

Effect of paranasal sinusitis on the development of otitis media with effusion:
influence of eustachian tube function and adenoid immunity.

Hong CK(1), Park DC, Kim SW, Cha CI, Cha SH, Yeo SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Concordance between sinusitis and otitis media with effusion (OME)
has been reported in 5-60% of patients. Since nasal diseases induce edema and
lymphoid tissue hyperplasia in the nasopharyngeal mucosa, especially the
adenoids, chronic infection of the adenoids has been reported to induce otitis
media. In addition, deterioration in the mucosal barrier of the adenoids makes
the latter vulnerable to bacterial infections, resulting in OME or sinusitis. We 
therefore evaluated adenoid local immunity and Eustachian tube function by
sinusitis and the concordance between sinusitis and OME.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined PNS series and tympanometry of 520 patients
who had undergone adenotonsillectomies. In addition, local adenoidal immunity was
evaluated in 10 children with OME and sinusitis, 11 with only sinusitis, 10 with 
only OME and 12 with no history of OME or sinusitis. Adenoid size, squamous
metaplasia, IgA, BCL-6, and mucosal barrier were also determined.
RESULTS: Of 520 patients, 80 (15.4%) had both OME and sinusitis. The incidence of
Eustachian tube dysfunction differed significantly between patients with and
without sinusitis (p=0.03). The incidence of squamous metaplasia differed
significantly between patients with sinusitis plus OME and patients with
sinusitis alone (p=0.01), and between patients with OME alone and those without
both conditions (p=0.005). Patients with both sinusitis and OME differed
significantly in IgA secretion (p=0.01) and Bcl-6 expression (p=0.02) from those 
with sinusitis alone, as did patients with OME alone and those without both
conditions (p=0.02 and p=0.03, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Sinusitis plus OME were present in 15.4% of patients. Eustachian
tube dysfunction was present in 37.9% of sinusitis patients and in 28.4% of those
without sinusitis. IgA, BCL-6 and squamous metaplasia were important in local
adenoidal immunity.

PMID: 18768224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Oct;32(10):1523-31. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31816b6478.

SIRT1 expression is associated with poor prognosis of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Jang KY(1), Hwang SH, Kwon KS, Kim KR, Choi HN, Lee NR, Kwak JY, Park BH, Park
HS, Chung MJ, Kang MJ, Lee DG, Kim HS, Shim H, Moon WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chonbuk National University Medical School, Institute
for Medical Sciences, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.

Sirtuin1 (SIRT1) is a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent deacetylase.
Recently, it is suggested that SIRT1 may be involved in the development of
malignant tumors including mouse lymphoma. Therefore, we investigated the
prevalence and the prognostic impact of SIRT1 expression in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL). Immunohistochemical expression of SIRT1, p53, bcl2, CD10, bcl6,
and multiple myeloma-1 (MUM1) were evaluated by using a 2 mm core from 104 DLBCL 
patients for tissue microarray. Positive expression of SIRT1 was seen in 74%
(77/104) of patients. In total DLBCL patients, SIRT1 and p53 expression were
significantly associated with shorter overall survival (OS) by univariate
analysis (P=0.001 and P=0.011, respectively). SIRT1 was also an independent
prognostic factor by multivariate analysis (P=0.01). According to the expression 
patterns of CD10, bcl6, and MUM1, germinal center B cell (GCB) types were
represented in 38 cases (37%) and non-GCB types were represented in 66 cases
(63%). In the GCB type, only p53 expression was associated with a significantly
shorter OS (P=0.032). In the non-GCB type, expression of SIRT1 correlated with
shorter OS by univariate analyses (P=0.005) and multivariate analyses (P=0.049). 
In conclusion, we showed that SIRT1 expression is a clinically significant
prognostic indicator for DLBCL patients.

PMID: 18724249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Immunol. 2008 Nov;46(1):80-90. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.07.002. Epub 2008
Aug 20.

Ongoing somatic hypermutation of the rearranged VH but not of the V-lambda gene
in EBV-transformed rheumatoid factor-producing lymphoblastoid cell line.

Chezar I(1), Lobel-Lavi L, Steinitz M, Laskov R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Cancer Research, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transforms human peripheral B cells into lymphoblastoid 
cell lines (LCLs) that secrete specific antibodies. In contrast to peripheral
blood B cells, LCLs express the activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) gene,
a key enzyme in the generation of somatic hypermutation (SHM) in immunoglobulin
variable genes. We have previously studied an LCL that secretes a rheumatoid
factor (RF: an IgM(lambda) anti-IgG antibody) and identified the accumulation of 
SHM at a frequency of 1.5 x 10(-3)mut/bp in the rearranged variable region heavy 
chain gene (VH) of its RF sub-culture (i.e., RF-2004). The aim of the present
work was to find out whether SHM was initiated as an early event following EBV
transformation. Our results show that already the earliest RF-culture (RF-1983)
mutates its VH at a somewhat higher frequency of 1.9 x 10(-3). Overall, we
detected 17 point mutations in the RF-2004 culture and in 26 cellular clones
derived from the RF-1983 and RF-2004 cultures. Most of the mutations were due to 
C to T or G to A transitions, with preferential targeting to WRCH/DGYW hotspot
motifs, indicating that they were due to the initial phase of AID-directed
mutations. A genealogical tree demonstrates that mutations were accumulated in a 
stepwise manner with 1-2 mutations per cell division. However, no mutations were 
found in the rearranged V-lambda (Vlambda) gene in the same RF-cultures and their
subclones (i.e., <1.2 x 10(-4)mut/bp). To our knowledge this is the first
reported clonal cell line that generates SHM in the VH, but not in the Vlambda.
It may be due to abrogation of a cis-regulatory element(s) in the Vlambda or to a
lack of a specific trans-acting factor which differentially direct the SHM
machinery to this gene. Out of the 17 point mutations detected in both cell lines
there were, 1 stop codon, 3 mutations which obliterated the binding of the RF
antibody to its IgG antigen and 1 or 2 mutations which enhanced antigen-binding
affinity. These results show that the evolutionary developed germline encoded
antibody combining site is highly sensitive to amino acid replacements. Our
combined findings that the RF cells accumulate in a stepwise manner up to 1-2
point mutations/sequence per cell division and the generation of high percentage 
of functionally deleterious mutations, are in accord with the
'multiphase-recycling model' of SHM, which states that B cells in the germinal
center are subjected to multiple rounds of somatic mutations interchanged with
periods of antigenic selection.

PMID: 18718665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 15;181(4):2338-47.

Blimp-1 attenuates Th1 differentiation by repression of ifng, tbx21, and bcl6
gene expression.

Cimmino L(1), Martins GA, Liao J, Magnusdottir E, Grunig G, Perez RK, Calame KL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Human Nutrition, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

T cell-specific deletion of Blimp-1 causes abnormal T cell homeostasis and
function, leading to spontaneous, fatal colitis in mice. Herein we explore the
role of Blimp-1 in Th1/Th2 differentiation. Blimp-1 mRNA and protein are more
highly expressed in Th2 cells compared with Th1 cells, and Blimp-1 attenuates
IFN-gamma production in CD4 cells activated under nonpolarizing conditions.
Although Blimp-1-deficient T cells differentiate normally to Th2 cytokines in
vitro, Blimp-1 is required in vivo for normal Th2 humoral responses to NP-KLH
(4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl/keyhole lymphocyte hemocyanin) immunization. Lack 
of Blimp-1 in CD4 T cells causes increased IFN-gamma, T-bet, and Bcl-6 mRNA. By
chromatin immunoprecipitation we show that Blimp-1 binds directly to a distal
regulatory region in the ifng gene and at multiple sites in tbx21 and bcl6 genes.
Our data provide evidence that Blimp-1 functions in Th2 cells to reinforce Th2
differentiation by repressing critical Th1 genes.

PMID: 18684923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Genes Cells. 2008 Sep;13(9):931-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01216.x. Epub
2008 Aug 4.

BCL11A is a SUMOylated protein and recruits SUMO-conjugation enzymes in its
nuclear body.

Kuwata T(1), Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

BCL11A/EVI9 is a zinc-finger protein predominantly expressed in brain and
hematopoietic cells. Previous studies show that BCL11A is involved in acute
myelomonocytic leukemia and chronic lymphoid leukemia in mouse and human,
respectively. Moreover, BCL11A is localized in the characteristic nuclear body in
which BCL6 is co-localized. However, the significance of BCL11A in leukemogenesis
and nuclear function remains unknown. In this study we show that BCL11A interacts
with UBC9, a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) E2 conjugating enzyme, and
recruits SUMO1 into the nuclear body. A lysine residue at amino acid 634 of
BCL11A is SUMOylated but not required for the SUMO1 recruitment. The N-terminal
region of BCL11A is responsible for SUMO1 recruitment as well as its nuclear body
formation. We also show that SENP2, a SUMO specific peptidase, is co-localized in
the nuclear body. These results suggest that BCL11A could be involved in the SUMO
conjugation system, and that BCL11A might play an important role in protein
modification.

PMID: 18681895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2008 Jan-Mar;112(1):191-5.

[Gastric lymphoma. Morphological and immunohistochemical study].

[Article in Romanian]

Ferariu D(1), Danciu M, Ciobanu D, Florea N, Scripcariu V, Mihailovici MS.

Author information: 
(1)Spitalul Clinic de Urgenta Sf. Spiridon Iasi Serviciul de Anatomie Patologica 
si Prosectura.

Most of extranodal lymphomas are localized in gastrointestinal tract, gastric
lymphoma representing more than 50% of them. The role that Helicobacter pylori
(H. pylori) plays in pathogenesis of gastric lymphoma has changed the therapeutic
approach.AIMS: Description of morphological features and immunohistochemical
pattern of gastric lymphomas from patients admitted in University Hospital "Sf.
Spiridon" Iasi.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty four gastric lymphomas were investigated using
routine histopathological technics and immunohistochemical staining based on a
large panel of antibodies: CD3, CD5, CD20, CD79á, CD23, CD30, cyclin-D1, BCL2,
BCL6, ALK1, Ki67, CK-cocktail, anti-H. pylori.
RESULTS: All gastric lymphomas were localized in the antrum, most of them being
solitary and large-sized tumors. Ninety-seven percent were B-cell lymphomas,
41.17% were mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue lymphomas (MALT lymphomas), and
the remaining were high grade lymphomas. Only one case was classified as
peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Cytokeratin cocktail immunostaining improved the
detection of typical lymphoepithelial lesions, which characterized exclusively
the MALT lymphomas. The sensibility for H. pylori detection in gastric lymphoma
cases was increased by 22% using anti-H. pylori antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemistry is a diagnostic method for gastric lymphomas,
being useful in identification of lymphoepithelial lesions, detection of H.
pylori infection, and is mandatory for lymphomas classification according to WHO 
criteria.

PMID: 18677925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Aug 18;40(4):352-7.

[Clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical and molecular analysis in 15 cases of
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren YL(1), Hong L, Nong L, Zhang S, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma(AITL) completely, we
gave injdepth investigation of histopathological features, specific
immunochemical markers, antigen receptor gene rearrangements and in situ
hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV).
METHODS: 15 cases of typical AITL displayed effacement of the normal lymph node
architecture partially or completely, abundance of arborizing high endothelial
vessels, infiltration of polymorphic cells and hyperplastic atypical T
lymphocytes with or without clear cytoplasm. Clinical characteristics,
histological manifestations, and immunohistochemical staining for CD3, CD20,
CD4ìCD21, CXCL13, CD10, and BCL6 were analyzed. Polymerase chain reaction for
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) and T cell receptor gamma (TCRgamma)
rearrangements and in situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus encoded RNA
(EBER-1) were performed.
RESULTS: Histologically, we found eight cases with regressed lymphoid follicles, 
six with absence of follicles and one with hyperplastic follicles with
interfollicular lesions. We also found eight cases displaying aggregation of
clear cells, four infiltration of large lymphoid cells, five abundant epithelioid
histiocytes. CD20 staining showed hyperplasia of large B cells in four cases.
CD21 expression exihibited extrafollicular expansion of follicular dendritic cell
meshworks in 11 cases (73.3%), partially with a tendency of perivascular
distribution. Positive rate for CXCL13 and CD10 are 73.3% and 6.7% respectively. 
Monoclonal rearrangements of TCRgamma were detected in 6/15 (40%) of cases, IgH
rearrangements in 7/15 (46.7%), of which five were monoclonal, while two
oligoclonal. 8 out of 15 cases (53h3%) contained EBV-positive cells. Among the
four cases with large B cell proliferation, three were EBV-positive.
CONCLUSION: AITL display great complexity and diversity clinicopathologically.
Only when we recognize such diversity, can we reasonably apply and properly
evaluate immunochemical markers and molecular techniques, and thus give a correct
diagnosis.

PMID: 18677379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Oct 17;375(2):190-3. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.116. Epub 2008 Aug 21.

Alternative splicing generates a short BCL6 (BCL6S) isoform encoding a compact
repressor.

Shen Y(1), Ge B, Ramachandrareddy H, McKeithan T, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, 600S. 42th Street, Omaha, NE 68198-7660, USA.

BCL6 gene transcribes two main mRNA isoforms, variant 1 and variant 2, which have
distinct transcription start sites. However, these two isoforms encode identical 
BCL6 protein. Recently, a third variant was sequenced from a human hippocampus
cDNA library (DB465062). In this study, we cloned and sequenced a novel BCL6
spliced isoform (BCL6S) which lacks exon 7 that encodes the first two zinc
fingers of BCL6. We found a splicing isoform, BCL6S, that excludes exon 7 but
retains the last four of the six zinc fingers (ZFs) coding region of the BCL6
gene. BCL6S mRNA and protein were expressed in human cell lines and tissues that 
expressed BCL6, but accounted for a minor portion of BCL6 transcripts or protein.
BCL6S protein was also detectable in BCL6 positive cells. BCL6S could form
homodimers or heterodimers with BCL6 and could bind to classical BCL6-binding
sites. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that BCL6S could effectively
repress typical BCL6 target genes. BCL6S is a compact repressor that may have a
functional role in normal and neoplastic germinal center B cells.

PMCID: PMC2573862
PMID: 18675787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Nov;32(11):1643-53. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181758806.

Fluorescence immunophenotypic and interphase cytogenetic characterization of
nodal lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.

Sargent RL(1), Cook JR, Aguilera NI, Surti U, Abbondanzo SL, Gollin SM, Swerdlow 
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) is a small B-cell lymphoma with plasmacytic
differentiation that does not fulfill the criteria for any other small B-cell
lymphoma. Cytogenetic characterization of nodal LPL is limited and the
distinction from marginal zone lymphomas with plasmacytic differentiation can be 
problematic. Thus, 17 cases of lymph node-based LPL were studied with
fluorescence immunophenotypic and interphase cytogenetics for the investigation
of neoplasia (FICTION) using a CD79a antibody and probes to detect trisomies of
chromosomes 3 (15 cases), 12 (16 cases), and 18 (17 cases); rearrangements (R) of
IgH (10 cases), BCL6 (6 cases), PAX5 (7 cases), and MALT1 (16 cases); and
deletion 6q21 (7 cases). Cases with IgH R were further studied with an IgH/BCL2
probe. In cases without FICTION studies, previously reported fluorescence in situ
hybridization results for IgH, PAX5, and deletion 6q21 were available from prior 
studies. The histopathology, immunophenotype, and available clinical data were
also reviewed. Three pathologic categories were recognized: 5 classic LPL, 5
vaguely nodular polymorphous (VN-P), and 7 other. Among the classic LPL, 4/4 had 
an IgM paraproteinemia, 5/5 had bone marrow involvement (BM+), and 1/5 had
+MALT1. One of one VN-P LPL had an IgM paraprotein, 2/4 were IgM+, 2/4 IgG+, 1/3 
had BM+, and 1/5 had an IgH R. Among the other cases, 2/3 had a paraprotein, 2/7 
were IgM+, 5/7 IgG+, and 0/3 had BM+. Of these cases, 1 showed +12, 1 +18, and 1 
IgH/BCL2 rearrangement plus +18. None of the 17 cases had a 6q21 deletion or +3. 
Therefore, with rare exception, lymph node-based LPL with classic or more varied 
histopathologic features does not have the cytogenetic abnormalities frequently
associated with bone marrow-based LPL/Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia or many of
the marginal zone lymphomas. The search for better objective inclusionary
criteria for LPL must continue.

PMID: 18670352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 23;3(7):e2743. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002743.

Splice variants of the forkhead box protein AFX exhibit dominant negative
activity and inhibit AFXalpha-mediated tumor cell apoptosis.

Lee EJ(1), Kim JM, Lee MK, Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Loss-of-function in the apoptosis-inducing genes is known to
facilitate tumorigenesis. AFX (FOXO4), a member of forkhead transcription factors
functions as a tumor suppressor and has 2 isoforms, AFXalpha (505 a.a.) and
AFXzeta (450 a.a.). In human cancer cells, we identified an N-terminally deleted 
form of AFXalpha (alpha198-505), translated from a downstream start and 2 short
N-terminal AFX proteins (90, and 101 a.a.) produced by aberrant splicing.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We investigated the expression and role of these AFX
variants. Cell transduction study revealed that short N-terminal AFX proteins
were not stable. Though alpha(198-505) protein expression was detected in the
cytoplasm and nucleus, alpha(198-505) expressing cells did not show a
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling mediated by PI3 kinase signaling. Whereas, we
observed this shuttling in cells expressing either AFXalpha or AFXzeta protein.
AFXzeta and alpha(198-505) lost the ability to transactivate BCL6 or suppress
cyclin D2 gene expression. These variants did not induce cancer cell death
whereas AFXalpha resulted in apoptosis. We found that AFXzeta and alpha(198-505) 
suppress the AFXalpha stimulation of BCL6 promoter in a dose dependent manner,
indicating dominant negative activity. These variants also inhibited AFXalpha
induction of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of function by aberrant splicing and the dominant negative
activity of AFX variants may provide a mechanism for enhanced survival of
neoplastic cells.

PMCID: PMC2447181
PMID: 18648506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Oct 10;26(29):4814-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.16.1455. Epub 2008
Jul 21.

Del(6)(q22) and BCL6 rearrangements in primary CNS lymphoma are indicators of an 
aggressive clinical course.

Cady FM(1), O'Neill BP, Law ME, Decker PA, Kurtz DM, Giannini C, Porter AB,
Kurtin PJ, Johnston PB, Dogan A, Remstein ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CellNetix Pathology, Olympia, WA, USA.

PURPOSE: Primary CNS lymphoma (PCNSL) is an aggressive lymphoma but clinically
validated biologic markers that can predict natural history to tailor treatment
according to risk are lacking. Several genetic changes including BCL6
rearrangements and deletion of 6q22, containing the putative tumor suppressor
gene PTPRK, are potential risk predictors. Herein we determined the prevalence
and survival impact of del(6)(q22) and BCL6, immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH),
and MYC gene rearrangements in a large PCNSL cohort treated in a single center.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed
using two-color probes for BCL6, MYC, IGH-BCL6, and del(6)(q22) on thin sections 
of 75 paraffin-embedded samples from 75 HIV-negative, immunocompetent patients
newly diagnosed with PCNSL. Survival data were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier
survival curves, log-rank tests, and proportional hazards regression adjusting
for age, deep structure involvement, and high-dose methotrexate (HDMTX)
treatment.
RESULTS: The prevalence of del(6)(q22) and BCL6, IGH, and MYC translocations was 
45%,17%, 13%, and 3%, respectively. The presence of del(6)(q22) and/or a BCL6
translocation was associated with inferior overall survival (OS; P = .0097). The 
presence of either del(6)(q22) alone or a BCL6 translocation alone was also
associated with inferior OS (P = .0087). Univariable results held after adjusting
for age, deep structure involvement, and HDMTX.
CONCLUSION: Del (6)(q22) and BCL6 rearrangements are common in PCNSL and predict 
for decreased OS independent of deep structure involvement and HDMTX. Unlike
systemic diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, del(6)(q22) is common and IGH
translocations are infrequent and usually involve BCL6 rather than BCL2,
suggesting a distinct pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2653136
PMID: 18645192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 Aug;130(2):193-201. doi: 10.1309/ELPKF130Q0MCMWU8.

The spectrum of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas with dual IgH-BCL2 and BCL6
translocations.

Keller CE(1), Nandula S, Fisher J, Subramaniyam S, Vakiani E, Savage DG, Murty
VV, Alobeid B, Bhagat G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Dual IgH/BCL2 and BCL6 translocations are rarely observed in B-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphomas (B-NHLs). We investigated the morphologic, phenotypic, and cytogenetic 
spectrum of B-NHL with such dual translocations. Dual IgH/BCL2 and BCL6
translocations were detected in follicular lymphomas (FLs) and diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs), representing 6.1% of 132 B-NHLs in our series,
including 6 (11%) of 56 FLs (grades 1, 2, and 3a) and 2 (3%) of 76 DLBCLs; 33% of
FLs with dual translocations had variant morphologic features. All
dual-translocation FLs were CD10+/BCL6+/BCL2+/MUM1-, and the DLBCLs demonstrated 
"activated" germinal center (CD10+/BCL6+/MUM1+) and non-germinal center
(CD10-/BCL6+/MUM1+) phenotypes. BCL6 translocations in all cases involved
nonimmunoglobulin genes/loci. Mean chromosome abnormalities in dual-translocation
FLs and DLBCLs did not differ from IgH/BCL2 FLs and DLBCLs. Detection of dual
translocations predominantly in low-grade FLs suggests that BCL6 abnormalities
are acquired early in the histologic evolution of a subset of IgH/BCL2-associated
FLs.

PMID: 18628087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nihon Rinsho. 2008 Jul;66(7):1297-302.

[Malignant lymphoma of the small intestine].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura S(1), Matsumoto T, Iida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University.

The clinicopathologic features of malignant lymphoma of the small intestine were 
reviewed. Genetically, characteristic chromosomal translocations have been
identified in several B-cell lymphomas, such as t (11 ; 18)/API2-MALT1 in MALT
lymphoma, t (14 ; 18)/IGH-BCL2 in follicular lymphoma, or t (3 ; 14)/BCL6-IGH in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Histologically, DLBCL is most frequently
observed, and T-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma are more frequent in small 
intestinal cases than in gastric cases. Macroscopically, small intestinal
lymphomas are classified as polypoid, ulcerative (including stricturing,
non-stricturing and aneurysmal forms on radiography), multiple lymphomatous
polyposis, diffuse, or other types. A significant correlation is observed between
these macroscopic/radiographic and histologic types. The therapeutic strategy,
such as surgery, chemotherapy, antibiotics or watch-and-wait, should be
determined based on the disease extent, histologic type, and clinical stage.

PMID: 18616120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. World Allergy Organ J. 2008 Jul;1(7):115-22. doi: 10.1097/WOX.0b013e31817dc522.

Role of the Transcriptional Repressor BCL6 in Allergic Response and Inflammation.

Arima M(1), Fukuda T, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba; and Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Clinical
Immunology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Dokkyo, Japan.

Various molecules participate in different phases of allergic reactions. This
means that many genes are encoding molecules related to allergic reactions, such 
as cytokines, chemokines, and their receptors as effect or molecules. The
transcriptional repressor BCL6 has emerged as a multifunctional regulator of
lymphocyte differentiation and immune responses. BCL6-deficient (BCL6) mice
display T helper type 2 (Th2)-type inflammation, which is caused by abnormality
of both lymphoid cells and nonlymphoid cells. Thus, BCL6 apparently contributes
to negative regulation of various central molecules such as cytokines, in
particular Th2 cytokines, CC chemokines, and immunoglobulin E in allergic
diseases. Therefore, BCL6 may be a molecular target for Th2-type allergic
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3651038
PMID: 23282478  [PubMed]


487. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Aug;32(8):1190-200. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318166f46a.

Expression of the interferon regulatory factor 8/ICSBP-1 in human reactive
lymphoid tissues and B-cell lymphomas: a novel germinal center marker.

Martinez A(1), Pittaluga S, Rudelius M, Davies-Hill T, Sebasigari D, Fountaine
TJ, Hewitt S, Jaffe ES, Raffeld M.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

To assess the role of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 8 in B-cell development 
and lymphomagenesis, we studied its expression in reactive lymphoid tissues, its 
relationship to other B-cell transcription factors, and its expression in a
series of 232 B-cell tumors and 30 cell lines representing a variety of B-cell
developmental stages. We found that although IRF8 was detectable in most reactive
B-cells, its expression levels differed with developmental stage. Germinal center
B cells contained the highest levels of IRF8, with lower levels seen in mantle
and marginal zone B cells and none in plasma cells. IRF8 was coexpressed with
PAX-5, Pu.1, and B-cell lymphoma (BCL)-6, and similar to BCL-6, was absent from
the small population of IRF4-positive germinal center B cells thought to be
committed to postgerminal center developmental programs. Similarly, IRF8 was most
strongly expressed in lymphomas of germinal center origin with lower levels
present in mantle cell lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and marginal zone
lymphomas, and no expression observed in plasmacytic/plasmablastic neoplasms. The
reciprocal expression pattern with IRF4 in reactive tissues was generally
maintained in lymphomas with some exceptions. These results suggest an important 
role for IRF8 during germinal center B-cell development and in related lymphomas,
and provide a new diagnostic marker helpful in distinguishing B-cell non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma subtypes.

PMID: 18580679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cancer Sci. 2008 Sep;99(9):1760-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00873.x. Epub
2008 Jun 28.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma after transformation from low-grade follicular
lymphoma: morphological, immunohistochemical, and FISH analyses.

Maeshima AM(1), Omatsu M, Nomoto J, Maruyama D, Kim SW, Watanabe T, Kobayashi Y, 
Tobinai K, Matsuno Y.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, 
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. akmaeshi@ncc.go.jp

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is one of the most common subtypes of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma and frequently transforms to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). To
clarify some aspects of the natural history of FL, we retrospectively examined 43
consecutive patients who had DLBCL with pre- or coexisting FL grade 1 or 2. The
patients comprised 22 men and 21 women with a median age of 53 years. Most of the
patients (34/43) showed advanced-stage (III or IV) disease initially. We examined
both FL and DLBCL components morphologically, immunohistochemically, and by
interface fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH: IGH/BCL2 fusion, BCL6
translocation) analysis. Most of the DLBCLs were classified as the centroblastic 
subtype, with two exceptions of the anaplastic subtype. Immunohistochemical
analysis of both the FL and DLBCL components revealed the following respective
positivity rates: CD20 100%/100%, CD10 86%/66%, Bcl-2 96%/91%, Bcl-6 84%/88%,
MUM1 16%/34%, CD30 0%/20%, CD138 0%/0%, and CD5 0%/3%. Loss of CD10 (6/36, 17%)
and gain of MUM1 (7/28, 25%) and CD30 (5/21, 24%) through transformation were not
infrequent. High positivity rates for Bcl-2 and Bcl-6 were maintained throughout 
transformation. Among the DLBCLs, 84% were classified as the germinal center
B-cell phenotype (GCB) and 16% as non-GCB in accordance with the criteria of Hans
et al. IGH/BCL2 fusion was detected by FISH in 89% of FLs and 82% of DLBCLs. BCL6
translocation was detected in 1/6 (17%) DLBCLs without IGH/BCL2 fusion. Thus,
although the morphological features and FISH results for DLBCL were consistent
with transformed FL, the immunophenotype showed wide heterogeneity.

PMID: 18549405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Soc Biol. 2007;201(4):385-95. doi: 10.1051/jbio:2007909. Epub 2008 Mar 5.

[Micro RNA, C/D RNA and parental genoming imprinting.].

[Article in French]

Cavaille J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des Eucaryotes LBME - CNRS UMR 5099 - IFR 
109, Université Paul Sabatier, 118, Route de Narbonne 31062 - Toulouse Cedex,
France.

Experimental and computer-assisted approaches have led us to identify hundreds of
small non-coding RNA (ncRNAs) whose genes - clustered at two chromosomal domains 
(the DLK1-GTl2 region/human 15q11q13 and the SNURF-SNRPN/human 14q32 loc) - are
subjected to genomic imprinting. Here, we discuss their genomic organization,
their expression pattern and their potential functions.

PMID: 18533099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 15;283(33):22565-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803490200. Epub 2008
Jun 4.

BCL6-mediated attenuation of DNA damage sensing triggers growth arrest and
senescence through a p53-dependent pathway in a cell context-dependent manner.

Ranuncolo SM(1), Wang L, Polo JM, Dell'Oso T, Dierov J, Gaymes TJ, Rassool F,
Carroll M, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The BCL6 oncogenic transcriptional repressor is required for development of
germinal center centroblasts, which undergo simultaneous genetic recombination
and massive clonal expansion. Although BCL6 is required for survival of
centroblasts, its expression in earlier B-cells is toxic. Understanding these
opposing effects could provide critical insight into normal B-cell biology and
lymphomagenesis. We examined the transcriptional and biological effects of BCL6
in various primary cells. BCL6 repression of ATR was previously shown to play a
critical role in the centroblast phenotype. Likewise, we found that BCL6 could
impose an ATR-dependent phenotype of attenuated DNA damage sensing and repair in 
primary fibroblasts and B-cells. BCL6 induced true genomic instability because
DNA repair was delayed and was qualitatively impaired, which could be critical
for BCL6-induced lymphomagenesis. Although BCL6 can directly repress TP53 in
centroblasts, BCL6 induced TP53 expression in primary fibroblasts and B-cells,
and these cells underwent p53-dependent growth arrest and senescence in the
presence of physiological levels of BCL6. This differential ability to trigger a 
functional p53 response explains at least in part the different biological
response to BCL6 expression in centroblasts versus other cells. The data suggest 
that targeted re-activation of TP53 could be of therapeutic value in
centroblast-derived lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC2504889
PMID: 18524763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Histopathology. 2008 Jul;53(1):20-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2008.03060.x. Epub 
2008 Jun 2.

Mantle cell lymphoma with aberrant expression of CD10.

Zanetto U(1), Dong H, Huang Y, Zhang K, Narbaitz M, Sapia S, Kostopoulos I, Liu
H, Du MQ, Bacon CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, City Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
ulises.zanetto@swbh.nhs.uk

AIMS: Morphological, immunophenotypic and genetic heterogeneity amongst mantle
cell lymphomas (MCLs) can lead to difficulties in diagnosis and management. The
aim was to describe the clinical and pathological features of MCLs with aberrant 
expression of CD10.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Of 17 specimens from 13 patients, 14 expressed CD10 and
three (presenting before or after a CD10+ specimen) did not. All expressed cyclin
D1 and carried the t(11;14)(q13;q32)/CCND1-IGH translocation. Similar to
non-selected MCL patients, most patients had disseminated disease and an adverse 
clinical course. Five specimens showed pleomorphic blastoid morphology and
blastoid transformation was associated with a change in phenotype, including gain
or loss of CD10. Additional phenotypic variations likely to cause diagnostic
difficulty were present in eight specimens: five were CD5- and five (all CD10+)
expressed Bcl-6. One Bcl-6+ case carried a BCL-6 translocation and three others
had extra copies of the BCL-6 gene. Sequence analysis of the immunoglobulin heavy
chain variable region in five cases showed only one to have low-level somatic
mutation, indicating that they did not arise from germinal centre B cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of CD10 by MCL is often associated with other variant
morphological, immunophenotypic or genetic features, but does not reflect
derivation from germinal centre B cells.

PMID: 18518902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Lett. 2008 Sep 28;269(1):37-45. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.04.020. Epub
2008 May 23.

TIMP1 induces CD44 expression and the activation and nuclear translocation of
SHP1 during the late centrocyte/post-germinal center B cell differentiation.

Kim YS(1), Seo DW, Kong SK, Lee JH, Lee ES, Stetler-Stevenson M,
Stetler-Stevenson WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Korea University Ansan Hospital, 516 Gojan-1 Dong,
Danwon-Gu, Gyeonggi-Do, Ansan 425-707, Republic of Korea. apysk@korea.ac.kr

Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP1) is a survival factor of germinal 
center (GC) B cells, and its over-expression is correlated with aggressive B cell
lymphomas and classical Hodgkin lymphomas. We previously demonstrated that TIMP1 
down-regulates B-cell receptor and BCL6, and activates interleukins-6,-10
(ILs)/signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) signaling in GC 
B cells. The activation of ILs/STAT3 signaling can amplify CD44 function, and
vice versa, and induce protein-tyrosine phosphatase SHP1 activity by a negative
feedback mechanism. Here, we show that TIMP1 up-regulates cell surface CD44
(standard and variants 3 and 7-10) and induces the activity and nuclear
localization of SHP1 in an Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-negative Burkitt lymphoma
cell line, the neoplastic counterpart of GC centroblasts. These results suggest
that TIMP1 functions as a differentiating and survival factor of GC B cells by
modulating CD44 and SHP1 in the late centrocyte/post-GC stage, regardless of EBV 
infection.

PMCID: PMC3448268
PMID: 18502033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mod Pathol. 2008 Aug;21(8):973-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.75. Epub 2008 May
23.

BCL6 gene amplification/3q27 gain is associated with unique clinicopathological
characteristics among follicular lymphoma without BCL2 gene translocation.

Karube K(1), Ying G, Tagawa H, Niino D, Aoki R, Kimura Y, Hashikawa K, Suefuji N,
Sugita Y, Nomura Y, Shimizu K, Yoshida S, Seto M, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan.
karube1975@yahoo.co.jp

Although approximately 10-20% cases of follicular lymphoma lack BCL2 gene
rearrangement, there are few reports having described the alternative genetic
aberrations and their association about clinicopathological features. In this
study, analysis by Fluorescence in situ hybridization of BCL6 gene aberrations in
100 follicular lymphoma cases without IGH/BCL2 rearrangement resulted in the
identification of four subgroups. Group I: BCL6 gene rearrangement (n=41); Group 
II: BCL6 gene amplification/3q27 gain (n=30); Group III: the absence of both
(n=23); and Group IV: the presence of both (n=6). Group II showed higher grade
morphology (Grade 3a/b: 93%), higher bcl2 and MUM1 expression (73 and 57%,
respectively), and more frequent combination with BCL2 gene amplification/18q21
gain (90%) than the other groups. BCL6 gene aberration, especially
amplification/3q27 gain, indicates the presence of certain morphological and
phenotypical findings in follicular lymphoma cases without IGH/BCL2
rearrangement.

PMID: 18500267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Sep;51(3):369-74. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21619.

Pediatric diffuse large B-cell lymphoma demonstrates a high proliferation index, 
frequent c-Myc protein expression, and a high incidence of germinal center
subtype: Report of the French-American-British (FAB) international study group.

Miles RR(1), Raphael M, McCarthy K, Wotherspoon A, Lones MA, Terrier-Lacombe MJ, 
Patte C, Gerrard M, Auperin A, Sposto R, Davenport V, Cairo MS, Perkins SL;
SFOP/LMB96/CCG5961/UKCCSG/NHL 9600 Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

BACKGROUND: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) makes up 10-20% of pediatric
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and these patients have a significantly better prognosis
than adults with DLBCL. The difference in prognosis may be related to clinical,
phenotypic, and/or biological differences between adult and pediatric DLBCL. In
adult DLBCL, the germinal center (GC) phenotype is associated with a better
prognosis than the activated B-cell (ABC) phenotype. However, a high
proliferative index and expression of Bcl2 and c-Myc protein have all been
associated with worse outcomes. While multiple studies have addressed the
phenotype and expression patterns of adult DLBCL, relatively little is known
about these biological variables in pediatric DLBCL. The goal of this study was
to investigate the proliferative index, the relative frequencies of the GC and
non-GC subtypes, and the expression of Bcl2 and c-Myc protein in a cohort of
children with DLBCL treated in a uniform manner.
PROCEDURE: We performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) for MIB1, CD10, Bcl6, MUM1,
Bcl2, and c-Myc on DLBCL tissue from children treated uniformly in the FAB LMB96 
trial (SFOP LMB96/CCG5961/UKCCSG/NHL 9600).
RESULTS: Compared to published adult DLBCL studies, pediatric DLBCL demonstrated 
moderate to high proliferation rates (83%), increased c-Myc protein expression
(84%), decreased Bcl2 protein expression (28%), and an increased frequency of the
GC phenotype (75%).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that there are significant biologic
differences between pediatric and adult forms of DLBCL, which may contribute to
the superior prognosis seen in the pediatric population relative to adult
disease.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2712231
PMID: 18493992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Leuk Res. 2008 Dec;32(12):1837-41. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.04.005. Epub 2008 
May 19.

Clinicopathologic features and treatment outcome of primary breast diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma.

Niitsu N(1), Okamoto M, Nakamine H, Hirano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, International Medical
Center, Saitama Medical University, Hidaka, Saitama, Japan.
nniitsu@saitama-med.ac.jp

We studied the clinicopathologic features and treatment outcome of patients with 
breast diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. As to the cellular immunophenotype, CD5 was
detected in two patients, CD10 in 4, BCL2 in 20, BCL6 in 11, and MUM-1 in 17. The
5-year progression-free survival was 77% and the 5-year overall survival was 87%.
Patients with the germinal center B-cell (GCB) type had a significantly better
prognosis than those with the non-GCB type. The combination of
anthracycline-containing chemotherapy and/or involved-field radiotherapy produced
a relatively good prognosis. However, it is a heterogeneous disease with regard
to histological type and pathological state.

PMID: 18490056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Neurochem. 2008 Jul;106(2):805-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05489.x. Epub 
2008 May 19.

Large-scale analysis of glucocorticoid target genes in rat hypothalamus.

Sato H(1), Horikawa Y, Iizuka K, Sakurai N, Tanaka T, Shihara N, Oshima A, Takeda
J, Mikuni M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Gunma University Graduate School 
of Medicine, and Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Regulation, Gunma, Japan.

Insufficient glucocorticoid (GC) signaling is frequently observed in major
depressive disorder (MDD). Since emotional and behavioral symptoms are often
accompanied by disturbances in hypothalamic systems, GC insufficiency in this
region is regarded as important in the pathogenesis of MDD. In this study, 22
early GC-responsive genes comprising 15 up-regulated and 7 down-regulated genes
in rat hypothalamus were identified as being regulated at least two-fold by
dexamethasone using microarray with 22 599 unique transcripts. Among these 22
genes, five of which are novel GC-responsive genes, the expression patterns of
sgk, bcl6, pdk4, and plekhf1 were examined in vitro in detail, and GC-responsive 
regions were identified only within the promoter of sgk. This suggests that
glucocorticoid response element-independent pathways also play a critical role in
early GC-response in hypothalamus. Considering that a number of these
GC-responsive genes are candidate neuronal regulators, this gene list should be
useful in clarifying the relationship between GC insufficiency and the
pathogenesis of MDD.

PMID: 18489715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):644-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-131813. Epub 2008 May
16.

Reversible disruption of BCL6 repression complexes by CD40 signaling in normal
and malignant B cells.

Polo JM(1), Ci W, Licht JD, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

Germinal center (GC) B cells undergo somatic hypermutation, class switch
recombination, and rapid clonal expansion to produce high-affinity antibodies.
The BCL6 transcriptional repressor facilitates this phenotype because it can
repress DNA damage checkpoint genes. GC B and T cells can make transient direct
physical contact; T cells were observed to be associated with dead B-cell
fragments. We thus hypothesized that one function of CD40 signaling from T cells 
within this timeframe could be to modulate BCL6 activity. CD40 signaling rapidly 
disrupts the ability of BCL6 to recruit the SMRT corepressor complex by excluding
it from the nucleus, leading to histone acetylation, RNA polymerase II
processivity, and activation of BCL6 target genes, such as CD23b, ATR, and TP53. 
Washout of CD40 to emulate transient T-cell contact permitted BCL6 target gene
mRNA levels to return to their repressed levels, demonstrating that this is a
reversible process, which could allow centroblasts that pass quality control to
either continue proliferation or undergo terminal differentiation. These data
suggest that transient CD40 signaling in the GC might allow T cells to weed out
heavily damaged centroblasts while at the same time promoting survival of intact 
B cells, which could undergo differentiation or additional rounds of
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2481532
PMID: 18487509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Leuk Res. 2008 Aug;32(8):1176-82. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2007.10.006.

Characterization of de novo diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with a translocation of
c-myc and immunoglobulin genes.

Kikuchi A(1), Nakamura N, Kuze T, Sasaki Y, Abe M, Ohno H, Akasaka T, Nakamura S,
Ohshima K, Ando K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

The characteristics of de novo diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with
translocation of c-myc and immunoglobulin (Ig) genes (c-myc/Ig DLBCL), were
investigated in 13 cases of c-myc/Ig DLBCL. Immunohistochemistry revealed five
cases were positive for CD10 and BCL6 expression (CD10(+)/BCL6(+)), five cases of
CD10(-)/BCL6(+)/MUM1(-), one case of CD10(-)/BCL6(+)/MUM1(+) and two cases of
CD10(-)/BCL6(-)/MUM1(+) expression, indicating 10 cases of germinal center B-cell
DLBCL and three cases of non-germinal center B-cell DLBCL. Ongoing mutation of
the Ig heavy chain gene variable region (IgH-V) was found in two cases with CD10 
and BCL6 expression and one case showing CD10(-)/BCL6(+)/MUM1(-) expression.
These three cases of ongoing mutation of the IgH-V gene did not express BCL2,
unlike those without ongoing mutation. These results suggest a heterogeneous
immunophenotype and genotype for c-myc/Ig DLBCL, with CD10(-)/BCL6(+)/MUM1(-)
cases the most frequent.

PMID: 18460403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Hematol Oncol. 2008 Dec;26(4):199-211. doi: 10.1002/hon.859.

Genetic and phenotypic analysis of B-cell post-transplant lymphoproliferative
disorders provides insights into disease biology.

Vakiani E(1), Basso K, Klein U, Mansukhani MM, Narayan G, Smith PM, Murty VV,
Dalla-Favera R, Pasqualucci L, Bhagat G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

B-cell post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) are classified as
early lesions, polymorphic lymphomas (P-PTLD) and monomorphic lymphomas (M-PTLD).
These morphologic categories are thought to reflect a biologic continuum,
although supporting genetic data are lacking. To gain better insights into PTLD
pathogenesis, we characterized the phenotypes, immunoglobulin (Ig) gene
alterations and non-Ig gene (BCL6, RhoH/TTF, c-MYC, PAX5, CIITA, BCL7A, PIM1)
mutations of 21 PTLD, including an IM-like lesion, 8 P-PTLD and 12 M-PTLD. Gene
expression profile analysis was also performed in 12 cases. All PTLD with clonal 
Ig rearrangements showed evidence of germinal centre (GC) transit based on the
analysis of Ig and BCL6 gene mutations, and 74% had a non-GC phenotype (BCL6 +/- 
MUM1+). Although surface Ig abnormalities were seen in 6/19 (32%) PTLD, only
three showed 'crippling' Ig mutations indicating other etiologies for loss of the
B-cell receptor. Aberrant somatic hypermutation (ASHM) was almost exclusively
observed in M-PTLD (8/12 vs. 1/8 P-PTLD) and all three recurrent cases analysed
showed additional mutations in genes targeted by ASHM. Gene expression analysis
showed distinct clustering of PTLD compared to B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(B-NHL) without segregation of P-PTLD from non-GC M-PTLD or EBV+ from EBV- PTLD. 
The gene expression pattern of PTLD appeared more related to that of memory and
activated B-cells. Together, our results suggest that PTLD represent a distinct
type of B-NHL deriving from an antigen experienced B-cell, whose evolution is
associated with accrual of genetic lesions.

Copyright (c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18457340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Curr Opin Immunol. 2008 Apr;20(2):162-9. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2008.03.016. Epub
2008 May 2.

Plasma cell differentiation and survival.

Tarlinton D(1), Radbruch A, Hiepe F, Dörner T.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia.
tarlinton@wehi.edu.au

Humoral immunity depends on the regulated production and maintenance of antibody 
secreting cells during the course of an immune response. Recent insights into the
transcriptional regulation of the initiation of plasma cell differentiation have 
clarified aspects of this process, particularly with respect to the choice
between the memory B cell and plasma cell differentiation pathways. It is now
possible to specify the conditions favouring these outcomes and to predict where 
they might occur within the germinal center. Once formed, plasma cell survival is
critically dependent on accessing niches that are formed by stomal elements in
both normal and inflamed tissues. The apparent homeostasis of plasma cell numbers
means that new specificities can persist only at the expense of existing ones,
raising questions on how immunological memory is maintained in the face of new
immune responses. The answer appears to be through the reduction of the process
to a single cell level, thereby introducing an element of stochasticity.

PMID: 18456483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Jul;49(7):1392-8. doi: 10.1080/10428190802087454.

SNARK, a novel downstream molecule of EBV latent membrane protein 1, is
associated with resistance to cancer cell death.

Kim JH(1), Kim WS, Park C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, Korea.

To investigate the effect of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1) on human cancer cells, we sought to identify and analyse potential target 
genes that were differentially expressed in the presence and absence of LMP1.
LMP1 upregulated the expression of SNARK compared with the empty vector
transfected control cells, which was confirmed by reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction. Cytotoxicity assay showed that SNARK expression
increased drug resistance in response to doxorubicin (P = 0.0009), whereas
knockdown of SNARK by siRNA (siSNARK) effectively inhibited LMP-1-mediated
increase of cell survival (P = 0.0131). The expression of anti-apoptotic genes
such as BCL6 and BIRC2 was increased by SNARK, and knockdown of these genes
decreased SNARK-mediated increase of cell survival. The associations of SNARK,
BCL6, and BIRC2 and the presence of EBV were also observed in T-cell lymphoma
cell lines, NKL and HANK-1. These results suggest that SNARK is a downstream
cellular target of LMP1 in malignant cells and can be a novel candidate for
therapeutic intervention of EBV-associated cancer.

PMID: 18452098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 May;49(5):874-82. doi: 10.1080/10428190801895345.

Therapeutic targeting of the BCL6 oncogene for diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Parekh S(1), Privé G, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
NY, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor often expressed constitutively in diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) due to mutations of its genomic locus. BCL6
mediates aberrant survival, proliferation, genomic instability and
differentiation blockade in DLBCL cells. The biochemical study of BCL6 mediated
gene repression has provided the basis for design of agents that inhibit BCL6 and
kill lymphoma cells. The repressor activity of the BCL6 BTB domain is
particularly well defined from the structural standpoint. Design of inhibitors
targeting BCL6 BTB domain protein interaction surfaces appears to be an effective
approach, which reactivates important BCL6 target genes and readily kills DLBCL
cells. Targeting other domains of BCL6 or using histone deacetylase inhibitors to
overcome BCL6 mediated repression may also be useful. Recent studies in DLBCL
transcriptional signatures have revealed a subset of DLBCLs that are particularly
dependent on BCL6 to maintain their survival and these patients could be
candidates for clinical trials of BCL6 inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2748726
PMID: 18452090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;68(9):3361-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5817.

Sequential transcription factor targeting for diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Cerchietti LC(1), Polo JM, Da Silva GF, Farinha P, Shaknovich R, Gascoyne RD,
Dowdy SF, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Transcription factors play a central role in malignant transformation by
activating or repressing waves of downstream target genes. Therapeutic targeting 
of transcription factors can reprogram cancer cells to lose their advantages in
growth and survival. The BCL6 transcriptional repressor plays a central role in
the pathogenesis of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) and controls
downstream checkpoints, including the p53 tumor suppressor gene. We report that a
specific inhibitor of BCL6 called BPI can trigger a p53 response in DLBCL cells. 
This was partially due to induction of p53 activity and partially due to relief
of direct repression by BCL6 of p53 target genes. BPI could thus induce a
p53-like response even in the presence of mutant p53. Moreover, sequential BCL6
peptide inhibitors followed by p53 peptide or small-molecule activators provided 
a more powerful antilymphoma effect than either treatment alone by maximally
restoring p53 target gene expression. Therefore, tandem targeting of the
overlapping BCL6 and p53 transcriptional programs can correct aberrant survival
pathways in DLBCL and might provide an effective therapeutic approach to lymphoma
therapy.

PMCID: PMC2748725
PMID: 18451163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jun;294(6):E1152-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90255.2008. Epub 2008 Apr 29.

Molecular correlates for maximal oxygen uptake and type 1 fibers.

Parikh H(1), Nilsson E, Ling C, Poulsen P, Almgren P, Nittby H, Eriksson KF, Vaag
A, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden. hemang.parikh@med.lu.se

Maximal oxygen uptake (Vo(2max)) and the amount of type 1 fibers are
interrelated, but the underlying unifying molecular mechanisms are poorly
understood. To explore these mechanisms, we related gene expression profiles in
skeletal muscle biopsies of 43 age-matched men from published datasets with
Vo(2max) and the amount of type 1 fibers and replicated some of the findings in
muscle biopsies from 154 young and elderly individuals using real-time PCR. We
identified 66 probe sets (genes or expressed sequence tags) positively and 83
probe sets inversely correlated with Vo(2max) and 171 probe sets positively and
217 probe sets inversely correlated with percentage of type 1 fibers in human
skeletal muscle. Genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) showed high
expression in individuals with high Vo(2max), whereas the opposite was not the
case in individuals with low Vo(2max). Instead, genes such as AHNAK and BCL6 were
associated with low Vo(2max). Also, expression of the OXPHOS genes NDUFB5 and
ATP5C1 increased with exercise training and decreased with aging. In contrast,
expression of AHNAK in skeletal muscle decreased with exercise training and
increased with aging. Eleven genes (NDUFB4, COX5A, UQCRB, ATP5C1, ATP5G3, ETHE1, 
FABP3, ISCA1, MYST4, C9orf3, and PKIA) were positively correlated with both
Vo(2max) and the percentage of type 1 fibers. Vo(2max) closely reflects
expression of OXPHOS genes, particularly that of NDUFB5 and ATP5C1, in skeletal
muscle, suggesting good muscle fitness. In contrast, a high expression of AHNAK
was associated with a low Vo(2max) and poor muscle fitness.

PMID: 18445752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;14(10):3002-10. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4946. 
Epub 2008 Apr 29.

Translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene locus predict better
survival in gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Nakamura S(1), Ye H, Bacon CM, Goatly A, Liu H, Kerr L, Banham AH, Streubel B,
Yao T, Tsuneyoshi M, Savio A, Takeshita M, Dartigues P, Ruskoné-Fourmestraux A,
Matsumoto T, Iida M, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. shonaka@intmed2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: The pathogenesis and clinical heterogeneity of gastric diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) are poorly understood. We have comprehensively
investigated the incidence and clinical significance of lymphoma-associated
chromosomal translocations, particularly those involving the immunoglobulin heavy
chain (IGH) gene locus, in a large series of gastric DLBCL.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: One hundred forty-one cases of primary gastric DLBCL [58
with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and 83 without MALT
lymphoma] were enrolled. Translocations involving BCL6, c-MYC, FOXP1, MALT1, and 
IGH were investigated using interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization. In
positive cases, additional fluorescence in situ hybridization was done with
appropriate probes for potential partner genes. Cases were classified into
germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) or non-GCB subgroups by immunophenotyping with 
CD10, BCL6, and MUM1.
RESULTS: Translocations involving IGH were detected in 36 (32%) of 111 cases;
their partner genes included BCL6 (n = 10), c-MYC (n = 5), and FOXP1 (n = 3) but 
remained unknown in the remaining 18 cases. t(14;18)/IGH-BCL2,
t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1, and t(1;14)/BCL10-IGH were not detected in any case.
t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 was detected in none of the cases, except for one case of
DLBCL with MALT lymphoma, which showed positive signals only in MALT lymphoma
cells. IGH-involved translocation was associated with younger age but not with
any other clinicopathologic factors including GCB or non-GCB immunophenotypes.
Cox multivariate analysis revealed that IGH-involved translocation, in addition
to younger age and early stage, was an independent prognostic factor for better
overall and EFSs.
CONCLUSION: IGH-involved translocations are frequent in gastric DLBCL and seem to
identify cases with favorable prognosis.

PMID: 18445693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 May;129(5):723-6. doi: 10.1309/CMPGPYTMFRM6RVQR.

Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of bone displays preferential
rearrangements of the c-MYC or BCL2 gene.

Lima FP(1), Bousquet M, Gomez-Brouchet A, de Paiva GR, Amstalden EM, Soares FA,
Dastugue N, Vassallo J, Brousset P.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiopathology of Toulouse-Purpan, and Department of Pathology,
Paul-Sabatier University, Toulouse, France.

We selected a series of 63 primary diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) of
bone collected in tissue microarrays from centers in France and Brazil. These
cases were classified according to the expression of antigens associated with
germinal center (GC; n = 42) or non-GC (n = 21) stages of B-cell differentiation.
By fluorescence in situ hybridization, we found a substantial number of cases
with a rearrangement of BCL2 (9/32) and c -MYC (n = 3), whereas the PAX5, BCL6,
BCL1 cyclin D1, and ALK genes were in germline configuration. It is interesting
that 1 case, with a GC phenotype, showed dual BCL2 and c -MYC rearrangement. The 
majority of the cases with rearrangements were of the GC phenotype. These
results, associated with the lack of BCL6 rearrangement, suggest that bone DLBCL 
represents a specific group within extranodal B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 18426731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Apr 15;182(2):144-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.01.013.

The GAS5 (growth arrest-specific transcript 5) gene fuses to BCL6 as a result of 
t(1;3)(q25;q27) in a patient with B-cell lymphoma.

Nakamura Y(1), Takahashi N, Kakegawa E, Yoshida K, Ito Y, Kayano H, Niitsu N,
Jinnai I, Bessho M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Saitama Medical University, 38 Morohongo,
Moroyama-machi, Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan. ynakam@saitama-med.ac.jp

The BCL6 gene is frequently disrupted at its 5' noncoding region by 3q27
chromosomal translocations in B-cell lymphoma. As a result of translocation, BCL6
is juxtaposed to reciprocal partners, such as the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene
family. Besides the Ig loci, multiple non-Ig partners of the BCL6 translocation
have been reported. Here we describe the identification of the GAS5 (growth
arrest-specific transcript 5) gene as a novel partner of the BCL6 in a patient
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, harboring the t(1;3)(q25;q27). In this case, 
the chromosome 1 breakpoint was located within the intronic small nucleolar RNA
(snoRNA) sequence of GAS5 and the chromosome 3 breakpoint at 4 kb upstream of
BCL6 exon 1a. As the result of chromosomal translocation, the GAS5-BCL6 chimeric 
transcripts were expressed, in which the 5'-terminal oligopyrimidine (5'TOP)
sequence of GAS5 was fused to the whole coding sequence of BCL6. The GAS5 gene on
chromosome 1q25 is the second BCL6 partner, to the SNHG5 on 6q15, which is
classified as a non-protein-coding multiple snoRNA host and 5'-TOP class gene.

PMID: 18406879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neurobiol Dis. 2008 Jun;30(3):303-11. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.01.012. Epub 2008
Mar 10.

Immune transcriptome alterations in the temporal cortex of subjects with autism.

Garbett K(1), Ebert PJ, Mitchell A, Lintas C, Manzi B, Mirnics K, Persico AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203 USA.

Autism is a severe disorder that involves both genetic and environmental factors.
Expression profiling of the superior temporal gyrus of six autistic subjects and 
matched controls revealed increased transcript levels of many immune
system-related genes. We also noticed changes in transcripts related to cell
communication, differentiation, cell cycle regulation and chaperone systems.
Critical expression changes were confirmed by qPCR (BCL6, CHI3L1, CYR61, IFI16,
IFITM3, MAP2K3, PTDSR, RFX4, SPP1, RELN, NOTCH2, RIT1, SFN, GADD45B, HSPA6, HSPB8
and SERPINH1). Overall, these expression patterns appear to be more associated
with the late recovery phase of autoimmune brain disorders, than with the innate 
immune response characteristic of neurodegenerative diseases. Moreover, a
variance-based analysis revealed much greater transcript variability in brains
from autistic subjects compared to the control group, suggesting that these genes
may represent autism susceptibility genes and should be assessed in follow-up
genetic studies.

PMCID: PMC2693090
PMID: 18378158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 1;180(7):4805-15.

STAT3-mediated up-regulation of BLIMP1 Is coordinated with BCL6 down-regulation
to control human plasma cell differentiation.

Diehl SA(1), Schmidlin H, Nagasawa M, van Haren SD, Kwakkenbos MJ, Yasuda E,
Beaumont T, Scheeren FA, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

STAT family members have been implicated in regulating the balance between B cell
lymphoma (BCL)6 and B lymphocyte induced maturation protein (BLIMP)1 to control
plasma cell differentiation. We previously showed that STAT5 induces BCL6 to
block plasma cell differentiation and extend the life span of human B cells. The 
heterogeneity in STAT activation by cytokines and their effects on B cell
differentiation prompted us to investigate the effect of STAT3 activation in
plasma cell differentiation. First stimulation with IL-21, which promotes plasma 
cell differentiation, induced robust and prolonged STAT3 activation in primary
human B cells. We then investigated effects of direct STAT3 activation on
regulation of plasma cell genes, cellular phenotype, and Ig production.
Activation of a tamoxifen-regulated STAT3-estrogen receptor fusion protein
triggered BLIMP1 mRNA and protein up-regulation, plasma cell phenotypic features,
and Ig secretion. When STAT3 was activated by IL-21 in B cells ectopically
expressing BCL6, BLIMP1 was up-regulated, but only partial plasma cell
differentiation was achieved. Lastly, through coexpression of BCL6 and STAT3-ER, 
we verified that STAT3 activation functionally mimicked IL-21 treatment and that 
STAT3-mediated BLIMP1 up-regulation occurred despite high BCL6 expression levels 
indicating that BCL6 is not the dominant repressor of BLIMP1. Thus, up-regulation
of BLIMP1 alone is not sufficient for differentiation of primary human B cells
into plasma cells; concomitant down-regulation of BCL6 is absolutely required for
completion of the plasma cell differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC2396731
PMID: 18354204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Jul-Aug;41(1):95-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.02.003.
Epub 2008 Mar 17.

BCL6 represses CHEK1 and suppresses DNA damage pathways in normal and malignant
B-cells.

Ranuncolo SM(1), Polo JM, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, New York 10128, USA.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor protein that is expressed in a
developmentally regulated fashion during B-cell maturation. Specifically, BCL6 is
required for formation of germinal centers in response to T-cell dependent
antigen activation. Germinal center B-cells feature the ability to tolerate rapid
proliferation and simultaneous genetic recombination. Genetic lesions that cause 
constitutive expression of BCL6 are commonly associated with diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCL). Recent studies show that BCL6 contributes to the germinal
center phenotype by directly repressing genes involved in sensing or responding
to DNA damage including ATR, TP53 and CDKN1A. The CHEK1 protein is activated
through phosphorylation by the ATR kinase domain in response to DNA damage.
Activated CHEK1 can phosphorylate and modulate the activity a number of proteins 
including p53, providing a link between ATR sensing of DNA damage and p53
checkpoint activity. Herein we show that BCL6 can directly bind to a DNA
consensus element in the CHEK1 promoter and repress its expression in normal and 
malignant B-cells. DLBCL cells can be killed by a specific BCL6 peptide inhibitor
(BPI) that interferes with corepressor binding to the BCL6 BTB domain. BPI could 
reactivate CHEK1 in DLBCL cells, suggesting that its induction might contribute
to BPI anti-lymphoma effects. Therefore, BCL6 can suppress multiple genes
involved in a common pathway sensing, transducing and responding to genotoxic
stress.

PMCID: PMC2723786
PMID: 18346918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 Apr;129(4):630-8. doi: 10.1309/42CQ0HU7XEY9QMQX.

A subset of CD5- diffuse large B-cell lymphomas expresses nuclear cyclin D1 with 
aberrations at the CCND1 locus.

Ehinger M(1), Linderoth J, Christensson B, Sander B, Cavallin-Ståhl E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

In 231 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, the expression of cyclin D1 and CD5 was
evaluated. All cases were CD5-. Ten (4.3%) were positive for cyclin D1 and were
subjected to fluorescence in situ hybridization at the CCND1 locus. One case
showed the t(11;14). In another case, the telomeric probe signal for cyclin D1
was lost in most tumor cells, and in a small proportion of the cells, there were 
fluorescence signals indicative of the t(11;14). Two other cases displayed
additional cyclin D1 signals in the absence of the t(11;14). All cases but 1 were
positive for bcl-6 or MUM1, disfavoring the possibility of misdiagnosed blastoid 
variants of CD5- mantle cell lymphomas. Thus, contrary to the current view, there
seems to exist a certain number of cyclin D1+ and CD5- diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas, some of which have structural aberrations at the CCND1 locus,
including the t(11;14).

PMID: 18343791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Haematologica. 2008 Apr;93(4):623-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12005. Epub 2008 Mar
6.

Primary extramedullary plasmacytoma: similarities with and differences from
multiple myeloma revealed by interphase cytogenetics.

Bink K(1), Haralambieva E, Kremer M, Ott G, Beham-Schmid C, de Leval L, Peh SC,
Laeng HR, Jütting U, Hutzler P, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Fend F.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Pathology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Oberschleissheim, Germany.

Primary extramedullary plasmacytoma is an indolent neoplasm that infrequently
converts to multiple myeloma. Since cytogenetic data on extramedullary
plasmacytoma are lacking, we studied 38 cases of this type of neoplasm by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Fourteen cases (37%) contained IGH breaks,
including six with a t(4;14) translocation. No translocations t(11;14), t(14;16),
t(8;14), nor breaks involving MALT1, BCL6 or FOXP1 were found. Loss of 13q (40%),
as well as chromosomal gains (82%) were common. There was no correlation between 
chromosomal alterations and clinical features or local relapse. Cytogenetically, 
extramedullary plasmacytoma and multiple myeloma are closely related. However,
the distribution of IGH translocation partners, with the notable absence of
t(11;14), is different. Key words: extramedullary plasmacytoma, multiple myeloma,
cytogenetics, IGH translocation, fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 18326524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Br J Haematol. 2008 Apr;141(1):69-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07011.x.

Expression of the human germinal-centre-associated lymphoma protein in diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Baecklund E(1), Natkunam Y, Backlin C, Iliadou A, Askling J, Ekbom A, Feltelius
N, Klareskog L, Enblad G, Lossos IS, Levy R, Sundström C, Rosenquist R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
eva.baecklund@swipnet.se

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) can be subdivided into germinal centre
(GC)-like and non-GC-like subtypes by CD10, BCL6 and MUM1/IRF4 status. We
previously reported that patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are at
increased risk of non-GC DLBCL. This study examined a new GC-marker, human
germinal-centre-associated lymphoma (HGAL) protein, in RA-DLBCL. Of 111, 38 (34%)
DLBCL were HGAL-positive and showed less disseminated disease and a tendency
toward improved overall survival compared to HGAL-negative cases. This supports
that a majority of RA-DLBCL are of non-GC origin, indicating a specific role for 
activated peripheral B cells in the pathogenesis of RA-DLBCL.

PMID: 18324968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Haematologica. 2008 Apr;93(4):543-50. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12251. Epub 2008 Feb 
20.

Detection of somatic quantitative genetic alterations by multiplex polymerase
chain reaction for the prediction of outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Jardin F(1), Ruminy P, Kerckaert JP, Parmentier F, Picquenot JM, Quief S,
Villenet C, Buchonnet G, Tosi M, Frebourg T, Bastard C, Tilly H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Centre Henri Becquerel, 76000 Rouen, France.
fabrice.jardin@rouen.fnclcc.fr

BACKGROUND: Genomic gains and losses play a crucial role in the development of
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. High resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization provides a comprehensive view of these genomic imbalances but is
not routinely applicable. We developed a polymerase chain reaction assay to
provide information regarding gains or losses of relevant genes and prognosis in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Two polymerase chain reaction assays (multiplex polymerase
chain reaction of short fluorescent fragments, QMPSF) were designed to detect
gains or losses of c-REL, BCL6, SIM1, PTPRK, MYC, CDKN2A, MDM2, CDKN1B, TP53 and 
BCL2. Array comparative genomic hybridization was simultaneously performed to
evaluate the sensitivity and predictive value of the QMPSF assay. The biological 
and clinical relevance of this assay were assessed.
RESULTS: The predictive value of the QMPSF assay for detecting abnormal DNA copy 
numbers ranged between 88-97%, giving an overall concordance rate of 92% with
comparative genomic hybridization results. In 77 cases of diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas, gains of MYC, CDKN1B, c-REL and BCL2 were detected in 12%, 40%, 27%
and 29%, respectively. TP53 and CDKN2A deletions were observed in 22% and 36%
respectively. BCL2 and CDKN2A allelic status correlated with protein expression. 
TP53 mutations were associated with allelic deletions in 45% of cases. The
prognostic value of a single QMPSF assay including TP53, MYC, CDKN2A, SIM1 and
CDKN1B was predictive of the outcome independently of the germinal center B-cell 
like/non-germinal center B-cell like subtype or the International Prognostic
Index.
CONCLUSIONS: QMPSF is a reliable and flexible method for detecting somatic
quantitative genetic alterations in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and could be
integrated in future prognostic predictive models.

PMID: 18287131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 15;29(3):384-91. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.026.

Structure of a BCOR corepressor peptide in complex with the BCL6 BTB domain
dimer.

Ghetu AF(1), Corcoran CM, Cerchietti L, Bardwell VJ, Melnick A, Privé GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics and Proteomics, Ontario Cancer Institute, 101
College Street, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.

The transcriptional corepressors BCOR, SMRT, and NCoR are known to bind
competitively to the BCL6 BTB domain despite the fact that BCOR has no detectable
sequence similarity to the other two corepressors. We have identified a 17
residue motif from BCOR that binds directly to the BCL6 BTB domain and determined
the crystal structure of the complex to a resolution of 2.6 A. Remarkably, the
BCOR BCL6 binding domain (BCOR(BBD)) peptide binds in the same BCL6 binding site 
as the SMRT(BBD) peptide despite the lack of any significant sequence similarity 
between the two peptides. Mutations of critical BCOR(BBD) residues cause the
disruption of the BCL6 corepression activities of BCOR, and a BCOR(BBD) peptide
blocks BCL6-mediated transcriptional repression and kills lymphoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2665293
PMID: 18280243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mod Pathol. 2008 Jun;21(6):653-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.30. Epub 2008 Feb
8.

Expression of HGAL in primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas: evidence for
germinal center derivation of primary cutaneous follicular lymphoma.

Xie X(1), Sundram U, Natkunam Y, Kohler S, Hoppe RT, Kim YH, Cook JR, Hammel J,
Swerdlow SH, Guitart J, Smith MD, Bosler D, Listinsky C, Lossos IS, Hsi ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The classification of primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma (PCLBCL) is based
on standard morphology, immunohistochemistry, and clinical presentation. There
are two major subtypes in the current WHO-EORTC classification: follicle center
lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg-type (DLBCL-LT). The goals of
this study were to examine a series of DLBCLs to determine (1) whether the
immunohistochemical paradigm of germinal center B-cell and non-germinal center
B-cell types of systemic DLBCL could be applied to PCLBCL; (2) whether
application of the newly described germinal center B-cell marker, human germinal 
center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) also discriminates between these types as a
further support for germinal center B-cell origin for primary cutaneous center
lymphoma; and (3) whether any of these biologic markers were of prognostic
significance. To this end, 32 cases of diffuse PCLBCL (22 primary cutaneous
follicular center lymphomas and 10 DLBCL-LT) were classified based on the
WHO-EORTC criteria and studied for expression of CD20, BCL2, BCL6, CD10, MUM-1,
and HGAL by immunohistochemistry. Results were correlated with clinical features.
HGAL and BCL6 expression and germinal center B-cell phenotype were associated
with primary cutaneous follicular center lymphoma. The combination of HGAL and
BCL6 positivity had the highest sensitivity (88%) and specificity (100%) for
predicting subtype compared to either marker alone. Both HGAL and BCL6 were
associated with the germinal center B-cell phenotype. The correlation of HGAL
expression with the germinal center B-cell phenotype demonstrates the role of
this marker in the classification of cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas. BCL6
expression was the only immunohistochemical marker associated with overall
survival. Characterizing PCLBCLs with markers of B-cell maturation stage is a
useful framework for studying, classifying, and clinically stratifying these
lymphomas.

PMID: 18264083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int Immunol. 2008 Mar;20(3):453-60. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn005. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Regulation of the plasma cell transcription factor Blimp-1 gene by Bach2 and
Bcl6.

Ochiai K(1), Muto A, Tanaka H, Takahashi S, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp-1) is a key regulator for plasma
cell differentiation. Prior to the terminal differentiation into plasma cells,
Blimp-1 expression is suppressed in B cells by transcription repressors BTB and
CNC homology 2 (Bach2) and B cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6). Bach2 binds to the Maf
recognition element (MARE) of the promoter upstream region of the Blimp-1 gene
(Prdm1) by forming a heterodimer with MafK. Bach2 and Bcl6 were found to interact
with each other in B cells. While both Bach2 and Bcl6 possess the BTB domain
which mediates protein-protein interactions, they interacted in a BTB-independent
manner. Bcl6 is known to repress Prdm1 through a Bcl6 recognition element 1 in
the intron 5, in which a putative, evolutionarily conserved MARE was identified. 
Both repressed the expression of a reporter gene containing the intron 5 region
depending on the presence of the respective binding sites in 18-81 pre-B cells.
Co-expression of Bach2 and Bcl6 resulted in further repression of the reporter
plasmid. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed MafK to bind to the intron
MARE in various B cell lines, thus suggesting that it binds as a heterodimer with
Bach2. Therefore, the interaction between Bach2 and Bcl6 might be crucial for the
proper repression of Prdm1 in B cells.

PMID: 18256039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Feb;25(1):73-7.

[Detection of 3q27 chromosomal abnormality in diffuse large B cell lymphoma using
FISH on cell microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang HY(1), Li HL, Zhao T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Affiliated South Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510515 People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of 3q27 chromosome rearrangement with
bcl-6 gene amplification and the molecular classification, therapeutic
efficacies, and clinical stages in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBC).
METHODS: The newly invented cell microarray was used to detect 3q27 chromosome
rearrangement and bcl-6 gene amplification in 60 cases of DLBCL by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH). The molecular classification of germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB) and non-germinal center B-cell-like (non-GCB) was investigated 
by analyzing the expression of CD20, CD10, bcl-6 and MUM1 simultaneously by
immunohistochemical S-P method and tissue microarray. The information of
therapeutic efficacies and clinical stages was obtained by analyzing clinical
cases. The relationships among the factors were analyzed by statistics.
RESULTS: In 60 cases of DLBCL, 48.3%(29/60) were GCB and 51.7%(31/60) were
non-GCB. The 3q27 chromosome rearrangement and bcl-6 gene amplification were
present in 15 and 22 cases respectively. In 15 cases with 3q27 rearrangement,
bcl-6 protein expression was positive in 3(20.0%), which was significantly
different from that in cases without 3q27 rearrangement (P=0.017). In 60 cases of
DLBCL, bcl-6 gene amplification was present in 22 cases, in which 5(22.7%) were
GCB and 17(77.3%) were non-GCB, which was significantly different from that in
cases without bcl-6 gene amplification (P=0.003). In 36 cases undergoing the
normal CHOP program treatment, bcl-6 gene amplification was present in 15 cases
and the rates of the complete remission, partial remission and no change were
4(26.7%), 4(26.7%) and 7(46.7%) respectively, and again it was significantly
different from that in cases without bcl-6 gene amplification (P=0.016). There
were no statistical significances among bcl-6 gene, BCL-6 protein expression, and
clinical stages. Cases with BCL-6 protein positive and negative expression were
not correlated with therapeutic efficacies and clinical stages.
CONCLUSION: There is lower expression of BCL-6 protein in cases with bcl-6 gene
fragmentation. Cases with bcl-6 gene amplification are non-GCB with worse
therapeutic results and later clinical stages. There may be other genes near
chromosome 3q27 associated with DLBCL prognosis.

PMID: 18247310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;68(3):783-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0008.

BCL6 represses Smad signaling in transforming growth factor-beta resistance.

Wang D(1), Long J, Dai F, Liang M, Feng XH, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) controls a wide spectrum of cellular
processes. Deregulation of TGF-beta signaling contributes to the pathogenesis of 
many diseases including cancer and autoimmune diseases. TGF-beta signaling is
generally mediated through intracellular signal transducers and transcription
factors called Smads. Herein, we have identified the oncoprotein BCL6 as a
transcriptional corepressor of tumor suppressor Smad4. BCL6 physically interacts 
with Smad3 and Smad4, disrupts the Smad-p300 interaction, and represses the
transcriptional activity of Smad4. In accordance, B-cell lymphoma cells with a
high expression level of BCL6 were found to be refractory to TGF-beta
antiproliferative response, whereas knockdown of BCL6 expression in B-cell
lymphoma cells partially restores the TGF-beta responses. This study provides
strong evidence that overexpression of BCL6 contributes to TGF-beta resistance in
B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 18245479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Cancer. 2008 May 15;122(10):2249-54. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23397.

Genomic profiling of 766 cancer-related genes in archived esophageal normal and
carcinoma tissues.

Chen J(1), Guo L, Peiffer DA, Zhou L, Chan OT, Bibikova M, Wickham-Garcia E, Lu
SH, Zhan Q, Wang-Rodriguez J, Jiang W, Fan JB.

Author information: 
(1)Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

We employed the BeadArraytrade mark technology to perform a genetic analysis in
33 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human esophageal carcinomas, mostly
squamous-cell-carcinoma (ESCC), and their adjacent normal tissues. A total of
1,432 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) derived from 766 cancer-related
genes were genotyped with partially degraded genomic DNAs isolated from these
samples. This directly targeted genomic profiling identified not only previously 
reported somatic gene amplifications (e.g., CCND1) and deletions (e.g., CDKN2A
and CDKN2B) but also novel genomic aberrations. Among these novel targets, the
most frequently deleted genomic regions were chromosome 3p (including tumor
suppressor genes FANCD2 and CTNNB1) and chromosome 5 (including tumor suppressor 
gene APC). The most frequently amplified genomic region was chromosome 3q
(containing DVL3, MLF1, ABCC5, BCL6, AGTR1 and known oncogenes TNK2, TNFSF10,
FGF12). The chromosome 3p deletion and 3q amplification occurred coincidently in 
nearly all of the affected cases, suggesting a molecular mechanism for the
generation of somatic chromosomal aberrations. We also detected significant
differences in germline allele frequency between the esophageal cohort of our
study and normal control samples from the International HapMap Project for 10
genes (CSF1, KIAA1804, IL2, PMS2, IRF7, FLT3, NTRK2, MAP3K9, ERBB2 and PRKAR1A), 
suggesting that they might play roles in esophageal cancer susceptibility and/or 
development. Taken together, our results demonstrated the utility of the
BeadArray technology for high-throughput genetic analysis in FFPE tumor tissues
and provided a detailed genetic profiling of cancer-related genes in human
esophageal cancer.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18241037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2175-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01400-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

CtBP is an essential corepressor for BCL6 autoregulation.

Mendez LM(1), Polo JM, Yu JJ, Krupski M, Ding BB, Melnick A, Ye BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. hye@aecom.yu.edu

The transcription repressor BCL6 plays an essential role in the formation and
function of germinal centers (GCs). While normal B cells promptly shut off BCL6
when they exit the GC, many GC-derived B-cell lymphomas sustain BCL6 expression
through chromosomal translocations and activating mutations. We have previously
shown that a common effect of lymphoma-associated BCL6 gene alterations is to
bypass a negative autoregulatory loop that controls its transcription. In this
study, we report that BCL6 autoregulation is independent of several known
corepressor complexes including silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid
hormone receptors, nuclear receptor coreceptor, BCL6 corepressor, and MTA3/NuRD. 
Furthermore, we show that BCL6 can interact with the CtBP (C-terminal binding
protein) corepressor both in vitro and in vivo and that CtBP is recruited by BCL6
to its 5' regulatory region. In lymphoma cell lines carrying BCL6 translocations,
small interfering RNA-mediated CtBP knock-down selectively relieved the
previously silenced wild-type BCL6 allele but not the translocated alleles, which
are driven by heterologous promoters. These results demonstrate that CtBP is a
novel BCL6 corepressor and suggest that a unique corepressor requirement for BCL6
autoregulation may allow GC B cells to differentially control the expression of
BCL6 and other BCL6 target genes in response to environmental stimuli during the 
GC stage of B cell development.

PMCID: PMC2268420
PMID: 18212045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hum Pathol. 2008 Feb;39(2):292-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.08.002.

A B-cell lymphoma-associated chromosomal translocation in a progressive
transformation of germinal center.

Bouron-Dal Soglio D(1), Truong F, Fetni R, Hazourli S, Champagne J, Oligny LL,
Fournet JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Sainte-Justine, 3175
chemin de la Côte Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1C5.
dorothee.dal_soglio.hsj@ssss.gouv.qc.ca

Progressive transformation of germinal center (PTGC) is a pattern of lymph node
reactive hyperplasia. It can also be the predominant pattern in a hyperplastic
lymph node known as florid PTGC. It is characterized histologically by the
expansion of the mantle zone lymphocytes into both the adjacent sinusoids and
germinal centers. The lymphocytes destroying the germinal centers are
predominantly B cells, with a minor population of T cells. Morphologically, it
can be confused with nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin disease (NLPHD)
because of its nodular pattern and because of the presence of large cells that
can be incorrectly identified as lymphocytic and histiocytic cells. A
relationship between PTGC and NLPHD remains unclear, and many authors have
suggested that PTGC can represent a precursor lesion of NLPHD. Here we report the
first karyotype obtained in PTGC, in a 12-year-old boy. It shows a
t(3;22)(q27;q11) translocation, probably involving the BCL6 gene. This
translocation has previously been described in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and
in NLPHD with BCL6 rearrangement. This finding offers an insight into a possible 
tumorigenic pathway from PTGC to NLPHD. Further studies will be required to
confirm this hypothesis.

PMID: 18206497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Jan;49(1):95-101. doi: 10.1080/10428190701742472.

Frequency of BCL2 and BCL6 translocations in follicular lymphoma: relation with
histological and clinical features.

Díaz-Alderete A(1), Doval A, Camacho F, Verde L, Sabin P, Arranz-Sáez R, Bellas
C, Corbacho C, Gil J, Perez-Martín M, Ruiz-Marcellán M, Gonzalez L, Montalbán C, 
Piris M, Menarguez J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón,
Madrid, Spain.

Erratum in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Mar;49(3):598.

Follicular lymphomas (FLs) usually carry BCL2 translocations although BCL6
translocations are also present. We explored relationships between translocations
status and clinical or histological parameters at diagnosis in 182 patients
stratified in four groups: BCL2-/BCL6-, BCL2+/BCL6-, BCL2-/BCL6+ and BCL2+/BCL6+.
BCL2-/BCL6- and BCL2+/BCL6-. Double negative cases were ascribed to lower
histological grades. In contrast, BCL2-/BCL6+ cases corresponded to higher
grades. However, a majority of BCL2+/BCL6+ tumours were classified as lower
grades. These results were reinforced by the finding that double positive
patients had lower LDH levels and PS than those with solitary BCL6
rearrangements. Bone marrow involvement was more frequent in BCL2+/BCL6+ compared
with BCL2-/BCL6+ tumours. Our data confirm the presence of a relationship between
histological grade and translocation status, suggesting that FLs carrying BCL6
translocations probably constitute a special biological subtype. Clinical and
histological differences between BCL2-/BCL6+ and BCL2+/BCL6+ tumours could
reflect an interplay between both translocations.

PMID: 18203018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Oct;36(10):654-9.

[Subgrouping and outcome prediction of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by
immunohistochemistry].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye ZY(1), Cao YB, Lin TY, Lin HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To categorize diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) into germinal
center B cell-like (GCB) and non-germinal center B cell-like (non-GCB) subgroups 
by immunohistochemistry; and to investigate the underlying prognostic
significance.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical study for CD10, bcl-6 and MUM1 was performed on 133 
cases of DLBCL. The cases were then categorized into GCB and non-GCB subgroups.
The 5-year overall survival and 5-year progression-free survival rates were
compared between the GCB and non-GCB groups, and among the cases with different
immunohistochemical expression or with different IPI.
RESULTS: Amongst the 133 case studied, CD10 was expressed in 33.1%, while bcl-6
was positive in 34.6% and MUM1 in 45.1%. CD10 expression had a favorable impact
on 5-year overall survival (P=0.041) and 5-year progression-free survival
(P=0.031). On the other hand, bcl-6 expression had a favor able impact on 5-year 
progression-free survival (P=0.044). Expression of MUM1 carried an adverse effect
on 5-year overall survival (P=0.031) and 5-year progression-free survival
(P=0.028). GCB immunophenotype was demonstrated in 40.6% of the cases, while
59.4% showed a non-GCB profile. GCB DLBCL had a significantly longer 5-year
overall survival (P=0.004) and 5-year progression-free survival (P=0.003), as
compared with the non-GCB group. When dividing the cases into two groups
according to their IPI score (IPI=0 to 1 and IPI=2 to 5), it turned out that the 
5-year overall and progression-free survival rates of the GCB group were
significantly higher than those of the non-GCB group (P=0.019 and 0.014
respectively in cases with IPI of 0 to 1 and P=0.006 and 0.009 respectively in
cases with IPI of 2 to 5). The non-GCB cases with a IPI of 2 to 5 had the poorest
prognosis.
CONCLUSION: DLBCL subgrouping by immunohistochemistry and analysis of the
subgrouping with IPI is feasible and useful in predicting clinical outcome.

PMID: 18194597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Pathol. 2008 Mar;214(4):498-507. doi: 10.1002/path.2279.

BCL6 represses NFkappaB activity in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Perez-Rosado A(1), Artiga M, Vargiu P, Sanchez-Aguilera A, Alvarez-Barrientos A, 
Piris M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Centre 
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor whose deregulated expression plays a key role
in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). BCL6 expression characterizes one of 
the two main subtypes (GC type) of DLBCL, while the other (ABC type) is
recognized by increased NFkappaB activation. The mechanistic basis of this
distinction remains unclear and the BCL6 targets have been only partially
explored. Here we describe how NFkappaB activity is increased after BCL6
silencing by shRNA in DLBCL cells, leading us to propose that BCL6 represses
NFkappaB activity. We also demonstrate that this repression is brought about by a
mechanism involving protein-protein interaction between BCL6 and NFkappaB
members, both in vitro and in vivo. Analysis of a series of DLBCLs shows a
negative correlation between the expression of NFkappaB target genes and BCL6.
This combined approach using silenced cells and a series of human DLBCL samples
leads us to a better understanding of the role of BCL6 as an NFkappaB regulator
in B-cells.

PMID: 18189332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Leuk Res. 2008 Jul;32(7):1015-21. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2007.11.028. Epub 2008
Jan 4.

Quantifying the role of aberrant somatic hypermutation in transformation of
follicular lymphoma.

Halldórsdóttir AM(1), Frühwirth M, Deutsch A, Aigelsreiter A, Beham-Schmid C,
Agnarsson BA, Neumeister P, Richard Burack W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Somatic hypermutation (SHM) aberrantly targets proto-oncogenes in various
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. To test the association of SHM with transformation of
follicular lymphoma (FL), we sequenced mutational hot spots in five
proto-oncogenes (BCL6, PAX5, RHOH, MYC and PIM1) in 32 low-grade FL (lgFL) with
follicular histology and 26 transformed FL (tFL) with diffuse large cell
histology. No difference was detected in the fraction of specimens mutated (75%
of lgFL and 77% of tFL) or in the mutation load (0.08 for lgFL vs. 0.06
mutations/100 bp/allele for tFL). Serial specimens were examined from 25 patients
showing stable low-grade FL (slgFL; n=6) or a low-grade FL that later transformed
into diffuse large cell lymphoma (tFL; n=19). slgFL and tFL patients accumulated 
similar numbers of mutations in the interval between biopsies. These data
indicate that mutations attributable to aberrant SHM occur with similar frequency
in low-grade and transformed FL; transformation is not associated with a higher
rate of aberrant SHM. Moreover, the frequency of mutations attributable to
aberrant SHM in tFL was significantly lower than that reported for de novo
diffuse large B cell lymphoma, suggesting differing oncogenic mechanisms in
transformed follicular lymphoma and de novo diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

PMID: 18180034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Haematologica. 2008 Jan;93(1):145-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.11927.

Chromosomal translocations involving BCL6 in MALT lymphoma.

Ye H, Remstein ED, Bacon CM, Nicholson AG, Dogan A, Du MQ.

Chromosomal translocations involving BCL6 were detected in 7 out of 392 cases of 
MALT lymphoma by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation with a BCL6
break-apart probe. With the exception of BCL6 protein expression in 2 of the 7
cases, these BCL6 translocation-positive MALT lymphomas were histologically and
immunophenotypically identical to classic cases.

PMID: 18166802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Haematologica. 2008 Jan;93(1):e21-3. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12085.

Human herpes virus 8-negative primary effusion lymphoma with BCL6 rearrangement
in a patient with idiopathic CD4 positive T-lymphocytopenia.

Niino D(1), Tsukasaki K, Torii K, Imanishi D, Tsuchiya T, Onimaru Y, Tsushima H, 
Yoshida S, Yamada Y, Kamihira S, Tomonaga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Nagasaki Medical Center, 2-1001-1, Kubara,
Omura, Nagasaki 856-8562, Japan. niino522@yahoo.co.jp

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) was initially designated as a body-cavity-based
lymphoma and recognized as a distinct clinical entity without a contiguous tumor 
mass. PEL was first reported in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) and the distinctive feature of PEL originally reported as a B-cell
neoplasm characterized by infection of the tumor cells by human herpes virus 8
(HHV-8). However, there have recently been several reports of PEL in patients
without human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or HHV-8 infection.

PMID: 18166773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mod Pathol. 2008 Mar;21(3):282-96. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3800993. Epub 2007 Dec 
28.

Presence of simian virus 40 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas in Tunisia
correlates with germinal center B-cell immunophenotype, t(14;18) translocation,
and P53 accumulation.

Amara K(1), Trimeche M, Ziadi S, Laatiri A, Mestiri S, Sriha B, Mokni M, Korbi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia.

Previously we have reported the presence of simian virus 40 DNA in 56% of diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas in Tunisia. Here, we investigated the relationship between
the status of simian virus 40 and t(14;18) translocation, germinal center status,
and P53 and BCL2 expression to assess the clinical and biological relevance of
simian virus 40 presence in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Therefore, we
evaluated by immunohistochemistry the expression patterns of CD10, BCL6, MUM1,
BCL2, and P53 in 86 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (48 simian virus 40-positive
and 38 simian virus 40-negative cases). The t(14;18) translocation was
investigated by polymerase chain reaction. Immunostaining patterns for CD10,
BCL6, and MUM1 were used to subclassify diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cases as
germinal center or non-germinal center phenotypes. Germinal center phenotype,
t(14;18), P53, and BCL2 expression were found in 71, 30, 55, and 65% of cases,
respectively. Interestingly, germinal center phenotype, t(14;18), and P53
accumulation were found to be more frequent in simian virus 40-positive cases
than in simian virus 40-negative ones (81, 44, 69 vs 58, 13, 37%; P=0.018, 0.002,
and 0.003, respectively). However, there were no correlations between the
presence of simian virus 40 and the expression of CD10, BCL6, MUM1 and BCL2,
patient's age and gender, clinical stage, or the International Prognosis Index.
Multivariate logistic regression analyses revealed that the germinal center
phenotype, P53 accumulation, and t(14;18) were independent factors for simian
virus 40 association (P=0.029, 0.006, and 0.014, respectively). There were no
significant differences in overall survival regarding P53, BCL2, or t(14;18)
status. However, patients with germinal center phenotype or low International
Prognosis Index scores displayed a significantly better survival than those with 
non-germinal center phenotype or high International Prognosis Index scores
(P=0.003 and 0.0001, respectively). These two prognosis factors remain
independent in multivariate analyses (P=0.001 and <0.0001, respectively).
Interestingly, among patients with germinal center phenotype, simian virus
40-positive subgroup displayed a significantly shorter survival than simian virus
40-negative subgroup (P=0.034). In summary, these findings support a role of
simian virus 40 in the pathogenesis of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. On other
hand, they suggest that a significant proportion of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
cases with germinal center phenotype may result from early transformation by
simian virus 40, mainly those harboring the t(14;18). Modern Pathology (2008) 21,
282-296; doi:10.1038/modpathol.3800993; published online 28 December 2007.

PMID: 18165800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Clin Immunol. 2008 Mar;28(2):97-106. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Blimp-1 connects the intrinsic and extrinsic regulation of T cell homeostasis.

Nutt SL(1), Kallies A, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria, 3050, Australia. nutt@wehi.edu.au

The body tends to maintain a relatively constant number of peripheral T cells, a 
phenomenon termed T cell homeostasis. Homeostasis is controlled by the
coordinated activity of extrinsic regulation, most notably through cytokines of
the common gamma chain (cgammaC) family and intrinsic regulation by transcription
factors. Whereas the former mechanism has been extensively studied and is
relatively well characterized, the transcription factors that govern the
homeostasis of late-stage effector and memory T cells have been less well defined
but include regulators such as T-bet, Eomes, Bcl6, and Id2. The transcriptional
repressor, Blimp-1 is well known as a master regulator of the terminal
differentiation of B cells into antibody secreting plasma cells. Recent
experiments have now revealed that Blimp-1 is also a key regulator of T cell
differentiation. Blimp-1 is expressed in differentiated effector T cells and
controls their homeostasis. Interestingly, Blimp-1 expression is controlled by
the same cgammaC cytokines that regulate T cell homeostasis suggesting a direct
link between the extrinsic and intrinsic arms of the process.

PMID: 18071884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;36(9):625-6.

[Analysis of mutations in IgVH genes in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas].

[Article in Chinese]

Liang Y, Zhou R, Zhang W, Zhang HL, Xu HD, Mao ZR.

PMID: 18070454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Genet. 2008 Jan;40(1):108-12. Epub 2007 Dec 9.

AID is required for germinal center-derived lymphomagenesis.

Pasqualucci L(1), Bhagat G, Jankovic M, Compagno M, Smith P, Muramatsu M, Honjo
T, Morse HC 3rd, Nussenzweig MC, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, the Departments of Pathology and Genetics &
Development, and the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA. lp171@columbia.edu

Most human B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (B-NHLs) derive from germinal centers
(GCs), the structure in which B cells undergo somatic hypermutation (SHM) and
class switch recombination (CSR) before being selected for high-affinity antibody
production. The pathogenesis of B-NHL is associated with distinct genetic
lesions, including chromosomal translocations and aberrant SHM, which arise from 
mistakes occurring during CSR and SHM. A direct link between these DNA remodeling
events and GC lymphoma development, however, has not been demonstrated. Here we
have crossed three mouse models of B cell lymphoma driven by oncogenes (Myc, Bcl6
and Myc/Bcl6; refs. 5,6) with mice lacking activation-induced cytidine deaminase 
(AID), the enzyme required for both CSR and SHM. We show that AID deficiency
prevents Bcl6-dependent, GC-derived B-NHL, but has no impact on Myc-driven,
pre-GC lymphomas. Accordingly, abrogation of AID is associated with the
disappearance of CSR- and SHM-mediated structural alterations. These results show
that AID is required for GC-derived lymphomagenesis, supporting the notion that
errors in AID-mediated antigen-receptor gene modification processes are principal
contributors to the pathogenesis of human B-NHL.

PMID: 18066064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(7):1995-2006. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

MicroRNA targets in immune genes and the Dicer/Argonaute and ARE machinery
components.

Asirvatham AJ(1), Gregorie CJ, Hu Z, Magner WJ, Tomasi TB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

We studied 613 genes which regulate immunity and, utilizing predictive
algorithms, identified 285 genes as microRNA (miRNA or miR) targets. Of these,
approximately 250 are newly predicted gene-miR interactions. The frequency of
predicted miRNA binding sites in immune gene 3'UTRs indicated preferential
targeting of immune genes compared to the genome. Major targets include
transcription factors, cofactors and chromatin modifiers whereas upstream
factors, such as ligands and receptors (cytokines, chemokines and TLRs), were, in
general, non-targets. About 10% of the immune genes were 'hubs' with eight or
more different miRNAs predicted to target their 3'UTRs. Hubs were focused on
certain key immune genes, such as BCL6, SMAD7, BLIMP1, NFAT5, EP300 and others.
NF-kappaB and p53 do not themselves have binding sites for miRNAs but rather
these pathways are targeted by miRNAs at downstream sites. MHC class II genes
lacked miRNA targets but binding sites were identified in the CIITA gene and were
shown experimentally to repress IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II activation.
Unexpectedly, factors involved in regulating message stability via AU-rich
elements (ARE) were heavily targeted. Moreover, multiple components involved in
the generation and effector functions of miRNAs (Dicer and Argonautes) were
themselves miRNA targets suggesting that a subset of miRNAs may indirectly
control their own production as well as other miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC2678893
PMID: 18061676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2007 Dec;52(16 Suppl):2087-91.

[Transcriptional regulation of spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwamori N(1), Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor Colledge of Medicine.

PMID: 21089276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Virchows Arch. 2008 Jan;452(1):75-81. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

Analysis of follicular lymphoma by dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Lee D(1), Seo J, Oh Y, Kim J, Ko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Kangnam-gu, Ilwon-dong 50, 135-710, Seoul, South Korea,
yhko@smc.samsung.co.kr.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is divided into two groups: one with the
t(14;18)(q32;q21) and the other without this translocation but with other
chromosomal abnormalities including t(3q27) break. The majority of FLs in Western
countries have the former chromosomal changes with characteristic clinical
features and low histological grades. The goal of this study was to investigate
the characteristics of Korean FLs with regard to the underlying molecular
defects. Sixty-one cases of FL were evaluated from two centers in Korea by
immunostaining for CD10, bcl-2, and bcl-6 proteins. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization was performed to detect the t(14;18) and t(3q27) break. Cases with 
FL grade 3 accounted for 57% of all 61 cases. The t(14;18) was detected in 43.9% 
of the cases studied, and the frequency was 80, 50, 34.8, and 9.1% from grade 1
through grade 3b. The t(3q27) was detected in 16.1% of cases. Cases without a
t(14;18) were mainly histological grade 3 (P < 0.001) and had a tendency to have 
the t(3q27) and bcl-2 amplification. The incidence of t(14;18)-positive low-grade
FL was found to be lower in Korea than in Western countries. The increased
frequency of t(14;18)-negative grade 3 FL attributes to the lower incidence of
t(14;18) in Korean FL.

PMID: 18040714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Leuk Res. 2008 May;32(5):727-36. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

New chromosomal alterations in a series of 23 splenic marginal zone lymphoma
patients revealed by Spectral Karyotyping (SKY).

Baró C(1), Salido M, Espinet B, Astier L, Domingo A, Granada I, Millà F, Carrió
A, Costa D, Luño E, Hernández JM, Campo E, Florensa L, Ferrer A, Salar A,
Bellosillo B, Besses C, Serrano S, Solé F.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biologia Animal, Vegetal i Ecologia, Unitat d'Antropologia
Biològica, Facultat de Biociències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Bellaterra, Spain. cbaro@imim.es

Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) is a B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder
with characteristic clinical, immunophenotypic, cytological and histological
features. Some karyotypic abnormalities have been related to this disorder and
most of them are usually complex and difficult to define. The aim of present
study was to characterize new chromosomal aberrations involved in this disease.
We performed conventional banding cytogenetics and Spectral Karyotyping (SKY)
technique in 23 patients diagnosed with SMZL having a complex karyotype among a
series of 160 SMZL cases. Del(7)(q22-q32) and trisomy 3/3q were the most common
chromosomal aberrations. In addition, new translocations involving chromosomes 3,
6, 8, 9, 12 and 14q32 region were detected.

PMID: 18023866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Leukemia. 2008 Jun;22(6):1262-6. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

T(3;7)(q27;q32) fuses BCL6 to a non-coding region at FRA7H near miR-29.

Schneider B, Nagel S, Kaufmann M, Winkelmann S, Bode J, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

PMID: 17989715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Haematol. 2007 Dec;79(6):501-7. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by immunohistochemistry:
identification of prognostic subgroups.

Sjö LD(1), Poulsen CB, Hansen M, Møller MB, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a frequent lymphoma subtype with a
heterogeneous behavior and a variable response to conventional chemotherapy. This
clinical diversity is believed to reflect differences in the molecular pathways
leading to lymphomagenesis. In this study, we have analyzed pretreatment,
diagnostic samples from 108 DLBCL by immunohistology for expression of four
markers linked to germinal center B-cells (CD10, Bcl-6), postgerminal center
B-cells (MUM1) and apoptosis (Bcl-2). The results indicate that both CD10 and
Bcl-6 are favorable prognostic indicators, in contrast to Bcl-2, which is an
adverse parameter. Furthermore, using two algorithms for distinction between low-
and high-risk patients proposed by Hans et al. (Blood, 2004; 103:275) and Muris
et al. (Journal of Pathology, 2006; 208:714), it is shown that both are useful
for predicting outcome in DLBCL. However, in this report, the algorithm of Hans
et al. was superior to that of Muris et al. These findings confirm and extend
other studies and indicate that different prognostic subgroups of DLBCL can be
distinguished by simple immunohistological investigations for a limited number of
markers. Whether these groups are also relevant for individual treatment
decisions will be important to investigate in prospective studies.

PMID: 17986209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 15;179(10):7157-65.

IL-21 administration into the nostril alleviates murine allergic rhinitis.

Hiromura Y(1), Kishida T, Nakano H, Hama T, Imanishi J, Hisa Y, Mazda O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Type I allergic diseases such as allergic rhinitis are caused by IgE-mediated
humoral immune responses, while eosinophils also fulfill important roles in the
etiology of IgE-mediated allergy. IL-21 regulates growth, differentiation, and
function of T, B, and NK cells, while the production of IgE is also influenced by
IL-21. In this study we examined whether IL-21 is capable of controlling
IgE-mediated allergic reactions in vivo by using the allergic rhinitis mouse
model that was established by repetitive sensitization and intranasal challenge
with OVA. Intranasal administration with recombinant mouse IL-21 (rmIL-21)
significantly reduced the number of sneezes, as well as the serum concentration
of OVA-specific IgE, in comparison with that of untreated allergic mice. The
rmIL-21 treatment also suppressed germline Cepsilon transcription in the
nasal-associated lymphoid tissues, which may have, at least partly, resulted from
the up-regulation of Bcl-6 mRNA caused by IL-21. Local expression of IL-4, IL-5, 
and IL-13 was also inhibited by the intranasal cytokine therapy whereas, in
contrast, the expression of endogenous IL-21 mRNA was induced by exogenous
rmIL-21. Moreover, IL-21 acted on nasal fibroblasts to inhibit production of
eotaxin. This novel function of IL-21 may be associated with the attenuation of
eosinophil infiltration into nasal mucosa that was revealed by histopathological 
observation. These results indicated that IL-21 nasal administration effectively 
ameliorated allergic rhinitis through pleiotropic activities, i.e., the
prevention of IgE production by B cells and eotaxin production by fibroblasts.

PMID: 17982108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Nov;179(1):69-75.

Derivative (3)t(3;18)(q27;q21)t(18;16)(q21;?) involving the BCL2 and BCL6 genes
in follicular lymphoma with t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21).

Yamamoto K(1), Ono K, Katayama Y, Shimoyama M, Matsui T.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School
of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is genetically characterized by t(14;18)(q32;q21)
involving the BCL2 gene (BCL2), and is often associated with 3q27 translocations 
involving the BCL6 gene (BCL6). We describe here an unusual case of FL with a
variant three-way translocation t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21). A 57-year-old man was
given a diagnosis of FL, grade 2. Chromosome analysis showed
49,XY,+X,+3,t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21),i(6)(p10),+21. Spectral karyotyping confirmed
three derivative chromosomes, der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21), der(14)t(3;14)(q27;q32),
and der(18)t(14;18)(q32;q21). Furthermore, an extra chromosome 3 was shown to be 
an unbalanced translocation der(3)t(3;16)(q27;?). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analyses detected an IGH/BCL2 fusion signal on the
der(18)t(14;18)(q32;q21). FISH also demonstrated split signals of BCL2 and BCL6
on both the der(3)t(3;16)(q27;?) and the der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21). The findings
indicate that the three-way translocation involved BCL2, IGH, and BCL6 and that
the der(3)t(3;16)(q27;?) contained the 18q21 fragment including BCL2. It is
probable that the translocation between chromosome 16 and the
der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21) occurred after duplication of the der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21)
as clonal evolution. Thus, this additional chromosome was revised as
der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21)t(18;16)(q21;?) and the final karyotype was as follows:
49,XY,+X,t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21),+der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21)t(18;16)(q21;?),i(6)(p10)
,+21. These findings suggest that the der(3)t(3;18)(q27;q21) involving BCL2 and
BCL6 had a crucial role in the pathogenesis of FL with t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21).

PMID: 17981218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Adv Immunol. 2007;96:103-39.

The expansion and maintenance of antigen-selected CD8(+) T cell clones.

Fearon DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Immunology Unit, University of Cambridge, Medical Research
Council Centre, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The biological purpose of the mature, postthymic CD8(+) T cell is to respond to
microbial antigens with a developmental program of clonal expansion and
concomitant differentiation leading to effector cells (T(EFF)) that provide
antimicrobial defense. Because many microbial infections persist into a chronic
phase, this antigen-stimulated developmental program must be capable of
continually generating T(EFF), perhaps for the lifetime of the individual. This
chapter proposes that the ability of a CD8(+) T cell clone to maintain the
continual production of T(EFF) during periods of persistent antigenic stimulation
is based on a program that has two sequential phases of clonal expansion: an
initial stage that occurs mainly in the secondary lymphoid tissues and is
mediated by ligation of the T cell receptor (TCR) and CD27, and a subsequent,
IL-2-dependent phase that occurs predominantly in peripheral, nonlymphoid
tissues. The TCR/CD27-dependent phase establishes a nondifferentiating,
self-renewing pool of clonally expanding cells, and the IL-2-dependent phase
mediates continued clonal expansion that is coupled to the development of T(EFF).
The two pools are linked by the process of asymmetrical division within the
self-renewing subset so that, at steady state of cellular replication in this
TCR/CD27-dependent subset, one daughter cell remains undifferentiated and the
other initiates its commitment to IL-2-dependent terminal differentiation.
Superimposed on this basic scheme are a shift in the CD8(+) T cell response to
type I and II interferon (IFN) from anti- to pro-proliferative and
transcriptional control of replicative senescence by Bmi-1, Blimp-1, and
BCL6/BCL6b. This developmental program ensures that despite the occurrence of
cellular senescence antiviral CD8(+) T cell clones are maintained for the
duration of persistent viral infections.

PMID: 17981205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Oct 26;8:415.

Prediction potential of candidate biomarker sets identified and validated on gene
expression data from multiple datasets.

Gormley M(1), Dampier W, Ertel A, Karacali B, Tozeren A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
mpg33@drexel.edu

BACKGROUND: Independently derived expression profiles of the same biological
condition often have few genes in common. In this study, we created populations
of expression profiles from publicly available microarray datasets of cancer
(breast, lymphoma and renal) samples linked to clinical information with an
iterative machine learning algorithm. ROC curves were used to assess the
prediction error of each profile for classification. We compared the prediction
error of profiles correlated with molecular phenotype against profiles correlated
with relapse-free status. Prediction error of profiles identified with supervised
univariate feature selection algorithms were compared to profiles selected
randomly from a) all genes on the microarray platform and b) a list of known
disease-related genes (a priori selection). We also determined the relevance of
expression profiles on test arrays from independent datasets, measured on either 
the same or different microarray platforms.
RESULTS: Highly discriminative expression profiles were produced on both
simulated gene expression data and expression data from breast cancer and
lymphoma datasets on the basis of ER and BCL-6 expression, respectively. Use of
relapse-free status to identify profiles for prognosis prediction resulted in
poorly discriminative decision rules. Supervised feature selection resulted in
more accurate classifications than random or a priori selection, however, the
difference in prediction error decreased as the number of features increased.
These results held when decision rules were applied across-datasets to samples
profiled on the same microarray platform.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that many gene sets predict molecular phenotypes
accurately. Given this, expression profiles identified using different training
datasets should be expected to show little agreement. In addition, we demonstrate
the difficulty in predicting relapse directly from microarray data using
supervised machine learning approaches. These findings are relevant to the use of
molecular profiling for the identification of candidate biomarker panels.

PMCID: PMC2211325
PMID: 17963508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Blood. 2008 Feb 1;111(3):1515-23. Epub 2007 Oct 19.

Constitutively activated STAT3 promotes cell proliferation and survival in the
activated B-cell subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Ding BB(1), Yu JJ, Yu RY, Mendez LM, Shaknovich R, Zhang Y, Cattoretti G, Ye BH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) consists of at least 2 phenotypic subtypes;
that is, the germinal center B-cell-like (GCB-DLBCL) and the activated
B-cell-like (ABC-DLBCL) groups. It has been shown that GCB-DLBCL responds
favorably to chemotherapy and expresses high levels of BCL6, a transcription
repressor known to play a causative role in lymphomagenesis. In comparison,
ABC-DLBCL has lower levels of BCL6, constitutively activated nuclear
factor-kappaB, and tends to be refractory to chemotherapy. Here, we report that
the STAT3 gene is a transcriptional target of BCL6. As a result, high-level STAT3
expression and activation are preferentially detected in ABC-DLBCL and
BCL6-negative normal germinal center B cells. Most importantly, inactivating
STAT3 by either AG490 or small interference RNA in ABC-DLBCL cells inhibits cell 
proliferation and triggers apoptosis. These phenotypes are accompanied by
decreased expression of several known STAT3 target genes, including c-Myc, JunB, 
and Mcl-1, and increased expression of the cell- cycle inhibitor p27. In addition
to identifying STAT3 as a novel BCL6 target gene, our results define a second
oncogenic pathway, STAT3 activation, which operates in ABC-DLBCL, suggesting that
STAT3 may be a new therapeutic target in these aggressive lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC2214773
PMID: 17951530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Immunol. 2008 Mar;45(5):1337-45. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

A role for Bcl6 in sequential class switch recombination to IgE in B cells
stimulated with IL-4 and IL-21.

Kitayama D(1), Sakamoto A, Arima M, Hatano M, Miyazaki M, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

IgE plays an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases and
high-affinity IgE memory B cells are differentiated from IgG1 B cells developed
in germinal centers. Bcl6, a sequence specific transcriptional repressor, is
highly expressed in germinal center B cells and suppresses expression of
Cvarepsilon germline transcript. However, a role for Bcl6 in inhibition of the
sequential class switching from IgG1 to IgE in germinal center B cells is not
known. When splenic B cells from Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6-KO) and Bcl6-transgenic
(Bcl6-TG) mice were stimulated with anti-IgM Ab and anti-CD40 Ab plus IL-4,
IgG1(+)IgE(+) B cells were detected in Bcl6-KO B cell culture but not in Bcl6-TG 
B cell culture. Cgamma1 and Cvarepsilon germline transcript in Bcl6-KO B cells
were induced earlier than those in wild-type (Bcl6-WT) B cells after stimulation.
When activated B cells were simultaneously stimulated with IL-21, expression of
Cgamma1 germline transcript in Bcl6-WT and Bcl6-KO B cells was enhanced by IL-21 
stimulation, indicating that IL-21 is an enhancer of Cgamma1 expression induced
by IL-4. The amount of Cgamma1 germline transcript in the Bcl6-KO B cells was
more than that in the Bcl6-WT B cells. Conversely, IL-21 stimulation suppressed
Cvarepsilon expression in the Bcl6-WT B cells. However, the suppression was not
observed in the Bcl6-KO B cells, suggesting that the IL-21-mediated suppression
of Cvarepsilon expression is due to Bcl6. Thus, Bcl6 controls the Cgamma1 and
Cvarepsilon expression and stabilizes class switching to IgG1 in activated B
cells simultaneously stimulated with IL-4 and IL-21.

PMID: 17950876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2007 Oct;2(4):235-41. doi: 10.1007/s11899-007-0032-0.

Prognostic markers in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: Keys to the underlying
biology.

Winter JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine and the Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Suite 850, 676 North St. Clair Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
j-winter@northwestern.edu

Prognostic markers identify subgroups of patients with similar risk profiles,
helping to guide clinical care. The addition of rituximab to conventional
anthracycline-based chemotherapy has improved clinical outcomes for patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Studies suggest that rituximab eliminates 
or modulates the significance of some markers (eg, BCL6 or BCL2), whereas other
previously unimportant markers may emerge as significant prognostic indicators in
the setting of treatment that now includes rituximab. These changes in the
prognostic profile are likely to reflect the impact of rituximab on survival
pathways important to some groups of patients with DLBCL but not to other groups,
and thereby may provide clues to the underlying biology of the disease. They also
identify subgroups of patients likely to benefit most from rituximab therapy and 
those who seem to garner no advantage from its inclusion in their treatment.
Studies of prognostic indicators in the context of modern therapy have the
potential to identify new, rational therapeutic targets for this biologically
diverse disease.

PMID: 20425375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Oct 1;178(1):73-6.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with a novel translocation involving BCL6.

Iqbal J(1), Gupta S, Chen QH, Brody JP, Koduru P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, North Shore University Hospital, 300 Community Drive,
Manhasset, NY 11030, USA. jabel.iqbal@roswellpark.org

Translocation of the BCL6 gene is one of the most common chromosomal changes seen
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, primarily affecting the 5' regulatory region
which is usually replaced with the sequences of the translocation partner. This
translocation involves both immunoglobulin and nonimmunoglobulin gene partners,
the former being the more common. Here we report a case of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma with immunophenotypic features of a germinal center type, involving
translocation of BCL6 to chromosome 11 and partnering with one or more
nonimmunoglobulin genes. To our knowledge this novel translocation in the context
of an activated B-cell type diffuse large B-cell lymphoma has not been previously
described in the literature. We speculate about the putative partner gene
involved in the translocation and the pathophysiological significance of the
translocation.

PMID: 17889713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 2;373(4):820-6. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

A beta-sheet interaction interface directs the tetramerisation of the Miz-1 POZ
domain.

Stead MA(1), Trinh CH, Garnett JA, Carr SB, Baron AJ, Edwards TA, Wright SC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Research Group, Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Garstang/Astbury
Buildings, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

The POZ/BTB domain is an evolutionarily conserved motif found in approximately 40
zinc-finger transcription factors (POZ-ZF factors). Several POZ-ZF factors are
implicated in human cancer, and POZ domain interaction interfaces represent an
attractive target for therapeutic intervention. Miz-1 (Myc-interacting
zinc-finger protein) is a POZ-ZF factor that regulates DNA-damage-induced cell
cycle arrest and plays an important role in human cancer by virtue of its
interaction with the c-Myc and BCL6 oncogene products. The Miz-1 POZ domain
mediates both self-association and the recruitment of non-POZ partners. POZ-ZF
factors generally function as homodimers, although higher-order associations and 
heteromeric interactions are known to be physiologically important; crucially,
the interaction interfaces in such large complexes have not been characterised.
We report here the crystal structure of the Miz-1 POZ domain up to 2.1 A
resolution. The tetrameric organisation of Miz-1 POZ reveals two types of
interaction interface between subunits; an interface of alpha-helices resembles
the dimerisation interface of reported POZ domain structures, whereas a novel
beta-sheet interface directs the association of two POZ domain dimers. We show
that the beta-sheet interface directs the tetramerisation of the Miz-1 POZ domain
in solution and therefore represents a newly described candidate interface for
the higher-order homo- and hetero-oligomerisation of POZ-ZF proteins in vivo.

PMID: 17880999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Hematol. 2007 Aug;86(2):196-8.

Molecular cloning of translocation breakpoint from der(8)t(3;8)(q27;q24) defines 
juxtaposition of downstream of C-MYC and upstream of BCL6.

Sonoki T, Tatetsu H, Nagasaki A, Hata H.

PMID: 17875538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nat Immunol. 2007 Oct;8(10):1132-9. Epub 2007 Sep 9.

Genotoxic stress regulates expression of the proto-oncogene Bcl6 in germinal
center B cells.

Phan RT(1), Saito M, Kitagawa Y, Means AR, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, the Department of Pathology and Genetics &
Development, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Antigen-specific B cells are selected in germinal centers, the structure in which
these cells proliferate while accomplishing genome-remodeling processes such as
class-switch recombination and somatic hypermutation. These events are associated
with considerable genotoxic stress, which cells tolerate through suppression of
DNA-damage responses by Bcl-6, a transcription factor required for the formation 
of germinal centers. Here we show that the expression of Bcl-6 is regulated by
DNA damage through a signaling pathway that promotes Bcl-6 degradation. After DNA
damage accumulated, the kinase ATM promoted Bcl-6 phosphorylation, leading to its
interaction with the isomerase Pin1 and its degradation by the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Because Bcl-6 is required for the maintenance of
germinal centers, our findings suggest that the extent of genotoxic stress
controls the fate of germinal center B cells by means of Bcl-6.

PMID: 17828269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007 Sep;48(9):1774-9.

CD40 expression identifies a prognostically favourable subgroup of diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma.

Linderoth J(1), Ehinger M, Jerkeman M, Bendahl PO, Akerman M, Berglund M, Enblad 
G, Erlanson M, Roos G, Cavallin-Ståhl E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institution of Clinical Sciences, Lund University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden. johan.linderoth@med.lu.se

In order to confirm our earlier findings of the prognostic effects of CD23 and
CD40 expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), possibly due to
association with the germinal center (GC) phenotype and/or an increased
autologous tumour response, tumour specimens from 125 patients with de novo DLBCL
were investigated for immunohistochemical expression of CD23, CD40, BCL6, CD10,
MUM1, CD4 and CD8. CD40 was positive in 64% and was associated with improved
overall survival (p = 0.03). A GC phenotype was present in 47%, and was also
associated with a better overall survival (p = 0.006) but did not correlate with 
CD40-expression. There was no correlation between amount of tumour infiltrating
T-cells and CD40-positivity. CD23 was positive in 10% and expression did not
correlate with prognosis. In conclusion, the prognostic effect of CD40 expression
was confirmed, but did not correlate with GC-phenotype or T-cell infiltration.

PMID: 17786713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Cell. 2007 Sep;12(3):280-92.

A signaling pathway mediating downregulation of BCL6 in germinal center B cells
is blocked by BCL6 gene alterations in B cell lymphoma.

Saito M(1), Gao J, Basso K, Kitagawa Y, Smith PM, Bhagat G, Pernis A, Pasqualucci
L, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Oct;12(4):403.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Sep;12(3):189-91.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor necessary for the
development of germinal centers (GCs) and directly implicated in lymphomagenesis.
Post-GC development of B cells requires BCL6 downregulation, while its
constitutive expression caused by chromosomal translocations leads to diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Herein we identify a signaling pathway that
downregulates BCL6 expression in normal GC B cells and is blocked in a subset of 
DLBCL due to alterations in the BCL6 gene. Activation of the CD40 receptor leads 
to NF-kappaB-mediated induction of the IRF4 transcription factor, which, in turn,
represses BCL6 expression by binding to its promoter region. A subset of DLBCL
displays chromosomal translocations or mutations that disrupt the IRF4-responsive
region in the BCL6 promoter and block its downregulation by CD40 signaling.

PMID: 17785208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Cell. 2007 Sep;12(3):189-91.

The endless complexity of lymphocyte differentiation and lymphomagenesis: IRF-4
downregulates BCL6 expression.

Lossos IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
ilossos@med.miami.edu

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Sep;12(3):280-92.

The BCL6 gene is a key factor necessary for formation of germinal centers and is 
implicated in pathogenesis of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). In this
issue of Cancer Cell, Saito and colleagues explore regulation of BCL6 gene
expression by CD40-NF-kappaB signaling pathway and show that the IRF4
transcriptional factor, induced by the NF-kappaB canonical pathway, directly
downregulates BCL6 expression. The authors further demonstrate that this negative
regulatory mechanism may be disturbed in DLBCLs harboring BCL6 gene
translocations or mutations. These finding suggest that IRF4 may function as a
key regulator of germinal center reaction and a guardian of lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 17785200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Haematologica. 2007 Oct;92(10):1343-50.

A clinicopathological study of B-cell differentiation markers and transcription
factors in classical Hodgkin's lymphoma: a potential prognostic role of
MUM1/IRF4.

Valsami S(1), Pappa V, Rontogianni D, Kontsioti F, Papageorgiou E, Dervenoulas J,
Karmiris T, Papageorgiou S, Harhalakis N, Xiros N, Nikiforakis E, Economopoulos
T.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon University General Hospital, 1
Rimini Street, 12462 Haidari, Athens, Greece. serenavalsami@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Although most patients with classical Hodgkin's
lymphoma (CHL) are cured, a significant minority are refractory to treatment. The
investigation of biological markers could improve the predictive capacity of
clinical staging systems. The aim of our study was to detect B-cell
differentiation markers and transcription factors in CHL in order to define
subgroups with different histogeneses and prognoses.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We evaluated 107 cases of CHL for BCL6, CD79a, MUM1/IRF4 and 
B-cell transcription factors BOB.1, OCT.2 expression by immunohistochemistry.
Statistical analysis was performed using Fisher's exact test, the Mann-Whitney
test, the Kaplan-Meier method and the log rank test. Univariate and multivariate 
regression analyses were performed to identify variables with a significant
effect on survival.
RESULTS: CD79a was expressed in 5.8%, BCL6 in 14.7%, MUM1/IRF4 in 92.3%, BOB.1 in
53.4% and OCT.2 in 12.6% of cases. There was no significant association between
CD79a or BCL6 expression and clinical characteristics. Univariate analysis showed
that age of 45 or more, stage III and IV disease and MUM/IRF4 negative status
were associated with significantly shorter time to progression (TTP) and overall 
survival (OS). On multivariate analysis the lack of MUM/IRF4 expression was
associated with significantly shorter TTP while age of 45 or more and the
presence of extralymphatic sites of disease were associated with significantly
shorter OS.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Our study has confirmed that MUM1/IRF4 is
expressed in most cases of CHL and shows that lack of this expression in a
minority of cases may be a potential adverse prognostic factor.

PMID: 17768115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Lab Invest. 2007 Oct;87(10):979-97. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Quantitative nuclease protection assay in paraffin-embedded tissue replicates
prognostic microarray gene expression in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.

Roberts RA(1), Sabalos CM, LeBlanc ML, Martel RR, Frutiger YM, Unger JM, Botros
IW, Rounseville MP, Seligmann BE, Miller TP, Grogan TM, Rimsza LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724-5043, USA.

Gene expression profiling (GEP) has identified genes whose expression levels
predict patient survival in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Such discovery
techniques generally require frozen samples unavailable for most patients. We
developed a quantitative nuclease protection assay to measure expression levels
of prognostic DLBCL genes using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. 
FFPE tissue was sectioned, permeabilized, denatured in the presence of specific
probes, and hybridized to mRNA in situ. Nuclease subsequently destroyed
non-hybridized probe. Alkaline hydrolysis freed mRNA-bound probes from tissue,
which were transferred to ArrayPlates for probe capture and chemiluminescent
quantification. We validated assay performance using frozen, fresh, and FFPE
DLBCL samples, then used 39 archived DLBCL, previously microarray analyzed, to
correlate GEP and ArrayPlate results. We compared old (>18 years) with new (<2
months) paraffin blocks made from previously frozen tissue from the original
biopsy. ArrayPlate gene expression results were confirmed with
immunohistochemistry for BCL2, BCL6, and HLA-DR, showing agreement between mRNA
species and the proteins they encode. Assay performance was linear to
approximately 1 mg sample/well. RNase and DNase treatments demonstrated assay
specificity for RNA detection, both fixed and soluble RNA detection. Comparisons 
were excellent for lysate vs snap-frozen vs FFPE (R(2)>0.98 for all comparisons).
Coefficients of variation for quadruplicates on FFPE were generally <20%.
Correlation between new and old paraffin blocks from the same biopsy was good
(R(2)=0.71). Comparison of ArrayPlate to Affymetrix and cDNA microarrays showed
reasonable correlations. Insufficient power from small sample size prevented
successfully correlating results with patient survival, although hazard ratios
trended the expected directions. We developed an assay to quantify expression
levels of survival prediction genes in DLBCL using FFPE, fresh, or frozen tissue.
While this technique cannot replace GEP for discovery, it indicates that
expression differences identified by GEP can be replicated on a platform
applicable to archived FFPE samples.

PMID: 17700562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(4):R54.

BCoR-L1 variation and breast cancer.

Lose F(1), Arnold J, Young DB, Brown CJ, Mann GJ, Pupo GM; Kathleen Cuningham
Foundation Consortium for Research into Familial Breast Cancer, Khanna KK,
Chenevix-Trench G, Spurdle AB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Cell Biology Division, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
300 Herston Road, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, 4006.

Erratum in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(5):406.

INTRODUCTION: BRCA1 is involved in numerous essential processes in the cell, and 
the effects of BRCA1 dysfunction in breast cancer carcinogenesis are well
described. Many of the breast cancer susceptibility genes such as BRCA2, p53,
ATM, CHEK2, and BRIP1 encode proteins that interact with BRCA1. BCL6
corepressor-like 1 (BCoR-L1) is a newly described BRCA1-interacting protein that 
displays high homology to several proteins known to be involved in the
fundamental processes of DNA damage repair and transcription regulation. BCoR-L1 
has been shown to play a role in transcription corepression, and expression of
the X-linked BCoR-L1 gene has been reported to be dysregulated in breast cancer
subjects. BCoR-L1 is located on the X chromosome and is subject to X
inactivation.
METHODS: We performed mutation analysis of 38 BRCA1/2 mutation-negative breast
cancer families with male breast cancer, prostate cancer, and/or haplotype
sharing around BCoR-L1 to determine whether there is a role for BCoR-L1 as a
high-risk breast cancer predisposition gene. In addition, we conducted
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) on lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from the
index cases from these families and a number of cancer cell lines to assess the
role of BCoR-L1 dysregulation in cancer and cancer families.
RESULTS: Very little variation was detected in the coding region, and qRT-PCR
analysis revealed that BCoR-L1 expression is highly variable in cancer-free
subjects, high-risk breast cancer patients, and cancer cell lines. We also report
the investigation of a new expression control, DIDO1 (death inducer-obliterator
1), that is superior to GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) and UBC 
(ubiquitin C) for analysis of expression in LCLs.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that BCoR-L1 expression does not play a large
role in predisposition to familial breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2206730
PMID: 17697391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Toxicol Lett. 2007 Aug 30;173(1):57-65. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Expression of STAT3 and Bcl-6 oncoprotein in sodium arsenite-treated SV-40
immortalized human uroepithelial cells.

Huang YC(1), Hung WC, Kang WY, Chen WT, Chai CY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Arsenic is widely distributed in the environment, and it is a proven toxic and
carcinogenic agent. On the southwest coast of Taiwan, an endemic occurrence of
chronic arsenical poisoning due to a high concentration of arsenic in
artesian-well water has been reported. However, the mechanisms of its
carcinogenic action are still unclear. The Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway is an essential cascade for
mediating normal functions of different cytokines in the development of the
hematopoietic and immune systems. In this study, the substantial morphological
changes observed in SV-40 immortalized human uroepithelial cells (SV-HUC-1) after
treatment of various concentrations of arsenite were examined, and the expression
of Bcl-6, Jak-2 and p-STAT3 (Tyr 705) were evaluated by immunocytochemistry and
Western blotting. Our results showed that the expression of Bcl-6 increased
dose-dependently in arsenite-treated urothelial cells. Sodium arsenite treatment 
reduced Jak-2 protein expression in a dose-dependent manner. However, treatment
of SV-HUC-1 cells with arsenite at concentration ranges from 2 and 4microM for
48h dramatically increased p-STAT3 (Tyr 705), but the levels decreased at
8-40microM of arsenite. Our data suggest that arsenic-mediated inactivation of
the JAK-STAT signaling pathway might be caused by Bcl-6 interaction with JAK
tyrosine kinase or STAT. In conclusion, our findings indicate that arsenic
inhibits JAK tyrosine kinase protein expression and suggest the interference in
the JAK-STAT pathway might be through Bcl-6 playing an important role in
arsenic-associated carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17689208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Br J Haematol. 2007 Sep;138(6):733-9. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

Frequent occurrence of B-cell lymphomas in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and
proliferation of Epstein-Barr virus-infected cells in early cases.

Willenbrock K(1), Bräuninger A, Hansmann ML.

Author information: 
(1)Senckenbergisches Institut für Pathologie, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
willenbrock@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Secondary lymphomas occurring in the setting of angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma (AILT) are considered to be rare. Their occurrence has been attributed
to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoproliferations. A previous study
detected a dysregulated hypermutation process in B-cells of AILT. The present
study aimed at estimating the frequency of B-cell lymphomas in AILT. By studying 
the expression of EBV and activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) as an
indicator of hypermutating cells, we assessed whether B-cell lymphoproliferations
in AILT were strictly associated with EBV and whether hypermutation might
contribute to lymphomagenesis. Among 161 cases of AILT, diagnosed between 1996
and 2005 at the lymph node registry, Frankfurt, Germany, 19 cases were detected
that also had B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and two cases had classical
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). EBV was detected in tumour cells of 7/18 NHL and both HL, 
suggesting that factors other than EBV contribute to lymphomagenesis. AID was
expressed in AILT in large cells disseminated in the tissue, implying that the
process of somatic hypermutation is ongoing in AILT, although the GC architecture
is disrupted. This might be relevant in the development of secondary lymphomas.

PMID: 17672882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Aug;31(8):1181-5.

T-bet transcription factor detection facilitates the diagnosis of minimal hairy
cell leukemia infiltrates in bone marrow trephines.

Jöhrens K(1), Stein H, Anagnostopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Consultation and Reference Center for Hematopathology at the Institute of
Pathology, Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
korinna.joehrens@charite.de

Diagnosis of minimal infiltration by hairy cell leukemia (HCL) cells in bone
marrow trephines is challenging as its differentiation from interstitially
distributed infiltrates of reactive B cells and small B-cell lymphomas other than
HCL is difficult or impossible. The diagnostic utility of DBA.44,
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and of the recently propagated Annexin
A1 is limited in this diagnostic setting since DBA.44 does not always label all
HCL cells, TRAP is frequently weakly expressed whereas the numerous Annexin
A1-positive hematopoietic cells interfere with the immunohistochemical
recognition of sparse HCL cells. Therefore, we searched for antibodies suitable
for the identification of minimal HCL infiltrates in formalin-fixed bone marrow
trephines. Among the antibodies tested those directed against the T-cell
associated transcription factor T-bet showed the required specificity: (1) T-bet 
is highly expressed in all 85 cases of HCL including 31 cases showing only
minimal infiltrates, and (2) T-bet is exclusively expressed only on a subset of
reactive T cells which are rare in bone marrow. Although T-bet is also weakly
expressed in a proportion of the tumor cells of some small B-cell lymphomas
(n=32/69) other than HCL, a reliable distinction is nevertheless easily possible 
because (1) T-bet is strongly expressed by all hairy cells of all HCL cases and
(2) T-bet is not coexpressed in HCL with markers typical for other small B-cell
lymphomas/leukemias (ie, CD23, CD5, CD10, and/or BCL6). Therefore, the
immunohistochemical detection of T-bet in infiltrated bone marrow trephines
represents an important adjunct for the diagnosis of HCL.

PMID: 17667540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Aug 18;39(4):346-50.

[A case of marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of the pulmonary mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue type].

[Article in Chinese]

Mu XD(1), Wang GF, Diao XL, Que CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 
100034, China. muxiangdong@tom.com

Marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of the pulmonary mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
type (pulmonary MALT-MZL), a common kind of primary pulmonary lymphoma, is rare
in pulmonary malignant tumors. One patient in our hospital was diagnosed by
bronchoscope and the literatures on the subject were reviewed. The patient
presented with periodical fever, cough and chest pain, and antibiotic therapy had
no use. Chest CT scan showed the consolidation of right middle lobe and left
lower lobe with CT angiogram signs, air bronchograms and distended bronchi.
Pleural effusion in the left thorax mainly consisted of monocytes. Monoclonal
protein was found in the electrophoresis of serum protein. Bronchial stenosis and
swollen mucosa were seen with bronchoscope. The tissue section of transbronchial 
lung biopsy (TBLB) specimens showed diffusedly infiltrated small lymphocytes and 
a lymphoepithelial lesion. CD20 was positive and CD3, CD5, CD10, CD21, CD23,
bcl2, bcl6 were negative in immunohistochemical stain. The clinical
manifestations of pulmonary MALT-MZL are nonspecific and misdiagnosis is common, 
Appropriate invasive biopsy procedures are necessary for early diagnosis.
Presentations such as periodical fever, distended bronchi in pulmonary
consolidation, monoclonal protein might indicate diagnosis. Treatment includes
surgical resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Pulmonary MALT-MZL belongs to 
inert lymphoma and prognosis is relatively good.

PMID: 17657256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Ann Hematol. 2008 Feb;87(2):151-3. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

The t(1;3)(p34;q27) translocation: a nonrandom BCL6 rearrangement in diffuse
large B cell lymphoma.

Niitsu N, Nakamine H, Hagiwara Y, Tanae K, Miura I.

PMID: 17653714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):530-7. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

''Minor'' BCL2 breakpoints in follicular lymphoma: frequency and correlation with
grade and disease presentation in 236 cases.

Weinberg OK(1), Ai WZ, Mariappan MR, Shum C, Levy R, Arber DA.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Department of Pathology, 300 Pasteur Dr., Room L235,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. okw@stanford.edu

Follicular lymphomas are frequently associated with the t(14;18)(q32;q21). This
translocation can be detected by karyotype, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In addition to the breakpoints
currently used for diagnosis located in the major breakpoint region (MBR) and the
minor cluster region (mcr), recent studies have reported the existence of other
breakpoints (3' BCL2, 5'mcr, and icr). In this study, we examined the frequency
of all five breakpoints in 236 cases of follicular lymphomas by real-time PCR
analysis. The distribution of breakpoint sites consisted of MBR in 118 cases
(50%), mcr in 11 (5%), icr in 32 (13%), 3' BCL2 in 13 (6%), and 5' mcr in three
cases (1%). These findings illustrate significantly higher frequency of the icr
breakpoint as compared with the more frequently studied mcr. Correlation of
breakpoints with histology showed that MBR breakpoints occur more frequently in
grade 2 lymphomas (P = 0.042). A majority of the PCR-negative cases (75%)
contained an IGH/BCL2 translocation with FISH methods, suggesting the presence of
other BCL2 breakpoints. Correlation of breakpoints with survival did not reveal
significant differences. Diagnostic laboratories should consider expanding their 
PCR methods to include other BCL2 breakpoints and correlating with FISH methods
when appropriate.

PMCID: PMC1975105
PMID: 17652637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Eur J Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;86(10):581-9. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

IRF4 negatively regulates proliferation of germinal center B cell-derived
Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines and induces differentiation toward plasma cells.

Teng Y(1), Takahashi Y, Yamada M, Kurosu T, Koyama T, Miura O, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

To investigate the roles of interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) in B-cell
development, we established germinal center B cell-derived Burkitt's lymphoma
cell lines that exogenously express IRF4. Daudi-IRF4 expressed IRF4 in the
presence of doxycycline (inducible expression), and Raji-IRF4 constitutively
expressed an IRF4-estrogen receptor chimeric protein, which was activated by
4-hydroxytamoxifen. Expression or activation of IRF4 resulted in growth
inhibition accompanied by accumulation of cells in G0/G1. Upregulation of the
plasma cell markers CD38 and CD138 and downregulation of the germinal center cell
marker B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) were also observed. Furthermore, mRNAs for BCL6
and paired box gene 5 (PAX5) were decreased and those for B-lymphocyte-induced
maturation protein-1 (BLIMP1)/PR domain containing 1 (PRDM1) and X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) were increased, which corresponds to the characteristic changes 
in transcription factor expression in B cells differentiating toward plasma
cells. Impairment in proliferation and differentiation toward plasma cells
induced by IRF4 were not inhibited by enforced expression of BCL6. These results 
suggest that IRF4 inhibits cell cycle progression of germinal center B
cell-derived Burkitt's lymphoma cells and induces terminal differentiation toward
plasma cells through mechanisms independent of BCL6 downregulation.

PMID: 17651861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;67(14):6555-64.

Target sequence accessibility limits activation-induced cytidine deaminase
activity in primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma.

Popov SW(1), Moldenhauer G, Wotschke B, Brüderlein S, Barth TF, Dorsch K, Ritz O,
Möller P, Leithäuser F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081
Ulm, Germany.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) initiates somatic hypermutation (SHM)
and class switch recombination (CSR) in activated B lymphocytes and is
potentially implicated in genomic instability of B-cell malignancies. For unknown
reasons, B-cell neoplasms often lack SHM and CSR in spite of high AID expression.
Here, we show that primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL), an immunoglobulin 
(Ig)-negative lymphoma that possesses hypermutated, class-switched Ig genes,
expresses high levels of AID with an intact primary structure but does not do CSR
in 14 of 16 cases analyzed. Absence of CSR coincided with low Ig germ-line
transcription, whereas high level germ-line transcription was observed only in
those two cases with active CSR. Interleukin-4/CD40L costimulation induced CSR
and a marked up-regulation of germ-line transcription in the PMBL-derived cell
line MedB-1. In the PMBL cell line Karpas 1106P, CSR was not inducible and
germ-line transcription remained low on stimulation. However, Karpas 1106P, but
not MedB-1, had ongoing SHM of the Ig gene and BCL6. These genes were transcribed
in Karpas 1106P, whereas transcription was undetectable or low in MedB-1 cells.
Thus, accessibility of the target sequences seems to be a major limiting factor
for AID-dependent somatic gene diversification in PMBL.

PMID: 17638864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Eur J Haematol. 2007 Aug;79(2):146-9.

Tissue microarray is inappropriate for analysis of BCL6 expression in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Linderoth J(1), Ehinger M, Akerman M, Cavallin-Ståhl E, Enblad G, Erlanson M,
Jerkeman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
johan.linderoth@med.lu.se

OBJECTIVE: In this study, our aim was to investigate how different
immunohistochemical techniques may influence the result of BCL6 positivity and
categorization in germinal center (GC) and non-GC derived diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), as it has been proposed that classification of DLBCL according 
to cell-of-origin by immunohistochemistry may be performed as a routine procedure
in the diagnostic work-up. However, a number of technical issues need to be
solved before introducing this as a standard technique.
METHODS: Tumor specimens from 122 patients with de novo stage II-IV disease,
adequately treated with anthracycline-containing chemotherapy regimens were
collected. Immunohistochemical expression of BCL6, CD10, and MUM-1/IRF4 was
examined using a tissue microarray (TMA) technique. BCL6 and CD10 were also
evaluated on whole tissue sections.
RESULTS: Due to profound tissue heterogeneity, BCL6 showed a wide range of
positivity, with a high number of false negative results by TMA (25% positive),
compared to 53% on whole tissue sections (WTS). CD10 was more homogeneously
expressed, and TMA results corresponded better to WTS. Consequently, the results 
from categorization into GC and non-GC DLBCL differed considerably by use of the 
two methods, and resulted in very different outcome in terms of overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Immunohistochemical GC-status determined on TMA is not reliable
enough to be used for individual treatment decisions in DLBCL, mostly due to
difficulties in interpreting BCL6 status.

PMID: 17635238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Leukemia. 2007 Nov;21(11):2332-43. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Distinctive patterns of BCL6 molecular alterations and their functional
consequences in different subgroups of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Iqbal J(1), Greiner TC, Patel K, Dave BJ, Smith L, Ji J, Wright G, Sanger WG,
Pickering DL, Jain S, Horsman DE, Shen Y, Fu K, Weisenburger DD, Hans CP, Campo
E, Gascoyne RD, Rosenwald A, Jaffe ES, Delabie J, Rimsza L, Ott G,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Connors JM, Vose JM, McKeithan T, Staudt LM, Chan WC;
Leukemia/Lymphoma Molecular Profiling Project.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Gene expression profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has revealed
biologically and prognostically distinct subgroups: germinal center B-cell-like
(GCB), activated B-cell-like (ABC) and primary mediastinal (PM) DLBCL. The BCL6
gene is often translocated and/or mutated in DLBCL. Therefore, we examined the
BCL6 molecular alterations in these DLBCL subgroups, and their impact on BCL6
expression and BCL6 target gene repression. BCL6 translocations at the major
breakpoint region (MBR) were detected in 25 (18.8%) of 133 DLBCL cases, with a
higher frequency in the PM (33%) and ABC (24%) subgroups than in the GCB (10%)
subgroup. Translocations at the alternative breakpoint region (ABR) were detected
in five (6.4%) of 78 DLBCL cases, with three cases in ABC and one case each in
the GCB and the unclassifiable subgroups. The translocated cases involved IgH and
non-IgH partners in about equal frequency and were not associated with different 
levels of BCL6 mRNA and protein expression. BCL6 mutations were detected in 61%
of DLBCL cases, with a significantly higher frequency in the GCB and PM subgroups
(>70%) than in the ABC subgroup (44%). Exon-1 mutations were mostly observed in
the GCB subgroup. The repression of known BCL6 target genes correlated with the
level of BCL6 mRNA and protein expression in GCB and ABC subgroups but not with
BCL6 translocation and intronic mutations. No clear inverse correlation between
BCL6 expression and p53 expression was observed. Patients with higher BCL6 mRNA
or protein expression had a significantly better overall survival. The biological
role of BCL6 in translocated cases where repression of known target genes is not 
demonstrated is intriguing and warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2366166
PMID: 17625604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Jul;131(7):1084-8.

Grading of follicular lymphoma: comparison of routine histology with
immunohistochemistry.

Martinez AE(1), Lin L, Dunphy CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Lineberger Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7525, USA.

CONTEXT: Follicular lymphoma (FL) grading is based on the average number of large
transformed cells in 10 neoplastic follicles at x40 high-power field (x10-40
high-power field) examination (grade 1, 0-5 centroblasts per high-power field;
grade 2, 6-15 centroblasts per high-power field; grade 3, >15 centroblasts per
high-power field).
OBJECTIVE: Since there may be significant interobserver variability, we analyzed 
the usefulness of immunohistochemical stains in grading FLs more reliably.
DESIGN: Forty-three FLs initially graded by World Health Organization criteria
(grade 1, 12; grade 2, 18; grade 3, 13) were reviewed and stained with CD3, CD20,
Ki-67, CD30, CD68, PAX-5, and BCL-6. Retrospective review was performed for the
average number of large cells, of large lymphoid cells, of large cells staining
with CD3, CD20, BCL-6 (40 cases), and PAX-5, and of all cells staining with CD68,
Ki-67, and CD30.
RESULTS: By histologic review, 8 of 43 FLs had a significant grade change (4
cases upgraded and 4 cases downgraded). CD3 and CD30 stained only 0 to 3 large
cells and 0 to 3 cells, respectively, in neoplastic follicles. CD68+ cells
represented the large nonlymphoid cells. Increasing FL grades demonstrated
increases in Ki-67+ cells. The original grade showed substantial agreement with
CD20 and moderate agreement with PAX-5 and BCL-6. The original histologic grade
agreed with immunohistochemical-based grade using 2 or more antibodies in 5 of 8 
discordant cases (4 by CD20 or BCL-6 and PAX-5; 1 by CD20, PAX-5, and BCL-6).
CONCLUSIONS: Interobserver variability of histologic FL grading may be
significant; we showed low-end "substantial agreement." Immunohistochemical
stains (ie, CD20, PAX-5, and BCL-6) may more reliably determine the number of
large transformed cells in neoplastic follicles; Ki-67 staining correlates with
higher FL grades. Immunohistochemical stains may be evaluated in clinical trials 
of FL patients to determine prognostic significance.

PMID: 17616995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Jul;31(7):1050-8.

Primary follicular lymphoma of the testis and epididymis in adults.

Bacon CM(1), Ye H, Diss TC, McNamara C, Kueck B, Hasserjian RP, Rohatiner AZ,
Ferry J, Du MQ, Dogan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Box 231, Level 3 Lab Block, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QQ, UK. cmb82@cam.ac.uk

Primary testicular lymphomas typically occur in patients over 60 years of age.
Most are diffuse large B-cell lymphomas with frequent dissemination and a poor
prognosis. Primary follicular lymphoma of the adult testis has not been well
characterized. However, a small number of primary testicular follicular lymphomas
have recently been described in children. These showed stage 1E disease, a lack
of BCL2 gene rearrangement and Bcl-2 protein expression, and a good clinical
outcome. Here, we describe 5 cases of primary follicular lymphoma of the testis
and epididymis in adults. These presented as unilateral testicular masses 12 to
40 mm in diameter and were characterized histologically by small neoplastic
follicles in a sclerotic background. The neoplastic cells expressed CD10 and
Bcl-6, but not Bcl-2 and lacked t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IGH-BCL2 and BCL6 gene
rearrangements. Four of the five patients were 35 years old or younger, and 4
presented with stage 1EA disease. Although follow-up is 12 months or less in 2 of
the 5 patients, to date each has followed an indolent clinical course. These
features are different from those of most adult nodal follicular lymphomas but
are very similar to those of the pediatric primary testicular follicular
lymphomas. Together, the pediatric and adult cases represent a discrete
clinicopathologic entity of t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IGH-BCL2-negative primary
follicular lymphoma of the testis and epididymis, which typically present as
clinically indolent localized disease in young males and should be distinguished 
from the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma more frequently seen in the testes of
older adults.

PMID: 17592272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Viral Hepat. 2007 Jul;14(7):484-91.

Somatic hypermutation and mRNA expression levels of the BCL-6 gene in patients
with hepatitis C virus-associated lymphoproliferative diseases.

Hofmann WP(1), Fernandez B, Herrmann E, Welsch C, Mihm U, Kronenberger B,
Feldmann G, Spengler U, Zeuzem S, Sarrazin C.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Innere Medizin II, Kirrbergerstrasse, Universitätsklinikum des
Saarlandes, Homburg, Germany.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection leads to mixed cryoglobulinaemia (MC)
and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL). Aberrant somatic hypermutation and
deregulation of the oncogene BCL-6 is associated with lymphomagenesis. Recently, 
HCV was shown to induce BCL-6 mutations in vitro. The BCL-6 gene (area B) was
cloned and sequenced from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of 21
chronically HCV-infected patients with or without MC and B-NHL, and six healthy
controls. Mutational frequencies, genetic complexity and diversity were
calculated. BCL-6 mRNA from PBMC was quantified by real-time polymerase chain
reaction, and additional sustained virologic responders to antiviral therapy and 
HBV patients served as controls. The overall/recurrent mutational frequencies
tended to be lower in MC and B-NHL patients when compared with controls (P = 0.15
and 0.06, respectively). Genetic complexity was significantly lower in MC and
B-NHL patients (P = 0.025). BCL-6 mRNA concentration was decreased in all HCV
patients when compared with healthy controls, sustained virologic responder and
HBV patients (P = 0.005). Although HCV can induce BCL-6 mutations in vitro, lower
mutational frequencies and decreased BCL-6 mRNA expression in vivo suggest no
major role of aberrant somatic hypermutation in HCV-associated MC and B-NHL.

PMID: 17576390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Pathol. 2007 Sep;213(1):106-15.

The BCL6-associated transcriptional co-repressor, MTA3, is selectively expressed 
by germinal centre B cells and lymphomas of putative germinal centre derivation.

Jaye DL(1), Iqbal J, Fujita N, Geigerman CM, Li S, Karanam S, Fu K, Weisenburger 
DD, Chan WC, Moreno CS, Wade PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. dljaye@emory.edu

Metastasis-associated protein 3 (MTA3) is a recently described cell-type specific
component of the Mi-2-NURD transcriptional co-repressor complex that is expressed
in breast epithelia and germinal centre B cells. In model B cell lines, MTA3
physically interacts with BCL6 and appears to be instrumental in maintenance of
the germinal centre B cell transcriptional programme that precludes premature
plasmacytic differentiation. Here, we report selective, in situ cell-type
specific expression of MTA3 among lymphoid cells largely confined to the germinal
centre B cell compartment. Centroblasts display greater expression than smaller, 
less proliferative centrocytes, with undetectable expression in quiescent plasma 
cells. Among B cell neoplasms, germinal centre B cell-like lymphomas likewise
exhibit selective expression that generally escalates with increasing
proliferative capacity. MTA3 protein expression was, in accord, highly predictive
of the germinal centre B cell-like gene expression profile for diffuse large B
cell lymphomas. Lastly, relative repression of a subset of known BCL6 targets,
including BLIMP1 and p27kip1, was highest in diffuse large B cell lymphomas that 
co-expressed both MTA3 and BCL6 protein. Together, these novel data suggest a
role for MTA3 in BCL6-mediated lymphomagenesis in germinal centre B cell-like
neoplasms.

PMID: 17573669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nat Immunol. 2007 Jul;8(7):705-14. Epub 2007 Jun 10.

Bcl-6 mediates the germinal center B cell phenotype and lymphomagenesis through
transcriptional repression of the DNA-damage sensor ATR.

Ranuncolo SM(1), Polo JM, Dierov J, Singer M, Kuo T, Greally J, Green R, Carroll 
M, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Antibody specificity and diversity is generated in B cells during germinal center
maturation through clonal expansion while they undergo class-switch recombination
and somatic hypermutation. Here we demonstrate that the transcriptional repressor
Bcl-6 mediates this phenotype by directly repressing ATR in centroblasts and
lymphoma cells. ATR is critical in replication and DNA damage-sensing
checkpoints. Bcl-6 allowed B cells to evade ATR-mediated checkpoints and
attenuated the response of the B cells to exogenous DNA damage. Repression of ATR
was necessary and sufficient for those Bcl-6 activities. CD40 signaling 'rescued'
B cells from those effects by disrupting the Bcl-6 transcription-repression
complex on the promoter of the gene encoding ATR. Our data demonstrate a
transcriptional regulatory loop whereby Bcl-6 mediates the centroblast phenotype 
through transient silencing of ATR.

PMID: 17558410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2361-70. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

EPO modulation of cell-cycle regulatory genes, and cell division, in primary bone
marrow erythroblasts.

Fang J(1), Menon M, Kapelle W, Bogacheva O, Bogachev O, Houde E, Browne S,
Sathyanarayana P, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Stem and Progenitor Cell Biology, Maine Medical Center Research
Institute, Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.

Erythropoietin (EPO's) actions on erythroblasts are ascribed largely to survival 
effects. Certain studies, however, point to EPO-regulated proliferation. To
investigate this problem in a primary system, Kit(pos)CD71(high) erythroblasts
were prepared from murine bone marrow, and were first used in the array-based
discovery of EPO-modulated cell-cycle regulators. Five cell-cycle progression
factors were rapidly up-modulated: nuclear protein 1 (Nupr1), G1 to S phase
transition 1 (Gspt1), early growth response 1 (Egr1), Ngfi-A binding protein 2
(Nab2), and cyclin D2. In contrast, inhibitory cyclin G2, p27/Cdkn1b, and B-cell 
leukemia/lymphoma 6 (Bcl6) were sharply down-modulated. For CYCLIN G2, ectopic
expression also proved to selectively attenuate EPO-dependent UT7epo cell-cycle
progression at S-phase. As analyzed in primary erythroblasts expressing minimal
EPO receptor alleles, EPO repression of cyclin G2 and Bcl6, and induction of
cyclin D2, were determined to depend on PY343 (and Stat5) signals. Furthermore,
erythroblasts expressing a on PY-null EPOR-HM allele were abnormally distributed 
in G0/G1. During differentiation divisions, EPOR-HM Ter119(pos) erythroblasts
conversely accumulated in S-phase and faltered in an apparent EPO-directed
transition to G0/G1. EPO/EPOR signals therefore control the expression of select 
cell-cycle regulatory genes that are proposed to modulate stage-specific
decisions for erythroblast cell-cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC1988929
PMID: 17548578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):2067-74. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

BCL6 programs lymphoma cells for survival and differentiation through distinct
biochemical mechanisms.

Parekh S(1), Polo JM, Shaknovich R, Juszczynski P, Lev P, Ranuncolo SM, Yin Y,
Klein U, Cattoretti G, Dalla Favera R, Shipp MA, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):1707-8.

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor is the most commonly involved oncogene in
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). Constitutive expression of BCL6 mediates
lymphomagenesis through aberrant proliferation, survival, and differentiation
blockade. Binding of BCL6 to the SMRT/N-CoR corepressors mediates the BCL6
survival effect in DLBCL. Although the basis for differentiation blockade is
unknown in DLBCL, recent data suggest that BCL6 binding to the MTA3 corepressor
might be involved. We report that BCL6 and MTA3 are coexpressed in normal
germinal center B cells and DLBCL. Depletion of MTA3 in DLBCL cells induced a
differentiation-related BCL6 target gene (PRDM1), but not target genes involved
in survival. Accordingly, MTA3 and PRDM1 expression are mutually exclusive in
germinal center B cells. We performed chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP)-on-chip mapping of the PRDM1 locus, identifying a novel BCL6 binding site 
on intron 3 of the PRDM1 gene, and show that BCL6 recruits MTA3 to this site. In 
DLBCL cells, MTA3 depletion induced plasmacytic differentiation but did not
decrease viability of DLBCL cells. However, MTA3 depletion synergized with a
specific BCL6 inhibitor that blocks SMRT/N-CoR binding to decrease DLBCL
viability. Taken together, these results show that BCL6 regulates distinct
transcriptional programs through the SMRT/N-CoR and MTA3 corepressors,
respectively, and provides a basis for combinatorial therapeutic targeting of
BCL6.

PMCID: PMC1976344
PMID: 17545502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Int Med Res. 2007 Mar-Apr;35(2):224-30.

BCL6 gene mutations in transitional cell carcinomas.

Cho HY(1), Park HS, Lin Z, Kim I, Joo KJ, Cheon J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gachon University of Medicine and Science, Incheon,
Korea.

The B-cell lymphoma-6 (BCL6) gene was initially identified at a translocation
site observed frequently in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. In the present study,
BCL6 mutations at the 5' non-coding region in 47 cases of transitional call
carcinoma (TCC) were analysed using polymerase chain reaction-single-strand
conformation polymorphism. The results were compared with data obtained
previously by immunohistochemical staining for the BCL6 protein. Overall, BCL6
mutations were observed in 44.7% of cases. Mutation of the 5' non-coding region
was not correlated with histological grade of the tumour; however, the better the
histological grade, the greater the mutation rate of the E1.12 fragment. The BCL6
mutation occurred independently of over-expression of the protein. The BCL6 gene 
mutation and the protein expression were detectable in a large proportion of
TCCs. BCL6 protein over-expression as well as BCL6 gene mutation of the E1.12
fragment may play an important role in the morphological differentiation of TCC.

PMID: 17542409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Immunol Lett. 2007 Jun 15;110(2):145-51. Epub 2007 May 22.

Bcl6 is required for the IL-4-mediated rescue of the B cells from apoptosis
induced by IL-21.

Tsuruoka N(1), Arima M, Arguni E, Saito T, Kitayama D, Sakamoto A, Hatano M,
Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

IL-21 has a pro-apoptotic effect on freshly isolated B cells stimulated with LPS,
and also induces Bcl6 expression in the activated B cells. However, a role for
Bcl6 in the activated B cells is not known. When naive B cells from
Bcl6-deficient mice were stimulated with LPS plus IL-21, those B cells died by
apoptosis as wild-type B cells. Co-stimulation of those B cells with IL-4
partially rescued the wild-type B cells but not the Bcl6-deficient B cells from
the IL-21-induced apoptosis. Bcl-2 was not up-regulated in both B cells
stimulated with LPS plus IL-21 and IL-4. Bcl-X(L) and Bax were up-regulated in
both B cells stimulated with LPS plus IL-4, and the co-stimulation with IL-21 did
not modulate these up-regulations in wild-type B cells. However, the
co-stimulation clearly suppressed the Bcl-X(L) up-regulation but not the Bax
up-regulation in Bcl6-deficient B cells. Thus, Bcl6 is required for maintaining
the Bcl-X(L) up-regulation in B cells stimulated with LPS plus IL-21 and IL-4,
and the up-regulation may partially rescue the B cells from apoptosis induced by 
IL-21.

PMID: 17532053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;27(15):5275-85. Epub 2007 May 25.

Aberrant regulation of hematopoiesis by T cells in BAZF-deficient mice.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Sehra S, Cooper S, Toney LM, Kusam S, Aloor JJ, Marchal CC,
Dinauer MC, Dent AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and The Walther Oncology Center, 950
W. Walnut St. R2 302, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

The BAZF (BCL-6b) protein is highly similar to the BCL-6 transcriptional
repressor. While BCL-6 has been characterized extensively, relatively little is
known about the normal function of BAZF. In order to understand the physiological
role of BAZF, we created BAZF-deficient mice. Unlike BCL-6-deficient mice,
BAZF-deficient mice are healthy and normal in size. However, BAZF-deficient mice 
have a hematopoietic progenitor phenotype that is almost identical to that of
BCL-6-deficient mice. Compared to wild-type mice, both BAZF-deficient and
BCL-6-deficient mice have greatly reduced numbers of cycling hematopoietic
progenitor cells (HPC) in the BM and greatly increased numbers of cycling HPC in 
the spleen. In contrast to HPC from wild-type mice, HPC from BAZF-deficient and
BCL-6-deficient mice are resistant to chemokine-induced myelosuppression and do
not show a synergistic growth response to granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor plus stem cell factor. Depletion of CD8 T cells in
BAZF-deficient mice reverses several of the hematopoietic defects in these mice. 
Since both BAZF- and BCL-6-deficient mice have defects in CD8 T-cell
differentiation, we hypothesize that both BCL-6 and BAZF regulate HPC homeostasis
by an indirect pathway involving CD8 T cells.

PMCID: PMC1952080
PMID: 17526724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Gut. 2007 Oct;56(10):1358-63. Epub 2007 May 24.

Clinical impact of genetic aberrations in gastric MALT lymphoma: a comprehensive 
analysis using interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation.

Nakamura S(1), Ye H, Bacon CM, Goatly A, Liu H, Banham AH, Ventura R, Matsumoto
T, Iida M, Ohji Y, Yao T, Tsuneyoshi M, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Box 231, Level 3 Lab Block, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. sn330@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: There is a need for genetic biomarkers to guide prognosis
and management of gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas. We 
assessed the incidence and clinical significance of the MALT lymphoma-associated 
genetic abnormalities t(11;18)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)/BCL10-IGH, t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1,
t(3;14)/FOXP1-IGH, and extra copies of MALT1 and FOXP1 in gastric MALT lymphomas 
from Japan.
METHODS: The presence of translocations and copy number changes involving MALT1, 
IGH and FOXP1 were assessed in 90 cases of gastric MALT lymphoma using interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). In cases carrying a MALT1
translocation, FISH for API2-MALT1 was performed, whereas in those carrying an
IGH translocation, FISH was performed for BCL10, BCL6, BCL2, c-MYC and/or CCND1.
RESULTS: t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 was detected in 18 of 87 (21%) cases and was
significantly associated with Helicobacter pylori-negativity, resistance to H
pylori eradication and Bcl10 nuclear expression. Four of 68 (6%) cases carried a 
translocation involving IGH and FOXP1 (n = 1), BCL2 (n = 1) or an unknown partner
(n = 2). Neither t(1;14)/BCL10-IGH nor t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1 was detected. Extra
copies of MALT1 and FOXP1 were detected in 18 of 71 (25%) cases and 10 of 59
(17%) cases, respectively. The presence of extra copies of MALT1 was
significantly associated with progression or relapse of lymphoma, and was an
independent adverse prognostic factor for event-free survival as determined by
multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 is frequent, whereas IGH-involved translocations
are rare in gastric MALT lymphoma in Japan. The presence of extra copies of
MALT1, often suggestive of partial or complete trisomy 18, is a frequent genetic 
aberration in gastric MALT lymphoma, which appears to predict adverse clinical
behaviour.

PMCID: PMC2000261
PMID: 17525089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jul 15;16(14):1773-82. Epub 2007 May 21.

Left-sided embryonic expression of the BCL-6 corepressor, BCOR, is required for
vertebrate laterality determination.

Hilton EN(1), Manson FD, Urquhart JE, Johnston JJ, Slavotinek AM, Hedera P,
Stattin EL, Nordgren A, Biesecker LG, Black GC.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, St Mary's
Hospital, Manchester, UK.

Oculofaciocardiodental (OFCD) syndrome is an X-linked male lethal condition
encompassing cardiac septal defects, as well as ocular and dental anomalies. The 
gene mutated in OFCD syndrome, the BCL-6 corepressor (BCOR), is part of a
transcriptional repression complex whose transcriptional targets remain largely
unknown. We reviewed cases of OFCD syndrome and identified patients exhibiting
defective lateralization including dextrocardia, asplenia and intestinal
malrotation, suggesting that BCOR is required in normal laterality determination.
To study the function of BCOR, we used morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) to
knockdown expression of xtBcor in Xenopus tropicalis, thus creating an animal
model for OFCD syndrome. The resulting tadpoles had cardiac and ocular features
characteristic of OFCD syndrome. Reversed cardiac orientation and disorganized
gut patterning were seen when MOs were injected into the left side of embryos,
demonstrating a left-sided requirement for xtBcor in lateral determination in
Xenopus. Ocular defects displayed no left-right bias and included anterior and
posterior segment disorders such as microphthalmia and coloboma. Expression of
xtPitx2c was shown to be downregulated when xtBcor was depleted. This identifies 
a pathway in which xtBcor is required for lateral specification, a process
intrinsically linked to correct cardiac septal development.

PMID: 17517692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Exp Med. 2007 May 14;204(5):1157-66. Epub 2007 May 7.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase acts as a mutator in BCR-ABL1-transformed
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Feldhahn N(1), Henke N, Melchior K, Duy C, Soh BN, Klein F, von Levetzow G,
Giebel B, Li A, Hofmann WK, Jumaa H, Müschen M.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Research Program, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) encoding the oncogenic BCR-ABL1 kinase defines a
subset of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with a particularly unfavorable
prognosis. ALL cells are derived from B cell precursors in most cases and
typically carry rearranged immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) variable (V) region
genes devoid of somatic mutations. Somatic hypermutation is restricted to mature 
germinal center B cells and depends on activation-induced cytidine deaminase
(AID). Studying AID expression in 108 cases of ALL, we detected AID mRNA in 24 of
28 Ph(+) ALLs as compared with 6 of 80 Ph(-) ALLs. Forced expression of BCR-ABL1 
in Ph(-) ALL cells and inhibition of the BCR-ABL1 kinase showed that aberrant
expression of AID depends on BCR-ABL1 kinase activity. Consistent with aberrant
AID expression in Ph(+) ALL, IGH V region genes and BCL6 were mutated in many
Ph(+) but unmutated in most Ph(-) cases. In addition, AID introduced DNA
single-strand breaks within the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2B in Ph(+) ALL cells, 
which was sensitive to BCR-ABL1 kinase inhibition and silencing of AID expression
by RNA interference. These findings identify AID as a BCR-ABL1-induced mutator in
Ph(+) ALL cells, which may be relevant with respect to the particularly
unfavorable prognosis of this leukemia subset.

PMCID: PMC2118573
PMID: 17485517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Jan;18(1):53-66. Epub 2007 May 2.

Differential gene expression between sensory neocortical areas: potential roles
for Ten_m3 and Bcl6 in patterning visual and somatosensory pathways.

Leamey CA(1), Glendining KA, Kreiman G, Kang ND, Wang KH, Fassler R, Sawatari A, 
Tonegawa S, Sur M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. cathy@physiol.usyd.edu.au

Adult neocortical areas are characterized by marked differences in
cytoarchitecture and connectivity that underlie their functional roles. The
molecular determinants of these differences are largely unknown. We performed a
microarray analysis to identify molecules that define the somatosensory and
visual areas during the time when afferent and efferent projections are forming. 
We identified 122 molecules that are differentially expressed between the regions
and confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction 95% of the 20 genes
tested. Two genes were chosen for further investigation: Bcl6 and Ten_m3. Bcl6
was highly expressed in the superficial cortical plate corresponding to
developing layer IV of somatosensory cortex at postnatal day (P) 0. This had
diminished by P3, but strong expression was found in layer V pyramidal cells by
P7 and was maintained until adulthood. Retrograde tracing showed that Bcl6 is
expressed in corticospinal neurons. Ten_m3 was expressed in a graded pattern
within layer V of caudal cortex that corresponds well with visual cortex.
Retrograde tracing and immunostaining showed that Ten_m3 is highly expressed
along axonal tracts of projection neurons of the developing visual pathway.
Overexpression demonstrated that Ten_m3 promotes homophilic adhesion and neurite 
outgrowth in vivo. This suggests an important role for Ten_m3 in the development 
of the visual pathway.

PMID: 17478416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Leukemia. 2007 Aug;21(8):1821-4. Epub 2007 May 3.

Analysis of BCL-6, CD95, PIM1, RHO/TTF and PAX5 mutations in splenic and nodal
marginal zone B-cell lymphomas suggests a particular B-cell origin.

Traverse-Glehen A, Verney A, Baseggio L, Felman P, Callet-Bauchu E, Thieblemont
C, Ffrench M, Magaud JP, Coiffier B, Berger F, Salles G.

PMID: 17476282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS Med. 2007 May;4(5):e158.

TXNIP regulates peripheral glucose metabolism in humans.

Parikh H(1), Carlsson E, Chutkow WA, Johansson LE, Storgaard H, Poulsen P, Saxena
R, Ladd C, Schulze PC, Mazzini MJ, Jensen CB, Krook A, Björnholm M, Tornqvist H, 
Zierath JR, Ridderstråle M, Altshuler D, Lee RT, Vaag A, Groop LC, Mootha VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is characterized by defects in
insulin secretion and action. Impaired glucose uptake in skeletal muscle is
believed to be one of the earliest features in the natural history of T2DM,
although underlying mechanisms remain obscure.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We combined human insulin/glucose clamp physiological
studies with genome-wide expression profiling to identify thioredoxin interacting
protein (TXNIP) as a gene whose expression is powerfully suppressed by insulin
yet stimulated by glucose. In healthy individuals, its expression was inversely
correlated to total body measures of glucose uptake. Forced expression of TXNIP
in cultured adipocytes significantly reduced glucose uptake, while silencing with
RNA interference in adipocytes and in skeletal muscle enhanced glucose uptake,
confirming that the gene product is also a regulator of glucose uptake. TXNIP
expression is consistently elevated in the muscle of prediabetics and diabetics, 
although in a panel of 4,450 Scandinavian individuals, we found no evidence for
association between common genetic variation in the TXNIP gene and T2DM.
CONCLUSIONS: TXNIP regulates both insulin-dependent and insulin-independent
pathways of glucose uptake in human skeletal muscle. Combined with recent studies
that have implicated TXNIP in pancreatic beta-cell glucose toxicity, our data
suggest that TXNIP might play a key role in defective glucose homeostasis
preceding overt T2DM.

PMCID: PMC1858708
PMID: 17472435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 1;104(18):7449-54. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Repression of the PDCD2 gene by BCL6 and the implications for the pathogenesis of
human B and T cell lymphomas.

Baron BW(1), Zeleznik-Le N, Baron MJ, Theisler C, Huo D, Krasowski MD, Thirman
MJ, Baron RM, Baron JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
beverly.baron@uchospitals.edu

The human BCL6 gene on chromosome 3 band q27, which encodes a transcriptional
repressor, is implicated in the pathogenesis of human lymphomas, especially the
diffuse large B-cell type. We previously identified the human PDCD2 (programmed
cell death-2) gene as a target of BCL6 repression. PDCD2 encodes a protein that
is expressed in many human tissues, including lymphocytes, and is known to
interact with corepressor complexes. We now show that BCL6 can bind directly to
the PDCD2 promoter, repressing its transcription. Knockdown of endogenous BCL6 in
a human B cell lymphoma line by introduction of small interfering RNA duplexes
increases PDCD2 protein expression. Furthermore, there is an inverse relationship
between the expression levels of the BCL6 and PDCD2 proteins in the lymphoid
tissues of mice overexpressing human BCL6 (high BCL6 levels, minimal PDCD2) and
controls (minimal BCL6, high PDCD2) as well as in tissues examined from some
human B and T cell lymphomas. These data confirm PDCD2 as a target of BCL6 and
support the concept that repression of PDCD2 by BCL6 is likely important in the
pathogenesis of certain human lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC1863460
PMID: 17468402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007 Apr;48(4):767-73.

Establishment and characterization of the new splenic marginal zone
lymphoma-derived cell line UCH1 carrying a complex rearrangement involving
t(8;14) and chromosome 3.

Matsuhashi Y(1), Tasaka T, Kakazu N, Nagai M, Sadahira K, Nishida K, Taniwaki M, 
Abe T, Ishida T.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Kagawa University, Kagawa, Japan.

A new cell line, designated UCH1, was established from a patient with splenic
marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL). UCH1 cells feature a mature B-cell phenotype,
characterized by surface IgM +, kappa+, CD5-, CD10-, CD19+ and CD20+. The BCL2
and BCL6 genes retained their germ-line configurations and overexpression of
cyclin D1 was not detected. UCH1 cells carry numerical and structural aberrations
in chromosome 3, but these were too complex to be analyzed with the conventional 
G-banding method. Spectral karyotyping (SKY) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis clearly demonstrated the presence of a balanced
translocation between chromosomes 8 and 14 [t(8;14)(q24;q32)] in the complex
aberrations involving chromosome 3. The results of Southern blot analysis
supported this finding by showing rearrangement of the c-myc gene in UCH1 cells. 
SKY analysis also identified a translocation involving chromosome band 18q21, to 
which BCL2 and MALT1 genes were assigned, suggesting their implication in the
development or progression of SMZL.

PMID: 17454636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Ann Oncol. 2007 Jul;18(7):1203-8. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Clinicopathologic correlations of stage IE/IIE primary thyroid diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Niitsu N(1), Okamoto M, Nakamura N, Nakamine H, Bessho M, Hirano M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama, Japan. nniitsu@saitama-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: We studied the clinicopathological characteristics and prognoses of
localized stage thyroid diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study included 32 patients with stage I/IIE thyroid
DLBCL. Their median age was 66 years, the male/female ratio was 10/22.
RESULTS: As to the cellular immunophenotype, CD20 was positive in 31/32, CD5 in
0/32, CD10 in 4/32, CD23 in 1/32, BCL2 in 14/30, and BCL6 in 24/32. Twelve cases 
showed abnormal karyotypes: two cases with t(8;14)(q24;q32), four cases with
3q27, two cases with 17p11, and four cases with other abnormal karyotypes. As for
treatment, eight cases were treated with chemotherapy alone and 24 cases were
treated with chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy. Complete response was
achieved in 94%. The 5-year progression-free survival was 84% and the 5-year
overall survival was 90% with a median follow-up period of 62 months. The
germinal center B-cell (GCB) type had a significantly better prognosis than the
non-GCB type.
CONCLUSION: Localized stage thyroid DLBCL is a disease with a relatively good
prognosis. It is, however, a heterogeneous disease with regard to histological
type and pathological state. Localized stage thyroid DLBCL has a good prognosis
and it is that there are more GCB-type DLBCL lymphomas.

PMID: 17429099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2007 Apr;26(2):194-8.

Lymphoma-like lesion of the uterine cervix: report of 12 cases of a rare entity.

Ma J(1), Shi QL, Zhou XJ, Meng K, Chen JY, Huang WB.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical School of Medical College of Nanjing University, Department of
Pathology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing Jiangsu, P.R. China.

Lymphoma-like lesion of the female genital tract is rare. We report 12 cases of
lymphoma-like lesions of the cervix in patients ranging from 27-54 years of age
(mean 41). The commonest clinical presentation was post-coital bleeding (8),
which was followed by vaginal bleeding (2) and leukorrhagia (4). Grossly, the
lesions were either polypoid (8) or ulcerated (4). On histological examination,
the lesions were eroded and involved the superficial mucosa 2-12 mm (mean 4 mm)
in depth. They comprised sheets of dense populations of predominantly large
lymphoid cells admixed with small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils.
Follicle formation was occasionally seen. Immunostaining revealed the majority of
the large cells were B cells (CD20(+), CD79a(+)) with no aberrant CD5 and CD43
expression. The lymphoid cells in the follicle were CD10(+) and bcl6(+) but
negative for bcl-2. Cyclin D1 was negative. There was no immunoglobulin light
chain restriction and polymerase chain reaction for T cell receptor-gamma chain
gene and immunoglobulin heavy chain gene demonstrated polyclonal patterns. In
situ hybridization for EBER and high risk HPV 6/11 and 16/18 were negative. All
patients were well with one case developing local recurrence in the follow-up
period up to 7 years.

PMID: 17413989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 2007 Sep 13;26(42):6244-52. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (Parp-1) binds in a sequence-specific manner at
the Bcl-6 locus and contributes to the regulation of Bcl-6 transcription.

Ambrose HE(1), Papadopoulou V, Beswick RW, Wagner SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Investigative Sciences, Department of Haematology, Imperial
College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

Bcl-6 is a transcription factor that is normally expressed in germinal centre B
cells. It is essential for the formation of germinal centres and the production
of high-affinity antibodies. Transcriptional downregulation of Bcl-6 occurs on
terminal differentiation to plasma cells. Bcl-6 is highly expressed in B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and, in a subset of cases of diffuse large cell lymphoma, 
the mechanism of Bcl-6 overexpression involves interruption of normal
transcriptional controls. Transcriptional control of Bcl-6 is, therefore,
important for normal antibody responses and lymphomagenesis, but little is known 
of the cis-acting control elements. This report focuses on a region of
mouse/human sequence homology in the first intron of Bcl-6, which is a candidate 
site for such a control element. We demonstrate that poly-(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (Parp-1) binds in vitro and in vivo to specific sequences in this
region. We further show that PARP inhibitors, and Parp-1 knockdown by siRNA
induce Bcl-6 mRNA expression in Bcl-6 expressing cell lines. We speculate that
Parp-1 activation plays a role in switching off Bcl-6 transcription and
subsequent B-cell exit from the germinal centre.

PMID: 17404575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Exp Med. 2007 Apr 16;204(4):819-30. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Repression of BCL-6 is required for the formation of human memory B cells in
vitro.

Kuo TC(1), Shaffer AL, Haddad J Jr, Choi YS, Staudt LM, Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Memory B cells provide rapid protection to previously encountered antigens;
however, how these cells develop from germinal center B cells is not well
understood. A previously described in vitro culture system using human tonsillar 
germinal center B cells was used to study the transcriptional changes that occur 
during differentiation of human memory B cells. Kinetic studies monitoring the
expression levels of several known late B cell transcription factors revealed
that BCL-6 is not expressed in memory B cells generated in vitro, and gene
expression profiling studies confirmed that BCL-6 is not expressed in these
memory B cells. Furthermore, ectopic expression of BCL-6 in human B cell cultures
resulted in formation of fewer memory B cells. In addition, the expression
profile of in vitro memory B cells showed a unique pattern that includes
expression of genes encoding multiple costimulatory molecules and cytokine
receptors, antiapoptotic proteins, T cell chemokines, and transcription factors. 
These studies establish new molecular criteria for defining the memory B cell
stage in human B cells.

PMCID: PMC2118536
PMID: 17403935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 18;282(20):14797-806. Epub 2007 Mar 27.

The carboxyl-terminal fragment of pro-HB-EGF reverses Bcl6-mediated gene
repression.

Kinugasa Y(1), Hieda M, Hori M, Higashiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Ehime University Graduate
School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, To-on, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF), a member of 
the EGF family, is synthesized as a type I transmembrane precursor (pro-HB-EGF). 
Ectodomain shedding of pro-HB-EGF yields an amino-terminal soluble ligand of EGF 
receptor (HB-EGF) and a carboxyl-terminal fragment (HB-EGF-CTF) consisting of the
transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. We previously showed that the HB-EGF-CTF
translocates from the plasma membrane to the nucleus and plays a role as a
signaling molecule. Immunoprecipitation showed that HB-EGF-CTF can associate with
Bcl6, a transcriptional repressor in mammalian cells. A glutathione S-transferase
pulldown assay revealed that HB-EGF-CTF interacted efficiently with zinc fingers 
4-6 of Bcl6. A luciferase reporter assay showed that the nuclear translocation of
HB-EGF-CTF following shedding reversed transcriptional repression of cyclin D2 by
Bcl6. Additionally, the level of cyclin D2 protein increased and Bcl6 interaction
with the cyclin D2 promoter decreased in parallel with the shedding of pro-HB-EGF
at all endogenous levels. These findings suggest that HB-EGF-CTF is a potent
regulator of gene expression via its interaction with the transcriptional
repressor Bcl6.

PMID: 17392284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2007 Mar;6(1):8-18. Epub 2007 Mar 24.

Functional analysis of the role of POK transcriptional repressors.

Costoya JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Lab, Departamento de Fisioloxia, Facultade de Medicina,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Rua San Francisco s/n, 15782 Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain. jcostoya@usc.es

Transcription factors (TF) play a key role in certain mechanisms by which
specific genes are expressed in a temporal and tissue-specific manner.
Understanding those mechanisms is still a challenging question in biology. Their 
modular organization allows the possibility of classifying them based on the
structure of the domains that bind DNA or interact with other proteins. Those
domains not only define the different TF families but also provide insights into 
the biological functions played by them. Among these, the POK (Poxviruses and
Zinc-finger (POZ) and Krüppel) family of transcription repressors is
characterized by the presence in their structures of an amino-terminal POZ/Broad 
Complex, Tramtrack, and Bric à brac (BTB) domain and several Krüppel-type zinc
fingers at the carboxy-terminal moiety. The POZ/BTB domain mediates homo- and
heterodimerization as well as protein-protein interactions, allowing the
recruitment of corepressor complexes. On the other hand, the specific zinc
fingers mediate specific DNA sequences recognition and binding. In the last few
years, several reports have highlighted the importance that this family of
transcriptional repressors plays in different processes such as cancer,
development and stem cell biology.

PMID: 17384421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 18;282(20):15248-57. Epub 2007 Mar 22.

A novel corepressor, BCoR-L1, represses transcription through an interaction with
CtBP.

Pagan JK(1), Arnold J, Hanchard KJ, Kumar R, Bruno T, Jones MJ, Richard DJ,
Forrest A, Spurdle A, Verdin E, Crossley M, Fanciulli M, Chenevix-Trench G, Young
DB, Khanna KK.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 300 Herston Road, Herston 4029,
Queensland, Australia.

Corepressors play a crucial role in negative gene regulation and are defective in
several diseases. BCoR is a corepressor for the BCL6 repressor protein. Here we
describe and functionally characterize BCoR-L1, a homolog of BCoR. When tethered 
to a heterologous promoter, BCoR-L1 is capable of strong repression. Like other
corepressors, BCoR-L1 associates with histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity.
Specifically, BCoR-L1 coprecipitates with the Class II HDACs, HDAC4, HDAC5, and
HDAC7, suggesting that they are involved in its role as a transcriptional
repressor. BCoR-L1 also interacts with the CtBP corepressor through a
CtBP-interacting motif in its amino terminus. Abrogation of the CtBP binding site
within BCoR-L1 partially relieves BCoR-L1-mediated transcriptional repression.
Furthermore, BCoR-L1 is located on the E-cadherin promoter, a known
CtBP-regulated promoter, and represses the E-cadherin promoter activity in a
reporter assay. The inhibition of BCoR-L1 expression by RNA-mediated interference
results in derepression of E-cadherin in cells that do not normally express
E-cadherin, indicating that BCoR-L1 contributes to the repression of an authentic
endogenous CtBP target.

PMID: 17379597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Immunol. 2007 Apr 1;178(7):4104-11.

Different kinetics of blimp-1 induction in B cell subsets revealed by reporter
gene.

Fairfax KA(1), Corcoran LM, Pridans C, Huntington ND, Kallies A, Nutt SL,
Tarlinton DM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G
Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The transcriptional repressor Blimp-1 (B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1)
has been described as a "master regulator" of B cell differentiation into
Ab-secreting cells (ASCs). Although there is mounting evidence for the importance
and necessity of Blimp-1 in plasma cell development, there is uncertainty as to
the role it plays in B cell differentiation of B cell subsets and the way in
which it may interact with other transcription factors such as Pax5 and Bcl6
during ASC differentiation. Using a mouse expressing GFP under the control of the
Blimp-1 regulatory elements (Blimp-1(GFP/+)), we examined the kinetics of Blimp-1
up-regulation in purified B cell subsets following activation. B1 cells showed
the most rapid and pronounced up-regulation of Blimp-1 in response to the
mitogens tested, followed by marginal zone B cells and then conventional B2
cells. Interestingly, only B1 cells substantially up-regulated Blimp-1 expression
in response to CpG. B1 cells secreted negligible Ig upon isolation but were able 
to up-regulate Blimp-1 and initiate Ig secretion within 28 h of stimulation. Also
of interest, B1 cells have a transcriptional factor profile that is intermediate 
between a naive B cell and an ASC, indicative of the semiactivated state of B1
cells. Transferred naive Blimp-1(GFP/+) B1 and B2 cells both gave rise to ASCs in
the bone marrow, suggesting no intrinsic barriers to B1 cell entry into the
long-lived ASC compartment.

PMID: 17371965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2586-94.

G-rich proto-oncogenes are targeted for genomic instability in B-cell lymphomas.

Duquette ML(1), Huber MD, Maizels N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common lymphoid malignancy in adults.
It is a heterogeneous disease with variability in outcome. Genomic instability of
a subset of proto-oncogenes, including c-MYC, BCL6, RhoH, PIM1, and PAX5, can
contribute to initial tumor development and has been correlated with poor
prognosis and aggressive tumor growth. Lymphomas in which these proto-oncogenes
are unstable derive from germinal center B cells that express activation-induced 
deaminase (AID), the B-cell-specific factor that deaminates DNA to initiate
immunoglobulin gene diversification. Proto-oncogene instability is evident as
both aberrant hypermutation and translocation, paralleling programmed instability
which diversifies the immunoglobulin loci. We have asked if genomic sequence
correlates with instability in AID-positive B-cell lymphomas. We show that
instability does not correlate with enrichment of the WRC sequence motif that is 
the consensus for deamination by AID. Instability does correlate with G-richness,
evident as multiple runs of the base guanine on the nontemplate DNA strand.
Extending previous analysis of c-MYC, we show experimentally that transcription
of BCL6 and RhoH induces formation of structures, G-loops, which contain
single-stranded regions targeted by AID. We further show that G-richness does not
characterize translocation breakpoints in AID-negative B- and T-cell
malignancies. These results identify G-richness as one feature of genomic
structure that can contribute to genomic instability in AID-positive B-cell
malignancies.

PMID: 17363577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3207-12. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Transcriptional signature with differential expression of BCL6 target genes
accurately identifies BCL6-dependent diffuse large B cell lymphomas.

Polo JM(1), Juszczynski P, Monti S, Cerchietti L, Ye K, Greally JM, Shipp M,
Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) often express BCL6, a transcriptional
repressor required for the formation of normal germinal centers. In a subset of
DLBCLs, BCL6 is deregulated by chromosomal translocations or aberrant somatic
hypermutation; in other tumors, BCL6 expression may simply reflect germinal
center lineage. DLBCLs dependent on BCL6-regulated pathways should exhibit
differential regulation of BCL6 target genes. Genomic array ChIP-on-chip was used
to identify the cohort of direct BCL6 target genes. This set of genes was
enriched in modulators of transcription, chromatin structure, protein
ubiquitylation, cell cycle, and DNA damage responses. In primary DLBCLs
classified on the basis of gene expression profiles, these BCL6 target genes were
clearly differentially regulated in "BCR" tumors, a subset of DLBCLs with
increased BCL6 expression and more frequent BCL6 translocations. In a panel of
DLBCL cell lines analyzed by expression arrays and classified according to their 
gene expression profiles, only BCR tumors were highly sensitive to the BCL6
peptide inhibitor, BPI. These studies identify a discrete subset of DLBCLs that
are reliant on BCL6 signaling and uniquely sensitive to BCL6 inhibitors. More
broadly, these data show how genome-wide identification of direct target genes
can identify tumors dependent on oncogenic transcription factors and amenable to 
targeted therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC1805543
PMID: 17360630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Exp Med. 2007 Mar 19;204(3):633-43. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Aberrant immunoglobulin class switch recombination and switch translocations in
activated B cell-like diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Lenz G(1), Nagel I, Siebert R, Roschke AV, Sanger W, Wright GW, Dave SS, Tan B,
Zhao H, Rosenwald A, Muller-Hermelink HK, Gascoyne RD, Campo E, Jaffe ES, Smeland
EB, Fisher RI, Kuehl WM, Chan WC, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer
Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

To elucidate the mechanisms underlying chromosomal translocations in diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), we investigated the nature and extent of
immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR) in these tumors. We used Southern
blotting to detect legitimate and illegitimate CSR events in tumor samples of the
activated B cell-like (ABC), germinal center B cell-like (GCB), and primary
mediastinal B cell lymphoma (PMBL) subgroups of DLBCL. The frequency of
legitimate CSR was lower in ABC DLBCL than in GCB DLBCL and PMBL. In contrast,
ABC DLBCL had a higher frequency of internal deletions within the switch mu (Smu)
region compared with GCB DLBCL and PMBL. ABC DLBCLs also had frequent deletions
within Sgamma and other illegitimate switch recombinations. Sequence analysis
revealed ongoing Smu deletions within ABC DLBCL tumor clones, which were
accompanied by ongoing duplications and activation-induced cytidine
deaminase-dependent somatic mutations. Unexpectedly, short fragments derived from
multiple chromosomes were interspersed within Smu in one case. These findings
suggest that ABC DLBCLs have abnormalities in the regulation of CSR that could
predispose to chromosomal translocations. Accordingly, aberrant switch
recombination was responsible for translocations in ABC DLBCLs involving BCL6,
MYC, and a novel translocation partner, SPIB.

PMCID: PMC2137913
PMID: 17353367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Apr;7(5):550-7. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Characterization of Bcor expression in mouse development.

Wamstad JA(1), Bardwell VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, Developmental Biology and Genetics Graduate Program,
University of Minnesota, 6-160 Jackson Hall, 321 Church St SE, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

Mutation of the gene encoding the transcriptional corepressor BCOR results in the
X-linked disorder Oculofaciocardiodental syndrome (OFCD or MCOPS2). Female OFCD
patients suffer from severe ocular, craniofacial, cardiac, and digital
developmental defects and males do not survive through gestation. BCOR can
mediate transcriptional repression by the oncoprotein BCL6 and has the ability to
reduce transcriptional activation by AF9, a known mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)
fusion partner. The essential role of BCOR in development and its ability to
modulate activity of known oncogenic proteins prompted us to determine the
expression profile of Bcor during mouse development. Identification of
independently transcribed exons in the 5' untranslated region of Bcor suggests
that three independent promoters control the expression of Bcor in mice. Although
Bcor is widely expressed in adult mouse tissues, analysis of known spliced
isoforms in the coding region of Bcor reveals differential isoform usage. Whole
mount in situ hybridization of mouse embryos shows that Bcor is strongly
expressed in the extraembryonic tissue during gastrulation and expression
significantly increases throughout the embryo after embryonic turning. During
organogenesis and fetal stages Bcor is differentially expressed in multiple
tissue lineages, with a notable presence in the developing nervous system.
Strikingly, we observed that Bcor expression in the eye, brain, neural tube, and 
branchial arches correlates with tissues affected in OFCD patients.

PMCID: PMC2002546
PMID: 17344103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Mar 1;25(7):805-12.

Immunohistochemical prognostic markers in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma:
validation of tissue microarray as a prerequisite for broad clinical
applications--a study from the Lunenburg Lymphoma Biomarker Consortium.

de Jong D(1), Rosenwald A, Chhanabhai M, Gaulard P, Klapper W, Lee A, Sander B,
Thorns C, Campo E, Molina T, Norton A, Hagenbeek A, Horning S, Lister A,
Raemaekers J, Gascoyne RD, Salles G, Weller E; Lunenburg Lymphoma Biomarker
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. d.d.jong@nki.nl

PURPOSE: The results of immunohistochemical class prediction and prognostic
stratification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) have been remarkably
various thus far. Apart from biologic variations, this may be caused by
differences in laboratory techniques, scoring definitions, and inter- and
intraobserver variations. In this study, an international collaboration of
clinical lymphoma research groups from Europe, United States, and Canada
concentrated on validation and standardization of immunohistochemistry of the
currently potentially interesting prognostic markers in DLBCL.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sections of a tissue microarray from 36 patients with DLBCL
were stained in eight laboratories with antibodies to CD20, CD5, bcl-2, bcl-6,
CD10, HLA-DR, MUM1, and MIB-1 according to local methods. The study was performed
in two rounds firstly focused on the evaluation of laboratory staining variation 
and secondly on the scoring variation.
RESULTS: Different laboratory staining techniques resulted in unexpectedly highly
variable results and very poor reproducibility in scoring for almost all markers.
No single laboratory stood out as uniformly poor or excellent. With elimination
of variation due to staining, high agreement was found for CD20, HLA-DR, and
CD10. Poor agreement was found for bcl-6 and Ki-67. Optimization of techniques
and uniformly agreed on scoring criteria improved reproducibility.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that semiquantitative immunohistochemistry for
subclassification of DLBCL is feasible and reproducible, but exhibits varying
rates of concordance for different markers. These findings may explain the wide
variation of biomarker prognostic impact reported in the literature.
Harmonization of techniques and centralized consensus review appears mandatory
when using immunohistochemical biomarkers for treatment stratification.

PMID: 17327602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int Immunol. 2007 Apr;19(4):427-33. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Bcl6 is essential for the generation of long-term memory CD4+ T cells.

Ichii H(1), Sakamoto A, Arima M, Hatano M, Kuroda Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Bcl6 plays a role in the generation and maintenance of memory CD8(+) T cells. We 
analyzed here a role for Bcl6 in the generation of long-term memory CD4(+) T
cells. Naive CD45RB(+) CD4(+) T cells from Bcl6-deficient DO11.10 (KJ1.26(+))
transgenic mice were transferred into BALB/c mice and immunized with ovalbumin
peptide and LPS. Long-term memory KJ1.26(+) CD4(+) T cells from wild-type mice
were detected in the spleen, lungs and liver during 10 weeks after immunization; 
however, Bcl6-deficient KJ1.26(+) CD4(+) T cells were vanished completely in
those organs 4 weeks after immunization. Since memory CD4(+) T cells can be
generated from effector CD4(+) T cells, properties of Bcl6-deficient effector
CD4(+) T cells were compared with those wild-type effector CD4(+) T cells 10 days
after immunization. Numbers of IFN-gamma-non-producing CD45RB(-), CD62L(+) or
IL-7Ralpha(+) effector CD4(+) T cells in the spleen, lungs and liver were similar
between Bcl6-deficient and wild-type CD4(+) T cells. However, the percentage of
apoptotic cells in Bcl6-deficient effector CD4(+) T cells was higher than that in
wild-type effector CD4(+) T cells. At the late effector phase, the number of
IFN-gamma-non-producing cells and the percentage of apoptotic cells in
Bcl6-deficient CD4(+) T cells were smaller and higher than those in wild-type
CD4(+) T cells, respectively. These data suggest that Bcl6 in CD4(+) T cells
plays a role in protection of memory precursor CD4(+) T cells from apoptosis and 
may involve in survivability of long-term memory CD4(+) T cells.

PMID: 17307796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2007 May;6(5):820-34. Epub 2007 Feb 11.

Proteomics analysis of Ring1B/Rnf2 interactors identifies a novel complex with
the Fbxl10/Jhdm1B histone demethylase and the Bcl6 interacting corepressor.

Sánchez C(1), Sánchez I, Demmers JA, Rodriguez P, Strouboulis J, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Ring1B/Rnf2 is a RING finger protein member of the Polycomb group (PcG) of
proteins, which form chromatin-modifying complexes essential for embryonic
development and stem cell renewal and which are commonly deregulated in cancer.
Ring1B/Rnf2 is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that catalyzes the monoubiquitylation of the
histone H2A, one of the histone modifications needed for the transcriptional
repression activity of the PcG of proteins. Ring1B/Rnf2 was shown to be part of
two complexes, the PRC1 PcG complex and the E2F6.com-1 complex, which also
contains non-PcG members, thus raising the prospect for additional Ring1B/Rnf2
partners and functions extending beyond the PcG. Here we used a high throughput
proteomics approach based on the single step purification, using streptavidin
beads, of in vivo biotinylated Ring1B/Rnf2 and associated proteins from a nuclear
extract from erythroid cells and their identification by mass spectrometry. About
50 proteins were confidently identified of which 20 had not been identified
previously as subunits of Ring1B/Rnf2 complexes. We found that histone
demethylases LSD1/Aof2 and Fbxl10/Jhdm1B, casein kinase subunits, and the BcoR
corepressor were among the new interactors identified. We also isolated an
Fbxl10/Jhdm1B complex by biotinylation tagging to identify shared interacting
partners with Ring1B/Rnf2. In this way we identified a novel Ring1B-Fbxl10
complex that also includes Bcl6 corepressor (BcoR), CK2alpha, Skp1, and
Nspc1/Pcgf1. The putative enzymatic activities and protein interaction and
chromatin binding motifs present in this novel Ring1B-Fbxl10 complex potentially 
provide additional mechanisms for chromatin modification/recruitment to chromatin
and more evidence for Ring1B/Rnf2 activities beyond those typically associated
with PcG function. Lastly this work demonstrates the utility of biotinylation
tagging for the rapid characterization of complex mixtures of multiprotein
complexes achieved through the iterative use of this simple yet high throughput
proteomics approach.

PMID: 17296600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Haematologica. 2007 Feb;92(2):267-8.

MUM1 expression dichotomises follicular lymphoma into predominantly,
MUM1-negative low-grade and MUM1-positive high-grade subtypes.

Naresh KN.

We investigated the expression of MUM1 (multiple myeloma oncogene 1)/IRF4
(interferon regulatory factor 4) in 46 cases of follicular lymphoma (FL) and
correlated this with grade and expression of CD10, Bcl-6 and Ki-67. The analysis 
suggests that MUM1 expression dichotomises FL into low-grade FL of
CD10+/Bcl-6+/MUM1-/Ki-67low phenotype, and high-grade FL of CD10+/-
/Bcl-6+/weak/MUM1+/ Ki-67high phenotype.

PMID: 17296585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Haematologica. 2007 Feb;92(2):176-83.

Expression of the RNA-binding protein VICKZ in normal hematopoietic tissues and
neoplasms.

Natkunam Y(1), Vainer G, Chen J, Zhao S, Marinelli RJ, Hammer AS, Hamilton-Dutoit
S, Pikarsky E, Amir G, Levy R, Yisraeli JK, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
Ilossos@med.miami.edu

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: VICKZ family members are RNA-binding regulatory
proteins expressed during embryogenesis but not usually found in normal adult
tissue. The presence of VICKZ in normal germinal centers (GC) prompted us to
characterize the expression pattern of this protein in lymphoid and hematopoietic
tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We generated a pan-VICKZ antibody that recognized all three
isoforms of VICKZ protein and screened 889 patients' samples by immunohistologic 
methods. We also analyzed the expression of VICKZ in normal hematopoiesis tissue 
by staining samples of tonsils, lymph nodes
RESULTS: VICKZ protein expression was documented for the first time in normal
human GC and in follicular (126/165), mediastinal large B-cell (9/10), Burkitt
(2/2), diffuse large B-cell (DLBCL, 155/200), lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's
(12/13), classical Hodgkin's (101/108), and anaplastic large cell (6/8) lymphomas
and in lymphoid and myeloid leukemias. Since DLBCL may derive from GC or non-GC B
cells we performed hierarchical cluster analysis for VICKZ, HGAL, BCL6, CD10,
MUM1/IRF4 and BCL2 which showed that VICKZ is expressed in both subtypes. In
addition, VICKZ mRNA isoforms were differentially expressed in lymphoma subtypes 
and over 40% of DLBCL expressed hVICKZ2, an isoform not usually present in normal
GC B cells.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: We show that in normal lymphoid tissues VICKZ is 
expressed in GC lymphocytes but in lymphoid neoplasms its expression is not
limited to GC-derived lymphoma subtypes. However, VICKZ exhibits differential
expression in lymphoma subtypes and thus may be a marker of potential value in
the diagnosis and study of hematopoietic neoplasia. The aberrant expression of
its isoforms in DLBCL raises the possibility that these isoforms may be
associated with different functions and suggests that further study of their role
in normal and neoplastic lymphoid cells is warranted.

PMID: 17296566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Pathol Int. 2007 Mar;57(3):148-52.

Bcl2-negative follicular lymphomas frequently have Bcl6 translocation and/or Bcl6
or p53 expression.

Guo Y(1), Karube K, Kawano R, Suzumiya J, Takeshita M, Kikuchi M, Huang GS, Li Q,
Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka,
Japan.

Bcl2 is an important protein involved in the pathogenesis of follicular lymphoma 
(FL). However, approximately 10% of FL cases do not express Bcl2. The present
study was designed to compare gene aberrations, prosurvival gene expression,
apoptosis and proliferation rates in Bcl2-positive and -negative FL cases. Bcl2
translocation and Bcl6 translocation were detected and compared using
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). A tendency for Bcl6 translocation to
occur was found more frequently in Bcl2-negative FL than in the Bcl2-positive
cases. The expression of Bcl-X, BAX, p53, Bcl6 was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry. Bcl2 family proteins Bcl-X and BAX were expressed similarly
in the two FL types. In some cases of Bcl2-negative FL there was high expression 
of Bcl6 or p53 but no such Bcl2-positive FL cases were detected. Furthermore,
there was an inverse relationship between the expression of Bcl6 and p53. These
results indicate that the Bcl6 translocation occurs more frequently in
Bcl2-negative FL. Furthermore, other prosurvival proteins such as p53 and Bcl6
may play an important role in the pathogenesis of Bcl2-negative FL.

PMID: 17295647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Apr;56(4):588-97. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

New prognostic relevant factors in primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas.

Hallermann C(1), Niermann C, Fischer RJ, Schulze HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Institute for Tumors of the Skin, Munster, Germany.
christian.hallermann@fachklinik-hornheide.de

BACKGROUND: There is a growing body of literature that has enhanced our
understanding of the biology of primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(PCDLBCL) including in the context of gene profiling studies. Recent studies have
demonstrated an activated proliferation profile associated with leg type lymphoma
including overexpression of proto-oncogenes PIM1, PIM2, and cMYC, and the
transcription factors MUM1 and OCT2. Although gene profiling is very useful in
understanding the molecular basis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (LBCL), it is 
not practical from a routine diagnostic perspective. In this regard, the purpose 
of the study was to further define an armamentarium of easily applied
immunohistochemical stains to accurately prognosticate PCDLBCL.
METHODS: In all, 35 patients with PCDLBCL, 14 of follicle center and 21 of leg
type, were analyzed using antibodies against CD5, CD138, BCL2, BCL6, OCT2, MUM1, 
FOXP1, and cMYC. Findings were correlated with clinical data.
RESULTS: All cases stained negative for CD5 and CD138. Both subtypes differed in 
distinct staining patterns for BCL6, BCL2, OCT2, MUM1, and FOXP1. Staining for
BCL2, OCT2, and/or MUM1 was associated with poor, and BCL6 with a favorable
prognosis. Expression of cMYC was irrespective of prognosis or subtype, whereas
ulceration or primary manifestation on the leg or multiple lesions was indicative
for worse prognosis.
LIMITATIONS: Case number was a limitation.
CONCLUSION: Discriminating PCDLBCL supports the validity of the World Health
Organization/European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
classification. To identify risk factors in patients with PCDLBCL we recommend
thorough evaluation of clinical presentation and exploratory staining pattern for
BCL2, BCL6, MUM1 and OCT2.

PMID: 17289214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Blood. 2007 Jun 1;109(11):4952-63. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

The gene expression profile of nodal peripheral T-cell lymphoma demonstrates a
molecular link between angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and follicular
helper T (TFH) cells.

de Leval L(1), Rickman DS, Thielen C, Reynies Ad, Huang YL, Delsol G, Lamant L,
Leroy K, Brière J, Molina T, Berger F, Gisselbrecht C, Xerri L, Gaulard P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Sart-Tilman, Tour de
Pathologie +1, University of Liège, 4000 Liège, Belgium. l.deleval@ulg.ac.be

The molecular alterations underlying the pathogenesis of angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified (PTCL-u) are
largely unknown. In order to characterize the ontogeny and molecular differences 
between both entities, a series of AITLs (n = 18) and PTCLs-u (n = 16) was
analyzed using gene expression profiling. Unsupervised clustering correlated with
the pathological classification and with CD30 expression in PTCL-u. The molecular
profile of AITLs was characterized by a strong microenvironment imprint
(overexpression of B-cell- and follicular dendritic cell-related genes,
chemokines, and genes related to extracellular matrix and vascular biology), and 
overexpression of several genes characteristic of normal follicular helper T
(T(FH)) cells (CXCL13, BCL6, PDCD1, CD40L, NFATC1). By gene set enrichment
analysis, the AITL molecular signature was significantly enriched in published
T(FH)-specific genes. The enrichment was higher for sorted AITL cells than for
tissue samples. Overexpression of several T(FH) genes was validated by
immunohistochemistry in AITLs. A few cases with molecular T(FH)-like features
were identified among CD30(-) PTCLs-u. Our findings strongly support that T(FH)
cells represent the normal counterpart of AITL, and suggest that the AITL
spectrum may be wider than suspected, as a subset of CD30(-) PTCLs-u may derive
from or be related to AITL.

PMID: 17284527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Feb;37(2):358-67.

CD38 cross-linking enhances TLR-induced B cell proliferation but decreases IgM
plasma cell differentiation.

Manjarrez-Orduño N(1), Moreno-García ME, Fink K, Santos-Argumedo L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biomedicine Department, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados del IPN, Mexico City, México.

It is becoming increasingly clear that the regulation of proliferation and
differentiation of B cells to plasma cells involves the integration of a variety 
of intracellular signals provided by receptors of both the adaptive and innate
immune system. The cross-linking of the surface molecule CD38 induces calcium
mobilization, protein phosphorylation and NF-kappaB translocation into the
nucleus, ultimately leading to proliferation and isotype switching toward IgG1.
Here we describe (a) the effect on B cell activation of stimulating through both 
CD38 and Toll-like receptors 4, 7 and 9; and (b) that CD38 cross-linking
increases the number of proliferating cells and the rate of proliferation in
LPS-stimulated B cells by a Bruton's tyrosine kinase- and protein kinase
C-dependent mechanism. In contrast, CD38 cross-linking reduces the number of
cells committed to IgM plasma cell differentiation as measured by the number of
CD138+ cells, antibody secretion, and the expression of PAX5, Bcl6 and Blimp-1.
Since a putative ligand for CD38 is expressed by germinal center follicular
dendritic cells, and CD38 expression is down-regulated in germinal center B
cells, we speculate that CD38 might participate in the outcome of post-germinal
center antibody responses.

PMID: 17274001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 21;26(29):4243-52. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

Global DNA methylation profiling reveals silencing of a secreted form of Epha7 in
mouse and human germinal center B-cell lymphomas.

Dawson DW(1), Hong JS, Shen RR, French SW, Troke JJ, Wu YZ, Chen SS, Gui D,
Regelson M, Marahrens Y, Morse HC 3rd, Said J, Plass C, Teitell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1732, USA.

Most human lymphomas originate from transformed germinal center (GC) B
lymphocytes. While activating mutations and translocations of MYC, BCL2 and BCL6 
promote specific GC lymphoma subtypes, other genetic and epigenetic modifications
that contribute to malignant progression in the GC remain poorly defined.
Recently, aberrant expression of the TCL1 proto-oncogene was identified in major 
GC lymphoma subtypes. TCL1 transgenic mice offer unique models of both aggressive
GC and marginal zone B-cell lymphomas, further supporting a role for TCL1 in
B-cell transformation. Here, restriction landmark genomic scanning was employed
to discover tumor-associated epigenetic alterations in malignant GC and marginal 
zone B-cells in TCL1 transgenic mice. Multiple genes were identified that
underwent DNA hypermethylation and decreased expression in TCL1 transgenic
tumors. Further, we identified a secreted isoform of EPHA7, a member of the Eph
family of receptor tyrosine kinases that are able to influence tumor
invasiveness, metastasis and neovascularization. EPHA7 was hypermethylated and
repressed in both mouse and human GC B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas, with the
potential to influence tumor progression and spread. These data provide the first
set of hypermethylated genes with the potential to complement TCL1-mediated GC
B-cell transformation and spread.

PMCID: PMC2756834
PMID: 17260020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2007 May-Jun;38(3):199-203. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

Design of antisense oligonucleotides and short interfering RNA duplexes (siRNA)
targeted to BCL6 mRNA: towards rational drug development for specific lymphoma
subsets.

Kalota A(1), Opalinska JB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Many algorithms based on computational analysis and thermodynamic parameters have
been developed to predict the secondary structure of RNA. Still, many antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides (AS ODNs), or siRNA molecules designed according to these
predictions fail to silence the intended target, whereas other, not fulfilling
those criteria prove highly active. We have developed a reliable mapping
strategy, which allows us to predict the sites accessible for hybridization
within target mRNA in vitro and in vivo. Our mapping experiments employed
self-quenching reporter molecules (SQRMs) and were first carried out in a cell
free system, and later confirmed in vivo.

PMID: 17254814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Leukemia. 2007 Mar;21(3):515-23. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Mapping of MYC breakpoints in 8q24 rearrangements involving non-immunoglobulin
partners in B-cell lymphomas.

Bertrand P(1), Bastard C, Maingonnat C, Jardin F, Maisonneuve C, Courel MN,
Ruminy P, Picquenot JM, Tilly H.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Etude des Proliférations Lymphoïdes, Centre Henri Becquerel, INSERM
U614, IFRMP23, Rouen, France. pbertrand@rouen.fnclcc.fr

Chromosomal translocations joining the immunoglobulin (IG) and MYC genes have
been extensively reported in Burkitt's and non-Burkitt's lymphomas but data
concerning MYC rearrangements with non-IG partners are scarce. In this study,
8q24 breakpoints from 17 B-cell lymphomas involving non-IG loci were mapped by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In seven cases the breakpoint was
inside a small region encompassing MYC: in one t(7;8)(p12;q24) and two
t(3;8)(q27;q24), it was telomeric to MYC whereas in four cases, one
t(2;8)(p15;q24) and three t(8;9)(q24;p13) it was located in a 85 kb region
encompassing MYC. In these seven cases, partner regions identified by FISH
contained genes known to be involved in lymphomagenesis, namely BCL6, BCL11A,
PAX5 and IKAROS. Breakpoints were cloned in two t(8;9)(q24;p13), 2.5 and 7 kb
downstream from MYC and several hundred kb 5' to PAX5 on chromosome 9, joining
MYC to ZCCHC7 and to ZBTB5 exon 2, two genes encoding zinc-finger proteins. In
these seven cases, MYC expression measured by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was significantly higher when
compared to that of patients without 8q24 rearrangement (P=0.006). These results 
suggest that these rearrangements are the consequence of a non-random process
targeting MYC together with non-IG genes involved in lymphocyte differentiation
and lymphoma progression.

PMID: 17230227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2006 Nov;57 Suppl 7:95-110.

Age-dependent changes in bovine skeletal muscle transcriptomic profile.

Sadkowski T(1), Jank M, Oprzadek J, Motyl T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
Agricultural University, Poland.

The postnatal growth of muscle tissue occurs by hypertrophy comprising satellite 
cells proliferation, differentiation and protein turnover. The highest rate of
skeletal muscle gains and protein synthesis in bulls occurs in the period between
180 and 360 days of postnatal life. However, genes which are responsible for
quantitative and qualitative changes in skeletal muscle during this period are
not identified up to date. The aim of our study was to compare the changes in
transcriptomic profile of skeletal muscle (m. semitendinosus) in 12 Polish Black 
and White bulls between 6 and 12 month of life. For experimental purposes we used
bovine cDNA microarray (the NBFGC EST collection) which contains 18,263 unique
genes, derived from many different tissue types and various physiologically
important states within these tissues. Our results revealed 53 genes which
expression changed in the same manner depending on age of all examined pairs of
animals. Thirty two of these genes showed at least 2-fold difference in
expression between two analyzed age points. Age-dependent up-regulation was the
most pronounced in the case of following genes: similar to MAD2L1 binding
protein, similar to thymocyte protein thy28 isoform 1, similar to type I
inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate 5-phosphatase, similar to nucleoside diphosphate
kinase 6, proline rich 14, similar to transcription factor E2-alpha and
phospholipase C gamma 1. The highest age-dependent decrease of the transcript was
observed in the case of: similar to ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1,
similar to latent TGF-beta binding protein 3 precursor, phospho-mannomutase 2,
CD74 antigen, similar to BCL6 co-repressor-like 1, platelet/endothelial cell
adhesion molecule (PECAM1), necdin, zygin, tight junction protein 3, ankyrin and 
apolipoprotein-L3. Although the role of the most of above genes and interactions 
between products of their expression is not clear at the moment, the significance
of their response between 6 and 12 month of age may indicate their involvement in
growth, development and metabolic changes in bovine skeletal muscle during the
first year of postnatal life.

PMID: 17228098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Blood. 2007 Jan 15;109(2):843-4; discussion 844-5.

BCL-6 and rituximab in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: where are we?

Dunleavy K, Davis RE, Landgren O, Staudt LM, Wilson WH.

Comment on
    Blood. 2006 Jun 1;107(11):4207-13.

PMID: 17210865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Leuk Res. 2007 Sep;31(9):1191-7. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

Prognostic impact of chromosomal alteration of 3q27 on nodal B-cell lymphoma:
correlation with histology, immunophenotype, karyotype, and clinical outcome in
329 consecutive patients.

Niitsu N(1), Okamoto M, Nakamura N, Nakamine H, Aoki S, Hirano M, Miura I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Saitama, Japan. nniitsu@saitama-med.ac.jp

Rearrangements involving the BCL6 gene are found in 30% of diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCLs). We evaluated the clinical characteristics and prognoses of
patients with B-cell lymphoma carrying 3q27 translocations. Among the 59 patients
having 3q27 translocation, 10.9% had follicular lymphoma (FL) and 23.1% had
DLBCL. It is of interest that the prognostic significance was not found between
FL and DLBCL with 3q27 translocations. Progression-free survival (PFS) rate was
significantly higher in the FL patients with 3q27 translocation than in those
with 18q21 translocation. PFS rate was significantly higher in the DLBCL patients
with 3q27 translocation than in those with 18q21 translocation. These findings
suggest that the presence of 3q27 translocation is a significant prognostic
factor in DLBCL.

PMID: 17197022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Inform. 2007 Dec 12;3:399-420.

Germinal center B cell-like (GCB) and activated B cell-like (ABC) type of diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL): analysis of molecular predictors, signatures, cell
cycle state and patient survival.

Blenk S(1), Engelmann J, Weniger M, Schultz J, Dittrich M, Rosenwald A,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Müller T, Dandekar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum, Am Hubland
Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Aiming to find key genes and events, we analyze a large data set on diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) gene-expression (248 patients, 12196 spots). Applying the
loess normalization method on these raw data yields improved survival
predictions, in particular for the clinical important group of patients with
medium survival time. Furthermore, we identify a simplified prognosis predictor, 
which stratifies different risk groups similarly well as complex signatures. We
identify specific, activated B cell-like (ABC) and germinal center B cell-like
(GCB) distinguishing genes. These include early (e.g. CDKN3) and late (e.g.
CDKN2C) cell cycle genes. Independently from previous classification by marker
genes we confirm a clear binary class distinction between the ABC and GCB
subgroups. An earlier suggested third entity is not supported. A key regulatory
network, distinguishing marked over-expression in ABC from that in GCB, is built 
by: ASB13, BCL2, BCL6, BCL7A, CCND2, COL3A1, CTGF, FN1, FOXP1, IGHM, IRF4, LMO2, 
LRMP, MAPK10, MME, MYBL1, NEIL1 and SH3BP5. It predicts and supports the
aggressive behaviour of the ABC subgroup. These results help to understand target
interactions, improve subgroup diagnosis, risk prognosis as well as therapy in
the ABC and GCB DLBCL subgroups.

PMCID: PMC2675856
PMID: 19455257  [PubMed]


112. Protein Sci. 2007 Feb;16(2):336-42. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Crystal structure of the BTB domain from the LRF/ZBTB7 transcriptional regulator.

Stogios PJ(1), Chen L, Privé GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, 101 College Street,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BTB-zinc finger (BTB-ZF) proteins are transcription regulators with roles in
development, differentiation, and oncogenesis. In these proteins, the BTB domain 
(also known as the POZ domain) is a protein-protein interaction motif that
contains a dimerization interface, a possible oligomerization surface, and
surfaces for interactions with other factors, including nuclear co-repressors and
histone deacetylases. The BTB-ZF protein LRF (also known as ZBTB7, FBI-1, OCZF,
and Pokemon) is a master regulator of oncogenesis, and represses the
transcription of a variety of important genes, including the ARF, c-fos, and
c-myc oncogenes and extracellular matrix genes. We determined the crystal
structure of the BTB domain from human LRF to 2.1 A and observed the canonical
BTB homodimer fold. However, novel features are apparent on the surface of the
homodimer, including differences in the lateral groove and charged pocket
regions. The residues that line the lateral groove have little similarity with
the equivalent residues from the BCL6 BTB domain, and we show that the 17-residue
BCL6 Binding Domain (BBD) from the SMRT co-repressor does not bind to the LRF BTB
domain.

PMCID: PMC2203294
PMID: 17189472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Arch Dermatol. 2006 Dec;142(12):1561-6.

Cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia presenting as a solitary facial nodule: clinical, 
histopathological, immunophenotypical, and molecular studies.

Bergman R(1), Khamaysi Z, Sahar D, Ben-Arieh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Dermatopathology Section, Rambam Medical Center,
and the Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel. r_bergman@rambam.health.gov.il

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the clinicopathological, immunophenotypical, and
molecular characteristics of cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia presenting as a
solitary facial nodule.
DESIGN: Retrospective study.
SETTING: University dermatology department.
PATIENTS: Three patients with a solitary facial nodule were studied clinically,
histologically, immunophenotypically, and molecularly for T-cell receptor and
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangements.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Histological, immunophenotypical, and molecular
characteristics in relation to the clinical outcome.
RESULTS: Histologically, dense diffuse lymphocytic infiltrates were present
throughout the dermis, occasionally extending into the subcutaneous fat and the
epidermis and hair follicles. Small lymphocytes predominated, but in 2 cases
there were also medium to large atypical lymphocytes, with some blastlike
lymphocytes. The lymphocytic population was mixed with more CD3(+) T cells than
CD20(+) B cells, without germinal centers. There were more CD4(+) than CD8(+)
cells, and some of the T cells stained for the memory T-cell marker CD45RO.
Numerous CD68(+) histiocytes were scattered or formed small aggregates, and in 1 
case small granulomas and many scattered S100 protein-positive and
CD1a(+)dendritic cells were present. In addition, several polytypic plasma cells,
eosinophils, and extravasated erythrocytes were found. Immunostaining for CD10,
CD21, CD30, CD56, and BCL6 was negative. The Ki-67 proliferation index was
relatively low (5%-10%). Results of the T-cell receptor gene rearrangement
studies were positive in 2 cases, 1 of which also harbored clonal B cells.
Serologic test results for Borrelia burgdorferi, Borrelia afzelii, and Borrelia
garinii were negative in all 3 cases. Two lesions regressed spontaneously after
an incisional biopsy, and none of the cases showed recurrence or extracutaneous
spread during a follow-up period of 5.0 to 5.5 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia that presents as a solitary facial
nodule may share clinical, cytological, immunophenotypical, and molecular
features with both benign reactive lymphocytic infiltrates and cutaneous
lymphomas, and therefore a careful clinical and therapeutic approach is
warranted.

PMID: 17178981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jan 1;172(1):70-3.

A novel t(2;3)(p11;q27) in a case of follicular lymphoma.

Tapinassi C(1), Micucci C, Lahortiga I, Malazzi O, Gasparini P, Gorosquieta A,
Odero MD, Belloni E.

Author information: 
(1)IFOM, FIRC Institute for Molecular Oncology Foundation, Via Adamello 16, 20139
Milan, Italy.

Rearrangement of the BCL6 gene is found in follicular lymphomas and in diffuse
large B cell lymphomas of follicular center cell origin. The breakpoints cluster 
mainly in a region spanning the first noncoding exon of the gene (the major
breakpoint region). A second breakpoint cluster has also been identified upstream
of the first BCL6 noncoding exon (the alternative breakpoint region [ABR]). To
date, eight different rearrangements involving the ABR have been reported. Here, 
we describe a novel rearrangement involving a t(2;3)(p11;q27) translocation that 
affects the ABR in an unusual combination with the IGK locus.

PMID: 17175383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jan 1;172(1):45-53.

A novel t(3;8)(q27;q24.1) simultaneously involving both the BCL6 and MYC genes in
a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Wang HY(1), Bossler AD, Schaffer A, Tomczak E, DiPatri D, Frank DM, Nowell PC,
Bagg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Hospital 
of the University of Pennsylvania, 7.103 Founders Pavilion, 3400 Spruce Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19014-4284, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) are a clinically and biologically
heterogeneous group of hematologic malignancies. Specific genetic aberrations
underlie some of this heterogeneity. These genetic events include distinct and
separate translocations resulting in the dysregulated expression of either BCL6
protein with the t(3;14)(q27;q32) or c-MYC protein with the t(8;14)(q24;q32), as 
a consequence of the juxtaposition of these oncogenes with heterologous promoters
or enhancers, such as those of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene. Here, we
report the case of a patient with DLBCL with a unique t(3;8)(q27;q24.1) that
involves the BCL6 and MYC genes. We know of no previous report of this
translocation in DLBCL, which simultaneously affects two key genes implicated in 
lymphomagenesis and may reflect a novel genetic mechanism in neoplastic
transformation.

PMID: 17175379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Dec;47(12):2655-6.

Concurrent rearrangement of BCL1 and BCL6 with a single immunoglobulin locus in a
case of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Ní Ainle F, Hayden PJ, Crosby P, Murphy K, McCarthy D, Kelly J, Neat MJ.

PMID: 17169813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Virol. 2007 Mar;81(5):2274-82. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

EBNA2 interferes with the germinal center phenotype by downregulating BCL6 and
TCL1 in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma cells.

Boccellato F(1), Anastasiadou E, Rosato P, Kempkes B, Frati L, Faggioni A,
Trivedi P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Department of Experimental
Medicine and Pathology, University of Rome La Sapienza, Viale Regina Elena 324,
00161 Rome, Italy.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-negative diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and
Burkitt lymphoma-derived cell lines infected in vitro with a recombinant EBV
expressed type II/III latency. High expression of EBNA2 inversely correlated with
expression of germinal center (GC)-associated genes, BCL6 and TCL1. The decreased
expression of BCL6 appeared to be dose dependent, with almost complete abrogation
in highly EBNA2-expressing clones. The role of EBNA2 in negative regulation of
these genes was confirmed by transfection and in a hormone-inducible EBNA2 cell
system. LMP1 transfection reduced expression of TCL1, but not of BCL6, in DLBCLs.
The GC-associated gene repression was at the transcriptional level and CBF1
independent. A decrease in HLA-DR, surface immunoglobulin M, and class II
transactivator expression and an increase in CCL3, a BCL6 repression target, was 
observed in EBNA2-expressing clones. Since BCL6 is indispensable for GC formation
and somatic hypermutations (SHM), we suggest that the previously reported lack of
SHM seen in EBNA2-expressing GC cells from infectious mononucleosis tonsils could
be due to negative regulation of BCL6 by EBNA2. These findings suggest that EBNA2
interferes with the GC phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1865942
PMID: 17151114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2006 Nov;46(2):43-53.

Pathogenetic and clinical implications of non-immunoglobulin ; BCL6
translocations in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Ohno H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Takeda General Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations affecting band 3q27, where BCL6 gene is located, are
among the most common genetic abnormalities in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of B-cell
type (B-NHL). The BCL6 gene encodes a BTB/POZ zinc finger transcription factor,
which exerts repressive activity by recruiting corepressor molecules. The
3q27/BCL6 translocation is unique in that it can involve not only immunoglobulin 
(Ig) genes but also non-Ig chromosomal loci as a partner. To date, around 20
non-Ig partner genes have been identified. As a result of non-Ig ; BCL6
translocations, many types of regulatory sequences of each partner gene
substitute for the 5' untranslated region of BCL6, and the rearranged BCL6 comes 
under the control of the replaced promoter. The introduction of non-Ig ; BCL6
constructs into transformed cells led to high-level Bcl-6 protein expression in
the nucleus, while BCL6 mRNA levels in clinical materials of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) with non-Ig ; BCL6 translocations were unexpectedly low. A
comparative study suggested that non-Ig ; BCL6 translocation and a low level of
BCL6 mRNA expression are concordant indicators of a poor clinical outcome in
cases of DLBCL. The coexistence of a non-Ig ; BCL6 translocation with t(14 ;
18)(q32 ; q21) in a single clone did not significantly affect the clinical
features of follicular lymphoma. The pathogenetic and clinical implications of
non-Ig ; BCL6 translocations in B-NHL subtypes may not be identical to those of
Ig ; BCL6.

PMID: 17142954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Blood. 2007 Apr 1;109(7):3076-9.

CD10-MUM1+ follicular lymphoma lacks BCL2 gene translocation and shows
characteristic biologic and clinical features.

Karube K(1), Guo Y, Suzumiya J, Sugita Y, Nomura Y, Yamamoto K, Shimizu K,
Yoshida S, Komatani H, Takeshita M, Kikuchi M, Nakamura N, Takasu O, Arakawa F,
Tagawa H, Seto M, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Xijing
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shannxi, People's Republic
of China. karube1975@yahoo.co.jp

CD10 and MUM1 are representative B cell differentiation markers. Follicular
lymphoma (FL) is usually positive for CD10 and negative for MUM1. In this study, 
however, we compared 22 FLs with peculiar phenotype CD10-MUM1+ with 119 typical
CD10+MUM1- FLs. All CD10-MUM1+ FL patients exhibited follicular structure with
follicular dendritic meshwork, and a high rate of somatic hypermutation and
ongoing mutation, similar to typical FL. However, CD10-MUM1+ FLs were encountered
frequently in the elderly compared with CD10+MUM1- typical FLs (67.0 versus 58.7 
years, P < .01), showed high grade (grade 3A or 3B) morphology (91% versus 17%, P
< .001), diffuse proliferation (59% vs 19%, P < .001), and lacked BCL2/IGH
translocation (5% versus 92.5%, P < .001), which is the most characteristic
aberration in FL, and 88% showed BCL6 gene abnormalities (translocation or
amplification). Our results indicate that CD10-MUM1+ FL is different from typical
FL with respect to biologic and clinical features.

PMID: 17138820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Hum Pathol. 2007 Feb;38(2):365-72. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization is more sensitive than BIOMED-2
polymerase chain reaction protocol in detecting IGH-BCL2 rearrangement in both
fixed and frozen lymph node with follicular lymphoma.

Belaud-Rotureau MA(1), Parrens M, Carrere N, Turmo M, Ferrer J, de Mascarel A,
Dubus P, Merlio JP.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Laboratory, CHU Bordeaux, 33604 Pessac, France.

The detection of t(14;18)(q32;q21) is advisable for the diagnosis of follicular
lymphoma (FL). In 51 patients with FL, we evaluated the applicability and
sensitivity of interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using commercially available reagents. In 23
patients, only a formalin-fixed lymph node was available. In 28 patients, both
frozen and formalin-fixed lymph nodes were evaluated. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization was found to be 100% applicable whatever the material type. With
the use of IGH-BCL2 dual-fusion, dual-color probes, t(14;18) translocation was
detected in 47 (92%) of 51 FL cases with concordant results between isolated
nuclei (n = 41) and frozen cytologic imprints (n = 28). Twenty-two
IGH-BCL2-positive cases were also studied on fixed sections with BCL2 split
signal probes showing a BCL2 split in all. Conversely, no BCL2 split was observed
in IGH-BCL2-negative cases (n = 4). Owing to DNA degradation as assessed by the
failure of control genes amplification, the applicability of PCR was found to be 
76% in fixed lymph nodes (n = 51). After exclusion of the 12 noninformative
cases, the BIOMED-2 protocol allowed the detection of an IGH-BCL2 fusion in 25
(64%) of 39 fixed specimens with 11 PCR-negative (31%) of 36 FISH-positive cases.
Even on frozen material with 100% applicability, the amplification of a BCL2-JH
breakpoint was achieved in only 20 (71%) of 28 cases with 5 PCR-negative (20%)
out of 25 FISH-positive cases. Therefore, FISH was found superior to PCR (using
BIOMED-2 protocol) in detecting IGH-BCL2 fusion. Finally, FISH individualized 4
IGH-BCL2-negative FL cases without specific histopathologic features. With the
use of split signal DNA probes, 1 case showed a trisomy of the BCL2 locus and
another displayed BCL6 and IGH breakpoints that would suggest a t(3;14). Whether 
such IGH-BCL2-negative cases are characterized by alternative oncogenetic
pathways remains to be determined.

PMID: 17134735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Dec;54(12):3774-81.

Characteristics of diffuse large B cell lymphomas in rheumatoid arthritis.

Baecklund E(1), Backlin C, Iliadou A, Granath F, Ekbom A, Amini RM, Feltelius N, 
Enblad G, Sundström C, Klareskog L, Askling J, Rosenquist R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Akademiska Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
Eva.Baecklund@swipnet.se

OBJECTIVE: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are at increased risk of
malignant lymphomas, with a correlation between RA disease severity and lymphoma 
risk, most pronounced for diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs), which also
constitute the majority of RA-associated lymphomas. DLBCLs can be further
subdivided into germinal center (GC)-like and non-GC-like subtypes, with
different cellular origins and prognoses. This study was undertaken to
investigate whether RA displays a specific association with any of the DLBCL
subtypes.
METHODS: We identified 139 patients with DLBCLs within a population-based
case-control study of 378 RA patients with lymphoma. The DLBCLs were examined for
CD10, Bcl-6, and interferon regulatory factor 4 expression patterns,
subclassified into GC and non-GC subtypes, and then correlated with clinical
parameters.
RESULTS: We found a statistically significant predominance of the non-GC subtype 
(97 patients; 70% of all DLBCLs). These patients more often had an advanced stage
of lymphoma at diagnosis and had a worse 5-year overall survival rate (16% versus
33%) compared with patients with the GC subtype. There was a strong association
with RA disease activity in both subtypes, with >70% of the GC and non-GC cases
occurring in RA patients with the highest overall disease activity scores.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that severe RA is particularly associated with
the non-GC subtype of DLBCL, and indicate a critical role of activated peripheral
B cells as the cells of origin in these lymphomas.

PMID: 17133544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Dec;36(12):3146-56.

Bcl6 controls granzyme B expression in effector CD8+ T cells.

Yoshida K(1), Sakamoto A, Yamashita K, Arguni E, Horigome S, Arima M, Hatano M,
Seki N, Ichikawa T, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

Bcl6, a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor, is important for generation 
and maintenance of memory CD8(+) T cells. Although memory CD8(+) T cells are
generated from effector CD8(+) T cells, a role for Bcl6 in effector CD8(+) T
cells is largely unknown. We show here that Bcl6 expression was transiently
induced in activated CD8(+) T cells and continuously up-regulated in effector
CD8(+) T cells. The amount of granzyme B mRNA among effector molecules produced
by effector CD8(+) T cells inversely correlated with the amount of Bcl6 mRNA in
CD8(+) T cells. Overexpression of Bcl6 in CD8(+) T cells resulted in lower
killing activity at their effector phase, supporting the reduction of granzyme B 
expression in effector CD8(+) T cells by Bcl6. We identified a putative
Bcl6-binding DNA sequence in the promoter region of the granzyme B gene. Binding 
of Bcl6 to the Bcl6-binding sequence was detected in naive CD8(+) T cells but not
in activated CD8(+) T cells by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, 
the Bcl6-binding sequence was required for Bcl6 to repress the luciferase
reporter gene expression controlled by the granzyme B promoter. Thus, the
granzyme B gene is a molecular target of Bcl6 in effector CD8(+) T cells.

PMID: 17125145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2006 Dec;14(4):369-74.

CD56-positive large B-cell lymphoma.

Weisberger J(1), Gorczyca W, Kinney MC.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-REFERENCE Laboratories, Inc, Elmwood Park, NJ 07407, USA.
jweisberger@bioreference.com

CD56 (NCAM), a neural adhesion molecule, is normally expressed on natural killer 
cells and subsets of T cells and is commonly seen on hematolymphoid neoplasms
such as plasma cell myeloma and acute myelogenous leukemia. It is uncommon in
B-cell lymphoma. From 2001 to 2003 a cohort of 20 cases of CD56 B-cell lymphomas 
was identified by flow cytometry (<0.5% of all B-cell lymphomas studied) during a
2-year period. Most (90%) expressed CD10 and 5/5 tested cases were BCL6,
suggesting a follicular origin. An extranodal disease presentation was seen in
45% and may be related to CD56 expression. These CD56 B-cell lymphomas may
represent a new subset of large B-cell lymphoma. The relationship of cells with
this antigenic profile to normal B-cell differentiation is explored.

PMID: 17122631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006 Dec;30(12):1546-53.

The incidence and anatomic site specificity of chromosomal translocations in
primary extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT lymphoma) in North America.

Remstein ED(1), Dogan A, Einerson RR, Paternoster SF, Fink SR, Law M, Dewald GW, 
Kurtin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN
55905, USA. remstein.ellen@mayo.edu

Several balanced translocations have been identified in extranodal marginal zone 
B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) but there
are few data regarding their frequency in different anatomic sites or the
frequency of translocations involving BCL6 or kappa or lambda immunoglobulin
light chain genes (IGK or IGL), particularly in patients from geographic regions 
other than Europe and Japan. One hundred thirty-three paraffin-embedded North
American primary MALT lymphoma specimens from diverse anatomic sites were studied
by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for API2-MALT1,
IGH-MALT1, IGH-BCL10, IGH-FOXP1, IGH, +/- centromeres 3, 7, 12, and 18, and a
subset (n=74) were analyzed using FISH probes for IGK, IGL, and BCL6.
Translocations were mutually exclusive and were detected in 26% of cases (17%
API2-MALT1, 5% IGH-MALT1, 3% IGH-unknown translocation partner, and 1%
IGH-BCL10). Aneuploidy was associated with IGH-MALT1 and IGH-BCL10 but only
rarely with API2-MALT1. There was striking site specificity, with API2-MALT1
showing a marked predilection for lung and intestine, and IGH-MALT1 and IGH-BCL10
occurring almost exclusively in lung. Twenty-three percent of
translocation-negative primary MALT lymphomas from diverse sites showed
complete/partial trisomy 18. No MALT lymphomas with translocations involving IGK,
IGL, BCL6, or FOXP1 were identified. This FISH panel detected cytogenetic
abnormalities in half of all MALT lymphomas, and translocations arose
preferentially in MALT lymphomas of the lung and gastrointestinal tract.
Differences in incidence and anatomic site specificity of translocations between 
North American and non-North American cases may reflect geographic variability of
infectious or other etiologic factors.

PMID: 17122510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Dec;171(2):101-4.

Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma associated with a near-tetraploid karyotype, 
rearrangement of BCL6, and a t(11;14)(q13;q32).

Rashid R(1), Johnson RJ, Morris S, Dickinson H, Czyz J, O'Connor SJ, Owen RG.

Author information: 
(1)HMDS Laboratory, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Great George Street,
Leeds, UK. rumana@doctors.org.uk

Chromosome analysis of a patient with intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVL)
revealed a complex, near-tetraploid karyotype with 83 chromosomes. Abnormalities 
included a t(11;14)(q13;q32), which was confirmed with both interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using an IGH/cyclin D1 dual-color,
dual-fusion probe set and cyclin D1 immunohistochemical analysis. Abnormality of 
3q was also evident. Interphase FISH analysis with a dual-color, break-apart
probe set confirmed rearrangement of BCL6. To our knowledge, this is the first
report of these abnormalities in IVL.

PMID: 17116487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Oncol. 2006 Dec;29(6):1561-6.

Resveratrol induces apoptosis in transformed follicular lymphoma OCI-LY8 cells:
evidence for a novel mechanism involving inhibition of BCL6 signaling.

Faber AC(1), Chiles TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA.

Resveratrol is a polyphenolic compound that exhibits anti-proliferative and
anti-inflammatory activities. BCL6, a transcriptional repressor frequently
translocated in lymphomas, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and
transformed follicular lymphoma (FL), regulates germinal center B-cell
differentiation. We report herein that resveratrol treatment of human LY8
follicular lymphoma cells leads to an accumulation of LY8 cell in G0/G1 phase and
apoptosis. Resveratrol decreased the expression of BCL6 protein, concomitant with
the increased expression of several BCL6 regulated gene products, including p27, 
p53 and CD69. In addition, resveratrol reduces Myc expression in LY8 cells. These
results demonstrate for the first time that resveratrol inhibits a BCL6-linked
pathway and suggest that loss of BCL6 expression may represent a key event
underlying the anti-proliferative activities of resveratrol on LY8 cells. The use
of resveratrol to treat aggressive lymphomas with BCL6 and/or MYC translocations 
may prove useful as an effective therapy.

PMID: 17088997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Blood. 2006 Nov 15;108(10):3623-4.

Subtype preference of the BCL6397G/C polymorphism in germinal-center and
non-germinal-center subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Berglund M, Amini RM, Book M, Rosenquist R, Roos G, Thunberg U.

PMID: 17085720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 15;177(10):6930-9.

Stages of germinal center transit are defined by B cell transcription factor
coexpression and relative abundance.

Cattoretti G(1), Shaknovich R, Smith PM, Jäck HM, Murty VV, Alobeid B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA. giocatto@gmail.com

The transit of T cell-activated B cells through the germinal center (GC) is
controlled by sequential activation and repression of key transcription factors, 
executing the pre- and post-GC B cell program. B cell lymphoma (BCL) 6 and IFN
regulatory factor (IRF) 8 are necessary for GC formation and for its molecular
activity in Pax5+PU.1+ B cells. IRF4, which is highly expressed in BCL6- GC B
cells, is necessary for class switch recombination and the plasma cell
differentiation at exit from the GC. In this study, we show at the single-cell
level broad coexpression of IRF4 with BCL6, Pax5, IRF8, and PU.1 in pre- and
post-GC B cells in human and mouse. IRF4 is down-regulated in BCL6+ human GC
founder cells (IgD+CD38+), is absent in GC centroblasts, and is re-expressed in
positive regulatory domain 1-positive centrocytes, which are negative for all the
B cell transcription factors. Activated (CD30+) and activation-induced cytidine
deaminase-positive extrafollicular blasts coexpress Pax5 and IRF4. PU.1-negative 
plasma cells and CD30+ blasts uniquely display the conformational epitope of IRF4
recognized by the MUM1 Ab, an epitope that is absent from any other IRF4+PU.1+
lymphoid and hemopoietic subsets. Low grade B cell lymphomas, representing the
malignant counterpart of pre- and post-GC B cells, accordingly express IRF4.
However, a fraction of BCL6+ diffuse large B cell lymphomas express IRF4 bearing 
the MUM1 epitope, indicative of a posttranscriptional modification of IRF4 not
seen in the normal counterpart.

PMID: 17082608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10332-8.

Chromosomal breakpoints affecting immunoglobulin loci are recurrent in Hodgkin
and Reed-Sternberg cells of classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

Martín-Subero JI(1), Klapper W, Sotnikova A, Callet-Bauchu E, Harder L, Bastard
C, Schmitz R, Grohmann S, Höppner J, Riemke J, Barth TF, Berger F, Bernd HW,
Claviez A, Gesk S, Frank GA, Kaplanskaya IB, Möller P, Parwaresch RM, Rüdiger T, 
Stein H, Küppers R, Hansmann ML, Siebert R; Deutsche Krebshilfe Network Project
Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphomas.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Human Genetics and Hematopathology, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Chromosomal breakpoints affecting immunoglobulin (IG) loci are recurrent in many 
subtypes of B-cell lymphomas. However, despite the predominant B-cell origin of
the Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells in classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL),
the presence of chromosomal translocations in IG loci has not yet been
systematically explored. Therefore, we have investigated a series of cHL for
chromosomal breakpoints in the IGH (n = 230), IGL (n = 139), and IGK (n = 138)
loci by interphase cytogenetics. Breakpoints in the IGH, IGL, or IGK locus were
observed in the HRS cells of 26 of 149 (17%), 2 of 70, and 1 of 77 evaluable
cHLs, respectively. The IG partners could be identified in eight cHLs and
involved chromosomal bands 2p16 (REL), 3q27 (BCL6, two cases), 8q24.1 (MYC),
14q24.3, 16p13.1, 17q12, and 19q13.2 (BCL3/RELB). In 65 of 85 (76%) cHLs
evaluable for an IGH triple-color probe, the HRS cells showed evidence for a
(partial) deletion of the IGH constant region, suggesting the presence of class
switch recombination (CSR). Furthermore, analyses with this probe in cases with
IGH breakpoints indicated that at least part of them seem to be derived from CSR 
defects. Our results show that chromosomal breakpoints affecting the IG loci are 
recurrent in cHL.

PMID: 17079453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):2156-64. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Gene-expression profiling of systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma reveals
differences based on ALK status and two distinct morphologic ALK+ subtypes.

Lamant L(1), de Reyniès A, Duplantier MM, Rickman DS, Sabourdy F, Giuriato S,
Brugières L, Gaulard P, Espinos E, Delsol G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U563 Centre
de physiopathologie Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse, France.

With the use of microarray gene-expression profiling, we analyzed a homogeneous
series of 32 patients with systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) and 5
ALCL cell lines. Unsupervised analysis classified ALCL in 2 clusters,
corresponding essentially to morphologic subgroups (ie, common type vs small cell
and "mixed" variants) and clinical variables. Patients with a morphologic variant
of ALCL had advanced-stage disease. This group included a significant number of
patients who experienced early relapse. Supervised analysis showed that ALK+ALCL 
and ALK- ALCL have different gene-expression profiles, further confirming that
they are different entities. Among the most significantly differentially
expressed genes between ALK+ and ALK- samples, we found BCL6, PTPN12, CEBPB, and 
SERPINA1 genes to be overexpressed in ALK+ ALCL. This result was confirmed at the
protein level for BCL-6, C/EBPbeta and serpinA1 through tissue microarrays. The
molecular signature of ALK- ALCL included overexpression of CCR7, CNTFR, IL22,
and IL21 genes but did not provide any obvious clues to the molecular mechanism
underlying this tumor subtype. Once confirmed on a larger number of patients, the
results of the present study could be used for clinical and therapeutic
management of patients at the time of diagnosis.

PMID: 17077326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Sep;47(9):1991-3.

A subtype of aggressive B-cell lymphoma with an unusual presentation of effusion 
without masses.

Kamihira S, Jiann C, Uemura A, Tsuruda K, Hasegawa H, Sugahara K, Yamada Y.

PMID: 17065024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 8;351(1):1-6. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

Structure of the POZ domain of human LRF, a master regulator of oncogenesis.

Schubot FD(1), Tropea JE, Waugh DS.

Author information: 
(1)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, P.O. Box B, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

The proto-oncogenic properties of the POK family of transcriptional repressors
BCL6, PLZF, and LRF have been well established. These proteins utilize their
amino-terminal POZ domains for multimerization and the recruitment of
co-repressors. Because LRF represses the production of the tumor suppressor
p19(Arf) (ARF), it is regarded as an attractive therapeutic target for the
treatment of many types of cancer. The crystal structure of the LRF POZ domain
reveals a high degree of structural conservation with the corresponding domains
of BCL6 and PLZF. However, striking differences between the electrostatic
properties of the BCL6 and LRF POZ domains suggest that if, like BCL6, LRF
interacts with the co-repressor SMRT, it almost certainly uses a different
mechanism to do so. These differences may also explain why LRF interacts with
BCL6 but not with PLZF. Finally, the conservation of crystal packing contacts
suggests the probable location of the interface that mediates LRF/BCL6 complex
formation.

PMID: 17052694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1636-42. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

The oncoprotein LMO2 is expressed in normal germinal-center B cells and in human 
B-cell lymphomas.

Natkunam Y(1), Zhao S, Mason DY, Chen J, Taidi B, Jones M, Hammer AS, Hamilton
Dutoit S, Lossos IS, Levy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, USA, and 
Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, UK. yaso@stanford.edu

We previously developed a multivariate model based on the RNA expression of 6
genes (LMO2, BCL6, FN1, CCND2, SCYA3, and BCL2) that predicts survival in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) patients. Since LMO2 emerged as the strongest
predictor of superior outcome, we generated a monoclonal anti-LMO2 antibody in
order to study its tissue expression pattern. Immunohistologic analysis of over
1200 normal and neoplastic tissue and cell lines showed that LMO2 protein is
expressed as a nuclear marker in normal germinal-center (GC) B cells and
GC-derived B-cell lines and in a subset of GC-derived B-cell lymphomas. LMO2 was 
also expressed in erythroid and myeloid precursors and in megakaryocytes and also
in lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemias. It was rarely expressed in mature
T, natural killer (NK), and plasma cell neoplasms and was absent from
nonhematolymphoid tissues except for endothelial cells. Hierarchical cluster
analysis of immunohistologic data in DLBCL demonstrated that the expression
profile of the LMO2 protein was similar to that of other GC-associated proteins
(HGAL, BCL6, and CD10) but different from that of non-GC proteins (MUM1/IRF4 and 
BCL2). Our results warrant inclusion of LMO2 in multivariate analyses to
construct a clinically applicable immunohistologic algorithm for predicting
survival in patients with DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC1794056
PMID: 17038524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Oct 15;170(2):152-7.

Coexistence of neocentromeric marker 3q and trisomy 3 in two different tissues in
a 3-year-old boy with peripheral T-cell lymphoma: support for a gene dosage
effect hypothesis.

Batanian JR(1), Bernreuter K, Koslosky L, Frater JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, St Louis University
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63104, USA. batanijr@slu.edu

A very small supernumerary de novo marker chromosome was ascertained during
cytogenetic diagnosis of a 3 1/2-year-old boy with peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
unspecified. The marker, which was C-band and alpha-satellite DNA negative, was
identified in the pleural effusion and involved cervical lymph node whereas the
involved bone marrow cells had trisomy 3 as a clone. The neocentromere marker was
characterized by multiple probes demonstrating an inversion duplication of the
distal portion of chromosome 3q involving the BCL6 gene. Whole or partial trisomy
3q represents one of the most recurrent chromosomal abnormalities occurring in
T-cell lymphomas, suggesting that the 3q contains a critical region for the
pathogenesis of T-cell lymphoma. Our present case showed that the critical region
may reside within the neocentromere marker 3q27~q29 in this case in particular
and revealed a different mechanism in increasing gene dosage rather than gene
disruption. In addition, this type of neocentromere is one most often reported in
constitutional cases. Here, we report its presence in cancer for the first time.

PMID: 17011987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mod Pathol. 2006 Dec;19(12):1521-7. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Primary testicular diffuse large B-cell lymphoma belongs to the nongerminal
center B-cell-like subgroup: A study of 18 cases.

Al-Abbadi MA(1), Hattab EM, Tarawneh MS, Amr SS, Orazi A, Ulbright TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
alabbadi@dmc.org

The most common type of primary testicular lymphoma is diffuse large B-cell type,
which has the potential for aggressive clinical behavior. Diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma can be further subclassified into two major prognostic categories:
germinal center B-cell-like and nongerminal center B-cell-like. Such distinction 
is made possible using the immunohistochemical expression of CD10, Bcl-6 and
MUM1. The aim of this study was to stratify primary testicular lymphoma of the
diffuse large B-cell type according to this scheme. Immunohistochemical stains
for CD10, Bcl-6 and MUM1 were performed on 18 cases of primary testicular
lymphoma of diffuse large B-cell type. Subclassification was carried out as
previously described where CD10 and/or Bcl-6 positivity and negativity for MUM1
were considered indicative of germinal center B-cell-like type and the opposite
expression as nongerminal center B-cell-like type. The proliferative activity was
determined using immunostaining with the Ki-67 antibody. Of 18 cases, 16 (89%)
were found to belong to the nongerminal center B-cell-like type. Two cases (11%) 
were classified as germinal center B-cell-like type; one had a CD10-positive,
Bcl-6-positive and MUM1-negative profile, and the other was CD10 negative, Bcl-6 
positive and MUM1 negative. The former occurred in a 38-year-old patient who was 
human immunodeficiency virus positive. All the cases expressed high proliferative
activity (> or =50% Ki-67 labeling). We conclude that most (89%) primary
testicular lymphomas of the diffuse large B-cell type belong to the nongerminal
center B-cell-like subgroup and have high proliferative activity.

PMID: 16998463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Blood. 2007 Jan 1;109(1):298-305. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Expression of the human germinal center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) protein
identifies a subset of classic Hodgkin lymphoma of germinal center derivation and
improved survival.

Natkunam Y(1), Hsi ED, Aoun P, Zhao S, Elson P, Pohlman B, Naushad H, Bast M,
Levy R, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, USA.

The human germinal-center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) gene and its cognate protein
are expressed in a germinal center (GC)-specific manner. Its expression in
classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) prompted us to address whether HGAL expression
could distinguish biologically distinct subgroups of cHL. Tissue microarrays from
145 patients treated with curative intent showed HGAL staining in 75% and was
closely correlated with MUM1/IRF4 (92%) expression. BCL6 (26%), CD10 (0%), BCL2
(31%), Blimp1 (0.02%), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) (20%) showed no specific
correlation; neither did phospho-STAT6, a key mediator of IL-4 and IL-13
signaling that induces HGAL and is implicated in cHL pathogenesis. In our study
cohort, the 5-year overall survival (OS) correlated with young age (less than 45 
years, P < .001), low stage (stage I and II, P = .04), and low International
Prognostic Score (P = .002). In univariate analysis, HGAL expression was
associated with improved OS (P = .01) and failure-free survival (FFS) (P = .05)
but was not independent of other factors in multivariate analysis of OS or FFS.
The expression of the GC-specific marker HGAL in a subset of cHL suggests that
these cHLs retain characteristics of GC-derived lymphomas. The association with
improved OS in univariate but not multivariate analysis suggests that HGAL
expression is related to known clinical parameters of improved survival.

PMCID: PMC1785075
PMID: 16954503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Sep 1;24(25):4135-42.

Prognostic impact of germinal center-associated proteins and chromosomal
breakpoints in poor-risk diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

van Imhoff GW(1), Boerma EJ, van der Holt B, Schuuring E, Verdonck LF,
Kluin-Nelemans HC, Kluin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. g.w.van.imhoff@int.umcg.nl

PURPOSE: Outcome of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with a germinal center 
B-cell (GCB) expression profile is superior to that of non-GCB DLBCL. This
conclusion is mainly derived from patients with mixed international prognostic
index (IPI) risk profiles treated with CHOP-like therapy (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone). We wondered whether the prognostic
impact of the expression profile would hold out in a homogeneous cohort of
poor-risk DLBCL patients treated with high-dose sequential therapy (HDT) and
autologous stem-cell transplantation (ASCT) as first-line therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DLBCL from 66 newly diagnosed poor-risk patients, treated
in two sequential prospective Dutch Hemato-Oncology Association (HOVON) trials,
were studied retrospectively for expression of CD10, bcl6, MUM1/IRF4, bcl2, Ki67,
and CD21+ follicular dendritic cells (FDC) by immunohistochemistry, and for the
breakpoints of BCL2, BCL6, and MYC by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH).
Lymphomas with any follicular component were excluded.
RESULTS: A GCB immunophenotype profile was found in 58% and non-GCB
immunophenotype profile in 42% of the tumors. Clinical characteristics of both
groups were similar. Complete response (CR) rate was higher in patients with
CD10+ tumors (58% v 30%; P = .03). A GCB immunophenotype profile, its
constituting markers CD10 more than 30% and MUM1 less than 70%, and bcl2 less
than 10% were each associated with a better overall survival (OS). FDC networks, 
equally present in GCB and non-GCB tumors, had superior CR (73% v 31%; P = .01), 
but disease-free survival rates were lower and there was no difference in OS
rates. None of the breakpoints had a prognostic impact on outcome.
CONCLUSION: Also in patients with poor-risk DLBCL treated with HDT and ASCT, the 
GCB immunophenotype and bcl2 expression retained a major impact on survival.

PMID: 16943530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;26(18):6880-9.

Polycomb group and SCF ubiquitin ligases are found in a novel BCOR complex that
is recruited to BCL6 targets.

Gearhart MD(1), Corcoran CM, Wamstad JA, Bardwell VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, 6-160 Jackson Hall, 321 
Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The corepressor BCOR potentiates transcriptional repression by the
proto-oncoprotein BCL6 and suppresses the transcriptional activity of a common
mixed-lineage leukemia fusion partner, AF9. Mutations in human BCOR cause male
lethal, X-linked oculofaciocardiodental syndrome. We identified a BCOR complex
containing Polycomb group (PcG) and Skp-Cullin-F-box subcomplexes. The PcG
proteins include RING1, RYBP, NSPC1, a Posterior Sex Combs homolog, and RNF2, an 
E3 ligase for the mono-ubiquitylation of H2A. BCOR complex components and
mono-ubiquitylated H2A localize to BCL6 targets, indicating that the BCOR complex
employs PcG proteins to expand the repertoire of enzymatic activities that can be
recruited by BCL6. This also suggests that BCL6 can target PcG proteins to DNA.
In addition, the BCOR complex contains components of a second ubiquitin E3
ligase, namely, SKP1 and FBXL10 (JHDM1B). We show that BCOR coimmunoprecipitates 
isoforms of FBXL10 which contain a JmjC domain that recently has been determined 
to have histone H3K36 demethylase activity. The recruitment of two distinct
classes of E3 ubiquitin ligases and a histone demethylase by BCOR suggests that
BCOR uses a unique combination of epigenetic modifications to direct gene
silencing.

PMCID: PMC1592854
PMID: 16943429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Virol. 2006 Nov;80(22):11191-9. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Epstein-Barr virus represses the FoxO1 transcription factor through latent
membrane protein 1 and latent membrane protein 2A.

Shore AM(1), White PC, Hui RC, Essafi A, Lam EW, Rowe M, Brennan P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Immunology, Henry Wellcome Research Institute,
Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, United Kingdom.
brennanp@cardiff.ac.uk

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is associated with the development of many
B-cell lymphomas, including Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin's lymphoma, and
posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease. The virus alters a diverse range of
cellular molecules, which leads to B-cell growth and immortalization. This study 
was initiated to investigate the interplay between EBV and a proapoptotic
transcription factor target, FoxO1. In this report, we show that EBV infection of
B cells leads to the downregulation of FoxO1 expression by phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-mediated nuclear export, by inhibition of FoxO1 mRNA expression, and by 
alteration of posttranslational modifications. This repression directly
correlates with the expression of the FoxO1 target gene Bcl-6 and inversely
correlates with the FoxO1-regulated gene Cyclin D2. Expression of the EBV genes
for latent membrane protein 1 and latent membrane protein 2A decreases FoxO1
expression. Thus, our data elucidate distinct mechanisms for the regulation of
the proapoptotic transcription factor FoxO1 by EBV.

PMCID: PMC1642148
PMID: 16943287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Pathologica. 2006 Apr;98(2):139-46.

[Molecular diagnosis of non-Hodgkin B lymphomas by capillary electrophoresis and 
Genescan analysis: a molecular pathology laboratory experience].

[Article in Italian]

Donisi PM(1), Di Lorenzo N, Paparella A, Riccardi M, Stracca-Pansa V.

Author information: 
(1)U.O.S. Patologia Molecolare, Dipartimento di Medicina di Laboratorio ed
Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale Civile di Venezia.

PCR protocols for immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene rearrangements
amplification make easy the NHL-B identification. In this study we analyzed PCR
products by Capillary Electrophoresis (CE) and GeneScan (GS) software, wich
offers clear advantages over the conventional methods such as agarose gels
(AGGE), characterized by hight rate of false negative and false positive results.
We suggested some criteria--not included in previous NHL-B issues--useful to a
correct analysis of results in GS. Since 2003, we collected 2,977 samples (2,770 
peripheral blood and bone marrow, and 207 tissues) for GS analysis from NHL-B
patients. At beginning PCR products were detected by both AGGE and CE. FR2 and
FR3 VH regions were amplified by PCR seminested; together with Bcl-6
"housekeeping" gene from the same sample, as marker of DNA quality and PCR
efficiency. Bcl-2/IgH and Bcl1/IgH traslocations were also analyzed for
follicular and mantle cells lymphomas respectively. Resolution and sensitivity
tests, developed with serial diluitions of clonal products in water and in DNA
from healthy individuals, showed for GS 1% of resolution limit (3% AGGE) and 0.5%
of sensitivity (5% AGGE). Our criteria for correct interpretations of results
are: a) use of "house-keeping" gene Bcl-6; b) costant reference scales for hight 
and molecular weight; c) clonal peak at least twice higher than adiacent peaks;
d) position of clonal peak (central or eccentric) as regards to policlonal peaks 
distributions. e) peaks features for oligoclonal or biallelic rearrangements
evaluation. GS is an ideal method for detecting IgH rearrangements and some
characteristic traslocations. The precise determination of the size of the PCR
product can be used for the minimal residual disease evaluation. Moreover, it
allows semi-quantitative resolution of fragments only one base different in size 
and may be more objective than gel-based methods.

PMID: 16929787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006 Aug;65(8):776-82.

Chromosomal translocations fusing the BCL6 gene to different partner loci are
recurrent in primary central nervous system lymphoma and may be associated with
aberrant somatic hypermutation or defective class switch recombination.

Schwindt H(1), Akasaka T, Zühlke-Jenisch R, Hans V, Schaller C, Klapper W, Dyer
MJ, Siebert R, Deckert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital of Cologne, Köln, Germany.

Primary central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSLs) are diffuse large B cell
lymphomas confined to the brain. Only minimal data exist on chromosomal
aberrations underlying PCNSLs. We studied 41 PCNSLs by fluorescence in situ
hybridization for breakpoints affecting the BCL6 locus in chromosomal band 3q27. 
Of 37 cases evaluable, 14 (38%) carried a breakpoint in the BCL6 locus. Two of
these showed juxtaposition of BCL6 to the IGH locus. In 4 cases, the BCL6
breakpoints were cloned using long-distance inverse polymerase chain reaction.
All breakpoints were located within the BCL6 major translocation cluster. The
translocation partners were the IGH gene in 14q32.33, the IGL gene in 22q11.22,
and the histone 1 H4I gene in 6p22.1. In the fourth case, a deletion in 3q leads 
to loss of an 837-kb fragment extending from the first intron of BCL6 to the
third intron of the lipoma-preferred partner (LPP) gene. This deletion may bring 
the BCL6 gene under the control of regulatory elements of the LPP gene or the
miRNA-28 gene located in intron 4 of LPP. DNA sequence analysis of the junctional
sequences provided evidence that aberrant class switch recombination or somatic
hypermutation may be involved in the generation of BCL6 translocations.

PMID: 16896311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Immunology. 2006 Aug;118(4):497-508.

Interleukin-5 regulates genes involved in B-cell terminal maturation.

Horikawa K(1), Takatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the
Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Interleukin (IL)-5 induces CD38-activated splenic B cells to differentiate into
immunoglobulin M-secreting cells and undergo micro to gamma 1 class switch
recombination (CSR) at the DNA level, resulting in immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1)
production. Interestingly, IL-4, a well-known IgG1-inducing factor does not
induce immunoglobulin production or micro to gamma 1 CSR in CD38-activated B
cells. In the present study, we implemented complementary DNA microarrays to
investigate the contribution of IL-5-induced gene expression in CD38-stimulated B
cells to immunoglobulin-secreting cell differentiation and micro to gamma 1 CSR. 
IL-5 and IL-4 stimulation of CD38-activated B cells induced the expression of 418
and 289 genes, respectively, that consisted of several clusters. Surprisingly,
IL-5-inducible 78 genes were redundantly regulated by IL-4. IL-5 and IL-4 also
suppressed the gene expression of 319 and 325 genes, respectively, 97 of which
were overlapped. Genes critically regulated by IL-5 include
immunoglobulin-related genes such as J chain and immunoglobulinkappa, and genes
involved in B-cell maturation such as BCL6, activation-induced cytidine deaminase
(Aid) and B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) and tend to be
induced slowly after IL-5 stimulation. Intriguingly, among genes, the retroviral 
induction of Blimp-1 and Aid in CD38-activated B cells could induce
IL-4-dependent maturation to Syndecan-1+ antibody-secreting cells and micro to
gamma 1 CSR, respectively, in CD38-activated B cells. Taken together,
preferential Aid and Blimp-1 expression plays a critical role in IL-5-induced
immunoglobulin-secreting cell differentiation and micro to gamma 1 CSR in
CD38-activated B cells.

PMCID: PMC1782313
PMID: 16895557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 2004;88:63-8.

[The spectrum of lymphoproliferations and malignant lymphoma after organ
transplant].

[Article in German]

Müller-Hermelink HK(1), Ott G, Kneitz B, Rüdiger T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universität Würzburg.

Lymphoproliferative disease in patients with organ transplantation has
increasingly been diagnosed in recent years. It is caused by immunosuppression
after organ transplantion. A large percentage of these tumors is associated with 
Epstein-Barr virus infection. The classification differentiates between early
lesions, polymorphic and monomorphic lymphoproliferations. Whereas the early
lesions are often polyclonal, the remaining groups are mostly monoclonal.
Polymorphic lymphoproliferative disease shows a wide spectrum of B-cell
differentiation, whereas monomorphic proliferations resemble sproadic malignant
lymphomas. The latter also show genetic abberations of the c-myc-, Ras-, p53- and
Bcl6-genes. With reference to the germinal center reaction, posttransplant
lymphoproliferations have to be assigned to the post-follicular activated B-cell 
type. While until 1991 only 2% of the cases of PTLD had an EBV-association, the
EBV-associated PTLD have been frequently observed in recent times and presently
constitute about 20% of the cases. EBV-negative PTLD constitute a negative
prognostic factor. Posttransplant lymphomas might also represent a model for
sporadic lymphoproliferative disease, that for example also occurs at elderly
patients.

PMID: 16892535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hum Pathol. 2006 Aug;37(8):1093-9. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Intrachromosomal rearrangement of chromosome 3q27: an under recognized mechanism 
of BCL6 translocation in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Keller CE(1), Nandula S, Vakiani E, Alobeid B, Murty VV, Bhagat G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Balanced reciprocal translocations involving chromosomal region 3q27, which led
to identification of the BCL6 protooncogene, are one of the most common recurrent
chromosomal abnormalities reported in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (B-NHL).
Cloning of the breakpoints of these translocations has facilitated the
identification of a number of BCL6 partners including immunoglobulin genes and
more than 20 non-immunoglobulin genes on almost all human chromosomes. Fusion of 
BCL6 with these genes leads to deregulated BCL6 expression because of
substitution of its promoter with that of the translocation partner. Despite the 
promiscuous nature of BCL6 translocations, intrachromosomal rearrangements of the
BCL6 gene have not been well recognized. In the present study, we present
evidence for intrachromosomal rearrangements, because of interstitial deletions
and inversions, involving region 3q27 as an overlooked mechanism of BCL6
deregulation. These rearrangements accounted for 3/20 (15%) of all BCL6
translocations occurring in B-NHL, including follicular lymphomas, diffuse large 
B-cell lymphomas, and marginal zone B-cell lymphomas, diagnosed at our institute.
In addition to confirming previously described partner loci on chromosome 3, we
also identified a novel BCL6 partner locus (3p24) that to our knowledge has not
been reported previously. Our data should help facilitate the identification of
new BCL6 partner genes, which may enhance our understanding of the clinical and
biological role of BCL6 in B-NHL pathogenesis.

PMID: 16867873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. APMIS. 2006 Jun;114(6):474-8.

T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma associated with a near-tetraploid
karyotype and complex genetic abnormalities.

de Leval L(1), Harris NL, Lampertz S, Herens C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CHU Sart-Tilman, Liege, Belgium. L.deLeval@ulg.ac.be

Cytogenetic data for T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (THRLBCL) are
scarcely available. We report here a case of THRLBCL with a near-tetraploid
karyotype and complex chromosomal aberrations, without rearrangement of BCL2 or
BCL6, and characterized pathologically by a variegated morphologic appearance
with areas resembling nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma (NLPHL).

PMID: 16856972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Haematol. 2006 Oct;77(4):318-26. Epub 2006 Jul 19.

Establishment and characterisation of two novel human KSHV- and EBV-negative
Burkitt cell lines, GAL-01 and GAL-02, from a primary lymphomatous effusion.

Thielen C(1), Herens C, Fassotte MF, Detrooz E, Drion P, Diss T, Boniver J, de
Leval L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, C.H.U. of Liège, Liege, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) is a highly aggressive mature B-cell neoplasm
comprising endemic, sporadic and immunodeficiency-associated variants. Human cell
lines constitute a very useful tool to investigate the biology of lymphoid
neoplasia. In this study, we succeeded in establishing two human cell lines,
GAL-01 and GAL-02, from a HIV-negative patient with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
-negative sporadic BL presenting as an effusion. GAL-01 and GAL-02 were
established at diagnosis and after one course of polychemotherapy, respectively. 
The in vivo effusion occurred in a very peculiar clinical setting; the patient
having a previous history of intestinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
METHODS: The morphologic, immunophenotypic and molecular genetic features of GAL 
cell lines are reported and compared with those of the parental tumour. The
findings clearly demonstrated that the Burkitt effusion did not represent disease
progression of the intestinal tumour, but represented a second primary
haematological malignancy. The in vivo tumorigenic properties of the cells were
tested by subcutaneous injection to NOD/SCID mice.
RESULTS: Both cell lines were composed of medium-sized lymphoid cells with
clumped chromatin, multiple medium-sized nucleoli and moderate amounts of
vacuolated cytoplasm. GAL cells display the phenotype and genotype of a B-cell
lineage (positive for CD20, CD79a and clonal rearrangement of Ig heavy chain),
carry the c-MYC rearrangement by t(8;22)(q24;q11) translocation and are
characterised by the expression of the germinal centre-associated antigens CD10, 
BCL6, CD38 and absent to low BCL2 expression. EBV and HHV8 were not identified
within parental tumour or in cultured cells. Subcutaneous injection of both cell 
lines to NOD/SCID mice induced tumour formation.
CONCLUSIONS: GAL-01 and GAL-02, two novel EBV-negative human BL cell lines
represent a potentially useful experimental model to study the biology of BL
possibly including the resistance to chemotherapy.

PMID: 16856916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Virchows Arch. 2006 Sep;449(3):320-7. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Overlapping morphologic and immunophenotypic profiles in small B-cell lymphoma. A
report of two cases.

Kostopoulos I(1), Cocco M, Ginanneschi C, D'Amuri A, Lazzi S, Fabbri A, Forconi
F, De Santi MM, Leoncini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece.

We present two cases of small B-cell lymphomas of particular diagnostic interest 
because the histological patterns were at variance with their immunophenotype.
One of these lymphomas, involving the gallbladder and duodenum, showed a marginal
zone lymphoma-like (MALT type) pattern of cellular infiltration with CD5
negativity but (unexpectedly) Cyclin D1 positivity. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis of this case was performed because of the aberrant
expression of Cyclin D1, and was clearly positive for the Cyclin D1 gene
translocation. The second case, occurring in a lymph node, showed the typical
growth pattern of a follicular lymphoma but it had an atypical immunophenotype,
namely, expression of Cyclin D1, CD10, and Bcl2 and focally Bcl6, accompanied by 
a lack of CD5 and CD23. The Cyclin D1 gene translocation was detected by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), whereas c-myc and Bcl2 genes
translocation were absent. Numerical chromosomal changes, which were visualized
for chromosomes 8, 11, and 18 could be correlated to the aberrant immunoprofile. 
In this context, we discuss the diagnostic value of Cyclin D1, CD5, CD23, CD10,
Bcl6 markers revealed by immunohistochemistry, as well as the significance of
detection by FISH of chromosomal translocations such as t(11;14) and t(14;18).
The question still remains as to whether such cases should be designated as
specific lymphoma entities or reported as unclassifiable and the chromosome
aberration reported.

PMID: 16847683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Pathol. 2006 Oct;210(2):163-71.

Primary testicular diffuse large B-cell lymphomas have activated B-cell-like
subtype characteristics.

Booman M(1), Douwes J, Glas AM, de Jong D, Schuuring E, Kluin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.booman@path.umcg.nl

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) constitute a heterogeneous group of
lymphomas in which germinal centre B-cell-like and activated B-cell-like subtypes
can be discerned based on pathology, clinical presentation, and gene expression
patterns. Testicular DLBCLs form an immune-privileged site-related subgroup of
DLBCLs with an unfavourable prognosis. In the present study, cDNA microarray
analysis, immunohistochemistry for CD10, Bcl6 and MUM1, and somatic hypermutation
analysis of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangements were used to
determine the subtype of primary testicular DLBCL. Immunohistochemistry revealed 
14/22 testicular DLBCLs with an activated B-cell-like immunophenotype and 8/22
with an ambiguous immunophenotype co-expressing CD10 and high levels of MUM1.
cDNA microarray analysis of these 22 and four additional cases showed a uniform
activated B-cell-like gene expression pattern for both immunophenotypes. Somatic 
hypermutation analysis of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes showed a very high
mutation load in seven cases tested, but intraclonal heterogeneity was found at
low level in only one of these cases. It is concluded that primary testicular
DLBCLs have uniform activated B-cell-like subtype characteristics despite a
number of cases showing an ambiguous immunophenotype.

PMID: 16823896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2006 Jun;3(2):141-73.

Microarray analysis of mercury-induced changes in gene expression in human liver 
carcinoma (HepG2) cells: importance in immune responses.

Ayensu WK(1), Tchounwou PB.

Author information: 
(1)Cellomics and Toxicogenomics Research Laboratory, NIH-RCMI Center for
Environmental Health, College of Science, Engineering and Technology, Jackson
State University, Jackson, Mississippi 39217, USA Email:
paul.b.tchounwou@jsums.edu.

Mercury is widely distributed in the biosphere, and its toxic effects have been
associated with human death and several ailments that include cardiovascular
diseases, anemia, kidney and liver damage, developmental abnormalities,
neurobehavioral disorders, autoimmune diseases, and cancers in experimental
animals. At the cellular level, mercury has been shown to interact with
sulphydryl groups of proteins and enzymes, to damage DNA, and to modulate cell
cycle progression and/or apoptosis. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms 
of mercury toxicity remain to be elucidated. Our laboratory has demonstrated that
mercury exposure induces cytotoxicity and apoptosis, modulates cell cycle, and
transcriptionally activates specific stress genes in human liver carcinoma cells.
The liver is one of the few organs capable of regeneration from injury. Dormant
genes in the liver are therefore capable of reactivation. In this research, we
hypothesize that mercury-induced hepatotoxicity is associated with the modulation
of specific gene expressions in liver cells that can lead to several disease
states involving immune system dysfunctions. In testing this hypothesis, we used 
an Affymetrix oligonucleotide microarray with probe sets complementary to more
than 20,000 genes to determine whether patterns of gene expressions differ
between controls and mercury (1-3 microg/mL) treated cells. There was a clear
separation in gene expression profiles between controls and mercury-treated
cells. Hierarchical cluster analysis identified 2,211 target genes that were
affected. One hundred and eighty-eight of these genes were up-regulated, among
which forty eight were significant (p = 0.001) with greater than a two-fold
change difference in the concentration range (1-3 microg/mL) of mercury-treated
cells; twelve genes were moderately over-expressed with an increase of more than 
one fold (p = 0.004). 2,023 genes were down-regulated with only forty of them
reaching statistically significant decline at p = 0.05 according to the Welch's
ANOVA/Welch's t-test. Further analyses of affected genes identified genes located
on all human chromosomes with higher than normal effects on genes found on
chromosomes 1-14, 17-20 (sex-determining region Y)-box18SRY, 21 (splicing factor,
arginine/serine-rich 15 and ATP-binding), and X (including BCL6-co-repressor).
These genes are categorized as control and regulatory genes for metabolic
pathways involving the cell cycle (cyclin-dependent kinases), apoptosis, cytokine
expression, Na+/K+ ATPase, stress responses, G-protein signal transduction,
transcription factors, DNA repair as well as metal-regulatory transcription
factor 1, MTF1 HGNC, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 5 (neuroglycan C),
ATP-binding cassette, sub-family G (WHITE), cytochrome b-561 family protein,
CDC-like kinase 1 (CLK1 HGNC) (protein tyrosine kinase STY), Na+/H+ exchanger
regulatory factor (NHERF HGNC), potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily H
member 2 (KCNH2), putative MAPK activating protein (PM20, PM21), ras homolog gene
family, polymerase (DNA directed), delta regulatory subunit (50 kDa), leptin
receptor involved in hematopoietin/interferon-class (D200- domain) cytokine
receptor activity and thymidine kinase 2, mitochondrial TK2 HGNC and related
genes. Significant alterations in these specific genes provide new directions for
deeper mechanistic investigations that would lead to a better understanding of
the molecular basis of mercury-induced toxicity and human diseases that may
result from disturbances in the immune system.

PMCID: PMC3807506
PMID: 16823088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 11;26(2):224-33. Epub 2006 Jul 3.

STAT5 represses BCL6 expression by binding to a regulatory region frequently
mutated in lymphomas.

Walker SR(1), Nelson EA, Frank DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Deregulated expression of BCL6 is a pathogenic event in many lymphomas. BCL6
blocks cellular differentiation by repressing transcription of its target genes, 
and this may promote tumorigenesis. Conversely, the transcription factor signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)5 promotes differentiation in
many systems. STAT5 upregulates a number of genes repressed by BCL6, raising the 
possibility that STAT5 and BCL6 have opposing roles in transcriptional
regulation. Therefore, we sought to determine the effects of STAT5 activation on 
BCL6 expression and function. We found that activation of STAT5 downregulates
BCL6 expression in B-lymphoma cells and other hematopoietic cell lines. We
identified two potential STAT-binding regions in the first exon and first intron 
of BCL6 that fell within regions of high inter-species homology, suggesting
conservation of regulatory function. STAT5 can bind inducibly and regulate
transcription at one of these regions, identifying BCL6 as a STAT5 target gene.
Additionally, STAT5-mediated downregulation of BCL6 results in loss of BCL6
repression of its target genes, confirming that STAT5 is a negative regulator of 
BCL6 function. The STAT5 responsive region of the BCL6 gene is mutated frequently
in B-cell lymphomas, suggesting that loss of the repressive effects of STAT5 on
BCL6 might contribute to the pathogenesis of these cancers.

PMID: 16819511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2007 Feb;55(1):73-83. Epub 2006 Jul 3.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene: a leading role during germinal center development and
lymphomagenesis.

Jardin F(1), Ruminy P, Bastard C, Tilly H.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Hématologie Clinique, Centre Henri-Becquerel, Rouen, France.
fabrice.jardin@rouen.fnclcc.fr

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a nuclear transcriptional repressor, with pivotal
roles in germinal center (GC) formation and regulation of lymphocyte function,
differentiation, and survival. BCL6 suppresses p53 in GCB-cells and its
constitutive expression can protect B-cell lines from apoptosis induced by DNA
damage. BCL6-mediated expression may allow GCB-cells to sustain the low levels of
physiological DNA breaks related to somatic mutation (SM) and immunoglobulin
class switch recombination which physiologically occur in GCB-cells. Three types 
of genetic events occur in the BCL6 locus and involve invariably the 5'
non-coding region and include translocations, deletions and SM actively targeted 
to the 5' untranslated region. These acquired mutations occur independently of
translocations but may be involved in the deregulation of the gene and/or
translocation mechanisms. The favorable prognostic value of high levels of BCL6
gene expression in NHL seems well-established. By contrast, the relevance of SM
or translocation of the gene remains unclear. However, it is likely that
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL) harboring the most frequent translocation involving
BCL6, i.e. t(3;14), are characterized by a common cell of origin and similar
oncogenic mechanisms. Several experiments and mouse models mimicking BCL6
translocation occurring in human lymphoma have demonstrated the oncogenic role of
BCL6 and constitute a rational to consider BCL6 as a new therapeutic target in
NHL. BCL6 blockade can be achieved by different strategies which include siRNA,
interference by specific peptides or regulation of BCL6 acetylation by
pharmacological agents such as SAHA or niacinamide and would be applicable to
most type of B-cell NHL.

PMID: 16815642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Acta Med Indones. 2006 Apr-Jun;38(2):72-6.

Gene rearrangements in follicular lymphoma among Indonesian.

Oehadian A(1), Koide N, Fianza PI, Fadjari TH, Sumantri R, Supandiman I, Yokochi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Internal medicine, 
Padjadjaran University, Hasan Sadikin Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia.

Comment in
    Acta Med Indones. 2006 Apr-Jun;38(2):65-6.

AIM: Gene rearrangement has an important role in the management of lymphoma. We
investigated the rearrangements of B-cell leukaemia/lymphoma 2 (BCL2), BCL6 and
Paired homeobox 5 (PAX5) genes in Indonesian follicular lymphoma (FL) patients.
METHODS: We examined gene rearrangements using various kinds of polymerase chain 
reactions (PCRs) on 24 patients' peripheral blood DNA.
RESULTS: BCL2 rearrangement was found in 58% (14 of 24 patients), 8 at mbr (major
breakpoint region), 2 at mcr (minor cluster region) and 4 at icr (intermediate
cluster region), respectively. No rearrangement in BCL6 and PAX5 was detected.
There was a significant difference in the incidence of spleen involvement between
patients with BCL-2 rearrangement and without it (50% vs. 11%, p=0.04). BCL-2
rearrangement was correlated with spleen involvement (OR=9) and anemia (OR=2.3).
CONCLUSION: BCL2 rearrangement in Indonesian FL was higher than previous reports 
from other Asia countries (58% vs. 48%, respectively). Our method using
peripheral blood DNA might be useful for the molecular diagnosis of FL.

PMID: 16799206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jul;47(7):2750-6.

Detection of the bcl-2 t(14;18) translocation and proto-oncogene expression in
primary intraocular lymphoma.

Wallace DJ(1), Shen D, Reed GF, Miyanaga M, Mochizuki M, Sen HN, Dahr SS, Buggage
RR, Nussenblatt RB, Chan CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Research,
National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20895-1857,
USA, and Department of Ophthalmology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.

PURPOSE: Primary intraocular lymphoma (PIOL) is a diffuse large B cell lymphoma
that initially infiltrates the retina, vitreous, or optic nerve head, with or
without central nervous system involvement. This study examined the expression of
the bcl-2 t(14;18) translocation, the bcl-10 gene, and high expression of bcl-6
mRNA in PIOL cells.
METHODS: Microdissection and PCR analysis were used to examine vitreous specimens
in patients with PIOL for the presence of bcl-2 t(14;18) translocations, the
bcl-10 gene, and expression of bcl-6 mRNA. A medical record review was also
conducted to determine whether the bcl-2 t(14;18) translocation correlated with
prognosis.
RESULTS: Forty of 72 (55%) PIOL patients expressed the bcl-2 t(14;18)
translocation at the major breakpoint region. Fifteen of 68 (22%) patients
expressed the translocation at the minor cluster region. The bcl-10 gene was
detected in 6 of 26 (23%) patients, whereas 4 of 4 (100%) PIOL patients expressed
higher levels of bcl-6 mRNA compared with inflammatory lymphocytes. An analysis
of clinical outcome in 23 PIOL patients revealed no significant association
between bcl-2 t(14;18) translocations and survival or relapse. However, patients 
with the translocation were significantly younger.
CONCLUSIONS: PIOL has unique molecular patterns of bcl-2, bcl-10, and bcl-6 when 
compared with other systemic lymphomas. This study lays the foundation for future
studies aimed at exploring the genotypic classification of PIOL based on the
quantitative molecular framework of gene expression profiling, with the goal of
providing useful adjuncts to the pathologic diagnosis of this complex disease.

PMCID: PMC1945012
PMID: 16799010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Nat Immunol. 2006 Jul;7(7):704-6.

IRF4 - a factor for class switching and antibody secretion.

Fillatreau S, Radbruch A.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jul;7(7):773-82.

PMID: 16785887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mod Pathol. 2006 Sep;19(9):1270-6. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Expression of B-cell transcription factors in primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma.

Hoefnagel JJ(1), Mulder MM, Dreef E, Jansen PM, Pals ST, Meijer CJ, Willemze R,
Vermeer MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.j.hoefnagel@lumc.nl

Expression patterns of eight transcription factors involved in different stages
of B-cell development were investigated in a large group of primary cutaneous
B-cell lymphomas and compared with expression patterns during normal B-cell
development. The following transcription factors were investigated: Pax-5, PU.1, 
Oct2, BOB.1, Bcl-6, Mum1/IRF4, Blimp-1 and FOXP1. Primary cutaneous large B-cell 
lymphomas, leg type showed aberrant coexpression of Bcl-6 and Mum1/IRF4 and in
addition strong expression of FOXP1. Expression of FOXP1 and Mum1/IRF4 strongly
suggests an activated B-cell type of origin. In contrast, primary cutaneous
follicle center lymphomas showed expression of Bcl-6, Pax-5, PU.1, Oct2 and
BOB.1, but not of Mum1/IRF4, Blimp-1 and FOXP1. Primary cutaneous marginal zone
B-cell lymphoma showed expression of Pax-5, PU.1, Oct2 and BOB.1, but not Bcl-6
by the neoplastic B-cells, and Mum1/IRF4 and Blimp-1 by the neoplastic plasma
cells. In conclusion, in primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma and primary
cutaneous marginal zone B-cell lymphoma expression patterns were observed similar
to their supposed benign counterparts, germinal center B-cells and postgerminal
center B-cells, respectively, which might reflect their indolent clinical
behaviour and excellent prognosis. In contrast, the activated B-cell expression
pattern in the group of primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma, leg type may
contribute to its poor prognosis and Mum1/IRF4 and FOXP1 may serve as additional 
diagnostic markers for this type of primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma.

Published online 16 June 2006.

PMID: 16778825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Jun 14;12(22):3602-8.

Roles of syndecan-1, bcl6 and p53 in diagnosis and prognostication of
immunoproliferative small intestinal disease.

Vaiphei K(1), Kumari N, Sinha SK, Dutta U, Nagi B, Joshi K, Singh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, PGIMR, Chandigarh, India. kvaiphei@gmail.com

AIM: To evaluate roles of syndecan-1, bcl6 and p53 in diagnosis and
prognostication of immunoproliferative small intestinal disease (IPSID) and to
study profiles of kappa (kappa) and lambda (lambda) light chains and IgA heavy
chain.
METHODS: The study consisted of 11 cases of IPSID and similar number of controls 
which included 11 of normal intestinal mucosa and 11 of high grade B cell
lymphoma of ileum. The parameters analyzed included clinical profiles,
biochemical and other laboratory investigations, radiologic and histological
findings including immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: All IPSID cases had demonstrable serum IgA heavy chain and heavy mucosal
plasma cell infiltration. According to Galian's histological staging, there were 
4 patients with stage A and 7 with stage B. kappa and lambda light chains were
over-expressed in 7 patients; 1 stage A patient had H pylori-positive active
gastritis and eradication of H pylori led to disease remission. Stage A biopsies 
had higher expression for syndecan-1, while stage B had higher expression for
bcl6 and p53. Syndecan-1, kappa and lambda light chains and IgA heavy chain
showed inverse relationship with bcl6 and p53. All patients were treated with
doxycycline. CHOP regime was added in 5 patients who developed frank lymphoma.
Three died of the disease due to extensive organ infiltration.
CONCLUSION: Certain immunomarkers like syndecan-1, kappa and lambda light chains 
and IgA heavy chain could be of much help in identifying early stage IPSID. Stage
B IPSID showed higher expression for bcl6 and p53 than stage A IPSID. bcl6 and
p53 expressions correlated with a more advanced disease stage and aggressive
tumour behavior.

PMCID: PMC4087578
PMID: 16773719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Blood. 2006 Oct 1;108(7):2373-83. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

High BCL6 expression predicts better prognosis, independent of BCL6 translocation
status, translocation partner, or BCL6-deregulating mutations, in gastric
lymphoma.

Chen YW(1), Hu XT, Liang AC, Au WY, So CC, Wong ML, Shen L, Tao Q, Chu KM, Kwong 
YL, Liang RH, Srivastava G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

To investigate the role of BCL6 in the pathogenesis of gastric lymphoma, we
analyzed the BCL6 promoter region for BCL6 translocations, somatic
hypermutations, and deregulating mutations in 43 gastric lymphomas, including 4
extranodal marginal-zone B-cell lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues
(MALT lymphomas), 33 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs), and 6 composite
DLBCLs with residual MALT lymphoma (DLCLMLs). BCL6 promoter substitutions by
immunoglobulin (Ig) and non-Ig translocation partners, resulting in its
deregulation, were frequently involved in DLBCL (36.4%) and DLCLML (50%). Two
novel BCL6 translocation partner genes, 28S rRNA and DMRT1, and a new BCL6
translocation breakpoint in intron 2 were also identified. Deregulating mutations
were found only in DLBCL (24.2%), which correlated significantly with high BCL6
protein expression. Significantly, high BCL6 expression correlated strongly with 
longer overall survival (OS), independent of mechanism in gastric DLBCL and
DLCLML. Gastric DLBCLs were further subclassified into germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB) and non-GCB subgroups immunohistochemically. High BCL6
expression was detected in all GCB cases, irrespective of BCL6 genetic
alterations. In the non-GCB subgroup, BCL6-deregulating mutations correlated
significantly with high BCL6 expression level. No significant correlation was
found between the BCL6 expression level and OS in the non-GCB subgroup, which had
significantly poorer prognosis than the GCB subgroup.

PMID: 16772602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Jul 1;168(1):69-72.

A subtle t(3;8) results in plausible juxtaposition of MYC and BCL6 in a child
with Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia and ataxia-telangiectasia.

Sandlund JT(1), Kastan MB, Kennedy W, Behm F, Entrekin E, Pui CH, Kalwinsky DT,
Raimondi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 
North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. john.sandlund@stjude.org

Translocations involving 3q27 that affect the BCL6 gene are common and specific
chromosomal abnormalities in B-cell precursor non-Hodgkin lymphoma (mainly
diffuse large-cell and follicular lymphoma), but they have not been reported in
Burkitt lymphoma. Here, we describe a case in which a BCL6 rearrangement and
additional complex cytogenetic abnormalities occurred in a child with Burkitt
lymphoma/leukemia and ataxia-telangiectasia. Although cytogenetic analysis of the
bone marrow revealed clonal abnormalities of chromosome arms 8q and 14p and other
subclonal abnormalities, the t(8;14) or its variants typically associated with
Burkitt lymphoma were not observed. Fluorescence in situ hybridization with
locus-specific probes and multicolor spectral karyotyping demonstrated a complex 
pattern of chromosomal rearrangements leading to a subtle t(3;8)(q27;q24.1) that 
rearranged BCL6 and placed it adjacent to MYC. We speculate that this genetic
lesion occurred as a result of chromosomal instability due to the underlying
disease.

PMID: 16772123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nat Immunol. 2006 Jul;7(7):773-82. Epub 2006 Jun 11.

Transcription factor IRF4 controls plasma cell differentiation and class-switch
recombination.

Klein U(1), Casola S, Cattoretti G, Shen Q, Lia M, Mo T, Ludwig T, Rajewsky K,
Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology and Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jul;7(7):704-6.

B cells producing high-affinity antibodies are destined to differentiate into
memory B cells and plasma cells, but the mechanisms leading to those
differentiation pathways are mostly unknown. Here we report that the
transcription factor IRF4 is required for the generation of plasma cells.
Transgenic mice with conditional deletion of Irf4 in germinal center B cells
lacked post-germinal center plasma cells and were unable to differentiate memory 
B cells into plasma cells. Plasma cell differentiation required IRF4 as well as
the transcriptional repressor Blimp-1, which both acted 'upstream' of the
transcription factor XBP-1. In addition, IRF4-deficient B cells had impaired
expression of activation-induced deaminase and lacked class-switch recombination,
suggesting an independent function for IRF4 in this process. These results
identify IRF4 as a crucial transcriptional 'switch' in the generation of
functionally competent plasma cells.

PMID: 16767092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cancer Cell. 2006 Jun;9(6):435-43.

Specific activation of microRNA-127 with downregulation of the proto-oncogene
BCL6 by chromatin-modifying drugs in human cancer cells.

Saito Y(1), Liang G, Egger G, Friedman JM, Chuang JC, Coetzee GA, Jones PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90089, USA.

Expression profiling of T24 cells revealed that 17 out of 313 human miRNAs were
upregulated more than 3-fold by simultaneous treatment with the
chromatin-modifying drugs 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and 4-phenylbutyric acid. One of
these, miR-127, is embedded in a CpG island and is highly induced from its own
promoter after treatment. miR-127 is usually expressed as part of a miRNA cluster
in normal cells but not in cancer cells, suggesting that it is subject to
epigenetic silencing. In addition, the proto-oncogene BCL6, a potential target of
miR-127, was translationally downregulated after treatment. These results suggest
that DNA demethylation and histone deacetylase inhibition can activate expression
of miRNAs that may act as tumor suppressors.

PMID: 16766263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Hematol. 2006 May;83(4):331-6.

Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma: a single-center study of
clinicopathologic characteristics.

Kolonic SO(1), Dzebro S, Kusec R, Planinc-Peraica A, Dominis M, Jaksic B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Merkur University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia. 
ostojic@net.hr

Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMLBCL) is a subset of LBCL with
unique clinicopathologic features. Some studies have raised the question of
differences in biological features and clinical course among patients from
different parts of the world. We conducted a retrospective clinicopathologic
analysis of 24 patients with PMLBCL from a single center in Croatia. We also
conducted the first investigation of the frequency of lymphotropic viruses human 
herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) and HHV-8 in lymphoid lesions of this disease. The clinical
characteristics of the patients were as expected, with high International
Prognostic Index scores, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels, and
bulky disease being adverse prognostic factors. Only 6 patients (25%) showed CD30
expression, and Bcl-6 protein expression was, in our series, prognostically
favorable (P = .0401). One patient's tumor had detectable HHV-6 genome sequence, 
but no HHV-8 sequences were detected in any tumors. Two thirds of the patients
received CHOP chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunomycin, vincristine, and
prednisone) with a relatively low complete remission rate (43.8%; median
follow-up, 33.8 months). This study confirmed the moderate preponderance among
PMLBCL patients of young females with B symptoms and elevated LDH levels. The
CHOP regimen proved effective as first-line therapy only in patients with limited
disease. Therefore, other third-generation chemotherapy protocols may be
considered for treatment, especially in patients with bulky and advanced disease.

PMID: 16757434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hum Pathol. 2006 Jun;37(6):742-8.

High frequency and strong prognostic relevance of O6-methylguanine DNA
methyltransferase silencing in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas from the Middle
East.

Al-Kuraya K(1), Narayanappa R, Siraj AK, Al-Dayel F, Ezzat A, El Solh H,
Al-Jommah N, Sauter G, Simon R.

Author information: 
(1)King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia.

Several clinically relevant molecular classifiers of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) have recently been demonstrated in Western populations. However,
substantial molecular differences have recently been shown between tumors derived
from different ethnic groups. To investigate prevalence and interrelationship of 
recently suggested molecular prognostic markers in Middle East DLBCL, we analyzed
coexpression of CD10/Bcl6 (by immunohistochemistry), t(14;18) translocations (by 
fluorescence in situ hybridization), and methylation of the gene encoding the DNA
repair enzyme O(6)-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) in a series of 190 
DLBCL patients from Saudi Arabia with clinical follow-up data. Coexpression of
CD10/Bcl6 (germinal center-like immunophenotype) was found in 13%, t(14;18)
translocations in 17.9%, and MGMT methylation in 75.9% of cases. There was a
trend toward better prognosis (although statistically insignificant) in tumors
with coexpression of CD10/Bcl6. MGMT methylation were significantly related to
good prognosis. The combined analysis of both parameters revealed that MGMT
methylation was independent of immunophenotype and remained a significant
predictor of prognosis in nongerminal center-like DLBCL subgroup. t(14;18) was
significantly associated with CD10/Bcl6 coexpression (46.7%) but infrequent in
CD10-/Bcl6-negative lymphomas (9.4%; P = .0073). However, t(14;18) was unrelated 
to clinical outcome. In summary, our data suggest a strong prognostic importance 
of MGMT methylation independent of DLBCL immunophenotype. Based on previous data 
from Western patients, the rate of MGMT hypermethylation was higher, and the
portion of germinal center-like DLBCL was lower than expected. These results
provide evidence for molecular differences between Saudi Arabian and Western
DLBCL.

PMID: 16733216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Hum Pathol. 2006 Jun;37(6):675-83.

BCL6 alternative breakpoint region break and homozygous deletion of 17q24 in the 
nodular lymphocyte predominance type of Hodgkin's lymphoma-derived cell line DEV.

Atayar C(1), Kok K, Kluiver J, Bosga A, van den Berg E, van der Vlies P, Blokzijl
T, Harms G, Davelaar I, Sikkema-Raddatz B, Martin-Subero JI, Siebert R, Poppema
S, van den Berg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Centre
Groningen and University of Groningen 9700 RB, The Netherlands.

DEV is the only cell line derived from nodular lymphocyte predominance type of
Hodgkin's lymphoma (NLPHL); however, a comprehensive report about the genetic and
immunophenotypic profile of this unique cell line is lacking. We analyzed DEV
with respect to immunophenotype and genetic aberrations. The immunostaining
revealed positivity for CD45, CD20, CD22, CD79a, IgA2, CD80, CD86, CD74, and
BCL6. Cytogenetically, DEV has complex chromosome 3 translocations involving
chromosomes 7, 14, and 22. A detailed analysis of the 3q27 breakpoint of the
der(3)t(3;14)(p14;q32)t(3;22)(q27;q11.2) revealed a break in the BCL6 alternative
breakpoint region. Using array comparative genomic hybridization, a 3-megabase
homozygous deletion at 17q24.1-24.2 was identified. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization indicated the presence of 2 chromosome 17 homologues, each of which
carried a small interstitial deletion. Eight microsatellite markers flanking the 
homozygously deleted region all showed a homozygous pattern suggesting loss of
one of the parental alleles. D17S1809 and D17S1816 could not be amplified using
DEV DNA, in keeping with a location within the homozygously deleted segment. In
conclusion, DEV has an immunophenotype that is consistent with the neoplastic
cells of NLPHL cases, the lymphocytic and histiocytic cells. We demonstrated
involvement of the BCL6 gene based on the presence of a breakpoint in the
alternative breakpoint region and nuclear staining for BCL6 protein and
identified a homozygously deleted region at 17q24.

PMID: 16733207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Blood. 2006 Sep 15;108(6):2006-12. Epub 2006 May 25.

Association of Ig/BCL6 translocations with germinal center B lymphocytes in human
lymphoid tissues: implications for malignant transformation.

Yang X(1), Lee K, Said J, Gong X, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Hart and Louise Lyon Immunology Laboratory, Division of Clinical Immunology,
Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California-Los Angeles, 10833 Le Conte Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1680, USA.

Chromosomal translocations (CTs) between immunoglobulin (Ig) genes and the BCL6
proto-oncogene are frequently associated with diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
(DLBCLs) and follicular lymphomas (FLs) and are implicated in the development of 
these lymphomas. However, whether Ig/BCL6 translocation per se is sufficient to
drive malignant transformation is not clear. To understand the biology of
Ig/BCL6-translocated cells prior to their malignant transformation, we developed 
a system capable of detecting 1 to 3 Igmu/BCL6 CT cells in 1 million mixed cells 
through the detection of chimeric Imu-BCL6E2 and BCL6E1-Cmu1 transcripts that
reflect reciprocal Igmu/BCL6 translocations. The chimeric transcripts that
existed in the vast majority of normal lymphoid tissues are due to Igmu/BCL6 CT
and were not generated from trans-splicing. Both Imu-BCL6E2 and BCL6E1-Cmu1
transcripts were coexpressed in the same cell populations. The Ig/BCL6
recombination junctions themselves were isolated from B-cell subpopulations
expressing the Imu-BCL6 transcripts. The appearance of Igmu/BCL6 CT was
associated with cells expressing germinal center but not naive B-cell markers.
This study shows that Ig/BCL6 translocations occur in germinal center-stage B
cells in healthy humans, and that Ig/BCL6 CTs per se are not likely sufficient to
cause the malignant transformation in the context of human B cells.

PMCID: PMC1895534
PMID: 16728698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Histopathology. 2006 Jun;48(7):880-1.

Burkitt lymphoma and Leishmaniasis in the same tissue sample in an AIDS patient.

Boutros N, Hawkins D, Nelson M, Lampert IA, Naresh KN.

PMID: 16722944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cancer. 2006 May 16;5:18.

Functional studies of BCL11A: characterization of the conserved BCL11A-XL splice 
variant and its interaction with BCL6 in nuclear paraspeckles of germinal center 
B cells.

Liu H(1), Ippolito GC, Wall JK, Niu T, Probst L, Lee BS, Pulford K, Banham AH,
Stockwin L, Shaffer AL, Staudt LM, Das C, Dyer MJ, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, 1 University Station, A5000, University of Texas, Austin,
Texas 78712, USA. hui.liu@zimmer.com

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal aberrations of BCL11A at 2p16.1 have been reported in a
variety of B-cell malignancies and its deficiency in mice leads to a profound
block in B-cell development.
RESULTS: Alternative pre-mRNA splicing of BCL11A produces multiple isoforms
sharing a common N-terminus. The most abundant isoform we have identified in
human lymphoid samples is BCL11A-XL, the longest transcript produced at this
locus, and here we report the conservation of this major isoform and its
functional characterization. We show that BCL11A-XL is a DNA-sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor that associates with itself and with other BCL11A
isoforms, as well as with the BCL6 proto-oncogene. Western blot data for
BCL11A-XL expression coupled with data previously published for BCL6 indicates
that these genes are expressed abundantly in germinal-center-derived B cells but 
that expression is extinguished upon terminal differentiation to the plasma cell 
stage. Although BCL11A-XL/BCL6 interaction can modulate BCL6 DNA binding in
vitro, their heteromeric association does not alter the homomeric transcriptional
properties of either on model reporter activity. BCL11A-XL partitions into the
nuclear matrix and colocalizes with BCL6 in nuclear paraspeckles.
CONCLUSION: We propose that the conserved N-terminus of BCL11A defines a
superfamily of C2HC zinc-finger transcription factors involved in hematopoietic
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC1526750
PMID: 16704730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int Immunol. 2006 Jul;18(7):1079-89. Epub 2006 May 15.

JunD/AP-1 and STAT3 are the major enhancer molecules for high Bcl6 expression in 
germinal center B cells.

Arguni E(1), Arima M, Tsuruoka N, Sakamoto A, Hatano M, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The Bcl6 proto-oncogene, which encodes a transcriptional repressor, is
ubiquitously expressed and predominantly in germinal center (GC) B cells.
Although the promoter region of the human Bcl6 gene has been reported, enhancer
molecules for its high expression in GC B cells were largely unknown. Here we
show that transcriptional start sites of the murine Bcl6 gene were different from
the reported human one. DNA sequence around the new promoter region is highly
conserved between mice and humans and has no canonical TATA or CCAAT box. Two
AP-1-binding elements in the promoter region were the major enhancer elements in 
GC-derived B lymphoma cells, and JunD/AP-1 was detected in GC B cells. In
addition, we identified the silencer region with three Bcl6-binding elements
around the start site. Bcl6 bound to the silencer elements and its
over-expression repressed the promoter activity through the elements. Activated
STAT factors (STATs), especially activated STAT3, also bound to the silencer
elements in GC B cells and competed with Bcl6 for the binding, suggesting that
JunD/AP-1 and activated STATs drive high Bcl6 expression in GC B cells. Since
stimulation of splenic B cells with IL-4 or IL-21 induced high Bcl6 expression
with induction of junD and activation of STATs, these cytokines may be inducers
for its high expression in GC B cells. However, IL-21 but not IL-4 stimulation
activated STAT3 in splenic B cells. Thus, IL-21 may be a major inducer for high
Bcl6 expression in GC B cells.

PMID: 16702165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jul;19(7):963-73. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Clinicopathologic implications of tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-1-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Choi JW(1), An JS, Lee JH, Lee ES, Kim KH, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biostatistics Interest Group, Korea University
Ansan Hospital, Ansan, Republic of Korea.

The tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) is a stromal factor that
promotes plasmablastic differentiation, and the survival of germinal center
B-cells. The expression of TIMP-1 is known to be correlated with a subset of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma at the mRNA level, and Epstein-Barr virus infection in
vitro. To characterize TIMP-1(+) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, TIMP-1 expression
was investigated in tissue microarrays from 182 cases of de novo diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma and compared with prognostic factors, immunophenotypes, and
Epstein-Barr virus infection status. TIMP-1 was expressed not only in tumor cells
themselves, in 14 of 182 cases (8%), designated as TIMP-1(+) diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, but also in stromal cells like fibroblasts and endothelial cells. In
univariate analysis and hierarchical clustering, our findings suggest that TIMP-1
expression may represent a distinct subgroup. In multivariate analysis, TIMP-1(+)
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (n=14) was associated with unfavorable outcomes
compared to TIMP-1(-) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (n=168) (odds ratio=2.5,
P=0.049). Together with TIMP-1 expression, age (greater than 60 years), the
presence of B-symptoms, abnormal lactate dehydrogenase level, or more advanced
stage (III/IV) was correlated with a poor overall survival. However, TIMP-1
expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was not correlated with other
prognostic factors including: clinical stage, international prognostic index
score, and nongerminal center B-cell phenotype, as well as Epstein-Barr virus
infection. Our results suggest that TIMP-1 expression may be an independent
negative prognostic factor in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 16648868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Hum Pathol. 2006 May;37(5):528-33.

Molecular, cytogenetic, and immunophenotypic characterization of follicular
lymphoma grade 3B; a separate entity or part of the spectrum of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma or follicular lymphoma?

Bosga-Bouwer AG(1), van den Berg A, Haralambieva E, de Jong D, Boonstra R, Kluin 
P, van den Berg E, Poppema S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, and
University of Groningen, 9713AW Groningen, The Netherlands.
a.g.bosga-bouwer@medgen.umcg.nl

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2007 Jan;38(1):191-2; author reply 192-3.

We studied a histological homogeneous group of 29 cases with the diagnosis of
follicular lymphoma (FL) grade 3B (FL3Bs). In a previous study, we subdivided
this group in 3 subgroups based on (1) aberrations of the 3q27 region, (2) lack
of 3q27 and t(14;18), and (3) the presence of a t(14;18). In this study, we
further characterized the FL3B lymphomas that are currently part of the spectrum 
of FL in the WHO classification, taking into account other cytogenetical
aberrations, immunohistochemistry for P53, bcl2, bcl6, and CD10, rearrangement of
the proto-oncogene myc, and mutation of the tumor suppressor gene TP53. With
respect to P53, bcl2, bcl6 expression, myc rearrangement, and TP53 mutation, FL3B
represents a homogeneous group. CD10 expression and gain of chromosome 7,
considered to be typical FL markers, were more common in the FL3B
t(14;18)-positive subgroup. The lack of CD10 expression and gain of chromosome 7 
in most cases in the other 2 subgroups suggest that those cases have a closer
relation to diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 16647949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Virchows Arch. 2006 Jul;449(1):78-87. Epub 2006 Apr 22.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma with involvement of the expanded mantle zone.

Ikonomou IM(1), Tierens A, Troen G, Aamot HV, Heim S, Lauritzsen GF, Vålerhaugen 
H, Delabie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. ida.m.munster.ikonomou@radiumhospitalet.no

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) with a nodular architecture is rare. Recently, 
two variants have been described with infiltration of the B-cell follicle, one
variant that localizes to the marginal zone with a so-called perifollicular
growth pattern, and a variant that localizes to the germinal center. These
lymphomas have a CD4+ phenotype and may express Bcl-6. We have studied five
similar cases of PTCL with involvement of the B-cell follicle. However, our cases
differ from the cases previously described by their predominant and frequently
patchy involvement of the expanded mantle zone of the B-cell follicle at onset.
Later biopsies in three of the cases show diffuse infiltration of the lymph node,
without features of angioimmunoblastic TCL (AILT). All cases expressed Bcl-6 in
addition to CD4. Cytogenetics was available in four of the cases but revealed no 
recurrent chromosomal aberrations or changes associated with other types of PTCL.
No mutations of the BCL-6 gene were observed. Together, the cases seem to have an
intermediately aggressive clinical behavior. Whether our cases are part of a
spectrum of PTCLs that encompasses previously described variants with predominant
marginal zone or germinal center infiltration or they represent a separate T-cell
lymphoma type remains to be demonstrated by a study of more of such cases.

PMID: 16633785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006 Apr;30(4):529-36.

Molecular cytogenetic evidence of t(14;18)(IGH;BCL2) in a substantial proportion 
of primary cutaneous follicle center lymphomas.

Streubel B(1), Scheucher B, Valencak J, Huber D, Petzelbauer P, Trautinger F,
Weihsengruber F, Mannhalter C, Cerroni L, Chott A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna General
Hospital, Vienna, Austria.

In contrast to nodal follicular lymphoma, limited data exist on genetic changes
in primary cutaneous follicular lymphoma (primary cutaneous follicle center
lymphoma according to WHO-EORTC). The detection rate of the BCL2 rearrangement,
representing the characteristic t(14;18)(q32;q21) underlying follicular lymphoma,
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been reported to vary over a wide range
(0%-41%), and only a few cases have been studied by molecular cytogenetic
techniques such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In this study, 27
primary cutaneous follicle center lymphomas were analyzed by FISH and the results
compared with those obtained by PCR. FISH demonstrated translocations affecting
the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus (IGH) in 14 of 27 cases (52%): a
t(14;18)(q32;q21) involving BCL2 was found in 11 cases (41%), a t(3;14)(q27;q32) 
affecting BCL6 in 2 cases (7%), and in 1 case the partner gene of IGH could not
be identified. Interestingly, PCR did not detect BCL2 rearrangement in any case. 
These data suggest that the t(14;18)(q32;q21) frequently occurs in primary
cutaneous follicular lymphoma. The reason(s) why BCL2 rearrangements escape the
detection by PCR is (are) not clear but could be due to BCL2 mutations,
breakpoints outside the amplified DNA, or a high load of somatic mutations.

PMID: 16625101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 10;25(35):4947-54. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Two patterns of chromosomal breakpoint locations on the immunoglobulin
heavy-chain locus in B-cell lymphomas with t(3;14)(q27;q32): relevance to
histology.

Ruminy P(1), Jardin F, Picquenot JM, Gaulard P, Parmentier F, Buchonnet G,
Maisonneuve C, Tilly H, Bastard C.

Author information: 
(1)1Groupe d'Etude des Proliférations Lymphoïdes, Centre Henri Becquerel, INSERM 
U614, IFR23, Rouen, France.

The t(3;14)(q27;q32) is the most common translocation involving BCL6 in B-cell
lymphoma. Although this translocation was predominantly associated with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), recent studies have shown that it can also be
found in follicular lymphomas (FL), often associated with a large cell component.
To further investigate the relationship that might exist between this
translocation and the phenotype of the tumors, we studied 34 lymphomas with a
t(3;14)(q27;q32). Twenty cases were DLBCL, 14 FL and most cases, regardless of
histology, were negative for the expression of CD10 (26/32, 81%). We identified
the IGH switch region involved in the translocation for 32 cases. Our data
indicate that in DLBCL most breakpoints involve the switch mu (17/19; 89%),
whereas in FL most involve a switch gamma (9/13; 70%) (P=0.0016, Fisher's exact
test). This correlation between the histology and the structure of the
translocated allele suggests that the lymphomas with Smu and Sgamma
translocations may originate from different cells, or that the substituted
regulatory regions that come to deregulate BCL6 may affect the presentation of
the disease.

PMID: 16619046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;66(8):4368-77.

Antitumor activity of a small-molecule inhibitor of human silent information
regulator 2 enzymes.

Heltweg B(1), Gatbonton T, Schuler AD, Posakony J, Li H, Goehle S, Kollipara R,
Depinho RA, Gu Y, Simon JA, Bedalov A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

SIRT1 and other NAD-dependent deacetylases have been implicated in control of
cellular responses to stress and in tumorigenesis through deacetylation of
important regulatory proteins, including p53 and the BCL6 oncoprotein. Hereby, we
describe the identification of a compound we named cambinol that inhibits
NAD-dependent deacetylase activity of human SIRT1 and SIRT2. Consistent with the 
role of SIRT1 in promoting cell survival during stress, inhibition of SIRT1
activity with cambinol during genotoxic stress leads to hyperacetylation of key
stress response proteins and promotes cell cycle arrest. Treatment of
BCL6-expressing Burkitt lymphoma cells with cambinol as a single agent induced
apoptosis, which was accompanied by hyperacetylation of BCL6 and p53. Because
acetylation inactivates BCL6 and has the opposite effect on the function of p53
and other checkpoint pathways, the antitumor activity of cambinol in Burkitt
lymphoma cells may be accomplished through a combined effect of BCL6 inactivation
and checkpoint activation. Cambinol was well tolerated in mice and inhibited
growth of Burkitt lymphoma xenografts. Inhibitors of NAD-dependent deacetylases
may constitute novel anticancer agents.

PMID: 16618762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Immunol. 2007 Jan;44(4):494-505. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Somatic mutations and activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) expression in
established rheumatoid factor-producing lymphoblastoid cell line.

Gil Y(1), Levy-Nabot S, Steinitz M, Laskov R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Cancer Research, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Ein-Karem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transforms human peripheral B cells into lymphoblastoid 
cell lines (LCLs), allowing the production of specific antibody-secreting cell
lines. We and others have previously found that in contrast to peripheral blood B
cells, EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines express the activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AID) gene. The opposite is true for the germinal
center-specific BCL6 gene: it is expressed in adult peripheral blood B cells and 
is no longer expressed in LCLs. The present work extends our findings and shows
that whereas AID expression is rapidly induced following EBV infection, BCL6
expression is gradually down-regulated and is fully extinguished in already
established LCLs. The question of whether AID activation induces the process of
somatic hypermutation (SHM) was investigated in adult-derived LCLs. It was found 
that the VH gene from the rheumatoid factor-producing RF LCL (derived from a
rheumatoid arthritis patient), accumulated somatic point mutations in culture.
Overall, nine unique mutations have accumulated in the rearranged VH gene since
the generation of the RF cell line. Four additional intraclonal mutations were
found among 10 cellular clones of the RF cells. One out of the four was in CDR1
and could be correlated with loss of antigen-binding activity in three out of the
10 clones. Altogether, these 13 mutations were preferentially targeted to the
DGYW motifs and showed preference for CG nucleotides, indicating that they were
AID-mediated. By contrast, mutations were not detected among 3700-4000
nucleotides each of the Vlambda, Cmu and GAPDH genes derived from the same RF
cell cultures and the cellular clones. Our results thus show that AID may
generate point mutations in the rearranged Ig VH during in vitro cell culture of 
adult-LCLs and that these mutations may be responsible, at least in part, for the
known instability and occasional loss of antigen-binding activity of
antibody-secreting LCLs.

PMID: 16574227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nat Immunol. 2006 May;7(5):457-65. Epub 2006 Mar 26.

Transcriptional repressor Blimp-1 regulates T cell homeostasis and function.

Martins GA(1), Cimmino L, Shapiro-Shelef M, Szabolcs M, Herron A, Magnusdottir E,
Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 May;7(5):445-6.

The B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp-1) transcriptional repressor
is required for terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes. Here we document a
function for Blimp-1 in the T cell lineage. Blimp-1-deficient thymocytes showed
decreased survival and Blimp-1-deficient mice had more peripheral effector T
cells. Mice lacking Blimp-1 developed severe colitis as early as 6 weeks of age, 
and Blimp-1-deficient regulatory T cells were defective in blocking the
development of colitis. Blimp-1 mRNA expression increased substantially in
response to T cell receptor stimulation. Compared with wild-type CD4(+) T cells, 
Blimp-1-deficient CD4(+) T cells proliferated more and produced excess
interleukin 2 and interferon-gamma but reduced interleukin 10 after T cell
receptor stimulation. These results emphasize a crucial function for Blimp-1 in
controlling T cell homeostasis and activation.

PMID: 16565721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cancer. 2006 Mar 24;5:12.

Dominant negative retinoic acid receptor initiates tumor formation in mice.

Kupumbati TS(1), Cattoretti G, Marzan C, Farias EF, Taneja R, Mira-y-Lopez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA. tara.s.kupumbati@medtronic.com

BACKGROUND: Retinoic acid suppresses cell growth and promotes cell
differentiation, and pharmacological retinoic acid receptor (RAR) activation is
anti-tumorigenic. This begs the question of whether chronic physiological RAR
activation by endogenous retinoids is likewise anti-tumorigenic.
RESULTS: To address this question, we generated transgenic mice in which
expression of a ligand binding defective dominant negative RARalpha
(RARalphaG303E) was under the control of the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
promoter. The transgene was expressed in the lymphoid compartment and in the
mammary epithelium. Observation of aging mice revealed that transgenic mice,
unlike their wild type littermates, developed B cell lymphomas at high
penetrance, with a median latency of 40 weeks. MMTV-RARalphaG303E lymphomas were 
high grade Pax-5+, surface H+L Ig negative, CD69+ and BCL6- and cytologically and
phenotypically resembled human adult high grade (Burkitt's or lymphoblastic)
lymphomas. We postulated that mammary tumors might arise after a long latency
period as seen in other transgenic models of breast cancer. We tested this idea
by transplanting transgenic epithelium into the cleared fat pads of wild type
hosts, thus bypassing lymphomagenesis. At 17 months post-transplantation, a
metastatic mammary adenocarcinoma developed in one of four transplanted glands
whereas no tumors developed in sixteen of sixteen endogenous glands with wild
type epithelium.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that physiological RAR activity may normally
suppress B lymphocyte and mammary epithelial cell growth and that global RAR
inactivation is sufficient to initiate a stochastic process of tumor development 
requiring multiple transforming events. Our work makes available to the research 
community a new animal resource that should prove useful as an experimental model
of aggressive sporadic lymphoma in immunologically uncompromised hosts. We
anticipate that it may also prove useful as a model of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC1444935
PMID: 16563162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Eur J Haematol. 2006 Apr;76(4):284-93.

New chromosome abnormalities and lack of BCL-6 gene rearrangements in Argentinean
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Cerretini R(1), Noriega MF, Narbaitz M, Slavutsky I.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Investigaciones Hematológicas Mariano
R. Castex, Academia Nacional de Medicina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
rcerretini@argentina.com

OBJECTIVES: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Cytogenetic studies have revealed a broad spectrum of
clonal genetic abnormalities and complex karyotypes. The purpose of this study
was to contribute to the understanding of the genomic alterations associated with
this group of lymphomas.
METHODS: Cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and molecular
analyses were performed in 30 cases with DLBCL: 20 de novo DLBCL (dn-DLBCL) and
10 DLBCL secondary to follicular lymphoma (S-DLBCL).
RESULTS: A total of 37 different structural chromosomal rearrangements were
found: 27% translocations, 54% deletions, and 19% other alterations. Chromosomes 
8, 6, 2, and 9 were the most commonly affected. Interestingly, translocation
t(3;14)(q27;q32) and/or BCL-6 gene rearrangements were not observed either by
cytogenetic studies or by FISH analysis. Fifteen novel cytogenetic alterations
were detected, among them translocations t(2;21)(p11;q22) and t(8;18)(q24;p11.3) 
appeared as sole structural abnormalities. Translocation t(14;18)(q32;q21) and/or
BCL-2-IGH gene rearrangements were the genomic alterations most frequently
observed: 50% of S-DLBCL and 30% of dn-DLBCL. Deletions del(4)(q21), del(6)(q27),
del(8)(q11), and del(9)(q11) were recurrent. The most common gains involved
chromosome regions at 12q13-q24, 7q10-q32, and 17q22-qter; 6q was the most
frequently deleted region, followed by losses at 2q35-qter, 7q32-qter, and
9q13-qter. Four novel regions of loss were identified: 5q13-q21, 2q35-qter (both 
recurrent in our series), 4p11-p12, and 17q11-q12.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies emphasize the value of combining conventional
cytogenetics with FISH and molecular studies to allow a more accurate definition 
of the genomic aberrations involved in DLBCL.

PMID: 16519699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4926-9. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma and primary cutaneous large B-cell
lymphoma, leg type, are both targeted by aberrant somatic hypermutation but
demonstrate differential expression of AID.

Dijkman R(1), Tensen CP, Buettner M, Niedobitek G, Willemze R, Vermeer MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden,
The Netherlands.

We assessed primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PCLBCL, leg type; 
n = 13), and primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma (PCFCL; n = 19) for
somatic hypermutation (SHM) of BCL6, and aberrant SHM of MYC, RhoH/TTF, and PAX5.
We demonstrate SHM of BCL6 in 8 PCLBCLs (62%), leg type, and 7 PCFCL patients
(37%), and aberrant SHM in PAX5, RhoH/TTF, and/or MYC in 7 PCLBCLs (54%), leg
type, and 10 PCFCL patients (53%). The majority of mutations consisted of single 
base-pair substitutions (n = 54) with rare deletions/insertions (n = 4), and
displayed molecular features typical of the SHM process. Quantitative real-time
PCR and immunohistochemical stainings for activation-induced cytidine deaminase, 
which is indispensable for SHM, demonstrated significantly higher expression in
PCLBCL, leg type. Our results suggest that (aberrant) SHM may contribute to the
pathogenesis of PCLBCL, leg type, and PCFCL and is not restricted to diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas with an aggressive clinical behavior.

PMID: 16507780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Eur J Haematol. 2006 Jun;76(6):465-72. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Fas and Fas ligand expression on germinal center type-diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma is associated with the clinical outcome.

Kojima Y(1), Tsurumi H, Goto N, Shimizu M, Kasahara S, Yamada T, Kanemura N, Hara
T, Sawada M, Saio M, Yamada T, Takahashi T, Tomita E, Takami T, Moriwaki H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

In recent years, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has been classified by DNA
microarray analysis into the germinal center B-cell-like (GC) type, the activated
B-cell-like (ABC) type and type 3. The latter two types can be collectively
categorized as the non-GC (NGC) type. From the prognostic perspective, the GC
type has a favorable clinical outcome when compared with the NGC type. The
protein Fas induces apoptosis of lymphocytes by binding with the Fas ligand
(FasL), and escape from such apoptosis is considered to lead to malignant
transformation of the cells and unrestricted growth of lymphoma. We proposed a
hypothesis that Fas/FasL expression could be possibly related with a better
survival of GC type DLBCL and evaluated 69 DLBCL cases immunohistochemically with
CD10, Bcl-6, MUM1, Fas and FasL. These lymphomas were classified as GC type
(positive for CD10 or Bcl-6 and negative for MUM1) or NGC type. The GC type had a
better overall survival rate than the NGC type (P = 0.0723). Among markers as
given above, positive CD10 was the most significant prognostic factor for overall
survival in total DLBCL (P < 0.05). In the GC type, Fas and FasL expressions were
significantly associated with a favorable overall survival (Fas: P < 0.005; FasL:
P < 0.05). Hence, Fas or FasL expression might contribute to a better prognosis
of this type of DLBCL.

PMID: 16494623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;12(4):1152-6.

Comparison of the expression and prognostic significance of differentiation
markers between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of central nervous system origin
and peripheral nodal origin.

Lin CH(1), Kuo KT, Chuang SS, Kuo SH, Chang JH, Chang KC, Hsu HC, Tien HF, Cheng 
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Whether diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of primary central nervous
system origin (PCNSL) is biologically different from DLBCL of peripheral nodal
origin (NL) remains unclear. The purpose of this study was to compare the
expression frequencies and prognostic significance of a panel of cell
differentiation markers between these two disease entities.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: This study included HIV-unrelated patients with PCNSL (n =
51) and NL (n = 72) treated at four hospitals in Taiwan for whom archival tumor
tissue was available. Immunohistochemistry for CD10, BCL-6, MUM-1, vs38c, CD138, 
and BCL-2 was done. CD10, BCL-6, and MUM-1 expression results were used to
classify all cases into the germinal center B-cell (GCB) or the non-GCB subgroup.
The prognostic significances of clinical and immunophenotypic markers were
evaluated.
RESULTS: Nuclear MUM-1 expression was significantly higher in PCNSL than in NL (P
< 0.001; 84% versus 53%). PCNSL tumors were more frequently classified into the
non-GCB subgroup than NL tumors (P = 0.020; 78% versus 62%). For patients with
PCNSL, univariate analysis showed that patients with BCL-6 expression had a trend
towards longer survival (P = 0.073; median survival, 25.3 versus 7.3 months), and
multivariate analysis showed BCL-6 was an independent prognostic factor (P =
0.026). For patients with NL, both of univariate (P = 0.003) and multivariate
analyses (P = 0.002) showed that GCB was significantly associated with favorable 
survival.
CONCLUSION: The higher frequency of non-GCB subclassification, which was mainly
contributed by nuclear MUM-1 expression in PCNSL implies that it has a more
differentiated cellular origin than NL. BCL-6 expression in patients with PCNSL
and GCB subgroup in patients with NL were favorable prognostic factors.

PMID: 16489068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2006 Feb;41(2):212-22.

Cytogenetic and clinicopathological characterization by fluorescence in situ
hybridization on paraffin-embedded tissue sections of twenty-six cases with
malignant lymphoma of small intestine.

Yoshida N(1), Nomura K, Wakabayashi N, Konishi H, Nishida K, Taki T, Mitsufuji S,
Horiike S, Yanagisawa A, Yamagishi H, Nakamura S, Okanoue T, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. naohisa@koto.kpum.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: In small intestinal malignant lymphoma (SIML), the correlation between
specific chromosomal abnormalities and clinicopathological features remains
unclear. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of chromosomal
translocations involving the BCL1, BCL2, c-MYC, BCL6 and MALT1 genes by using
fluorescence in situ hybridization directly on paraffin-embedded tissue sections 
(tissue-FISH).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Twenty-six cases diagnosed as having SIML between 1996 and 
2003 were the subjects of the clinicopathological investigation conducted in this
study. Tissue-FISH was performed with specific probes on paraffin-embedded tissue
sections as described previously.
RESULTS: The primary site was frequently located at the duodenum (9 cases, 35%). 
In accordance with the World Health Organization classification, 14 (53%) cases
were diagnosed as having diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and 6 (23%) as
marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).
Macroscopically, DLBCL and MALT lymphoma displayed various macroscopic features. 
Cytogenetically, IGH-BCL2 translocation was detected in 3 (21%) out of 14 DLBCL
cases, but in none of the MALT lymphomas. BCL6 translocation was detected in 5
(35%) of 14 DLBCL cases and in 1 (17%) of 6 MALT lymphoma cases (17%). API2-MALT1
translocation was detected in 1 (7%) of 14 DLBCL cases and in 1 (17%) of 6 MALT
lymphoma cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The duodenum was preferentially involved in SIML. DLBCL and MALT
lymphoma showed various macroscopic features. Tissue-FISH analysis disclosed that
DLBCL is cytogenetically heterogeneous. Furthermore, our study validated
tissue-FISH as an additional promising diagnostic tool for detecting specific
chromosomal translocations in NHL.

PMID: 16484127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Exp Cell Res. 2006 May 1;312(8):1312-22. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Plastic downregulation of the transcriptional repressor BCL6 during maturation of
human dendritic cells.

Pantano S(1), Jarrossay D, Saccani S, Bosisio D, Natoli G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Vela 6, Bellinzona CH6500,
Switzerland. serafino.pantano@unil.ch

Dendritic cell (DC) maturation links peripheral events initiated by the encounter
with pathogens to the activation and expansion of antigen-specific T lymphocytes 
in secondary lymphoid organs. Here, we describe an as yet unrecognized modulator 
of human DC maturation, the transcriptional repressor BCL6. We found that both
myeloid and plasmacytoid DCs constitutively express BCL6, which is rapidly
downregulated following maturation triggered by selected stimuli. Both in
unstimulated and maturing DCs, control of BCL6 protein levels reflects the
convergence of several mechanisms regulating BCL6 stability, mRNA transcription
and nuclear export. By regulating the induction of several genes implicated in
the immune response, including inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and survival
genes, BCL6 may represent a pivotal modulator of the afferent branch of the
immune response.

PMID: 16455075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Blood. 2006 Jun 1;107(11):4207-13. Epub 2006 Jan 31.

Prognostic significance of Bcl-6 protein expression in DLBCL treated with CHOP or
R-CHOP: a prospective correlative study.

Winter JN(1), Weller EA, Horning SJ, Krajewska M, Variakojis D, Habermann TM,
Fisher RI, Kurtin PJ, Macon WR, Chhanabhai M, Felgar RE, Hsi ED, Medeiros LJ,
Weick JK, Reed JC, Gascoyne RD.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. j-winter@northwestern.edu

Erratum in
    Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2292.

Comment in
    Blood. 2007 Jan 15;109(2):843-4; discussion 844-5.

Bcl-6 protein expression, a marker of germinal center origin, has been associated
with a favorable prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). To determine
the prognostic significance of this marker when rituximab (R) was added to
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) chemotherapy,
we prospectively studied Bcl-6 protein expression by immunohistochemical staining
of 199 paraffin-embedded specimens from patients enrolled in the US Intergroup
phase 3 trial comparing R-CHOP to CHOP with or without maintenance R. In Bcl-6(-)
patients, failure-free survival (FFS) and overall survival (OS) were prolonged
for those treated with R-CHOP alone compared to CHOP alone (2-year FFS 76% versus
9%, P < .001; 2-year OS 79% versus 17%, P < .001). In contrast, no differences in
FFS and OS were detected between treatment arms for Bcl-6(+) cases. In the
multivariate analysis, treatment arm (CHOP versus R-CHOP) was the major
determinant of both FFS (P < .001) and OS (P < .001) for the Bcl-6(-) subset,
whereas the International Prognostic Index risk group was the only significant
predictor of outcome among Bcl-6(+) cases. Bcl-2 protein expression was not
predictive of outcome in either group. In this study, we observed a reduction in 
treatment failures and death with the addition of R to CHOP in Bcl-6(-) DLBCL
cases only. Our finding that Bcl-6(+) cases did not benefit from the addition of 
R to CHOP requires independent confirmation.

PMCID: PMC1895783
PMID: 16449523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mod Pathol. 2006 Mar;19(3):438-46.

AIDS and non-AIDS diffuse large B-cell lymphomas express different antigen
profiles.

Madan R(1), Gormley R, Dulau A, Xu D, Walsh D, Ramesh KH, Cannizaro L, Tamas EF, 
Kumar P, Sparano J, LeValley A, Xue X, Bhattacharyya PK, Ioachim HL, Ratech H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine/Montefiore
Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467, USA.

Based on gene expression profiling, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas arising in
immunocompetent patients can be divided into germinal center and activated B-cell
types. Since little is known about acquired immunodeficiency syndrome associated 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, we tested whether the protein expression of
germinal center and activated B-cell markers differed between acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) vs non-AIDS diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. We
immunohistochemically stained tissue microarrays of 39 de novo diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas: 12 AIDS associated and 27 non-AIDS, with germinal center (BCL6,
CD10, CyclinH) and activated B-cell markers (MUM1, CD138, PAK1, CD44, BCL2). We
scored each case for percent positive cells (0-19%=0; 20-49%=1; 50-100%=2). The
activated B-cell and germinal center summation scores of each case were used as
(x, y) coordinate data points to construct two-dimensional contour-frequency
plots. The contour plot of non-AIDS diffuse large B-cell lymphomas showed two
distinct clusters: a cluster with a high germinal center phenotype (cluster 1)
and a cluster with a high activated B-cell phenotype (cluster 3). In contrast,
the AIDS-related diffuse large B-cell lymphomas formed a single aggregate
(cluster 2) (P=0.02, Fisher exact test). When the contour plots of the
AIDS-related and the non-AIDS cases were superimposed, cluster 2 of the AIDS
cases expressed an intermediate germinal center/activated B-cell phenotype
compared to clusters 1 and 3 of the non-AIDS diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Our 
results confirm that non-AIDS diffuse large B-cell lymphomas segregate into two
groups with either germinal center or activated B-cell phenotype. We report the
new finding that the AIDS status of the patient predicts the immunophenotype of
the diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 16444194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Dermatol Sci. 2006 Apr;42(1):55-63. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

Increased expression of germinal center-associated nuclear protein (GANP) is
associated with malignant transformation of melanocytes.

Kageshita T(1), Kuwahara K, Oka M, Ma D, Ono T, Sakaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Germinal center-associated nuclear protein (GANP) is a newly cloned
molecule that is up-regulated in the germinal center B cells. Although GANP
functions in the regulation of DNA repair during replication and survival of B
cells, little is known about its expression in melanocytic cells.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether GANP and phosphorylated-GANP (P-GANP) are
expressed in cultured human melanocytes and melanoma cells and in benign and
malignant melanocytic lesions. In addition, we aim to determine whether GANP and 
P-GANP are associated with malignant transformation of melanocytic lineage.
METHODS: GANP and P-GANP expression in cultured melanocytic cells was analyzed by
immunostaining and in vitro kinase assay. GANP and P-GANP expression in
melanocytic lesions was analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: GANP and P-GANP were up-regulated in cultured melanoma cells compared to
melanocytes. GANP and P-GANP were restricted to nucleus of melanocytes but
co-expressed in cytoplasm of melanoma cells. On the other hand, GANP and P-GANP
were widely expressed at various levels in melanocytic nevi and melanoma lesions 
with nuclear and cytoplasmic staining pattern. Melanoma cells showed a stronger
intensity of GANP and P-GANP than melanocytic nevus cells, however the staining
intensity in primary melanoma lesions was not associated with any
clinicopathological variables. Cytoplasmic GANP and P-GANP expression was
associated with MCM3 and Ki67 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest, for the first time, that GANP and P-GANP are
up-regulated in cultured melanoma cells compared to melanocytes and also they are
widely expressed in benign and malignant melanocytic tumor cells.

PMID: 16431081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Histopathology. 2006 Jan;48(2):162-73.

A clinicopathological study of nodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma. A report on
21 cases.

Traverse-Glehen A(1), Felman P, Callet-Bauchu E, Gazzo S, Baseggio L, Bryon PA,
Thieblemont C, Coiffier B, Salles G, Berger F.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Pierre Benite,
Lyon, France.

AIMS: To report the clinicopathological findings of 21 cases of primary nodal
marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (NMZL). NMZL is a recently characterized lymphoma
and few series have been published.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The clinical data were characteristic of a disseminated
disease at presentation: presence of peripheral and abdominal lymph nodes, bone
marrow involvement (62%), disease stage III and IV (76%), elevated lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) (48%). Other features included peripheral blood involvement
(23%), anaemia (24%), thrombocytopenia (10%) and presence of serum M component
(33%), while the previously reported association with hepatitis C virus and
cryoglobulinaemia was not found. Relapses were frequent but the majority of
patients receiving chemotherapy had a good initial response. Morphological
features were heterogeneous and there were some differences compared with other
marginal zone B-cell lymphomas (MZL). Pure monocytoid B-cell lymphomas were rare 
(10%) but a minor component of monocytoid B cell was observed more frequently
(23%). Plasmacytoid or plasmacytic differentiation was a very common feature
(61%). Large cells and a high mitotic count were also frequent (57%).
CONCLUSION: NMZL can be distinguished from splenic MZL and extranodal MZL by its 
aggressive morphology and disseminated disease at presentation.

PMID: 16405665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Curr Biol. 2006 Jan 10;16(1):80-8.

Ken & barbie selectively regulates the expression of a subset of Jak/STAT pathway
target genes.

Arbouzova NI(1), Bach EA, Zeidler MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

A limited number of evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathways are
repeatedly reused during development to regulate a wide range of processes. Here 
we describe a new negative regulator of JAK/STAT signaling and identify a
potential mechanism by which the pleiotropy of responses resulting from pathway
activation is generated in vivo. As part of a genetic interaction screen, we have
identified Ken & Barbie (Ken) , which is an ortholog of the mammalian
proto-oncogene BCL6 , as a negative regulator of the JAK/STAT pathway. Ken
genetically interacts with the pathway in vivo and recognizes a DNA consensus
sequence overlapping that of STAT92E in vitro. Tissue culture-based assays
demonstrate the existence of Ken-sensitive and Ken-insensitive STAT92E binding
sites, while ectopically expressed Ken is sufficient to downregulate a subset of 
JAK/STAT pathway target genes in vivo. Finally, we show that endogenous Ken
specifically represses JAK/STAT-dependent expression of ventral veins lacking
(vvl) in the posterior spiracles. Ken therefore represents a novel regulator of
JAK/STAT signaling whose dynamic spatial and temporal expression is capable of
selectively modulating the transcriptional repertoire elicited by activated
STAT92E in vivo.

PMID: 16401426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mod Pathol. 2006 Feb;19(2):299-306.

A spindle cell variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma possesses genotypic and
phenotypic markers characteristic of a germinal center B-cell origin.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A, Libra M, Gasparotto D, Navolanic PM, Spina M, Tirelli
U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy.
antonio.carbone@istitutotumori.mi.it

Lymphoma with prominent spindle cell features, the so-called spindle cell
lymphoma, is an unusual morphological variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Five new cases of spindle cell lymphoma have been analyzed by a multiparameter
approach in order to clarify its clinical and biological features. All patients
presented advanced stage disease with extranodal involvement. Vagina was the most
common extranodal site. All patients received chemotherapy and are alive in
complete remission. Morphologically, all five cases exhibited proliferation of
spindle cells with a vaguely storiform pattern highly suggestive of spindle cell 
neoplasms of nonlymphoid origin. In contrast, the results of immunohistochemical 
analysis indicated that all five cases were hematolymphoid neoplasms of the
B-cell lineage. These lymphomas consisted of a B-cell clonal population which
exhibited somatic immunoglobulin and BCL-6 mutations as well as BCL-6 protein
expression. The neoplastic spindle cells therefore closely resemble B cells
residing in the germinal center. The absence of MUM1 expression in neoplastic
spindle cells suggested that neoplastic spindle cells may be related to the early
phases of intragerminal center maturation of B cells. The germinal center
phenotype, with restricted expression of BCL-6, was associated with the presence 
of a primary extranodal origin, normal lactate dehydrogenase levels, and good
response to treatment.

PMID: 16400323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Mar;47(3):495-501.

B-cell differentiation immunophenotypes in classical Hodgkin lymphomas.

Bai M(1), Panoulas V, Papoudou-Bai A, Horianopoulos N, Kitsoulis P, Stefanaki K, 
Rontogianni D, Agnantis NJ, Kanavaros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.
mbai@cc.uoi.gr

The bcl6/CD10/MUM1/CD138 B-cell differentiation immunophenotypes were analysed in
101 cases of classical Hodgkin lymphomas (cHL) aiming to elucidate their
histogenesis. Three major bcl6/CD10/MUM1/CD138 immunophenotypes were
distinguished on the basis of the immunohistochemical positivity of Hodgkin and
Reed-Sternberg (H/RS) cells: (a) the late germinal center (GC)/early post-GC
B-cell-like immunophenotype (bcl6-/CD10-/MUM1+/CD138-); 59/101 cases (59%), (b)
the post-GC B-cell-like immunophenotype (bcl6-/CD10-/MUM1+/CD138+); 24/101 cases 
(24%) and (c) the indeterminate immunophenotype (bcl6+/CD10-/MUM1+/CD138-: 14
cases and bcl6+/CD10-/MUM1+/CD138+: four cases); 18/101 cases (18%). The above
findings indicate that H/RS cells in most cHL display bcl6/CD10/MUM1/CD138
immunophenotypes consistent with late GC/early post-GC or post-GC B-cell
differentiation. In addition, H/RS cells in a small fraction of cHL display
indeterminate bcl6/CD10/MUM1/CD138 immunophenotypic profiles which are
characterized by simultaneous expression of GC, late GC/early post-GC and post-GC
B-cell differentiation proteins. These immunophenotypic profiles do not
correspond to the differentiation immunophenotypes of normal B-cells and their
identification in a part of cHL suggests that the differentiation process of H/RS
cells is not complete in a fraction of these cells and/or is still ongoing at the
time of observation.

PMID: 16396774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2006 Aug;26(8):1089-102. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Gene expression in blood changes rapidly in neutrophils and monocytes after
ischemic stroke in humans: a microarray study.

Tang Y(1), Xu H, Du X, Lit L, Walker W, Lu A, Ran R, Gregg JP, Reilly M, Pancioli
A, Khoury JC, Sauerbeck LR, Carrozzella JA, Spilker J, Clark J, Wagner KR, Jauch 
EC, Chang DJ, Verro P, Broderick JP, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)MIND Institute and Department of Neurology, University of California at Davis,
Sacramento, California 95817, USA.

Ischemic brain and peripheral white blood cells release cytokines, chemokines and
other molecules that activate the peripheral white blood cells after stroke. To
assess gene expression in these peripheral white blood cells, whole blood was
examined using oligonucleotide microarrays in 15 patients at 2.4+/-0.5, 5 and 24 
h after onset of ischemic stroke and compared with control blood samples. The
2.4-h blood samples were drawn before patients were treated either with
tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) alone or with tPA plus Eptifibatide (the 
Combination approach to Lysis utilizing Eptifibatide And Recombinant tPA trial). 
Most genes induced in whole blood at 2 to 3 h were also induced at 5 and 24 h.
Separate studies showed that the genes induced at 2 to 24 h after stroke were
expressed mainly by polymorphonuclear leukocytes and to a lesser degree by
monocytes. These genes included: matrix metalloproteinase 9; S100 calcium-binding
proteins P, A12 and A9; coagulation factor V; arginase I; carbonic anhydrase IV; 
lymphocyte antigen 96 (cluster of differentiation (CD)96); monocarboxylic acid
transporter (6); ets-2 (erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2); homeobox 
gene Hox 1.11; cytoskeleton-associated protein 4; N-formylpeptide receptor;
ribonuclease-2; N-acetylneuraminate pyruvate lyase; BCL6; glycogen phosphorylase.
The fold change of these genes varied from 1.6 to 6.8 and these 18 genes
correctly classified 10/15 patients at 2.4 h, 13/15 patients at 5 h and 15/15
patients at 24 h after stroke. These data provide insights into the inflammatory 
responses after stroke in humans, and should be helpful in diagnosis,
understanding etiology and pathogenesis, and guiding acute treatment and
development of new treatments for stroke.

PMID: 16395289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Exp Med. 2006 Jan 23;203(1):63-72. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Regulation of the germinal center gene program by interferon (IFN) regulatory
factor 8/IFN consensus sequence-binding protein.

Lee CH(1), Melchers M, Wang H, Torrey TA, Slota R, Qi CF, Kim JY, Lugar P, Kong
HJ, Farrington L, van der Zouwen B, Zhou JX, Lougaris V, Lipsky PE, Grammer AC,
Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2008 Jun 9;205(6):1507.
    J Exp Med. 2006 Feb 20;203(2):475.

Interferon (IFN) consensus sequence-binding protein/IFN regulatory factor 8
(IRF8) is a transcription factor that regulates the differentiation and function 
of macrophages, granulocytes, and dendritic cells through activation or
repression of target genes. Although IRF8 is also expressed in lymphocytes, its
roles in B cell and T cell maturation or function are ill defined, and few
transcriptional targets are known. Gene expression profiling of human tonsillar B
cells and mouse B cell lymphomas showed that IRF8 transcripts were expressed at
highest levels in centroblasts, either from secondary lymphoid tissue or
transformed cells. In addition, staining for IRF8 was most intense in tonsillar
germinal center (GC) dark-zone centroblasts. To discover B cell genes regulated
by IRF8, we transfected purified primary tonsillar B cells with enhanced green
fluorescent protein-tagged IRF8, generated small interfering RNA knockdowns of
IRF8 expression in a mouse B cell lymphoma cell line, and examined the effects of
a null mutation of IRF8 on B cells. Each approach identified activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AICDA) and BCL6 as targets of transcriptional activation.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated in vivo occupancy of 5'
sequences of both genes by IRF8 protein. These results suggest previously
unappreciated roles for IRF8 in the transcriptional regulation of B cell GC
reactions that include direct regulation of AICDA and BCL6.

PMCID: PMC2118063
PMID: 16380510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2006 Feb;16(1):71-7. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Specific peptides for the therapeutic targeting of oncogenes.

Privé GG(1), Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Division of Cancer
Genomics and Proteomics, Ontario Cancer Institute, 610 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 2M9, Canada.

Tumors are dependent on oncogenic proteins for their maintenance and survival.
The ideal cancer therapy would include drugs that specifically target these
proteins. Many such proteins function through interfaces that can be difficult to
target effectively with small molecules. However, recent advances in
cell-permeable peptide technology, improving cellular penetration and stability, 
raise the possibility that specific peptide interference of oncogenic proteins
could be successfully translated to the clinic. Several active anti-tumor
peptides were recently described. For example, a stable peptide inhibitor of the 
Hsp90 ATP-binding pocket killed a wide range of tumors in vitro and in vivo, and 
a peptide inhibitor of the BCL6 oncoprotein was active in B-cell lymphomas; both 
peptides functioned without toxicity to normal tissues.

PMID: 16377176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Jan 1;164(1):81-3.

Frequency of chromosomal aneuploidies and deletions of the RB and TP53 genes in
MALT lymphomas harboring the t(14;18)(q32;q21).

Murga Penas EM(1), Hinz K, Biller L, Zivkovic T, Röser K, Löning T, Parwaresch R,
Bokemeyer C, Dierlamm J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Germany.

The t(14;18)(q32;q21) involving the MALT1/MLT and IGH genes has been identified
recently as a recurrent abnormality in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphomas. The frequency of secondary chromosomal aberrations in MALT lymphomas
harboring the t(14;18) is largely unknown. We therefore analyzed six
t(14;18)-positive MALT lymphomas (five parotid, one conjunctiva) by interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization for aneuploidies of chromosomes 3, 7, 12, 18, 
and X, gains or disruption of the CMYC/8q24 and BCL6/3q27 genes, as well as
deletions of the retinoblastoma and TP53 tumor suppressor genes. Except for one
MALT lymphoma of the parotid with trisomy 3, neither aneuploidies nor deletions
were detected in any of our cases.

PMID: 16364768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Haematologica. 2005 Dec;90(12):1711-3.

The prognostic value of interim positron emission tomography scans combined with 
immunohistochemical data in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Fields PA, Mikhaeel G, Hutchings M, van der Walt J, Nunan T, Schey SA.

The treatment of hematologic malignancies is moving towards risk-stratified
directed therapy, whereby treatment is based on the disease's biological
characteristics and response to treatment. We investigated whether BCL2 and BCL6 
status could add to the prognostic information yielded by an interim positron
emission tomography (PET) scan in the ability to predict outcome. Negative
interim scans and BCL2-negative status correlated with continuing remission
(p<0.005) at a median follow up of 24 months.

PMID: 16330454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Environ Health Perspect. 2005 Dec;113(12):1747-54.

Discrimination of vanadium from zinc using gene profiling in human bronchial
epithelial cells.

Li Z(1), Stonehuerner J, Devlin RB, Huang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

We hypothesized that gene expression profiling may discriminate vanadium from
zinc in human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs). RNA from HBECs exposed to
vehicle, V (50 microM), or Zn (50 microM) for 4 hr (n = 4 paired experiments) was
hybridized to Affymetrix Hu133A chips. Using one-class t-test with p < 0.01, we
identified 140 and 76 genes with treatment:control ratios > or = 2.0 or < or =
0.5 for V and Zn, respectively. We then categorized these genes into functional
pathways and compared the number of genes in each pathway between V and Zn using 
Fisher's exact test. Three pathways regulating gene transcription, inflammatory
response, and cell proliferation distinguished V from Zn. When genes in these
three pathways were matched with the 163 genes flagged by the same statistical
filtration for V:Zn ratios, 12 genes were identified. The hierarchical clustering
analysis showed that these 12 genes discriminated V from Zn and consisted of two 
clusters. Cluster 1 genes (ZBTB1, PML, ZNF44, SIX1, BCL6, ZNF450) were
down-regulated by V and involved in gene transcription, whereas cluster 2 genes
(IL8, IL1A, PTGS2, DTR, TNFAIP3, CXCL3) were up-regulated and linked to
inflammatory response and cell proliferation. Also, metallothionein 1 genes
(MT1F, MT1G, MT1K) were up-regulated by Zn only. Thus, using microarray analysis,
we identified a small set of genes that may be used as biomarkers for
discriminating V from Zn. The novel genes and pathways identified by the
microarray may help us understand the pathogenesis of health effects caused by
environmental V and Zn exposure.

PMCID: PMC1314916
PMID: 16330358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2005;294:109-33.

Clinical and laboratory parameters that define clinically relevant B-CLL
subgroups.

Chiorazzi N(1), Allen SL, Ferrarini M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Research, North Shore-LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY
11030, USA. chiorazzi@att.net

B cell-type chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is a heterogeneous disease. This
is reflected by the very wide-ranging clinical courses that B-CLL patients
experience and by the marked variation in laboratory findings between patients.
In this chapter, we will review the various clinical and laboratory parameters
that divide B-CLL patients into "subgroups," and correlate the parameters that
define them. When feasible, we will also link clinical features to the cellular
and genetic characteristics recently defined for these leukemic cells. The
discussion is limited to parameters that define phenotypes or subgroups that may 
relate to disease activity and clinical outcome.

PMID: 16329193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006 Mar;96(2):177-86.

High-resolution mapping of molecular events associated with immortalization,
transformation, and progression to breast cancer in the MCF10 model.

Worsham MJ(1), Pals G, Schouten JP, Miller F, Tiwari N, van Spaendonk R, Wolman
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Wayne State School of
Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. mworsha1@hfhs.org

BACKGROUND: A comprehensive and consistent picture of the genetic changes that
underlie breast cancer initiation, development, and progression remains
unresolved. The MCF10 series of cell lines represents many steps in that
progression. We performed high resolution mapping of the MCF10 series of cell
lines to identify specific gene targets to elucidate the molecular correlates of 
immortalization, development, and progression of breast cancer at the level of
individual genes.
DESIGN: We evaluated the initial untransformed outgrowths (MCF-10MS and MCF-10A) 
with six transformed cell lines with benign proliferations (MCF-10AT1,
MCF-10AT1kcl2), carcinoma in situ (MCF-10CA1h cl13), and invasive carcinoma
(MCF-10CA1h cl2, MCF-10CA1a cl1, MCF-10CA1d cl1). Losses and gains of loci at 112
unique human genome sites were interrogated using the multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification assay (MLPA).
RESULTS: Cytogenetic alterations in the four benign progenitors that persisted in
the CIS and invasive cell lines corresponded to gains and losses of genes by
MLPA. MCF-10MS had only normal gene copies. The untransformed MCF-10A had
cytogenetic gain of 5q13-qter with corresponding gains of the IL3, IL4 and IL12B 
genes at 5q31-q33; gain of distal 19q12-qter was reflected in gains in KLK3 and
BAX gene loci at 19q13-q13.4. The observed genic gain of cMYC at 8q24.12 was not 
indicated by cytogenetics. The apparently balanced t(3;9) component of the
t(3;9)(p13;p22)t(3;5)(p26;q31) resulted in complete loss of the CDKN2A and CDKN2B
genes at 9p21. Additional clonal cytogenetic changes in the DCIS cell line
(MCF-10A1h cl13) involving chromosomes 1, 3 and 10 persisted in the invasive
progeny, with gain of corresponding genes at 1p13 (BCAR2, BCAR3, NRAS, TGFB2), at
3p12-13 (IL12A), and 3q21-27 (MME, PIK3CA, BCL6).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study adopted a comprehensive exploration of genetic changes
using high resolution molecular probes applied to the MCF10 family of cell lines 
to identify individual genes in a continuum starting from normal breast
epithelial cells and progressing through immortalization, transformation and
invasive malignancy. Homozygous loss of CDKN2A and CDKN2B genes and gain of MYC
were initiating immortalization events. Transformation and progression to
malignancy event were marked by gains of IL13, VEGF, HRAS, TRAF2, and BCAS2,
IL12A, and MME, respectively.

PMID: 16319984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Nov 2;97(21):1616-8.

A putative exonic splicing polymorphism in the BCL6 gene and the risk of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Zhang Y(1), Lan Q, Rothman N, Zhu Y, Zahm SH, Wang SS, Holford TR, Leaderer B,
Boyle P, Zhang B, Zou K, Chanock S, Zheng T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520-8034, USA. yawei.zhang@yale.edu

Recent studies have shown that the B-cell lymphoma 6 gene (BCL6) is an oncogene
that contributes to lymphomagenesis. Exon 6 of BCL6 contains a common single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (-195 C>T; dbSNP ID: rs1056932) that alters a
potential binding site for an exonic splicing enhancer. We used unconditional
logistic regression models to examine the association between this SNP and the
risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in a population-based case-control study of
women residing in Connecticut (461 case patients and 535 control subjects). The
risk of NHL among women with the CC genotype was more than double that of women
with the TT genotype (odds ratio [OR] = 2.2, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.5
to 3.3). Higher risks were observed for two NHL subtypes, namely B-cell chronic
lymphatic leukemia/prolymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (OR = 3.5, 
95% CI = 1.6 to 7.8) and T-cell lymphoma (OR = 5.2, 95% CI = 2.0 to 13.3). Our
results support the hypothesis that a genetic variant that could alter mRNA
transcripts of BCL6 may contribute to the etiology of NHL and suggest that this
variant warrants further investigation.

PMID: 16264183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Blood. 2006 Feb 15;107(4):1599-607. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

BCL6 is regulated by p53 through a response element frequently disrupted in
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Margalit O(1), Amram H, Amariglio N, Simon AJ, Shaklai S, Granot G, Minsky N,
Shimoni A, Harmelin A, Givol D, Shohat M, Oren M, Rechavi G.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital, Chaim Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel-Hashomer 52621, Israel.

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor mediates survival, proliferation, and
differentiation blockade of B cells during the germinal-center reaction and is
frequently misregulated in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (BNHL). The p53
tumor-suppressor gene is central to tumorigenesis. Microarray analysis identified
BCL6 as a primary target of p53. The BCL6 intron 1 contains a region in which 3
types of genetic alterations are frequent in BNHL: chromosomal translocations,
point mutations, and internal deletions. We therefore defined it as TMDR
(translocations, mutations, and deletions region). The BCL6 gene contains a p53
response element (p53RE) residing within the TMDR. This p53RE contains a motif
known to be preferentially targeted by somatic hypermutation. This p53RE is
evolutionarily conserved only in primates. The p53 protein binds to this RE in
vitro and in vivo. Reporter assays revealed that the BCL6 p53RE can confer
p53-dependent transcriptional activation. BCL6 mRNA and protein levels increased 
after chemotherapy/radiotherapy in human but not in murine tissues. The increase 
in BCL6 mRNA levels was attenuated by the p53 inhibitor PFT-alpha. Thus, we
define the BCL6 gene as a new p53 target, regulated through a RE frequently
disrupted in BNHL.

PMID: 16249378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3307-19.

Identification of genes involved in the initiation of human Th1 or Th2 cell
commitment.

Lund R(1), Ahlfors H, Kainonen E, Lahesmaa AM, Dixon C, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku/Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of naïve T helper (Th) cells is induced by TCR activation and
IL-12/STAT4 or IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways, forming Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively. In this study, oligonucleotide arrays were used to identify genes
regulated during the initiation of human Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation at 2
and 6 h in presence or absence of immunosuppressive TGF-beta. As a result the
immediate targets of IL-12, IL-4 and TGF-beta were identified. The effects of
IL-12 at this early stage were minimal and consistent with the known kinetics of 
IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-4, however, was observed to rapidly regulate 63 genes,
26 of which were differentially expressed at both the 2- and 6-h time points. Of 
these IL-4 regulated genes, one-third have previously been observed to display
expression changes in the later phases of the polarization process. Similarly to 
the key regulators, TBX21 and GATA3, the transcription factors SATB1, TCF7 and
BCL6 were differentially regulated at the protein level during early Th1 and Th2 
cell polarization. Moreover, the developing Th1 and Th2 cells were demonstrated
to be responsive to the immunosuppressive TGF-beta and IL-10. In this study, a
panel of novel factors that may be important regulators of the differentiation
process was identified.

PMID: 16220538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Hematol Oncol. 2005 Jun;23(2):61-7.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders: molecular basis of disease
histogenesis and pathogenesis.

Capello D(1), Rossi D, Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medical Sciences and IRCAD, Amedeo
Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) represent a serious
complication of solid organ and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. PTLD
generally display B-cell lineage derivation, involvement of extranodal sites,
aggressive histology and clinical behaviour, and frequent association with EBV
infection. The occurrence of IgV mutations in the overwhelming majority of PTLD
documents that malignant transformation targets germinal centre (GC) B-cells and 
their descendants both in EBV-positive and EBV-negative cases. Analysis of
phenotypic markers of B-cell histogenesis, namely BCL6, MUM-1 and CD138, allows
further distinction of PTLD histogenetic categories. PTLD expressing the
BCL6(+)/MUM1(+/-)/CD138(-) profile reflect B-cells actively experiencing the GC
reaction and comprise diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) centroblastic and
Burkitt lymphoma. PTLD expressing the BCL6(-)/MUM1(+)/CD138(-) phenotype
putatively derive from B-cells that have concluded the GC reaction and comprise
the majority of polymorphic PTLD and a fraction of DLBCL. A third group of PTLD
is reminiscent of post-GC and pre- terminally differentiated B-cells that show
the BCL6(-)/MUM1(+)/CD138(+) phenotype and are morphologically represented by
either polymorphic PTLD or DLBCL immunoblastic. The molecular pathogenesis of
PTLD involves infection by oncogenic viruses, namely Epstein-Barr virus, as well 
as genetic or epigenetic alterations of several cellular genes. At variance with 
lymphoma arising in immunocompetent hosts, whose genome is relatively stable, a
fraction of PTLD are characterized by microsatellite instability as a consequence
of defects in the DNA mismatch repair mechanism. Apart from microsatellite
instability, molecular alterations of cellular genes recognized in PTLD include
alterations of c-MYC, BCL-6, p53, DNA hypermethylation, and aberrant somatic
hypermutation of proto-oncogenes.

PMID: 16216037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;44(9):681-3.

[Factors affecting the prognosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in Chinese].

[Article in Chinese]

Weng Y(1), Gao ZF, Liu K, Zhang WJ, Ke XY, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University, Health Science Center, Beijing
100083, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the correlation between clinical prognosis and
clinicopathologic features, origin and cell proliferous index of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in China.
METHODS: The data of 60 cases of DLBCL were collected with the study of
international prognostic index (IPI) and the follow-up results.
Immunohistochemistry stain was used to check the expression of CD(45)RO, CD(3),
CD(20), CD(79)a, CD(45)RA, Ki-67, p53 and bcl-6.
RESULTS: The ratio of male to female is 1.73 and the average age is 53.1. In
53.3% cases lymph node were involved (32/60), gastric intestinal tract and tonsil
were the most common extranodal sites of involvement. 23 patients 38.3% died
during follow-up, the longest survival period lasting 108 months.16 died in the
first year after establishment of diagnosis (16/23, 69.6%). IPI is an independent
prognostic index; the lower the index, the better the prognosis (P = 0.0102).
Positive incidence of CD(20), CD(79)a and CD(45)RA was 91.5%, 73.7% and 58.3%.
Ki-67, p53, bcl-6 were expressed in some cases (48/53, 90.6%; 26/46, 56.5%;
21/41, 51.2%). The expression of bcl-6 protein was somewhat related with
prognosis (P = 0.0049), but the expression of p53 was not (P = 0.5948).
CONCLUSIONS: The clinicopathologic features of DLBCL are similar in the East and 
the West. It is highly aggressive tumor. Most of the cases died in the first year
after establishment of diagnosis. IPI can be used to predict the clinical
outcome. The expression of bcl-6 protein was somewhat related with clinical
prognosis, but that of p53 was not.

PMID: 16202261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005 Oct;46(10):1513-6.

Translocation of BCL2 and BCL6 to the same immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in a 
case of follicular lymphoma.

Rack K(1), Delannoy A, Ravoet C, Vannuffel P, Hamels J, Gillerot Y.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Allée des
Templiers, Loverval 6280, Belgium. katrina.rack@ipg.be

Follicular Lymphoma is a low grade malignancy of mature B-cells. The hallmark
chromosome abnormality is the translocation t(14;18) which is observed in 70 -
80% of cases with a translocation t(3;14) present in a further 10%. Rarely both
of these translocations, or one of their variants, may be present. These
co-incident translocations usually involve different Ig loci or different Ig
alleles. We present here a case of Follicular Lymphoma with leukemic presentation
and a complex translocation involving the IgH, BCL2 and BCL6 loci. Double
oncogene translocations to a single immunoglobulin locus are extremely rare in
lymphomas with few cases described to date. To our knowledge this is the first
reported case with a complex translocation involving these loci.

PMID: 16194898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Nov 11;337(1):201-8.

IL-6-induced Bcl6 variant 2 supports IL-6-dependent myeloma cell proliferation
and survival through STAT3.

Tsuyama N(1), Danjoh I, Otsuyama K, Obata M, Tahara H, Ohta T, Ishikawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Signal Analysis, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, Minami Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.
tsuyama@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

IL-6 is a growth and survival factor for myeloma cells, although the mechanism by
which it induces myeloma cell proliferation through gene expression is largely
unknown. Microarray analysis showed that some B-cell lymphoma-associated
oncogenes such as Bcl6, which is absent in normal plasma cells, were upregulated 
by IL-6 in IL-6-dependent myeloma cell lines. We found that Bcl6 variant 2 was
upregulated by STAT3. ChIP assay and EMSA showed that STAT3 bound to the upstream
region of variant 2 DNA. Expression of p53, a direct target gene of Bcl6, was
downregulated in the IL-6-stimulated cells, and this process was impaired by an
HDAC inhibitor. Bcl6 was knocked down by introducing small hairpin RNA, resulting
in decreased proliferation and increased sensitivity to a DNA damaging agent.
Thus, STAT3-inducible Bcl6 variant 2 appears to generate an important IL-6 signal
that supports proliferation and survival of IL-6-dependent myeloma cells.

PMID: 16188230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):964-6.

A-Miz-ing BCL6.

Wu X, Jelinek DF.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):1054-60.

PMID: 16177801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Oct;93(3):191-8.

High grade primary breast lymphoma: is it a different clinical entity?

Fruchart C(1), Denoux Y, Chasle J, Peny AM, Boute V, Ollivier JM, Genot JY,
Michels JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France.

Primary lymphoma of the breast (PBL) is a rare neoplasm, its outcome remains
unclear compared to other lymphomas. We performed a retrospective study of 19
cases of high grade PBL. There were 17 Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and 
2 follicular and diffuse grade 3 lymphomas. Four patients were treated with local
treatment only, 15 received chemotherapy including 11 treated with CHOP or ACVBP 
regimens followed by involved field radiotherapy. The actuarial survival for the 
whole population was 38%. Three of the 4 patients treated only with a local
treatment died of their lymphoma. Three patients progressed on therapy and 5
relapsed in the first year of follow-up including 2 central nervous system
recurrences. Among the 11 patients treated with chemotherapy, 2 died of their
lymphoma. The overall survival of this subgroup was 73% (median follow-up of 57
months). We observed, like others in the literature, a better prognosis for
lymphomas co-expressing Bcl6 and CD 10. The treatment should be based on the same
modalities, but including a CNS prophylaxis even if poor prognosis factors are
lacking. A radical mastectomy increases the risk of treatment failure and has to 
be avoided.

PMID: 16172797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Dec 1;96(5):938-50.

Translating the histone code into leukemia.

Linggi BE(1), Brandt SJ, Sun ZW, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The "histone code" is comprised of the covalent modifications of histone tails
that function to regulate gene transcription. The post-translational
modifications that occur in histones within the regulatory regions of genes
include acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, sumoylation,
and ADP-ribosylation. These modifications serve to alter chromatin structure and 
accessibility, and to act as docking sites for transcription factors or other
histone modifying enzymes. Several of the factors that are disrupted by
chromosomal translocations associated with hematological malignancies can alter
the histone code in a gene-specific manner. Here, we discuss how the histone code
may be disrupted by chromosomal translocations, either directly by altering the
activity of histone modifying enzymes, or indirectly by recruitment of this type 
of enzyme by oncogenic transcription factors. These alterations in the histone
code may alter gene expression pattern to set the stage for leukemogenesis.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16167339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2005 Dec;4(12):1898-909. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Analysis of BCL6-interacting proteins by tandem mass spectrometry.

Miles RR(1), Crockett DK, Lim MS, Elenitoba-Johnson KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84132, USA.

B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is a 95-kDa nuclear phosphoprotein and member of the Pox
virus zinc finger/bric-a-brac, tramtrack, broad complex (POZ/BTB) family of
transcription factors. BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor required for germinal 
center formation, and the gene encoding it is frequently altered in diffuse large
B-cell and follicular lymphomas. The dysregulation of BCL6 has therefore been
implicated in lymphomagenesis. A limited number of proteins is known to interact 
with BCL6 and modulate its activity or participate in its role in transcriptional
regulation. Identification of additional BCL6-binding proteins could reveal
potential signaling targets and previously undescribed functional roles for BCL6.
We used a functional proteomic approach to determine the identity of proteins
that interact with BCL6. Proteins were isolated by co-immunoprecipitation with an
anti-BCL6 antibody and identified using MS/MS. We identified 61 proteins in the
BCL6 immunocomplex from the following Gene Ontology categories: transcription
regulator activity (n = 18), binding activity (n = 11), signal transducer
activity (n = 10), catalytic activity (n = 8), structural molecule activity (n = 
3), enzyme regulator activity (n = 3), transporter activity (n = 2), motor
activity (n = 2), chaperone activity (n = 1), and unknown function (n = 3).
Importantly we identified BCL6 and several previously reported BCL6-interacting
proteins in the BCL6 immunocomplex. The remaining proteins have not been shown
previously to be associated with BCL6. MS/MS results were validated on four
proteins using immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Two of these protein
interactions were further confirmed by reciprocal immunoprecipitation. This study
demonstrates the utility of antibody immunoprecipitation and subsequent peptide
identification by MS/MS for the elucidation of BCL6-binding proteins. Many of the
novel proteins identified in this study suggest additional functional roles for
BCL6 beyond transcriptional repression.

PMID: 16147992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):1054-60. Epub 2005 Sep 4.

BCL6 interacts with the transcription factor Miz-1 to suppress the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and cell cycle arrest in germinal center B 
cells.

Phan RT(1), Saito M, Basso K, Niu H, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):964-6.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor that is required for 
germinal center formation and has been linked to lymphomagenesis. BCL6 functions 
by directly binding to specific DNA sequences and suppressing the transcription
of target genes. Here we report an alternative mechanism by which BCL6 controls
the transcription of genes lacking a BCL6 binding site and show that this
mechanism was required for the prevention of tumor suppressor p53-independent
cell cycle arrest in germinal center B cells. BCL6 interacted with the
transcriptional activator Miz-1 and, via Miz-1, bound to the promoter and
suppressed transcription of the cell cycle arrest gene CDKN1A. Through this
mechanism, BCL6 may facilitate the proliferative expansion of germinal centers
during the normal immune response and, when deregulated, the pathological
expansion of B cell lymphomas.

PMID: 16142238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Virchows Arch. 2005 Nov;447(5):869-74. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

Molecular cytogenetic characterization of an ins(4;X) occurring as the sole
abnormality in an aggressive, poorly differentiated soft tissue sarcoma.

Surace C(1), Storlazzi CT, Engellau J, Domanski HA, Gustafson P, Panagopoulos I, 
D'Addabbo P, Rocchi M, Mandahl N, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85, Lund,
Sweden.

Cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of an
aggressive undifferentiated soft tissue sarcoma diagnosed as primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) revealed an insertion ins(4;X)(q31-32;p11p22) as the
sole aberration. To identify the molecular genetic consequences, contigs of
bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) covering Xp11-p22 and 4q31-32 were
constructed. The breakpoint in Xp22 was considered unlikely to be of pathogenetic
significance, as it was very close to the Xp telomere, a region devoid of known
or predicted genes. The breakpoint in Xp11 was mapped within a BAC clone
containing BCOR, encoding a BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6)-interacting protein that may
influence apoptosis, as the only known gene. FISH analysis with three overlapping
clones on normal chromosomes 4 disclosed that the insertion of Xp11 material in
der(4) was accompanied by a deletion of chromosome 4 material. Only a predicted
gene (XM_094074) was shown to be partially included in the deletion. This gene
displays a high similarity with the gene encoding the embryonic blastocoelar
extracellular matrix (ECM) protein in sea urchin, which is involved in the
migration of the primary mesenchyme cells during embryogenesis. Our results
suggest that BCOR and/or an ECM-like protein could be involved in the
pathogenesis of a subgroup of PNET or PNET-like sarcomas.

PMID: 16133367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Oct 1;23(28):7060-8. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

Large cleaved and immunoblastic lymphoma may represent two distinct
clinicopathologic entities within the group of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

De Paepe P(1), Achten R, Verhoef G, Wlodarska I, Stul M, Vanhentenrijk V, Praet
M, De Wolf-Peeters C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
pascale.depaepe@ugent.be

PURPOSE: The reliability of immunohistochemistry for subdividing diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) into germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) and non-GCB
prognostic subgroups is debated. In this study we evaluated the prognostic
significance of such subgrouping on a series of 153 DLBCL patients. Furthermore, 
we investigated whether both subgroups could comprise clinicopathologic entities 
recognized by their morphology and characterized by a distinct phenotype,
specific genetic abnormalities, and clinical characteristics.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All samples from patients were reviewed and morphologically
subdivided into large cleaved, immunoblastic, and not otherwise specified DLBCL. 
GCB and non-GCB immunohistochemical profiles were established. The presence of
chromosomal translocations involving BCL2, BCL6, and MYC and/or rearrangements of
these genes was investigated.
RESULTS: Subdividing DLBCL with either a GCB or non-GCB immunophenotypic profile 
was not of prognostic significance. Nevertheless, CD10 expression was a predictor
of favorable outcome, whereas high bcl-2 expression and BCL6 rearrangement were
adverse predictors of disease-free survival. Interestingly, large cleaved DLBCL
was clearly associated with a GCB immunophenotypic profile, CD10 expression, BCL2
rearrangement, age younger than 60 years, and low to low/intermediate
International Prognostic Index risk, but was not of prognostic significance. In
contrast, immunoblastic morphology was associated with a non-GCB profile and was 
a significant predictor of unfavorable DFS.
CONCLUSION: Subdividing DLBCL into subgroups based on their immunohistochemical
profile was not of prognostic significance. Nevertheless, it allowed the
additional characterization of two lymphoma subgroups previously recognized in
the Working Formulation. Both correspond to two distinct clinicopathologic
entities within the DLBCL.

PMID: 16129841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Clin Pathol. 2005 Sep;58(9):962-7.

High frequency of germinal centre derivation in diffuse large B cell lymphoma
from Asian patients.

Shia AK(1), Gan GG, Jairaman S, Peh SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Recent reports have divided diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
into germinal centre B cell-like and activated B cell-like subgroups with
implicated differences in prognosis.
AIMS: To delineate the germinal centre B cell derivation group from an Asian
series of DLBCLs.
METHODS: Fifty four cases were analysed by polymerase chain reaction to detect
the t(14;18) translocation and immunohistochemistry for BCL2, CD10, BCL6, and
E2F1 expression.
RESULTS: Eighteen of 54 cases had bcl2 gene rearrangement, 36 of 52 expressed
BCL2, 29 of 52 expressed BCL6, 20 of 53 expressed CD10, and 18 of 53 expressed
E2F1. There was a significant association between bcl2 gene rearrangement and the
expression of both BCL2 and CD10. Using the minimally acceptable criteria of
t(14;18) rearrangement and/or CD10 expression, 26 of 54 cases were probably
germinal centre derived, in agreement with other reports. A higher proportion of 
cases had t(14;18) translocation, suggesting that they may be derived from
transformed follicular lymphomas. E2F1 positivity did not correlate with the
known germinal centre markers, even though it has recently been suggested that it
may be a new GC marker.
CONCLUSIONS: It may be possible to stratify patients for treatment using markers 
for specific lineages of B cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1770829
PMID: 16126878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Lett. 2006 Jul 8;238(1):142-5. Epub 2005 Aug 25.

Single nucleotide polymorphism in 5'-flanking region of BCL6 is not associated
with increased risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Susova S(1), Trneny M, Soucek P.

Author information: 
(1)Biotransformations Group, National Institute of Public Health, Centre of
Occupational Diseases, Srobárova 48, Prague 10, 100 42, Czech Republic.

Mutations in the 5'-regulatory region of BCL6 were suggested to play a role in
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) progression and in the transformation of follicular 
lymphoma to more aggressive diffuse large B-cell type. The aim of this study was 
to explore association between polymorphism G397C in the 5'-region of BCL6 and
both incidence and progression of NHL in 154 NHL cases and 362 controls. Neither 
frequencies of the rare BCL6 allele 397C nor particular genotypes differed
significantly between NHL cases and controls. There was no significant
association of histological type of NHL and clinical characteristics with this
polymorphism.

PMID: 16125304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Leukemia. 2005 Oct;19(10):1824-30.

Clinical and biological relevance of single-nucleotide polymorphisms and acquired
somatic mutations of the BCL6 first intron in follicular lymphoma.

Jardin F(1), Ruminy P, Parmentier F, Picquenot JM, Courel MN, Bertrand P,
Buchonnet G, Tilly H, Bastard C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France.
fabrice.jardin@rouen.fnclcc.fr

Genetic modifications of the BCL6 gene in lymphoma include translocations,
deletions, and somatic mutations (SM) of the 5' noncoding region. Three
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the major mutation cluster region (MMC)
have been reported, including two substitutions (397G/C, 502G/A) and one deletion
(520DeltaT). Clinical and biological relevance of these SNPs are unknown. Based
on a case-control study, BCL6 SNPs frequencies were assessed in 97 t(14;18)
follicular lymphomas (FL) and in 54 lymphomas with 3q27 rearrangement. Allele
frequencies were similar in the FL and controls groups. The 397 G/C genotype was 
correlated to a higher-grade transformation risk (P=0.02). SM were observed in
39.1% of FL and were characterized by a clustering distribution (hot spots
spanning position 420-435, 106-127, and 590-600). No correlation between
genotypes or acquired mutational status and BCL6 expression was demonstrated.
However, gel mobility-shift assays, using SNPs containing probes show results
representative for protein/DNA complexes. This study demonstrates that the first 
BCL6 intron is a highly variable region as a consequence of both SNP and SM,
which may contribute to biology and outcome of FL.

PMID: 16094416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Comp Med. 2005 Jun;55(3):231-5.

Squamous cell carcinomas of the skin at ear tag sites in aged FVB/N mice.

Baron BW(1), Langan G, Huo D, Baron JM, Montag A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

We report the development of squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) of the skin at or
near the site of ear tags composed of a nickel-copper alloy and used for
identification during the course of a long-term study of incipient congenic FVB/N
mice containing the human BCL6 transgene (FVB.Cg-Tg[tetO-BCL6]Bbn
Tg[EmicroSR-tTa]83Bop), their littermate controls, and wild-type FVB/N. Of a
total population of 160 mice, 14 (8.8%) developed SCCs in the tagged (right) ear 
after a median observation period of 25 months, but none of the animals developed
tumors in the opposite ear (P = 0.0001). Nine of the fourteen mice with SCCs had 
to be euthanized because they were thought to be in distress from the ear
condition, but the remaining five died or were euthanized for other reasons
related to the research study. These animals ranged in age from 331 to 921 days
at the time of death. Five of the tumors were well-differentiated (grade 1) SCCs;
the remainder were grade 3 and tended to be deeply invasive neoplasms with
undifferentiated areas containing a spindle cell component. One of these
metastasized to kidney. When using the FVB/N mouse strain for long-term studies, 
it is necessary to consider that nearly 9% of the population may develop SCCs at 
or near ear-tag sites that may necessitate early removal of the animal.

PMID: 16089170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Hum Pathol. 2005 Jul;36(7):784-91.

CD10 and BCL6 expression in the diagnosis of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma: 
utility of detecting CD10+ T cells by flow cytometry.

Yuan CM(1), Vergilio JA, Zhao XF, Smith TK, Harris NL, Bagg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITCL) is a histologically distinct and
relatively common subtype of T-cell lymphoma. Although the putative normal cell
counterpart is a mature CD4+ T cell, the precise cell of origin remains elusive. 
We evaluated cases with a diagnosis of AITCL to determine the specificity and
utility of CD10 coexpression, particularly by flow cytometry (FCM), in
facilitating this diagnosis. Coexpression of BCL6 was also assessed. Eight AITCL 
cases were evaluated histologically, immunohistochemically, and by 4-color FCM.
Four cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS),
were also analyzed. The lymphoma cells in all 8 AITCL cases were CD4+, CD45RO+ T 
cells, with classic extrafollicular meshworks of CD21/CD23/CD35+ follicular
dendritic cells. Furthermore, all cases of AITCL cases contained interfollicular 
CD10+ cells by immunohistochemistry, and increased coexpression of CD10 on T
cells was also detected in 6 of 8 cases by FCM. CD10 coexpression was not
observed in all 4 PTCL-NOS cases. Although not specific for AITCL, increased
numbers of BCL6+ cells were seen in AITCL as compared with PTCL-NOS. Double
immunohistochemistry performed on an AITCL case with high numbers of BCL6+ cells 
highlighted coexpression of BCL6 and CD4 on the same cells. The finding suggests 
that AITCL may be a neoplasm of (possibly intrafollicular) CD10+, BCL6+, and CD4+
memory T cells. Although our series is small, our results suggest that CD10
coexpression may be a useful discriminant, particularly if the differential
diagnosis is PTCL-NOS, and demonstrate that this can be determined by FCM.

PMID: 16084948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Nov;44(3):301-4.

BCL6 alternative translocation breakpoint cluster region associated with
follicular lymphoma grade 3B.

Bosga-Bouwer AG(1), Haralambieva E, Booman M, Boonstra R, van den Berg A,
Schuuring E, van den Berg E, Kluin P, Poppema S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Ant. Deusinglaan 4, AW 9713 Groningen, The Netherlands.
A.G.Bosga-Bouwer@medgen.umcg.nl

Translocations involving band 3q27, affecting the major breakpoint region (MBR)
of BCL6, are common in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). Recent data
suggest an alternative breakpoint cluster region (ABR) located between 245 and
285 kb 5' of BCL6, which might be associated with Follicular Lymphoma (FL). Ten
DLBCLs and 9 FLs grade 3B with cytogenetic rearrangements at 3q27 were studied by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to discriminate between breakpoints at 
the ABR and MBR. Eight DLBCLs contained a breakpoint in the MBR, and 6 FL grade
3B (FL3B) cases contained a breakpoint in the ABR. No specific chromosomal
partners could be identified in both groups. Previously published data have
suggested that FL3B cases with 3q27 aberrations are closely related to the
majority of DLBCLs of germinal center cell origin. However, our findings suggest 
that the mechanism of 3q27 rearrangement in FL3B cases is similar to the
mechanism in follicular lymphomas grade 1,2, and 3A cases.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16075463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Mol Diagn. 2005 Aug;7(3):352-6.

Molecular cytogenetic analyses of immunoglobulin loci in nodular lymphocyte
predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma reveal a recurrent IGH-BCL6 juxtaposition.

Renné C(1), Martín-Subero JI, Hansmann ML, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Senckenberg Institute of Pathology, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt,
Germany. c.renne@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Chromosomal translocations juxtaposing different oncogenes to the immunoglobulin 
(IG) loci are the hallmark of various B-cell lymphomas. Because the tumor cells
in nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma (NLPHL) are also derived
from B cells, we examined whether NLPHL harbors chromosomal translocations that
affect IG loci. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was applied to 24 NLPHL cases 
using probes flanking the IGH, IGK, and IGL loci as well as the BCL6 gene.
Fourteen of these cases were additionally analyzed by combined immunofluorescence
and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Chromosomal breakpoints in the IGH locus 
were detected in five NLPHL. All these cases also contained a BCL6 breakpoint.
Triple-color interphase cytogenetics demonstrated the presence of an IGH-BCL6
juxtaposition, indicating a t(3;14)(q27;q32) in all five cases. There was no
evidence for breakpoints affecting the IGK or IGL loci. Our results show that
translocations juxtaposing the BCL6 oncogene next to the IGH locus are recurrent 
in NLPHL.

PMCID: PMC1867541
PMID: 16049307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Histochem Cytochem. 2006 Jan;54(1):31-8. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Genetic immunization: a new monoclonal antibody for the detection of BCL-6
protein in paraffin sections.

García JF(1), García JF, Maestre L, Lucas E, Sánchez-Verde L, Romero-Chala S,
Piris MA, Roncador G.

Author information: 
(1)Monoclonal Antibodies Unit, Biotechnology Program, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (Spanish National Cancer Centre), C/Melchor Fernández
Almagro 3, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

Genetic immunization can be combined with hybridoma technology to generate
high-affinity monoclonal antibodies (MAbs). A new anti-BCL-6 MAb (GI191E/A8) was 
produced by cloning full-length BCL-6 cDNA into a eukaryotic vector and
delivering this into mouse epidermis using a helium gene gun. A comparative study
was made of the specificity and the effects of formalin fixation on
immunohistochemistry quality of GI191E/A8 and two other anti-BCL-6 MAbs. To
evaluate its possible application to differential diagnosis of lymphomas, two
tissue microarrays (89 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and 24 B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cases) were stained with GI191E/A8 and another anti-BCL-6
MAb produced by conventional means. Using GI191E/A8, the detection of BCL-6
protein was significantly increased, and its specificity was independent of
formalin-fixation time. Using automatic quantified analysis, the correlation
between the two anti-BCL-6 MAbs tested was identical in cases with overexpression
or absence of BCL-6. In cases with intermediate BCL-6 protein expression,
detection with GI191E/A8 was more sensitive. A significant association of higher 
BCL-6 expression and longer median overall survival times in diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas was found. Using conventionally produced MAbs in the same patient
group, the association was not significant.

PMID: 16046671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Hematology. 2005 Apr;10(2):115-29.

Targeted somatic mutation of the BCL6 proto-oncogene and its impact on
lymphomagenesis.

Jardin F(1), Sahota SS.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Hématologie Clinique and Groupe d'étude des proliférations
lymphoïdes, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France. fabrice.jardin@rouen.fnclcc.fr

Cloning translocation breakpoints which cluster suspiciously to specific
chromosomal loci has proved fruitful, leading to the identification of genes
implicated in the onset of hematological malignancy. One of the most notable is
BCL6, located on chromosome 3q27. The BCL6 is now known to encode a nuclear
transcriptional repressor, with pivotal roles in germinal center (GC) formation
and regulation of lymphocyte function, differentiation and survival. Unusually,
the BCL6 gene locus is also actively targeted by the somatic mutation (SM)
mechanism, at a rate indicative of specific, regulated events in both normal and 
malignant B-cells. These mutations occur in approximately 30% of normal
centrocytes and centroblasts, but not in naive or pre-GC B-cells. They are also
observed in approximately 70% of diffuse large B-cells lymphomas, approximately
30% of follicular lymphomas (FL) and at various frequencies in many lymphoma
subtypes. Mutations are generated in the 5' proximity of the BCL6 promoter,
including the first intron and are mainly single nucleotide substitutions, but
with insertions and deletions also observed. Mutations in BCL6 occur
independently of translocations, although mutational levels can be dramatically
influenced by aberrantly translocated chromosomal elements, which map in the
vicinity of the gene. Indeed, SMs are directly implicated in the generation of
chromosomal translocations, as suggested by the overlap of the breakpoint cluster
region and the mutational cluster domain. The prognostic value of the overall
level of BCL6 mutations in specific lymphoma populations is, in the main, not as 
yet fully resolved. The accumulation of mutations in BCL6 during high grade
transformation of FL, a mutational clustering and specific recurrent mutations
suggest that some mutations may be selected for by their effect on the survival
of the tumoral clone. In fact, it is now clear that SM can target and disrupt
regulatory motifs in BCL6 to result in upregulated gene expression. Exogenous
factors can also perturbate SM in BCL6. Viral infection elevates BCL6 mutational 
activity, suggesting a potential link with onset of virus-associated lymphoma.
These findings to date reveal several mechanisms which can influence specific
mutations targeting BCL6, and which may contribute to lymphomagenesis by
dysregulating control of BCL6 expression.

PMID: 16019457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Aug;29(8):1086-94.

Clinical, immunophenotypic, and genetic analysis of adult lymphomas with
morphologic features of Burkitt lymphoma.

Haralambieva E(1), Boerma EJ, van Imhoff GW, Rosati S, Schuuring E,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Kluin PM, Ott G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.

A prompt distinction of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) versus diffuse large B cell
lymphomas (DLBCL) has important clinical implications; however, this distinction 
can be difficult. We analyzed 74 adult gray zone and 10 reference pediatric BL
using immunohistochemistry (Ki-67, CD10, bcl2, bcl6) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) for MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 breakpoints. Two algorithms for
classification were followed: algorithm A used a two-step review by four
hemato-pathologists and algorithm B a set of only biologic markers (Ki-67 > or = 
90%, CD10+, bcl6+, bcl2-, MYC breakpoint+, BCL2 and BCL6 breakpoint-). Both
algorithms categorized all reference cases as BL. In the adult group, algorithm A
resulted in 21 adult BL and 52 DLBCL and algorithm B in 23 BL and 51
"non-Burkitt" lymphomas (nBL); 9 cases (12%) contained two different
translocations and were categorized as nBL in algorithm B. Fifteen cases (20%)
fulfilled the BL criteria of both algorithms. Although not considered as BL
according to both algorithms, many other lymphomas showed nonetheless a
phenotypic and/or genetic shift to BL. BL according to algorithm B was more
homogeneous with respect to clinical presentation (gender and localization) than 
BL defined by algorithm A. Our data suggest that only a few cases of these gray
zone lymphomas represent true de novo BL. Immunohistochemistry for Ki-67, CD10,
and bcl2 with analysis of MYC and preferably also BCL2 and BCL6 may be advised as
a marker panel for this diagnostic dilemma.

PMID: 16006805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Methods Mol Med. 2005;115:217-30.

Cloning of immunoglobulin chromosomal translocations by long-distance inverse
polymerase chain reaction.

Karran EL(1), Sonoki T, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, University of Leicester, 
UK.

Many subtypes of B-cell malignancy are characterized by chromosomal
translocations that target the immunoglobulin loci. Molecular cloning of such
translocations continues to allow the identification of genes whose deregulated
expression plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of B-cell malignancy. The
clustering of breakpoints within the immunoglobulin loci has allowed the
development of rapid and robust polymerase chain reaction methods for cloning. We
discuss in this chapter the use of long-distance inverse polymerase chain
reaction methods to clone immunoglobulin chromosomal translocation breakpoints
from clinical material. These methods have been successfully applied to several
other types of chromosomal translocation including those involving other genes
such as BCL6, ETV6, and MYC.

PMID: 15998970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Histopathology. 2005 Jul;47(1):101-10.

Large B-cell lymphoma with Hodgkin's features.

García JF(1), Mollejo M, Fraga M, Forteza J, Muniesa JA, Pérez-Guillermo M,
Pérez-Seoane C, Rivera T, Ortega P, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncologica (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. jfgarcia@cnio.es

AIMS: To describe the features of a series of nine cases of diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL) showing morphological and immunophenotypic features that are
intermediate with Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Most cases (6/9) presented as mediastinal tumours affecting 
young males, while the other three cases arose in extramediastinal locations.
Histopathologically, tumours showed diffuse large cell areas in a polymorphous
background, with pleomorphic cytology and the common presence of Hodgkin's and
Reed-Sternberg cells. Immunophenotypically, tumours shared features of DLBCL and 
classical HL, with expression of CD30, CD15 (6/9), and a full B-cell profile
including CD45RB, CD20, CD79a and OCT2. Epstein-Barr virus-latent membrane
protein expression was found in 2/9 cases. The majority of tumours had
immunohistochemical features consistent with activation of the NF-(kappa)B
pathway, including nuclear location of the c-REL/p65 subunit, overexpression of
phosphorylated I(kappa)B(alpha), and overexpression of NF-(kappa)B targets.
Finally, 2/9 cases showed 3q27 (BCL6) rearrangement, and 1/9 had p53 gene
mutations, both of which are rarely detected in classical HL.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that DLBCLs with HL features constitute a
distinctive subgroup of aggressive lymphomas whose neoplastic growth and peculiar
characteristics could be facilitated by a particular microenvironment found in
the mediastinum.

PMID: 15982329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Histopathology. 2005 Jul;47(1):90-100.

Extrafollicular proliferation of B cells in the absence of follicular
hyperplasia: a distinct reaction pattern in lymph nodes correlated with primary
or recall type responses.

Brighenti A(1), Andrulis M, Geissinger E, Roth S, Müller-Hermelink HK, Rüdiger T.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anatomia Patologica, Università degli Studi di Verona, Verona,
Italy.

AIMS: Extrafollicular activation of B cells is rarely observed in human lymph
nodes. The aim of this study was to extensively analyse the expression of surface
molecules and transcription factors in four such cases, comparing them with
follicular B cells and medullary cord plasma cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Various combinations of B-cell-related surface markers and
transcription factors were studied by triple immunofluorescence. While in the
germinal centre, reactive immunoglobulin production occurred exclusively in
non-proliferating cells, in extrafollicular activation proliferation of B cells
and immunoglobulin production coexisted. In two of these cases proliferating
cells were mainly IgG+CD27+, i.e. derived from class-switched postgerminal centre
memory B cells. Some of these cells expressed CD30. In the other two cases,
immunoglobulin-forming cells were non-class-switched IgM+CD27- B cells,
representing a primary expansion of naive B cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Extrafollicular B-cell activation is the morphological correlate of 
rapid B-cell responses that do not involve the germinal centres. It is
pathogenetically heterogeneous, comprising primary responses that occur prior to,
or independent of, germinal centre reaction or memory cell activation in recall
responses.

PMID: 15982328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Immunol. 2005 Aug;42(12):1453-9. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Bcl6 regulates Th2 type cytokine productions by mast cells activated by
FcepsilonRI/IgE cross-linking.

Ohtsuka Y(1), Arima M, Fujimura L, Li H, Sakamoto A, Okamoto Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics H2, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Inohana 1-8-1, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6-/-) mice displayed Th2 type inflammation, which caused by
abnormality of non-lymphoid cells. However, initiators for the Th2 type
inflammation were not clear. In order to elucidate the initiators, we
investigated property and function of mast cells derived from Bcl6-/- mice. Mast 
cells were developed from bone marrow cells cultured with IL-3 (BMMCs). Although 
the development of BMMCs from Bcl6-/- mice was similar to that from wild-type
mice, proliferation of Bcl6-/- BMMCs stimulated with IL-3 was slightly lower than
that of wild-type BMMCs. When these BMMCs were stimulated by FcepsilonRI/IgE
cross-linking, Bcl6-/- BMMCs produced Th2 cytokines more than wild-type BMMCs
did. Thus, Bcl6-/- mast cells are one of the initiators for Th2 type inflammation
in Bcl6-/- mice, and Bcl6 may be a molecular target for Th2 type allergic
diseases.

PMID: 15950739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Clin Pathol. 2005 Jun;58(6):629-33.

Lymphoma associated chromosomal abnormalities can easily be detected by FISH on
tissue imprints. An underused diagnostic alternative.

Buño I(1), Nava P, Alvarez-Doval A, Alvarez-Rodríguez F, Díez-Martín JL,
Menárguez J.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Transplant Unit, Hospital G.U. Gregorio Marañón, C/ Doctor
Esquerdo 46, 28007 Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) is useful for detecting
specific chromosomal abnormalities in various tumours. In lymphomas, diagnosis is
frequently made using paraffin wax embedded tissue. However, FISH performed under
these conditions presents potential technical problems and difficulties in
interpretation.
AIMS: To show that FISH using tissue imprints and cytopreps or alternatively,
bone marrow (BM) smears, constitutes an easy and rapid strategy to overcome these
constraints.
METHODS: The study comprised 46 patients with lymphoma. Sixty nine tissue
imprints, cytopreps, or BM smears were analysed by FISH. Dual colour, dual fusion
FISH probes were used to detect the t(8;14), t(11;14), and t(14;18)
translocations, whereas a dual colour breakapart FISH probe was used to detect
chromosomal translocations involving the BCL6 gene.
RESULTS: Tissue imprints and cytopreps were successfully hybridised in all 52
cases, whereas hybridisation was successful in 16 of 17 archival BM smears. All
patients could be analysed to identify either the presence or absence of
chromosomal translocations.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of tissue imprints, cytopreps, or BM smears to identify
chromosomal abnormalities by FISH is a rapid and useful ancillary approach for
diagnostic purposes. Therefore, it could be used on a routine basis whenever
fresh samples are available.

PMCID: PMC1770679
PMID: 15917416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Jun;159(2):184-6.

A t(2;3)(q11;q27) involving the BCL6 gene in follicular lymphoma with dup(12q)
and t(14;18).

Yamamoto K, Okamura A, Hato A, Nishikawa S, Yakushijin K, Matsui T.

PMID: 15899396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Jun;159(2):174-6.

Unique three-way translocation, t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21), in follicular lymphoma.

Okano A(1), Nakano S, Namura K, Yamada N, Uchida R, Fuchida S, Okamoto M, Ochiai 
N, Shimazaki C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan.
aokano@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

A 43-year-old woman was diagnosed as having stage IV follicular lymphoma.
Phenotypically, the lymphoma cells were CD5(-), CD10(+), CD19(+), CD20(+),
CD23(-), HLA-DR(+), and IgM-lambda(+). Conventional chromosomal analysis showed a
three-way t(3;14;18)(q27;q32;q21) in the lymphoma cells, which was confirmed by
spectral karyotyping (SKY) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Immunohistochemistry revealed that both BCL2 and BCL6 proteins were expressed in 
the lymphoma cells, whereas only the BCL6 gene, and not the BCL2 gene, was
rearranged by Southern blotting. The patient received combination chemotherapy
and has been well for 3 years. This is the first reported case showing a
three-way translocation involving 2 major lymphoma-specific abnormalities, 3q27
and t(14;18)(q32;q21).

PMID: 15899393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2005 Jun;13(2):116-23.

The t(14;18) in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: correlation with germinal
center-associated markers and clinical features.

Xu Y(1), McKenna RW, Doolittle JE, Hladik CL, Kroft SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9072, USA. yin.xu@utsouthwestern.edu

The clinical and biologic relevance of the t(14;18) and features of germinal
center (GC) differentiation in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) remain
controversial. The authors examined the association of t(14;18) with
GC-associated markers and clinical features in 44 de novo DLBCLs (22 nodal and 22
primary extranodal). CD10, bcl-2, and bcl-6 were expressed in 50%, 62%, and 54%
of cases respectively. There were no significant differences in expression of
these markers between nodal and extranodal cases. Coexpression of CD10 and bcl-6 
was seen in 12 of 41 cases, and was more frequent in nodal than extranodal DLBCL 
(9 of 21 vs. 3 of 20; P = 0.05). A CD10+/bcl-6+ phenotype was not significantly
associated with bcl-2 expression, stage, complete remission rate, or survival.
The t(14;18) was found in 7 of 44 (16%) cases (6 nodal, 1 extranodal; P = 0.09). 
It was associated with a CD10+/bcl-6+ phenotype (5 of 7 vs. 7 of 27; P = 0.015)
and a trend toward more frequent bcl-6 expression (6 of 7 vs. 15 of 34; P =
0.09), but no association with bcl-2 expression, CD10, clinical stage, complete
remission, or survival. Among nodal or high-stage (III-IV) DLBCL, cases with the 
t(14;18) showed a trend toward decreased survival (P = 0.12).

PMID: 15894922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cancer Cell. 2005 May;7(5):445-55.

Deregulated BCL6 expression recapitulates the pathogenesis of human diffuse large
B cell lymphomas in mice.

Cattoretti G(1), Pasqualucci L, Ballon G, Tam W, Nandula SV, Shen Q, Mo T, Murty 
VV, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, 
USA.

Diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL) derive from germinal center (GC) B cells
and display chromosomal alterations deregulating the expression of BCL6, a
transcriptional repressor required for GC formation. To investigate the role of
BCL6 in DLBCL pathogenesis, we have engineered mice that express BCL6
constitutively in B cells by mimicking a chromosomal translocation found in human
DLBCL. These mice display increased GC formation and perturbed post-GC
differentiation characterized by a decreased number of post-isotype switch plasma
cells. Subsequently, these mice develop a lymphoproliferative syndrome that
culminates with the development of lymphomas displaying features typical of human
DLBCL. These results define the oncogenic role of BCL6 in the pathogenesis of
DLBCL and provide a faithful mouse model of this common disease.

PMID: 15894265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Pathol. 2005 Jul;206(3):312-9.

PU.1 protein expression has a positive linear association with protein expression
of germinal centre B cell genes including BCL-6, CD10, CD20 and CD22:
identification of PU.1 putative binding sites in the BCL-6 promotor.

Torlakovic E(1), Malecka A, Myklebust JH, Tierens A, Aasheim HC, Nesland JM,
Smeland E, Kvaløy S, Delabie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway. emt323@mail.usask.ca

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2006 Sep;210(1):130-1; author reply 132.

The transcription factor PU.1 has been shown to be crucial for the early stages
of B cell development but its function at later stages of B cell development is
less well known. We observed previously that PU.1 is expressed uniformly
throughout the mature pre-plasma cell B cell population, the only exception being
a subpopulation of germinal centre (GC) cells which showed exceptionally high
expression of PU.1. This suggested that PU.1 may also have a role in GC B cell
biology. To test this hypothesis and to screen for possible genes regulated by
PU.1, we first evaluated semi-quantitatively the possible co-expression of PU.1
with proteins known to be upregulated or downregulated during GC B cell
development. Normal lymphoid tissues and 255 B cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas of
putative GC B cell origin were evaluated. PU.1 expression was positively
associated with CD10 (p < 0.0001), CD20 (p = 0.043), CD22 (p = 0.005), CD79a (p =
0.024) and Bcl-6 (p < 0.0001) and negatively associated with cytoplasmic
immunoglobulin light-chain expression (p = 0.036) in diffuse large B cell
lymphoma. Identical or nearly identical associations were found in follicular
lymphoma. Since CD20 is known to be partly regulated by PU.1 and putative
PU.1-binding sites have been described in the regulatory regions of the CD22,
CD79a and CD10 genes, we looked for putative PU.1 binding sites in the BCL6
promotor. Four such putative PU.1 binding sites were identified. Further analysis
by gel-shift electromobility essay showed that PU.1 protein binds to three of the
four putative binding sites in the BCL6 promotor. PU.1 and Bcl-6 were also found 
to be upregulated in centroblasts in the normal GC, but jointly downregulated in 
a subpopulation of centrocytes. Our findings support the contention that PU.1 may
also have an important role in GC B cell development.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15892171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Eur J Haematol. 2005 Jun;74(6):453-65.

Microarray-based classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Poulsen CB(1), Borup R, Nielsen FC, Borregaard N, Hansen M, Grønbaek K, Møller
MB, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Denmark. c.poulsen@rh.dk

OBJECTIVE: Hierarchical clusterings of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
based on gene expression signatures have previously been used to classify DLBCL
into Germinal Center B-cell (GCB) and Activated B-cell (ABC) types. To examine if
it was feasible to perform a cross-platform validation on the Affymetrix HG-U133A
oligonucleotide arrays and improve the classification, we determined the
expression profiles of pretreatment, diagnostic samples from 52 primary nodal
DLBCL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: First, three previously published gene lists were converted 
to the HG-U133A probe sets and used for hierarchical clustering. In this way,
three subtypes, including the GCB type (n = 20), the ABC type (n = 25) and an
intermediate group, Type-3 (n = 5), were distinguished. The CD10 and Bcl-6
expression as well as t(14;18) translocation were prevalent, but not exclusive to
the GCB type. By contrast, MUM1 was only expressed in the ABC and in Type-3
samples. The 5-year survival was similar between the groups, but GCB patients
showed a better initial response to CHOP or CHOP-like regimens than the remaining
patients and tended to have less advanced disease and lower IPI scores. As a next
step, an improved set of classifier genes was generated by analysis of 34
patients that were consistently classified as GCB or ABC in the above analyses.
Seventy-eight genes were selected and demonstrated on two previously published
data sets (Shipp et al. Nat Med 2002;8:68-74 and Houldsworth et al. Blood
2004;103:1862-1868) to exhibit a higher specificity than the original gene lists.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that gene expression profiling with Affymetrix Genechips 
is efficient to distinguish between GCB and ABC types of DLBCL and that these are
likely to represent separate biological entities. The Genechip platform is highly
standardised and therefore useful for future prospective investigations to
establish the value of gene expression profiling in the clinical management of
DLBCL.

PMID: 15876249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Ann Hematol. 2005 Aug;84(8):506-9. Epub 2005 May 5.

Molecular epidemiology of follicular lymphoma in Chinese: relationship with
bcl-2/IgH translocation and bcl-6 397G/C polymorphism.

Au WY(1), Fung A, Liang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, People's Republic of China. auwing@hotmail.com

The relative incidence of follicular lymphoma (FL) compared with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLCL) is low in Chinese. This may be due to a lower incidence of
t(14;18)-mediated disease, a rapid transformation of FL to DLCL, or a lower
incidence of FL-prone genetic polymorphisms (e.g., bcl-6 G397C). Using a
conventional and long-distance polymerase chain reaction technique, we showed
that 93% (43/46) of Chinese FL cases are t(14;18) related and are molecularly
indistinguishable from Caucasian cases. The translocation was uncommonly found in
Chinese DLCL cases (8/58, 14%). Furthermore, the incidence of bcl-6 hypermutation
in FL and DLCL cases appeared to be comparable. These data do not suggest a high 
incidence of transformation from FL to DLCL in Chinese. Sequencing study also did
not show an increased incidence of G397C polymorphism (heterozygote+homozygotes) 
in FL compared to a population with Chinese background or DLCL cases (25+5% vs
30+4% vs 22+3%). The reasons for the lower incidence of FL in Chinese remain
unanswered.

PMID: 15875184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Neoplasma. 2005;52(3):267-72.

Primary lymphoma of the liver -- morphological and clinical analysis of 6 cases. 
Success of aggressive treatment.

Ziarkiewicz-Wroblewska B(1), Gornicka B, Suleiman W, Wroblewski T, Morton M,
Wilczynski GM, Heleniak H, Skwarek A, Koperski L, Dudek K, Krawczyk M,
Jedrzejczak WW, Dwilewicz-Trojaczek J, Wasiutynski A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland. 
wroblewskabogna@tlen.pl

Histological, clinical and immunohistochemical analysis of 6 cases of primary
liver lymphomas (PLL) are presented. PLL represents 4.3% of primary malignant
liver tumors diagnosed in our department. The patients were relatively young
people, who despite the presence of a large tumor, were in good general health
status. There were no signs of scirrhosis, and cancer markers were normal. All
lymphomas were CD20, CD79a, BAX positive, CD3, CD30, EMA, CD10, CD5, CD59, c-myc,
Bcl2, EBV(LMP), CK negative. The proliferation index (Ki67) was high, ranging
from 50-100%. In two cases positive staining for Bcl6 and in another one for
cyclin D1 was obtained. The major histological type of the tumor was diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma. Positive immunohistochemical results with BAX and the lack
of Bcl2, c-myc and CD59 are associated with better prognosis. We have not
confirmed the value of Bcl6 and CD10 stains as a predictor of poor outcome.
Despite clinically advanced stage at the time of diagnosis, if treated
appropriately, the primary lymphoma of the liver has relatively good prognosis
(five of our patients are alive).

PMID: 15875091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Cell Sci. 2005 May 1;118(Pt 9):1873-83.

BCL6 suppresses RhoA activity to alter macrophage morphology and motility.

Pixley FJ(1), Xiong Y, Yu RY, Sahai EA, Stanley ER, Ye BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. pixley@aecom.yu.edu

BCL6 is a potent transcriptional repressor that plays important roles in germinal
center formation, T helper cell differentiation and lymphomagenesis and regulates
expression of several chemokine genes in macrophages. In a further investigation 
of its role in macrophages, we show that BCL6 inactivation in primary bone
marrow-derived macrophages leads to decreased polarization, motility and cell
spreading accompanied by an increase in peripheral focal complexes, anchored
F-actin bundles and cortical F-actin density. These changes were associated with 
excess RhoA activation. C3 transferase inhibition of RhoA activity reverted the
adhesion structure phenotype, which was not affected by Rho kinase inhibitors,
suggesting that other downstream effectors of Rho maintain this Bcl6(-/-)
phenotype. Excess RhoA activation in BCL6-deficient macrophages is associated
with a decrease in the p120RasGAP (RASA1)-mediated translocation of p190RhoGAP
(GRLF1) to active RhoA at the plasma membrane and a reduction in cell surface
expression of the CSF1R that has been reported to recruit RasGAP to the plasma
membrane. Reconstitution of BCL6 expression in Bcl6(-/-) macrophages results in
complete reversion of the morphological phenotype and a significant increase in
cell surface CSF1R expression whereas overexpression of the CSF1R corrects the
polarization and adhesion structure defects. These results demonstrate that BCL6 
suppresses RhoA activity, largely through upregulation of surface CSF1R
expression, to modulate cytoskeletal and adhesion structures and increase the
motility of macrophages.

PMID: 15860730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Blood. 2005 Aug 15;106(4):1164-74. Epub 2005 Apr 26.

Advances in the biology and therapy of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: moving
toward a molecularly targeted approach.

Abramson JS(1), Shipp MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) displays striking heterogeneity at the
clinical, genetic, and molecular levels. Clinical prognostic models can define a 
population at high risk for relapse following empiric chemotherapy, although such
models do not account for underlying biologic differences among tumors. Commonly 
observed genetic abnormalities that likely contribute to pathogenesis include
translocations of BCL6, BCL2, cMYC, and FAS(CD95) mutations, and aberrant somatic
hypermutation. Despite recent advances in empiric chemotherapy, including
interval reduction of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine,
prednisone) and the incorporation of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, a
significant proportion of patients still die of their disease. Gene expression
profiling has shed light on the molecular heterogeneity within DLBCL by
highlighting similarities between subsets of tumors and normal B cells,
identifying features associated with unfavorable responses to empiric combination
chemotherapy, and defining robust subtypes with comprehensive transcriptional
signatures. Such strategies have suggested distinct routes to lymphomagenesis and
have identified promising rational therapeutic targets. Additional novel
therapies under investigation include those targeting BCL6 and BCL2, as well as
development of novel monoclonal antibody-based therapies. Our increasing
molecular understanding of the heterogeneous subsets within DLBCL will likely
improve the current empiric therapy of DLBCL by identifying rational therapeutic 
targets in specific disease subtypes.

PMID: 15855278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Aug;43(4):414-23.

Amplification of IGH/MYC fusion in clinically aggressive IGH/BCL2-positive
germinal center B-cell lymphomas.

Martín-Subero JI(1), Odero MD, Hernandez R, Cigudosa JC, Agirre X, Saez B,
Sanz-García E, Ardanaz MT, Novo FJ, Gascoyne RD, Calasanz MJ, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus
Kiel, Germany.

Activation of an oncogene via its juxtaposition to the IGH locus by a chromosomal
translocation or, less frequently, by genomic amplification is considered a major
mechanism of B-cell lymphomagenesis. However, amplification of an IGH/oncogene
fusion, coined a complicon, is a rare event in human cancers and has been
associated with poor outcome and resistance to treatment. In this article are
descriptions of two cases of germinal-center-derived B-cell lymphomas with
IGH/BCL2 fusion that additionally displayed amplification of an IGH/MYC fusion.
As shown by fluorescence in situ hybridization, the first case contained a
IGH/MYC complicon in double minutes, whereas the second case showed a
BCL2/IGH/MYC complicon on a der(8)t(8;14)t(14;18). Additional molecular
cytogenetic and mutation analyses revealed that the first case also contained a
chromosomal translocation affecting the BCL6 oncogene and a biallelic
inactivation of TP53. The second case harbored a duplication of REL and acquired 
a translocation affecting IGL and a biallelic inactivation of TP53 during
progression. Complicons affecting Igh/Myc have been reported previously in
lymphomas of mouse models simultaneously deficient in Tp53 and in genes of the
nonhomologous end-joining DNA repair pathway. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first time that IGH/MYC complicons have been reported in human lymphomas. 
Our findings imply that the two mechanisms resulting in MYC deregulation, that
is, translocation and amplification, can occur simultaneously.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15852472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 May 24;102(21):7418-25. Epub 2005 Apr 15.

BCL6b mediates the enhanced magnitude of the secondary response of memory CD8+ T 
lymphocytes.

Manders PM(1), Hunter PJ, Telaranta AI, Carr JM, Marshall JL, Carrasco M,
Murakami Y, Palmowski MJ, Cerundolo V, Kaech SM, Ahmed R, Fearon DT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Immunology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Medical Research Council Centre, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

A characteristic of the secondary response of CD8(+) T cells that distinguishes
it from the primary response is the generation of greater numbers of effector
cells. Because effector CD8(+) T cells are derived from a pool of less
differentiated, replicating cells in secondary lymphoid organs, and because IL-2 
mediates effector differentiation, the enhanced secondary response may reflect
the enlargement of this generative pool by the transient repression of
IL-2-mediated differentiation. We have examined for this function the
transcriptional repressor BCL6b, a homologue of BCL6 that represses IL-2-induced 
B cell differentiation. BCL6b is expressed in a small subset of
antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells. Ectopic expression of BCL6b in CD8(+) T cells
diminishes their growth in response to IL-2 in vitro. Female mice in which the
BCL6b gene has been interrupted have normal primary responses of CD8(+) T cells
to infection with vaccinia expressing the H-Y epitope, Uty, but Uty-specific,
BCL6b(-/-), memory CD8(+) T cells have diminished recall proliferative responses 
to this epitope in vitro. BCL6b(-/-) mice also have normal primary CD8(+) T cell 
responses to influenza infection, but nucleoprotein peptide-specific, BCL6b(-/-),
memory CD8(+) T cells have a cell autonomous defect in the number of effector
cells generated in response to reinfection. Therefore, BCL6b is required for the 
enhanced magnitude of the secondary response of memory CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC1140431
PMID: 15833813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 May;29(5):666-73.

Genetic aberrations in primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma: a fluorescence in
situ hybridization study of 25 cases.

Wiesner T(1), Streubel B, Huber D, Kerl H, Chott A, Cerroni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.

In contrast to nodal large B-cell lymphomas, recurrent chromosomal aberrations
have been studied only in a small number of cases of primary cutaneous diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (PCDLBCL). We investigated 25 PCDLBCLs (classified
according to the WHO-EORTC classification into PCDLBCL, leg-type, 8; and PCDLBCL,
other, 17), using an interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization technique. All
cases were analyzed for chromosomal aberrations commonly observed in nodal large 
B-cell lymphomas, including structural aberrations of the genes BCL2, BCL6, and
c-MYC, and numerical aberrations of the chromosomes/genes 3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13,
17, 18q, RB1, and p53. We observed genetic aberrations in 19 (76%) of 25
patients. The most frequent numerical aberrations were gains of chromosome 12 (7 
of 25, 28%), 7 (5 of 25, 20%), 3 (5 of 25, 20%), 18q (3 of 25, 12%), 11 (3 of 25,
12%), X (3 of 25, 12%), and losses of chromosome/gene 17/p53 (3 of 25, 12%).
BCL2, c-MYC, and BCL6 were rearranged with the IGH gene in 4 (16%), 1 (4%), and
none (0%) of 25 cases, respectively. Most aberrations were homogeneously
distributed among cases of PCDLBCL, leg-type and of PCDLBCL, other, cases located
on the leg or at other body sites, cases with round and cleaved cell morphology, 
and Bcl-2+ and Bcl-2- cases. These results suggest that PCDLBCLs show similar
chromosomal aberrations irrespective of classification, anatomic site, cell
morphology, and Bcl-2 expression, and that many similarities between primary
cutaneous and nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphomas can be observed.

PMID: 15832092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Leukemia. 2005 Jun;19(6):1058-63.

Low-grade follicular lymphoma with t(14;18) presents a homogeneous disease entity
otherwise the rest comprises minor groups of heterogeneous disease entities with 
Bcl2 amplification, Bcl6 translocation or other gene aberrances.

Guo Y(1), Karube K, Kawano R, Yamaguchi T, Suzumiya J, Huang GS, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka
814-0180, Japan.

Follicular lymphomas (FL) are morphologically classified into grades 1, 2, 3a and
3b by the World Health Organization. Bcl2, Bcl6 and CD10 are phenotypic markers
of FL while the Bcl2 t(14;18) and Bcl6 t(3q27) gene translocations are common
genetic changes. However, to date, there has been no integrated analysis based on
phenotype, grade and genotype from large numbers of FL cases. We graded 261 cases
of FL and determined their phenotypes and gene alterations. According to the
antigen markers and gene alterations of 147 cases, we classified FL into typical 
and the others types. The typical group, which includes 69% cases of FL, is
characterized by low histological grade (grade 1, 2), coexpression of BCL2 and
CD10 and Bcl2 gene translocation. The rest comprises a small part of low-grade FL
without Bcl2 gene translocation and high-grade (grade 3a, 3b) FL. These FLs
include some heterogeneous disease entities. They are characterized by high
histological grade (87%), no definite expression of BCL2 or CD10 and several
kinds of gene aberrances including Bcl2 translocation, Bcl6 translocation, Bcl2
amplification or other unknown gene abnormality. Our findings indicate that
typical FL presents a homogeneous disease entity whereas the rest comprises
heterogeneous diseases entities.

PMID: 15815725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Pathol. 2005 May;206(1):76-86.

PRDM1/Blimp-1 is expressed in human B-lymphocytes committed to the plasma cell
lineage.

Cattoretti G(1), Angelin-Duclos C, Shaknovich R, Zhou H, Wang D, Alobeid B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
gc87@columbia.edu

PRDM1/Blimp-1 (in human and mouse, respectively) has a central role in
determining and shaping the secretory arm of mature B-cell differentiation. In
this study, a mouse monoclonal antibody that recognizes PRDM1 was used to detail 
its distribution in normal human lymphoid tissue and in lymphoid neoplasms that
correspond to different stages of B-cell differentiation. PRDM1 was expressed in 
germinal centre blasts that co-express Pax5, CD19, CD20, and CD10, but not BCL6
or MTA-3. Pax5 was downregulated and full plasma cell morphology and phenotype
were acquired by PRDM1+, nuclear cREL-, pre-plasma cells upon exit from the
germinal centre. Activated extrafollicular B-cells (CD30+, Pax5+) were largely
PRDM1-. PRDM1 was also absent in tissue histiocytes and the majority of resting
T-cells and S-100+ antigen-presenting cells. PRDM1 and CD138 were expressed
simultaneously in human lymphomas with plasma cell differentiation, but not in
marginal zone lymphomas or chronic lymphocytic leukaemias. A minority of diffuse 
large B-cell lymphomas expressed PRDM1 and Hodgkin lymphomas were largely PRDM1-.
Infiltrating T-cells in PRDM1- B-cell lymphomas expressed PRDM1. In conclusion,
PRDM1 staining is a reliable and informative assay to define plasma cell
commitment and differentiation in human normal and neoplastic B-cell lineages.

2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15772984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 May;13(5):563-9.

Novel mutations in BCOR in three patients with oculo-facio-cardio-dental
syndrome, but none in Lenz microphthalmia syndrome.

Horn D(1), Chyrek M, Kleier S, Lüttgen S, Bolz H, Hinkel GK, Korenke GC, Riess A,
Schell-Apacik C, Tinschert S, Wieczorek D, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Kutsche K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charité, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin,
Germany.

Oculo-facio-cardio-dental (OFCD) syndrome is a rare X-linked dominant condition
with male lethality characterized by microphthalmia, congenital cataracts, facial
dysmorphic features, congenital heart defects, and dental anomalies. Mutations in
BCOR (BCL6 co-repressor) located in Xp11.4 have been described to cause OFCD
syndrome. Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is inherited in an X-linked recessive
pattern comprising microphthalmia/anophthalmia, mental retardation, malformed
ears, digital, skeletal, and urogenital anomalies (synonym: microphthalmia with
associated anomalies (MAA)). One locus for MAA has been mapped to Xq27-q28.
Nonetheless, linkage and subsequent mutation analysis revealed a single missense 
mutation (p.P85L) in BCOR in a large family with presumed Lenz microphthalmia
syndrome (MAA2). We describe novel mutations in BCOR in three patients with OFCD 
syndrome, two small deletions (c.2488_2489delAG and c.3286delG) and a
submicroscopic deletion of about 60 kb encompassing at least BCOR exons 2-15. No 
BCOR mutation was detected in eight patients with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome.
Our data confirm that BCOR is the causative gene for OFCD syndrome; however, the 
failure to identify any mutation in patients with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome
together with the oligosymptomatic phenotype in the reported MAA2 patients
suggest that BCOR is not the major gene for this syndrome.

PMID: 15770227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nat Immunol. 2005 Mar;6(3):303-13. Epub 2005 Feb 13.

STAT5 regulates the self-renewal capacity and differentiation of human memory B
cells and controls Bcl-6 expression.

Scheeren FA(1), Naspetti M, Diehl S, Schotte R, Nagasawa M, Wijnands E, Gimeno R,
Vyth-Dreese FA, Blom B, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology of the Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlands.

It is unknown how B cells that mature during a germinal center reaction 'decide' 
between plasma or memory cell fate. Here we describe a previously unknown
subpopulation of B cells in the human germinal center that is characterized by
tyrosine phosphorylated transcriptional activator STAT5. These cells had an
activated centrocyte phenotype and had abundant expression of BCL6 but low
expression of PRDM1, both encoding transcriptional repression proteins. Using RNA
interference and ectopic expression of constitutively activated forms of STAT5,
we demonstrate here a function for STAT5 in the self-renewal of B cells in vitro.
STAT5b isoform seemed to directly upregulate Bcl-6, and ectopic expression of
Bcl-6 in B cells resulted in self-renewal and inhibition of plasma cell
differentiation. These data indicate that activation of STAT5 is involved in
regulation of memory B cell differentiation.

PMID: 15711548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Haematologica. 2005 Feb;90(2):200-6.

Indolent lymphoplasmacytic and marginal zone B-cell lymphomas: absence of both
IRF4 and Ki67 expression identifies a better prognosis subgroup.

Petit B(1), Chaury MP, Le Clorennec C, Jaccard A, Gachard N, Moalic-Judge S,
Labrousse F, Cogné M, Bordessoule D, Feuillard J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Anatomie Pathologique, France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Small B-cell indolent lymphomas postulated to be of a 
post-germinal center origin include marginal zone lymphomas of the spleen (S-MZL)
or lymph nodes (N-MZL) and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas and
lymphoplasmacytic lymphomas (LPL). The existence of rather aggressive cases
stresses the need for new biological prognostic markers.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 90 tumors (20 LPL, 41 MALT lymphomas, 12 N-MZL,
17 S-MZL), investigating the expression of CD5, CD10, CD20, CD23, CD27, CD38,
CD79a, CD138, Bcl6, cyclin D1, IRF4 and Ki67 antigens by immunohistochemistry.
Results were compared to the histology, the standard clinical and biological
parameters, and the global survival.
RESULTS: Tumors were all positive for CD20 and CD79a, occasionally positive for
CD5, CD23, CD138 and cyclin D1, and all negative for Bcl-6 and CD10. CD38, CD27
and IRF4 expression was heterogeneous. IRF4 expression was correlated with
plasma-cell differentiation (p=0.0017). Ki67 expression was increased mainly in
N-MZL (66%) and LPL (45%). In terms of overall survival, Ki67, IRF4 and
C-reactive protein levels were found to be the 3 independent parameters
associated with a worse outcome. Lack of both Ki67 and IRF4 expression was
associated with a longer survival (median overall survival 9.8+/-1.1 years versus
3.6+/-1.3 years in the other group) (p=0.0011).
INTERPRETATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS: Absence of expression of both Ki67 and IRF4 is
likely to define a group of memory B-cell lymphomas with a better prognosis. This
may have an important impact in the staging of patients since expression of these
markers is easily assessed in routine diagnosis.

PMID: 15710572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Cutan Pathol. 2005 Mar;32(3):227-34.

Expression of the bcl-6 and MUM1/IRF4 proteins correlate with overall and
disease-specific survival in patients with primary cutaneous large B-cell
lymphoma: a tissue microarray study.

Sundram U(1), Kim Y, Mraz-Gernhard S, Hoppe R, Natkunam Y, Kohler S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA. sundram@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: Systemic B-cell lymphomas have been studied using microarrays, which 
has led to a better understanding of their molecular characteristics. Initial
microarray studies of these lymphomas have implicated several genes as important 
predictors of outcome. In this study, we used a tissue microarray (TMA) to
characterize primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas (PCLBCL).
METHODS: We studied 14 patients for whom clinical follow up was available,
including four patients whose lesions were limited to the leg on presentation.
Immunohistochemical staining with CD20, CD44, CD21, CD5, CD10, bcl-2, bcl-6,
Ki67, p53, and multiple myeloma 1 (MUM1) was examined.
RESULTS: Our results identify two subgroups of lymphomas. The first group showed 
staining with bcl-6 and had an overall survival of 176 months (p = 0.003). The
majority of this group was negative for MUM1. The second group lacked staining
with bcl-6 and had an overall survival of 26 months, with a majority of these
cases staining with MUM1. Three of four patients with PCLBCL of the leg showed no
staining with bcl-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the utility of TMAs in the analysis of PCLBCL
and that expression of bcl-6 and MUM1 correlates with survival.

PMID: 15701085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 11;328(2):499-506.

CpG inhibits IgE class switch recombination through suppression of NF kappa B
activity, but not through Id2 or Bcl6.

Kusunoki T(1), Sugai M, Gonda H, Nambu Y, Nagata-Nakajima N, Katakai T, Kusunoki 
M, Sakamoto A, Tokuhisa T, Nakahata T, Yokota Y, Shimizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The CpG motif in DNA plays a critical role in immunity via modulating the Th1/Th2
balance. In B cells, CpG-containing oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODNs) inhibit
IL-4-mediated class switch recombination (CSR) to IgG1 and IgE through inhibition
of the germline transcription (GLT) of these isotypes. However, the molecular
mechanism of this inhibitory effect remains elusive. We showed here that Id2 and 
Bcl6, both of which inhibit IgE GLT and CSR, are not involved in this inhibitory 
pathway. We demonstrated that there is reduced activity of NF kappa B binding to 
the IgE promoter and a reduction of Irf4 protein in CpG ODN-treated B cells.
These data indicate the critical role of NF kappa B and Irf4 in the regulation of
IgE CSR through actions downstream of CpG signaling.

PMID: 15694375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Mar 14;483(3):251-62.

Differentially expressed transcripts from phenotypically identified olfactory
sensory neurons.

Yu TT(1), McIntyre JC, Bose SC, Hardin D, Owen MC, McClintock TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and The Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience of
Sensory Systems Program, The University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536-0298, USA.

In comparing purified mouse olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) with neighboring
cells, we identified 54 differentially expressed transcripts. One-third of the
transcripts encode proteins with no known function, but the others have functions
that correlate with challenges faced by OSNs. The OSNs expressed a diversity of
signaling protein genes, including stomatin (Epb7.2), S100A5, Ddit3, Sirt2, CD81,
Sdc2, Omp, and Ptpla. The elaboration of dendrites, cilia, and axons that places 
OSNs in contact with diverse cell types and signals presumably also requires
large investments in cytoskeletal-associated proteins, lipid biosynthesis, and
energy production. Several of the genes encode proteins that participate in these
biological processes, including ATP5g3, Ndufa9, Sqrdl, Mdh1, Got1, beta-2
tubulin, Capza1, Bin3, Tom1, Acl6, and similar to O-MACS. Three transcripts had
restricted expression patterns. Similar to O-MACS and Gstm2 had zonally
restricted expression patterns in OSNs and sustentacular cells but not in
Bowman's glands, suggesting that zonality can be differentially regulated by cell
type. The mosaic expression pattern of S100A5 in approximately 70% of OSNs
predicts that it is coexpressed with a subset of odorant receptors. We captured
four abundant transcripts, Cyp2a4, similar to Cyp2g1, Gstm2, and Cbr2, that
encode xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes expressed by sustentacular cells or
Bowman's glands, reinforcing the interpretation that clearance of xenobiotic
compounds is a major function of these cells. Within the olfactory epithelium,
Cbr2 is a new anatomical marker for sustentacular cells. We also discovered that 
Reg3g is a marker for respiratory epithelium.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2967457
PMID: 15682396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Blood. 2005 May 15;105(10):3979-86. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Expression of the human germinal center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) protein, a new
marker of germinal center B-cell derivation.

Natkunam Y(1), Lossos IS, Taidi B, Zhao S, Lu X, Ding F, Hammer AS, Marafioti T, 
Byrne GE Jr, Levy S, Warnke RA, Levy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur
Dr, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. yaso@stanford.edu

We identified the human germinal center-associated lymphoma (HGAL) in
gene-expression profiling studies of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). The
expression of HGAL correlated with survival in patients with DLBCL. The HGAL gene
is the human homolog of M17, a mouse gene expressed specifically in normal
germinal center (GC) B cells. We generated a monoclonal antibody against the HGAL
protein and show that HGAL is expressed in the cytoplasm of GC lymphocytes and in
lymphomas of GC derivation. Among 727 lymphomas tested by immunohistochemistry on
tissue microarrays, HGAL staining was found in follicular lymphomas (103 of 107),
Burkitt lymphomas (40 of 40), mediastinal large B lymphomas (7 of 8), and in
DLBCLs (103 of 151). Most marginal zone lymphomas lacked HGAL staining.
Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphomas (12 of 17) and, surprisingly, classical 
Hodgkin lymphomas (78 of 107) were found to be positive. Hierarchical clustering 
of comparative immunohistologic results in DLBCLs demonstrates that the
expression of HGAL is similar to 2 other GC-associated proteins, BCL6 and CD10,
but different from 2 markers associated with a non-GC phenotype, MUM1/IRF4 and
BCL2. The restricted expression and GC specificity of HGAL protein suggest that
it may have an important role in the diagnosis of specific lymphomas, and,
potentially in the identification of subtypes associated with different
prognoses.

PMCID: PMC1895083
PMID: 15677569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Feb;157(1):12-7.

Variant t(14;18) in malignant lymphoma: a report of seven cases.

Bentley G(1), Palutke M, Mohamed AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Detroit Medical Center, Wayne State University School
of Medicine, Hutzel Professional Building, 4727 St. Antoine Boulevard, Suite 411,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The BCL2 gene was identified through molecular analysis of the breakpoints
involved in the t(14;18)(q32;q21) found in the majority of follicular lymphomas
(FL). Variant translocations leading to juxtaposing of the BCL2 with either the
IGK or IGL gene have been recognized in B-cell malignant lymphoma, although they 
are rare. We identified seven lymphoma cases that had variant translocations.
Three cases had simple translocations involving two chromosomal regions:
t(18;22)(q21;q11.2) in two cases and t(2;18)(p11.2;q21) in the third case.
Complex translocations affecting more than two chromosomes were seen in the
remaining four cases. Fluorescence in situ hybridization using the LSI IGH/BCL2
DNA probes revealed rearrangements of the BCL2 gene locus in all cases. In
addition, expression of BCL2 protein was seen in all cases; only five of the
seven cases expressed BCL6 protein. Morphologically, the lymphomas were
categorized as B-cell follicular lymphoma in six cases and in the seventh case as
diffuse large cell lymphoma (Richter syndrome) transformed from preexisting
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). In case 2, the variant t(18;22) was seen as a
secondary aberration evolving from a trisomy 12 clone. The findings revealed that
BCL2 rearrangements in some malignant lymphomas occur through variant simple or
complex chromosomal translocations, but always involving the IGH, IGK, or IGL
chromosomal site. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization proved to be an
important tool in evaluating these cases by showing IGH/BCL2 gene fusion or
repositioning of the BCL2 gene.

PMID: 15676141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell Cycle. 2005 Feb;4(2):239-41. Epub 2005 Feb 13.

Reprogramming specific gene expression pathways in B-cell lymphomas.

Melnick A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and MolecularBiology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NewYork 10461, USA. amelnick@aecom.yu.edu

The BCL6 transcriptional repressor is normally expressed during the germinal
center phase of B-cell differentiation. Germinal center B-cells typically undergo
rapid proliferation in spite of accumulating DNA damage caused by class switch
recombination and somatic hypermutation. BCL6 is required to license B-cells for 
the germinal center reaction and its down regulation appears to be important for 
cells to exit this stage and undergo further differentiation. BCL6 appears to
mediate these biological effects by recruiting corepressor complexes to silence
critical cell cycle checkpoint and differentiation related genes. Based on our
data and recent publications, we propose that these gene pathways are regulated
through distinct transcriptional mechanisms, which can be specifically targeted
to reprogram B-cells preferentially for either growth suppression and apoptosis, 
or differentiation. As BCL6 plays a central role in the pathogenesis of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, we predict that targeting BCL6 transcriptional repression 
complexes in malignant B-cells may constitute a novel form of transcription
therapy for lymphomas and possibly other tumors.

PMID: 15655367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Mar;42(3):287-98.

Analysis of myelodysplastic syndromes with complex karyotypes by high-resolution 
comparative genomic hybridization and subtelomeric CGH array.

Martínez-Ramírez A(1), Urioste M, Melchor L, Blesa D, Valle L, de Andrés SA, Kok 
K, Calasanz MJ, Cigudosa JC, Benítez J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid,
Spain.

Molecular cytogenetic techniques enabled us to clarify numerical and structural
alterations previously detected by conventional cytogenetic techniques in 37
patients who had myelodysplastic syndromes with complex karyotypes. Using
high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization (HR-CGH), we found the most
recurrent alterations to be deletion of 5q (70%), 18q (35%), 7q (32%), 11q (30%),
and 20q (24%), gain of 11q (35%) and 8q (24%), and trisomy of chromosome 8 (19%).
Furthermore, in 35% of the patients, 20 amplifications were identified. These
amplifications were shown by FISH to involve some genes previously described as
amplified in hematological malignancies, such as ERBB2, MLL, and RUNX1. In
addition, two other genes, BCL6 and BCL2, which are classically related to
apoptosis and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, were shown for the first time to be involved 
in amplification. Genomic alterations involving different subtelomeric regions
with losses in 4p16, 5p15.3, 6q27, 18p11.3, and 18q23 and gains in 1p36.3 and
19p13.3 were detected by HR-CGH. Array CGH analysis of the subtelomeric regions
in some samples was able to confirm a number of these alterations and found some 
additional alterations not detected by conventional CGH.

PMID: 15611930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Blood. 2005 Apr 1;105(7):2924-32. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

Distinct IL-4-induced gene expression, proliferation, and intracellular signaling
in germinal center B-cell-like and activated B-cell-like diffuse large-cell
lymphomas.

Lu X(1), Nechushtan H, Ding F, Rosado MF, Singal R, Alizadeh AA, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, University of Miami, 1475 NW 12th Ave (D8-4), Miami, FL
33136, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) can be subclassified into germinal center
B-cell (GCB)-like and activated B-cell (ABC)-like tumors characterized by long
and short survival, respectively. In contrast to ABC-like DLBCL, GCB-like tumors 
exhibit high expression of components of the interleukin 4 (IL-4) signaling
pathway and of IL-4 target genes such as BCL6 and HGAL, whose high expression
independently predicts better survival. These observations suggest distinct
activity of the IL-4 signaling pathway in DLBCL subtypes. Herein, we demonstrate 
similar IL-4 expression but qualitatively different IL-4 effects on GCB-like and 
ABC-like DLBCL. In GCB-like DLBCL, IL-4 induces expression of its target genes,
activates signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 (STAT6) signaling,
and increases cell proliferation. In contrast, in the ABC-like DLBCL, IL-4
activates AKT, decreases cell proliferation by cell cycle arrest, and does not
induce gene expression due to aberrant Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT6 signaling
attributed to STAT6 dephosphorylation. We found distinct expression profiles of
tyrosine phosphatases in DLBCL subtypes and identified putative STAT6 tyrosine
phosphatases-protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 1 (PTPN1) and PTPN2,
whose expression is significantly higher in ABC-like DLBCL. These differences in 
tyrosine phosphatase expression might underlie distinct expression profiles of
some of the IL-4 target genes and could contribute to a different clinical
outcome of patients with GCB-like and ABC-like DLBCLs.

PMID: 15591113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nature. 2004 Dec 2;432(7017):635-9.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene suppresses p53 expression in germinal-centre B cells.

Phan RT(1), Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics and the Department of Pathology, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The human proto-oncogene BCL6 encodes a BTB/POZ-zinc-finger transcriptional
repressor that is necessary for germinal-centre formation and is implicated in
the pathogenesis of B-cell lymphoma. The precise function of BCL6 in
germinal-centre development and lymphomagenesis is unclear because very few
direct BCL6 target genes have been identified. Here we report that BCL6
suppresses the expression of the p53 (also known as tp53) tumour suppressor gene 
and modulates DNA damage-induced apoptotic responses in germinal-centre B cells. 
BCL6 represses p53 transcription by binding two specific DNA sites within the p53
promoter region and, accordingly, p53 expression is absent in germinal-centre B
cells where BCL6 is highly expressed. Suppression of BCL6 expression via specific
short interfering RNA leads to increased levels of p53 messenger RNA and protein 
both under basal conditions and in response to DNA damage. Most notably,
constitutive expression of BCL6 protects B cell lines from apoptosis induced by
DNA damage. These results suggest that an important function of BCL6 is to allow 
germinal-centre B cells to tolerate the physiological DNA breaks required for
immunoglobulin class switch recombination and somatic hypermutation without
inducing a p53-dependent apoptotic response. These findings also imply that
deregulated BCL6 expression contributes to lymphomagenesis in part by functional 
inactivation of p53.

PMID: 15577913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jan 7;326(1):242-8.

The ARF tumor suppressor inhibits BCL6-mediated transcriptional repression.

Suzuki H(1), Kurita M, Mizumoto K, Moriyama M, Aiso S, Nishimoto I, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, KEIO University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

The ARF tumor suppressor gene antagonizes generation of various tumors.
ARF-mediated tumor suppression occurs in a p53-independent manner as well as in a
p53-dependent manner. We here demonstrate that BCL6 is a target of the ARF tumor 
suppressor. Either mouse p19(ARF) or human p14(ARF) binds to BCL6 and
downregulates BCL6-induced transcriptional repression. ARF-mediated
downregulation of the BCL6 activity may account in part for ARF-mediated tumor
suppression.

PMID: 15567177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Virol. 2004 Dec;78(23):13253-61.

Comparative analysis of signal transduction by CD40 and the Epstein-Barr virus
oncoprotein LMP1 in vivo.

Panagopoulos D(1), Victoratos P, Alexiou M, Kollias G, Mosialos G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Biomedical Sciences Research Center Al. Fleming, 34
Al. Fleming St., Vari 16672, Greece.

There is much evidence, based primarily on in vitro studies, indicating that the 
Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) mimics an
activated CD40 receptor. In order to investigate the extent of similarity between
LMP1 and CD40 functions in vivo, we analyzed the cytoplasmic signaling properties
of LMP1 and CD40 in B cells in a directly comparable manner. For this purpose, we
generated transgenic mice expressing either LMP1 or a chimeric LMP1CD40 molecule,
which constitutively activates the CD40 pathway, under the control of the CD19
promoter. LMP1 and LMP1CD40 were expressed at similar levels in a
B-lymphocyte-specific manner. Similar to LMP1, LMP1CD40 suppressed germinal
center (GC) formation and antibody production in response to thymus-dependent
antigens, albeit to a greater extent than LMP1. Furthermore, the avidity of the
antibodies produced against thymus-dependent antigens was lower for LMP1CD40
transgenic mice than for wild-type and LMP1 transgenic mice. GC suppression was
linked to the ability of LMP1CD40 and LMP1 to downregulate mRNA and protein
levels of BCL6 and to suppress the activity of the BCL6 promoter. In contrast to 
LMP1, LMP1CD40 caused an upregulation of CD69, CD80, and CD86 in B cells and a
dramatic increase in serum immunoglobulin M. In addition, LMP1CD40 but not LMP1
transgenic mice had elevated numbers of marginal-zone B cells and increased
populations of polymorphonuclear cells and/or neutrophils. Consistent with these 
findings, LMP1CD40 but not LMP1 transgenic mice showed signs of spontaneous
inflammatory reactions and the potential for autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC524978
PMID: 15542676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nat Med. 2004 Dec;10(12):1329-35. Epub 2004 Nov 7.

Specific peptide interference reveals BCL6 transcriptional and oncogenic
mechanisms in B-cell lymphoma cells.

Polo JM(1), Dell'Oso T, Ranuncolo SM, Cerchietti L, Beck D, Da Silva GF, Prive
GG, Licht JD, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The BTB/POZ transcriptional repressor and candidate oncogene BCL6 is frequently
misregulated in B-cell lymphomas. The interface through which the BCL6 BTB domain
mediates recruitment of the SMRT, NCoR and BCoR corepressors was recently
identified. To determine the contribution of this interface to BCL6
transcriptional and biological properties, we generated a peptide that
specifically binds BCL6 and blocks corepressor recruitment in vivo. This
inhibitor disrupts BCL6-mediated repression and establishment of silenced
chromatin, reactivates natural BCL6 target genes, and abrogates BCL6 biological
function in B cells. In BCL6-positive lymphoma cells, peptide blockade caused
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. BTB domain peptide inhibitors may constitute a
novel therapeutic agent for B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 15531890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Blood. 2005 Mar 1;105(5):2135-7. Epub 2004 Nov 2.

Deregulated expression of the Myc cellular oncogene drives development of mouse
"Burkitt-like" lymphomas from naive B cells.

Zhu D(1), Qi CF, Morse HC 3rd, Janz S, Stevenson FK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Group, Tenovus Laboratory, Southampton University
Hospitals Trust, Southampton SO16 6YD, United Kingdom. d.zhu@soton.ac.uk

Chromosomal translocations juxtaposing immunoglobulin (Ig) and MYC genes are the 
hallmarks of human Burkitt lymphoma (BL), with deregulated MYC expression being a
critical factor in pathogenesis. By inserting an intact mouse Myc gene into the
mouse genome, proximal to the Ig enhancer Emu, the effect of a precise mimic of
the major t(8;14) translocation of human endemic BL (eBL) could be investigated. 
Knock-in mice developed IgM-positive B-cell tumors, with most being typical of
eBL by histology and immunophenotype, including expression of the germinal center
(GC)-associated protein, BCL6. Unlike eBL, however, analysis of Ig V(H) sequences
revealed no significant level of somatic mutation. Thus, constitutive expression 
of Myc in the knock-in mice is apparently able to induce "Burkitt-like" lymphomas
before antigen stimulation and formation of a GC. In contrast, human eBL
development occurs in a GC or post-GC site with a likely contribution to
pathogenesis from Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and other epigenetic factors.

PMID: 15522957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(22):10058-71.

FoxO3a and BCR-ABL regulate cyclin D2 transcription through a
STAT5/BCL6-dependent mechanism.

Fernández de Mattos S(1), Essafi A, Soeiro I, Pietersen AM, Birkenkamp KU,
Edwards CS, Martino A, Nelson BH, Francis JM, Jones MC, Brosens JJ, Coffer PJ,
Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research-UK Laboratories, Department of Cancer Medicine, Imperial
College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Cell cycle arrest by FoxO transcription factors involves transcriptional
repression of cyclin D, although the exact mechanism remains unclear. In this
study, we used the BCR-ABL-expressing cell line BV173 as a model system to
investigate the mechanisms whereby FoxO3a regulates cyclin D2 expression.
Inhibition of BCR-ABL by STI571 results in down-regulation of cyclin D2
expression, activation of FoxO3a activity, and up-regulation of BCL6 expression. 
Using reporter gene assays, we demonstrate that STI571, FoxO3a, and BCL6 can
repress cyclin D2 transcription through a STAT5/BCL6 site located within the
cyclin D2 promoter. We propose that BCR-ABL inhibition leads to FoxO3a
activation, which in turn induces the expression of BCL6, culminating in the
repression of cyclin D2 transcription through this STAT5/BCL6 site. This process 
was verified by mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses. We
find that conditional activation of FoxO3a leads to accumulation of BCL6 and
down-regulation of cyclin D2 at protein and mRNA levels. Furthermore, silencing
of FoxO3a and BCL6 in BCR-ABL-expressing cells abolishes STI571-mediated effects 
on cyclin D2. This report establishes the signaling events whereby BCR-ABL
signals are relayed to cyclin D2 to mediate cell cycle progression and defines a 
potential mechanism by which FoxO proteins regulate cyclin D2 expression.

PMCID: PMC525464
PMID: 15509806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cancer Sci. 2004 Oct;95(10):809-14.

Comparison of genetic aberrations in CD10+ diffused large B-cell lymphoma and
follicular lymphoma by comparative genomic hybridization and tissue-fluorescence 
in situ hybridization.

Zhang X(1), Karnan S, Tagawa H, Suzuki R, Tsuzuki S, Hosokawa Y, Morishima Y,
Nakamura S, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

CD10 is one of the hallmarks of germinal center B-cells where follicular
lymphomas (FL) originate. It has not been clearly established, however, whether
CD10(+) diffuse B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) are genetically similar to FL. We
therefore examined 19 CD10(+) DLBCL and 40 FL by means of comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) and tissue-fluorescence in situ hybridization (T-FISH).
Chromosomal imbalance was more frequently detected in CD10(+) DLBCLs (19/19) than
in FLs (24/40). Significant differences were found in eight frequently imbalanced
regions, namely those with gains of chromosomes 7q and 12 and those with losses
of chromosomes 1p, 4p, 6q, 15q, 16p and 17. Amplification of the 3q region where 
BCL6 is located is reported to occur frequently in DLBCL, but it was only found
in one of the 19 CD10(+) DLBCL cases we examined. The involvement of t(14;18) in 
CD10(+)+ DLBCL (31%) and in FL (73%) was significantly different (P = 0.0064).
The CGH pattern of CD10(+) DLBCL with t(14;18) was also different from that of FL
with t(14;18). Taken together, our results indicate that CD10(+) DLBCL
constitutes a unique subtype entity with genetic characteristics significantly
different from those of FL and DLBCL.

PMID: 15504248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Leukemia. 2004 Dec;18(12):2026-31.

Rapid amplification of immunoglobulin heavy chain switch (IGHS) translocation
breakpoints using long-distance inverse PCR.

Sonoki T(1), Willis TG, Oscier DG, Karran EL, Siebert R, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Haematology and Cytogenetics, Institute of Cancer Research, UK.

Molecular cloning of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) translocation breakpoints
identifies genes of biological importance in the development of normal and
malignant B cells. Long-distance inverse PCR (LDI-PCR) was first applied to
amplification of IGH gene translocations targeted to the joining (IGHJ) regions. 
We report here successful amplification of the breakpoint of IGH translocations
targeted to switch (IGHS) regions by LDI-PCR. To detect IGHS translocations,
Southern blot assays using 5' and 3' switch probes were performed. Illegitimate
Smu rearrangements were amplified from the 5' end (5'Smu LDI-PCR) from the
alternative derivative chromosome, and those of Sgamma or Salpha were amplified
from the 3' end (3'Sgamma or 3'alpha LDI-PCR) from the derivative chromosome 14. 
Using a combination of these methods, we have succeeded in amplifying IGHS
translocation breakpoints involving FGFR3/MMSET on 4p16, BCL6 on 3q27, MYC on
8q24, IRTA1 on 1q21 and PAX5 on 9p13 as well as BCL11A on 2p13 and CCND3 on 6p21.
The combination of LDI-PCR for IGHJ and IGHS allows rapid molecular cloning of
almost all IGH gene translocation breakpoints.

PMID: 15496980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Nov;28(11):1401-16.

KSHV-positive solid lymphomas represent an extra-cavitary variant of primary
effusion lymphoma.

Chadburn A(1), Hyjek E, Mathew S, Cesarman E, Said J, Knowles DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA. achadbur@mail.med.cornell.edu

Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is a unique form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
associated with Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV; HHV-8) that displays
a distinct constellation of clinical, morphologic, immunologic, and molecular
characteristics. Rare KSHV-containing immunoblastic lymphomas occurring in solid 
tissues have been described. Whether they represent part of the spectrum of PEL
has not been determined. The morphologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular
features of KSHV-positive solid lymphomas occurring in 8 HIV+/AIDS patients were 
systematically investigated and compared with those of 29 similarly analyzed
PELs. The 8 KSHV-positive solid lymphomas were virtually indistinguishable from
the 29 PELs based on morphology (immunoblastic/anaplastic), immunophenotype (CD45
positive; T cell antigen negative; CD30, EMA, CD138 positive; CD10, CD15, BCL6
negative) and genotype (100% immunoglobulin genes rearranged; no identifiable
abnormalities in C-MYC, BCL6, BCL1, BCL2; and uniformly EBV positive). The only
identifiable phenotypic difference was that the KSHV-positive solid lymphomas
appeared to express B cell-associated antigens (25%) and immunoglobulin (25%)
slightly more often than the PELs (<5% and 15%, respectively; P = 0.11 and P =
0.08, respectively). The clinical presentation and course of the patients who
develop KSHV-positive solid lymphomas were also similar, except for the lack of
an effusion and somewhat better survival (median 11 months vs. 3 months).
However, the 3 KSHV-positive solid lymphoma patients alive without disease 11,
25, and 44 months following initial presentation were recently diagnosed patients
and, unlike the other patients with KSHV-positive solid lymphomas, received
anti-retroviral therapy. These findings strongly suggest that these decidedly
rare KSHV-positive solid lymphomas belong to the spectrum of PEL. Therefore, we
propose that the KSHV-positive solid lymphomas be designated extra-cavitary PELs.

PMID: 15489644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Med Hypotheses. 2004;63(5):823-6.

Possible interaction between activator protein-1 and proto-oncogene B-cell
lymphoma gene 6 in breast cancer patients resistant to tamoxifen.

Altundag K(1), Altundag O, Gunduz M, Arun B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University,
Institute of Oncology, Sihhiye, 06100 Ankara, Turkey. drkadri@usa.net

About 75% of breast tumors are positive for the estrogen receptor (ER) or
progesterone receptor (PgR) or both, and estrogen is the main stimulant in the
development and growth of these tumors. Tamoxifen, an estrogen receptor
antagonist has been endocrine treatment for hormone-sensitive breast cancer for
more than 20 years. However, the underlying cause of treatment failure in many
breast cancer patients receiving tamoxifen is resistance to tamoxifen. The
mechanisms of tamoxifen and the molecular events responsible for resistance to
tamoxifen are not fully understood. Two ER subtypes, ERalpha and ERbeta, activate
the Activator Protein-1 (AP-1) response elements, and through interactions
between ERs and the AP-1 transcription factors c-fos and c-jun, these
transcription factors regulate the genes involved in many cellular processes,
including proliferation, differentiation, cell motility, and apoptosis. Thus, the
interaction between ERs and AP-1 could be important clinically and could have
bearing on the response to tamoxifen. Tamoxifen acts as an agonist on genes under
the control of an AP-1 response elements when ERalpha or ERbeta is expressed.
AP-1 blockade suppresses mitogenic signals from multiple different peptide growth
factors as well as estrogen, and inhibits the growth of MCF-7 breast cancer cells
both in vitro and in vivo. Tamoxifen actually activate the AP-1 transcription
factor. Increased AP-1 activity in breast cancer cells can lead to tamoxifen
resistance. The proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma gene 6 (BCL-6) has been
characterized as a regulator of B-lymphocyte growth and development. BCL-6 is
also expressed in the mammary epithelium in nonpregnant animals and during early 
pregnancy and is expressed in 68% of histologically high-grade ductal breast
carcinomas, which are clinically the most aggressive. BCL-6 is a potent repressor
of transcriptional activity mediated by AP-1 factors. We hypothesize that
increased BCL-6 in breast cancer cells might block tamoxifen resistance by
repressing AP-1, eventually resulting in apoptosis. We also suggest that BCL-6
expression must be analyzed in ER-positive breast cancer patients and the results
must be correlated with predictive and prognostic factors and survival.

PMID: 15488654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Leukemia. 2004 Nov;18(11):1775-9.

AID is expressed in germinal center B-cell-like and activated B-cell-like diffuse
large-cell lymphomas and is not correlated with intraclonal heterogeneity.

Lossos IS(1), Levy R, Alizadeh AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
ilossos@med.miami.edu <ilossos@med.miami.edu>

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), highly expressed in germinal center 
(GC)-lymphocytes, is involved in somatic hypermutation (SHM). We examined AID
expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) of germinal center B-cell
(GCB)-like and activated B-cell (ABC)-like subtypes. These two types of DLBCL are
characterized by high and low expression of GC-specific genes, respectively. AID 
expression was detected in both GCB- and ABC-like DLBCL, thus demonstrating a
dissociation between AID expression and that of other GC genes. We also tested
for the presence of intraclonal heterogeneity in immunoglobulin and BCL6 genes in
those same tumors and in follicle center lymphomas (FCL) that transformed to
DLBCL. The level of AID expression did not correlate with the presence of
intraclonal sequence heterogeneity in either IgV(H) or BCL6. Our findings suggest
that lymphomas maintain some but not all of the gene expression signatures of
their normal B-cell counterparts. The fact that AID expression can be elevated
without intraclonal sequence heterogeneity raises the possibility that other
factors are required for SHM in these tumors. We found decreased levels of AID
expression in DLBCL that evolved from FCL and which had acquired new mutations in
their BCL6 genes. This dissociation suggests that AID expression and SHM may
occur at the time prior to the clinical detection of transformed lymphoma.

PMID: 15385936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Oct 1;154(1):67-71.

Molecular cytogenetic study of a mantle cell lymphoma with a complex
translocation involving the CCND1 (11q13) region.

Maravelaki S(1), Burford A, Wotherspoon A, Joshi R, Matutes E, Catovsky D,
Brito-Babapulle V.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Haematology and Cytogenetics, Institute of Cancer
Research/Royal Marsden NHS Trust, Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ, UK.

We describe a progressive mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) in which multicolor
fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) on metaphases did not detect the
characteristic t(11;14)(q13;q32), although translocations of chromosomes 11 with 
15, and 14 with 15 were observed. When CCND1/IGH probes were hybridized to
metaphases, however, cryptic fusion signals were detected on the der(11) and
der(14) sites of CCND1 (11q13) and IGH (14q32), revealing a complex translocation
involving chromosomes 11, 14, and 15. Interphase FISH with CCND1/IGH probes
revealed varying patterns with one or two fusion signals, and some with no clear 
evidence of fusion. Loss of 17p and gain of 3q, known to be associated with
disease progression in MCL, were detected with M-FISH and confirmed with the use 
of p53 and BCL6 probes together with comparative genomic hybridization, which
detected also an interstitial deletion on 7p21. This case further illustrates the
value of M-FISH in combination with fusion probes in elucidating complex
cytogenetic abnormalities.

PMID: 15381376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Haematologica. 2004 Sep;89(9):1091-9.

Primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma: hypermutation of the BCL6 gene targets
motifs different from those in diffuse large B-cell and follicular lymphomas.

Malpeli G(1), Barbi S, Moore PS, Scardoni M, Chilosi M, Scarpa A, Menestrina F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia, Sezione di Anatomia Patologica Università di
Verona, Strada Le Grazie I-37134 Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Somatic hypermutation of the BCL6 gene and its
expression in lymphoma represent specific markers for B-cell transit through the 
germinal center. Thus, analysis of BCL6 may aid in clarifying the relationship
between primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) and other non-thymic diffuse
large cell lymphomas (DLCL).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty-four PMBL were analyzed for BCL6 status, including
first intron mutations, by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), and immunohistochemistry. We also performed a meta-analysis of
reported BCL6 mutations in PMBL (n=141), DLCL (n=233), and follicular lymphoma
(n=120).
RESULTS: Thirteen PMBL (54%) showed hypermutation of BCL6. All cases showed bcl6 
mRNA and immunohistochemical expression. Meta-analysis demonstrated that the
preferentially altered sequence motifs of BCL6 in PMBL were TA (p=0.002) and AT
(p=0.0008) dinucleotides and TAT trinucleotides (p=0.001). GC and RGYW/WRCY
motifs were a target in DLCL and FL but not in PMBL. Moreover, the DNA stretch
spanning nucleotides 150-270 was highly targeted only in PMBL.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The consistent expression of bcl6 protein and
occurrence of hypermutation indicate that PMBL should be considered of germinal
center origin. The fact that the hypermutation sites and mutational spectrum of
BCL6 in PMBL differ from those found in FL and DLCL might suggest that the
maturation block of the transforming cells differs among these tumor types, and
that the characteristic mutational pattern is present before neoplastic
transformation. Thus, our findings strengthen the hypothesis that PMBL originate 
from an already defined sub-population of B-cells, which are different from those
leading to either DLCL or FL.

PMID: 15377470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Sep 28;101(39):14198-203. Epub 2004 Sep 16.

The human BCL6 transgene promotes the development of lymphomas in the mouse.

Baron BW(1), Anastasi J, Montag A, Huo D, Baron RM, Karrison T, Thirman MJ,
Subudhi SK, Chin RK, Felsher DW, Fu YX, McKeithan TW, Baron JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Section of Hematology-Oncology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. beverly.baron@uchospitals.edu

BCL6, a gene on chromosome 3, band q27, encodes a zinc finger transcriptional
repressor that is needed for germinal center formation and has been implicated in
the pathogenesis of some human lymphomas when it is mutated or involved in
chromosomal rearrangements. To explore further the mechanisms of action of BCL6
in lymphomagenesis, we developed a transgenic mouse model mimicking a common
translocation, the t(3, 14)(q27;q32), in human lymphomas. The transgenic mice
develop normally and express the transgenic BCL6 protein constitutively in
lymphocytes. A small fraction of the animals develop B and T cell lymphomas after
a long latency period, but the incidence is dramatically enhanced following
administration of N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea, a carcinogen that induces DNA mutations.
The N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced lymphomas spread widely, were exclusively T
cell, expressed the BCL6 protein, and occurred only in the transgenic mice.
Because BCL6 expression has been reported in a number of T cell tumors as well as
in the more commonly occurring B cell lymphomas in humans, our transgenic mice
provide a model for the study of human lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC521136
PMID: 15375218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Oct;45(10):2169-72.

BCL-6-positive human herpesvirus 8-associated solid lymphoma arising from liver
and spleen as multiple nodular lesions.

Hasegawa H(1), Katano H, Tanno M, Masuo S, Ae T, Sato Y, Takahashi H, Iwasaki T, 
Kurata T, Sata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Shinjuku, 
Tokyo, Japan.

We report a case of BCL-6-positive B cell lymphoma with human herpesvirus 8
(HHV-8) infection. A human immunodeficiency virus-infected patient developed a
diffuse large B cell lymphoma, which was found exclusively in the liver and
spleen with the absence of lymphadenopathy and effusion in any body cavities. The
lymphoma cells were composed of medium to large-sized cells positive for CD20,
CD45, and BCL-6, and negative for epithelial cell membrane antigen, CD30, CD45RO,
and CD138/syndecan-1, suggesting a germinal center B cell origin. The patient was
serologically positive for HHV-8, and HHV-8 was detected in the liver biopsy
tissue both by polymerase chain reaction and by immunohistochemistry for
HHV-8-encoded latency-associated nuclear antigen. Other HHV-8-associated
diseases, such as Kaposi's sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma, or multicentric
Castleman's disease were not detected in the patient. Chemotherapy was effective 
and reduced the size of the lymphoma dramatically. This is the first case report 
of a germinal center B cell-originating lymphoma with HHV-8 infection.

PMID: 15370268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Oct;45(10):2105-10.

Mutational analysis of IgVH and BCL-6 genes suggests thymic B-cells origin of
mediastinal (thymic) B-cell lymphoma.

Csernus B(1), Timár B, Fülöp Z, Bognár A, Szepesi A, László T, Jáksó P, Warnke R,
Kopper L, Matolcsy A.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Faculty of
Medicine, Semmelweis University, H-1085 Budapest, Ullöi út 26, Hungary.

Mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma (MBL) has been defined as a subtype of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBL) arising in the mediastinum with
characteristic clinicopathological features. It has been postulated that MBL
arise from non-circulating thymic B-cells and represent a distinct lymphoma
entity, however, the histogenesis of the disease is not yet fully understood. In 
order to clarify the histogenetic derivation of MBL and to determine the
relationship of MBL to thymic B-cells we have analyzed the nucleic acid sequences
of immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain variable region (VH) and 5' noncoding region
of BCL-6 genes in normal thymic B-cells and six cases of MBL. Thymic B-cells and 
tumor cells of MBLs displayed hypermutated VH and/or BCL-6 genes but intraclonal 
divergence did not associate with these mutations. Since somatic mutations of the
IgVH and BCL-6 genes are histogenetic markers of B-cell transit through the
germinal centre (GC), these results suggest that both thymic B-cells and MBLs
derived from GC or an equivalent environment where B-cells underwent somatic
hypermutation. The similar pattern of mutations of IgVH and BCL-6 genes found in 
thymic B-cells and MBLs further supports the theory that MBLs originate from
thymic B-cells.

PMID: 15370257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Aug;45(8):1559-67.

Molecular-cytogenetic characterization of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with double and 
cryptic translocations of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene.

Kanda-Akano Y(1), Nomura K, Fujita Y, Horiike S, Nishida K, Nagai M, Miura I,
Nakamura S, Seto M, Iida S, Ueda R, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

The present study aimed to characterize the clinical and molecular-cytogenetic
features of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) with double translocation of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) gene. G-banding analysis, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) with the IGH (Cgamma and VH) and oncogene (c-MYC, BCL1,
BCL2, and BCL6) probes, and long-distance polymerase chain reaction (LD-PCR) were
performed on 6 patients with B-cell lymphoma, one with angioimmunoblastic T-cell 
lymphoma, and one with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with B-cell phenotype. 
G-banding analysis detected two different 14q32 translocations, t(14,18) and add 
(14)(q32) in a patient with ALL. Two distinct partners of double IGH
translocation identified by FISH were as follows: c-MYC + BCL2 in 3 patients,
c-MYC + BCL1 in 2, c-MYC + BCL6 in one, BCL2 + 9q22 in one, and 1q21 + 6q27 in
one. Colocalization of BCL1 and c-MYC probes was demonstrated in a patient with
mantle cell lymphoma. LD-PCR detected c-MYC/Cmu, c-MYC/Calpha and BCL6/Cmu, and
c-MYC/Calpha fusion in each one patient. Seven of 8 patients showed high serum
LDH. Central nervous system and leukemic involvement was observed in 5 and 6
patients, respectively. Median survival time of patients with c-MYC/IGH
translocation was 9 months. The results defined a clinical subset of B-cell
lymphoma/leukemia showing extremely poor prognosis. C-MYC/IGH translocation is
possibly an evolutionary alteration following the primary IGH translocation with 
BCL1, BCL2, or BCL6. Furthermore, FISH identified one novel (9q22) and one
cryptic chromosomal breakpoints (6q27) involved in IGH translocation.

PMID: 15370207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. BMC Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;5:20.

Distinct gene expression profiles in different B-cell compartments in human
peripheral lymphoid organs.

Shen Y(1), Iqbal J, Xiao L, Lynch RC, Rosenwald A, Staudt LM, Sherman S, Dybkaer 
K, Zhou G, Eudy JD, Delabie J, McKeithan TW, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Eppley Cancer Institute, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. ylshen@unmc.edu

BACKGROUND: There are three major B-cell compartments in peripheral lymphoid
organs: the germinal center (GC), the mantle zone (MNZ) and the marginal zone
(MGZ). Unique sets of B-cells reside in these compartments, and they have
specific functional roles in humoral immune response. MNZ B cells are naive cells
in a quiescent state and may participate in GC reactions upon proper stimulation.
The adult splenic MGZ contains mostly memory B cells and is also known to provide
a rapid response to particulate antigens. The GC B-cells proliferate rapidly and 
undergo selection and affinity maturation. The B-cell maturational process is
accompanied by changes in the expression of cell-surface and intracellular
proteins and requires signals from the specialized microenvironments.
RESULTS: We performed laser microdissection of the three compartments for gene
expression profiling by cDNA microarray. The transcriptional program of the GC
was dominated by upregulation of genes associated with proliferation and DNA
repair or recombination. The MNZ and MGZ showed increased expression of genes
promoting cellular quiescence. The three compartments also revealed distinct
repertoires of apoptosis-associated genes, chemokines and chemokine receptors.
The MNZ and GC showed upregulation of CCL20 and CCL18 respectively. The MGZ was
characterized by high expression of many chemokines genes e.g. CXCL12, CCL3,
CCL14 and IFN-associated genes, consistent with its role in rapid response to
infections. A stromal signature was identified including genes associated with
macrophages or with synthesis of extracellular matrix and genes that influenced
lymphocyte migration and survival. Differentially expressed genes that did not
belong to the above categories include the well characterized BCL6 and CD10 and
many others whose function is not known.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptional profiling of B-cell compartments has identified
groups of genes involved in critical molecular and cellular events that affect
proliferation, survival migration, and differentiation of the cells. The gene
expression study of normal B-cell compartments may additionally contribute to our
understanding of the molecular abnormalities of the corresponding lymphoid
tumors.

PMCID: PMC535350
PMID: 15369600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Sep;153(2):115-21.

Cytogenetics and fluorescence in situ hybridization studies of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma in children and young adults.

Dave BJ(1), Weisenburger DD, Higgins CM, Pickering DL, Hess MM, Chan WC, Sanger
WG.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Laboratory, Munroe Meyer Institute for Genetics and
Rehabilitation, 985440 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5440, USA.
bdave@unmc.edu

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common subtype of adult
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), is infrequently seen in adolescents and is rare in
children. Due to the infrequency of the disease, single institution-based
cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies of pediatric
DLBCL have not been reported so far and, hence, the possible differences in
pediatric and adult DLBCL have not been evaluated. We performed cytogenetic and
FISH analyses of 7 pediatric and 5 young adult DLBCL cases referred to the
University of Nebraska Medical Center. Karyotypic studies revealed numeric and
structural chromosome abnormalities in all cases. Loss of chromosomes 2, 3, 4, 6,
12, 15, 16, and 17, and gain of 12, 18, and X were observed in more than 20% of
the cases (#10878;3 cases). Sex chromosome abnormalities and cytogenetically
unidentifiable chromosomes and/or segments were observed in 80% (10/12) of the
cases. Recurrent breakpoints (observed in 3 or more cases) included 14q32 (IGH)
and 17p13 (TP53), which clustered in the young adult group. The breakpoints 7q36,
9p24, 13q34, and 16q24 were noted in two cases each. We performed interphase FISH
studies to verify the possible rearrangements of the breakpoints that are
frequently implicated in adult DLBCL. Our results confirmed that the pediatric
cases did not show rearrangements of 3q27 (BCL6), 14q32 (IGH), 18q21 (BCL2), 8q24
(CMYC), and 17p13 (TP53), except for one case with IGH;BCL2 dual fusion
[t(14;18)(q32;q21)] and one with a 17p13 (TP53) deletion. Although 3q27 was noted
to be rearranged by conventional cytogenetics in two young adult DLBCL cases,
FISH investigations verified that BCL6 was not disrupted. The t(8;14)(q24;q32)
with rearranged CMYC ascertained by FISH, was observed in a single young adult
DLBCL case. These results highlight a distinctly different representation of
cytogenetic abnormalities in pediatric versus adult DLBCL.

PMID: 15350300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Haematologica. 2004 Aug;89(8):965-72.

Heterogeneity of BCL6 rearrangements in nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's 
lymphoma.

Wlodarska I(1), Stul M, De Wolf-Peeters C, Hagemeijer A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NLPHL) showed recurrent rearrangement of the BCL6 which is gene detected in 48% 
of cases analyzed by interphase-fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). These
findings point to a critical role for BCL6 in the development of this distinct
Hodgkin's lymphoma. We present our results of metaphase-FISH analyses aimed at
identifying and characterizing BCL6-related chromosomal translocations in NLPHL.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Four NLPHL cases with available metaphase spreads obtained
either at the time of diagnosis or during progression to diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) were collected. Extensive metaphase-FISH analysis was performed 
to identify the affected partner chromosomes and reciprocal breakpoints.
RESULTS: Each of the analyzed NLPHL cases showed a different type of BCL6
rearrangement that included the t(3;22)(q27;q11) targeting immunoglobulin (IG)
alpha chain locus, complex t(3;7;3;1) involving the 7p12/Ikaros gene region,
t(3;9)(q27;p13) affecting an unknown gene in vicinity of PAX5, and
t(3;4)(q27;q32) showing the alternative 3q27 breakpoint outside BCL6 and
possibly, an internal deletion of BCL6. Retrospective interphase-FISH analysis of
2 cases with subsequent DLBCL showed the same type of BCL6 translocation as in
NLPHL samples.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The spectrum of BCL6 aberrations targeting IG as 
well as non-IG loci in NLPHL is similar to that found in DLBCL. These findings
further support the hypothesis of a germinal center B-cell-derived origin of
NLPHL and of a relationship between these two lymphoma entities. This latter
issue is additionally illustrated in two NLPHL patients who subsequently
developed DLBCL and showed the same type of BCL6 rearrangements in both tumors.

PMID: 15339680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Int Immunol. 2004 Oct;16(10):1439-49. Epub 2004 Aug 16.

BAZF is required for activation of naive CD4 T cells by TCR triggering.

Takamori M(1), Hatano M, Arima M, Sakamoto A, Fujimura L, Hartatik T, Kuriyama T,
Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, 1-8-1, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

BAZF, a member of the Bcl6 gene family, acts as a sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor in association with Bcl6. However, the tissue
expression pattern of BAZF differs from that of Bcl6, suggesting a
Bcl6-independent function of BAZF. In order to examine the physiological function
of BAZF, we generated BAZF-deficient mice and transgenic mice with BAZF-cDNA
under the control of the lck proximal promoter (lck-BAZF). These mice were viable
and no gross anatomical abnormalities were observed after birth. Since Bcl6 is a 
key molecule for the generation of memory T cells, we examined the function of T 
cells of these mice. We show here that cell proliferation of naive CD4 T cells,
but not memory ones, of BAZF-deficient mice to anti-CD3 antibody stimulation was 
impaired. Conversely, cell proliferation of naive CD4 T cells, but not memory
ones, of lck-BAZF mice was augmented. Since cell proliferation of naive CD4 T
cells of lck-Bcl6 mice to anti-CD3 antibody stimulation was severely impaired,
BAZF may attenuate the regulatory effect of Bcl6 on antigenic activation of naive
CD4 T cells by Bcl6/BAZF heterodimer formation. These results suggest that BAZF
is necessary for activation of naive T cells to antigenic stimulation.

PMID: 15314041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Aug 11;18(3):331-9.

Na+/H+ exchanger 1 deficiency alters gene expression in mouse brain.

Zhou D(1), Xue J, Gavrialov O, Haddad GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 1 (NHE1) is well known to function as a major regulator of
intracellular pH (pH(i)). It is activated by low pH(i) and exchanges
extracellular Na(+) for intracellular H(+) to maintain cellular homeostasis.
Despite the fact that we now have evidence suggesting other roles for NHE1, there
has been no comprehensive study investigating its role as a signaling molecule.
Toward this aim, we used in this study NHE1 null mutant mice and cDNA microarrays
to investigate the effects of NHE1 on global gene expression in various regions
of the brain, e.g., cortex, hippocampus, brain stem-diencephalon, and cerebellum.
We found that a total of 35 to 79 genes were up- or downregulated in each brain
region, with the majority being downregulated. The effect of NHE1 null mutation
on gene expression is region specific, and only 11 genes were changed in all
brain regions studied. Further analysis of the cis-regulatory regions of
downregulated genes revealed that transcription suppressors, BCL6 and E4BP4, were
probable candidates that mediated the inhibitory effect of NHE1 null mutation.
One of the genes, MCT-13, was not only downregulated in the NHE1 null mutant
brain but also in tissue cultures treated with an NHE1 inhibitor. We conclude
that 1) a relatively small number of genes were altered in the NHE1 null mouse
brain; 2) the effects of NHE1 null mutation on gene expression are region
specific; and 3) several genes implicated in neurodegeneration have altered
expression, potentially offering a molecular explanation for the phenotype of the
NHE1 null mouse.

PMID: 15306696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Am J Pathol. 2004 Aug;165(2):481-90.

Cytogenetic alterations affecting BCL6 are predominantly found in follicular
lymphomas grade 3B with a diffuse large B-cell component.

Katzenberger T(1), Ott G, Klein T, Kalla J, Müller-Hermelink HK, Ott MM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2,
97080 Würzburg, Germany. path054@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Recently, classical banding cytogenetic studies suggested that follicular
lymphomas (FLs) grade 3 with preserved maturation to centrocytes (FL3A) are
closely related to FL grades 1 and 2 and frequently harbor the t(14;18), whereas 
FL grade 3B, consisting of centroblasts exclusively, do frequently show 3q27
alterations. To clarify the prevalence of BCL6 and BCL2 rearrangements in FL and 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBLs), we performed a large scale bicolor
interphase cytogenetic (fluorescence in situ hybridization) study on 188
well-characterized B-NHLs classified according to the World Health Organization
Classification of Tumors of the Lymphoid Tissues. BCL6 rearrangements were
detected in a significantly higher number of FL3B with a DLBL component (12 of
22, 55%) compared with purely diffuse nodal DLBLs (19 of 77, 25%) and DLBLs with 
a well-documented primary extranodal origin (2 of 27, 7%) (P < 0.001). Five FL3B 
without a DLBL component were negative for both t(14;18) and 3q27 aberrations. FL
grades 1/2 and FL3A were t(14;18)-positive in 88% and 64% of cases, respectively,
but 3q27 alterations were identified in only four FL3A. These data exemplify
different genetic pathways in the genesis of FLs with a high content of
centroblasts and suggest that 3q27 rearrangements are predominantly associated
with FL grade 3B harboring a DLBL component.

PMCID: PMC1618575
PMID: 15277222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Aug;28(8):1051-6.

Aberrant Bcl6 protein expression in mantle cell lymphoma.

Camacho FI(1), García JF, Cigudosa JC, Mollejo M, Algara P, Ruíz-Ballesteros E,
Gonzalvo P, Martín P, Pérez-Seoane C, Sánchez-García J, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas,
C/Melchior Fernández Almagro 3, E-28029 Madrid, Spain. fcamacho@cnio.es

Mantle cell lymphoma is routinely considered as a Bcl6-negative B-cell lymphoma
carrying the translocation t(11;14). Here we describe a series of five
Bcl6-positive mantle cell lymphoma cases, including three classic and two
blastoid variants. The proliferative index of these cases, measured with the
Ki-67 antibody, was slightly higher than in Bcl6-negative mantle cell lymphoma
cases (32.2 vs. 23.7%) Bcl6 expression was associated with translocations
involving 3q27 in four of the five cases and an extra copy of the BCL6 gene in
the fifth. A mutational study of the major mutational cluster in the BCL6 gene
revealed no increased mutation rate, except in one case. One of the three cases
displayed a high mutational index in the IgVH gene, suggesting exposure to a
germinal center microenvironment. Chromosomal alterations involving 3q27 seem to 
be responsible for this increased Bcl6 expression, which needs to be considered
when Bcl6 is used in lymphoma diagnosis.

PMID: 15252312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):883-91.

Bcl6 acts as an amplifier for the generation and proliferative capacity of
central memory CD8+ T cells.

Ichii H(1), Sakamoto A, Kuroda Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

Central memory CD8(+) T cells (T(CM)) are considered to be more efficient than
effector ones (T(EM)) for mediating protective immunity. The molecular mechanism 
involved in the generation of these cells remains elusive. Because Bcl6 plays a
role in the generation and maintenance of memory CD8(+) T cells, we further
examined this role in the process in relation to T(CM) and T(EM) subsets. In this
study, we show that T(CM) and T(EM) were functionally identified in CD62L(+) and 
CD62L(-) memory (CD44(+)Ly6C(+)) CD8(+) T cell subsets, respectively. Although
T(CM) produced similar amounts of IFN-gamma and IL-2 to T(EM) after anti-CD3
stimulation, the cell proliferation capacity after stimulation and tissue
distribution profiles of T(CM) differed from those of T(EM). Numbers of T(CM)
were greatly reduced and elevated in spleens of Bcl6-deficient and lck-Bcl6
transgenic mice, respectively, and those of T(EM) were constant in nonlymphoid
organs of these same mice. The majority of Ag-specific memory CD8(+) T cells in
spleens of these mice 10 wk after immunization were T(CM), and the number
correlated with Bcl6 expression in T cells. The proliferation of Ag-specific
memory CD8(+) T cells upon secondary stimulation was dramatically up-regulated in
lck-Bcl6 transgenic mice, and the adoptive transfer experiments with Ag-specific 
naive CD8(+) T cells demonstrated that some of the up-regulation was due to the
intrinsic effect of Bcl6 in the T cells. Thus, Bcl6 is apparently a crucial
factor for the generation and secondary expansion of T(CM).

PMID: 15240675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Int J Hematol. 2004 Jun;79(5):474-9.

Case of B-cell lymphoma with rearrangement of the BCL1, BCL2, BCL6, and c-MYC
genes.

Kawakami K(1), Miyanishi S, Sonoki T, Nakamura S, Nomura K, Taniwaki M, Murata T,
Kadowaki S, Kadowaki N, Miura I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Suzuka General Hospital, Suzuka-shi, Mie, Japan.
Kawakei@cocoa.ocn.ne.jp

We managed a peculiar case of lymphoma showing immunohistochemical overexpression
of cyclin D1. At initial examination the patient had meningeal lymphomatosis and 
general lymphadenopathy. Histologic examination of biopsy specimens of inguinal
lymph nodes showed tumor cells and vague nodular growth resembling lymphoblasts. 
The results of flow cytometric analysis were positive for CD10, CD20, CD103, and 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) and Ig kappa and were negative for CD5, CD23, and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase activity. Results of immunohistochemical analysis of
paraffin-embedded specimens were positive for cyclin D1 and Bcl2 in the tumor
cells. Sixty percent of tumor cells had positive results for MIB1/Ki67.
Cytogenetic and molecular studies revealed tumor cells simultaneously had
t(14;18)(q32;q21), t(11;22)(q13;q11), t(8;14)(q24;q32), and t(3;14)(q27;q32) with
the rearrangement of BCL1, BCL2, BCL6, and c-MYC genes. Lymphadenopathy showed a 
quick and complete response to doxorubicin-containing systemic chemotherapy with 
rituximab, but the central nervous system disease progressed and killed the
patient.

PMID: 15239399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;64(13):4428-33.

Genomic DNA-chip hybridization reveals a higher incidence of genomic
amplifications in pancreatic cancer than conventional comparative genomic
hybridization and leads to the identification of novel candidate genes.

Holzmann K(1), Kohlhammer H, Schwaenen C, Wessendorf S, Kestler HA, Schwoerer A, 
Rau B, Radlwimmer B, Döhner H, Lichter P, Gress T, Bentz M.

Author information: 
(1)Chip Facility, Abt. Innere Medizin III, Universität Ulm, Germany.
karlheinz.holzmann@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6358.

Genomic analyses aimed at the detection of high-level DNA amplifications were
performed on 13 widely used pancreatic cancer cell lines and 6 pancreatic tumor
specimens. For these analyses, array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(Matrix-CGH) onto dedicated microarrays was used. In comparison with chromosomal 
CGH (eight amplifications), a >3-fold number of DNA amplifications was detected
(n = 29). The most frequent amplifications mapped to 7p12.3 (three pancreatic
cancer cell lines and three pancreatic tumor specimens), 8q24 (four pancreatic
cancer cell lines and one pancreatic tumor specimen), 11q13 (three pancreatic
cancer cell lines and three pancreatic tumor specimens), and 20q13 (four
pancreatic cancer cell lines and three pancreatic tumor specimens). Genes
contained in the consensus regions were MYC (8q24), EGFR (7p12.3), and FGF3
(11q13). In six of seven pancreatic cancer cell lines and pancreatic tumor
specimens with 20q13 amplifications, the novel candidate gene NFAT C2, which
plays a role in the activation of cytokines, was amplified. Other amplifications 
also affected genes for which a pathogenetic role in pancreatic carcinoma has not
been described, such as BCL10 and BCL6, two members of the BCL family. A subset
of amplified genes was checked for overexpression by means of real-time PCR,
revealing the highest expression levels for BCL6 and BCL10. Thus, Matrix-CGH
allows the detection of a high number of amplifications, resulting in the
identification of novel candidate genes in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 15231651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Ann Pathol. 2004 Apr;24(2):136-48; quiz 135.

[Nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease and its differential
diagnosis].

[Article in French]

Carbonnelle A(1), Delarue R, Canioni D, Brousse N.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologiques, UPRES EA 219 (Université
Paris V), Paris.

Comment in
    Ann Pathol. 2004 Apr;24(2):125-8.

Nodular lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease (NLPHD), previously called
nodular paragranuloma, is a rare entity recognized as a clinico-pathological
entity distinct from classic Hodgkin's lymphoma. It is an indolent B cell
lymphoma derived from a germinal center cell. NLPHD may closely resemble
lymphocyte-rich classic Hodgkin's disease (LR-CHD) or T-cell or histiocyte-rich
large B-cell lymphoma (TCRLBCL). A reproducible distinction between these
entities is difficult but the classification is prognostically relevant. NLPHD is
characterized by neoplastic "popcorn" cells CD20+ CD30- CD15- EMA+ Bcl6+
scattered within a nodular background predominantly composed of small B
lymphocytes. LR-CHD neoplastic proliferation is composed of CD20+/- CD30+ CD15+/-
EMA- Bcl6+/- Reed Sternberg or Hodgkin's cells, scattered within numerous CD3+ T 
cells. TCRLBCL is an agressive lymphoma composed of CD20+ CD30- CD15- EMA+/-
Bcl6+/- polymorphic neoplastic cells, scattered within a mixture of CD3+ T cells 
and histiocytes. Epstein Barr virus is detectable within half cases of LR-CHD,
but never in NLPHD and rarely in TCRLBCL. The transcription factors BOB1, PU-1,
BSAP and IRF4 are new markers that could be useful for differential diagnosis.

PMID: 15220833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Pathol. 2004 Jul;165(1):159-66.

BCL2 translocation defines a unique tumor subset within the germinal center
B-cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Iqbal J(1), Sanger WG, Horsman DE, Rosenwald A, Pickering DL, Dave B, Dave S,
Xiao L, Cao K, Zhu Q, Sherman S, Hans CP, Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC, Gascoyne
RD, Ott G, Müller-Hermelink HK, Delabie J, Braziel RM, Jaffe ES, Campo E, Lynch
JC, Connors JM, Vose JM, Armitage JO, Grogan TM, Staudt LM, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, 983135 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA.

Gene expression profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has revealed
prognostically important subgroups: germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) DLBCL,
activated B cell-like (ABC) DLBCL, and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma.
The t(14;18)(q32;q21) has been reported previously to define a unique subset
within the GCB-DLBCL. We evaluated for the translocation in 141 cases of DLBCL
that were successfully gene expression profiled. Using a dual-probe fluorescence 
in situ hybridization assay, we detected the t(14;18) in 17% of DLBCLs and in 34%
of the GCB subgroup which contained the vast majority of positive cases. In
addition, 12 t(14;18)-positive cases detected by polymerase chain reaction assays
on additional samples were added to the fluorescence in situ
hybridization-positive cases for subsequent analysis. Immunohistochemical data
indicated that BCL2, BCL6, and CD10 protein were preferentially expressed in the 
t(14;18)-positive cases as compared to t(14;18)-negative cases. Within the GCB
subgroup, the expression of BCL2 and CD10, but not BCL6, differed significantly
between cases with or without the t(14;18): 88% versus 24% for BCL2 and 72%
versus 32% for CD10, respectively. In the GCB-DLBCL subgroup, a heterogeneous
group of genes is overexpressed in the t(14;18)-positive subset, among which BCL2
is a significant discriminator. Interestingly, the t(14;18)-negative subset is
dominated by overexpression of cell cycle-associated genes, indicating that these
tumors are significantly more proliferative, suggesting distinctive pathogenetic 
mechanisms. However, despite this higher proliferative activity, there was no
significant difference in overall or failure-free survival between the
t(14;18)-positive and -negative subsets within the GCB subgroup.

PMCID: PMC1618550
PMID: 15215171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 1;173(1):68-78.

T follicular helper cells express a distinctive transcriptional profile,
reflecting their role as non-Th1/Th2 effector cells that provide help for B
cells.

Chtanova T(1), Tangye SG, Newton R, Frank N, Hodge MR, Rolph MS, Mackay CR.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 384 Victoria Street, Darlinghurst, New
South Wales 2010, Australia.

Effector T cell responses have long been viewed in the context of the Th1/Th2
paradigm. Recently, a third major subset of nonpolarized effector T cells that
provides help to B cells has been identified. These T cells, termed T follicular 
helper (T(FH)) cells, home to the B cell areas of secondary lymphoid tissue,
through interactions mediated via the chemokine receptor CXCR5 and its ligand
CXCL13. Affymetrix microarrays were used to identify transcription factors,
cytokines, and cell surface molecules that underlie the differentiation pathways 
and functional properties of the T(FH) subset. The transcriptional profile of
human CXCR5(+) T(FH) cells was compared with that of Th1 and Th2 cells, which
enabled the identification of numerous genes expressed preferentially by T(FH)
cells, over the other effector subsets. Certain T(FH) genes were also expressed
by B cells and thus appear to be particularly relevant for humoral immunity. Abs 
were used to confirm the expression of several factors. In particular, CD84 and
CD200, the cytokine IL-21, and the transcription factor BCL6 were all strongly
associated with T(FH) cells. Gene microarrays reveal a highly distinctive
transcriptional profile for a third subset of effector T cells that differs
markedly from Th1 and Th2 cells.

PMID: 15210760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jul;123(1):213-9.

Molecular cytogenetic analysis of chromosomal breakpoints in the IGH, MYC, BCL6, 
and MALT1 gene loci in primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas.

Hallermann C(1), Kaune KM, Gesk S, Martin-Subero JI, Gunawan B, Griesinger F,
Vermeer MH, Santucci M, Pimpinelli N, Willemze R, Siebert R, Neumann C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Goettingen, Germany.
CHallermann@gmx.de

Chromosomal translocations affecting the IGH locus and various oncogene loci are 
recurrent in many types of systemic B-cell lymphomas. Hardly any data exist,
however, on such translocations in primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCL).
Here, a series of 29 PCBCL was investigated by interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridization with probes for the IGH, MYC, BCL6, and MLT1 loci. None of the six 
follicle center cell lymphomas and nine marginal zone lymphomas showed evidence
for any translocation affecting these loci. In contrast, 11 of 14 large B-cell
lymphomas of the leg harbored breakpoints in at least one of the loci.
Translocations involving the MYC locus were detected in six cases, five of them
derived from a MYC/IGH juxtaposition and one from a translocation involving a
non-IG gene partner. Rearrangements of the BCL6 locus were detected in five
B-cell lymphomas of the leg, and involved IGH (two cases), IGL (one case), and
non-IG genes (two cases). This study shows that large B-cell lymphomas of the leg
display a pattern of chromosomal translocations similar to their systemic
counterparts whereas primary cutaneous follicle center cell lymphomas and
marginal zone lymphomas lack these typical chromosomal translocations.

PMID: 15191563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. N Engl J Med. 2004 Apr 29;350(18):1828-37.

Prediction of survival in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma based on the expression
of six genes.

Lossos IS(1), Czerwinski DK, Alizadeh AA, Wechser MA, Tibshirani R, Botstein D,
Levy R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical
Center, Stanford, Calif, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Apr 29;350(18):1814-6.

BACKGROUND: Several gene-expression signatures can be used to predict the
prognosis in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma, but the lack of practical tests for a
genome-scale analysis has restricted the use of this method.
METHODS: We studied 36 genes whose expression had been reported to predict
survival in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma. We measured the expression of each of 
these genes in independent samples of lymphoma from 66 patients by quantitative
real-time polymerase-chain-reaction analyses and related the results to overall
survival.
RESULTS: In a univariate analysis, genes were ranked on the basis of their
ability to predict survival. The genes that were the strongest predictors were
LMO2, BCL6, FN1, CCND2, SCYA3, and BCL2. We developed a multivariate model that
was based on the expression of these six genes, and we validated the model in two
independent microarray data sets. The model was independent of the International 
Prognostic Index and added to its predictive power.
CONCLUSIONS: Measurement of the expression of six genes is sufficient to predict 
overall survival in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 15115829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Apr 15;10(8):2725-37.

Predictive models for breast cancer susceptibility from multiple single
nucleotide polymorphisms.

Listgarten J(1), Damaraju S, Poulin B, Cook L, Dufour J, Driga A, Mackey J,
Wishart D, Greiner R, Zanke B.

Author information: 
(1)Cross Cancer Institute of the Alberta Cancer Board, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Hereditary predisposition and causative environmental exposures have long been
recognized in human malignancies. In most instances, cancer cases occur
sporadically, suggesting that environmental influences are critical in
determining cancer risk. To test the influence of genetic polymorphisms on breast
cancer risk, we have measured 98 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
distributed over 45 genes of potential relevance to breast cancer etiology in 174
patients and have compared these with matched normal controls. Using machine
learning techniques such as support vector machines (SVMs), decision trees, and
naïve Bayes, we identified a subset of three SNPs as key discriminators between
breast cancer and controls. The SVMs performed maximally among predictive models,
achieving 69% predictive power in distinguishing between the two groups, compared
with a 50% baseline predictive power obtained from the data after repeated random
permutation of class labels (individuals with cancer or controls). However, the
simpler naïve Bayes model as well as the decision tree model performed quite
similarly to the SVM. The three SNP sites most useful in this model were (a) the 
+4536T/C site of the aldosterone synthase gene CYP11B2 at amino acid residue 386 
Val/Ala (T/C) (rs4541); (b) the +4328C/G site of the aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase
CYP1B1 at amino acid residue 293 Leu/Val (C/G) (rs5292); and (c) the +4449C/T
site of the transcription factor BCL6 at amino acid 387 Asp/Asp (rs1056932). No
single SNP site on its own could achieve more than 60% in predictive accuracy. We
have shown that multiple SNP sites from different genes over distant parts of the
genome are better at identifying breast cancer patients than any one SNP alone.
As high-throughput technology for SNPs improves and as more SNPs are identified, 
it is likely that much higher predictive accuracy will be achieved and a useful
clinical tool developed.

PMID: 15102677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mod Pathol. 2004 Jun;17(6):623-30.

IgV(H) and bcl6 somatic mutation analysis reveals the heterogeneity of cutaneous 
B-cell lymphoma, and indicates the presence of undisclosed local antigens.

Franco R(1), Camacho FI, Fernández-Vázquez A, Algara P, Rodríguez-Peralto JL, De 
Rosa G, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto dei Tumori G Pascale, Napoli, Italy.

Our understanding of the ontology of B-cell lymphomas (BCL) has been improved by 
the study of mutational status of IgV(H) and bcl6 genes, but only a few cases of 
cutaneous BCL have been examined for this status. We analyzed IgV(H) and bcl6
somatic mutations in 10 cutaneous BCL, classified as follicular (three primary
and one secondary), primary marginal zone (two cases), and diffuse large BCL
(three primary and one secondary). We observed a lower rate (<2%) of IgV(H)
mutation in all marginal zone lymphomas, and a preferential usage of V(H)2-70
(one primary follicular and two primary diffuse large BCL). Fewer than expected
replacement mutations in framework regions (FR) were observed in three primary
follicular lymphomas (FLs) and in all diffuse large BCL, indicating a negative
antigen selection pressure. Ongoing mutations were observed in eight of 10 cases.
Only two primary FLs and two diffuse large BCL showed bcl6 somatic mutation.
These data support the heterogeneous nature of the different cutaneous BCL, and
specifically the distinction between cutaneous follicular and marginal zone
lymphomas. The biased usage of V(H)2-70, the low rate of replacement mutation in 
the FR, and the presence of ongoing mutation imply that local antigens could
modulate the growth of primary cutaneous BCL.

PMID: 15098010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mod Pathol. 2004 Jul;17(7):847-56.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas with germinal center B-cell-like differentiation
immunophenotypic profile are associated with high apoptotic index, high
expression of the proapoptotic proteins bax, bak and bid and low expression of
the antiapoptotic protein bcl-xl.

Bai M(1), Skyrlas A, Agnantis NJ, Kamina S, Tsanou E, Grepi C, Galani V,
Kanavaros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty, University of Ioannina, Ioannina,
Greece. mbai@cc.uoi.gr

The aim of this study was to analyze the relations between differentiation
immunophenotypes and the status of apoptosis and proliferation in diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas. Therefore, the bcl6/CD10/MUM1/CD138 differentiation
immunophenotypic profiles were studied in relation to (a) the apoptotic index,
(b) the apoptosis-associated bcl2 family proteins bcl2, bcl-xl, bax, bak, bad and
bid, (c) the proliferation index (Ki67) and (d) the cell cycle proteins cyclin A,
cyclin B1, cyclin D3, cyclin E, p53, Rb, p16 and p27 in 79 cases of diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas. Two major differentiation immunophenotypic profiles were
distinguished: the germinal center B-cell-like profile; 31 cases
(bcl6+/CD10+/-/MUM1-/CD138-: 29 cases and bcl6-/CD10+/MUM1-/CD138-: two cases)
and the nongerminal center B-cell-like profile (bcl6+/-/CD10-/MUM1+/CD138-); 48
cases. The expression of bax, bak and bid and the apoptotic index were
significantly higher in the germinal center B-cell-like profile than in the
nongerminal center B-cell-like profile (P=0.045, 0.018, 0.003 and 0.034,
respectively). In contrast, the expression of bcl-xl was significantly lower in
the germinal center B-cell-like profile than in the nongerminal center
B-cell-like profile (P=0.026). The expression of bcl6 and CD10 showed significant
positive correlation with the expression of bax (r=0.659, P<0.001 and r=0.240,
P=0.033, respectively), bak (r=0.391, P<0.001 and r=0.233, P=0.039, respectively)
and bid (r=0.652, P<0.001 and r=0.238, P=0.035, respectively) and significant
negative correlation with the expression of bcl-xl (r=-0.536, P<0.001 and
r=-0.250, P=0.029, respectively). The expression of MUM1 showed significant
negative correlation with the expression of bax (r=-0.276, P=0.014) and bid
(r=-0.266, P=0.018) and significant positive correlation with the expression of
bcl-xl (r=0.238, P=0.037). The above findings indicate that diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas with germinal center B-cell-like immunophenotypic profile are
associated with increased apoptosis status, high expression of the proapoptotic
proteins bax, bak and bid and low expression of the antiapoptotic protein bcl-xl.

Copyright 2004 USCAP, Inc.

PMID: 15073604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Minerva Med. 2004 Feb;95(1):53-64.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders. Molecular analysis of histogenesis
and pathogenesis.

Capello D(1), Berra E, Cerri M, Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences and IRCAD, Amedeo Avogadro, University of
Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy. capello@med.unipmn.it

AIM: Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) represent a serious
complication of solid organ transplantation. Despite several advances in the
biological categorization of PTLD, current classifications are not fully
predictive of the clinical behavior of the disease. This study assessed a
comprehensive molecular analysis of the clinico-pathologic spectrum of PTLD in
order to better clarify the physiopathology of these disorders.
METHODS: Fifty-two monoclonal PTLD were investigated for: 1). somatic
hypermutation of IgV genes by direct sequencing of IgV rearrangements; 2).
expression of BCL6, MUM1 and CD138 proteins by immunohistochemistry; 3). aberrant
hypermethylation of DAP-kinase gene by methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (PCR); 4). genotypic characterization of Epstein Barr virus (EBV) in EBV
infected PTLD by PCR analysis of the prevalence of deletions in the
carboxyterminal portion of the LMP1 gene and for the definition of type-1/type-2 
EBV infection.
RESULTS: We report that virtually all monoclonal PTLD originate from B cells that
have experienced the germinal center (GC) reaction reflecting different stages of
mature B cell differentiation and that tumor development seems frequently
associated with EBV and/or other molecular lesions preventing apoptosis of cells 
that have failed the physiological process of germinal center reaction.
CONCLUSION: To date, classification of PTLD is mainly based on morphology and
conventional immunophenotyping. Because current classification schemes are not
fully predictive of prognosis, knowledge of PTLD histogenesis and pathogenesis
may potentially contribute to refine the distinction of PTLD into more
homogeneous categories with prognostic relevance.

PMID: 15041926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Histol Histopathol. 2004 Apr;19(2):637-50.

Pathogenetic role of BCL6 translocation in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Ohno H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. hohno@k2.dion.ne.jp

Chromosomal translocation affecting the 3q27 band, where the BCL6 gene is
localized, is one of the most common genetic abnormalities in non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma of B-cell type (B-NHL). The translocation occurs within the major
translocation cluster (MTC) of BCL6, and as the result of translocation either
one of the three immunoglobulin (Ig) genes or a heterogeneous non-Ig gene is
juxtaposed to the coding regions of BCL6. On the other hand, somatic
hypermutation involves the BCL6 gene of not only B-NHL but also B-cells from
normal individuals. The mutations are clustered within a region of the MTC,
suggesting that a common molecular mechanism is operating for the two genetic
lesions of BCL6. The Bcl-6 protein is a transcriptional repressor that is an
important regulator of lymphoid development and function. The protein is
preferentially expressed in germinal center (GC) B-cells of normal lymphoid
tissues as well as in a variety of B-NHL subtypes derived from GC B-cells
irrespective of whether the BCL6 is rearranged. Although there is no consensus on
the effect of BCL6 translocation on the clinical outcome of B-NHL, many studies
coincide in showing that a high-level of BCL6 expression at either or both the
mRNA and protein levels is a favorable prognostic marker of diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma. In vitro evidence suggests that non-Ig/BCL6 translocation transiently
enhances the level of Bcl-6 expression, which may perturb a molecular network
that controls the differentiation of GC B-cells to Ig-secreting plasma cells,
thereby predisposing the B-cells to neoplastic transformation.

PMID: 15024721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Hematol. 2004 Jan;79(1):52-4.

Coexistent rearrangements of c-MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 genes in a diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Ueda C(1), Nishikori M, Kitawaki T, Uchiyama T, Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. kyotolsg@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

We present a patient with stage III de novo diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. The
lymphoma cells showed mature B-cell immunophenotype but lacked surface
immunoglobulin (Ig) expression. Long-distance and long-distance inverse
polymerase chain reaction assays to detect the oncogene/Ig gene rearrangement
revealed that the cells carried 3 independent fusion genes, namely, c-MYC/Ig
heavy chain gene (IgH), BCL2/IgH, and Ig lambda light chain gene/BCL6. Thus, the 
lymphoma cells concurrently carried t(8;14)(q24;q32), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and
t(3;22)(q27;q11), which developed in association with class switching, V/D/J
recombination, and somatic hypermutation, respectively. The lymphoma responded to
chemoradiotherapy, and the patient has been well for 2 years, suggesting that
multiple oncogene rearrangements may not necessarily be associated with poor
clinical outcome.

PMID: 14979479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell. 2003 Dec;12(6):1551-64.

Mechanism of SMRT corepressor recruitment by the BCL6 BTB domain.

Ahmad KF(1), Melnick A, Lax S, Bouchard D, Liu J, Kiang CL, Mayer S, Takahashi S,
Licht JD, Privé GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 
2M9, Canada.

BCL6 encodes a transcription factor that represses genes necessary for the
terminal differentiation of lymphocytes within germinal centers, and the
misregulated expression of this factor is strongly implicated in several types of
B cell lymphoma. The homodimeric BTB domain of BCL6 (also known as the POZ
domain) is required for the repression activity of the protein and interacts
directly with the SMRT and N-CoR corepressors that are found within large
multiprotein histone deacetylase-containing complexes. We have identified a 17
residue fragment from SMRT that binds to the BCL6 BTB domain, and determined the 
crystal structure of the complex to 2.2 A. Two SMRT fragments bind symmetrically 
to the BCL6 BTB homodimer and, in combination with biochemical and in vivo data, 
the structure provides insight into the basis of transcriptional repression by
this critical B cell lymphoma protein.

PMID: 14690607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2004 Feb;242(2):130-45. Epub 2003 Dec 18.

Prognostic value of cell-cycle markers in ocular adnexal lymphoma: an assessment 
of 230 cases.

Coupland SE(1), Hellmich M, Auw-Haedrich C, Lee WR, Stein H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Benjamin Franklin of the Free
University, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, Germany. secoupland@yahoo.de

BACKGROUND: To determine the prognostic value of cell-cycle associated markers in
ocular adnexal lymphoma (OAL).
METHODS: Two hundred sixty-one consecutive cases of ocular adnexal
lymphoproliferative lesions were subdivided into reactive lymphoid hyperplasia
(RLH), atypical lymphoid hyperplasia (ALH) and OAL. The latter were sub-typed
according to the new WHO Lymphoma Classification. All lesions were investigated
applying standard immunohistochemical methods with antibodies specific for pRB,
p53, p16, p21, BCL-6 and for multiple myeloma oncogene-1-protein (MUM1, also
known as IRF4). The main endpoints included the development of a local
recurrence, of systemic disease and of lymphoma-related death. The association of
prognostic variables with endpoints was assessed by multiple logistic and Cox
regression models, respectively.
RESULTS: The ocular adnexal lymphoproliferative lesions were categorised as OAL (
n=230; 88%), RLH ( n=29; 11%), and ALH ( n=2; 1%). The major lymphoma subtypes
included 136 extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (EMZL), 31 diffuse large
cell B-cell lymphomas, 27 follicular lymphomas, 9 plasmacytomas, 9
lymphoplasmocytic lymphoma/immunocytomas and 8 mantle cell lymphomas. The median 
follow-up time was 44.5 months. Most OAL patients had Stage IE disease and were
treated with radiotherapy. Thirty-seven (25%) Stage IE patients had tumour
relapses: these were significantly associated with an increased BCL6 blast
percentage. Sixty-two (42%) Stage IE patients developed systemic disease: they
had "non-EMZL" with large growth fractions and increased blast percentages for
BCL6. Fifty-seven (25%) OAL patients died because of their lymphoma;
lymphoma-related death was significantly associated on multivariable analysis
with advanced clinical stage, an age >60 years and large tumour growth fractions.
CONCLUSION: Subtyping of OAL according to the new WHO Lymphoma Classification,
the stage of disease and tumour cell growth fraction aided the prediction of (1) 
tumour relapse, (2) the development of systemic disease and (3) lymphoma-related 
death in OAL.

PMID: 14685876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Brain Pathol. 2003 Oct;13(4):534-8.

Molecular characterization of BCL6 breakpoints in primary diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas of the central nervous system identifies GAPD as novel translocation
partner.

Montesinos-Rongen M(1), Akasaka T, Zühlke-Jenisch R, Schaller C, Van Roost D,
Wiestler OD, Siebert R, Deckert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Cologne, Köln, Germany.

Primary central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSL) constitute diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas arising in and remaining confined to the brain. Little information is
available on cytogenetic changes in PCNSL, and recurrent chromosomal
translocations have not yet been identified. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) of a series of 13 PCNSL from immunocompetent patients revealed 3 cases
with signal patterns of a BCL6-specific probe suggesting a breakpoint in this
oncogene locus in chromosome band 3q27. Here, we describe cloning of the
translocation breakpoints by long-distance inverse polymerase chain reaction
(LDI-PCR) in 2 of these tumors. Both breakpoints affected the first intron of
BCL6. In one PCNSL, the HSPCA (HSP90A) gene in 14q32.31 was identified as BCL6
partner. In the second lymphoma, the gene encoding glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPD) on 12p13.31 was detected as a hitherto unknown partner of
BCL6. Our results suggest translocation-mediated BCL6 oncogene activation as a so
far unknown pathogenetically relevant mechanism in PCNSL.

PMID: 14655758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Dec;147(2):128-33.

A novel t(2;6)(p12;q23) appearing during transformation of follicular lymphoma
with t(18;22)(q21;q11) to diffuse large cell lymphoma.

Yamamoto K(1), Okamura A, Minagawa K, Yakushijin K, Urahama N, Gomyo H, Shimoyama
M, Itoh M, Matsui T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kobe University
School of Medicine, 7-5-2 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Follicular lymphoma is characterized genetically by t(14;18)(q32;q21), whereas
t(18;22)(q21;q11), a rare variant form of t(14;18), has been preferentially
observed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). We describe here an unusual case 
of follicular lymphoma with a t(18;22)(q21;q11), that progressed to diffuse large
cell lymphoma with a novel t(2;6)(p12;q23). Spectral karyotyping revealed that
add(2)(p12) and add(6)(q23) were derived from a t(2;6)(p12;q23). Fluorescence in 
situ hybridization analysis confirmed rearrangements of the BCL2 gene at 18q21
and the BCL6 gene at 3q27. Our results indicate that a reciprocal translocation
involving 6q23 could be implicated in the progression of follicular lymphoma and 
that t(18;22) may have a specific role in the pathogenesis of follicular lymphoma
as well as CLL.

PMID: 14623462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cas Lek Cesk. 2003;142(7):417-22.

[Large-cell diffuse B-cell lymphoma: heterogenous origin and prognosis from the
aspect of modern diagnosis].

[Article in Czech]

Soukup J(1), Krsková L, Mrhalová M, Kodet R, Campr V, Kubácková K, Trnený M.

Author information: 
(1)Ustav patologie a molekulární medicíny 2. LF UK a FNM, Praha.
jan.soukup@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas represent a heterogeneous group of
tumors with a different origin, morphological findings and a variable clinical
prognosis. These tumors have been recently classified into two prognostically
relevant subgroups differing in the gene expression. The key genes suitable for
routine diagnostics of DLBCL have not been yet identified. The aim of this work
was to study changes and expression of several genes and proteins participating
in the genesis of DLBCL.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analysed a group of 31 patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas. Basic clinical data including follow-up of the patients were
available. Tumors were examined by a panel of immunohistochemical reactions with 
antibodies against CD20, CD79a, BCL-2, BCL-6, CD10, Ki-67 and TP53. FISH was used
to detect a translocation t(14;18)(q32;q21) and/or a break in BCL6 region (3q27) 
suggestive of a translocation with a variable translocation partner t(3;?). PCR
was utilized to detect the translocation t(14;18) and a clonal rearrangement of
heavy and/or kappa chain of the immunoglobin genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of BCL-2 protein appeared to correlate with a higher 
mortality rate. The expression of other proteins examined in the study did not
correspond significantly with the clinical development of the disease. Tumors
with follicular lymphoma as a component had significantly higher mortality rate
than the tumors developing de novo. Moreover, higher mortality was evident in
cases with higher values of the International Prognostic Index (IPI).

PMID: 14515445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Hematol. 2003 Oct;74(2):112-8.

Case of acute lymphoblastic leukemia presenting with t(14;18)/BCL2, t(8;14)/cMYC,
and t(1;2)/FCGR2B.

Greer WL(1), Lee CL, Callanan MB, Zayed E, Sadek I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada. wenda.greer@cdha.nshealth.ca

The majority of follicular lymphoma and Burkitt's lymphoma are associated with
reciprocal translocations involving BCL2 and cMYC, respectively. Unusual reports 
of aggressive lymphoma presenting with both translocations have been described as
well as rare cases with a third structural alteration usually involving BCL6. The
patient described here presented with aggressive high-grade lymphocytic leukemia,
FAB subtype L2 (ALL-L2), and three reciprocal translocations, t(14;18)(q32;q21), 
t(8;14)(q24.1;q32), and t(1;2) (q22-23;p13). Despite immature morphology the
leukemic blasts had a mature B-cell phenotype; they were positive for surface
immunoglobulin heavy chains and negative for CD34, TdT, and CD10. Most reported
dual t(14;18)/t(8;14) cases have not shown sIg and were positive for CD10.
Molecular genetic analyses showed the typical rearrangements of BCL2 and cMYC as 
well as the FCGR2B gene on chromosome 1q23. The occurrence of a third oncogene
rearrangement in association with the dual BCL2, cMYC translocations in ALL
patients is very rare. To our knowledge, this is the first case where the third
hit involves the FCGR2B locus. This report reiterates the poor prognosis
associated with activation of cMYC together with elevated Bcl-2 expression. These
data also support recent evidence that dysregulation of FCGR2B may play a role in
tumor progression.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss Inc.

PMID: 14508797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Clin Immunol. 2003 Jul;23(4):235-46.

Immunoglobulin somatic hypermutation: double-strand DNA breaks, AID and
error-prone DNA repair.

Wu X(1), Feng J, Komori A, Kim EC, Zan H, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College
and Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, USA.

Somatic hypermutation (SHM) is critical for antibody affinity maturation and the 
generation of memory B cells. Somatic mutations consist mainly of single
nucleotide changes with rare insertions and deletions. Such changes would be
introduced during error-prone repair of lesions involving single-strand DNA
breaks (SSBs) or, more likely, double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs), as DSBs occur
exclusively in genes that have the potentials to undergo SHM. In the human, such 
genes include Ig V, BCL6, and c-MYC. In these germline genes, DSBs are blunt. In 
rearranged Ig V, BCL6, and translocated c-MYC genes, blunt DSBs are processed to 
yield resected DNA ends. This process is dependent on the expression of
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which is selectively expressed upon 
CD40-signaling in hypermutating B cells. CD40-induced and AID-dependent free 5'- 
and 3'-staggered DNA ends critically channel the repair of DSBs through the
homologous recombination (HR) repair pathway. During HR, the modulation of
critical translesion DNA polymerases, as signaled by cross-linking of the B cell 
receptor (BCR) for antigen, leads to the insertions of mismatches, i.e.,
mutations. The nature of DSBs, the possible roles of AID in the modification of
DSBs and that of the translesion DNA polymerases zeta and iota in the subsequent 
repair process that lead to the insertions of mutations are discussed here within
the context of an integrated model of SHM.

PMCID: PMC4624321
PMID: 12959216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Blood. 2003 Sep 1;102(5):1931-2; author reply 1932.

Multiple BCL6 translocation partners in individual cases of gastric lymphoma.

Chen YW, Liang AC, Au WY, Chu KM, Wong KY, Hu X, Lu L, Tang JC, Chan KW, Beh SL, 
Kwong YL, Liang RH, Srivastava G.

Comment on
    Blood. 2003 Aug 15;102(4):1443-8.

PMID: 12930733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Blood. 2003 Nov 15;102(10):3775-85. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

Molecular histogenesis of posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders.

Capello D(1), Cerri M, Muti G, Berra E, Oreste P, Deambrogi C, Rossi D, Dotti G, 
Conconi A, Viganò M, Magrini U, Ippoliti G, Morra E, Gloghini A, Rambaldi A,
Paulli M, Carbone A, Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences & Interdisciplinary Research
Center on Autoimmune Diseases, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont,
Via Solaroli 17, 28100 Novara, Italy.

Posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs) represent a serious
complication of solid organ transplantation. This study assessed the molecular
histogenesis of 52 B-cell monoclonal PTLDs, including 12 polymorphic PTLDs
(P-PTLDs), 36 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs), and 4 Burkitt/Burkitt-like
lymphomas (BL/BLLs). Somatic hypermutation (SHM) of immunoglobulin variable (IgV)
genes documented that most monoclonal B-cell PTLDs (75% P-PTLDs, 91.3% DLBCLs,
100% BL/BLLs) derive from germinal center (GC)-experienced B cells. B-cell
lymphoma 6 (BCL6) mutations occurred in 25% P-PTLDs, 60.6% DLBCLs, and 75.0%
BL/BLLs. A first histogenetic category of PTLDs (31.2% DLBCLs) express the
BCL6+/multiple myeloma oncogene-1 protein (MUM1-/+)/CD138- profile and mimic B
cells experiencing the GC reaction, as also suggested by ongoing SHM in a
fraction of these cases. A second subset of PTLDs (66.7% P-PTLDs and 31.2%
DLBCLs) display the BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138- phenotype and mimic B cells that have
concluded the GC reaction. A third histogenetic category of PTLDs (25.0% P-PTLDs 
and 31.2% DLBCLs) shows the BCL6-/MUM1+/CD138+ profile, consistent with
preterminally differentiated post-GC B cells. Crippling mutations of IgV heavy
chain (IgVH) and/or IgV light chain (IgVL) genes, leading to sterile
rearrangements and normally preventing cell survival, occur in 4 DLBCLs and 1
BL/BLL that may have been rescued from apoptosis through expression of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1). Overall, the
histogenetic diversity of monoclonal B-cell PTLDs may help define biologically
homogeneous categories of the disease.

PMID: 12907442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 17;22(29):4459-68.

BCL6 overexpression prevents increase in reactive oxygen species and inhibits
apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic reagents in B-cell lymphoma cells.

Kurosu T(1), Fukuda T, Miki T, Miura O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations and somatic mutations occurring in the 5' noncoding
region of the BCL6 gene, encoding a transcriptional repressor, are most frequent 
genetic abnormalities associated with non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma and result in
deregulated expression of BCL6. However, the significance of deregulated
expression of BCL6 in lymphomagenesis and its effect on clinical outcomes of
lymphoma patients have remained elusive. In the present study, we established
Daudi and Raji B-cell lymphoma cell lines that overexpress BCL6 or its mutant,
BCL6-Ala333/343, in which serine residues required for degradation through the
proteasome pathway in B-cell receptor-stimulated cells are mutated. BCL6
overexpression did not have any significant effect on cell proliferation, but
significantly inhibited apoptosis caused by etoposide, which induced a
proteasome-dependent degradation of BCL6. BCL6-Ala333/343 was not degraded after 
etoposide treatment and strongly inhibited apoptosis. In these lymphoma cell
lines, etoposide increased the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reduced mitochondria membrane potential, both of which were inhibited by the
antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC). NAC also inhibited apoptosis. Furthermore,
BCL6 overexpression was found to inhibit the increase in ROS levels and apoptosis
in response to etoposide and other chemotherapeutic reagents. These results raise
the possibility that deregulated expression of BCL6 may endow lymphoma cells with
resistance to chemotherapeutic reagents, most likely by enhancing the antioxidant
defense systems.

PMID: 12881702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Exp Med. 2003 Jul 21;198(2):211-21. Epub 2003 Jul 14.

BCL6 controls the expression of the B7-1/CD80 costimulatory receptor in germinal 
center B cells.

Niu H(1), Cattoretti G, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, 1150 St. Nicholas Ave.,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor required for the
development of germinal centers (GCs) and implicated in the pathogenesis of
GC-derived B cell lymphoma. Understanding the precise role of BCL6 in normal GC
formation and in lymphomagenesis depends on the identification of genes that are 
direct targets of its transcriptional repression. Here we report that BCL6
directly controls the expression of B7-1/CD80, a costimulatory receptor involved 
in B-T cell interactions critical for the development of T cell-mediated antibody
responses. Upon CD40 signaling, transcription of the CD80 gene is induced by the 
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB transcription factor. Our results show that BCL6
prevents CD40-induced expression of CD80 by binding its promoter region in vivo
and suppressing its transcriptional activation by NF-kappaB. Consistent with a
physiologic role for BCL6 in suppressing CD80, the expression of these two genes 
is mutually exclusive in B cells, and BCL6-defective mice show increased
expression of CD80 in B cells. The results suggest that BCL6 may directly control
the ability of B cell to interact with T cells during normal GC development. In
addition, these findings imply that T-B cell interactions may be disrupted in B
cell lymphoma expressing deregulated BCL6 genes.

PMCID: PMC2194068
PMID: 12860928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2003 Jun;17(3):785-820.

Etiology and pathogenesis of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Knowles DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, 525 East 68th Street, New York, NY 10021, USA.
dknowles@med.cornell.edu

The incidence of NHL is greatly increased in HIV-infected individuals; malignant 
lymphoma is the second most common neoplasm that occurs in association with AIDS.
The vast majority of neoplasms are clinically aggressive, monoclonal B-cell
neoplasms that exhibit Burkitt's, immunoblastic, large cell, or transitional
histopathology. Approximately 80% arise systemically (nodal or extranodal) and
20% arise as primary CNS lymphomas. A small proportion of neoplasms are body
cavity-based, primary effusion lymphomas that are uniquely associated with KSHV
infection. Recently, HIV-associated polymorphic lymphoproliferative disorders
have been described as well. AIDS-related NHLs appear to exhibit distinctive
clinical characteristics according to their histopathology and anatomic site of
origin. Factors that contribute to lymphoma development include HIV-induced
immunosuppression, impaired immune surveillance, cytokine release and
deregulation, and chronic antigenic stimulation. This environment is associated
with the development of oligoclonal B-cell expansions. The appearance of NHL is
characterized by the presence of a monoclonal B-cell population that displays a
variety of genetic lesions, including, for example, EBV infection, MYC gene
rearrangement, BCL6 gene rearrangement, P53 mutations and deletions, and RAS gene
mutations. The number and type of genetic lesions vary somewhat among
AIDS-related NHLs according to their histopathologic category and anatomic site
of origin. These findings suggest that more than one pathogenetic mechanism is
operational in the development and progression of AIDS-related NHLs. Further work
is necessary to develop a complete understanding of the etiology and pathogenesis
of NHL in the setting of HIV infection. AIDS-related NHL is an important biologic
model for investigating the development and progression of high-grade NHLs and
NHLs that develop in immunedeficient hosts.

PMID: 12852656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Leukemia. 2003 Jul;17(7):1390-7.

The BCL6 gene in B-cell lymphomas with 3q27 translocations is expressed mainly
from the rearranged allele irrespective of the partner gene.

Lossos IS(1), Akasaka T, Martinez-Climent JA, Siebert R, Levy R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical
Center, Stanford, CA 94305-5151, USA.

The BCL6 gene, which functions as a transcription repressor, is the target of
multiple chromosomal translocations in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL). These
translocations occur in the nontranslated region of the BCL6 gene, juxtaposing
regulatory sequences of the diverse partner genes to the open reading frame of
the BCL6 gene and thus are thought to deregulate BCL6 gene expression. The levels
of expression of the BCL6 gene and protein have been demonstrated to predict the 
clinical outcome of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. By contrast, the prognostic
significance of BCL6 gene translocations is unclear. In this study we have sought
an explanation for this apparent discrepancy. We examined tumors with a variety
of different BCL6 translocations and therefore with a variety of potentially
substituted promoters. We found no increase in total BCL6 mRNA levels in the NHL 
specimens harboring BCL6 gene translocation. Indeed, some of these tumors
expressed relatively low quantities of the BCL6 mRNA. We also sought to determine
whether BCL6 transcription occurs from the rearranged or from the normal
untranslocated allele in these tumors. We demonstrate that lymphoma cell lines
and majority of NHL tumor specimens expressed BCL6 mRNA predominantly from the
rearranged allele that may come under the control of various partner gene
promoters. However, few NHL tumors with BCL6 gene translocations expressed BCL6
mRNA equally from the rearranged and the nonrearranged alleles. Neither the
nature of the substituted promoters nor the presence of activating mutations in
the BCL6 regulatory sequences correlated with the allelic expression of the BCL6 
gene in these tumors.

PMID: 12835729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Jul;27(7):903-11.

Micronodular T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma of the spleen:
histology, immunophenotype, and differential diagnosis.

Dogan A(1), Burke JS, Goteri G, Stitson RN, Wotherspoon AC, Isaacson PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, University College London, London, UK.
a.dogan@ucl.ac.uk

Occasionally, primary large B-cell lymphomas (LBLs) arising in the spleen present
with a micronodular pattern involving the splenic white pulp but sparing the red 
pulp. Histologically, the nodules contain scattered large B cells in a background
of numerous T cells and histiocytes. They can cause substantial difficulty in
histologic diagnosis as the morphology can mimic reactive and inflammatory
lesions as well as other lymphoid neoplasms. In this study, we examined the
histology and immunophenotype of the micronodular T-cell/histiocyte-rich LBL
(MTLBL) of the spleen with a view to establish the characteristics that may be
helpful in diagnosis. Paraffin-embedded material from 17 cases of MTLBL was
studied. Clinical features and histology were reviewed and immunohistochemistry
was performed for immunoglobulins, CD20, CD79a, CD3, CD68, CD10, BCL6, BCL2,
OCT-2, epithelial membrane antigen, CD30, CD138, and EBV markers. The median age 
of presentation was 56 years, and the most frequent presenting features were
anemia and B symptoms. All cases showed a micronodular pattern of involvement.
The tumor nodules comprised a mixture of numerous CD3+ T cells and CD68+
histiocytes and scattered large CD20+ B cells with immunoglobulin light chain
restriction. They were positive for BCL6 and OCT2 but negative for CD10, CD138,
and EBV markers. There was variable expression of epithelial membrane antigen,
Bcl-2, and CD30. No follicle dendritic cell meshwork infrastructure underlying
the nodules could be demonstrated by staining for CD21 or CD35 antigens. The
prognosis was poor; seven of the 12 cases with follow-up were dead within 2
years. MTLBL is unique variant of T-cell/histiocyte-rich diffuse LBL,
characterized by primary splenic presentation and a micronodular architecture.
The main differential diagnoses include granulomatous inflammation, Hodgkin's
lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, and peripheral T-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 12826882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Jul;27(7):895-902.

Large B-cell lymphoma presenting in the spleen: identification of different
clinicopathologic conditions.

Mollejo M(1), Algara P, Mateo MS, Menárguez J, Pascual E, Fresno MF, Camacho FI, 
Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Program, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Only a few series of splenic large B-cell lymphoma have been previously reported,
including limited immunophenotypic studies and clinical data. Here we review the 
clinical data, morphology, and immunophenotype of series of 33 cases of large
B-cell lymphoma presenting in the spleen. Three main groups of tumors are
identified. Group A was characterized by macronodular tumors (20 cases), with
predominantly stage I disease and a favorable clinical outcome. All cases were
bcl6 positive. Group B was characterized by a micronodular pattern (nine cases), 
including a subset with T-cell-rich B-cell lymphoma features. Most of the
patients in this group were diagnosed at advanced clinical stages and died of the
disease. All cases were bcl6 positive. Group C was characterized by diffuse red
pulp infiltration (four cases) and advanced clinical stages and showed an
aggressive behavior. All but one case were bcl6 positive. The results of this
series define a characteristic type of large B-cell lymphoma presenting in the
spleen as a tumoral mass, associated with a relatively favorable clinical course.
Additionally, they provide evidence that clinical presentation as a tumor
confined to the spleen and the hilar lymph nodes is associated with lower
aggressivity.

PMID: 12826881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Immunity. 2003 Jun;18(6):727-38.

AID-dependent generation of resected double-strand DNA breaks and recruitment of 
Rad52/Rad51 in somatic hypermutation.

Zan H(1), Wu X, Komori A, Holloman WK, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College and Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Somatic hypermutation (SHM) of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes appears to involve the
generation of double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) and their error-prone repair. Here 
we show that DSBs occur at a high frequency in unrearranged (germline) Ig
variable (V) genes, BCL6 and c-MYC. These DSBs are blunt, target the mutational
RGYW/RGY hotspot, and would be resolved through nonhomologous end-joining, as
indicated by the presence of Ku70/Ku86 on these DNA ends. Upon CD40-induced
expression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), DSBs increase in
frequency and are resected to yield 5'- and 3'-protruding ends in hypermutating
rearranged V genes, BCL6 and translocated c-MYC. 3'-protruding ends would direct 
DSB repair through homologous recombination, as indicated by their exclusive
presence in S/G2 and recruitment of Rad52/Rad51, leading to SHM, upon mispair by 
error-prone DNA polymerases modulated by crosslinking of the B cell receptor for 
antigen.

PMCID: PMC4625537
PMID: 12818155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 1;171(1):426-31.

Bcl6 is a transcriptional repressor for the IL-18 gene.

Takeda N(1), Arima M, Tsuruoka N, Okada S, Hatano M, Sakamoto A, Kohno Y,
Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.

Bcl6 functions as a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor, and
Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6(-/-)) mice have been reported to display Th2-type
inflammatory diseases in multiple organs. Since IL-18 is a potent stimulator of
Th2 cells, we examined the expression of IL-18 mRNA in bone marrow-derived
macrophages from Bcl6(-/-) mice after LPS stimulation. Here we show that the
expression was strikingly up-regulated after stimulation. The expression was also
up-regulated in RAW264 cells, a murine macrophage cell line, by transfection with
the dominant negative type of Bcl6 gene. We identified a putative Bcl6-binding
DNA sequence (IL-18BS) upstream of exon 1 of the murine IL-18 gene and three
IL-18BSs in the promoter region of human IL-18 gene. Binding of Bcl6 in nuclear
protein from resting RAW264 cells to murine IL-18BS was detected by gel
retardation assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. The binding activity
was diminished gradually in RAW264 cells after LPS stimulation. However, the
amount of Bcl6 protein in these cells was constant over the period examined,
suggesting the functional modification of Bcl6 protein after stimulation.
Furthermore, murine IL-18BS was required for Bcl6 to repress the expression of
the luciferase reporter gene under control of the IL-18 promoter. Taken together,
Bcl6 is a key regulator of IL-18 production by macrophages.

PMID: 12817026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Microsc Res Tech. 2003 Jul 1;61(4):389-407.

The relationship between BCL6 bodies and nuclear sites of normal and halogenated 
DNA and RNA synthesis.

Puvion-Dutilleul F(1), Souquere-Besse S, Albagli-Curiel O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut André Lwoff, UPR 1983 CNRS, Villejuif, France.

BCL6 is a POZ/BTB and zinc finger transcription factor that self-interacts and
accumulates into discrete nuclear "bodies" of unknown function. We recently
reported that BCL6 bodies associate with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-substituted
DNA, suggesting their implication in replication. To examine this possibility, we
examine here by electron and confocal microscopy the relation between BCL6 bodies
and replication foci (RF) using incorporation of various halogenated nucleotides 
(BrdU, chlorodeoxyuridine, CldU, and iododeoxyuridine, IdU) or PCNA
(proliferating cell nuclear antigen) staining. We show that BCL6 bodies are found
associated with RF, as revealed by PCNA staining. However, such association is
markedly prolonged upon BrdU or CldU incorporation, but less, or not at all, upon
IdU incorporation. Pulse-chase and double-labeling experiments indicate that
IdU-substituted DNA leaves BCL6 bodies after a few tenths of minutes while BrdU- 
or CldU-substituted DNA stalls in their vicinity for several hours, thereby
giving the characteristic "crowns" of DNA entirely surrounding BCL6 bodies. In
all cases, however, the halogenated DNA ends up undergoing a movement from BCL6
bodies toward nucleoplasm and nuclear periphery to reach euchromatin and
heterochromatin, respectively. We propose that replicating DNA is prone to be
bound by BCL6, while BrdU/CldU incorporation increases this propensity possibly
because these two events have synergistic effects on the structure and
chromatinisation of the newly synthesized DNA. Finally, despite the known
proximity between nuclear sites of transcription and replication, we show via
several approaches that BCL6 bodies do not appear to be involved either in RNA
synthesis or storage.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12811744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jun;9(6):2133-9.

The t(14;18) is associated with germinal center-derived diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and is a strong predictor of outcome.

Barrans SL(1), Evans PA, O'Connor SJ, Kendall SJ, Owen RG, Haynes AP, Morgan GJ, 
Jack AS.

Author information: 
(1)HMDS, Academic Unit of Haematology and Oncology, Leeds General Infirmary,
Leeds, United Kingdom. sharonb@hmds.org.uk

The t(14;18) is present in a significant proportion of diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBCLs), however, the prognostic effect of the translocation and the
relationship with transformed follicular lymphoma remains controversial. To
clarify these uncertainties, interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
was used to determine the incidence of the t(14;18) in nodal DLBCL, and this was 
correlated with BCL2 expression, germinal center (GC) immunophenotype, and
patient outcome. FISH was performed on paraffin-extracted nuclei from 137 de novo
nodal DLBCLs. Eighteen of 137 de novo DLBCLs were t(14;18) positive. The t(14;18)
was most commonly associated with the subset of DLBCLs that expressed a GC
phenotype, defined as CD10+, BCL6+ (GC-type DLBCL): positive in 14 of 47 (30%)
cases, compared with 4 of 89 (5%) in the non-GC group (Pearson's chi(2) = 28.4; P
< 0.0001). All cases with a translocation expressed BCL2 protein, however, 40
expressed BCL2 protein without a t(14;18). GC-type DLBCL patients with a t(14;18)
had a significantly worse survival compared with GC-type DLBCL patients without
the translocation (2-year survivals were 29 and 63%, respectively; P = 0.006). Of
the cases without the translocation, BCL2 protein expression did not affect
survival. In contrast, in the non-GC group of DLBCLs, BCL2 protein expression
reduced the 2-year overall survival from 64% in the BCL2-negative group to 38%,
with a median survival of 15.0 months (P = 0.02). In conclusion, the t(14;18) is 
common in DLBCLs, particularly in GC-type DLBCLs, where the presence of the
translocation has a poor prognostic effect. BCL2 protein expression defines a
group of non-GC DLBCL patients with a poor prognosis.

PMID: 12796378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mod Pathol. 2003 May;16(5):471-80.

Increased expression of the bcl6 and CD10 proteins is associated with increased
apoptosis and proliferation in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Bai M(1), Agnantis NJ, Skyrlas A, Tsanou E, Kamina S, Galani V, Kanavaros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty, University of Ioannina, Ioannina,
Greece. mbai@cc.uoi.gr

There is increasing evidence that bcl6 and CD10 expression may be related to
apoptosis and cell cycle progression. Therefore, 79 cases of de novo diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas were studied for the expression of bcl6 and CD10 proteins 
in relation to 1) the apoptotic index; 2) the proliferation-associated proteins
Ki67, cyclin A, and cyclin B1; and 3) the expression of the bcl2, p53, Rb, p16,
and p27 proteins. Expression of bcl6, CD10, and bcl2 proteins was found in 54/79 
(68%), 28/79 (35%), and 47/74 (63%) cases, respectively. The bcl6/CD10 patterns
were as follows: bcl6+/CD10+ (26 cases, 32%), bcl6+/CD10- (28 cases, 33%),
bcl6-/CD10- (23 cases, 31%), and bcl6-/CD10+ (2 cases, 4%). Significant positive 
correlations were found between bcl6/Ki67 (r =.328, P =.003), bcl6/cyclin A (r
=.265, P =.018), bcl6/apoptotic index (r =.327, P =.010), CD10/Ki67 (r =.296, P
=.008), and CD10/apoptotic index (r =.397, P =.001). In addition, high expression
of bcl6 showed significant correlation with negative (null/low) bcl2 expression
(chi(2) test, P =.002). The above findings indicate that increased expression of 
the bcl6 and CD10 proteins is associated with increased apoptosis and
proliferation in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. The association between
increased bcl6 expression and enhanced apoptosis might be due, at least in part, 
to the null/low bcl2 expression because previous in vitro data showed that bcl6
overexpression induces apoptosis accompanied by bcl2 and bcl-xl downregulation.
Moreover, significant correlation was found between increased apoptotic index and
the bcl6+/CD10+ pattern (t test: P =.014, Mann-Whitney test: P =.046). This
finding and the positive correlation of the apoptotic index with bcl6 and CD10
expression may be related to previous results showing that the expression of
these proteins has favorable effects on the clinical outcome of diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 12748254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Blood. 2003 Aug 15;102(4):1443-8. Epub 2003 May 8.

BCL6 gene translocation in follicular lymphoma: a harbinger of eventual
transformation to diffuse aggressive lymphoma.

Akasaka T(1), Lossos IS, Levy R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical
Center, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2003 Sep 1;102(5):1931-2; author reply 1932.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is characterized by a relatively indolent clinical
course, but the disease often transforms into a more aggressive large cell
lymphoma with a rapidly progressive clinical course. In the present study, we
analyzed 41 cases of FL known to have subsequently transformed to aggressive
lymphoma and an additional 64 FL samples from patients not subsequently
transformed. We studied BCL6 gene rearrangement by the methodology of
long-distance inverse polymerase chain reaction (LDI-PCR). Of the 41 cases known 
to transform, 16 (39.0%) harbored BCL6 translocation or deletion at the time of
FL diagnosis. Among 64 cases not known to transform, BCL6 translocation was
detected in 9 (14.1%). The prevalence of BCL6 translocation in the group known to
transform was significantly higher (P =.0048). Among the transformation cases,
the partners of the BCL6 translocation were identified in 13 cases and included
IGH, CIITA, U50HG, MBNL, GRHPR, LRMP, EIF4A2, RhoH/TTF, and LOC92656 (similar to 
NAPA), whereas in the control group the BCL6 partners were IGH, CIITA, SIAT1, and
MBNL. In 13 cases paired specimens before and after transformation were
available. Among these paired specimens, a loss (3 cases) or a gain (1 case) of
BCL6 translocation was observed after the transformation. Analysis of clonality
showed that all of these cases represented the evolution of a subclone of the
original tumor population. Our study demonstrated that BCL6 translocation is not 
necessary for transformation but that BCL6 translocation in FL may constitute a
subgroup with a higher risk to transform into aggressive lymphoma.

PMID: 12738680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Res. 2003 Apr 1;63(7):1644-51.

Typing the histogenetic origin of the tumor cells of lymphocyte-rich classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma in relation to tumor cells of classical and
lymphocyte-predominance Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Bräuninger A(1), Wacker HH, Rajewsky K, Küppers R, Hansmann ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.
braeuninger@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) is separated into the classical (c) and
lymphocyte-predominance (lp) forms. Whereas classical Hodgkin-Reed/Sternberg
(HRS) cells carry mutated immunoglobulin (Ig) gene rearrangements that are often 
"crippled" and lack intraclonal diversity, and are likely derived from
preapoptotic germinal center (GC) B cells, the lymphocytic and histiocytic cells 
of lpHL are presumably derived from selected GC B cells and often show ongoing
somatic hypermutation. The recently identified lymphocyte-rich classical (lrc) HL
is characterized by HRS cells with the immunophenotype of classical HRS cells
(CD30(+)CD15(+)CD20(-)CD45(-)) but an infiltrate similar to lpHL and a clinical
behavior resembling lpHL. To identify the histogenetic origin of the HRS cells in
lrcHL and to determine the relationship to the lymphoma cells of cHL and lpHL we 
characterized seven cases of lrcHL by immunohistochemistry and sequenced the
rearranged Ig genes of single micromanipulated HRS cells. The expression patterns
of BCL6, CD138, Oct2, and BOB1 in HRS cells of lrcHL showed differences to those 
of both cHL and lpHL. Analyses of rearranged Ig genes identified clonal HRS cell 
expansions carrying mutated Ig rearrangements without significant intraclonal
diversity in all seven of the cases. In two cases crippling mutations, rendering 
originally functional V gene rearrangements nonfunctional, were observed. Thus,
the mutation pattern of rearranged Ig genes of HRS cells in lrcHL is clearly
different from those in lymphocytic and histiocytic cells of lpHL, and resembles 
the pattern in HRS cells of cHL, suggesting that HRS cells in lrcHL derive from
(preapoptotic) GC B cells that silenced hypermutation. In one case in addition to
the dominant HRS cell clone, CD30(+) EBV-infected HRS-like cells unrelated to the
tumor clone were observed, suggesting development of an expanded population of
EBV-harboring HRS-like cells in the microenvironment of HL.

PMID: 12670918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Apr 4;303(2):600-8.

Bcl6-dependent transcriptional repression by BAZF.

Takenaga M(1), Hatano M, Takamori M, Yamashita Y, Okada S, Kuroda Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, 1-8-1, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

BAZF, a member of Bcl6 gene family, acts as a sequence-specific transcriptional
repressor in various cells including NIH3T3 cells. The DNA-binding sequence for
BAZF is the same as that for Bcl6 and the repressor activity of BAZF was also
inhibited by Tricostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase, suggesting the
functional homology between them. However, BAZF unlike Bcl6 cannot function as a 
transcriptional repressor in embryonal fibroblasts of Bcl6-deficient mice and in 
Bcl6-null cell lines such as K562 and WIL2-NS. The BTB/POZ domain and the middle 
portion of BAZF bound to the BTB/POZ domain and the middle portion of Bcl6,
respectively. There is an identical 17 amino acid sequence in their middle
portions and the sequence was important for the binding. Since BAZF did not
directly bind to mSin3A and histone deacetylase 1 and the repressor activity of
BAZF was detected in K562 cells replenished with the BTB/POZ domain or the middle
portion of Bcl6, BAZF may display its transrepressor activity by recruiting an
mSin3A/histone deacetylase 1 complex through association with Bcl6.

PMID: 12659862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 1;100(7):4126-31. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

Somatic hypermutation of the B cell receptor genes B29 (Igbeta, CD79b) and mb1
(Igalpha, CD79a).

Gordon MS(1), Kanegai CM, Doerr JR, Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, and David
Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA.

Somatic hypermutation (SHM), coupled to selection by antigen, generates
high-affinity antibodies during germinal center (GC) B cell maturation. SHM is
known to affect Bcl6, four additional oncogenes in diffuse large B cell lymphoma,
and the CD95Fas gene and is regarded as a major mechanism of B cell
tumorigenesis. We find that mutations in the genes encoding the B cell receptor
(BCR) accessory proteins B29 (Igbeta, CD79b) and mb1 (Igalpha, CD79a) occur as
often as Ig genes in a broad spectrum of GC- and post-GC-derived malignant B cell
lines, as well as in normal peripheral B cells. These B29 and mb1 mutations are
typical SHM consisting largely of single nucleotide substitutions targeted to
hotspots. The B29 and mb1 mutations appear at frequencies similar to those of
other non-Ig genes but lower than Ig genes. The distribution of mb1 mutations
followed the characteristic pattern found in Ig and most non-Ig genes. In
contrast, B29 mutations displayed a bimodal distribution resembling the CD95Fas
gene, in which promoter distal mutations conferred resistance to apoptosis.
Distal B29 mutations in the cytoplasmic domain may contribute to B cell survival 
by limiting BCR signaling. B29 and mb1 are mutated in a much broader spectrum of 
GC-derived B cells than any other known somatically hypermutated non-Ig gene.
This may be caused by the common cis-acting regulatory sequences that control the
requisite coexpression of the B29, mb1, and Ig chains in the BCR.

PMCID: PMC153059
PMID: 12651942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Br J Haematol. 2003 Feb;120(3):424-33.

Follicular lymphoma lacking the t(14;18)(q32;q21): identification of two disease 
subtypes.

Horsman DE(1), Okamoto I, Ludkovski O, Le N, Harder L, Gesk S, Siebert R,
Chhanabhai M, Sehn L, Connors JM, Gascoyne RD.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Division, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Canada. dhorsman@bccancer.bc.ca

The clinical and pathological features, including karyotype data and BCL2 protein
expression pattern, of follicular lymphoma without a t(14;18)(q32;q21) have not
been well defined. We have identified and conducted a detailed analysis of 50
cases with follicular lymphoma who lack the t(14;18). Fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis was used to exclude cases with a cryptic IGH/BCL2
rearrangement. BCL2 protein expression level was assessed by
immunohistochemistry. The karyotypes were assessed for recurrent sites of
structural rearrangement, duplications and deletions on a band-by-band basis, and
compared with a large cohort of cases with t(14;18). A distinct pattern of
chromosomal alterations was identified in the cases without t(14;18). BCL2
protein overexpression was detected in 33% of 49 tested cases. In this minority, 
the karyotypes frequently showed increased copies of chromosome 18. The majority 
of cases (67%) did not show BCL2 overexpression and were characterized
prominently by the presence of t(3;14)(q27;q32), implying a role for BCL6.
Follicular lymphomas that lack a t(14;18) were segregated into two subgroups with
distinct cytogenetic, phenotypic and possibly clinical features: one with BCL2
protein overexpression not related to an IGH/BCL2 rearrangement and a second
without BCL2 overexpression. Objective identification of BCL2 expression level as
well as BCL2 and BCL6 status by cytogenetic or FISH analysis has potential
clinical utility and may yield insights into alternative genetic mechanisms
associated with B-cell lymphomas with a follicular growth pattern.

PMID: 12580956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Oncogene. 2003 Jan 30;22(4):507-16.

Ambivalent role of BCL6 in cell survival and transformation.

Albagli-Curiel O(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 1983, Institut André Lwoff, Villejuif, France.
olivier.albagli@ujf-grenoble.fr

The BCL6 gene is often structurally altered and probably 'misregulated' in two
different types of human B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (BNHL) thought to arise
from germinal centre B cells. BCL6 encodes a BTB/POZ and zinc finger protein
whose biochemical properties support a role as a DNA-binding transcriptional
repressor and disclose, in part, the underlying mechanisms. In contrast, the
study of the 'oncogenic' structural alterations of BCL6 in BNHL and of its
cellular functions gives rise to much more heterogeneous data with no obvious
unifying picture so that how and even whether BCL6 contributes to lymphomagenesis
remains unclear. This review will summarize the current knowledge about the
'oncogenic' alterations and cellular functions of BCL6 and, based on some
results, will propose the following hypotheses: (1) In various systems, including
in memory T cells and also in germinal centre B cells and possibly in certain
postmitotic cells, BCL6 may act by stabilizing a particular stage of
differentiation. (2) Both its ambivalent effects on cell survival and the
heterogeneous consequences of its alterations in BNHL suggest that BCL6 can be
oncogenic not only upon overexpression or persistent expression, as often
proposed, but also, similar to some of its relatives, upon 'accidental'
downregulation.

PMID: 12555064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2002 Dec;47(16 Suppl):2306-12.

[A role for Bcl6 in immune memory development].

[Article in Japanese]

Tokuhisa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)tokuhisa@med.m.chiba-u.ac.jp

PMID: 12518453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):2914-23. Epub 2002 Dec 19.

Mutations of the BCL6 proto-oncogene disrupt its negative autoregulation in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Pasqualucci L(1), Migliazza A, Basso K, Houldsworth J, Chaganti RS, Dalla-Favera 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics and the Department of Pathology, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor whose expression is
deregulated by chromosomal translocations in approximately 40% of diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). The BCL6 regulatory sequences are also targeted by
somatic hypermutation in germinal center (GC) B cells and in a fraction of all
GC-derived lymphomas. However, the functional consequences of these mutations are
unknown. Here we report that a subset of mutations specifically associated with
DLBCL causes deregulated BCL6 transcription. These mutations affect 2 adjacent
BCL6 binding sites located within the first noncoding exon of the gene, and they 
prevent BCL6 from binding its own promoter, thereby disrupting its negative
autoregulatory circuit. These alterations were found in approximately 16% of
DLBCLs devoid of chromosomal translocations involving the BCL6 locus, but they
were not found in normal GC B cells. This study establishes a novel mechanism for
BCL6 deregulation and reveals a broader involvement of this gene in DLBCL
pathogenesis.

PMID: 12515714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 10;300(2):391-6.

Point mutations in BCL6 DNA-binding domain reveal distinct roles for the six zinc
fingers.

Mascle X(1), Albagli O, Lemercier C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U309, Institut Albert Bonniot, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La Tronche
Cedex, France.

The B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) gene encodes a transcriptional repressor containing 
six C-terminal Krüppel-like zinc fingers. The zinc finger (ZF) cluster is
necessary and sufficient for interaction with both DNA and several proteins and
for nuclear targeting. However, the functional specificity of the six ZFs in
these cellular roles is unknown. To characterize this domain, we mutated
individually each ZF of BCL6. Our results reveal that mutation of the two
N-terminal ZFs does not impair cognate DNA-binding, cellular localization of the 
protein nor the transcriptional repression capacity of BCL6. By contrast,
mutation of any of the remaining ZFs abolishes the binding of BCL6 to DNA in
vitro and the transrepressive function of the protein in vivo. Finally, none of
the six mutations affect the interaction between BCL6 and class II histone
deacetylases. Thus our experiments demonstrate that BCL6 uses each of the four
C-terminus ZFs for binding to a target sequence while the two amino terminal
fingers are likely engaged in other unknown function(s).

PMID: 12504096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Int J Hematol. 2002 Aug;76 Suppl 1:323-6.

Molecular mechanisms of lymphomagenesis through transcriptional disregulation by 
chromosome translocation.

Seto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

Chromosome translation plays an important role for lymphomagenesis.
Transcriptional disregulation type of chromosome translocation involves a
majority of B-cell lymphoma. These include BCL1/cyclin D1 translocation in mantle
cell lymphoma, BCL2 in follicular lymphoma and BCL6 in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. It is known that the transcriptional disregulation type causes aberrant
gene expression at the stages where those genes are down-regulated in normal
counterpart cells. Normal B-cells at mantle zone stage down-regulate the
expression of BCL1 gene and become resting in cell cycle. However, BCL1
expression from translocated allele with immunoglobulin gene is not
down-regulated at the mantle zone stage, preventing cells from entering in
resting state, and puts cells in cell cycle, leading to development of mantle
cell lymphoma. BCL2 expression from altered allele also keeps its expression at
the germinal center stage where normal counterpart cells down-regulate BCL2
expression, and makes cells to resist apoptosis, leading to development of
follicular lymphoma. The same scenario can apply to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
with BCL6 translocation; i.e. aberrant BCL6 expression at the post germinal
center stage takes place where normal counterpart cells down-regulate BCL6
expression. Although a strong association of specific translocations with
specific disease types is found, these translocations by themselves are not
sufficient for malignant transformation. The factors other than chromosome
translocations will be discussed.

PMID: 12430874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2002 Sep;32(9):371-85.

Report of the fifteenth international symposium of the foundation for promotion
of cancer research: new horizons in the diagnosis and treatment of hematological 
malignancies based on molecular genetic features.

Multani PS(1), Tobinai K, Kakizoe T, Armitage JO, Ohno R, Sugimura T.

Author information: 
(1)IDEC Pharmaceuticals Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA, National Cancer Center, 
Tokyo, Japan.

The Fifteenth International Symposium of the Foundation for Promotion of Cancer
Research entitled 'New Horizons in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Hematological
Malignancies Based on Molecular Genetic Features' was held in Tokyo on January
15-17, 2002. Twenty-nine invited speakers, including 12 from abroad and 17 from
Japan, presented the updated results of their research. After an overview of the 
classification of hematological malignancies, new findings on some disease
entities based on novel immunophenotypic and molecular genetic features were
presented. The results of gene expression profiling and BCL6 and C-MYC gene
rearrangement in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma were presented and oncogenic
mechanism of acute myeloid leukemia was discussed. In the treatment of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and acute leukemia, the present consensus and future
directions were discussed based on the results of multicenter trials in the USA
and Japan. As a molecular targeting therapy, the remarkable effect of a BCR-ABL
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, STI571, in chronic myeloid leukemia and
gastrointestinal stromal tumor was presented. Thereafter, promising results of
active immunotherapy, chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, anti-CD20
radioimmunoconjugate and anti-CD22 immunotoxin for B-cell lymphoma were
presented. Finally, recent advances in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation were discussed, focusing on reduced-intensity preparative
regimens. The recent advances in basic and clinical research on hematological
malignancies would lead to further improvement in the prognosis and quality of
life of patients suffering from leukemia or lymphoma.

PMID: 12417606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 1;62(21):6224-30.

Characterization of t(3;6)(q27;p21) breakpoints in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
and construction of the histone H4/BCL6 fusion gene, leading to altered
expression of Bcl-6.

Kurata M(1), Maesako Y, Ueda C, Nishikori M, Akasaka T, Uchiyama T, Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

A recurrent translocation, t(3;6)(q27;p21), in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma results in 
fusion of BCL6 with a particular histone H4 gene on 6p21. We cloned five H4/BCL6 
junctions from both der(3) and der(6) chromosomes. The breakpoints on H4 were
distributed within the single exon or close to the terminal palindrome, and those
on BCL6 were localized within or close to the translocation hypercluster.
Deletions or duplications of variable numbers of nucleotides were identified at
the junctions. A total of eight single nucleotide alterations were introduced
into the translocation/mutation cluster of BCL6, whereas four single nucleotide
substitutions were identified within a 360-bp region of H4. Thus, the somatic
hypermutation mechanism is likely to target H4, resulting in a predisposition to 
the development of translocation with BCL6. Lymphoma cells carrying H4/BCL6
produced fusion transcripts containing both H4 and BCL6 messages; however, the
cells expressed only moderate levels of BCL6 mRNA. We constructed expression
plasmids that mimicked the H4/BCL6 fusion gene and transiently introduced them
into COS-7 cells. H4/BCL6-transfected cells expressed markedly higher levels of
Bcl-6 protein than cells transfected with a plasmid carrying BCL6 driven by its
normal promoter and displayed bright nuclear staining with a characteristic
punctate pattern with an anti-Bcl-6 antibody. Deletion analyses revealed that the
high-level Bcl-6 expression was promoted by the H4 regulatory sequences. The
levels of expression of activating transcription factor 3, prefoldin 4, and
retinoblastoma-binding protein 7 significantly increased in accordance with that 
of BCL6, suggesting that Bcl-6 may act as a transcriptional activator. Our study 
suggested that t(3;6)(q27;p21) leads to BCL6 overexpression; however, the
high-level BCL6 expression may not be required to maintain the malignant
phenotype of lymphoma cells.

PMID: 12414651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3109-17. Epub 2002 Oct 24.

Transformation of follicular lymphoma to diffuse large cell lymphoma is
associated with a heterogeneous set of DNA copy number and gene expression
alterations.

Martinez-Climent JA(1), Alizadeh AA, Segraves R, Blesa D, Rubio-Moscardo F,
Albertson DG, Garcia-Conde J, Dyer MJ, Levy R, Pinkel D, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Hospital Clinico, University of
Valencia, Spain. martinez_jos@gva.es

Genomic aberrations in a series of paired biopsy samples from patients who
presented initially with follicle center lymphoma (FCL) and subsequently
transformed to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) were measured by array
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). The consequences of these aberrations on
gene expression were determined by comparison with expression analysis on these
specimens using cDNA microarrays. A heterogeneous pattern of acquired genomic
abnormalities was observed upon transformation, some of which were recurrent in
small subsets of patients. Some of the genomic aberration acquired upon
transformation, such as gain/amplification of 1q21-q24, 2p16 (REL/BCL11A gene
loci), 3q27-q29 (including the BCL6 locus), 7q11.2-q22.1, 12pter-q12, 18q21
(including the BCL2 locus) and Xq, and deletion of 6q22-q24, 13q14-q21 and 17p13 
(P53 locus) have been previously implicated in the FCL/DLBCL pathogenesis. In
addition, novel genomic imbalances not previously reported in association with
FCL transformation, such as overrepresentation of 4p12-pter, 5p12-p15,
6p12.3-p21, 9p23, 9q13-q31, 16q, 17q21, and loss of 1p36.3, 4q21-q23, 5q21-q23,
9q31-qter, 11q24-q25, and 15q23, were identified. We observed a differential
expression profile of many genes within regions of gain and deletion upon
transformation, including novel target genes associated with FCL transformation. 
However, other genes did not show deregulated expression despite their location
within these areas. In summary, the combination of array CGH and expression
analysis provides a more comprehensive picture of the transformation of FCL to
DLBCL. This process is associated with the acquisition of a variable spectrum of 
genomic imbalances affecting recurrent chromosomal areas that harbor
overexpressed or underexpressed genes targeted upon transformation.

PMID: 12406872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Histopathology. 2002 Nov;41(5):414-20.

Immunohistochemical expression of CD10 and t(14;18) chromosomal translocation may
be indicators of follicle centre cell origin in nodal diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

McCluggage WG(1), Catherwood M, Alexander HD, McBride HA, Smith ME, Morris TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast City Hospital
Trust, Belfast, UK. glenn.mccluggage@bll.n-i.nhs.uk

AIMS: Although diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is categorized as a distinct entity 
in the REAL classification of lymphomas, it represents a heterogeneous group of
neoplasms. A subgroup is probably of follicle centre cell origin and may evolve
from a pre-existing follicular lymphoma. The t(14;18) chromosomal translocation
can be demonstrated in the majority of follicular lymphomas and the aim of this
study was to investigate the prevalence of t(14;18) translocation in a series of 
de novo nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. We correlated this with the
immunohistochemical expression of CD10, bcl2 and bcl6, markers which are usually 
expressed by the neoplastic cells in follicular lymphomas. We also correlated
these parameters with the presence or absence of p53 protein expression by the
neoplastic cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (n=34) were stained
immunohistochemically with monoclonal antibodies to CD10, bcl2, bcl6 and p53
(D07). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the t(14;18) translocation was also
performed. Fourteen, 24 and 29 (41%, 71%, 85%) cases exhibited positivity for
CD10, bcl2 and bcl6, respectively. In 12 cases there was positivity with D07
(35%). By PCR, the t(14;18) translocation was identified in five cases (15%),
four of which were positive for CD10 and bcl2 and all of which were positive for 
bcl6. One of five cases positive for the chromosomal translocation exhibited
positivity with D07.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study the t(14;18) translocation was identified in 15% of
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, all but one of which exhibited positivity for
CD10, bcl2 and bcl6. These may represent cases of follicle centre cell origin
which may or may not have evolved from a pre-existing follicular lymphoma. It is 
possible that positivity for CD10 especially may identify cases which are of
follicle centre cell origin and that the absence of t(14;18) translocation in
some of these cases may reflect the fact that the translocation cannot normally
be demonstrated in all follicular lymphomas. Whether the presence or absence of
the translocation and the immunophenotype are prognostically important should be 
investigated further.

PMID: 12405909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):606-13. Epub 2002 Oct 28.

Acetylation inactivates the transcriptional repressor BCL6.

Bereshchenko OR(1), Gu W, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics and the Department of Pathology, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The proto-oncogene BCL6 encodes a BTB/POZ-zinc finger transcriptional repressor
that is necessary for germinal-center formation and has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of B-cell lymphomas. Here we show that the co-activator p300 binds
and acetylates BCL6 in vivo and inhibits its function. Acetylation disrupts the
ability of BCL6 to recruit histone deacetylases (HDACs), thereby hindering its
capacity to repress transcription and to induce cell transformation. BCL6 is
acetylated under physiologic conditions in normal germinal-center B cells and in 
germinal center-derived B-cell tumors. Treatment with specific inhibitors shows
that levels of acetylation of BCL6 are controlled by both HDAC-dependent and
SIR2-dependent pathways. Pharmacological inhibition of these pathways leads to
the accumulation of the inactive acetylated BCL6 and to cell-cycle arrest and
apoptosis in B-cell lymphoma cells. These results identify a new mechanism of
regulation of the proto-oncogene BCL6 with potential for therapeutic
exploitation. Furthermore, these findings provide a new mechanism by which
acetylation can promote transcription not only by modifying histones and
activating transcriptional activators, but also by inhibiting transcriptional
repressors.

PMID: 12402037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Blood. 2003 Feb 15;101(4):1220-35. Epub 2002 Sep 12.

Cell cycle deregulation in B-cell lymphomas.

Sánchez-Beato M(1), Sánchez-Aguilera A, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Program, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Disruption of the physiologic balance between cell proliferation and death is a
universal feature of all cancers. In general terms, human B-cell lymphomas can be
subdivided into 2 main groups, low- and high-growth fraction lymphomas, according
to the mechanisms through which this imbalance is achieved. Most types of
low-growth fraction lymphomas are initiated by molecular events resulting in the 
inhibition of apoptosis, such as translocations affecting BCL2, in follicular
lymphoma, or BCL10 and API2/MLT1, in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphomas. This results in cell accumulation as a consequence of prolonged cell
survival. In contrast, high-growth fraction lymphomas are characterized by an
enhanced proliferative activity, as a result of the deregulation of oncogenes
with cell cycle regulatory functions, such as BCL6, in large B-cell lymphoma, or 
c-myc, in Burkitt lymphoma. Low- and high-growth fraction lymphomas are both able
to accumulate other alterations in cell cycle regulation, most frequently
involving tumor suppressor genes such as p16(INK4a), p53, and p27(KIP1). As a
consequence, these tumors behave as highly aggressive lymphomas. The simultaneous
inactivation of several of these regulators confers increased aggressivity and
proliferative advantage to tumoral cells. In this review we discuss our current
knowledge of the alterations in each of these pathways, with special emphasis on 
the deregulation of cell cycle progression, in an attempt to integrate the
available information within a global model that describes the contribution of
these molecular changes to the genesis and progression of B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 12393483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Blood. 2003 Jan 15;101(2):706-10. Epub 2002 Sep 12.

Frequent occurrence of BCL6 rearrangements in nodular lymphocyte predominance
Hodgkin lymphoma but not in classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

Wlodarska I(1), Nooyen P, Maes B, Martin-Subero JI, Siebert R, Pauwels P, De
Wolf-Peeters C, Hagemeijer A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium.

We studied the genomic status of BCL6 in 23 cases of nodular lymphocyte
predominance Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) and 40 cases of classical Hodgkin lymphoma 
(cHL), using dual-color interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The
BCL6 rearrangement was identified in 48% of NLPHL cases and was not detected in
cHL cases. As a confirmation, sequential or simultaneous immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and FISH using CD20 or BCL6 antibodies and BCL6 DNA probes was performed in
8 NLPHL cases. The BCL6-associated translocations, t(3;22)(q27;q11),
t(3;7)(q27;p12), and the most probable t(3;9)(q27;p13), were identified in 3
cases. A consistent expression of BCL6 protein in popcorn cells with the highest 
number of intensely stained cells in cases with a genomic BCL6 rearrangement was 
shown by IHC. These findings support the hypothesis of a germinal center B
cell-derived origin of NLPHL, indicate a significant role of BCL6 in the
pathogenesis of NLPHL, and provide further evidence of the genetic diversity
underlying the pathogenesis of NLPHL and cHL.

PMID: 12393409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Leuk Lymphoma. 2002 Jul;43(7):1375-81.

Non-immunoglobulin/BCL6 gene fusion in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: prognostic 
implications.

Ueda C(1), Akasaka T, Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

3q27 translocation affecting the BCL6 gene is one of the most common chromosomal 
abnormalities in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). BCL6 translocation can
involve not only one of the three immunoglobulin gene (Ig) loci but also another 
non-Ig chromosomal locus. 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends and long-distance
inverse polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods have identified a total of 13
recurrent non-Ig partner genes to date. As the result of non-Ig/BCL6
translocation, many types of regulatory sequences of each partner gene substitute
for the 5' untranslated region of the BCL6 and the rearranged BCL6 is presumed to
be under the control of the replaced promoter activity. BCL6 translocation occurs
more frequently in extranodal DLBCL than in node-based disease. However, the
impact of BCL6 translocation on the treatment outcome of DLBCL has been the
subject of controversy. We found that survival of DLBCL patients with non-Ig
partners was inferior to that of those with Ig/BCL6 translocation, suggesting
that non-Ig/BCL6 fusion is a poor prognostic indicator of DLBCL. We next created 
BCL6 expression plasmids containing a series of non-Ig/BCL6 fusion genes. COS-7
cells transiently transfected with these plasmids expressed high levels of Bcl-6 
protein and showed characteristic punctate nuclear staining. These findings
suggested that non-Ig/BCL6 translocation plays a pathogenetic role in a
proportion of DLBCL.

PMID: 12389616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2002 Oct;61(10):926-33.

Interphase cytogenetic analysis of lymphoma-associated chromosomal breakpoints in
primary diffuse large B-cell lymphomas of the central nervous system.

Montesinos-Rongen M(1), Zühlke-Jenisch R, Gesk S, Martín-Subero JI, Schaller C,
Van Roost D, Wiestler OD, Deckert M, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Cologne, Germany.

Primary central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSLs) are germinal center-derived
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) arising in and remaining confined to the 
brain, the pathogenesis of which is poorly understood. We investigated 13 PCNSLs 
from immunocompetent patients by means of interphase cytogenetics on
cryopreserved cells derived from stereotactic biopsies. Interphase fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed for the detection of structural
alterations affecting the IGH (14q32), IGK (2p12), IGL (22q11), BCL6 (3q27), MYC 
(8q24), CCND1 (11q13), MLT, and BCL2 (both 18q21) loci. Signal constellations
indicating breakpoints within the IGH and IGK locus were detected in 5 and 1
PCNSLs, respectively. There was no evidence for a t(8;14), t(11;14), or t(14;18) 
in this series of tumors. Breakpoints in the BCL6 locus were observed in 3 of the
13 cases, and nuclear Bcl-6 protein expression was detected in 6 of 9 PCNSLs,
including those with genomic alterations of the encoding locus. Gains of 18q21
represented the most frequent imbalances present in more than one third of all
cases. Interestingly, these gains included the MLT gene. Thus, this study
provides the first evidence for recurrent chromosomal translocations in PCNSLs.
While they share similarities with extracerebral DLBCL with respect to the
presence of IGH translocations, they appear to differ in the usage of
translocation partner genes, which remain to be identified.

PMID: 12387458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Blood. 2002 Nov 1;100(9):3415-8.

KSHV- and EBV-associated germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorder.

Du MQ(1), Diss TC, Liu H, Ye H, Hamoudi RA, Cabeçadas J, Dong HY, Harris NL, Chan
JK, Rees JW, Dogan A, Isaacson PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Free and University College Medical
School, University College London, Rockefeller Building, University Street,
London WC1E 6JJ, UK. m.du@ucl.ac.uk

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is known to be associated with 3
distinct lymphoproliferative disorders: primary effusion lymphoma (PEL),
multicentric Castleman disease (MCD), and MCD-associated plasmablastic lymphoma. 
We report 3 cases of a previously undescribed KSHV-associated lymphoproliferative
disorder. The disease presented as localized lymphadenopathy and showed a
favorable response to chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Histologically, the
lymphoproliferation is characterized by plasmablasts that preferentially involved
germinal centers of the lymphoid follicles, forming confluent aggregates. They
were negative for CD20, CD27, CD79a, CD138, BCL6, and CD10 but showed monotypic
kappa or lambda light chain. Clusters of CD10(+)CD20(+) residual follicle center 
cells were identified in some of the follicles. The plasmablasts were positive
for both KSHV and EBV, and most of them also expressed viral interleukin-6
(vIL-6). Unexpectedly, molecular analysis of whole tissue sections or
microdissected KSHV-positive aggregates demonstrated a polyclonal or oligoclonal 
pattern of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene rearrangement. The plasmablasts showed
somatic mutation and intraclonal variation in the rearranged Ig genes, and one
case expressed switched Ig heavy chain (IgA), suggesting that they originated
from germinal center B cells. We propose calling this distinctive entity
"KSHV-associated germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorder."

PMID: 12384445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Immunity. 2002 Sep;17(3):329-39.

Memory B cells without somatic hypermutation are generated from Bcl6-deficient B 
cells.

Toyama H(1), Okada S, Hatano M, Takahashi Y, Takeda N, Ichii H, Takemori T,
Kuroda Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.

After immunization with T cell-dependent antigens, the high-affinity B cells
selected in germinal centers differentiate into memory B cells or long-lived
antibody-forming cells. However, a role for germinal centers in development of
these B lineage cells is still controversial. We show here that Bcl6-deficient B 
cells, which cannot develop germinal centers, differentiated into IgM and IgG1
memory B cells in the spleen but barely differentiated into long-lived IgG1
antibody-forming cells in the bone marrow. Mutation in the V-heavy gene was null 
in these memory B cells. Therefore, Bcl6 and germinal center formation are
essential for somatic hypermutation, and generation of memory B cells can occur
independently of germinal center formation, somatic hypermutation, and Ig class
switching.

PMID: 12354385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Leuk Res. 2002 Aug;26(8):739-43.

The Bcl6 locus is not mutated in mouse B-cell lineage lymphomas.

Hori M(1), Qi CF, Torrey TA, Huppi K, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, 7 Centre Drive, Room 304, MSC 0760, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA .
mhori@niaid.nih.gov

In normal human germinal centre (GC) B-cells and post-GC B-cell lymphomas, a
region in the first intron of the BCL6 gene, termed the major mutations cluster
(MMC) exhibits somatic point mutations and deletions with patterns very similar
to those seen in the variable regions of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes. In studies of
mouse post-GC diffuse large cell lymphoma, Burkitt lymphomas, and plasmacytomas, 
direct sequencing or cold SSCP analyses revealed no mutations within a 686-bp
region in Bcl6 intron 1 with 72% identity to the human MMC. The mouse Bcl6 locus 
must be inaccessible to the mutational machinery responsible for somatic
mutations of Ig and BCL6 in humans.

PMID: 12191569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Pathologe. 2002 Jul;23(4):284-91.

[Primary CNS lymphomas. Morphology and diagnosis].

[Article in German]

Feiden W(1), Milutinovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Neuropathologie, Institut für Pathologie, Universität des
Saarlandes. pawfei@uniklinik-saarland.de

Diagnostically primary central nervous system lymphomas (PCNSL) have to be
differentiated from glioblastoma and brain metastases. Histologically the
overwhelming majority of PCNSL is represented by diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, 
in this series with a BCL6 expression in 80% of the cases detected by
immunohistochemistry. Stereotactic biopsy is the method of choice in establishing
the definite diagnosis and intraoperative smear cytology will detect the lymphoid
blasts. To confirm the B-cell lineage, immunohistochemistry is needed (CD20,
CD79a). Small reactive T-lymphocytes and monohistiocytic cells and activated
"microglia" are found within and at the periphery of PCNSL foci. The infiltrated 
brain tissue shows partially pleomorphic reactive astrocytes that can be confused
with neoplastic astrocytes, especially in small specimens. In contrast to
high-grade gliomas, however, PCNSLs do not show endothelial proliferations.
Subtypes or variants of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas can also be observed in
cases of PCNSL: the anaplastic variant with large multinucleated tumour cells
resembling Reed-Sternberg cells, T-cell rich B-cell lymphoma and intravascular
B-cell lymphoma with primary manifestation within the brain or the spinal cord.
HIV/AIDS-associated PCNSLs are characterised by large plasmoblastic or small
Burkitt-like cells and tumour necrosis. Primary leptomeningeal large B-cell
lymphomas do occur very rarely and are diagnosed by cerebrospinal fluid cytology.

PMID: 12185781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mod Pathol. 2002 Aug;15(8):807-16.

Chromosomal imbalances in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma detected by comparative
genomic hybridization.

Berglund M(1), Enblad G, Flordal E, Lui WO, Backlin C, Thunberg U, Sundström C,
Roos G, Allander SV, Erlanson M, Rosenquist R, Larsson C, Lagercrantz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
mattias.berglund@cmm.ki.se

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma. In contrast to many other hematological malignancies, no chromosomal
abnormalities with a diagnostic or prognostic value have been identified in
DLBCL. Numerical chromosomal imbalances were characterized by comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) performed on 54 DLBCL tumors from a total of 40 patients. The
clonal relatedness was demonstrated in 9 of 11 pairs of matched diagnostic tumors
and their relapses as determined by IGH gene rearrangement analysis and/or the
CGH profiles. Furthermore, immunohistochemical expression analyses of BCL2 and
BCL6/LAZ3 were performed on all cases. Copy number changes were detected in 94%
of the diagnostic tumor samples and in all of the relapses. Chromosomal losses in
diagnostic tumors were preferentially observed at 8p22-pter (29%), 1p34-pter
(26%), 6q23-qter (20%), 17p12-pter (17%) and 22q (17%), 9p23-pter (14%), whereas 
gains were mainly seen in Xq25-26 (43%), 13q22 (26%), 12cen-q14 (20%), 3q24-25
(11%), 7 (11%), and 18q12-21 (11%). Loss of 22q was significantly more commonly
seen in the diagnostic tumor samples with more advanced clinical stage in other
words, Stage III-IV compared with Stage I-II, and band 18q21 was significantly
more often gained in relapses as compared to diagnostic tumors. None of the
recurrent alterations were detected as a single abnormality, suggesting that
other genetic lesions below the detection level of CGH may be the initiating
event in the tumorigenesis of DLBCL. However, the distribution of CGH alterations
support the idea of a progression of genetic events where loss of 8p and 9p and
gain of 3q, 13q, and 18q would represent relatively early events because they
were distributed in tumors with only two abnormalities.

PMID: 12181265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Lab Invest. 2002 Jul;82(7):893-901.

High expression of methionine aminopeptidase type 2 in germinal center B cells
and their neoplastic counterparts.

Kanno T(1), Endo H, Takeuchi K, Morishita Y, Fukayama M, Mori S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. jtakayuk-tky@umin.ac.jp

Methionine aminopeptidase type 2 (MetAP2) is a bifunctional protein that plays
critical roles in the regulation of protein synthesis and post-translational
processing by (a) protecting the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 
from inhibitory phosphorylation by eukaryotic initiation factor 2 kinases and (b)
removing the amino-terminal methionine residue from nascent protein. MetAP2 is
also known as the molecular target of the angiogenesis inhibitor TNP-470. In
addition, it has been recently suggested that MetAP2 has an antiapoptotic
function in mesothelioma. To know the pattern of expression of MetAP2 in normal
and neoplastic tissues, we raised two specific rabbit polyclonal Abs and examined
the pattern of MetAP2 expression in various normal and pathologic specimens.
Unexpectedly, we found a very high and selective expression of MetAP2 in germinal
center B cells. In the germinal center, dark zone B cells tended to express more 
MetAP2 than light zone B cells. When 200 malignant lymphomas of various subtypes 
were studied, a high level of MetAP2 expression, equivalent to that observed in
germinal center B cells, was noted exclusively on B-cell lymphoma subtypes that
are currently regarded as the neoplastic counterparts of germinal center B cells.
The expression of MetAP2 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas correlated well with
that of BCL6 (p < 0.05) but not with that of either CD10 or BCL2. These data
suggest that MetAP2 has specific function(s) in germinal center B cells and that 
the function is shared by neoplastic counterparts of germinal center B cells.

PMID: 12118091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Immunol. 2002 Jul 15;169(2):829-36.

A putative silencer element in the IL-5 gene recognized by Bcl6.

Arima M(1), Toyama H, Ichii H, Kojima S, Okada S, Hatano M, Cheng G, Kubo M,
Fukuda T, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.

The Bcl6 gene is ubiquitously expressed in adult murine tissues and its product
functions as a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor. Bcl6-deficient mice
displayed eosinophilic inflammation caused by overproduction of Th2 cytokines.
The regulatory mechanism of those cytokine productions by Bcl6 is controversial. 
When CD4(+) T cells from Bcl6-deficient and lck-Bcl6-transgenic mice were
stimulated with anti-CD3 Abs, production of IL-5 among Th2 type cytokines was
preferentially affected by the amount of Bcl6 in the T cells. We found a putative
Bcl6-binding sequence (IL5BS) on the 3' untranslated region in the murine and
human IL-5 genes, and specific binding of Bcl6 protein to the sequence was
confirmed by gel retardation assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. The
binding activity of endogenous Bcl6 was transiently diminished in Th2 but not in 
Th1 clones after anti-CD3 stimulation. The exogenous Bcl6 repressed expression of
the reporter gene with the IL5BS in K562 cells and the repressor activity was
lost by a point mutation of the IL5BS. Furthermore, the IL5BS was required for
Bcl6 to repress expression of the IL-5 cDNA. Thus, the IL5BS may act as a
silencer element for Bcl6 to repress expression of the IL-5 gene.

PMID: 12097386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jun;160(6):1967-72.

A new method to extract nuclei from paraffin-embedded tissue to study lymphomas
using interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Paternoster SF(1), Brockman SR, McClure RF, Remstein ED, Kurtin PJ, Dewald GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Genetics, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is difficult to accomplish using
thin-sections of paraffin-embedded lymphoid tissue because of the high
cellularity and truncated cells that interfere with accurate scoring of
individual nuclei. We modified and tested a new technique to isolate individual
nuclei from tissue cores of paraffin-embedded tissue processed with xylene,
proteinase K, citric acid, and pepsin. The efficacy of this method to study
paraffin-embedded tissue was investigated in six normal lymph nodes or tonsils
and 32 malignant lymphomas including five mantle cell, five follicular, five
Burkitt, five extranodal marginal zone lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue, five anaplastic large-cell, and seven diffuse large B-cell. Fusion of
CCND1 and IgH, BCL2 and IgH, c-myc and IgH, and MALT1 and API2 were detected
using probes with a dual-fusion FISH strategy. Anomalies involving ALK and BCL6
were detected using break-apart FISH probes. FISH studies were successful for
each of the 38 specimens. Chromosome anomalies were detected in each malignant
specimen, but not in the normal lymphoid tissue. The correct chromosome anomaly
was detected in 22 of 22 specimens with genetic abnormalities that were
established by other genetic techniques. This FISH technique is useful to detect 
chromosome anomalies with high sensitivity and specificity in paraffin-embedded
tissue and may provide important diagnostic and prognostic genetic information.

PMCID: PMC1850824
PMID: 12057901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Br J Haematol. 2002 May;117(2):322-32.

Rearrangement of the BCL6 locus at 3q27 is an independent poor prognostic factor 
in nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Barrans SL(1), O'Connor SJ, Evans PA, Davies FE, Owen RG, Haynes AP, Morgan GJ,
Jack AS.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Haematology and Oncology, HMDS, Algernon Firth Building,
Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds LS1 3EX, UK. sharonb@hmds.org.uk

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) are a heterogeneous group of tumours,
varying in clinical features, immunophenotype and cytogenetics. The aim of this
study was to investigate the prognostic significance of BCL6 gene rearrangement
at the 3q27 locus in patients with primary nodal disease, and to examine
interrelationships with immunophenotype and International Prognostic Index (IPI).
We have developed a fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)-based technique for 
the retrospective analysis of the effect of BCL6 gene rearrangements on survival,
using nuclei extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue. FISH results were obtained 
in 111 presentation cases of nodal DLBCL. The IPI was calculated and each case
was stained immunocytochemically for BCL6, BCL2 and CD10. 3q27 rearrangements
were detected in 25% of cases. BCL2 protein and a germinal centre (GC) phenotype 
(defined as CD10+, BCL6+) were expressed in 56% and 41% of cases respectively. In
multivariate analysis, rearrangement of 3q27 and BCL2 expression and the absence 
of a GC phenotype were associated with a poor prognosis. These factors can be
used in conjunction with the IPI to improve risk stratification in nodal DLBCL.

PMID: 11972514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):22045-52. Epub 2002 Apr 19.

Class II histone deacetylases are directly recruited by BCL6 transcriptional
repressor.

Lemercier C(1), Brocard MP, Puvion-Dutilleul F, Kao HY, Albagli O, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U309, Equipe Chromatine et Expression des Gènes, Institut Albert
Bonniot, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La Tronche Cedex, France.

BCL6 is a member of the POZ/zinc finger (POK) family involved in survival and/or 
differentiation of a number of cell types and in B cell lymphoma upon chromosomal
alteration. Transcriptional repression by BCL6 is thought to be achieved in part 
by recruiting a repressor complex containing two class I histone deacetylases
(HDACs). In this study we investigated whether BCL6 could also target members of 
class II HDACs. Our results indicate that three related class II deacetylases,
HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7 can associate with BCL6 in vivo and in vitro. Using
electron microscopy, we found that endogenous BCL6 and class II HDACs partially
co-localize in the nucleus. Overexpression experiments showed that BCL6 and
HDAC4, -5, or -7 are intermingled onto common nuclear substructures and form
stable complexes. A highly conserved domain in the N-terminal region of HDAC5 and
HDAC7 as well as the zinc finger region of BCL6 were found necessary for the
complex formation in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, our data point to the zinc
finger region of BCL6 as a multifunctional domain which, beside its known
capacity to bind DNA, is involved in the nuclear targeting of the protein and in 
the recruitment of the class II HDACs, and hence constitutes an autonomous
repressor domain. Since PLZF, a BCL6 relative, could also interact with HDAC4,
-5, and 7, we suggest that class II HDACs are largely involved in the control of 
the POK transcription factors activity.

PMID: 11929873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Blood. 2002 Apr 1;99(7):2624-5.

Immunoglobulin (Ig)/BCL6 versus non-Ig/BCL6 gene fusion in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma corresponds to a high- versus low-level expression of BCL6 mRNA.

Ueda C, Uchiyama T, Ohno H.

Comment on
    Blood. 2001 Aug 15;98(4):945-51.

PMID: 11926184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Int J Cancer. 2002 Mar 20;98(3):470-4.

Interphase FISH assays for the detection of translocations with breakpoints in
immunoglobulin light chain loci.

Martín-Subero JI(1), Harder L, Gesk S, Schlegelberger B, Grote W,
Martinez-Climent JA, Dyer MJ, Novo FJ, Calasanz MJ, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Kiel, Germany.

Many B-cell malignancies bear chromosomal translocations juxtaposing
immunoglobulin (IG) genes with oncogenes, resulting in deregulated expression of 
the latter. Translocations affecting the IG heavy chain (IGH) locus in
chromosomal region 14q32 are most prevalent. However, variant translocations
involving the IG kappa (IGK) locus in 2p12 or the IG lambda (IGL) locus in 22q11 
occur recurrently in B-cell neoplasias. No routine methods for the detection of
all breakpoints involving IG light chain loci independently of the translocation 
partner have been described. For this reason, we have designed 2 novel interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays using differentially labeled
probes flanking the IGK and IGL locus, respectively. Based on extensive control
studies, the diagnostic thresholds for the detection of breakpoints were set at
0.3% for IGK and 1.4% for IGL. Fifteen cases of B-cell malignancies with
cytogenetically detectable chromosomal abnormalities in 2p11-14 were investigated
with the FISH assay for IGK. Breakpoints affecting the IGK locus were detected in
7 cases including all 4 variant Burkitt's translocations t(2;8)(p12;q24) and a
variant BCL2-associated translocation t(2;18)(p12;q21). Other translocation
partners were chromosome bands 7q21 and 16q24. Ten cases with abnormalities in
22q11-12 were investigated with the FISH assay for IGL. Breakpoints in the IGL
locus were diagnosed in 7 cases including both variant Burkitt's translocations
t(8;22)(q24;q11) and a t(3;22)(q27;q11) involving the BCL6 locus. Other
translocation partners were 2p13-14, 4q13 and 16p12. Our results show that these 
FISH assays provide flexible, simple and reliable tools in the diagnosis and
characterization of genetic changes in B-cell malignancies.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11920602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Hematol J. 2000;1(2):117-25.

FISH analysis with a YAC probe improves detection of LAZ3/BCL6 rearrangement in
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Roumier C(1), Galiègue-Zouitina S, Bastard C, Soenen V, Laï JL, Denis C,
Buchonnet G, Kerckaert JP, Cosson A, Fenaux P, Preudhomme C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie A CHU Lille, France, and Inserm Unité 524, Lille,
France.

INTRODUCTION: Chromosomal translocations involving the chromosome 3q27 region are
common in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), mainly diffuse large cell lymphoma
(DLCL) and less often in follicular lymphoma. Most of these rearrangements
involve the same major translocation cluster (MTC) on the 3q27 region, disrupting
the LAZ3/BCL6 gene. Some of those translocations are difficult to detect by
cytogenetic analysis and/or Southern-blot analysis. In the present report we used
a FISH assay to improve the detection of LAZ3/BCL6 rearrangements.
METHODS: We isolated a YAC clone (803g3), containing the BCL6 gene, in order to
analyze by FISH 19 cases of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with cytogenetically
detectable 3q27 rearrangement, including reciprocal translocation in 11 cases,
deletion in two cases, and addition of undefined chromosomal material on 3q27 in 
six cases.
RESULTS: In the 11 cases with reciprocal translocation, FISH results confirmed
cytogenetic data and showed disruption of the LAZ3 region: four t(3;4)(q27;p13), 
two t(3;11)(q27;q23.1), four t(3;14)(q27;q32) and one t(2;3)(p12;q27). In two of 
the cases, reciprocal t(3;14) was associated with other cytogenetically
detectable abnormalities of 3q27, but FISH showed that they did not affect the
LAZ3 gene region. FISH demonstrated a reciprocal translocation with LAZ3 gene
rearrangement in two of the six patients with add 3q27: one t(3;11) and one
t(3;14). In the two patients with del(3q27), one had two 3q27 FISH signals and
one had only one 3q27 FISH signal, but no LAZ3 gene rearrangement was observed.
CONCLUSION: We have identified a YAC containing the LAZ3/BCL6 gene. This YAC
probe could be useful in clinical practice to demonstrate LAZ3 rearrangements by 
FISH analysis on tumor samples in NHL.

PMID: 11920179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Genes Dev. 2002 Mar 15;16(6):681-6.

A senescence rescue screen identifies BCL6 as an inhibitor of anti-proliferative 
p19(ARF)-p53 signaling.

Shvarts A(1), Brummelkamp TR, Scheeren F, Koh E, Daley GQ, Spits H, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066
CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Senescence limits the proliferative capacity of primary cells in culture. We
describe here a genetic screen to identify genes that allow bypass of this
checkpoint. Using retroviral cDNA expression libraries, we identify BCL6 as a
potent inhibitor of senescence. BCL6 is frequently activated in non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, but its mechanism of action has remained unclear. BCL6 efficiently
immortalizes primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts and cooperates with RAS in
oncogenic transformation. BCL6 overrides the senescence response downstream of
p53 through a process that requires induction of cyclin D1 expression, as cyclin 
D1 knockout fibroblasts are specifically resistant to BCL6 immortalization. We
show that BCL6 expression also dramatically extends the replicative lifespan of
primary human B cells in culture and induces cyclin D1 expression, indicating
that BCL6 has a similar activity in lymphoid cells. Our results suggest that BCL6
contributes to oncogenesis by rendering cells unresponsive to antiproliferative
signals from the p19(ARF)-p53 pathway.

PMCID: PMC155362
PMID: 11914273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Curr Opin Immunol. 2002 Apr;14(2):216-23.

Transcriptional control of B-cell development.

Schebesta M(1), Heavey B, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7,
A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Significant progress has recently been made in our understanding of how
transcription factors such as PU.1, Notch1, E2A, EBF, Pax5, Bcl6, Blimp1 and XBP1
control different developmental decisions during the onset and terminal phase of 
B-lymphopoiesis. One emerging theme is that negative regulatory networks play an 
important role in suppressing alternative gene programs and their corresponding
cell fates throughout B-cell development.

PMID: 11869895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 1;291(3):567-73.

Cloning and characterization of the human BAZF gene, a homologue of the BCL6
oncogene.

Sakashita C(1), Fukuda T, Okabe S, Kobayashi H, Hirosawa S, Tokuhisa T, Miyasaka 
N, Miura O, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

The BAZF gene has recently been identified as a novel homologue of the BCL6
oncogene. Here we cloned the human BAZF gene using murine BAZF as a probe. The
predicted amino acid sequence was 91% identical to that of murine BAZF. The
BTB/POZ and zinc finger domains were almost completely conserved between human
and murine BAZF. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed that the
human BAZF gene is located on chromosome 17p13.1. Although expression of human
BAZF mRNA was ubiquitously detected in human tissues, abundant expression was
detected in heart and placenta. BAZF mRNA was expressed in some immature B cell
lines and erythroleukemia cell lines. The expression in a human erythroleukemia
cell line, HEL cells, was upregulated during megakaryocytic differentiation
induced by 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate. These expression patterns of
BAZF mRNA suggest that BAZF may regulate differentiation in stages or lineages
that are different from those regulated by BCL6.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11855826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 5;99(5):2860-5. Epub 2002 Feb 19.

The human programmed cell death-2 (PDCD2) gene is a target of BCL6 repression:
implications for a role of BCL6 in the down-regulation of apoptosis.

Baron BW(1), Anastasi J, Thirman MJ, Furukawa Y, Fears S, Kim DC, Simone F,
Birkenbach M, Montag A, Sadhu A, Zeleznik-Le N, McKeithan TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
bbaron@uchospitals.edu

BCL6, a gene on chromosome 3 band q27, encodes a Kruppel-type zinc finger
transcriptional repressor. Rearrangements of this gene are frequent in various
kinds of lymphomas, particularly of the large-cell B-cell type. The BCL6 nuclear 
phosphoprotein is expressed in a variety of tissues and is up-regulated
particularly in lymph node germinal centers. The zinc fingers of BCL6 bind DNA in
a sequence-specific manner. To identify targets of the BCL6 repressive effects,
we used a VP16-BCL6 fusion protein containing the zinc fingers but devoid of the 
repressor domains to compete with the binding of endogenous BCL6 in a transiently
transfected B-cell line and then performed subtractive hybridization by using a
method to selectively amplify sequences that are differentially expressed. We
found that the programmed cell death-2 (PDCD2) gene is a target of BCL6
repression. This gene is the human homolog of Rp8, a rat gene associated with
programmed cell death in thymocytes. Immunohistochemistry reveals the anticipated
inverse relationship between BCL6 and PDCD2 expression in human tonsil. PDCD2 is 
detectable in cells of the germinal center in areas where there is less BCL6
expression as well as in the mantle zone, where there is little or no BCL6
expression. These results raise the possibility that BCL6 may regulate apoptosis 
by means of its repressive effects on PDCD2. BCL6 deregulation may lead to
persistent down-regulation of PDCD2, reduced apoptosis, and, as a consequence,
accumulation of BCL6-containing lymphoma cells.

PMCID: PMC122438
PMID: 11854457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Jan 15;132(2):125-32.

Cytogenetic characterization of diffuse large cell lymphoma using multi-color
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Dave BJ(1), Nelson M, Pickering DL, Chan WC, Greiner TC, Weisenburger DD,
Armitage JO, Sanger WG.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Laboratories, Munroe Meyer Institute for Genetics and
Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985440 Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

We have employed multi-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) to
characterize the cytogenetic changes in 20 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
(DLBCL), that contained complex and partially characterized karyotypes. The
M-FISH analysis helped to delineate 94% of the unidentified abnormalities and
assisted in redefining some unidentified/misidentified karyotypic changes.
Recurrent breakpoints observed in approximately 20% cases included 14q32, 3p21,
3q27, 22q12, 1q25, and 18q21 (in decreasing order), and 1p22, 1q21, 4q31, 6q21,
and 8q24 (in four cases each). Numerical gain of chromosomes 7, 9, 12, and X and 
loss of chromosomes 1, 4, 6, 17, and Y, were noted in approximately 20% of cases.
The minimum deleted regions encompassed 6q21-q25, 1p22-p36, 1q32-q44, 2p23-p25,
4q31-q35, 13p13-q14, and 17p11-p13. Two cases presented with a sole structural
abnormality, and one contained a der(17)t(9;17)(p21;p13), which has not been
reported earlier as a sole abnormality in DLBCL. Upon completely characterizing
the karyotypes, we observed with interesting that in 55% of the cases, more than 
one BCL gene bearing regions was involved in translocations. In the remaining
45%, where only one or none of the BCL gene regions was involved in a
rearrangement, we observed the loss of chromosomes 6 and/or 17 or partial
deletions of 6q and/or 17p or gain of 7 and/or 12. Our findings suggest that,
although BCL2 and BCL6 are most often implicated in DLBCL, the possibility of the
disruptions of BCL3, BCL8, BCL9, and BCL10 as a "primary event" in DLBCL cannot
be ruled out. Most often, a combination of events may be necessary for the
genesis of DLBCL or progression of follicular lymphoma to DLBCL. Overall, M-FISH 
has enhanced our ability to provide a comprehensive karyotypic analysis, and has 
helped in defining the importance of BCL3, BCL8, BCL9, and BCL10 carrying
breakpoints in DLBCL.

PMID: 11850073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Oncogene. 2002 Jan 17;21(3):368-76.

The gene for interleukin-21 receptor is the partner of BCL6 in t(3;16)(q27;p11), 
which is recurrently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Ueda C(1), Akasaka T, Kurata M, Maesako Y, Nishikori M, Ichinohasama R, Imada K, 
Uchiyama T, Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)First Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Shogoin-Kawaramachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

BCL6 translocation affecting the chromosomal band 3q27 can involve a number of
non-immunoglobulin (non-IG) gene loci as partners. We report here that the gene
for interleukin-21 receptor (IL-21R) is the partner of BCL6 in t(3;16)(q27;p11)
translocation. The two breakpoints on 16p11 of a lymphoma cell line YM and case
no. 1012 with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, both of which carried t(3;16), were 
localized within the 27-kb intron 1 of IL-21R. As a result of t(3;16), the
promoter region of IL-21R was substituted for the regulatory sequences of BCL6 in
the same transcriptional orientation. Reverse transcriptase-mediated polymerase
chain reaction revealed chimeric mRNA consisting of two non-coding exons 1a/1b of
IL-21R and coding exons of BCL6 in both lymphoma cells. Fluorescence in situ
chromosomal hybridization of YM metaphase cells revealed fusion signals that
contained both the BCL6 and IL-21R sequences on the der(3)t(3;16) chromosome.
IL-21R was actively transcribed in YM cells, while BCL6 that was under the
control of the IL-21R promoter was only moderately expressed at the mRNA and
protein level. We constructed expression plasmid of BCL6 that followed the
promoter sequences of IL-21R. COS-7 cells transiently transfected with the
plasmid expressed high level Bcl-6 protein and displayed nuclear staining with a 
characteristic punctate pattern by immunofluorescence, indicating that expression
of BCL6 can be enhanced by t(3;16). This study added to the list of non-IG
partners of BCL6 translocations a new class of gene, i.e. cytokine receptor gene,
the expression of which is closely associated with lymphoid cells.

PMID: 11821949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(4):1158-71.

The hematopoiesis-specific GTP-binding protein RhoH is GTPase deficient and
modulates activities of other Rho GTPases by an inhibitory function.

Li X(1), Bu X, Lu B, Avraham H, Flavell RA, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cancer Biology Program, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The Rho subfamily of small GTP-binding proteins mediates many fundamental
cellular functions. The commonly studied members (Rho, Rac, and CDC42) regulate
actin reorganization, affecting diverse cellular responses, including adhesion,
cytokinesis, and motility. Another major function of the Rho GTPases is their
role in regulating transcriptional factors and nuclear signaling. RhoH is encoded
by a hematopoiesis-specific Rho-related gene recently identified in a fusion
transcript with bcl6 in lymphoma cell lines. Significantly, translocations and a 
high frequency of RhoH mutation have been detected in primary lymphoma cells. We 
show here that RhoH functions differently from other Rho GTPases. RhoH exerts no 
significant effect on actin reorganization. However, RhoH is a potent inhibitor
of the activation of NFkappaB and p38 by other Rho GTPases. This property,
together with the differential expression of RhoH in the Th1 subset of T cells,
suggests a role for RhoH in the functional differentiation of T cells. RhoH has
different amino acids in two highly conserved residues critical for GTPase
activity. Consequently, RhoH is GTPase deficient, remaining in a GTP-bound
activated state without cycling. Reduction of RhoH levels in T cells augments the
response to Rac activation. Furthermore, RhoH is dramatically down regulated
after phorbol myristate acetate treatment and in Th1 cells after activation by
anti-CD3. Hence, a mechanism for regulation of RhoH function is likely to exist
at the transcriptional level. The inhibitory function of RhoH supports a model in
which Rho GTPases with opposing functions may compete to modulate the final
outcome of a particular GTPase-activated pathway.

PMCID: PMC134637
PMID: 11809807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Feb;33(2):114-22.

Similar patterns of genomic alterations characterize primary mediastinal
large-B-cell lymphoma and diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.

Palanisamy N(1), Abou-Elella AA, Chaganti SR, Houldsworth J, Offit K, Louie DC,
Terayu-Feldstein J, Cigudosa JC, Rao PH, Sanger WG, Weisenburger DD, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Cell Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute
for Cancer Research, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
10021, USA.

To address the possible genetic relationship between primary mediastinal
large-B-cell lymphoma (PMLBCL) and diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), we
compared DNA copy number changes identified by comparative genomic hybridization 
(CGH) analysis of 40 PMLBCL and 91 DLBCL tumors. We assessed their karyotypes by 
G-banding; amplification of MYC, BCL2, and REL genes by Southern blotting; and
incidence of nonpolymorphic BCL6 mutations by single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis (SSCP). Overall, CGH identified overlapping and
nonoverlapping patterns of DNA copy number changes in the two groups. Among the
latter changes, gains of chromosomes 8, 11, 15, and 16 and losses of chromosomes 
5, 10, 15, 16, 17, and 20 were seen only in DLBCL, and gains of chromosomes 10,
21, and 22 and losses of chromosomes 11, 13, and 18 were seen only in PMLBCL.
Several overlapping changes were identified in both groups, with variation in
incidence. Statistical analysis of these changes showed significant gains of
chromosomes 3 (P <or= 0.05) and 7q (P <or= 0.05) in DLBCL and gains of
chromosomes 9 (P <or= 0.05) and 19 (P <or= 0.05) and the X chromosome (P <or=
0.05) and loss of chromosome 4 (P <or= 0.05) in PMLBCL. Frequent recurring DNA
amplification at 2p13-15 and less frequent amplification at 6p21, 12q13, and
18q21 were noted in both groups. Recurring amplification at 1q21 was seen only in
DLBCL, whereas nonrecurring amplification at 10p11.2 and 15q22-24 was seen only
in PMLBCL. G-banded karyotype analysis identified t(3;14)(q27;q32) in one and
t(14;18)(q32;q21) in two cases of PMLBCL. Seven of 13 cases exhibited SSCP
variants in the 5' noncoding region of BCL6. In addition, 19 of 24 PMLBCLs
assayed for BCL6 protein expression by immunohistochemistry showed positive
results, indicating an origin from a germinal center (GC)-derived B cell. Based
on these data, we conclude that PMLBCL is a distinct entity among GC-derived
high-grade DLBCLs.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11793437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Blood. 2002 Jan 15;99(2):627-33.

Neoplastic T cells in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma express CD10.

Attygalle A(1), Al-Jehani R, Diss TC, Munson P, Liu H, Du MQ, Isaacson PG, Dogan 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Royal Free and University College Medical
School, London, United Kingdom.

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) is a systemic disease involving lymph
nodes, spleen, and bone marrow. Although the histologic features have been well
described, the diagnosis is often challenging, as there are no specific
phenotypic or molecular markers available. This study shows that the neoplastic
cells of AITL can be identified by aberrant CD10 expression. Archival material
from 30 cases of AITL, 10 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma unspecified (PTL), 
and 10 cases of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia were reviewed. Single and double
immunostaining for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, CD21, CD10, BCL6, Ki67, and LMP-1 in situ
hybridization for Epstein-Barr early region and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
for T-cell receptor gamma chain gene and immunoglobulin heavy chain gene were
performed. Three overlapping histologic patterns with hyperplastic follicles,
depleted follicles, or without follicles were identified in AITL. Of the 30 cases
of AITL, 27 contained CD10(+) T cells. No CD10(+) T cells were present in the
cases of PTL or reactive hyperplasia. PCR confirmed a monoclonal or oligoclonal
T-cell population in 29 of 30 cases of AITL and a monoclonal B-cell population in
6 cases. Analysis of microdissected CD10(+) single cells showed that they
belonged to the neoplastic clone. In conclusion CD10 is a phenotypic marker that 
specifically identifies the tumor cells in 90% of AITL, including the early
cases. The presence of these cells distinguishes AITL from other PTLs. This
finding provides an objective criterion for accurate and early diagnosis of AITL.

PMID: 11781247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Blood. 2002 Jan 1;99(1):3-9.

Gastric marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of MALT type develop along 2 distinct
pathogenetic pathways.

Starostik P(1), Patzner J, Greiner A, Schwarz S, Kalla J, Ott G, Müller-Hermelink
HK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Würzburg University, Germany.
pter.starosik@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

Comment in
    Blood. 2002 Aug 1;100(3):1095-6; author reply 1096-7.

Low-grade marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) type can transform into high-grade diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). 
Up to 60% of the MALT lymphomas contain the recently described t(11;18). However,
this translocation has not been detected in any DLBCL so far. To elucidate the
pathogenesis of these tumors, microsatellite screening of 24 gastric MALT
lymphomas was performed and the results were compared with aberrations detected
in a previous study on gastric DLBCL. The most frequent aberration, found in 21% 
of the MALT lymphomas that were exclusively t(11;18)-negative cases, was
amplification of the 3q26.2-27 region (harboring the locus of the BCL6 gene).
Allelic imbalances in regions 3q26.2-27, 6q23.3-25, 7q31, 11q23-24, and 18q21
were shared by both MALT lymphoma and DLBCL. Loss of heterozygosity in regions
5q21 (APC gene locus), 9p21 (INK4A/ARF), 13q14 (RB), and 17p13 (p53) and allelic 
imbalances in 2p16, 6p23, and 12p12-13 occurred exclusively in DLBCL. Only one of
10 t(11;18)-positive MALT lymphomas showed an additional clonal abnormality.
These tumors thus display features of a clonal proliferation characterized by the
presence of the t(11;18). However, they only rarely display secondary aberrations
and do not seem to transform into DLBCL. In contrast, t(11;18)-negative MALT
lymphomas show numerous allelic imbalances--some of them identical with
aberrations seen in DLBCL--suggesting that this group is the source of tumors
eventually transforming into high-grade DLBCL.

PMID: 11756145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Int J Oncol. 2002 Jan;20(1):161-5.

Prognostic implications of BCL6 rearrangement in uniformly treated patients with 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma--a Nordic Lymphoma Group study.

Jerkeman M(1), Aman P, Cavallin-Stahl E, Torlakovic E, Akerman M, Mitelman F,
Fioretos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden.
mats.jerkeman@onk.lu.se

The purpose of this study was to investigate the prognostic implications of BCL6 
rearrangement in a uniformly treated population of patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and to characterise the relationship between BCL6
rearrangement and prognostic factors. A total of 269 patients with DLBCL entered 
a randomised trial comparing the chemotherapy regimen CHOP (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) to the MACOP-B (methotrexate, doxorubicin, 
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, bleomycin) regimen. In 44 cases,
frozen tissue was available for assessment of BCL6 status by Southern blot
analysis. BCL6 was rearranged in six of 43 evaluable cases (14%), and was
associated with elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and a higher patient age.
No association between BCL6 status and expression of BCL2, Ki-67 or TP53 was
found. Patients presenting with BCL6 rearrangement displayed a weak trend towards
better overall and failure-free survival (67 and 67% at 5 years), compared to
patients with germline BCL6 (63 and 52%), but the difference was not
statistically significant. In accordance with previously published series, the
presence of BCL6 rearrangement does not define a prognostically distinct subgroup
of DLBCL. Assessment of BCL6 status may, however, be of clinical interest when
related to other prognostic variables.

PMID: 11743658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cancer Res. 2001 Oct 1;61(19):7363-4.

Re: Akasaka, H., et al., Molecular anatomy of BCL6 translocations revealed by
long-distance polymerase chain reaction-based assays. Cancer Res., 60: 2335-2341,
2000.

Lossos IS, Jacobs Y, Cleary ML, Levy R.

Comment on
    Cancer Res. 2000 May 1;60(9):2335-41.

PMID: 11585778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Sep 26;1540(3):188-200.

A new functional domain of Bcl6 family that recruits histone deacetylases.

Zhang H(1), Okada S, Hatano M, Okabe S, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Inohana 1-8-1, Chuo-ku, 260-8670, Chiba, Japan.

The proto-oncogene Bcl6 and its family gene, BAZF, encode a sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor which contains the BTB/POZ domain in NH(2)-terminal
region and zinc finger motifs in COOH-terminal region. The BTB/POZ domain and the
middle portion of Bcl6 and BAZF are known to display transrepressor activity.
Since we have identified the identical 17-amino acid (aa) sequence in the middle 
portion of Bcl6 and BAZF, the 17aa region may be another repressive domain of the
middle portion. The reporter gene assay indicates that the 27aa sequence
including the 17aa region recruits histone deacetylases to express transrepressor
activity. Furthermore, overexpression of Bcl6 or Bcl6(POZ-) (Bcl6 deleted with
the BTB/POZ domain) induced apoptosis in NIH3T3 cells, and the apoptosis was
inhibited by the addition of histone deacetylase inhibitor in the culture.
However, apoptosis was not induced in NIH3T3 cells by overexpression of
Bcl6(POZ-) deleted with the 17aa region. These results indicate that the 17aa
region in the middle portion of Bcl6 is a functional domain of transrepressor
activity and is responsible for inducibility of apoptosis in NIH3T3 cells.

PMID: 11583814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Nov;32(3):281-4.

Splicing factor SRP20 is a novel partner of BCL6 in a t(3;6)(q27;p21)
translocation in transformed follicular lymphoma.

Chen W(1), Itoyama T, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The BCL6 gene mapped at chromosome band 3q27 encodes a zinc-finger transcription 
factor and is frequently rearranged and deregulated in B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma (NHL) by promiscuous chromosomal translocations which involve diverse
genes. We identified a novel t(3;6)(q27;p21) in a follicular lymphoma (FL) with
histologic evidence of transformation and, by cloning the translocation junction,
determined that the SRP20 gene was the partner. In this translocation, the 5'
regulatory region of the BCL6 was substituted by a putative regulatory region of 
SRP20. Previously, we hypothesized that substitution of BCL6 promoter by those of
the partner genes that were constitutively expressed throughout B-cell
development led to persistent and inappropriate expression of BCL6. We examined
the expression pattern of SRP20 during B-cell development by Northern blot
analysis of a panel of B-cell lines representing various stages of B-cell
development and noted that SRP20 mRNA was expressed throughout B-cell
development. The SRP20 gene plays an important role in regulation of pre-mRNA
splicing, and is expressed specifically in lymphoid tissues. This study provides 
the first evidence of SRP20 gene rearrangement in human hematopoietic
malignancies.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11579468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mod Pathol. 2001 Sep;14(9):913-9.

Cutaneous presentation of follicular lymphomas.

Franco R(1), Fernández-Vázquez A, Mollejo M, Cruz MA, Camacho FI, García JF,
Navarrete M, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomorphological and Functional Science, Federico II University 
of Napoli, Italy.

The description of primary cutaneous follicular lymphoma has raised interest in
the differential diagnosis of this versus disseminated follicular lymphoma
involving the skin. We report here on four cases of Stage IV follicular lymphoma,
diagnosed in skin biopsy, in which cutaneous lesion was the most noticeable
feature of clinical presentation. In all cases, the morphological features were
superimposed over typical nodal follicular lymphoma. Apart from classic B-cell
markers, they were characterized by CD10 and bcl6 positivity, markers of follicle
germinal center cells; and bcl2 expression, with a corresponding t(14;18)
translocation in three of three cases examined. In all four cases, bone marrow
study and clinical staging revealed disease that had disseminated since
diagnosis. Follow-up showed relapsing cutaneous and nodal disease in two cases.
The only difference observed with a control group of 10 cases of primary
cutaneous follicular lymphoma was the absence in this group of t(14; 18).
Disseminated classical follicular lymphoma has to be considered in the
differential diagnosis of follicular lymphoma presenting in the skin. This series
of cases suggests that the presence of t(14;18) could imply the existence of
disease that has disseminated beyond the skin and that cases harboring this
translocation could be candidates for systemic polychemotherapy.

PMID: 11557789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Blood. 2001 Sep 1;98(5):1555-60.

Detection of N-Ras codon 61 mutations in subpopulations of tumor cells in
multiple myeloma at presentation.

Kalakonda N(1), Rothwell DG, Scarffe JH, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Gene Regulation Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, and CRC
Department of Medical Oncology, Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2002 Aug 1;100(3):1101-2; author reply 1103.

Activating point mutations in codons 12, 13, or 61 of the K-ras and N-ras genes
have been reported to occur in up to 40% of patients with multiple myeloma at
presentation. In a study of 34 presentation myeloma cases using a sensitive
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism strategy on
enriched tumor cell populations, the present study detected N-ras codon 61
mutation-positive cells in all patients. Quantitative plaque hybridization using 
allele-specific oligonucleotide probes showed that in the majority of patients,
ras mutation-positive cells comprise only a subpopulation of the total malignant 
plasma cell compartment (range, 12%-100%). Using clonospecific point mutations in
the 5' untranslated region of the BCL6 gene to quantitate clonal B cells in
FACS-sorted bone marrow populations from 2 patients, the representation of ras
mutation-positive cells was independent of immunophenotype. These observations
imply that mutational activation of N-ras codon 61 is a mandatory event in the
pathogenesis of multiple myeloma; such mutations provide a marker of intraclonal 
heterogeneity that may originate at an earlier ontologic stage than
immunophenotypic diversification of the malignant B cell clone.

PMID: 11520807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2001 Aug;129(1):1-9.

Interphase detection of immunoglobulin heavy chain gene translocations with
specific oncogene loci in 173 patients with B-cell lymphoma.

Tamura A(1), Miura I, Iida S, Yokota S, Horiike S, Nishida K, Fujii H, Nakamura
S, Seto M, Ueda R, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirikoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-0841, Japan.

To detect immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) gene translocations with specific
oncogene loci, we established an interphase cytogenetic approach using
double-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (DC-FISH), which we used to
analyze 173 patients with B-cell lymphoma. DC-FISH using the IGH gene (14q32.3)
in combination with c-MYC (8q24.1), BCL1 (11q13.3), BCL2 (18q21.3), BCL6 (3q27), 
and PAX-5 (9p13) gene probes detected IGH translocations in 70 (40.5%) of 173
patients. The partner genes involved in IGH translocations were identified in 56 
(80%) of 70 patients, and fusion of the IGH gene with specific oncogenes was
detected in 53 of 56 patients, particularly in interphase nuclei of 28 patients
for whom cytogenetic analysis was not informative. The most common partner gene
was BCL2 (19 patients; 27% of IGH translocation-positive patients), followed by
BCL6 (16; 23%), BCL1 (11; 16%), c-MYC (7; 10%), and PAX-5 (2; 3%). These
oncogenes were closely associated with subtypes of B-cell lymphoma. The other
partners were 19q13 (BCL3), 6p25 (MUM1/IRF4), 1q36, and chromosome 8 identified
in one patient each. Six of the nine patients with add(14)(q32) showed a BCL6/IGH
translocation. Double translocations of the IGH gene were found in three
patients; c-MYC+BCL1, c-MYC+BCL2, and c-MYC+BCL6 in each one. Interphase FISH
using specific IGH-translocation probes is valuable for defining clinically
meaningful subgroups of B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 11520558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Leukemia. 2001 Sep;15(9):1475-84.

Detection of translocations affecting the BCL6 locus in B cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Sanchez-Izquierdo D(1), Siebert R, Harder L, Marugan I, Gozzetti A, Price HP,
Gesk S, Hernandez-Rivas JM, Benet I, Solé F, Sonoki T, Le Beau MM, Schlegelberger
B, Dyer MJ, Garcia-Conde J, Martinez-Climent JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Hospital Clinico, University of
Valencia, Spain.

Structural alterations in 3q27 affecting the BCL6 locus are among the most
frequent changes in B-NHL. The aim of the present study was to establish an
interphase-FISH assay for the detection of all diverse BCL6 translocations in
B-NHL. Two different approaches were tested, one using a PAC-clone spanning the
major breakpoint region (MBR) of BCL6 (span-assay), and another using two BAC
clones flanking the MBR (flank-assay). Interphase FISH with the span-assay
detected the various BCL6 translocations in seven B-NHL cell lines. The
dual-color flank-assay was evaluated in two laboratories independently: in normal
controls, the cutoff level for false-positive signals was 2.6%, whereas the
cutoff level for false-negatives in the seven cell lines was 7.5%. To test the
feasibility of the FISH strategies, 30 samples from patients with B-NHL with
cytogenetic abnormalities of 3q27 were evaluated with both assays. In 21 cases,
the span-assay indicated a BCL6 rearrangement. In 18 of the 21 cases, the
dual-color flank-assay confirmed the translocation including 12 different partner
chromosomal loci. The three false-positive cases detected with the span-assay
showed trisomy of chromosome 3 by cytogenetic analyses, and they were correctly
classified as non-rearranged with the flank-assay. In summary, our FISH strategy 
using two differently labeled flanking BCL6 BAC probes provides a robust,
sensitive, and reproducible method for the detection of common and uncommon
abnormalities of BCL6 gene in interphase nuclei. The routine application of this 
assay to patients with B-NHL will allow the assessment of the diagnostic and
prognostic significance of BCL6 rearrangements.

PMID: 11516111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Science. 2001 Jul 13;293(5528):248-50.

Arrested differentiation, the self-renewing memory lymphocyte, and vaccination.

Fearon DT(1), Manders P, Wagner SD.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Immunology Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, University of
Cambridge, MRC Centre, Cambridge CB2 2SP, UK. dtf1000@cus.cam.ac.uk

Vaccination for persistent viral or bacterial infections must program the immune 
system for a lifelong need to generate antigen-specific effector lymphocytes. How
the immune system does this is not known, but recent studies have shown that a
subset of B lymphocytes, the germinal center B cell, is capable of self-renewal
because it expresses a transcriptional repressor, BCL6, that blocks terminal
differentiation. If a similar mechanism for arresting differentiation exists for 
long-lived, antigen-selected lymphocytes, a stem cell-like capacity for
self-renewal could be the basis for the continual generation of effector
lymphocytes from the memory pool. Understanding how to regulate the terminal
differentiation of lymphocytes will improve immunotherapeutic approaches for
chronic infectious diseases and cancer.

PMID: 11452114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Jul;25(7):875-83.

Cutaneous follicular B-cell lymphoma: description of a series of 18 cases.

Franco R(1), Fernandez-Vazquez A, Rodriguez-Peralto JL, Bellas C, López-Ríos F,
Sáez A, Villuendas R, Navarrete M, Fernandez I, Zarco C, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program of the Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncologicas-Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

The lack of precise and homogeneous criteria for the recognition of primary
cutaneous follicular lymphoma has hindered gaining data on the frequency and
clinical and molecular features of this entity. In the course of a review of a
series of primary cutaneous lymphoma from different Spanish hospitals, we
collected a series of 18 cases of primary cutaneous follicular lymphoma and
analyzed its clinical, morphologic, and biologic characteristics. In this review 
only cases with a follicular pattern of growth, germinal center cytology, and
restriction to the skin in a minimum follow-up of 6 months have been included.
Cases of primary cutaneous follicular lymphoma were characterized by the
expression of classic markers of the germinal center, such as bcl6, CD10, and the
presence of aggregates of follicular dendritic cells. They frequently express
bcl2 protein, although classical t(14;18) was not found in any of the cases
analyzed. Analysis of the bcl6 noncoding first exon showed somatic mutations in
two of four cases analyzed, as would be expected in lymphoma deriving from the
germinal center. Clinically, most cases showed initial involvement of the head
and neck, with relapses in eight cases (involving the skin in five cases, both
skin and lymph node in two cases, and lymph node in one case). No death
attributable to the tumor was recorded. These data seem to imply that follicular 
lymphoma may present initially in the skin, lacking the characteristic t(14;18)
and having a relatively indolent course. Recognition of these tumors and
elucidation of their molecular alterations could lead to properly adapted staging
and treatment protocols for these patients.

PMID: 11420458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Br J Haematol. 2001 Jun;113(3):803-6.

Detection of reciprocal fusion 5'-BCL6/partner-3' transcripts in lymphomas
exhibiting reciprocal BCL6 translocations.

Kaneita Y(1), Yoshida S, Ishiguro N, Sawada U, Horie T, Mori S, Moriyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

It has been believed that replacement of the endogenous promoter and the
non-coding first exon of the BCL6 gene by a sequence derived from the
translocational partner gene is a main mechanism of the BCL6 dysregulation
resulting from translocation. In this study, we found that reciprocal BCL6
translocation led to the expression of not only the 5'-partner/BCL6-3' fusion
transcripts but also the 5'-BCL6/partner-3' fusion transcripts, suggesting that
reciprocal 5'-BCL6/partner-3' fusion genes are transcriptionally active. These
findings raise the possibility that reciprocal BCL-6 translocation may lead to
dysregulation of the partner gene as well as the BCL6 gene.

PMID: 11380473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 1;284(1):26-32.

Binding of BAZF and Bc16 to STAT6-binding DNA sequences.

Hartatik T(1), Okada S, Okabe S, Arima M, Hatano M, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, 260-8670, Japan.

BAZF, a family member of Bcl6, can function as a sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor. We determined BAZF-binding DNA sequence. The consensus
binding sequence (CBS) of BAZF is almost the same as those of Bcl6 previously
described. Three nucleotides of T, G and A at position 6, 8, and 9 in the CBS
(5'-ATTCCTAGAAAG-3') are important nucleotides for binding of both BAZF and Bcl6.
Since a part (5'-TTC-CTA-GAA-3') of the CBS resembled the sequence motif
(5'-TTC-(N3-4)-GAA-3') bound by STAT factors, BAZF and Bcl6 can bind to the
CD23b-STAT6-binding sequence (5'-TTTC-TTA-GAAAT-3'), the immunoglobulin germline 
epsilon-STAT6-binding sequence (5'-CTTC-CCAA-GAAC-3'), and the IL4-STAT6-binding 
sequence (5'-TTTC-CCA-GAAAA-3') with weak affinity. However, a mutation of C
nucleotide to T nucleotide in the IL4-STAT6-binding sequence
(5'-TTTC-CTA-GAAAA-3') strongly increased the binding activity of BAZF and Bcl6. 
These results suggest that BAZF and Bcl6 can repress some of STAT-induced
transcription by binding to DNA sequences recognized by STAT factors.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11374866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2001 Jan-Feb;27(1):217-22.

Non-Hodgkin lymphomas of mice.

Hori M(1), Xiang S, Qi CF, Chattopadhyay SK, Fredrickson TN, Hartley JW,
Kovalchuk AL, Bornkamm GW, Janz S, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Ward JM, Morse HC
3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Studies of lymphoid neoplasms occurring in normal or genetically engineered mice 
have revealed parallels and differences to non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) of humans.
Some mouse lymphomas have strong histologic similarities to the human NHL subsets
including precursor B- and T-cell lymphoblastic, small lymphocytic, splenic
marginal zone, and diffuse large-cell B-cell lymphomas (DLCL); whether molecular 
parallels also exist is under study. Others mouse types such as sIg+
lymphoblastic B-cell lymphoma have no histologic equivalent in human NHL even
though they share molecular deregulation of BCL6 with human DLCL. Finally,
Burkitt lymphoma does not appear to occur naturally in mice, but it can be
induced with appropriately engineered transgenes.

PMID: 11358382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Blood. 2001 Mar 15;97(6):1845-53.

Lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin disease is characterized by recurrent genomic
imbalances.

Franke S(1), Wlodarska I, Maes B, Vandenberghe P, Delabie J, Hagemeijer A, De
Wolf-Peeters C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, the Department of Pathology, the Laboratory of
Experimental Hematology, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium.

Single-cell polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been used as a tool to
demonstrate clonality and B-cell origin of Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells in Hodgkin
disease (HD). An analogous approach was used to investigate genomic imbalances in
a (cyto)genetically poorly characterized subentity: lymphocyte predominance
Hodgkin disease (LPHD). Nineteen cases of LPHD were selected for a comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) study. CGH was performed with degenerate
oligonucleotide primed-PCR (DOP-PCR)-amplified DNA from 4-5 microdissected CD20+ 
malignant cells. All analyzed cases revealed a high number of genomic imbalances 
(average 10.8 per case), involving all chromosomes but the excluded 19, 22, and
Y, indicating a high complexity of LPHD. The majority of detected aberrations
were recurrent. Gain of 1, 2q, 3, 4q, 5q, 6, 8q, 11q, 12q, and X, and loss of
chromosome 17 were identified in 36.8% to 68.4% of the analyzed cases. Some of
them have also been found in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), and possibly represent
secondary changes associated with disease progression. Gain of 2q, 4q, 5q, 6,
11q, however, are much more rarely observed in NHL and could be more specifically
associated with LPHD. Particularly interesting is a frequent overrepresentation
of chromosome arm 6q, a region usually deleted in NHL. Rearrangement of the BCL6 
gene (3q27) demonstrated by cytogenetics and fluorescence in situ hybridization
in 2 cases in this study suggests its contribution in pathogenesis of LPHD. In
conclusion, the data show a consistent occurrence of genomic alterations in LPHD 
and highlight genomic regions that might be relevant for development and/or
progression of this lymphoma entity.

PMID: 11238128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mod Rheumatol. 2001 Mar;11(1):1-5. doi: 10.3109/s101650170035.

Transcriptional regulation of memory B cell development.

Tokuhisa T(1), Hatano M, Okada S, Fukuda T, Kunimasa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine , 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670 , Japan.

Abstract Antigen-reactive B cells in the spleen of mice immunized with T
cell-dependent antigens generate antibody-producing foci in periarteriolar
lymphoid sheaths (PALS) or migrate into follicles to form germinal centers.
Germinal center B cells clonally expand, have somatic hypermutation in IgV-region
genes, are selected by apoptosis on the basis of antigen-specific signals, and
differentiate to memory B cells. Two transcription factors (Bcl6 and c-Fos) in B 
cells play a critical role in the development of germinal centers. (1) Bcl6 is
highly expressed in germinal center B cells, and defects in B cells perturb the
formation of germinal centers but not that of PALS-associated foci, indicating
the essential role of Bcl6 in the differentiation. (2) Overexpression of c-Fos in
germinal center B cells induces apoptosis and perturbs the formation of memory B 
cells. Overexpression of Bcl-2 cannot rescue c-Fos-induced apoptosis in germinal 
center B cells. Since c-Fos is induced in mature B cells which have reacted with 
antigens, and clonal deletion of self-reactive B cells is insensitive to
overexpression of Bcl-2, c-Fos may play a causal role in the clonal deletion of
germinal center B cells. Thus, these factors provide a unique opportunity to
investigate the molecular mechanisms of memory B cell development.

PMID: 24387012  [PubMed]


368. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Mar;25(3):307-15.

Primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma: the relation between morphology,
clinical presentation, immunohistochemical markers, and survival.

Fernández-Vázquez A(1), Rodríguez-Peralto JL, Martínez MA, Platón EM, Algara P,
Camacho FI, López-Ríos F, Zarco C, Sánchez-Yus E, Fresno MF, Barthe L, Aliaga A, 
Fraga M, Forteza J, Oliva H, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

The histogenesis, morphology, immunophenotype, and clinical behavior of cutaneous
large B-cell lymphomas (CLBCL) are largely a matter of controversy. We performed 
an investigation to determine whether CLBCL have features that differentiate them
from other large B-cell lymphomas and whether CLBCL is itself a heterogeneous
group. To this end, we reviewed the main characteristics of a series of 32 cases 
of LBCL found in the skin. We reviewed the clinical findings and paraffin
sections of the tumors from these 32 patients. The immunohistochemical study
performed included p53, MIB1, Bcl2, Bcl6, and CD10 markers. We carried out
statistical analysis of these data (univariate and multivariate), seeking an
association between the features of the tumors and clinical outcome, as defined
by failure-free survival time. Only one patient died as a consequence of the
lymphoma. Nevertheless, the accumulated probability of survival without failure
at 48 months was 0.46. The number, type, and localization of the lesions were not
associated with variations in either survival or failure-free survival. The
expression of p53 was negative in this group of CLBCL, whereas Bcl-2 expression
or localization in the lower leg did not relate to any other significant feature.
Histologic examination of the cases disclosed three different groups: Grade III
follicular lymphomas (FLs), monomorphous large B-cell lymphomas (LBCL type I),
and LBCL with an admixed component of small B-lymphocytes (LBCL type II). Grade
III FL (11 cases) tended to be found in the head and neck and showed CD10
expression in a majority of cases. A higher probability of lymph node relapses
was associated with cases located in the head and neck and with CD10+ tumors.
Cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas are indolent tumors, but follow an insidious
course. Our data support the interpretation that CLBCL is a heterogeneous
condition; comprises some LBCL derived from CD10+ germinal center cells which
manifests more frequently as tumors in the head and neck region, with an
increased probability of relapse in lymph nodes [1] and has some distinctive
morphologic features. The existence of a component of small B-cells within the
other CLBCL could lend support to the theory that some of these tumors, more than
arise de novo, may have originated in preexistent small B-cell lymphomas, but no 
firm evidence of this is provided in this study.

PMID: 11224600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 14;19(54):6240-50.

Colocalization and heteromerization between the two human oncogene POZ/zinc
finger proteins, LAZ3 (BCL6) and PLZF.

Dhordain P(1), Albagli O, Honore N, Guidez F, Lantoine D, Schmid M, The HD,
Zelent A, Koken MH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U524, IRCL, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille, France.

Most acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cases are associated with recurrent
translocations between the gene of retinoic receptor alpha and that of PML
(t(15;17)) or PLZF (t(11;17)). PML localizes onto discrete intranuclear domains, 
the PML-nuclear bodies, and displays anti-oncogenic and pro-apoptotic properties.
PLZF encodes a transcription factor belonging to the POZ/domain and Krüppel zinc 
finger (POK) family which interacts directly with PML. PLZF is related to another
POK protein, LAZ3(BCL6), which is structurally altered, and presumably
misexpressed, in many non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) cases. PLZF and LAZ3 share many 
functional properties: both inhibit cell growth, concentrate into punctated
nuclear subdomains and are sequence-specific transcriptional repressors
recruiting a histone deacetylase-repressing complex. Given these similarities, we
tested whether both proteins could be targeted by each other. Here, LAZ3 and PLZF
are shown to colocalize onto nuclear dots. Moreover, truncated derivatives of one
protein, which display a diffuse nuclear localization, are recruited onto nuclear
dots by the full-length other. The colocalization and the reciprocal 'rescue' is 
the result of a direct interaction between LAZ3 and PLZF, as indicated by yeast
two hybrid assays, in vitro immunoprecipitations, and GST pull down experiments. 
In contrast to LAZ3 homomerization, LAZ3/PLZF heteromerization in yeast does not 
solely depend on POZ/POZ contacts but rather also relies on interactions between 
the two zinc finger regions and 'cross' contacts between the zinc finger region
and the POZ domain of each partner. Likewise, LAZ3 shows some colocalization with
the PLZF partner PML upon stable overexpression of both proteins in CHO cells and
interacts with PML in yeast. Finally, endogenous LAZ3 and PLZF are co-induced and
partially colocalized in myeloid MDS cells. These data indicate that a physical
interaction between LAZ3 and PLZF underlies their simultaneous recruitment onto
multiproteic nuclear complexes, presumably involved in transcriptional silencing 
and whose integrity (for APL) and/or function (for APL and NHL) may be altered in
oncogenesis.

PMID: 11175338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Blood. 2000 Apr 15;95(8):2719-21.

The Ikaros gene, a central regulator of lymphoid differentiation, fuses to the
BCL6 gene as a result of t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocation in a patient with diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma.

Hosokawa Y(1), Maeda Y, Ichinohasama R, Miura I, Taniwaki M, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. yhosokaw@aichi-cc.pref.aichi.jp

The BCL6 gene, isolated from the breakpoints of 3q27-associated chromosomal
translocations, has been implicated in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBL).
Here we describe the molecular characterization of novel t(3;7)(q27;p12)
translocations in 2 patients with DLBL. Molecular genetic analysis of the
breakpoint area involving BCL6 revealed the presence of the Ikaros gene, a
central regulator of lymphoid differentiation that had been mapped to human
chromosome 7 band p13-p11.1. As a molecular consequence of the translocation, the
5' regulatory region of the BCL6 gene was replaced by the putative 5' regulatory 
region of the Ikaros gene, probably leading to deregulated expression of the BCL6
gene throughout B-cell differentiation. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses of a
patient sample established that the t(3;7)(q27;p12) results in fusion of the
Ikaros and BCL6 genes. This study provides the first evidence that the Ikaros
gene is rearranged in human hematopoietic malignant disorders. (Blood.
2000;95:2719-2721)

PMID: 10753856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Haematologica. 2001 Jan;86(1):64-70.

Molecular cytogenetic characterization of marginal zone B-cell lymphoma:
correlation with clinicopathologic findings in 14 cases.

Cuneo A(1), Bigoni R, Roberti MG, Milani R, Agostini P, Cavazzini F, Minotto C,
De Angeli C, Bardi A, Tammiso E, Negrini M, Cavazzini P, Castoldi G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Terapie Avanzate, Sezione di Ematologia, 
Università di Ferrara, via Savonarola 9, 44100 Ferrara, Italy. sse@dns.unife.it

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To improve the definition of the incidence and
significance of chromosome lesions occurring in marginal zone B-cell lymphoma
(MZBCL).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Fourteen cases of MZBCL diagnosed according to the REAL
classification were studied by conventional chromosome analysis (CCA) and by
interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the following probes: 
3q27/BCL6, 6q21, 7q31, 9p21/p16, 11q22/ATM, 13q14, 17p13, centromeres of #3, #7, 
#12. Pertinent clinical data were collected.
RESULTS: Primary disease presentation consisted of histologically documented
splenic MZBCL in 9 cases, nodal MZBCL in 3 cases and extra-nodal MZBCL in 2
cases. Four cases showed evolution into a high-grade lymphoma, due to the
presence of a predominant large cell or blast cell component. Clonal karyotype
anomalies were detected by CCA in 12 cases, 6 of which had a complex karyotype,
including all 4 cases with high-grade histology. Interphase FISH confirmed
cytogenetic data and revealed several cryptic chromosomal lesions. Overall,
total/partial +12 was found in five cases; 13q14 and 17p13 deletion were found in
four cases each; +3, 7q31 deletion and a BCL6 split signal were found in three
cases; deletions at 6q21 and 11q22.3 in two cases each; +7 and a 9p21 deletion
were found in one case each.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: i) Besides +3 and 7q-, 13q14 deletion,
total/partial +12, BCL6 rearrangement, and deletions at 6q21, 11q22-23, and
17p13.3 are relatively frequent events in MZBCL; ii) unlike in mantle cell
lymphoma, 9p21 deletion occurred infrequently in MZBCL; iii) a switch into high
grade histology is usually associated with complex chromosome defects, including 
6q-, 11q-, +12, and 17p.

PMID: 11146573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Methods Mol Med. 2001;55:157-76. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-074-8:157.

NPM-ALK Reverse Transcriptase-Polymerase Chain Reaction for Detecting the t(2;5) 
of Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma.

Shurtleff SA(1), Downing JR, Morris SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.

The development of modern molecular biology techniques and their use in
characterizing the genetic abnormalities that are of pathogenic significance in
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) now provides a means to diagnose and rationally
subcategorize these neoplasms in addition to the more traditional use of
morphologic and immunophenotypic criteria. The shortcomings of traditional
methods of NHL diagnosis and classification have been especially evident within
the morphological subset commonly referred to as the large-cell lymphomas, which 
comprise approx 25% and 40% of NHL in children and adults, respectively (1). The 
marked cytological, immunological, and clinical heterogeneity of this group of
tumors suggests that it is comprised of several biologically different neoplasms,
but morphological and immunophenotypic subclassification schema have failed to
identify meaningful subsets within the large-cell lymphomas. Recently, however,
two recurrent genetic abnormalities in large-cell NHL-activation of the BCL6/LAZ3
zinc finger gene located at 3q27 (altered in approx 30% of large-cell lymphomas
[2-4]) and the NPM-ALK fusion gene (5-7) produced by the t(2;5)-have been
analyzed to now permit the identification of patient subsets that have
reproducibly different therapeutic responses and survival rates in most studies, 
both of these molecular genetic subtypes appearing to have a superior prognosis
compared to those cases lacking these gene abnormalities.

PMID: 21312108  [PubMed]


373. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2000 Nov;123(1):44-8.

Lack of mutations of BCL6 and BCL10 genes in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphomas of the orbital adnexa.

Chen PM(1), Liu JH, Yu IT, Kao SC, Lin YC, Chiang H, Fan FS, Chiou TJ, Wang WS,
Yen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, and National Yang-Ming University, ROC, Taipei, Taiwan.

Knowledge regarding the molecular pathogenesis and progression of
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas of ocular adnexa is limited.
Eleven cases of ocular MALT lymphoma were analyzed by clonal rearrangement of
antigen receptor genes using Southern blot hybridization. Polymerase chain
reaction-single stranded conformational polymorphism analysis and DNA sequencing 
was utilized to analyze the mutations of BCL6 and BCL10 genes. Clonal
rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy genes was found in all 11 patients. No
point mutation was found in BCL6 or BCL10 genes in any of the samples analyzed.
We suggest that mutations of BCL6 and BCL10 genes are rare in low-grade MALT
lymphoma of ocular adnexa and are unlikely to be involved in the pathogenesis of 
the disease. But the role of alterations of both BCL6 and BCL10 genes in the
disease progression of low-grade MALT lymphoma require additional study.

PMID: 11120333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Development. 2001 Jan;128(1):57-65.

Testicular germ cell apoptosis in Bcl6-deficient mice.

Kojima S(1), Hatano M, Okada S, Fukuda T, Toyama Y, Yuasa S, Ito H, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Inohana 1-8-1, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Bcl6 protein has been detected in testicular germ cells, mainly spermatocytes, of
normal mice, but its physiological role is largely unknown. The number of
spermatozoa in the cauda epididymis of adult Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6-/-) mice is
lower than that of Bcl6+/+ mice. We have found numerous apoptotic spermatocytes
at the metaphase I stage with induction of Bax protein in adult Bcl6-/- testes.
Developmentally, the incidence of germ cell apoptosis of Bcl6-/- mice was similar
to that of Bcl6+/+ mice until six weeks of age and increased after eight weeks of
age. The incidence of apoptosis in heterozygous Bcl6+/- mice was also higher than
that of Bcl6+/+ mice. Since the activated form of p38 MAP kinase was detected in 
spermatocytes of adult Bcl6-/- mice, the germ cell apoptosis may be induced by
stressors. Treatment of testes of adult Bcl6+/+ mice with a mild hyperthermia
resulted in germ cell apoptosis predominantly in metaphase I spermatocytes with
induction of Bax protein and activation of p38 MAP kinase and this apoptosis
mimics that in adult Bcl6-/- mice. Thus, Bcl6 may play a role as a stabilizer in 
protecting spermatocytes from apoptosis induced by stressors.

PMID: 11092811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8560-70.

DNA replication progresses on the periphery of nuclear aggregates formed by the
BCL6 transcription factor.

Albagli O(1), Lindon C, Lantoine D, Quief S, Puvion E, Pinset C, Puvion-Dutilleul
F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1947, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France. oalbagli@vjf.cnrs.fr

The BCL6 proto-oncogene, frequently alterated in non-Hodgkin lymphoma, encodes a 
POZ/zinc finger protein that localizes into discrete nuclear subdomains. Upon
prolonged BCL6 overexpression in cells bearing an inducible BCL6 allele (UTA-L
cells), these subdomains apparently coincide with sites of DNA synthesis. Here,
we explore the relationship between BCL6 and replication by both electron and
confocal laser scanning microscopy. First, by electron microscope analyses, we
found that endogenous BCL6 is associated with replication foci. Moreover, we show
that a relatively low expression level of BCL6 reached after a brief induction in
UTA-L cells is sufficient to observe its targeting to mid, late, and at least
certain early replication foci visualized by a pulse-labeling with
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). In addition, when UTA-L cells are simultaneously
induced for BCL6 expression and exposed to BrdU for a few hours just after the
release from a block in mitosis, a nuclear diffuse BCL6 staining indicates cells 
in G(1), while cells in S show a more punctate nuclear BCL6 distribution
associated with replication foci. Finally, ultrastructural analyses in UTA-L
cells exposed to BrdU for various times reveal that replication progresses just
around, but not within, BCL6 subdomains. Thus, nascent DNA is localized near, but
not colocalized with, BCL6 subdomains, suggesting that they play an architectural
role influencing positioning and/or assembly of replication foci. Together with
its previously function as transcription repressor recruiting a histone
deacetylase complex, BCL6 may therefore contribute to link nuclear organization, 
replication, and chromatin-mediated regulation.

PMCID: PMC102161
PMID: 11046151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 5;19(42):4941-5.

Identification of negative regulatory regions within the first exon and intron of
the BCL6 gene.

Kikuchi M(1), Miki T, Kumagai T, Fukuda T, Kamiyama R, Miyasaka N, Hirosawa S.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Allied Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations involving BCL6 gene are frequent in human B-cell
lymphomas. Chromosomal breaks preferentially occur within a 3-kb region
containing the first exon and intron. Recent reports have revealed that internal 
deletions or point mutations also are common in this region, suggesting that
structural alteration of this region may be a crucial event in the development of
lymphomas. In this study, we identified two regions in the BCL6 gene that
negatively regulate BCL6 expression. One region, ES, is located within the first 
exon between nucleotides +472 and +543, and a second region, IS, is located
between +783 and + 918 of the first intron. A consensus nucleotide sequence for
the binding of the BCL6 protein itself was found within the ES region. An
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and a co-transfection experiment using a
BCL6 expression vector showed that transcription of the BCL6 gene was negatively 
regulated by the BCL6 gene product. The IS region which is included in the
regions commonly deleted in B-cell lymphomas had a silencer activity. Structural 
alterations of these two regions may play roles in the deregulated expression of 
the BCL6 gene in B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 11039912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Blood. 2000 Oct 15;96(8):2907-9.

Nonimmunoglobulin (non-Ig)/BCL6 gene fusion in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
results in worse prognosis than Ig/BCL6.

Akasaka T(1), Ueda C, Kurata M, Akasaka H, Yamabe H, Uchiyama T, Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)First Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Chromosomal translocation involving the BCL6 gene affects not only immunoglobulin
(Ig) genes but also a number of non-Ig genes as partners. The molecular anatomy
of the BCL6 gene rearrangements in 39 cases with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) by long-distance polymerase chain reaction-based assays was determined.
The results showed that Ig genes were affected in 21 cases; non-Ig genes, 15
cases; a deletion of more than a 1-kb segment, 2 cases; and a point mutation, 1
case. Comparative studies between the 21 cases with Ig gene partners and the 17
cases with non-Ig gene partners, including 2 cases with the deletion, showed that
the overall survival of the latter group of patients was significantly inferior
to that of the former (P = .0440), and the estimated 2-year overall survival
rates were 58.3% vs 17.6% (P = .005). Non-Ig/BCL6 fusion is a poor prognostic
indicator of DLBCL, and DLBCL with BCL6 translocation could be subclassified
according to the individual partner locus and/or gene. (Blood. 2000;96:2907-2909)

PMID: 11023530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Leuk Lymphoma. 2000 Aug;38(5-6):505-12.

Internal deletions within the BCL6 gene in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Nakamura Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi,
Japan. yu-nakam@dokkyomed.ac.jp

The BCL6 gene, encoding a POZ/Zinc finger protein which acts as a transcriptional
repressor, is frequently altered at its 5' non-coding region by 3q27 chromosomal 
translocations in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). BCL6 rearrangement is one 
of the most common genetic abnormalities in NHL. As a result of translocations,
the regulatory region of the BCL6 gene is replaced by an heterologous reciprocal 
partner such as the immunoglobulin (IG) genes. Promotor substitution leads to
deregulation of the BCL6 expression, which may be associated with
lymphomagenesis. Recent studies have shown that the 5' non-coding region of the
BCL6 gene is also subject to somatic hypermutation physiologically operating in
germinal center (GC) B-cells in a similar pattern to that of the IG genes. There 
is little evidence to show that structural alterations of the BCL6 gene may be
caused by mechanisms other than chromosomal translocations. To date, five cases
with NHL exhibiting gross BCL6 deletions of the 1.5-2.4 kb have been reported.
These deletions occurred in the same region as translocational breakpoints and
the somatic hypermutations cluster, but independently of chromosomal
rearrangements. The deletions overlapped at the 270 bp region and this region
contains a putative protein-binding sequence which may play a role in the
regulation of the BCL6 expression. Small separated deletions of 22-101 bp, which 
may also contain protein-binding sequences, were evident in another NHL case. In 
contrast to the TAL1 deletion in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the
BCL6 deletion is considered to be mediated by a mechanism other than aberrant
activity of the IG recombinase. Internal deletion within the BCL6 gene is a
recurrent molecular abnormality in B-cell NHL, which is sometimes
indistinguishable from rearrangements by chromosomal translocations. At present, 
the mechanism of DNA recombination and its role in lymphomagenesis remain
unknown.

PMID: 10953971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Leuk Res. 2000 Aug;24(8):719-32.

Genomic organisation and expression of BCL6 in murine B-cell lymphomas.

Qi CF(1), Hori M, Coleman AE, Torrey TA, Taddesse-Heath L, Ye BH, Chattopadhyay
SK, Hartley JW, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BCL6 encodes a transcription factor deregulated by chromosomal translocations in 
human diffuse large cell B lymphomas (DLCL). This study was designed to determine
whether Bcl6 might also be involved in lymphomas of mice. BCL6 protein was
expressed at high levels in 90% or more of DLCL but not in low grade B lymphomas.
Southern hybridisation studies demonstrated altered organisation of Bcl6 in three
primary DLCL and the WEHI 231 B-cell lymphoma cell line but not in low grade
tumours. Chromosomal painting and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)
analyses of the WEHI 231 metaphase spreads revealed a T(5;16) translocation with 
Bcl6 on Chromosome 16 at the translocation breakpoint. Deregulated expression of 
BCL6 is thus likely to contribute to the genesis of DLCL of mice as well as of
humans.

PMID: 10936424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Am J Surg Pathol. 2000 Aug;24(8):1068-78.

Lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease: the use of bcl-6 and CD57 in diagnosis
and differential diagnosis.

Kraus MD(1), Haley J.

Author information: 
(1)The Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Pathology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. kraus@path.wustl.edu

Distinction of lymphocyte predominance Hodgkin's disease (LPHD) from other forms 
of lymphoma often requires immunohistochemistry (IHC). Most previously published 
recommended panels include markers to define the large neoplastic cells (for
example, CD20, J chain, CD45) as well as the non-neoplastic background cells
(CD21, CD45RO, CD57, TiA 1). In the present study we examine the practical use of
a double IHC method designed to look simultaneously at two germinal center
specific cell types: bcl6+ cells and [bc16+, CD57+] co-positive cells. All 10
nodular LPHD had bcl6+ large cells and numerous CD57+ small background cells,
including [bcl6+CD57+] cells in rosettes. One case of LPHD with large cell
transformation contained numerous bcl6+ large cells both singly (in areas of
typical LPHD) and in sheets (in foci of large cell transformation), many CD57+
small cells but few [bcl6+CD57+] co-positive cells and no rosettes. In none of
the five cases of florid progressive transformation of germinal centers were true
rosettes seen, although all contained variable numbers of bcl6+ large cells and
CD57+ cells. Lymphocyte-rich classic Hodgkin's disease LRCHD cases were notable
for bcl6 reactivity in Reed-Sternberg cells in all cases, numerous background
small bcl6+ lymphocytes, and rare CD57+ cells. Two phenotypic profiles were
associated with the 10 cases of T cell-rich B cell large cell lymphoma (TCRBCL). 
In the first, group "A," six of six cases had bc16- large cells and few CD57+
small cells, and none had significant numbers of [bcl6+, CD57+] co-positive
cells. In the second, group "B," four of four cases had bcl6+ large cells with
numerous CD57+ and [bcl6+, CD57+] co-positive cells. These findings not only show
that LPHD can be distinguished from its morphologic mimics through identification
of specific germinal center cell types, but also identifies a second group of
TCRBCL (group "B") whose phenotype suggests it might be an architectural variant 
of nodular LPHD.

PMID: 10935647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Hum Pathol. 2000 Jul;31(7):871-3.

Common-variable immunodeficiency-related lymphomas associate with mutations and
rearrangements of BCL-6: pathogenetic and histogenetic implications.

Ariatti C(1), Vivenza D, Capello D, Migliazza A, Parvis G, Fassone L, Buonaiuto
D, Savinelli F, Rossi D, Saglio G, Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern
Piedmont, Novara, Italy.

Common-variable immunodeficiency (CVI) patients develop non-Hodgkin's lymphomas
(NHL), mainly B-lineage diffuse large-cell lymphomas (DLCL), with a high relative
risk. The molecular pathogenesis of CVI-related NHL (CVI-NHL) is unknown. Here we
aimed at providing a detailed molecular characterization of CVI-NHL.
Rearrangements of BCL-6 were detected in two thirds of CVI-NHL cases examined.
All 3 CVI-NHL also harbored point mutations of the BCL-6 5' noncoding regions,
which constitute a marker of B-cell transit through the germinal center (GC). The
number and molecular pattern of BCL-6 mutations in CVI-NHL were similar to that
detected in DLCL of immunocompetent hosts and in DLCL arising in other
immunodeficiency settings. Microsatellite instability occurred in one CVI-NHL
devoid of a BCL-6 rearrangement. All CVI-NHL scored negative for genetic lesions 
of BCL-2, p53, c-MYC, REL as well as for viral infection by EBV and HHV-8.
Overall, these data indicate that: similarly to other immunodeficiency-related
NHL, involvement of BCL6 occurs frequently also in CVI-NHL; and because BCL-6
mutations are acquired by B cells during GC transit, their occurrence in CVI-NHL 
suggest that these lymphomas are histogenetically related to GC B cells.

PMID: 10923927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Int Immunol. 2000 Jul;12(7):1085-93.

The TATA binding protein, c-Myc and survivin genes are not somatically
hypermutated, while Ig and BCL6 genes are hypermutated in human memory B cells.

Shen HM(1), Michael N, Kim N, Storb U.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, 920
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Immunoglobulin (IG:) genes are hypermutated in mature B cells after interaction
with antigen and T cells in a germinal center reaction. We and others have
recently shown that the human BCL6 gene is also hypermutated in human peripheral 
blood memory B cells and tonsils. A preliminary analysis of other non-Ig genes
(c-MYC:, S14 and AFP) suggested that they were not mutated in memory B cells. We 
have now performed an in-depth analysis of three non-Ig genes that are expressed 
in germinal center B cells in two human donors in whom BCL6 is highly mutated. It
was found that the TATA binding protein (TBP), c-MYC: and survivin genes are not 
hypermutated. This lack of targeting by the Ig hypermutation mechanism must be
due to the lack of regulatory DNA elements, since the primary sequences of the
three tested genes have at least as high intrinsic mutability indices as the BCL6
gene.

PMID: 10882420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Immunol Today. 2000 Jun;21(6):298-305.

Molecular insights into the immunopathogenesis of follicular lymphoma.

Stamatopoulos K(1), Kosmas C, Belessi C, Stavroyianni N, Kyriazopoulos P,
Papadaki T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Athens University School of Medicine and Laikon 
General Hospital, Athens, Greece.

Follicular lymphoma is caused by the transformation of a germinal-center-derived 
B cell with a t(14;18) chromosomal translocation. The distribution of somatic
mutations within immunoglobulin genes indicates that follicular-lymphoma cells
can interact with antigen. In addition, nonimmunoglobulin genes such as BCL6 seem
to undergo somatic hypermutation. Here, Kostas Stamatopoulos and colleagues
relate the molecular data about immunoglobulin genes and the protooncogenes BCL2 
and BCL6 to the pathogenesis and evolution of follicular lymphoma.

PMID: 10825742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Cancer Res. 2000 May 1;60(9):2335-41.

Molecular anatomy of BCL6 translocations revealed by long-distance polymerase
chain reaction-based assays.

Akasaka H(1), Akasaka T, Kurata M, Ueda C, Shimizu A, Uchiyama T, Ohno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2001 Oct 1;61(19):7363-4.

BCL6 translocations involve not only immunoglobulin (IG) genes but also a number 
of non-IG loci as partners. Junctional sequences of three IG/BCL6 translocations 
were readily obtained by long-distance PCR. In cases where partner loci were not 
determined, we developed a long-distance inverse PCR method, which amplifies
unknown fragments flanked by known BCL6 sequences. Using these two long-distance 
PCR-based approaches, we cloned junctional areas of BCL6 translocations from a
total of 58 cases of B-cell tumors. Nucleotide sequencing and database searches
revealed that 30 cases involved IGs as partners: IG heavy chain gene in 22, IG
kappa light chain gene in 1, and IG lambda light chain gene in 7. In contrast, 23
cases affected non-IG loci, including the H4 histone gene, heat shock protein
genes HSP89alpha and HSP90beta, and PIM-1 proto-oncogene. On der(3) chromosomes, 
complete sets of the promoters of these partner genes replaced that of BCL6 in
the same transcriptional orientation. These results suggest that BCL6 gene
affected by the translocation is transcriptionally activated by a variety of
stimuli, including cell cycle control, changes in the physical environment, and
response to cytokines. Break points on BCL6 occurred within the major
translocation cluster, and we identified a 120-bp hyper-cluster region a short
distance from the 3' end of exon 1. Gel mobility-shift assay suggested the
presence of a protein(s) that bound to this particular region.

PMID: 10811103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 13;19(16):2023-32.

Nonrandom 4p13 rearrangements of the RhoH/TTF gene, encoding a GTP-binding
protein, in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma.

Preudhomme C(1), Roumier C, Hildebrand MP, Dallery-Prudhomme E, Lantoine D, Laï
JL, Daudignon A, Adenis C, Bauters F, Fenaux P, Kerckaert JP, Galiègue-Zouitina
S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.524, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer, Lille, France.

We recently isolated the RhoH/TTF gene by its fusion to the LAZ3/BCL6 gene, in a 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) cell line, which bore a t(3;4)(q27;p11-13)
translocation. This gene encodes a novel Rho GTP-binding protein and is
specifically expressed in hematopoietic tissues. We made its precise mapping at
band 4p13, and described its partial genomic structure. Using fluorescence in
situ hybridization and molecular analyses, we report here on the rearrangement of
the RhoH/TTF gene, at band 4p13, in four cases of NHL with t(3;4)(q27;p13)
translocation and its fusion to the LAZ3/BCL6 gene at band 3q27, in three of
these cases. RT-PCR analysis of two cases allowed the detection of variable
fusion transcripts emerging from the rearranged alleles, and in one case, a
deregulated expression of both RhoH/TTF and LAZ3/BCL6 genes, by promoter
substitution, was observed. We also show here another rearrangement of the
RhoH/TTF gene in a patient with multiple myeloma and t(4;14)(p13;q32)
translocation, with breakage within the IGH gene. It is the first report which
describes the recurrent chromosomal alteration of a GTP-binding protein encoding 
gene, in patients with hematopoietic malignancies.

PMID: 10803463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hematol Oncol. 2000 Mar;18(1):1-13.

Genetic abnormalities in marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.

Dierlamm J(1), Wlodarska I, Michaux L, Stefanova M, Hinz K, Van Den Berghe H,
Hagemeijer A, Hossfeld DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.

Marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MZBCL) including extranodal mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue (MALT)-type lymphoma, nodal, and splenic MZBCL represents a
distinct subtype of B-non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Recently, important progress in the
elucidation of the genetic mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis and disease
progression of these lymphomas has been made. The API2 gene, an inhibitor of
apoptosis, and the novel MLT gene have been found to be altered by the
t(11;18)(q21;21), which represents the most frequent structural chromosomal
abnormality in extranodal low-grade MALT lymphoma. Another gene involved in the
regulation of apoptosis, the BCL10 gene, has been cloned from a MALT lymphoma
cytogenetically characterized by the t(1;14)(p22;q32). Along the same lines,
inactivating mutations of the proapoptotic FAS gene have been detected in a
relatively high proportion of extranodal MZBCLs. Considering these data and the
fact that at least some MALT lymphomas show low levels of apoptosis and seem to
escape from FAS-mediated apoptosis one may speculate that abrogation of apoptosis
constitutes a central pathogenetic mechanism in the development of these
lymphomas. The pathogenetic role of trisomy 3, the most frequent numerical
chromosomal change of MZBCL, is not known. The minimal overrepresented region has
been delineated to 3q21-23 and 3q25-29 using comparative genomic hybridization.
The BCL6 proto-oncogene, located on 3q27, which is rearranged in some MZBCL and a
high proportion of large cell B-cell lymphomas with extranodal localization,
represents one of the candidate genes residing in these critical regions.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 10797525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):3178-86.

Evi9 encodes a novel zinc finger protein that physically interacts with BCL6, a
known human B-cell proto-oncogene product.

Nakamura T(1), Yamazaki Y, Saiki Y, Moriyama M, Largaespada DA, Jenkins NA,
Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Toshima-ku,
Tokyo 170-8455, Japan. takuro-ind@umin.u-tokyo,ac.jp

Evi9 is a common site of retroviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid leukemias.
Here we show that Evi9 encodes a novel zinc finger protein with three
tissue-specific isoforms: Evi9a (773 amino acids [aa]) contains two C(2)H(2)-type
zinc finger motifs, a proline-rich region, and an acidic domain; Evi9b (486 aa)
lacks the first zinc finger motif and part of the proline-rich region; Evi9c (239
aa) lacks all but the first zinc finger motif. Proviral integration sites are
located in the first intron of the gene and lead to increased gene expression.
Evi9a and Evi9c, but not Evi9b, show transforming activity for NIH 3T3 cells,
suggesting that Evi9 is a dominantly acting proto-oncogene. Immunolocalization
studies show that Evi9c is restricted to the cytoplasm whereas Evi9a and Evi9b
are located in the nucleus, where they form a speckled localization pattern
identical to that observed for BCL6, a human B-cell proto-oncogene product.
Coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments show
that Evi9a and Evi9b, but not Evi9c, physically interact with BCL6, while
deletion mutagenesis localized the interaction domains in or near the second zinc
finger and POZ domains of Evi9 and BCL6, respectively. These results suggest that
Evi9 is a leukemia disease gene that functions, in part, through its interaction 
with BCL6.

PMCID: PMC85612
PMID: 10757802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Blood. 2000 Apr 1;95(7):2321-8.

A novel nuclear phosphoprotein, GANP, is up-regulated in centrocytes of the
germinal center and associated with MCM3, a protein essential for DNA
replication.

Kuwahara K(1), Yoshida M, Kondo E, Sakata A, Watanabe Y, Abe E, Kouno Y, Tomiyasu
S, Fujimura S, Tokuhisa T, Kimura H, Ezaki T, Sakaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kumamoto,
Japan.

Antigen (Ag) immunization induces formation of the germinal center (GC), with
large, rapidly proliferating centroblasts in the dark zone, and small,
nondividing centrocytes in the light zone. We identified a novel nuclear protein,
GANP, that is up-regulated in centrocytes. We found that GANP was up-regulated in
GC B cells of Peyer's patches in normal mice and in spleens from Ag-immunized
mice. GANP-positive cells appeared in the light zone of the GC, with coexpression
of the peanut agglutinin (PNA) (PNA)-positive B220-positive phenotype. The
expression of GANP was strikingly correlated with GC formation because
Bcl6-deficient mice did not show the up-regulation of GANP. GANP-positive cells
were mostly surrounded by follicular dendritic cells. Stimulation with anti-micro
and anti-CD40 induced up-regulation of ganp messenger RNA as well as GANP protein
in B220-positive B cells in vitro. GANP is a 210-kd protein localized in both the
cytoplasm and nuclei, with a homologous region to Map80 that is associated with
MCM3, a protein essential for DNA replication. Remarkably, GANP is associated
with MCM3 in B cells and MCM3 is also up-regulated in the GC area. These results 
suggest that the up-regulation of GANP might participate in the development of
Ag-driven B cells in GCs through its interaction with MCM3.

PMID: 10733502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Immunol. 1999 Oct-Nov;36(15-16):1043-53.

Differential regulation of germinal center genes, BCL6 and SWAP-70, during the
course of MAIDS.

Qi CF(1), Jessberger R, Torrey TA, Taddesse-Heath L, Ohta Y, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0760, USA.
cqi@atlas.niaid.nih.gov

Germinal centers (GC) are the sites of antigen-driven B cell switch
recombination, V(D)J gene hypermutation, and selection to generate high-afinity
CD38+ memory B cells. A marked expansion of GC associated with
hypergammaglobulinemia followed by complete disruption of normal splenic
architecture and a striking drop in immunoglobulin levels are prominent features 
of the murine retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency syndrome, MAIDS. B cell
lymphomas are frequent in long-term infected mice. Normal GC formation is
critically dependent on a number of genes including the transcription factor,
Bcl6. Deregulated expression of BCL6 protein has been implicated in the
development of human and mouse B cell lymphomas. Another nuclear protein,
SWAP-70, has been identified as a subunit of the protein complex, SWAP, that
recombines switch regions in vitro. To develop a fuller understanding of B cell
biology in MAIDS, we examined the characteristics of BCL6, SWAP-70, CD38, and
peanut agglutinin (PNA)-staining cells during the course of the disease. The
levels of both nuclear proteins increased rapidly until 6-8 weeks after
infection. During this time frame, BCL6 was expressed at highest levels in the
usually rare CD4+ Thyl- T cell subset as well as in B cells. At later times. BCL6
levels dropped to undetectable levels while SWAP-70 levels continued to increase.
Changes in the levels of either protein could not be ascribed to transcriptional 
regulation. PNA-reactive cells decreased in concert with BCL6 while CD38 staining
increased with SWAP-70. These results demonstrate that progression of MAIDS
results in the massive accumulation of B cells with the morphology of secretory
cells that behave like post-GC cells for expression of BCL6 and CD38, and for
PNA-staining but with abnormally high-level expression of SWAP-70.

PMID: 10698307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Am J Pathol. 2000 Feb;156(2):501-7.

Up-regulation of BOB.1/OBF.1 expression in normal germinal center B cells and
germinal center-derived lymphomas.

Greiner A(1), Müller KB, Hess J, Pfeffer K, Müller-Hermelink HK, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, Würzburg. Würzburg. München, Germany.

The BOB.1/OBF.1/OCAB.1 protein is a lymphocyte-specific transcriptional
coactivator. It interacts with the Oct1 and Oct2 transcription factors and
contributes to the transcriptional activity of octamer motifs. The analysis of
established B cell lines had suggested that BOB.1/OBF.1 is constitutively
expressed at all stages of B cell development. Here we show that expression of
BOB. 1/OBF.1 is regulated within the B cell lineage. Specifically, germinal
center B cells show highly increased BOB.1/OBF.1 levels. We can induce the
up-regulation by stimulating primary splenic B cells, eg, by triggering CD40
signaling in the presence of interleukin-4. Expression of BOB.1/OBF.1 is
detectable but reduced in spleens from mice unable to undergo the germinal center
reaction due to mutations in the TNF receptor p55 or lymphotoxin beta (LTbeta)
receptor genes. Furthermore, we demonstrate that BOB.1/OBF.1 expression is highly
regulated in human B cell lymphomas. Whereas lymphomas representing pre- and
postfollicular B cell developmental stages are negative for BOB.1/OBF.1,
high-level expression of BOB.1/OBF.1 is characteristic of germinal center-derived
tumors. In these tumors BOB.1/OBF.1 is typically coexpressed with high levels of 
Bcl6. These results imply that overexpression of BOB.1/OBF.1, like overexpression
of Bcl6, might play a role in the pathogenesis of germinal center-derived B cell 
lymphomas. Furthermore, overexpression of BOB.1/OBF.1 represents a characteristic
feature of these tumors that is useful in their identification.

PMCID: PMC1850056
PMID: 10666379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 23;18(56):7994-9.

Identification of heterologous translocation partner genes fused to the BCL6 gene
in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas: 5'-RACE and LA - PCR analyses of biopsy
samples.

Yoshida S(1), Kaneita Y, Aoki Y, Seto M, Mori S, Moriyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In order to elucidate the molecular mechanism(s) for BCL6 translocation, we
identified translocational partner genes by subjecting clinical biopsy samples
from patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma to 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends 
(5'-RACE). Sequence analysis of the 5'-RACE product revealed that the BCL6 gene
was fused to the J segment of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene in about 
half of the cases, but in the other half, it was fused to heterologous partners, 
including the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA), pim-1, eukaryotic initiation
factor 4AII (eif4AII), transferrin receptor (TFRR) and ikaros genes. Since
analyses using genomic long and accurate (LA) - PCR revealed that the breakpoints
in the partner gene were confined to the first intron or the second exon in all
cases, the promoter and the first exon of the BCL6 gene were replaced by the
promoter and the first or both the first and second exon of the partner gene. The
breakpoint flanking sequences had no recombination signal sequences (RSSs) or chi
sequences and were homologous with the switch region only when the BCL6 gene was 
fused to the IgH gene, suggesting that BCL6 translocation cannot be explained
solely by mistakes of V(D)J, or chi-mediated or class-switch recombination, but
rather another mechanism may also be required to explain the molecular mechanism 
for the promiscuous BCL6 translocation.

PMID: 10637510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1999 Nov;40(11):1198-200.

[CD5 positive B cell leukemic lymphoma associated with BCL6 rearrangement].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirai H(1), Shimura K, Takahashi R, Kikuta T, Ashihara E, Inada T, Fujita N,
Shimazaki C, Akasaka T, Ohno H, Nakagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine.

A 59-year-old man was admitted in December 1995 because of general fatigue
without lymphadenopathy. Increased abnormal lymphocytes (70%) were observed in
peripheral blood. Bone marrow aspiration was a dry tap. Biopsy specimens revealed
hypercellularity with infiltration of abnormal lymphocytes. Surface marker
analysis of tumor cells was positive for CD5, CD19, CD20, HLA -DR, kappa, and
sIgM and negative for CD10. Cytogenetic analysis disclosed a complex abnormal
karyotype including t(3;22) and rearrangement of the BCL6 gene. The patient was
given a diagnosis of CD5 positive B-cell lymphoma, but died in January 1997
despite repeated chemotherapy. This case was unique because BCL6 rearrangement
has been reported in various types of B-cell lymphoma but rarely associated with 
leukemic types without lymphadenopathy.

PMID: 10624132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Jan;27(1):69-75.

Identification and characterization of BCL6 translocation partner genes in
primary gastric high-grade B-cell lymphoma: heat shock protein 89 alpha is a
novel fusion partner gene of BCL6.

Xu WS(1), Liang RH, Srivastava G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Primary gastric high-grade B-cell lymphoma (HGBL) is a special type of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. So far, the genetic features of this tumor have not been 
well characterized. Recently, a high incidence of BCL6 rearrangements has been
detected in HGBL. However, no previous cytogenetic studies have found
translocations involving the BCL6 locus (3q27) in HGBL, and the genetic basis
underlying the BCL6 rearrangements in this tumor remains unclear. We therefore
characterized the partner genes of BCL6 in five primary gastric HGBLs with a
rearranged BCL6 gene by analyzing BCL6 transcripts using the 5' RACE (rapid
amplification of cDNA end) strategy. BCL6 translocation partner genes were
identified at the 5' end of the chimeric transcripts in all five cases, including
the immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IGH) gene in three cases and the immunoglobulin
lambda-light-chain gene and the heat shock protein 89 alpha (HSP89A) gene in the 
other two cases. The chimeric transcripts in all cases contained the intact BCL6 
exon 2, but lacked exon 1, which was replaced by sequences from the partner
genes, suggesting that BCL6 expression was under the control of regulatory
sequences of the partner genes. These results, for the first time, indicate that 
immunoglobulin genes, especially IGH, are the most common BCL6 translocation
partner genes in primary gastric HGBL and that HSP89A is a novel partner of BCL6.
Because immunoglobulin genes are also the most frequent partners of BCL6 in nodal
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), these data suggest that primary gastric
HGBL shares a common genetic basis with nodal DLBCL. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
27:69-75, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10564588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cardiovasc Res. 1999 Jun;42(3):670-9.

The role of Bcl6 in mature cardiac myocytes.

Yoshida T(1), Fukuda T, Hatano M, Koseki H, Okabe S, Ishibashi K, Kojima S, Arima
M, Komuro I, Ishii G, Miki T, Hirosawa S, Miyasaka N, Taniguchi M, Ochiai T,
Isono K, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The Bcl6 gene encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor
and is ubiquitously expressed in adult murine tissues including heart muscle. The
objective of this study was to examine the role of Bcl6 in cardiac myocytes.
METHOD: We developed Bcl6-deficient (Bcl6-/-) mice and histologically examined
hearts from these mice.
RESULTS: Massive myocarditis with eosinophilic infiltration occurred in Bcl6-/-
mice after 4-6 weeks of age. Since expression of the Bcl6 gene was induced in
normal cardiac myocytes after 2 weeks of age and thereafter detected through
adulthood, loss of Bcl6 in mature cardiac myocytes may be related to the
induction of eosinophilic myocarditis. To examine the effects of eosinophils from
Bcl6-/- mice on normal hearts, bone marrow cells from Bcl6-/- mice were
adoptively transferred into sublethally irradiated RAG1-deficient mice. Although 
massive eosinophilic infiltration was detected in conjunctivas and spleens from
the chimeric mice, myocarditis was never observed. Electron microscopic analysis 
of cardiac myocytes from Bcl6-/- mice revealed a spectrum of degenerative changes
prior to eosinophilic infiltration.
CONCLUSION: Bcl6 maynot be essential for the maturation of cardiac myocytes but
may play a role in protecting mature cardiac myocytes from eosinophilic
inflammation.

PMID: 10533607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 9;18(36):5063-75.

Overexpressed BCL6 (LAZ3) oncoprotein triggers apoptosis, delays S phase
progression and associates with replication foci.

Albagli O(1), Lantoine D, Quief S, Quignon F, Englert C, Kerckaert JP, Montarras 
D, Pinset C, Lindon C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U524, IRCL, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille, France.

One of the most frequent genetic abnormalities associated with non Hodgkin
lymphoma is the structural alteration of the 5' non coding/regulatory region of
the BCL6 (LAZ3) protooncogene. BCL6 encodes a POZ/Zn finger protein, a structure 
similar to that of many Drosophila developmental regulators and to another
protein involved in a human hematopoietic malignancy, PLZF. BCL6 is a sequence
specific transcriptional repressor controlling germinal center formation and T
cell dependent immune response. Although the expression of BCL6 negatively
correlates with cellular proliferation in different cell types, the influence of 
BCL6 on cell growth and survival is currently unknown so that the way its
deregulation may contribute to cancer remains elusive. To directly address this
issue, we used a tetracycline-regulated system in human U2OS osteosarcoma cells
and thus found that BCL6 mediates growth suppression associated with impaired S
phase progression and apoptosis. Interestingly, overexpressed BCL6 can colocalize
with sites of ongoing DNA synthesis, suggesting that it may directly interfere
with S phase initiation and/or progression. In contrast, the isolated Zn finger
region of BCL6, which binds BCL6 target sequence but lacks transcriptional
repression activity, slows, but does not suppress, U2OS cell growth, is less
efficient at delaying S phase progression, and does not trigger apoptosis. Thus, 
for a large part, the effects of BCL6 overexpression on cell growth and survival 
depend on its ability to engage protein/protein interactions with itself and/or
its transcriptional corepressors. That BCL6 restricts cell growth suggests that
its deregulation upon structural alterations may alleviate negative controls on
the cell cycle and cell survival.

PMID: 10490843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Leukemia. 1999 Sep;13(9):1441-7.

Molecular and immunological dissection of diffuse large B cell lymphoma: CD5+,
and CD5- with CD10+ groups may constitute clinically relevant subtypes.

Harada S(1), Suzuki R, Uehira K, Yatabe Y, Kagami Y, Ogura M, Suzuki H, Oyama A, 
Kodera Y, Ueda R, Morishima Y, Nakamura S, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemotherapy, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Japan.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBL) constitutes the greatest percentage of adult
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and represents a diverse spectrum of lymphoid neoplasms. 
Clinicopathologic, phenotypic and genotypic findings were correlated and compared
for 63 DLBL cases to investigate whether they represent clinically relevant
subtypes. They were all cyclin D1 negative and were phenotypically divided into
three groups, ie group I (CD5+ type, n=11), group II (CD5- CD10+ type, n=19), and
group III (CD5- CD10- type, n=33). Data were correlated by observing the
respective gene rearrangement and expression of BCL2 and BCL6. In clinical
aspects, the group I cases demonstrated a significantly inferior survival than
those of the other two groups (log-rank test, P = 0.016). Although rearrangement 
of BCL2 and BCL6 did not show any inclination to a specific subgroup, the
immunohistochemical detection of BCL2 was less frequent, at a statistically
significant level (P=0.011), in group II (50%) than in group I (82%) and III
(82%) cases. This appears to confirm the unique aspect of the CD5- CD10+ type
DLBL, indicating a certain relationship with the normal germinal center cells
which usually lack BCL2 expression. The BCL6 protein expression was detected in
most of the present DLBL cases (92%) irrespective of this grouping. These data
suggest that the phenotypic delineation by the detection of CD5 and CD10 will
improve our understanding of DLBL and be helpful in a future subgrouping of DLBL.

PMID: 10482997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Oct;26(2):97-105.

Nonrandom fusion of L-plastin(LCP1) and LAZ3(BCL6) genes by t(3;13)(q27;q14)
chromosome translocation in two cases of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Galiègue-Zouitina S(1), Quief S, Hildebrand MP, Denis C, Detourmignies L, Laï JL,
Kerckaert JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 524 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, Lille,
France. zouitina@lille.inserm.fr

The LAZ3(BCL6) gene on chromosome band 3q27 is nonrandomly disrupted in B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) by chromosomal translocations clustered within a
3.3-kb MTC (major translocation cluster) located between the two first noncoding 
exons. These translocations generally result in the expression of a chimeric mRNA
transcript between the LAZ3 gene and sequences derived from the partner
chromosome. Using RACE RT-PCR, we previously demonstrated fusion of LAZ3 with the
RhoH/TTF gene, a hemopoietic cell-specific small GTPase involved in cytoskeleton 
organization, and with the BOB1/OBF1 gene, a B-cell-specific coactivator of
octamer-binding transcription factors, following translocations t(3;4)(q27;p13)
and t(3;11)(q27;q23), respectively. Here we report the identification of the
L-Plastin(LCP1) gene as a novel LAZ3 partner in chimeric transcripts resulting
from a t(3;13)(q27;q14) translocation, in two cases of B-cell lymphoma. As a
consequence of the translocation, the 5' regulatory region of each gene was
exchanged, creating both LCP1-LAZ3 and reciprocal LAZ3-LCP1 fusion transcripts in
one case, and only a LCP1-LAZ3 fusion transcript in the other. The 13q14
chromosome region is frequently disrupted in various proliferative disorders, and
the LCP1 gene defines a new breakpoint site in this region. This gene encodes an 
actin-binding protein and is the second LAZ3 partner gene, with the RhoH/TTF
gene, involved in actin cytoskeleton organization. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
26:97-105, 1999.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10469447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jul 29;1424(1):R21-36.

Transcriptional deregulation in hereditary disorders and cancer: the 12th annual 
CABM symposium, October 21-22, 1998, Piscataway, NJ.

Rabson AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Cancer Institute of New
Jersey, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway 08854, USA.
rabson@mbcl.rutgers.edu

As can be seen from the above descriptions, the presentations at the CABM
symposium provided an extraordinarily rich and diverse panorama of some of the
most exciting science in current molecular biology. The presentations provided
both a general overview and a detailed analysis of multiple biological systems,
which despite their specific differences, also generated insights into important 
common themes. The success of any meeting is most appropriately measured by the
kinds of questions that are provoked for future study, not merely by the
recitation of past discoveries. In fact, the different presentations often raised
highly similar questions for future study. At the most fundamental levels of
transcriptional regulation, what are the signals that provide specificity of gene
expression? What is the structural basis of specific protein-protein
interactions, such as those between homeodomain proteins and beta-catenin-Lef1
interactions, and how are these determinants altered in transcriptional
regulation in oncogenesis and in genetic diseases? How is specificity achieved in
transcriptional repression, given that the fundamental biochemical reactions
often involve modifications of relatively ubiquitous components such as histones?
To what extent do changes in specificity of gene activation and repression or in 
chromosomal architecture mediate the kinds of developmental and oncogenic signals
mediated through transcriptional regulators such as Myc, BCL6 and other basic
helix-loop-helix proteins and the HMGI proteins? How do altered signaling
pathways affect diseases of development and differentiation such as
cardiovascular disorders and aging itself? What are the pathways that integrate
extracellular signals and transcription during the process of organogenesis? How 
do fundamental cellular structures such as adhesion junctions, and the
interactions of a cell with other cells and extracellular matrix impact on normal
and abnormal development and on malignancy, and how do these levels of structure 
and function alter nuclear regulation of transcription and cell division? These
are some of the recurrent questions raised in talk after talk at this symposium, 
questions that undoubtedly will provide the impetus for important discoveries
that will be presented at future CABM symposia.

PMID: 10456033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jul;13(7):1155-68.

The nuclear receptor corepressor N-CoR regulates differentiation: N-CoR directly 
interacts with MyoD.

Bailey P(1), Downes M, Lau P, Harris J, Chen SL, Hamamori Y, Sartorelli V, Muscat
GE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Ritchie
Research Laboratories, Brisbane, Australia.

Classical ligand-activated nuclear receptors (e.g. thyroid hormone receptor,
retinoic acid receptor), orphan nuclear receptors (e.g. Rev-erbAalpha/beta),
Mad/Max bHLH (basic helix loop helix)-LZ proteins, and oncoproteins, PLZF and
LAZ3/BCL6, bind DNA and silence transcription by recruiting a repressor complex
that contains N-CoR (nuclear receptor corepressor)/SMRT (silencing mediator of
retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor), Sin3A/B, and HDAc-1/-2 proteins. The
function of the corepressor, N-CoR, in the process of cellular differentiation
and coupled phenotypic acquisition, has not been investigated. We examined the
functional role of N-CoR in myogenesis (muscle differentiation), an ideal
paradigm for the analysis of the determinative events that govern the cell's
decision to divide or differentiate. We observed that the mRNA encoding N-CoR was
suppressed as proliferating myoblasts exited the cell cycle, and formed
morphologically and biochemically differentiated myotubes. Exogenous expression
of N-CoR (but not RIP13) in myogenic cells ablated 1) myogenic differentiation,
2) the expression of the myoD gene family that encode the myogenic specific bHLH 
proteins, and 3) the crucial cell cycle regulator, p21Waf-1/Cip-1 mRNA.
Furthermore, N-CoR expression efficiently inhibits the myoD-mediated myogenic
conversion of pluripotential C3H10T1/2 cells. We demonstrate that MyoD-mediated
transactivation and activity are repressed by N-CoR. The mechanism involves
direct interactions between MyoD and N-CoR; moreover, the interaction was
dependent on the amino-terminal repression domain (RD1) of N-CoR and the bHLH
region of MyoD. Trichostatin A treatment significantly stimulated the activity of
MyoD by approximately 10-fold and inhibited the ability of N-CoR to repress
MyoD-mediated transactivation, consistent with the involvement of the corepressor
and the recruitment of a histone deacteylase activity in the process. This work
demonstrates that the corepressor N-CoR is a key regulator of MyoD activity and
mammalian differentiation, and that N-CoR has a multifaceted role in myogenesis.

PMID: 10406466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Blood. 1999 Jun 15;93(12):4365-74.

Increased number of chromosomal imbalances and high-level DNA amplifications in
mantle cell lymphoma are associated with blastoid variants.

Beà S(1), Ribas M, Hernández JM, Bosch F, Pinyol M, Hernández L, García JL,
Flores T, González M, López-Guillermo A, Piris MA, Cardesa A, Montserrat E, Miró 
R, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Anatomic Pathology, Department of
Hematology, Hospital Clínic, Villarroel, 170, 08036-Barcelona, Spain.

Mantle cell lymphomas (MCLs) are characterized by 11q13 chromosomal
translocations and cyclin D1 overexpression. The secondary genetic and molecular 
events involved in the progression of these tumors are not well known. In this
study, we have analyzed 45 MCLs (32 typical and 13 blastoid variants) by
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). To identify the possible genes included 
in the abnormal chromosome regions, selected cases were analyzed for P53,
P16(INK4a), RB, C-MYC, N-MYC, BCL2, BCL6, CDK4, and BMI-1 gene alterations. The
most frequent imbalances detected by CGH were gains of chromosomes 3q (49%), 7p
(27%), 8q (22%), 12q (20%), 18q (18%), and 9q34 (16%) and losses of chromosomes
13 (44%), 6q (27%), 1p (24%), 11q14-q23 (22%), 10p14-p15 (18%), 17p (16%), and 9p
(16%). High-level DNA amplifications were identified in 11 different regions of
the genome, predominantly in 3q27-q29 (13%), 18q23 (9%), and Xq28 (7%). The CGH
analysis allowed the identification of regional consensus areas in most of the
frequently involved chromosomes. Chromosome gains (P =. 02) and losses (P =.01)
and DNA amplifications (P =.015) were significantly higher in blastoid variants. 
The significant differences between blastoid and typical tumors were gains of 3q,
7p, and 12q, and losses of 17p. CGH losses of 17p correlated with P53 gene
deletions and mutations. Similarly, gains of 12q and high-level DNA
amplifications of 10p12-p13 were associated with CDK4 and BMI-1 gene
amplifications, respectively. One of 2 cases with 8q24 amplification showed C-MYC
amplification by Southern blot. Alterations in 2p, 3q, 13, and 18q were not
associated with N-MYC, BCL6, RB, or BCL2 alterations, respectively, suggesting
that other genes may be the targets of these genetic abnormalities in MCLs.
Increased number of gains (0 v 1-4 v >4 gains per case) (P =.002), gains of 3q (P
=.02), gains of 12q (P =.03), and losses of 9p (P =. 003) were significantly
associated with a shorter survival of the patients. These results indicate that
an increased number of chromosome imbalances are associated with blastoid
variants of MCLs and may have prognostic significance.

PMID: 10361135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Jun;111(2):157-60.

Four cases of follicular lymphoma with t(14;18)(q32;q21) and t(3;4)(q27;p13) with
LAZ3 (BCL6) rearrangement.

Daudignon A(1), Bisiau H, Le Baron F, Laï JL, Wetterwald M, Galiègue-Zouitina S, 
Morel P, Duthilleul P.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Hématologie-Immunologie-Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier de
Valenciennes, France.

We report four cases of follicular lymphoma with both t(14;18)(q32;q21) and the
newly characterized t(3;4)(q27;p13). Molecular investigation confirmed LAZ3
(BCL6) rearrangement for all patients. The 3q27 aberrations have been rarely
described in low-grade lymphomas and may represent secondary events whose
implication remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 10347555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Br J Haematol. 1999 Apr;105(1):274-7.

Analysis of internal deletions within the BCL6 gene in B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.

Nakamura Y(1), Saito K, Furusawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Dokkyo University School of Medicine,
Tochigi, Japan.

The BCL6 gene is frequently altered by chromosomal translocations and/or point
mutations at its 5' non-coding portion in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (B-NHL). 
We analysed submicroscopic structural alterations of the BCL6 gene which had
arisen from internal deletion in four cases with B-NHL and found that these
deletions overlapped at the 280 bp region in the first intron. In electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, nuclear extracts prepared from various cell lines were
shown to bind to a fragment from this commonly deleted region. Our results
suggest that deregulation of BCL6 expression would be caused by loss of this
putative protein-binding sequence in some B-NHL cases.

PMID: 10233393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Hum Pathol. 1999 Apr;30(4):403-11.

Bcl-6 expression in reactive follicular hyperplasia, follicular lymphoma, and
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma with hyperplastic germinal centers:
heterogeneity of intrafollicular T-cells and their altered distribution in the
pathogenesis of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma.

Ree HJ(1), Kadin ME, Kikuchi M, Ko YH, Suzumiya J, Go JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The Bcl-6 gene product, a nuclear phosphoprotein, is expressed
independently of Bcl-6 gene rearrangement. In lymph nodes, expression of Bcl-6
protein is restricted to germinal center (GC) B-cells and 10% to 15% of CD3/CD4+ 
intrafollicular T cells. Interfollicular cells are negative for Bcl-6 protein,
except for rare CD3+/CD4+ T cells. Recently, we reported cases of
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) with hyperplastic GCs (AITL/GC), and
observed that borders of enlarged GCs were ill defined, with features suggestive 
of an outward migration of GC cells to surrounding interfollicular zones. This
prompted a study of follicular borders with Bcl-6 staining in reactive follicular
hyperplasias and follicular lymphomas to compare with AITL/GC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin sections were used for
immunostaining of Bcl-6. Six cases of AITL/GC, 12 nonspecific reactive follicular
hyperplasia (FH), 7 HIV adenopathy, 10 follicular lymphoma (FL), and 8 typical
AITL (ie, AITL without GC) were studied. Double staining for Bcl-6/CD20,
Bcl-6/CD3, and Bcl-6/CD57 was performed in selected cases.
RESULTS: In FH and HIV adenopathy, staining for Bcl-6 revealed densely populated 
GCs with well-defined and regular GC borders, whereas Bcl-6+ cells were rare in
the interfollicular areas. An occasional GC with an ill-defined border was
invariably surrounded by a broad mantle zone; those with indistinct mantle zones 
had well-defined, regular borders. In FL, follicles were densely populated, and
their borders were irregular, with some Bcl-6+ cells in the interfollicular
zones. In AITL/GC, GCs were less dense, GC borders were ill defined and
irregular, and the number of interfollicular Bcl-6+ cells was markedly increased.
Double staining revealed that these interfollicular Bcl-6+ cells in AITL/GC were 
Bcl6+/CD3+/CD20-/CD57- T cells. Moreover, CD3+ intrafollicular T cells were
depleted in AITL/GC, whereas they were abundant in FH. Intrafollicular CD57+
cells did not stain for Bcl-6, and were also depleted in AITL/GC. In typical
AITL, some neoplastic cells were positive for Bcl-6, showing variable degrees of 
staining.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) GCs of AITL/GC differed from those of other reactive follicular 
hyperplasias and follicular lymphomas, and staining for Bcl-6 was useful to
discern them. (2) Intrafollicular CD3+ T cells, many of which were also positive 
for Bcl-6, were markedly depleted in AITL/GC, with increased interfollicular
Bcl-6+/CD3+ cells, suggesting an outward migration of intrafollicular T cells in 
this condition. (3) Interfollicular Bcl-6+/CD3+ cells in AITL/GC were too
numerous to be accounted for by migration alone, suggesting local proliferation. 
(4) Intrafollicular CD57+ cells were negative for Bcl-6, indicating heterogeneity
of the intrafollicular T-cell population. (5) Some neoplastic cells in AITL
stained for Bcl-6, suggesting up-regulation of Bcl-6 expression in this tumor.

PMID: 10208461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Blood. 1999 Apr 1;93(7):2167-72.

Nonimmunoglobulin gene hypermutation in germinal center B cells.

Peng HZ(1), Du MQ, Koulis A, Aiello A, Dogan A, Pan LX, Isaacson PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, University College London Medical School,
London, UK.

Somatic hypermutation is the most critical mechanism underlying the
diversification of Ig genes. Although mutation occurs specifically in B cells
during the germinal center reaction, it remains a matter of debate whether the
mutation machinery also targets non-Ig genes. We have studied mutations in the 5'
noncoding region of the Bcl6 gene in different subtypes of lymphomas. We found
frequent hypermutation in follicular lymphoma (25 of 59 = 42%) (germinal center
cell origin) and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma (19 of 45 =
42%) (postgerminal center), but only occasionally in mantle cell lymphoma (1 of
21 = 4.8%) (pregerminal center). Most mutations were outside the motifs
potentially important for transcription, suggesting they were not important in
lymphomagenesis but may, like Ig mutation, represent an inherent feature of the
lymphoma precursor cells. Therefore, we investigated their normal cell
counterparts microdissected from a reactive tonsil. Bcl6 mutation was found in 13
of 24 (54%) clones from the germinal centre but only in 1 of 24 (4%) clones from 
the naive B cells of the mantle zone. The frequency, distribution, and nature of 
these mutations were similar to those resulting from the Ig hypermutation
process. The results show unequivocal evidence of non-Ig gene hypermutation in
germinal center B cells and provide fresh insights into the process of
hypermutation and lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 10090923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Differentiation. 1998 Nov;64(1):33-44.

Increased expression of the LAZ3 (BCL6) proto-oncogene accompanies murine
skeletal myogenesis.

Albagli-Curiel O(1), Dhordain P, Lantoine D, Auradé F, Quief S, Kerckaert JP,
Montarras D, Pinset C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U124, Onco-Hématologie Moléculaire, Lille, France.

The structural alterations of the LAZ3 (BCL6) gene are one of the most frequent
events found in non-Hodgkin lymphoma. LAZ3 encodes a transcriptional repressor
with a POZ/zinc finger structure similar to several Drosophila development
regulators and to the human promyelocytic leukemia-associated PLZF gene.
Consistent with the origin of LAZ3-associated malignancies, LAZ3 is expressed in 
mature B-cells and required for germinal center formation. However, its
ubiquitous expression, with predominant levels in skeletal muscle, suggests that 
it may act outside the lymphoid system. To study how LAZ3 could be involved in
skeletal muscle differentiation, we examined its expression in the C2 muscle
cells. We report here that LAZ3 is upregulated at both mRNA and protein levels
during the differentiation of proliferating C2 myoblasts into post-mitotic
myotubes. This rise in LAZ3 expression is both precocious and sustained, and is
not reversed when myotubes are re-exposed to mitogen-rich medium, suggesting that
irreversible evens occurring upon myogenic terminal differentiation contribute to
lock LAZ3 upregulation. In addition, using two different models, we found that a 
"simple" growth-arrest upon serum starvation is not sufficient to induce LAZ3
upregulation which rather appears as a feature of myogenic commitment and/or
differentiation. Finally, BrdU incorporation assays in C2 cells entering the
differentiation pathway indicate that "high" LAZ3 expression strongly correlates 
with their exit from the cell cycle. Taken as a whole, these findings suggest
that LAZ3 could play a role in muscle differentiation. Together with some results
reported in other cell types, we propose that LAZ3 may contribute to events
common to various differentiation processes, possibly the induction and
stabilization of the withdrawal from the cell cycle.

PMID: 9921651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Jan;24(1):16-23.

Genetic characterization of HHV-8/KSHV-positive primary effusion lymphoma reveals
frequent mutations of BCL6: implications for disease pathogenesis and
histogenesis.

Gaidano G(1), Capello D, Cilia AM, Gloghini A, Perin T, Quattrone S, Migliazza A,
Lo Coco F, Saglio G, Ascoli V, Carbone A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino at Novara, Italy.
giadano@med.no.unipmn.it

Human herpesvirus-8/Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-positive primary
effusion lymphoma (PEL) is a recently identified B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma
category characterized by liquid growth in the serous body cavities. Apart from
viral infection, no genetic alteration is known to be associated with PEL and no 
recurrent cytogenetic abnormality has been identified in these lymphomas. Yet the
consistent monoclonality of PEL indicates that the disease is not solely a
virus-driven proliferation. Here we report that PEL is associated with a high
frequency of mutations of BCL6 5' noncoding regions, and we identify karyotypic
abnormalities that may be recurrently involved in these lymphomas. Mutations of
BCL-6 5' noncoding regions occurred in 8/13 PEL. Mutations occurred in the
absence of BCL6 gross rearrangements were often multiple in the same patient (7/8
mutated cases), and occurred in both HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals.
Since BCL6 mutations are regarded as a genetic marker of B-cell transition
through the germinal center (GC), these data are consistent with histogenetic
derivation of PEL from GC or post-GC B-cells. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis of
seven PEL cell lines showed frequent occurrence of complete or partial trisomy 12
(7/7 cases), trisomy 7 (4/7 cases), and abnormalities of bands Iq21-25 (5/7
cases).

PMID: 9892104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Clin Genet. 1998 Oct;54(4):362-4.

Variants of B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and marked atopy.

Adra CN, Gao PS, Mao XQ, Baron BW, Pauker S, Miki T, Shirakawa T, Hopkin JM.

PMID: 9831352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):328-36.

Deregulation of BCL6 in non-Hodgkin lymphoma by insertion of IGH sequences in
complex translocations involving band 3q27.

Chaganti SR(1), Rao PH, Chen W, Dyomin V, Jhanwar SC, Parsa NZ, Dalla-Favera R,
Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Chromosomal band 3q27 frequently engages in translocations with a number of sites
within the genome, including those containing IG and other genes, during the
development of B-cell lymphoma. The BCL6 gene, mapped at 3q27, is deregulated in 
these translocations and was isolated from a t(3;14)(q27;q32) translocation. It
encodes a zinc-finger transcription repressor protein, which is expressed mainly 
in the germinal center (GC) B cells and plays a key role in GC development and
T-cell-dependent immune response. BCL6 deregulation in 3q27 translocations is
brought about by substitution of its 5' regulatory sequences by promoters of the 
rearranging genes. BCL6-rearranging genes studied so far (IGH, IGLL, TTF, BOBI,
H4) displayed a broader pattern of expression than BCL6 during B-cell
development. This observation has led to the suggestion that continued expression
of BCL6 beyond its developmentally regulated point of downregulation under the
direction of substituted promoters may keep the GC B cell in a cycling mode and
lead to clonal expansion and lymphoma development. However, the rearranging
partners of BCL6 in several of the 3q27 translocations have not yet been
identified. In a molecular cloning analysis of two such translocations,
t(1;3)(q21;q27) and t(3;6)(q27;p25), and an immunoblastic lymphoma cell line,
OSI-LY8, we identified a novel mechanism of BCL6 deregulation. This comprised
replacement of BCL6 5' regulatory sequences by insertion of IG gene
transcriptional regulatory sequences at the translocation junction. These studies
demonstrate novel features of instability of 3q27, and of the BCL6 and IGH genes,
in B-cell lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 9824206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1998 Dec;23(4):323-7.

Involvement of BCL6 in chromosomal aberrations affecting band 3q27 in B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Chaganti SR(1), Chen W, Parsa N, Offit K, Louie DC, Dalla-Favera R, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Chromosomal band 3q27 exhibits recurring and nonrecurring translocations and
other rearrangements in approximately 8% of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL)
belonging to low-grade as well as diffuse aggressive histologies. The BCL6 gene, 
which encodes a zinc-finger transcription repressor protein and which maps to
chromosomal band 3q27, is deregulated in t(3;14)(q27;q32) and other
translocations by substitution of its transcription regulatory sequences by those
of genes on the partner chromosomes. To delineate the cytogenetics and
investigate the nature and consequence of BCL6 involvement in the spectrum of
3q27 aberrations seen in NHL, we analyzed a panel of 53 NHL tumors with 3q27
aberrations for BCL6 gene rearrangements and a subset of 32 of these for
mutations. We identified four new recurring translocations involving 3q27, in
addition to the previously recognized t(3;14)(q27;q32) and its variant,
t(3;22)(q27;q11). Histologically, the 3q27 breaks were represented by 4% mantle
cell lymphomas, 38% follicular center cell lymphomas, and 58% diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas. Approximately 50% of the tumors exhibited BCL6 rearrangements, 
whereas 87.5% showed mutations in the 5' noncoding region which contains the
transcription regulatory sequences. These results demonstrate that a substantial 
proportion of cytogenetically detected 3q27 breaks in NHLs do not represent
BCL6-associated translocations. They also suggest alternate breakpoints which may
lead to BCL6 deregulation, or involvement of other genes in 3q27 translocations. 
The frequent BCL6 mutation in these tumors is consistent with our previous
observation of hypermutation of the 5' noncoding region of the gene in lymphomas 
arising in the germinal-center B-cells.

PMID: 9824205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 1;17(13):1717-22.

The t(2;3)(q21;q27) translocation in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma displays BCL6
mutations in the 5' regulatory region and chromosomal breakpoints distant from
the gene.

Chen W(1), Butler M, Rao PH, Chaganti SR, Louie DC, Dalla-Favera R, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

The BCL6 gene, mapped at the chromosomal band 3q27, encodes a POZ/Zinc finger
transcription repressor protein. It is frequently activated in Non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas (NHL) by translocations with breakpoints clustering in the 5' major
breakpoint region (MBR) as well as by mutations in the same region. The
translocations lead to BCL6 activation by substitution of promoters of
rearranging genes derived from the reciprocal chromosomal partners such as IG. We
report the molecular genetic analysis of a novel t(2;3)(q21;q27) translocation
subset in NHL comprising three cases without apparent BCL6 involvement in the
translocation. Southern blot analysis of tumor DNAs utilizing BCL6 MBR probes
revealed no rearrangement in two cases. Two rearranged bands in the third case
resulted from a deletion in one allele and a mutation in the other allele.
Southern blot analysis of DNA from one of the two tumors without BCL6
rearrangement, using a probe derived from the recently identified alternative
breakpoint region (ABR), showed a rearrangement. The ABR is located 200-270 kb
telomeric to MBR. Mutations were identified in the previously reported
hypermutable region of BCL6 in all three tumors. In one, the mutant allele alone 
was found to be expressed by RT-PCR analysis of RNA. These results demonstrate
the presence of 3q27 translocation breakpoints at a distance from BCL6 suggesting
distant breaks that deregulate the gene or involvement of other genes that may be
subject to rearrangement.

PMID: 9796700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 1998 Nov 1;92(9):3152-62.

Clinical relevance of BCL2, BCL6, and MYC rearrangements in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma.

Kramer MH(1), Hermans J, Wijburg E, Philippo K, Geelen E, van Krieken JH, de Jong
D, Maartense E, Schuuring E, Kluin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLCL) is characterized by a marked degree of
morphologic and clinical heterogeneity. We studied 156 patients with de novo DLCL
for rearrangements of the BCL2, BCL6, and MYC oncogenes by Southern blot analysis
and BCL2 protein expression. We related these data to the primary site of
presentation, disease stage, and other clinical risk factors. Structural
alterations of BCL2, BCL6, and MYC were detected in 25 of 156, 36 of 116, and 10 
of 151 patients, respectively. Three cases showed a combination of BCL2 and BCL6 
rearrangements, and two cases had a combination of BCL6 and MYC rearrangements.
BCL2 rearrangement was found more often in extensive (39%) and primary nodal
(17%) lymphomas than in extranodal cases (4%) (P = .003). BCL2 rearrangement was 
present in none of 40 patients with stage I disease, but in 22% of patients with 
stage II to IV (P = .006). The presence of BCL2 rearrangements did not
significantly affect overall survival (OS) or disease-free survival (DFS). In
contrast, high BCL2 protein expression adversely affected both OS (P = .008) and 
DFS (P = .01). BCL2 protein expression was poorly correlated with BCL2
rearrangement: only 52% of BCL2-rearranged lymphomas and 37% of BCL2-unrearranged
cases had high BCL2 protein expression. Rearrangement of BCL6 was found more
often in patients with extranodal (36%) and extensive (39%) presentation versus
primary nodal disease (28%). No significant correlation was found with disease
stage, lymphadenopathy, or bone marrow involvement. DFS and OS were not
influenced by BCL6 rearrangements. MYC rearrangements were found in 16% of
primary extranodal lymphomas, versus 2% of primary nodal cases (P = .02). In
particular, gastrointestinal (GI) lymphomas (5 of 18 cases, 28%) were affected by
MYC rearrangements. The distinct biologic behavior of these extranodal lymphomas 
was reflected by a high complete remission (CR) rate: 7 of 10 patients with MYC
rearrangement attained complete remission and 6 responders remained alive for
more than 4 years, resulting in a trend for better DFS (P = .07). These data show
the complex nature of molecular events in DLCL, which is a reflection of the
morphologic and clinical heterogeneity of these lymphomas. However, thus far,
these genetic rearrangements fail as prognostic markers.

Copyright 1998 by The American Society of Hematology

PMID: 9787151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Oct 15;26(20):4645-51.

The LAZ3(BCL-6) oncoprotein recruits a SMRT/mSIN3A/histone deacetylase containing
complex to mediate transcriptional repression.

Dhordain P(1), Lin RJ, Quief S, Lantoine D, Kerckaert JP, Evans RM, Albagli O.

Author information: 
(1)U124 INSERM/IRCL, Place de Verdun, F-59045 Lille cedex, France and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA. dhordain@infobiogen.fr

Recent works demonstrated that some transcriptional repressors recruit histone
deacetylases (HDACs) either through direct interaction, or as a member of a
multisubunit repressing complex containing other components referred to as
corepressors. For instance, the bHLH-Zip transcriptional repressors MAD/MXI
recruit HDACs together with the mSIN3 corepressors, whereas unliganded nuclear
receptors contact another corepressor, SMRT (or its relative N-CoR), which, in
turn, associates with both mSIN3 and HDACs to form the repressor complex.
Recently, we reported that SMRT also directly associates with LAZ3(BCL-6), a
POZ/Zn finger transcriptional repressor involvedin the pathogenesis of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. However, whether LAZ3 recruits the HDACs-containing
repression complex is currently unknown. We report here that LAZ3 associates with
corepressor mSIN3A both in vivo and in vitro , and found that a central region,
which harbours autonomous repression activity, is mainly responsible for this
interaction. Conversely, the N-terminal half of mSIN3A is both necessary and
sufficient to bind LAZ3. Moreover, we show that LAZ3 also interacts with an HDAC 
(HDAC-1) through its POZ domain in vitro while the immunoprecipitation of LAZ3
results in the coretention of an endogenous HDAC activity in vivo . Finally,
inhibitors of HDACs significantly reduce the LAZ3-mediated repression. Taken
together, we conclude that LAZ3 recruits a repressing complex containing SMRT,
mSIN3A and a HDAC, and that its full repressing potential on transcription
requires HDACs activity. Our results identify HDACs as molecular targets of LAZ3 
oncogene and further strengthen the connection between aberrant chromatin
acetylation and human cancers.

PMCID: PMC147883
PMID: 9753732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 27;17(8):971-9.

Molecular features of a new human lymphoma cell line carrying both BCL2 and BCL6 
gene rearrangements.

Yonetani N(1), Akasaka T, Akasaka H, Ohno H, Okuma M, Miura I, Takahashi N,
Miyanishi S, Okumura A, Muramatsu M, Fukuhara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations and/or their molecular equivalents involving the BCL6 
gene on 3q27 band have been suggested to be involved in the development of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of B-cell type (B-NHL). The rearrangement of BCL6
sometimes coexists with other translocations specific to B-NHL. Here, we report a
novel B-cell lymphoma cell line, YM, established from a patient with diffuse
large cell lymphoma. The YM cells expressed B-cell-associated antigens in
addition to mu delta/kappa monoclonal immunoglobulin. Southern blot analysis of
DNA from YM cells demonstrated rearrangement of the BCL2 gene within the 5'
flanking region (5'-BCL2). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primer pairs for
the BCL2 exons 1 and 2, and for the constant region of the immunoglobulin kappa
light chain gene (IGkappa) revealed PCR products encompassing the 5'-BCL2/IGkappa
fusion, indicating that the YM cells had a t(2;18)(p11;q21) translocation. The
BCL6 gene was rearranged at a point within the first intron, and cloning of the
rearranged BCL6 revealed unidentified sequences juxtaposed to the 5' side of the 
gene. The isolated clones were mapped to 16p11.2 by high resolution fluorescence 
in situ chromosomal hybridization. Thus, the YM cells carried a 3q27
translocation involving 16p11.2 as a partner. Chromosome painting of metaphase
spreads confirmed that the YM cells had both t(2;18) and t(3;16). Northern blot
analysis using a fragment immediately adjacent to the breakpoint on 16p11.2
revealed transcriptional activity within this locus. The YM cells expressed
abundant transcripts with aberrant sizes from BCL2 and BCL6, indicating
deregulated overexpression of the two genes resulting from the t(2;18) and
t(3;16). The YM cell line will therefore be useful to study whether BCL2 and BCL6
genes collaborate in the pathogenesis of B-NHL.

PMID: 9747876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Leukemia. 1998 Jul;12(7):1163-5.

BCL6 rearrangement and mediastinal involvement in a case of B cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Rubnitz JE, Abushullaih B, Kaste SC, Raimondi SC, Sandlund JT, Pui CH, Behm FG.

PMID: 9665205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 18;247(2):357-60.

Expression of the BCL6 gene in the pre- and postnatal mouse.

Bajalica-Lagercrantz S(1), Piehl F, Farnebo F, Larsson C, Lagercrantz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, CMM L8:01, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Human BCL6, also called LAZ3, is a protein involved in gene regulation and
abnormal expression of BCL6 and has been implicated in the tumorigenesis of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. We have analyzed the expression of murin bcl6 in pre- and
postnatal mouse using in situ hybridization histochemistry and Northern blotting.
The developing olfactory epithelium in the nasal cavity was the only tissue
displaying a positive bcl6 mRNA signal in the day 14 embryo. At gestational day
17, expression was primarily seen in skeletal muscle, olfactory epithelium, and
thymus, and also in the epithelium lining the upper airways and esophagus. In
selected tissues from postnatal mouse, bcl6 expression was detected in brain,
renal cortex, spleen, and thymus. The expression in brain was restricted to the
pyramidal cell layer of the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus regions CA1 and
CA2, and the dentate gyrus. Our results show that bcl6 expression is not confined
only to organs of the lymphatic system, such as spleen and thymus. Thus, bcl6 may
be active as a regulator of gene transcription in many different cell types,
including epithelial and nerve cells.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9642131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4235-44.

BAZF, a novel Bcl6 homolog, functions as a transcriptional repressor.

Okabe S(1), Fukuda T, Ishibashi K, Kojima S, Okada S, Hatano M, Ebara M, Saisho
H, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Center for Biomedical Science, Chiba
University School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The BCL6 gene, which has been identified from the chromosomal translocation
breakpoint in B-cell lymphomas, functions as a sequence-specific transcriptional 
repressor. We cloned a novel Bcl6-homologous gene, BAZF (encoding Bcl6-associated
zinc finger protein). The predicted amino acid sequence of BAZF indicated that
the BTB/POZ domain and the five repeats of the Krüppel-like zinc finger motif are
located in the NH2-terminal region and the COOH-terminal region, respectively.
BAZF associated with Bcl6 at the BTB/POZ domain and localized in the nucleus.
Since zinc finger motifs of BAZF were 94% identical to those of Bcl6 at the amino
acid level, BAZF bound specifically to the DNA-binding sequence of Bcl6 and
functioned as a transcriptional repressor. The repressor activity was associated 
with both the BTB/POZ domain and the middle portion of BAZF. The 17-amino-acid
sequence in the middle portion was completely conserved between BAZF and Bcl6,
and the conserved region was critical for the repressor activity. Expression of
BAZF mRNA, like that of Bcl6 mRNA, was induced in activated lymphocytes as an
immediate-early gene. Therefore, the biochemical character of BAZF is similar to 
that of Bcl6 although the tissue expression pattern of BAZF differs from that of 
Bcl6. This is apparently the first report of a gene family whose members encode
zinc finger proteins with the BTB/POZ domain.

PMCID: PMC109007
PMID: 9632807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Oncogene. 1998 May 14;16(19):2549-56.

Histone deacetylase associated with mSin3A mediates repression by the acute
promyelocytic leukemia-associated PLZF protein.

David G(1), Alland L, Hong SH, Wong CW, DePinho RA, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U163, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

The PLZF gene was identified first by its fusion with the retinoic acid receptor 
alpha gene in the t(11;17) translocation associated with a retinoic acid
resistant form of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). It encodes a krüppel-like
zinc finger protein with a POZ domain shared with a subset of regulatory proteins
including the BCL6 leukemogenic protein. PLZF, like BCL6, strongly represses
transcription initiated from different promoters. Here we show that PLZF
associates in vitro and in vivo with the Mad co-repressor mSin3A and the histone 
deacetylase HDAC1. Two domains in PLZF and the PAH1 structure of mSin3A mediate
these interactions. Trichostatin A, a specific inhibitor of histone deacetylases,
significantly reduces PLZF repression. These data strongly suggest that, like
nuclear receptors and Mad, PLZF represses transcription by recruiting a histone
deacetylase through the SMRT-mSin3-HDAC co-repressor complex. We also show that
BCL6 associates with HDAC1 indicating that this type of regulation might be
common to POZ/Zinc finger proteins involved in human leukemias. This work
supports a role for deregulated histone deacetylation in the development of both 
lymphoid and myeloid neoplasia in human and suggests that targeted histone
deacetylase inhibitors may be useful for treatment of certain types of
malignancies.

PMID: 9627120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Intern Med. 1998 Mar;37(3):311-5.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma involving bilateral breasts.

Kitawaki T(1), Yonetani N, Akasaka H, Akasaka T, Ohno H, Okuma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University.

Comment in
    Intern Med. 1998 Mar;37(3):233-4.

We describe here two cases of diffuse large cell type non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
affecting the bilateral breasts. The contralateral tumor in one case appeared 17 
months after the first mastectomy, whereas the bilateral tumors occurred
concurrently in the other patient who was pregnant and showed widespread
dissemination at initial presentation. Lymphoma cells from both cases showed the 
mature B-cell immunophenotype and had rearrangements of the BCL6 gene. Both
patients developed progressive disease despite chemo-radiotherapy and died of
leukemic manifestations. There were no apparent pathological features of
lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue origin.

PMID: 9617870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 15;26(12):2899-907.

The corepressor N-CoR and its variants RIP13a and RIP13Delta1 directly interact
with the basal transcription factors TFIIB, TAFII32 and TAFII70.

Muscat GE(1), Burke LJ, Downes M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Ritchie
Research Laboratories, B402A, St Lucia 4072, Queensland, Australia.
g.guscat@cmcb.uq.edu.au

Repression of transcription by the classical nuclear receptors (e.g. TR, RAR),
the orphan nuclear receptors (e.g. Rev-erbAalpha/beta), Mxi-1 and Mad bHLH-zip
proteins and the oncoproteins PLZF and LAZ3/BCL6 is mediated by the corepressors 
N-CoR and SMRT. The interaction of the corepressors with the components involved 
in chromatin remodelling, such as the recruiting proteins Sin3A/B and the histone
deacteylases HDAc-1 and RPD3, has been analysed in detail. The N-CoR/Sin3/HDAc
complexes have a key role in the regulation of cellular proliferation and
differentiation. However, the interaction of these corepressors with the basal
transcriptional machinery has remained obscure. In this study we demonstrated
that the N-terminalrepression domains and the receptor interactiondomains (RID)
of N-CoR and its splice variants, RIP13a and RIP13Delta1, directly interact with 
TAFII32 in vivo and in vitro . We show that interaction domain II within the
N-CoR and RIP13a RID is required for the interaction with TAFII32. We also
observed that N-CoR directly interacts with each of the basal factors, TFIIB and 
TAFII70, and can simultaneously interact with all three basal factors in a
non-competitive manner. Furthermore, we provide evidence that suggests the
RVR/Rev-erbbeta-corepressor complex also interacts with the general
transcriptional machinery, and that the physicalassociation of TFIIB with N-CoR
also occurs in the presence of Sin3B and HDAc-1. Interestingly, we observed that 
N-CoR expression ablated the functional interaction between TFIIB and TAFII32
that is critical to the initiation of transcription. In conclusion, this study
demonstrates that the N-terminal repressor region and the C-terminal RIDs are
part of the corepressor contact interface that mediates the interaction with the 
general transcription factors, and demonstrates that TAFs can also directly
interact with corepressors to mediate signals from repressors to the basal
machinery. We also suggest that N-CoR interacts with the central components of
the transcriptional initiation process (TFIIB, TAFs) and locks them into a
non-functional complex or conformation that is not conducive to transcription.

PMCID: PMC147645
PMID: 9611234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Immunol Rev. 1998 Apr;162:153-60.

Cis-acting sequences that affect somatic hypermutation of Ig genes.

Storb U(1), Peters A, Klotz E, Kim N, Shen HM, Hackett J, Rogerson B, Martin TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago
60637, Illinois, USA. stor@midway.uchicago.edu

We review our studies on the mechanism of somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin
genes. Most experiments were carried out using Ig transgenes. We showed in these 
experiments that all required cis-acting elements are present within the 10-16 kb
of a transgene. Only the Ig variable region and its proximate flanks are mutated,
not the constant region. Several Ig gene enhancers are permissive for somatic
mutation. Association of the enhancer with its natural Ig promoter is not
necessary. However, the mutation process seems specific for Ig genes. No
mutations were found in housekeeping genes from cells with high levels of somatic
hypermutation of their Ig genes. The Ig enhancers may provide the Ig gene
specificity. An exception may be the BCL6 gene, which was mutated in human but
not in mouse B cells. Transcription of a region is required for its mutability.
When the transcriptional promoter located upstream of the variable region is
duplicated upstream of the constant region, this region also becomes mutable.
This suggests a model in which a mutator factor associates with the RNA
polymerase at the promoter, travels with the polymerase during elongation, and
causes mutations during polymerase pausing. The DNA repair systems, nucleotide
excision repair and DNA mismatch repair, are not required. Our recent data with
an artificial substrate of somatic mutation suggest that pausing may be due to
secondary structure of the DNA or nascent RNA, and the specific mutations to
preferences of the mutator factor.

PMID: 9602361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Immunol Rev. 1998 Apr;162:107-16.

Monitoring and interpreting the intrinsic features of somatic hypermutation.

Neuberger MS(1), Ehrenstein MR, Klix N, Jolly CJ, Yélamos J, Rada C, Milstein C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.
msn@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

We have used both normal and transgenic mice to analyse the recruitment and
targeting of somatic hypermutation to the immunoglobulin loci. We compare methods
for analysing hypermutation and discuss how large databases of mutations can be
assembled by PCR amplification of the rearranged V-gene flanks from the germinal 
centre B cells of normal mice as well as by transgene-specific amplification from
transgenic B cells. Such studies confirm that hypermutation is preferentially
targeted to the immunoglobulin V gene with the bcl6 gene, for example, escaping
this intense mutational targeting in germinal centre B cells. We review our data 
concerning the nature of the hypermutation domain and the targeting of hotspots
within that domain. We consider how enhancer-mediated recruitment of
hypermutation to the immunoglobulin loci operates in a clonally maintained
fashion and illustrate how both the degree of expression and demethylation of the
transgene broadly correlate with its mutability.

PMID: 9602357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Br J Haematol. 1998 Mar;100(3):484-9.

Detection of chimaeric transcripts of the immunoglobulin heavy chain and BCL6
genes by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in B-cell non-Hodgkin's 
lymphomas.

Kawamata N(1), Nakamura Y, Miki T, Sato E, Isobe Y, Furusawa S, Hirosawa S,
Oshimi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Juntendo University, School of Medicne, Tokyo, Japan.

T(3;14)(q27;q32) is frequently detected in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas,
especially the diffuse large cell type and the follicular type. The BCL6 gene
encoding a putative transcriptional factor which resides on 3q27 rearranges to
the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene on 14q32 in this chromosomal
translocation. The upstream regulatory region of the BCL6 gene is replaced by the
IgH gene. Deregulation of the BCL6 gene may contribute to tumourigenesis of these
diseases. The rearrangement between the IgH and BCL6 genes generates chimaeric
transcripts in which the joining (J) region of the IgH gene fuses to exon 3 of
the BCL6 gene. We established a method to detect these chimaeric transcripts by
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using the consensus
sequence of the J region and the sequence of exon 3 of the BCL6 gene as primers. 
Using the semi-nested RT-PCR method and a cell line carrying t(3;14)(q27;q32), we
detected one lymphoma cell among 10,000 background cells. We detected these
chimaeric transcripts in two out of 13 clinical samples by this method. This
method can detect t(3;14)(q27;q32) easily, whereas this alteration is frequently 
overlooked by routine karyotype analysis. Since this technique is sensitive
enough to detect a small number of lymphoma cells with this genetic abnormality, 
it could be employed to detect contaminating lymphoma cells in bone marrow and
peripheral blood and minimal residual diseases.

PMID: 9504630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Hepatol. 1997 Nov;27(5):922-7.

Primary low-grade B-cell lymphoma of MALT-type occurring in the liver: a study of
two cases.

Maes M(1), Depardieu C, Dargent JL, Hermans M, Verhaeghe JL, Delabie J, Pittaluga
S, Troufléau P, Verhest A, De Wolf-Peeters C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND/METHODS: Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of the liver are rare. One
specific clinico-pathological entity has been identified as hepatosplenic
gamma/delta T-cell lymphoma. Recently, another distinct primary lymphoma of the
liver has been recognised as primary low-grade hepatic B-cell lymphoma of
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), based on a study comprising four cases.
We analysed two additional cases of this particular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, not
only by morphology and phenotyping, but also by genotyping and cytogenetic
analysis.
RESULTS: This type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is characterised by a dense lymphoid
infiltrate, localised in the portal tracts, and is associated with
lympho-epithelial lesions of the bile ducts, thereby mimicking hepatitis or an
inflammatory bile duct disorder. In one of our cases, translocation
t(3;14)(q27;q32) was identified as the sole cytogenetic abnormality. A high
incidence of trisomy 3 has been associated with marginal zone B-cell lymphomas,
and fluorescence in situ hybridisation as well as comparative genomic
hybridisation studies have shown frequent involvement of the long arm of
chromosome 3. Nevertheless, t(3;14)(q27;q32) involving BCL6 gene, located at
3q27, has not yet been found.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a role for the BCL6 gene in the histogenesis of 
this particular lymphoma.

PMID: 9382982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Blood. 1998 Jan 15;91(2):603-7.

Heterologous promoters fused to BCL6 by chromosomal translocations affecting band
3q27 cause its deregulated expression during B-cell differentiation.

Chen W(1), Iida S, Louie DC, Dalla-Favera R, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10021, USA.

The BCL6 gene encodes a POZ/Zinc-finger protein, which acts as a
sequence-specific transcriptional repressor. It is expressed in B cells within
the germinal centers (GC) and is required for GC formation. In approximately 40% 
of diffuse large cell lymphomas (DLCL) and approximately 14% of follicular
lymphomas (FL), the BCL6 gene is rearranged by chromosomal translocations, which 
juxtapose heterologous promoters and 5' untranslated sequences derived from other
chromosomes to the BCL6 coding domain or by mutations in the 5' regulatory
region. To understand the functional consequence of the chromosomal
translocations, we have studied the patterns of expression of the promoters found
juxtaposed to BCL6 in DLCL and FL during B-lineage differentiation. Distinct
heterologous 5' untranslated regions (IGH, IGL, TTF) were identified fused to the
BCL6 coding domain by analysis of BCL6 cDNAs in two DLCL cases and one mixed
follicular lymphoma (MxFL). These three sequences, as well as three other
previously identified BCL6 fusion partners (IGHG3, BOB1, H4), were studied for
their pattern of expression during B-lineage differentiation by Northern blot
analysis of B-cell lines representation by Northern blot analysis of B-cell lines
representative of the pre-B, B, immunoblast, and plasma cell stages. In contrast 
to BCL6, whose transcription is activated only in B cells within the GC, all of
the other sequences displayed a broader pattern of expression ranging from
constitutive expression throughout B-cell differentiation to persistent
expression in immunoblasts and plasma cells. These results indicate that the
expression of BCL6 is deregulated as a consequence of fusion to heterologous
promoter regions. The persistent expression of activated BCL6 may contribute to
lymphomagenesis by blocking B-cell differentiation within the GC.

PMID: 9427715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Leuk Lymphoma. 1997 Sep;27(1-2):53-63.

Significance of rearrangement of the BCL6 gene in B-cell lymphoid neoplasms.

Ohno H(1), Fukuhara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.
ohnohito-kyt@umin.u.-tokyo.ac.jp

Chromosomal translocations involving 3q27 are among the most common recurring
translocations in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) of B-cell phenotype. Molecular
cloning of junctional areas of the translocations resulted in isolation of the
BCL6 gene adjacent to the breakpoint cluster on 3q27. The gene encodes a
zinc-finger transcription factor which is expressed in nuclei of germinal center 
B-cells. Rearrangement of BCL6 was observed in 6.4 to 14.3% of follicular
lymphomas and 28.6 to 35.5% of diffuse large cell lymphomas; regarding the
latter, a Japanese series showed a lower incidence. Survival curves suggested
that NHL carrying rearrangement of BCL6 and lacking that of BCL2 is curable by
chemotherapy. Detailed analysis of the vicinity of translocations showed that the
5' untranslated region of BCL6 was replaced by heterogeneous promoters not only
from immunoglobulin genes but also from many previously uncharacterized loci.
Bcl-6 protein is expressed in NHL of follicular center B-cell origin,
independently of the presence or absence of BCL6 rearrangement. At present,
limited information is available about the functional consequences of the
rearrangements and, in particular, about their ultimate implications for
lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 9373196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Leuk Lymphoma. 1997 Oct;27(3-4):329-34.

Rearrangements of the BCL6 gene and chromosome aberrations affecting 3q27 in 54
patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Ohshima A(1), Miura I, Hashimoto K, Takahashi N, Utsumi S, Nimura T, Saito M,
Miki T, Hirosawa S, Miura AB.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Chromosome aberrations affecting 3q27 are among the most frequent non-random
abnormalities in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL), especially the diffuse, large
cell type. Recently, an association between BCL6 rearrangement and frequent
extranodal lesions, rare bone marrow infiltration and a favorable clinical
outcome was reported. We performed molecular studies of the BCL6 gene in 54
patients with NHL. Twelve patients (22%) with rearranged BCL6 genes were selected
for histological, clinical, molecular, and cytogenetic studies. Ten of these
cases were diffuse, large cell type lymphoma, one a follicular lymphoma, and one 
a mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). All cases were of the B-cell type and this is the
first time a rearranged BCL6 gene has been found in an MCL. Cytogenetic data for 
10 cases were available and the partner sites of the 3q27 translocation were
determined in 7 of 10 patients. These locations were variable, including 6p21.3, 
9p22, and 14q11 in addition to the immunoglobulin loci 14q32 (IGH), 2p12 (IGK),
and 22q11 (IGL). The heterogeneity in partner sites is distinct from other
lymphoma subgroups and may suggest that the genetic events are not uniform among 
patients with BCL6 rearrangements.

PMID: 9402330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1997 Dec;99(2):102-7.

Interphase detection of BCL6/IgH fusion gene in non-Hodgkin lymphoma by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Ueda Y(1), Nishida K, Miki T, Horiike S, Kaneko H, Yokota S, Misawa S, Abe T,
Kashima K, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Japan.

We characterized a t(3;14)(q27;q32) translocation in nine patients with B-cell,
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization with immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) and BCL6
gene probes detected t(3;14) rapidly and accurately, including complex t(3;14) in
three patients; one with t(3;12;8;14)(q27;p13;q24.1;q32) and two with
t(3;?;14)(q27;?;q32). Among these nine patients, seven escaped from cytogenetic
detection by our G-banding analysis. Double-color FISH with IgH (Y6) and BCL6
(cosB5-1) showed fusion of BCL6 and IgH genes on der(3)t(3;14) in all nine
patients, suggesting that der(3) may play a critical role in the development of
lymphoma carrying complex as well as standard t(3;14) translocations. BCL6/IgH
fusion gene was also demonstrated in interphase nuclei at a frequency of 23% to
91.5% over the cut-off value in control studies (9.0 +/- 2.76%). The breakpoints 
assessed by FISH with two cosmid clones containing BCL6 probes, cosB5-1 and
cosB5-2, were within the cluster region in seven patients including one with
complex type, but were not evaluated in two patients with t(3;?;14), because of
the loss of partner chromosome. Using double-color FISH with these two
BCL6-specific probes, none of an additional 32 patients in whom mitotic spreads
were available showed 3q27 translocations. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
with IgH and BCL6 gene probes is a rapid and sensitive method to detect t(3;14)
in routine cytogenetic studies.

PMID: 9398863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Leukemia. 1997 Nov;11(11):1993-4.

Two Burkitt-type lymphoma/leukemia-derived cell lines presenting 3q27
translocations and immunoglobulin/BCL6 chimeric transcripts.

Nakamura Y, Miki T, Kawamata N, Ohashi K, Hirosawa S, Kobayashi H, Maseki N,
Kaneko Y, Saito K, Enokihara H, Furusawa S.

PMID: 9369442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Br J Haematol. 1997 Sep;98(3):719-25.

BCL6 gene rearrangements also occur in marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.

Dierlamm J(1), Pittaluga S, Stul M, Wlodarska I, Michaux L, Thomas J, Verhoef G, 
Verhest A, Depardieu C, Cassiman JJ, Hagemeijer A, De Wolf-Peeters C, Van den
Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MZBCL) represents a distinct subtype of B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) which has been recently recognized and defined as a 
disease entity. Cytogenetically, these lymphomas reveal a high prevalence of
trisomy 3, and recent data obtained by comparative genomic hybridization indicate
that the chromosomal regions 3q21-23 and 3q25-29 might be of particular
pathogenetic significance. We identified structural chromosomal abnormalities
involving the region 3q27 and rearrangements of the BCL6 proto-oncogene in three 
out of 34 (9%) well-defined cases of extranodal, nodal and splenic MZBCL using
cytogenetic analysis. Southern blot, and fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). All three cases were characterized by a t(3;14)(q27;q32). Two of them
showed additional chromosomal abnormalities including trisomy 3, which was found 
in one case. The patients displayed extranodal disease and did not demonstrate
any striking clinical and histological differences when compared with MZBCL
lacking BCL6 rearrangement. The present study for the first time demonstrates the
occurrence of t(3;14)/BCL6 gene rearrangement in MZBCL, thus suggesting a role of
the BCL6 proto-oncogene in the pathogenesis of MZBCL.

PMID: 9332330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Sep 30;94(20):10762-7.

Corepressor SMRT binds the BTB/POZ repressing domain of the LAZ3/BCL6
oncoprotein.

Dhordain P(1), Albagli O, Lin RJ, Ansieau S, Quief S, Leutz A, Kerckaert JP,
Evans RM, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)U124 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Institut de
Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille Place de Verdun, F-59045 Lille Cedex France.
dhordain@infobiogen.fr

The LAZ3/BCL6 (lymphoma-associated zinc finger 3/B cell lymphomas 6) gene
frequently is altered in non-Hodgkin lymphomas. It encodes a sequence-specific
DNA binding transcriptional repressor that contains a conserved N-terminal
domain, termed BTB/POZ (bric-à-brac tramtrack broad complex/pox viruses and zinc 
fingers). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we show here that the LAZ3/BCL6
BTB/POZ domain interacts with the SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoid and
thyroid receptor) protein. SMRT originally was identified as a corepressor of
unliganded retinoic acid and thyroid receptors and forms a repressive complex
with a mammalian homolog of the yeast transcriptional repressor SIN3 and the
HDAC-1 histone deacetylase. Protein binding assays demonstrate that the LAZ3/BCL6
BTB/POZ domain directly interacts with SMRT in vitro. Furthermore, DNA-bound
LAZ3/BCL6 recruits SMRT in vivo, and both overexpressed proteins completely
colocalize in nuclear dots. Finally, overexpression of SMRT enhances the
LAZ3/BCL6-mediated repression. These results define SMRT as a corepressor of
LAZ3/BCL6 and suggest that LAZ3/BCL6 and nuclear hormone receptors repress
transcription through shared mechanisms involving SMRT recruitment and histone
deacetylation.

PMCID: PMC23478
PMID: 9380707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Exp Med. 1997 Aug 4;186(3):439-48.

Disruption of the Bcl6 gene results in an impaired germinal center formation.

Fukuda T(1), Yoshida T, Okada S, Hatano M, Miki T, Ishibashi K, Okabe S, Koseki
H, Hirosawa S, Taniguchi M, Miyasaka N, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Center for Biomedical Science, Chiba
University School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

The Bcl6 gene has been identified from the chromosomal translocation breakpoint
in B cell lymphomas, and its products are expressed highly in germinal center
(GC) B cells. To investigate the function of Bcl6 in lymphocytes, we have
generated RAG1-deficient mice reconstituted with bone marrow cells from
Bcl6-deficient mice (Bcl6(-/-)RM). Lymphogenesis in primary lymphoid tissues of
Bcl6(-/-)RM is normal, and Bcl6(-/-)RM produced control levels of primary IgG1
antibodies specific to T cell-dependent antigens. However, GCs were not found in 
these mice. This defect was mainly due to the abnormalities of B cells.
Therefore, Bcl6 is essential for the differentiation of GC B cells.

PMCID: PMC2199007
PMID: 9236196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genomics. 1997 Jul 1;43(1):89-94.

Genomic structure and assignment of the RhoH/TTF small GTPase gene (ARHH) to 4p13
by in situ hybridization.

Dallery-Prudhomme E(1), Roumier C, Denis C, Preudhomme C, Kerckaert JP,
Galiegue-Zouitina S.

Author information: 
(1)U. 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

The RhoH/TTF (ARHH) gene encodes a new member of the Ras superfamily of small
GTPases. The gene was identified by fusion to the BCL6/LAZ3 oncogene in an
initially described t(3;4)(q27;p11) translocation in a non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
cell line. The predicted amino acid sequence of the RhoH/TTF gene product
includes Rho-like GTPase structural motifs. The RhoH/TTF gene is restrictively
expressed in hematopoietic cells and tissues. Mutations in the human RAS genes
have been shown previously to be tumorigenic; in the search for a potential
implication of the RhoH/TTF gene in hemopoietic malignancies, we established its 
genomic structure. The RhoH/TTF gene spans 35 kb and contains two exons, with the
second bearing the entire amino-acid-coding region. Chromosomal mapping, by FISH 
experiments, places the RhoH/TTF gene on the short arm of chromosome 4, band p13.

PMID: 9226377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Ann Hematol. 1997 May;74(5):247-50.

BCL6 rearrangement in a patient with mantle cell lymphoma.

Miura I(1), Ohshima A, Chubachi A, Nimura T, Komatsuda A, Utsumi S, Saito M,
Machii T, Nakamura S, Seto M, Miura AB.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Japan.

We describe a patient with mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) associated with BCL6 gene
rearrangement. MCL is a distinct subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma characterized 
by CD5+, CD10-, CD20+, t(11;14)(q13;q32) and PRAD1/cyclin D1 overexpression.
Although rearrangement of the BCL6 gene is the most frequent genetic change among
diffuse lymphomas and some follicular lymphomas this is the first report of a
patient with MCL associated with BCL6 rearrangement.

PMID: 9200999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Leukemia. 1997 May;11(5):747-58.

Characteristic pattern of chromosomal gains and losses in marginal zone B cell
lymphoma detected by comparative genomic hybridization.

Dierlamm J(1), Rosenberg C, Stul M, Pittaluga S, Wlodarska I, Michaux L, Dehaen
M, Verhoef G, Thomas J, de Kelver W, Bakker-Schut T, Cassiman JJ, Raap AK, De
Wolf-Peeters C, Van den Berghe H, Hagemeijer A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Flanders Institute of Biotechnology, University 
of Leuven, Belgium.

Marginal zone B cell lymphoma (MZBCL) represents a distinct subtype of B cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, which has been recently recognized and defined as a
disease entity. We investigated 25 cases (18 at primary diagnosis and seven
during the course of disease) of MZBCL by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
and compared these results with cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), and Southern blot data. Twenty of the 25 cases (80%) showed gains (total 
49) or losses (total 15) of genetic material. In extranodal, nodal, and splenic
MZBCL, material of chromosomes 3 (52% of cases), 18 (32%), X (24%), and 1q (16%) 
was most frequently gained, whereas losses predominantly involved chromosomes 17 
(16%) and 9 (12%). High-level amplifications involving the regions 18q21-23 and
18q21-22, respectively, were detected in two cases. Gains of chromosomes 1q and
8q and losses of chromosome 17 or 17p occurred more frequently in relapsed or
progressive lymphomas. For all of the frequently affected chromosomes, CGH
allowed narrowing of the relevant subregions including 3q21-23, 3q25-29 and
18q21-23. By Southern blot analysis, the BCL2, BCL6, and CMYC proto-oncogenes
were found to be a part of the over-represented regions in two cases, one case,
and two cases, respectively, with gains involving 18q, 3q or 8q. In 13 cases, CGH
revealed chromosomal imbalances which were not detected by cytogenetic analysis
but could be confirmed by FISH or Southern blot analysis in all cases
investigated. On the other hand, CGH failed to detect trisomy 3, trisomy 18, and 
deletion 7q in three cases with a low proportion of tumor cells bearing these
abnormalities, as shown by interphase FISH. The characteristic pattern of
chromosomal gains and losses detected in this study confirms the distinct nature 
of MZBCL and may point to chromosomal regions involved in the pathogenesis of
these neoplasms.

PMID: 9180302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 May;19(1):14-21.

BCL6 can repress transcription from the human immunodeficiency virus type I
promoter/enhancer region.

Baron BW(1), Desai M, Baber LJ, Paras L, Zhang Q, Sadhu A, Duguay S, Nucifora G, 
McKeithan TW, Zeleznik-Le N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The gene BCL6 encodes a zinc finger protein with similarities to transcription
factors. We previously reported that a number of viral genomes, including human
immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1), contain sequences which are similar to the
BCL6 DNA-binding consensus in their promoter regions. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that the full-length BCL6 protein extracted from transfected 
COS cells and a bacterially expressed truncated protein containing the BCL6 zinc 
fingers can bind specifically to DNA from the U3 promoter/enhancer region of
HIV-1. Transient transfections were performed to analyze the effects of the BCL6 
protein on luciferase expression driven by the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
sequences. Full-length BCL6 significantly repressed luciferase activity compared 
with multiple controls. We conclude that the BCL6 protein can bind to the HIV-1
promoter-enhancer region and contains a domain upstream of its zinc fingers that 
can repress transcription from the HIV-1 LTR.

PMID: 9135990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:318-20.

Rearrangement of the BCL6 gene in B-cell lymphoid neoplasms.

Muramatsu M(1), Akasaka T, Kadowaki N, Ohno H, Fukuhara S, Okuma M.

Author information: 
(1)1st Div Dept Int Med., Fac Med, Kyoto Univ, Japan.

We report here a large series of B-cell neoplasms with regard to rearrangement of
the BCL6 gene on chromosome band 3q27. Southern blot analysis using probes from
the major translocation cluster (MTC) region of the BCL6 revealed rearrangement
in 32 of a total of 222 patients with various subtypes of B-cell neoplasm. In
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), rearrangements of the BCL6 gene were not closely
associated with a specific histopathologic subtype but distributed in
subcategories in the Working Formulation. A comparative study between NHL
associated either with BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangement showed that advanced disease
and bone marrow involvement were more frequent in BCL2(+) NHL. In contrast,
extranodal involvement was more frequently observed in the BCL6(+) NHL. The
survival curve of BCL6(+) NHL was characterized by a rapid decline followed by a 
plateau. Of the total of 32 BCL6(+) patients, 6 carried both BCL2 and BCL6
rearrangements, and showed clinicopathological properties of follicular lymphoma.
This study suggests that BCL6 rearrangement is primarily associated with large
cell lymphoma, and that BCL2(-)BCL6(+) NHL could potentially be curable with
modern combination chemotherapy.

PMID: 9209377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:316-7.

Long distance polymerase chain reaction for detection of chromosome
translocations in B-cell lymphoma/leukemia.

Akasaka T(1), Ohno H, Mori T, Okuma M.

Author information: 
(1)1st Div Dept Int Med, Fac Med, Kyoto Univ, Japan.

To establish a rapid and sensitive method to detect neoplastic cells carrying a
specific chromosomal translocation in B-cell lymphoma/leukemia, we have developed
a novel strategy based on long distance polymerase chain reaction (LD-PCR)
amplification. Genomic DNA were extracted from tumor cells carrying a
t(14;19)(q32;q13), a t(8;14)(q24;q32), a t(3;22)(q27;q11), a t(2;3)(p12;q27), and
a t(3;14)(q27;q32). Oligonucleotide primer pairs were designed to be
complementary to exons or flanking sequences of the BCL3, c-MYC and BCL6
oncogenes, and to constant region genes of the IG genes. LD-PCR with a newly
available Taq polymerase for longer product synthesis successfully amplified
fragments representing BCL3/C alpha junctional sequences for t(14;19); c-MYC/C
mu, c-MYC/C gamma and c-MYC/C alpha for t(8;14); BCL6/C lambda for t(3;22);
BCL6/C kappa for t(2;3); 5'-BCL6/C mu and 5'-BCL6/C gamma for t(3;14),
respectively. The sizes of the amplified fragments were varied from 1.8 kb to 12 
kb, which were specific to each material. Present study provides a useful tool
for diagnosis and subsequent management of B-cell lymphoma/leukemia characterized
with specific chromosomal translocation.

PMID: 9209376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:291-3.

Rapid detection of lymphoma-specific translocations in interphase nuclei of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Taniwaki M(1), Ueda Y, Nishida K, Takashima T, Kashima K, Matsuda F, Silverman
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Third Dept. of Internal med., Kyoto Pref. Univ. Med., Japan.

We have recently developed a method to detect tumor-specific rearrangement of the
IgH gene in interphase nuclei by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
Tumor-specific IgH gene rearrangement is equivalent to 14q32.33 translocation.
Using this approach, we detected 14q32.33 translocation in 29 of 70 patients with
B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Chromosome t(3;14) was found in 10 of these 
29 patients, and were demonstrated as a fusion signal of BCL6 and VH gene probes 
in interphase nuclei. Furthermore, in another series of 11 patients and a NHL
cell line, we demonstrated t(14;18) and t(11;14) in interphase and metaphase
cells with a combination of BCL2 (or PRAD1) with IgH gene probes. Interphase FISH
with lymphoma-associated gene probes is a rapid procedure for cytogenetic
diagnosis of B-cell NHL.

PMID: 9209369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11(4):594-8.

Expression of LAZ3/BCL6 in follicular center (FC) B cells of reactive lymph nodes
and FC-derived non-Hodgkin lymphomas.

Bajalica-Lagercrantz S(1), Piehl F, Lagercrantz J, Lindahl J, Weber G, Kerckeart 
JP, Porwit-MacDonald A, Nordenskjöld M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Chromosomal translocation resulting in abnormal expression of the LAZ3/BCL6 gene 
in B cells has been implicated in the tumorigenesis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL). Therefore we studied the expression pattern of LAZ3/BCL6 by in situ
hybridization with synthetic oligonucleotide probes in frozen tissue sections
from five reactive lymph nodes and 38 B cell and non-B NHL. In addition, we
investigated the expression of LAZ3/BCL6 by Northern blot analysis on multiple
human tissues. The LAZ3/BCL6 transcript was found in a variety of tissues,
including skeletal muscle, peripheral blood leukocytes, and weakly in normal
lymph nodes. In the tumor samples, expression of LAZ3/BCL6 was observed in 68% of
all B cell NHL and none of the non-B lymphomas. All cases of follicular, mixed
small and large cell lymphomas showed LAZ3/BCL6 expression confined to the
neoplastic follicles. A follicular expression pattern was also found in all
non-malignant reactive lymph nodes. Hence, the expression of LAZ3/BCL6 does not
correlate to malignancy, but reflects the origin of B cells from the germinal
centers.

PMID: 9096701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 20;14(7):849-55.

Small deletions occur in highly conserved regions of the LAZ3/BCL6 major
translocation cluster in one case of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma without 3q27
translocation.

Bernardin F(1), Collyn-d'Hooghe M, Quief S, Bastard C, Leprince D, Kerckaert JP.

Author information: 
(1)U124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, LILLE, France.

The LAZ3/BCL6 gene encoding a Zinc-finger nuclear protein is altered in
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas (NHLs) by translocations, mutations and/or deletions
clustered in its 5' non coding region, in a 3.3 Kbp EcoRI fragment which thus
defines the Major Translocation Cluster (MTC). In the present study, we describe 
at the molecular level the deletions found in the MTC of two (NHL) cases using,
(i) DNA obtained from a patient (GUI) with a monosomy 3 and three microdeletions 
of 101, 22, 25 bp in its unique untranslocated 3q27 allele; (ii) a cell line
derived from a patient (VAL) carrying a t(3;4) (q27;p11) translocation and a 2.4 
Kbp deletion in the untranslocated allele. As the MTC is recurrently subject to
alterations, we have cloned and sequenced the murine equivalent of the human MTC 
and promoter region in an attempt to identify sequences well conserved in mammals
that may be thus important for the LAZ3/BCL6 gene regulation. We show that the
human and mouse 5' upstream regions of the LAZ3/BCL6 gene although mainly
intronic share a particularly high homology of 79% on the overall sequence.
Strikingly, the small sequences which are deleted in patient (GUI) are highly
conserved (81%, 100% and 92% respectively). Furthermore, they may play a role in 
the pathogenesis since proteins prepared from B cell lines and HeLa nuclear
extracts bind to these sequences in gel retardation assays. Although a large part
of this region is intronic, the high conservation of its sequence and the
frequency of alterations in NHLs suggest that they are likely to be significant
for the regulation of the LAZ3/BCL6 gene.

PMID: 9047392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1997 Feb;93(2):147-51.

del(7q) in chronic B-cell lymphoid malignancies.

Hernandez JM(1), Mecucci C, Michaux L, Criel A, Stul M, Meeus P, Wlodarska I, Van
Orshoven A, Cassiman JJ, De Wolf-Peeters C, Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Twelve patients with diagnosis of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma/leukemia and
del[7q] were studied for their clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular
characteristics. Eleven patients were classified as small cell lymphoma whereas
one had a diffuse large cell lymphoma. Lymphoplasmacytic features were observed
in six out of eleven small cell lymphomas. Morphologically and immunologically
these small cell lymphomas could be classified as chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(typical or atypical; 4 cases), marginal zone lymphoma (splenic lymphoma with
villous lymphocytes; 1 case), mantle cell lymphoma (2 cases), or nonspecified,
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (4 cases). Eleven of twelve patients presented with
peripheral blood and bone marrow involvement. Two of twelve cases showed del[7q] 
as the sole anomaly. Two different types of deletions were present: ten cases had
del(7)(q21q31) and two cases had del(7)(q31q34). Cases that could be molecularly 
investigated did not show any involvement of BCL2, BCL3, or BCL6, and only one
case had BCL1 rearrangement. The data indicate that del(7q) is associated with a 
subset of mature small B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders of which some but not
all show lymphoplasmatic features.

PMID: 9078299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer Res. 1997 Jan 1;57(1):7-12.

A recurring translocation, t(3;6)(q27;p21), in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma results in 
replacement of the 5' regulatory region of BCL6 with a novel H4 histone gene.

Akasaka T(1), Miura I, Takahashi N, Akasaka H, Yonetani N, Ohno H, Fukuhara S,
Okuma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

3q27 translocations affecting the BCL6 gene can involve not only immunoglobulin
genes (IG) but also other as yet uncharacterized chromosomal loci as partners.
Here, we describe cloning of the junctional area of a recurring translocation,
t(3;6)(q27;p21), in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of B-cell type and isolation of clones
from 6p21; high resolution fluorescence in situ hybridization mapped the clones
to sub-band 6p21.3. Nucleotide sequence analysis of a fragment from the
junctional area of 6p21 revealed the presence of a novel H4 histone gene that was
included in the histone gene cluster on this particular region, and the same
fragment detected approximately 380-bp transcripts in hematological tumor cells. 
Breakpoints on 3q27 of two cases carrying t(3;6) were immediately 3' of the BCL6 
exon 1, and the H4 histone gene was substituted for the 5' regulatory elements of
BCL6. Because H4 gene expression is tightly coupled to DNA replication, this
study suggested an immediate mechanism for deregulated expression of BCL6,
leading to the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

PMID: 8988030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Baillieres Clin Haematol. 1996 Dec;9(4):653-67.

Practical role of molecular diagnostics in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.

Mauvieux L(1), Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Molecular techniques are becoming increasingly important in the analysis of NHL, 
both for diagnostic purposes and in order to evaluate prognosis accurately. The
increasing number of techniques available renders evaluation of their relative
roles important and a review of their informativity in NHL at diagnosis timely.
Molecular equivalents of chromosomal translocations generate either a qualitative
change due to the expression of a chimaeric, relatively tumour specific, protein,
such as the NPM-ALK associated with the t(2;5) in ALCL or a quantitative change
in the extent, stage or site of expression of a full length protein, due to its
juxtapositioning to and deregulation by an Ig or TCR gene. The latter represents 
errors of the somatic recombination process which lymphoid precursors undergo. In
NHL, this category includes BCL1/CCND1, BCL2, BCL6 and MYC. The molecular
characteristics, the functional consequences and the main clinical correlations
of each of these abnormalities is reviewed. At diagnosis, immunological detection
of the deregulated 'protooncogene' may well provide the simplest, most
appropriate screening technique for CCND1 and NPM-ALK induced ALK expression.
BCL6 abnormalities demonstrate similarities to BCL2 and MYC and a combination of 
immunophenotypic, FISH, Southern blot and PCR techniques are useful in their
characterization. For the approximately 50% of NHL without one of the above
markers, identification of a clonal Ig or TCR rearrangement can provide a useful 
'pan' B or T molecular equivalent, provided that the limitations of the detection
techniques are appreciated. Appropriate use of these techniques will transform
our ability to classify, stratify and eventually treat in a risk adapted manner, 
patients with NHL.

PMID: 9138611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 1;228(1):216-20.

The BCL6 gene is predominantly expressed in keratinocytes at their terminal
differentiation stage.

Yoshida T(1), Fukuda T, Okabe S, Hatano M, Miki T, Hirosawa S, Miyasaka N, Isono 
K, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

We analyzed the expression of the BCL6 gene in mouse tissues by in situ
hybridization. The expression was strong in the upper layer but undetectable in
the basal layer of epidermis from adult mice. When human keratinocytes were
cultured with a high concentration of calcium ion, these cells stopped their
proliferation and differentiated to their terminal stage. In these keratinocytes,
BCL6 expression was induced after stimulation and progressively up-regulated. The
kinetics was very similar to that of a cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor
p21sdil/cip1/WAF1 in these cells. These results suggest that BCL6 plays a role in
keratinocytes at terminal differentiation stage.

PMID: 8912662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Int J Hematol. 1996 Oct;64(3-4):249-56.

A new non-random chromosomal translocation t(3;6)(q27;p21.3) associated with BCL6
rearrangement in two patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Miura I(1), Ohshima A, Takahashi N, Hashimoto K, Nimura T, Utsumi S, Saito M,
Miki T, Hirosawa S, Miura AB.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Japan. ikuO@med.akita-u.ac.jp

We describe two cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma associated with t(3;6)(q27;p21.3)
and BCL6 rearrangement. The first case was in a 78-year old woman, whose
performance status (PS) was 1, the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was
elevated, and the Ann Arbor stage was IIIA with no extra nodal lymphomatous site.
The pathological diagnosis from a biopsy of the inguinal lymph node was
'malignant lymphoma (ML), follicular, small cleaved' according to the Working
Formulation. Complete remission was achieved. Although she had relapse in 1992,
remission was obtained again. The second case was in a 62-year old man, whose PS 
was 1, the serum LDH was normal, and Ann Arbor stage was IVA with the involvement
of the small intestine. Histological diagnosis of the cervical lymph node was
'ML, diffuse, large cell'. Complete remission was obtained without relapse. The
3q27 translocations, found in 20-30% of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, are unique in
having multiple chromosomal translocation partners. Chromosome band 6p21.3 is one
of these partner sites that may be the site of a novel gene. The two cases
presented here show that this translocation is a non-random chromosomal change
involving 3q27 and BCL6. Since t(3;6) was the sole karyotypic abnormality in one 
case, this translocation may play a role in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 8923787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1996 Sep;87(9):930-7.

p53 mutation in B-cell lymphoid neoplasms with reference to oncogene
rearrangements associated with chromosomal translocations.

Akasaka T(1), Muramatsu M, Kadowaki N, Ohno H, Ishizaki K, Yamabe H, Fukuhara S, 
Okuma M.

Author information: 
(1)First Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Sakyo-ku.

We investigated mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in B-cell lymphoid
neoplasms with reference to oncogene rearrangements associated with specific
chromosomal translocations. These included 15 patients with a BCL1/PRAD1 gene
rearrangement and/or PRAD1 overexpression, 45 with a BCL2 rearrangement, 2 with a
BCL3 rearrangement, 24 with a BCL6 rearrangement, and 6 with both BCL2 and BCL6
rearrangements. Thirty-six patients lacked detectable oncogene rearrangements.
Genomic DNA was isolated from involved tissues or leukemic cells obtained at
diagnosis and/or at relapse, and established cell lines. Polymerase chain
reaction-mediated single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct
sequencing were performed to analyze abnormalities of the p53 gene. We detected
p53 gene alterations in 18 of 128 patients, representing 21 of the total 151
materials analyzed. In the total of 66 patients with an oncogene rearrangement
studied at diagnosis, only one had a mutation; however, 6 of 37 patients studied 
at relapse showed p53 mutations. Sequential analysis revealed that the p53
mutation was closely associated with transformation from follicular lymphoma to
large cell lymphoma, exclusively in BCL2-positive lymphoma cases. Two of 13
mutations observed in oncogene rearrangement-positive cases and cell lines were
transitions at CpG dinucleotides. In contrast, the relationship between p53
mutations and clinical behavior in oncogene rearrangement-negative cases was
variable; 5 patients including one with indolent follicular lymphoma were
positive for p53 mutation at initial presentation, and 2 of the 5 showed
prolonged disease-free survival. Our findings suggest that p53 alteration
exhibits diverse functions in the development and progression of B-cell tumors
related to the presence or absence of oncogene rearrangement, and that
chemotherapy-related influences may be involved in the occurrence of
progression-associated p53 mutations.

PMID: 8878455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Leukemia. 1996 Sep;10(9):1492-6.

Heterogeneity of breakpoints at the transcriptional co-activator gene, BOB-1, in 
lymphoproliferative disease.

Yuille MA(1), Galiegue-Zouitina S, Hiorns LR, Jadayel D, De Schouwer PJ, Catovsky
D, Dyer MJ, Kerckaert JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK.

Chromosome 11q23 is frequently a site of chromosomal translocation in both acute 
leukemias and chronic lymphoproliferative disorders. In the former, an 8 kb
region within the MLL gene is consistently involved, whereas in the latter
breakpoints appear to be heterogeneous. In a B cell acute leukemia cell line with
t(14;18)(q32.3;q21.3) we have previously demonstrated a reciprocal translocation 
between the LAZ3/BCL6 gene at 3q27 and the B cell specific transcriptional
coactivator gene BOB-1 at 11q23.1, implicating BOB-1 as a potential
proto-oncogene. To confirm the chromosomal localization of BOB-1 we have mapped
it by FISH to 11q23.1. It lay immediately telomeric of the ATM gene. We have also
investigated the frequency of BOB-1 rearrangements in a panel of 32 cell lines
and 71 patient samples. In one case of T cell prolymphocytic leukemia-a disease
where 11q23 abnormalities are observed-a chromosomal rearrangement was identified
3.3-0.9 kb centromeric of the 3' end of the gene. Thus, there is a heterogeneity 
of breakpoints associated with BOB-1 while the frequency of the gene's
involvement in lymphoproliferative diseases is low.

PMID: 8751468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1996 Aug;90(1):49-53.

Translocation (3;14)(q27;q11): a new variant translocation in a patient with
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of B-cell type with BCL6 rearrangement.

Takahashi N(1), Miura I, Ohshima A, Utsumi S, Nimura T, Hashimoto K, Cyubachi A, 
Saitoh M, Enomoto K, Miki T, Hirosawa S, Miura A.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Japan.

We report a 65-year-old woman with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) carrying a
t(3;14)(q27;q11) and BCL6 rearrangement in the affected cells. She had
generalized lymphadenopathy and the bone marrow was infiltrated by lymphoma cells
at presentation. Histological diagnosis was "malignant lymphoma, diffuse, large
cell" type according to an International Working Formulation. Chromosome analysis
revealed a t(3;14)(q27;q11), which is a new variant translocation of t(3;14)
(q27;q32). Southern blot analysis showed rearrangement of BCL6, JH, and TCR beta 
but not of TCR delta. Cosmid probe of BCL6 hybridized to 14q11 and 3q27 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Although the band 14q11 is a locus of 
T-cell receptor alpha- and delta-chains (TCR alpha/delta), lymphoma cells
expressed B-cell, IgGk phenotype. The findings suggest that a novel
proto-oncogene in the vicinity of TCR alpha/delta is involved in this
translocation.

PMID: 8780747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Blood. 1996 Aug 1;88(3):985-94.

Application of long-distance polymerase chain reaction to detection of junctional
sequences created by chromosomal translocation in mature B-cell neoplasms.

Akasaka T(1), Muramatsu M, Ohno H, Miura I, Tatsumi E, Fukuhara S, Mori T, Okuma 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

Junctional sequences created by chromosomal translocations in mature B-cell
neoplasms, which involve immunoglobulin gene loci (IG) and putative
proto-oncogenes on reciprocal partner chromosomes, are unique to neoplastic cells
characterized by particular histological and immunological phenotypes. To
establish a rapid and sensitive method to detect neoplastic cells carrying a
specific chromosomal translocation, we have developed a novel strategy based on
long-distance polymerase chain reaction (LD-PCR) amplification. Genomic DNA was
extracted from tumor cells carrying t(14;19)(q32;q13), t(8;14)(q24;q32),
t(3;22)(q27;q11), t(2;3)(p12;q27), or t(3;14)(q27;q32). Thirty-two to 35-mer
oligonucleotide primer pairs were designed to be complementary to exons or
flanking sequences of the BCL3, c-MYC and BCL6 oncogenes, and to IG constant
region genes. LD-PCR with a newly available Taq polymerase for longer product
synthesis successfully amplified fragments representing BCL3/C alpha junctional
sequences for t(14;19); c-MYC/C mu, c-MYC/C gamma, and c-MYC/C alpha for t(8;14);
BCL6/C lambda for t(3;22); BCL6/C kappa for t(2;3); 5'-BCL6/C mu, and 5'-BCL6/C
gamma for t(3;14). In Burkitt's lymphoma/leukemia, all materials in which c-MYC
rearrangements were detectable by conventional Southern blot hybridization showed
positive LD-PCR amplification. The sizes of the amplified fragments varied from
1.8 kb to 12 kb, and these were specific to each material. Serial dilution of
tumor cells or DNA in negative materials demonstrated a single band on agarose
gel electrophoresis stained with ethidium bromide at a level of sensitivity of
10(-3), and hybridization with radioactive probe improved the level by one order 
of magnitude (1 cell in 10(4)), indicating that this LD-PCR approach is a
sensitive technique capable of detecting minimal residual disease. Thus, the
present study provided a useful tool for diagnosis and subsequent management of
B-cell neoplasms characterized by specific chromosomal translocations.

PMID: 8704258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mamm Genome. 1996 Aug;7(8):621-2.

Mapping of the mouse Bcl6 gene to chromosome 16.

Liao X(1), Gilbert DJ, Dent A, Staudt LM, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick
Cancer Research & Development Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

PMID: 8678989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul 9;93(14):6947-52.

BCL-6, a POZ/zinc-finger protein, is a sequence-specific transcriptional
repressor.

Chang CC(1), Ye BH, Chaganti RS, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Approximately 40% of diffuse large cell lymphoma are associated with chromosomal 
translocations that deregulate the expression of the BCL6 gene by juxtaposing
heterologous promoters to the BCL-6 coding domain. The BCL6 gene encodes a 95-kDa
protein containing six C-terminal zinc-finger motifs and an N-terminal POZ
domain, suggesting that it may function as a transcription factor. By using a DNA
sequence selected for its ability to bind recombinant BCL-6 in vitro, we show
here that BCL-6 is present in DNA-binding complexes in nuclear extracts from
various B-cell lines. In transient transfectin experiments, BCL6 can repress
transcription from promoters linked to its DNA target sequence and this activity 
is dependent upon specific DNA-binding and the presence of an intact N-terminal
half of the protein. We demonstrate that this part of the BCL6 molecule contains 
an autonomous transrepressor domain and that two noncontiguous regions, including
the POZ motif, mediate maximum transrepressive activity. These results indicate
that the BCL-6 protein can function as a sequence-specific transcriptional
repressor and have implications for the role of BCL6 in normal lymphoid
development and lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC38914
PMID: 8692924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Oncogene. 1996 Jun 6;12(11):2331-42.

Transcriptional repression by the proto-oncogene BCL-6.

Seyfert VL(1), Allman D, He Y, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In up to 45% of reported cases of the non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, diffuse large cell 
lymphoma, there are translocations of the BCL-6 gene, which are presumed to
deregulate its expression. The BCL-6 protein, which is unmutated in these
lymphomas, contains six Krüppel-like zinc fingers at its carboxy terminus and a
121 amino acid domain at its amino terminus, termed the POZ domain, which bears
homology with amino terminal domains in a subset zinc finger transcription
factors. In this study, we tested whether BCL-6 regulates transcription and if
the POZ domain has a role in this function. The BCL-6 POZ domain, when fused to
the GAL4 DNA binding domain, strongly repressed transcriptional activation
initiated from several different promoters including the SV40 enhancer/promoter. 
Repression was also observed when the fusion protein was bound at a distance of
200 bp 5' of the promoter. When the GAL4/BCL6 POZ domain fusion protein was
expressed in yeast, it was able to homodimerize in the nucleus. Nevertheless, in 
contrast with mammalian cells, the fusion protein did not repress transcription. 
To test the ability of the full length BC1-6 protein to repress transcription
when bound to DNA through its zinc finger DNA binding domain, high affinity BCL-6
binding sites were selected from a pool of random oligonucleotides. Full length
BCL-6 was able to strongly repress transcription when bound to its cognate site
cloned upstream of the thymidine kinase promoter. This repression was mediated,
in large measure, by the POZ domain, although a variant of BCL-6 lacking the POZ 
domain was able to repress transcription modestly. The ability of BCL-6 to
function as a transcriptional repressor may contribute to its ability to
transform B lymphocytes in diffuse large cell lymphoma.

PMID: 8649773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Br J Haematol. 1996 Jun;93(4):911-20.

Rearrangement of the BCL6 gene in B-cell lymphoid neoplasms: comparison with
lymphomas associated with BCL2 rearrangement.

Muramatsu M(1), Akasaka T, Kadowaki N, Ohno H, Yamabe H, Edamura S, Dor S, Mori
T, Okuma M, Fukuhara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

We report a series of B-cell neoplasms with regard to rearrangement of the BCL6
gene on chromosome band 3q27. Southern blot analysis using probes from the major 
translocation cluster (MTC) region of the BCL6 revealed rearrangement in 21/197
patients (10.7%) with B-cell neoplasms studied at presentation, and 11/25
patients (44%) first studied at relapse. In non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) studied 
at diagnosis, rearrangements of the BCL6 gene were not closely associated with a 
specific histopathologic subtype but distributed in subcategories in the Working 
Formulation. The incidence in follicular lymphoma was 12.1%, with significantly
higher frequency in mixed and large cell subtypes, and that in diffuse aggressive
lymphoma was 14.1%. Comigration analysis using probes from the immunoglobulin
genes revealed association of the BCL6 gene with one of the three immunoglobulin 
loci in 9/25 cases analysed. A comparative study between NHL associated either
with BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangement showed that advanced disease and bone marrow
involvement were more frequent in BCL2(+) NHL. In contrast, extranodal
involvement was more frequently observed in the BCL6(+) NHL. The survival curve
of BCL6(+) NHL was characterized by a rapid decline followed by a plateau. Of the
total of 32 BCL6(+) patients, six carried both BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangements; five
of these six showed clinicopathological properties characteristic of follicular
lymphoma, suggesting that the presence of the two genetic abnormalities does not 
necessarily have synergistic effects on malignant phenotypes. The high level of
BCL6 expression in follicular lymphoma cell lines carrying a BCL2 rearrangement
suggests that the deregulated BCL2 gene may have an effect on the development of 
genetic abnormalities of the BCL6 gene. The present study suggests that BCL6 gene
rearrangement is primarily involved in large cell lymphoma irrespective of growth
pattern of neoplastic cells, and that BCL6(+)BCL2(-) NHL could be curable with
modern intensive chemotherapy.

PMID: 8703825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Int J Oncol. 1996 May;8(5):851-8.

New recurrent structural chromosome aberrations in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Mrozek K, Bloomfield C.

Identification, and subsequent molecular dissection, of recurring structural
chromosome aberrations has led to a substantial increase in our understanding of 
lymphomagenesis. Thus we have reviewed the published literature on cytogenetic
findings in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) in search of previously unrecognized
recurring chromosome aberrations. Thirty-four balanced rearrangements, including 
32 reciprocal translocations and two inversions, and 25 unbalanced
translocations, each observed in at least two different cases of NHL and
previously unrecognized as recurring, have been ascertained. Among the 32
reciprocal translocations, 10 involved bands harboring one of the immunoglobulin 
(Ig) genes. In nine of these, the following bands or regions may be sites of
putative oncogenes that are activated through juxtaposition to Ig loci: 1p35-36, 
5q11, 6q21, 9p24, 12q13, 13q11, 15p11, 15q21-22 and 15q23-24. In one instance,
t(21;22)(q22;q11), Ig lambda chain gene involvement is unlikely, because the
t(21;22) has been identified in two NHLs of T-cell lineage. An additional four
reciprocal translocations and one inversion affected the band 3q27, containing
the BCL6/LAZ3 gene, and one of the following bands: 1q25, 3q12, 6p21, 7p13,
12p13. Three other reciprocal translocations had the breakpoint at 11q13 known to
harbor the BCL1 gene. Among the 16 remaining balanced rearrangements, one
translocation involved a band containing a gene for a T-cell receptor, i.e. 7q35.
Almost all chromosomes in the human karyotype (except 3, 8, 20 and 21) were
implicated in at least one of the 25 recurrent unbalanced translocations. The
distribution of resulting chromosomal imbalances is highly nonrandom, however,
because 17 translocations involved the long arm of chromosome 1 (1q) invariably
resulting in partial trisomy of 1q. We suggest that these unbalanced
translocations of Iq are best regarded as non-specific secondary abnormalities
that may contribute to lymphoma progression.

PMID: 21544437  [PubMed]


455. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1996 May;16(1):21-30.

Molecular heterogeneity of B-lineage diffuse large cell lymphoma.

Volpe G(1), Vitolo U, Carbone A, Pastore C, Bertini M, Botto B, Audisio E,
Freilone R, Novero D, Cappia S, De Giuli P, Mazza U, Resegotti L, Palestro G,
Saglio G, Gaidano G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Medicina, Universita di Torina, Italy.

B-lineage diffuse large cell lymphoma (B-DLCL) arising de novo is characterized
by a marked degree of clinical heterogeneity. To determine whether or not the
clinical heterogeneity of de novo B-DLCL is reflected by heterogeneity in the
molecular features of these tumors, we investigated the pattern of distribution
of several genetic lesions in 70 cases of de novo B-DLCL at diagnosis. The panel 
of genetic lesions tested comprised the molecular alterations most frequently
detected in B-DLCL, including rearrangements of BCL2, BCL6, and MYC as well as
deletions of 6q and mutations of TP53. One or more genetic lesions were detected 
in 39/70 cases of B-DLCL. Isolated structural alterations of BCL2, BCL6, 6q or
TPS3 were detected in 8/70, 10/70, 11/70, and 3/70 cases, respectively. No
isolated MYC lesions were detected. Six cases carried different combinations of
two genetic lesions, including lesions of BCL2 + BCL6 (1 case), BCL2 + MYC (1
case), BCL2 + 6q (2 cases), or BCL6 + 6q (2 cases). One case had accumulated
three genetic lesions, namely a rearrangement of BCL2 and BCL6 and a mutation of 
TPS3. Overall, these data show that multiple distinct patterns of genetic lesions
may associate with de novo B-DLCL, indicating that the molecular pathogenesis of 
this group of lymphomas is characterized by a high degree of molecular
heterogeneity.

PMID: 9162193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Leukemia. 1996 Apr;10(4):579-87.

The B cell transcriptional coactivator BOB1/OBF1 gene fuses to the LAZ3/BCL6 gene
by t(3;11)(q27;q23.1) chromosomal translocation in a B cell leukemia line (Karpas
231).

Galiéque Zouitina S(1), Quief S, Hildebrand MP, Denis C, Lecocq G,
Collyn-d'Hooghe M, Bastard C, Yuille M, Dyer MJ, Kerckaert JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

The LAZ3/BCL6 gene on chromosone 3q27 is recurrently disrupted in B cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas by translocations involving immunoglobulin genes or other
chromosone regions. We have cloned the breakpoint region and chromosone
derivatives of the t(3;11)(q27;q23.1) translocation, present in a B cell leukemia
cell line (Karpas 231), which define a novel 11q23.1 breakpoint site. As a
consequence of the translocation, LAZ3 regulatory regions upstream of non-coding 
exon 2 are replaced by those of BOB1/OBF1, a recently described B cell-specific
coactivator of octamer-binding transcription factors. A detailed structural study
of the BOB1/OBF1 genomic DNA and of a nearly full-length cDNA revealed particular
features in the 3' untranslated region, such as an Alu motif and a polymorphic
tetranucleotide microsatellite. Two mutations leading to two potential amino acid
changes in the C-terminal region, were also detected in one allele of a lymphoma 
B cell line, Raji. Due to its cell-specific expression and role as a coactivating
transcription factor, chromosomal translocation and/or point mutation of
BOB1/OBF1 may contribute to B cell tumorigenesis.

PMID: 8618432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Mar 27;220(3):911-5.

Multiple domains participate in distance-independent LAZ3/BCL6-mediated
transcriptional repression.

Albagli O(1), Dhordain P, Bernardin F, Quief S, Kerkaert JP, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

The LAZ3/BCL6 gene implicated in diffuse large cell lymphomas encodes a
transcriptional repressor containing Krüppel-fike zinc fingers. It harbours at
its N-terminus a conserved protein/protein interaction motif, the BTB/POZ domain,
which is also an autonomous transcriptional repression domain. We demonstrate
here using several GAL4-LAZ3/BCL6 chimeras that the BTB/POZ domain plays an
important but not exclusive role as its deletion gives rise to a GAL4 chimera
that mediates significant, albeit reduced, transcriptional repression. Moreover, 
the repressive effect mediated either by LAZ3/BCL6 or by the isolated domains
occurs with unaltered efficiency even at long distance (1.6 Kbp), ruling out
steric hindrance mechanisms. Finally, though the absence of a TATA box appears to
weaken this activity, it is largely promoter independent. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that multiple domains participate in the promoter and
distance-independent LAZ3/BCL6-mediated transcriptional repression.

PMID: 8607866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Methods Mol Med. 1996;6:75-89. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-341-4:75.

NPM-ALK Reverse Transcriptase-Polymerase Chain Reaction Analysis for Detection of
the t(2;5) Translocation of Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma.

Shurtleff SA(1), Downing JR, Morris SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.

The diagnosis and classification of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) has
traditionally been made based on morphologic and mununophenotypic criteria.
Unfortunately, because of the diverse nature of this group of diseases, rehante
solely on these criteria has frequently resulted in misdiagnosis. In addition,
investigators have been limited m their ability to define biologically and
clinically relevant non-Hodgkin's lymphoma subgroups using this diagnostic
approach. The development of modern molecular biological techniques and their use
to characterize the genetic abnormalities that are of pathogenic significance in 
NHL now provides an additional means to identify and to rationally subcategorize 
these neoplasms. The shortcomings of traditional methods of NHL diagnosis and
classification have been especially evident within the morphological subset
commonly referred to as the large-cell lymphomas, which comprise approx 25 and
40% of NHL m children and adults, respec tively (1). The marked cytological,
immunological, and clinical heterogeneity of this group of tumors suggests that
it is comprised of several biologically different neoplasms. However,
morphological and immunophenotypic subclassification of the large-cell lymphomas 
has failed to identify a subset of tumors having a reproducibly different
therapeutic response or patient survival rate. Until recently, recurrent genetic 
abnormalities characteristic of the large-cell lymphomas had not been
identified.However, the characterization during the past 2 yr of chromosomal
rearrangements mvolvmg the BCL6/LAZ3 zmc finger gene located at 3q27 (which is
altered m approx 30% of these tumors [2,3]), and the cloning by our group (4) of 
the NPM-ALK fusion gene produced by the t(2;5) may now permrt the identrficatton 
of molecular genetic subtypes of largecell lymphoma that possess unique
btological and/or clinical features.

PMID: 21380699  [PubMed]


459. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1996 Jan;86(1):76-9.

Presence of three recurrent chromosomal reaarrangements, t(2;3)(p12;q37),
del(8)(q24), and t(14;18), in an acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Berger R(1), Flexor M, Le Coniat M, Larsen CJ.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 301, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France.

A complex chromosomal abnormality associating three recurrent rearrangements,
t(2;3)((p12;q37), del (8)(q24) and t(14;18)(q32;q21), was detected in a patient
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia of the Burkitt type. Southern blot studies
showed rearrangements of the MYC, BCL2, and JH genes, thus confirming the
cytogenetic data. However, no rearrangement of the LAZ3/BCL6 gene, normally
localized on band 3q27, could be detected. The simultaneous presence of three
recurrent rearrangements specific for lymphoid malignancies addresses the
question of their timing in the malignant process and the prognostic significance
of the association of such anomalies.

PMID: 8616793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Blood. 1996 Jan 1;87(1):299-307.

Marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of different sites share similar cytogenetic and
morphologic features.

Dierlamm J(1), Pittaluga S, Wlodarska I, Stul M, Thomas J, Boogaerts M, Michaux
L, Driessen A, Mecucci C, Cassiman JJ, De Wolf-Peeters C, Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Blood. 1996 Jul 15;88(2):751-2.

Clinical, histologic, cytogenetic, and molecular genetic data of 31 patients with
extranodal, nodal, and splenic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MZBCL) are
presented. Despite these variable clinical manifestations, a similar spectrum of 
morphologic features as well as distinctive immunophenotypic findings were noted.
In all cases, a monotypic B-cell proliferation consistently negative for CD5,
CD10, and CD23 was found expanding the marginal zone of the B follicle with and
without colonization of the follicle centers. Clonal chromosomal abnormalities
were detected in 23 of the 31 patients. Recurrent aberrations included whole or
partial trisomy 3 (18 cases), trisomy 18 (9 cases), and structural rearrangements
of chromosome 1 with breakpoints in 1q21 (9 cases) or 1p34 (6 cases), all of
which were seen in extranodal, nodal, as well as splenic MZBCL. Abnormalities of 
the additional chromosome 3, such as +del(3)(p13),+i(3)(q10), or structural
changes involving the distal part of the long arm, were evident in 9 of the 18
cases. All recurrent abnormalities were found in MZBCL more frequently than in
other histologic entities of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (B-NHL). None of the
known lymphoma-associated chromosomal changes or rearrangements of the BCL1,
BCL2, BCL3, BCL6, and CMYC genes were detected. We conclude that MZBCL represent 
a distinct entity of B-NHL with characteristic morphologic and immunophenotypic
features and particular chromosomal abnormalities, and that a close histogenetic 
relationship between extranodal, nodal, and splenic MZBCL is likely, although the
clinical presentation may vary.

PMID: 8547655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Oncogene. 1995 Dec 21;11(12):2689-97.

The BTB/POZ domain targets the LAZ3/BCL6 oncoprotein to nuclear dots and mediates
homomerisation in vivo.

Dhordain P(1), Albagli O, Ansieau S, Koken MH, Deweindt C, Quief S, Lantoine D,
Leutz A, Kerckaert JP, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)U 124 INSERM, IRCL, Lille, France.

The LAZ3/BCL6 gene was identified by its disruption in 3q27 translocations
associated with diffuse large cell lymphomas. It is predicted to be a
transcription factor as it contains six Krüppel-like Zinc finger motifs and a
N-terminal BTB/POZ domain, a protein/protein interaction interface that is widely
conserved in Metazoans. Using two antisera raised against non overlapping regions
of the predicted ORF, we demonstrate that the LAZ3/BCL6 protein appears as a
close ca. 79 kDa doublet in B lymphoid cell lines with either a rearranged or a
non rearranged LAZ3/BCL6 locus. By immunofluorescence experiments on transiently 
transfected COS-1 or NIH3T3 cells, we show that the LAZ3/BCL6 protein displays a 
punctuated nuclear localisation. This appears to rely on LAZ3/BCL6 proper folding
and/or activities as it is impaired in a hormone reversible-fashion through
fusion of LAZ3/BCL6 to the ligand-binding domain of the oestrogen receptor.
Moreover, deletion of its BTB/POZ domain leads to the disappearance of the
nuclear dots although the protein remains nuclear. In addition, by using the
yeast two-hybrid system, we show that the LAZ3/BCL6 BTB/POZ domain homomerises in
vivo. Thus, the LAZ3/BCL6 BTB/POZ domain has the capability to self-interact and 
target the protein to discrete nuclear substructures.

PMID: 8545127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 19;92(26):12520-4.

Frequent somatic hypermutation of the 5' noncoding region of the BCL6 gene in
B-cell lymphoma.

Migliazza A(1), Martinotti S, Chen W, Fusco C, Ye BH, Knowles DM, Offit K,
Chaganti RS, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The BCL6 gene encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor and is altered by
chromosomal arrangements in its 5' noncoding region in approximately 30% of
diffuse large-cell lymphoma (DLCL). We report here that, in 22/30 (73%) DLCL and 
7/15 (47%) follicular lymphoma (FL), but not in other tumor types, the BCL6 gene 
is also altered by multiple (1.4 x 10(-3) -1.6 x 10(-2) per bp), often biallelic,
mutations clustering in its 5' noncoding region. These mutations are of somatic
origin and are found in cases displaying either normal or rearranged BLC6 alleles
indicating their independence from chromosomal rearrangements and linkage to
immunoglobulin genes. These alterations identify a mechanism of genetic
instability in malignant B cells and may have been selected during
lymphomagenesis for their role in altering BCL6 expression.

PMCID: PMC40389
PMID: 8618933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. EMBO J. 1995 Dec 15;14(24):6209-17.

Chromosomal translocations cause deregulated BCL6 expression by promoter
substitution in B cell lymphoma.

Ye BH(1), Chaganti S, Chang CC, Niu H, Corradini P, Chaganti RS, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The BCL6 gene codes for a zinc-finger transcription factor and is involved in
chromosomal rearrangements in 30-40% of diffuse large-cell lymphoma (DLCL). These
rearrangements cluster within the 5' regulatory region of BCL6 spanning its first
non-coding exon. To determine the functional consequences of these alterations,
we have analyzed the structure of the rearranged BCL6 alleles and their
corresponding RNA and protein species in two DLCL biopsies and one tumor cell
line which carried the t(3;14)(q27;q32) translocation involving the BCL6 and
immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) loci. In all three cases, the breakpoints were
mapped within the IgH switch region and the BCL6 first intron, leading to the
juxtaposition of part of the IgH locus upstream and in the same transcriptional
orientation to the BCL6 coding exons. An analysis of cDNA clones showed that
these recombinations generate chimeric IgH-BCL6 transcripts which initiated from 
IgH germline transcript promoters (I mu or I gamma 3), but retain a normal BCL6
coding domain. In the tumor cell line, the chimeric I gamma 3-BCL6 allele, but
not the germline BCL6 gene, was transcriptionally active and produced a normal
BCL6 protein. These findings indicate that t(3;14) translocations alter BCL6
expression by promoter substitution and imply that the consequence of these
alterations is the deregulated expression of a normal BCL6 protein.

PMCID: PMC394745
PMID: 8557040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Dec;6(12):1495-503.

The LAZ3/BCL6 oncogene encodes a sequence-specific transcriptional inhibitor: a
novel function for the BTB/POZ domain as an autonomous repressing domain.

Deweindt C(1), Albagli O, Bernardin F, Dhordain P, Quief S, Lantoine D, Kerckaert
JP, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)U124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches Sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

Rearrangements and mutations of the LAZ3/BCL6 gene are the most frequent events
associated with diffuse large-cell lymphoma, a particular class of non-Hodgkin's 
lymphomas. This gene encodes a putative regulatory protein with six COOH-terminal
Krüppel-like zinc fingers and a NH2-terminal hydrophobic region, the so-called
BTB/POZ domain, which mediates homo- as well as heterotypic interactions in other
related proteins. Recently, a consensus binding sequence has been defined using
the isolated LAZ3/BCL6 zinc finger region produced in bacteria. To understand the
normal and oncogenic functions of LAZ3/BCL6, we examined its properties as a
transcription factor. We thus demonstrated that its full-length product binds to 
the same consensus sequence, although the BTB/POZ domain decreases this activity,
at least in vitro. In transient transfection experiments, the LAZ3/BCL6 protein
exerts a repressive effect, both as a wild-type protein on its own target
sequence and as a GAL-4 fusion protein. Furthermore, our results indicate that
the BTB/POZ domain plays a prominent role in the mediation of this activity.
Indeed, on the LAZ3/BCL6 cognate sequence, deletion of the BTB/POZ domain
diminishes the repressive function. Conversely, as a GAL-4 chimera, the isolated 
LAZ3/BCL6 BTB/POZ domain appears nearly as efficient as the entire protein at
inducing transcriptional repression. Taken together, these findings demonstrate
that the LAZ3/BCL6 is a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor and point to 
a novel function for the BTB/POZ region, at least in LAZ3/BCL6, as an autonomous 
transcriptional inhibitory domain.

PMID: 9019154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Leuk Lymphoma. 1995 Dec;20(1-2):85-9.

BCL6 gene rearrangement and other cytogenetic abnormalities in diffuse large cell
lymphoma.

Offit K(1), Louie DC, Parsa NZ, Roy P, Leung D, Lo Coco F, Zelenetz A,
Dalla-Favera R, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, N.Y. 10021, USA.

Evidence for rearrangement of the BCL6 gene at 3q27 has been documented in 20-30%
diffuse lymphomas with a large cell component (DLLC), and was found to be of
prognostic significance at the time of diagnosis. To incorporate these
observations into current cytogenetic and clinical prognostic models, 76 cases of
DLLC with known BCL6 status were analyzed. Cytogenetic indicators of progression,
including trisomy 7, trisomy 12, del(6)(q21q25), and structural alterations of
17p were less frequent in BCL6 rearranged DLLC compared to BCL6 germline tumors. 
Despite a 93% overall survival at median follow-up of 30 months, a trend for
continued relapse resulted in a projected freedom from progression for the BCL6
rearranged cohort of 66% at 4 years, compared to 39% for the BCL6 germline
cohort. Six cases among the BCL6 rearranged group lacked additional cytogenetic
indicators of progression and remained free of disease at follow-up in excess of 
7 years, whereas BCL6 rearranged cases with increasing numbers of cytogenetic
aberrations showed decreased intervals free from progression of disease. These
results suggest that BCL6 rearrangement should be combined with other known
clinical and cytogenetic indicators in prognostic analyses of patients with DLLC.

PMID: 8750627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. C R Acad Sci III. 1995 Nov;318(11):1125-31.

Fusion of the LAZ3/BCL6 and BOB1/OBF1 genes by t(3; 11) (q27; q23) chromosomal
translocation.

Galiègue-Zouitina S(1), Quief S, Hildebrand MP, Denis C, Lecocq G,
Collyn-d'Hooghe M, Bastard C, Yuille M, Dyer MJ, Kerckaert JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 124, Institut de recherches sur le cancer de Lille, France.

The LAZ3/BCL6 gene on chromosome 3q27 is recurrently disrupted in B-cell non
Hodgkin's lymphomas by translocations involving immunoglobulin genes or other
chromosome regions. We have studied the t(3; 11) (q27; q23) translocation,
present in a B-cell leukemia cell line (Karpas 231). As a consequence of this
translocation, a LAZ3 chimeric transcript was created by fusion, 5' to the LAZ3
exon 2, with a transcribed sequence identical to BOB1/OBF1, a B cell-specific
coactivator of octamer-binding transcription factors, recently described.
Nucleotidic sequence of a nearly full-length cDNA of the BOB1/OBF1 gene revealed 
particular features in the 3' untranslated region of the gene, including
pyrimidine-rich sequence repeats, an Alu motif, and a polymorphic [CCTT]
tetranucleotide microsatellite. Two A to G transition mutations were also
detected in the coding region of one allele of a lymphoma B-cell line, Raji,
leading to 2 amino-acid changes in the C-terminal region. Due to its
cell-specificity and role as a coactivating transcription factor, chromosomal
translocation and/or perhaps point mutation of BOB1/OBF1 may contribute to B cell
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 8574789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1657-63.

The murine BCL6 gene is induced in activated lymphocytes as an immediate early
gene.

Fukuda T(1), Miki T, Yoshida T, Hatano M, Ohashi K, Hirosawa S, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan.

The chromosomal translocation involving 3q27 is often detected in human B-cell
lymphomas, especially diffuse lymphomas with a large-cell component. The BCL6
gene has been isolated from the chromosomal breakpoint in these lymphomas. Here
we cloned the murine BCL6 (mBCL6) cDNA from the muscle cDNA library using the
human BCL6 (hBCL6) cDNA as a probe. The predicted amino acid sequence was 95%
identical to that of hBCL6. It contains six repeats of the Krüppel-like
zinc-finger motif that are completely identical to those of hBCL6, indicating
that the BCL6 gene is well conserved between humans and mice. Expression of the
mBCL6 gene was ubiquitously detected in adult mouse tissues including lymphatic
organs. Furthermore, it was induced in lymphocytes activated with phorbol ester
and Ca2+ ionophore within 30 min after stimulation. This induction was not
inhibited by treatment of the cells with a protein synthesis inhibitor,
cycloheximide. These results suggest that BCL6 plays a role in activated
lymphocytes as an immediate early gene.

PMID: 7478591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Sep;14(1):1-7.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization identifies new chromosomal changes involving
3q27 in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with BCL6/LAZ3 rearrangement.

Wlodarska I(1), Mecucci C, Stul M, Michaux L, Pittaluga S, Hernandez JM, Cassiman
JJ, De Wolf-Peeters C, Van den Berghe H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Twelve B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas with BCL6/LAZ3 rearrangement selected from 
a series of 30 lymphomas with cytogenetically detectable 3qter abnormalities were
characterized at the histological, clinical, and cytogenetic levels, including
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, which was performed in all
cases but one. A classical t(3;14) and t(3;22) were found in three patients
(25%). In the remaining cases, eleven different 3q27 abnormalities were
demonstrated and characterized with the use of chromosome painting. Seven of
twelve "variant" rearrangements identified in our series affecting 1p32, 1p34,
3p14, 6q23, 12p13, 14q11, and 16p13 have not been reported before. Moreover,
involvement of both homologs of chromosome 3 in distinct translocations was
detected as an unexpected result in two cases and was confirmed via FISH in a
third case. The putative bichromosomal rearrangements of the 3q27 region were
evidenced by Southern analysis in one of these cases. In another case, FISH with 
a cosmid spanning the 3q27 breakpoint region demonstrated the involvement of
BCL6/LAZ3 only in one of two t(3q27). In our series, which was selected on
cytogenetic and molecular criteria, 50% (6 of 12) of cases with BCL6/LAZ3
rearrangement were diagnosed as diffuse, large B-cell lymphomas (DLCL). Another
33% (4 of 12) of cases were diagnosed as follicular center lymphomas (FL), with
t(14;18)/BCL2 rearrangement in all but one case. Furthermore, in three follicular
lymphoma cases in which multiple samples were analyzed, the disease showed no
evidence of histological progression during a follow-up period of 3-14
years.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8527378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Br J Haematol. 1995 Sep;91(1):101-3.

Bcl6/Laz3 rearrangements in post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders.

Delecluse HJ(1), Rouault JP, Jeammot B, Kremmer E, Bastard C, Berger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hôpital E. Herriot, Lyon, France.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) are well-known complications
of iatrogenic immune deficiency and are thought to result from the proliferation 
of B cells infected by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Some large cell lymphomas
occurring in the general population carry a rearrangement of the Bcl6/Laz3
zinc-finger-encoding gene. 15 EBV-associated PTLD were tested for the presence of
Bcl6/Laz3 rearrangements by Southern blot analysis using two specific probes
(F370, F372). One out of 15 cases displayed a rearranged band independent of the 
germline one. In contrast, 10 lymphoblastoid cell lines and one lymphoblastoid
cell line passaged in an SCID mouse carried only germline alleles of Bcl6/Laz3
after Southern blot hybridization. This indicates that genetic abnormalities may 
also play an important role in the development of some PTLD.

PMID: 7577614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Jul;13(3):225-6.

BCL6 gene stays on the der(3) chromosome in a t(3;22) (q27;q11) or t(3;14)
(q27;q32) associated with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Kobayashi H, Miki T, Nakamura Y, Kaneko Y.

Comment on
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1993 Nov;8(3):149-54.

PMID: 7669745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Jul;13(3):221-4.

BCL6 encodes a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein.

Baron BW(1), Stanger RR, Hume E, Sadhu A, Mick R, Kerckaert JP, Deweindt C,
Bastard C, Nucifora G, Zeleznik-Le N, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Chromosomal rearrangements of BCL6 are commonly associated with diffuse
large-cell lymphomas. We set out to determine the DNA-binding site of a
glutathione-S-transferase fusion protein containing the BCL6 zinc finger region
by employing cyclic amplification and selection of targets (CASTing). From
oligonucleotides containing 16 central random bases, sequences binding to the
protein on glutathione-coated beads were repeatedly selected and amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The binding sites were cloned and sequenced. A
consensus, TTTNNNGNNATNCTTT, was obtained. Protein binding studies of
double-stranded oligomers containing point mutations within the 3' CTTT confirmed
the binding specificity of this part of the consensus. In addition, evidence
indicated that some of the base pairs held constant in the oligonucleotides used 
for CASTing also contributed to binding.

PMID: 7669744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncogene. 1995 Jun 1;10(11):2171-8.

TTF, a gene encoding a novel small G protein, fuses to the lymphoma-associated
LAZ3 gene by t(3;4) chromosomal translocation.

Dallery E(1), Galiègue-Zouitina S, Collyn-d'Hooghe M, Quief S, Denis C,
Hildebrand MP, Lantoine D, Deweindt C, Tilly H, Bastard C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)U. 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

We have previously shown that the LAZ3/BCL6 gene encoding a potential
transcription factor, is disrupted in B-diffuse large cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas (NHL) with 3q27 chromosomal abnormalities involving the immunoglobulin 
(IG) genes. However, LAZ3 rearrangement also occurs in NHL bearing 3q27
translocations without involvement of the IG genes: for example the VAl cell line
exhibits t(3;4)(q27;p11). In the present work we have used a RT-PCR method to
detect and to sequence the LAZ3 mRNA products from the VAL cell line. We report
that the consequence of the t(3;4) is the expression of a chimeric transcript of 
LAZ3 with a new gene encoding a small G-like protein, termed TTF (Translocation
Three Four). Nucleotide sequence analysis of a 1.4 kb cDNA predicts that the TTF 
gene encodes a protein of 191 amino-acids similar to members of the RAS
superfamily including HRAS (27% identical), RAB1A (30% identical) and RHO
proteins: the human RAC1, RHOB and CDC42Hs proteins (respectively 43, 44 and 45% 
identical) and the yeast RHO2 protein (44% identical). Unlike most other small G 
proteins which are expressed ubiquitously, TTF was transcribed only in
hemopoietic cells as a 2.2 kb transcript. TTF may define a new subgroup of
RHO-like proteins.

PMID: 7784061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Blood. 1995 May 15;85(10):2877-84.

Analysis of LAZ3 (BCL-6) status in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: results of
rearrangement and gene expression studies and a mutational analysis of coding
region sequences.

Otsuki T(1), Yano T, Clark HM, Bastard C, Kerckaert JP, Jaffe ES, Raffeld M.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The LAZ3 gene encodes a novel zinc-finger protein that shares homology with
several Drosophila transcription factors. This gene was identified by its
disruption in translocations involving chromosome 3q27 in diffuse large-cell
lymphomas. To assess the frequency and role of this gene's involvement in
lymphomagenesis and tumor progression, we examined a series of 170 cases of
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of B-cell lineage for LAZ3 gene rearrangement,
expression, and mutation. The cases included 35 de novo diffuse aggressive
lymphomas (DAL; 19 large-cell, 4 mixed-cell, and 12 large-cell immunoblastic), 52
transformed aggressive lymphomas derived from follicular lymphomas (TFL), 42
indolent follicular lymphomas (FL), 14 mantle cell lymphomas (MCL), and 27 small 
noncleaved cell lymphomas (SNCL). LAZ3 rearrangements were found in 10 DAL
(28.6%), 9 TFL (17.3%), and 6 FL (14.3%), but not in any of the SNCL or MCL. LAZ3
rearrangement was not exclusive of bcl-2 rearrangement. Most rearrangement
breakpoints mapped to a 10-kb BamHI-Xba I fragment located 5' to the LAZ3 coding 
sequence, consistent with previously reported breakpoint locations. Northern
analysis of both rearranged and nonrearranged B-cell lymphoma cases showed
similar levels of a transcript of approximately 3.8 kb, indicating that LAZ3 is
broadly expressed in B-cell tumors and is not confined to rearranged cases. To
investigate whether mutation of the LAZ3 gene might contribute to a potential
role for this gene in lymphomagenesis, we screened the coding sequences of 13
rearranged cases, 6 nonrearranged cases, and 13 hematopoietic tumor cell lines.
Although three probable polymorphisms were identified, mutations were detected in
only 2 rearranged cases. Only 1 of these resulted in an amino acid substitution. 
Two cell lines (SU-DHL4 and Molt-4) also contained mutations; only one resulted
in an amino acid substitution. We conclude (1) that LAZ3 rearrangements occur in 
a significant fraction of de novo DAL as well as in a smaller subset of indolent 
and transformed follicular lymphomas; (2) that LAZ3 message is expressed in both 
rearranged and nonrearranged B-cell lymphomas; and (3) that mutation of the LAZ3 
gene does not contribute to its putative oncogenic role in most 3q27 translocated
B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 7742550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Oct 14;204(1):366-74.

Recognition DNA sequence of a novel putative transcription factor, BCL6.

Kawamata N(1), Miki T, Ohashi K, Suzuki K, Fukuda T, Hirosawa S, Aoki N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan.

The BCL6 gene involved in the 3q27 translocation associated with B-cell lymphomas
encodes a novel Cys2-His2 zinc finger protein. We generated a fusion protein of
glutathione S-transferase and zinc finger domain of BCL6 to determine recognition
sequences of BCL6 with polymerase chain reaction using random oligonucleotides of
26 bases as a ligand. A consensus of 14 nucleotides consisting of
(T/A)NCTTTCNAGG(A/G)AT was identified in the recognition sequences. In a gel
mobility shift assay, the probe containing the 14-nucleotide recognition sequence
formed a complex with the fusion protein and nuclear proteins from Burkitt's cell
lines overexpressing the BCL6 transcripts. The consensus sequence was protected
from the digestion by nuclease in a DNase I footprinting assay. In conclusion,
BCL6 may be involved in tumorigenesis by binding to the consensus sequences of
the other genes.

PMID: 7945383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1994 Sep;85(9):911-7.

Variant translocation of the BCL6 gene to immunoglobulin kappa light chain gene
in B-cell lymphoma.

Suzuki K(1), Miki T, Kawamata N, Hirosawa S, Yoshizawa K, Kiyosawa K, Aoki N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

A lymphoma cell line with a variant type of translocation, t(2;3)(p11;q27), was
established from a patient who had received liver transplantation. To elucidate
the molecular mechanism of the t(2;3)(p11;q27) chromosomal translocation, we
compared the structures of both derivative (der) chromosomal breakpoints with
those of their germline predecessors. We noted that the BCL6 gene on chromosome 3
was juxtaposed with the immunoglobulin kappa light chain (Ig kappa) gene on
chromosome 2 in a head-to-head configuration. The breakpoint of the BCL6 gene was
within a previously reported breakpoint cluster region. The breakpoint on
chromosome 2 was within the intron between the leader (L) and variable (V)
sequences of one of the V kappa genes, which was fused to the J kappa 3 (J =
joining) segment. At chromosomal junctures, a direct repeat duplication of
chromosome 3 sequences and a deletion of chromosome 2 sequences were discovered. 
These results are consistent with a translocation model with illegitimate pairing
of staggered double-stranded DNA breaks at 3q27 and 2p11, repair, and ligation to
generate der(3) and der(2) chromosomes.

PMID: 7961119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Leukemia. 1994 Aug;8(8):1327-30.

The organization of the BCL6 gene.

Kawamata N(1), Miki T, Fukuda T, Hirosawa S, Aoki N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical And Dental University
School of Medicine, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation involving 3q27 has been recently described in
B-cell malignancies, especially in diffuse large cell lymphomas. We have
previously cloned the breakpoint cluster region of 3q27 designated as the BCL6
locus, previously known as BCL5, and subsequently cloned the cDNA for the BCL6
(we previously reported it as BCL5) gene encoding a novel Cys2-His2 zinc-finger
protein, which locates adjacent to the breakpoints and is activated through the
translocation. To elucidate whether rearrangements occur within the BCL6 gene, we
characterized the genomic structure of the gene. The BCL6 gene encompasses about 
26 kilobases (kb) and consists of nine exons. Translation start site is located
in exon 3 and zinc-finger motif is distributed in the exons 6 to 9. We have
identified at least two types of mRNA alternatively spliced, which contain or do 
not contain exon 2 of 134 bp coding for the 5' untranslated region. A large
intron 1 of 9 kb is not efficiently spliced out, which might result in the
creation of minor 10-12-kb transcripts observed in the Northern blot analysis in 
addition to major 3.8-kb transcripts. The breakpoints are clustered around the
first exon, and the putative regulatory region of the BCL6 gene is removed
through the translocation, leading to the over-expression of the gene.

PMID: 8057668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Blood. 1994 Apr 1;83(7):1757-9.

Rearrangements of the BCL6 gene in diffuse large cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Lo Coco F(1), Ye BH, Lista F, Corradini P, Offit K, Knowles DM, Chaganti RS,
Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032.

The pathogenesis of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) with a large cell component
(DLLC, including diffuse large cell, DLCL; diffuse mixed cell, MX-D; and
immunoblastic, IMB) is unknown. A novel candidate proto-oncogene, BCL6, that is
involved in chromosome band 3q27 aberrations in NHL has been recently identified.
We have investigated the incidence and disease-specificity of BCL6 rearrangements
in a large panel of lymphoid tumors, including acute and chronic lymphoid
leukemias (96 cases), various NHL types (125 cases), and multiple myelomas (23
cases). BCL6 rearrangements were found in 16/45 (35.5%) DLLC, more frequently in 
DLCL (15/33, 45%) than in MX-D (1/10, 10%), in 2/31 (6.4%) follicular NHL, and in
no other tumor types. BCL6 rearrangements represent the first genetic lesion
specifically and recurrently associated with DLLC and should prove useful for
understanding the pathogenesis as well as for the clinical monitoring of these
tumors.

PMID: 8142643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Nat Genet. 1993 Sep;5(1):66-70.

LAZ3, a novel zinc-finger encoding gene, is disrupted by recurring chromosome
3q27 translocations in human lymphomas.

Kerckaert JP(1), Deweindt C, Tilly H, Quief S, Lecocq G, Bastard C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 124 INSERM, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer de Lille, France.

We have shown previously that chromosomal translocations involving chromosome
3q27 and immunoglobulin gene regions are the third most common specific
translocations in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). We now report the isolation of a 
gene that is disrupted in two cases by t(3;14) and t(3;4) translocations. The
gene (LAZ3) encodes a 79 kDa protein containing six zinc-finger motifs and
sharing amino-terminal homology with several transcription factors including the 
Drosophila tramtrack and Broad-complex genes, both of which are developmental
transcription regulators. LAZ3 is transcribed as a 3.8 kb message predominantly
in normal adult skeletal muscle and in several NHL carrying 3q27 chromosomal
defects. We suggest that it may act as a transcription regulator and play an
important role in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 8220427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Hum Mol Genet. 1993 Sep;2(9):1513.

HindIII polymorphism in the BCL6 gene.

Baron BW(1), Billstrand C, Madronero L, McKeithan TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

PMID: 7902168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jun 1;90(11):5262-6.

Identification of the gene associated with the recurring chromosomal
translocations t(3;14)(q27;q32) and t(3;22)(q27;q11) in B-cell lymphomas.

Baron BW(1), Nucifora G, McCabe N, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, McKeithan TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

Chromosomal translocations involving chromosome 3, band q27, are among the most
common rearrangements in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. From a bacteriophage lambda
library prepared from a lymphoma characterized by a t(3;14)(q27;q32), genomic
clones were isolated using a probe from the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus
(IGH) joining region. In addition to clones containing an apparently normal IGH
rearrangement, others were found to contain one of the translocation breakpoint
junctions. Normal chromosome 3 sequences and the reciprocal breakpoint junction
were subsequently isolated. DNA probes on each side of the chromosome 3
breakpoint hybridized at high stringency to the DNA of various mammalian species,
demonstrating evolutionary conservation. One such probe from the presumptive
der(3) chromosome detected an 11-kilobase transcript when hybridized to RNA of B-
and T-cell lines. A probe made from partial cDNA clones isolated from a T-cell
line hybridized with genomic DNA from both sides of the chromosome 3 breakpoint, 
indicating that the t(3;14) is associated with a break within the gene on
chromosome 3. In situ chromosomal hybridization revealed that the same gene is
involved in the t(3;22)(q27;q11). Preliminary nucleotide sequencing shows no
identity of the cDNA to gene sequences in available data banks. We propose the
name BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6) for this gene, since it is likely to play a role in
the pathogenesis of certain B-cell lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC46696
PMID: 8506375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


