
1. Parasitology. 2015 Nov;142(13):1563-73. doi: 10.1017/S0031182015001122. Epub 2015
Sep 4.

BRF1, a subunit of RNA polymerase III transcription factor TFIIIB, is essential
for cell growth of Trypanosoma brucei.

Vélez-Ramírez DE(1), Florencio-Martínez LE(1), Romero-Meza G(1), Rojas-Sánchez
S(1), Moreno-Campos R(1), Arroyo R(2), Ortega-López J(3), Manning-Cela R(4),
Martínez-Calvillo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biomedicina, Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala,Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México,Av. De los Barrios 1,Col. Los Reyes
Iztacala,Tlalnepantla,Edo. de México,CP 54090,México. (2)Departamento de
Infectómica y Patogénesis Molecular,Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados del IPN,Av. IPN 2508,México,D.F.,CP 07360,México. (3)Departamento de
Biotecnología y Bioingeniería,Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del
IPN,Av. IPN 2508,México,D.F.,CP 07360,México. (4)Departamento de Biomedicina
Molecular,Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN,Av. IPN
2508,México,D.F.,CP 07360,México.

RNA polymerase III (Pol III) synthesizes small RNA molecules that are essential
for cell viability. Accurate initiation of transcription by Pol III requires
general transcription factor TFIIIB, which is composed of three subunits:
TFIIB-related factor BRF1, TATA-binding protein and BDP1. Here we report the
molecular characterization of BRF1 in Trypanosoma brucei (TbBRF1), a parasitic
protozoa that shows distinctive transcription characteristics. In silico analysis
allowed the detection in TbBRF1 of the three conserved domains located in the
N-terminal region of all BRF1 orthologues, namely a zinc ribbon motif and two
cyclin repeats. Homology modelling suggested that, similarly to other BRF1 and
TFIIB proteins, the TbBRF1 cyclin repeats show the characteristic structure of
five a-helices per repeat, connected by a short random-coiled linker. As expected
for a transcription factor, TbBRF1 was localized in the nucleus. Knock-down of
TbBRF1 by RNA interference (RNAi) showed that this protein is essential for the
viability of procyclic forms of T. brucei, since ablation of TbBRF1 led to growth
arrest of the parasites. Nuclear run-on and quantitative real-time PCR analyses
demonstrated that transcription of all the Pol III-dependent genes analysed was
reduced, at different levels, after RNAi induction.

PMID: 26337955  [PubMed - in process]


2. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;35(16):2831-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00263-15. Epub 2015 Jun 
8.

A Region of Bdp1 Necessary for Transcription Initiation That Is Located within
the RNA Polymerase III Active Site Cleft.

Hu HL(1), Wu CC(2), Lee JC(2), Chen HT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China Institute of Molecular
Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. (2)Institute of
Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China htchen012@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

The RNA polymerase III (Pol III)-specific transcription factor Bdp1 is crucial to
Pol III recruitment and promoter opening in transcription initiation, yet
structural information is sparse. To examine its protein-binding targets within
the preinitiation complex at the residue level, photoreactive amino acids were
introduced into Saccharomyces cerevisiae Bdp1. Mutations within the highly
conserved SANT domain cross-linked to the transcription factor IIB
(TFIIB)-related transcription factor Brf1, consistent with the findings of
previous studies. In addition, we identified an essential N-terminal region that 
cross-linked with the Pol III catalytic subunit C128 as well as Brf1. Closer
examination revealed that this region interacted with the C128 N-terminal region,
the N-terminal half of Brf1, and the C-terminal domain of the C37 subunit,
together positioning this region within the active site cleft of the
preinitiation complex. With our functional data, our analyses identified an
essential region of Bdp1 that is positioned within the active site cleft of Pol
III and necessary for transcription initiation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4508317
PMID: 26055328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2015 May 13;10(5):e0127225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127225.
eCollection 2015.

Differential Phosphorylation of RNA Polymerase III and the Initiation Factor
TFIIIB in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lee J(1), Moir RD(1), Willis IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, United States of America. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America; Department of
Systems and Computational Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York, United States of America.

The production of ribosomes and tRNAs for protein synthesis has a high energetic 
cost and is under tight transcriptional control to ensure that the level of RNA
synthesis is balanced with nutrient availability and the prevailing environmental
conditions. In the RNA polymerase (pol) III system in yeast, nutrients and stress
affect transcription through a bifurcated signaling pathway in which protein
kinase A (PKA) and TORC1 activity directly or indirectly, through downstream
kinases, alter the phosphorylation state and function of the Maf1 repressor and
Rpc53, a TFIIF-like subunit of the polymerase. However, numerous lines of
evidence suggest greater complexity in the regulatory network including the
phosphoregulation of other pol III components. To address this issue, we
systematically examined all 17 subunits of pol III along with the three subunits 
of the initiation factor TFIIIB for evidence of differential phosphorylation in
response to inhibition of TORC1. A relatively high stoichiometry of
phosphorylation was observed for several of these proteins and the Rpc82 subunit 
of the polymerase and the Bdp1 subunit of TFIIIB were found to be differentially 
phosphorylated. Bdp1 is phosphorylated on four major sites during exponential
growth and the protein is variably dephosphorylated under conditions that inhibit
tRNA gene transcription. PKA, the TORC1-regulated kinase Sch9 and protein kinase 
CK2 are all implicated in the phosphorylation of Bdp1. Alanine substitutions at
the four phosphosites cause hyper-repression of transcription indicating that
phosphorylation of Bdp1 opposes Maf1-mediated repression. The new findings
suggest an integrated regulatory model for signaling events controlling pol III
transcription.

PMCID: PMC4430316
PMID: 25970584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genome Res. 2015 Feb;25(2):155-66. doi: 10.1101/gr.176925.114. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

BRF1 mutations alter RNA polymerase III-dependent transcription and cause
neurodevelopmental anomalies.

Borck G(1), Hög F(2), Dentici ML(3), Tan PL(4), Sowada N(5), Medeira A(6),
Gueneau L(7), Thiele H(8), Kousi M(4), Lepri F(3), Wenzeck L(2), Blumenthal I(9),
Radicioni A(10), Schwarzenberg TL(11), Mandriani B(12), Fischetto R(13),
Morris-Rosendahl DJ(14), Altmüller J(15), Reymond A(7), Nürnberg P(16), Merla
G(17), Dallapiccola B(3), Katsanis N(4), Cramer P(18), Kubisch C(19).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany;
guntram.borck@uni-ulm.de. (2)Gene Center Munich and Department of Biochemistry,
Center for Integrated Protein Science CIPSM, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, 81377 Munich, Germany; (3)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 00165
Rome, Italy; (4)Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA; (5)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, 89081
Ulm, Germany; (6)Serviço de Genética, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital S.
Maria, CHLN, 1649-035 Lisboa, Portugal; (7)Center for Integrative Genomics,
University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (8)Cologne Center for
Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; (9)Molecular
Neurogenetics Unit and Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center
for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02114, USA; (10)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 00161
Rome, Italy; (11)Department of Neonatology, Sapienza University, 00161 Rome,
Italy; (12)IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza, Medical Genetics Unit, 71013 San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; PhD Program, Molecular Genetics applied to Medical
Sciences, University of Brescia, 25121 Brescia, Italy; (13)U.O. Malattie
Metaboliche PO Giovanni XXIII, AOU Policlinico Consorziale, 70120 Bari, Italy;
(14)Genomic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London
SW3 6LY, United Kingdom; (15)Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; Institute for Human Genetics, University of
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; (16)Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG),
University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; Cologne Excellence Cluster on
Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of
Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC),
University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany; (17)IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della
Sofferenza, Medical Genetics Unit, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; (18)Max
Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biology,
37077 Göttingen, Germany; (19)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm,
89081 Ulm, Germany; Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Genome Res. 2015 Apr;25(4):609.

RNA polymerase III (Pol III) synthesizes tRNAs and other small noncoding RNAs to 
regulate protein synthesis. Dysregulation of Pol III transcription has been
linked to cancer, and germline mutations in genes encoding Pol III subunits or
tRNA processing factors cause neurogenetic disorders in humans, such as
hypomyelinating leukodystrophies and pontocerebellar hypoplasia. Here we describe
an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cerebellar hypoplasia and
intellectual disability, as well as facial dysmorphic features, short stature,
microcephaly, and dental anomalies. Whole-exome sequencing revealed biallelic
missense alterations of BRF1 in three families. In support of the pathogenic
potential of the discovered alleles, suppression or CRISPR-mediated deletion of
brf1 in zebrafish embryos recapitulated key neurodevelopmental phenotypes; in
vivo complementation showed all four candidate mutations to be pathogenic in an
apparent isoform-specific context. BRF1 associates with BDP1 and TBP to form the 
transcription factor IIIB (TFIIIB), which recruits Pol III to target genes. We
show that disease-causing mutations reduce Brf1 occupancy at tRNA target genes in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and impair cell growth. Moreover, BRF1 mutations reduce 
Pol III-related transcription activity in vitro. Taken together, our data show
that BRF1 mutations that reduce protein activity cause neurodevelopmental
anomalies, suggesting that BRF1-mediated Pol III transcription is required for
normal cerebellar and cognitive development.

© 2015 Borck et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4315290
PMID: 25561519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Hum Hered. 2014;77(1-4):175-82. doi: 10.1159/000360475. Epub 2014 Jul 29.

Consanguinity and hereditary hearing loss in Qatar.

Girotto G(1), Mezzavilla M, Abdulhadi K, Vuckovic D, Vozzi D, Khalifa Alkowari M,
Gasparini P, Badii R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Qatar is a sovereign state located on the Eastern coast of the Arabian Peninsula 
in the Persian Gulf. Its native population consists of 3 major subgroups: people 
of Arabian origin or Bedouins, those from an Eastern or Persian ancestry and
individuals with African admixture. Historically, all types of consanguineous
marriages have been and still are common in the Qatari population, particularly
among first and double-first cousins. Thus, there is a higher risk for most
inherited diseases including hereditary hearing loss (HHL). In particular, a
hearing loss prevalence of 5.2% has been reported in Qatar, with parental
consanguinity being more common among affected individuals as compared with
unaffected ones. Our recent molecular results confirm a high homogeneity and
level of inbreeding in Qatari HHL patients. Among all HHL genes, GJB2, the major 
player worldwide, accounts for a minor proportion of cases and at least 3
additional genes have been found to be mutated in Qatari patients. Interestingly,
one gene, BDP1, has been described to cause HHL only in this country. These
results point towards an unexpected level of genetic heterogeneity despite the
high level of inbreeding. This review provides an up-to-date picture of HHL in
Qatar and of the impact of consanguinity on this disease.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25060281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:519. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-519.

Transcriptional regulation and spatial interactions of head-to-head genes.

Chen Y, Li Y, Wei J(1), Li YY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, P R China.
Jenny.Wei@astrazeneca.com.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic genomes, about 10% of genes are arranged in a
head-to-head (H2H) orientation, and the distance between the transcription start 
sites of each gene pair is closer than 1 kb. Two genes in an H2H pair are prone
to co-express and co-function. There have been many studies on bidirectional
promoters. However, the mechanism by which H2H genes are regulated at the
transcriptional level still needs further clarification, especially with regard
to the co-regulation of H2H pairs. In this study, we first used the Hi-C data of 
chromatin linkages to identify spatially interacting H2H pairs, and then
integrated ChIP-seq data to compare H2H gene pairs with and without evidence of
spatial interactions in terms of their binding transcription factors (TFs). Using
ChIP-seq and DNase-seq data, histones and DNase associated with H2H pairs were
identified. Furthermore, we looked into the connections between H2H genes in a
human co-expression network.
RESULTS: We found that i) Similar to the behaviour of two genes within an H2H
pair (intra-H2H pair), a gene pair involving two distinct H2H pairs (inter-H2H
pair) which interact with each other spatially, share common transcription
factors (TFs); ii) TFs of intra- and inter-H2H pairs are distributed differently.
Factors such as HEY1, GABP, Sin3Ak-20, POL2, E2F6, and c-MYC are essential for
the bidirectional transcription of intra-H2H pairs; while factors like CTCF,
BDP1, GATA2, RAD21, and POL3 play important roles in coherently regulating
inter-H2H pairs; iii) H2H gene blocks are enriched with hypersensitive DNase and 
modified histones, which participate in active transcriptions; and iv) H2H genes 
tend to be highly connected compared with non-H2H genes in the human
co-expression network.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings shed new light on the mechanism of the transcriptional 
regulation of H2H genes through their linear and spatial interactions. For
intra-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors regulate their transcriptions through
bidirectional promoters, whereas for inter-H2H gene pairs, transcription factors 
are likely to regulate their activities depending on the spatial interaction of
H2H gene pairs. In this way, two distinctive groups of transcription factors
mediate intra- and inter-H2H gene transcriptions respectively, resulting in a
highly compact gene regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC4089025
PMID: 24962804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Anim Genet. 2014 Oct;45(5):674-84. doi: 10.1111/age.12184. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Comprehensive analysis of the whole transcriptomes from two different pig breeds 
using RNA-Seq method.

Ropka-Molik K(1), Zukowski K, Eckert R, Gurgul A, Piórkowska K, Oczkowicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomics, National Research Institute of Animal Production,
Krakowska 1, 32-083, Balice, Poland.

Next-generation sequencing RNA-Seq technology is a powerful tool that creates new
possibilities for whole-transcriptome analysis. In our study, the RNA-Seq method 
was applied to analyze global changes in transcriptome from muscle tissue (m.
semimembranosus) in two pig breeds (Pietrain and Polish Landrace, PL). The breeds
differ in terms of muscularity, growth rate and reproduction traits. Using three 
different approaches (deseq, cufflinks and edger) and taking into account the
most restrictive criteria, 35 genes differentially expressed between Pietrain and
PL pigs were identified. In both breeds, the most abundant were transcripts
encoding ribosomal and cytoskeletal proteins (TPM3, TCAP, TMOD4, TPM2, TNNC1) and
calcium-binding proteins involved in muscle contraction, calcium-mediated
signaling or cation transport (CASQ1, MLC2V, SLC25A4, MYL3). In PL pigs, we
identified up-regulation of several genes that play crucial roles in
reproduction: female gamete generation (BDP1, PTPN21, USP9X), fertilization
(EGFR) and embryonic development (CPEB4). In the Pietrain breed, only seven genes
were over-expressed (CISH, SPP1, TUBA8, ATP6V1C2, IGKC, predicted LOC100510960
and LOC100626400), and they play important roles in, for example, negative
regulation of apoptosis, immune response, cell-cell signaling, cell growth and
migration as well as the metabolic process. The functions of the majority of
selected genes were consistent with phenotypic variation in investigated breeds; 
thus, we proposed a new panel of candidate genes that can be associated with
economically important pig traits.

© 2014 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

PMID: 24961663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 2;8(12):e80323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080323. eCollection
2013.

Linkage study and exome sequencing identify a BDP1 mutation associated with
hereditary hearing loss.

Girotto G(1), Abdulhadi K, Buniello A, Vozzi D, Licastro D, d'Eustacchio A,
Vuckovic D, Alkowari MK, Steel KP, Badii R, Gasparini P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Nonsyndromic Hereditary Hearing Loss is a common disorder accounting for at least
60% of prelingual deafness. GJB2 gene mutations, GJB6 deletion, and the A1555G
mitochondrial mutation play a major role worldwide in causing deafness, but there
is a high degree of genetic heterogeneity and many genes involved in deafness
have not yet been identified. Therefore, there remains a need to search for new
causative mutations. In this study, a combined strategy using both linkage
analysis and sequencing identified a new mutation causing hearing loss. Linkage
analysis identified a region of 40 Mb on chromosome 5q13 (LOD score 3.8) for
which exome sequencing data revealed a mutation (c.7873 T>G leading to
p.*2625Gluext*11) in the BDP1 gene (B double prime 1, subunit of RNA polymerase
III transcription initiation factor IIIB) in patients from a consanguineous
Qatari family of second degree, showing bilateral, post-lingual, sensorineural
moderate to severe hearing impairment. The mutation disrupts the termination
codon of the transcript resulting in an elongation of 11 residues of the BDP1
protein. This elongation does not contain any known motif and is not conserved
across species. Immunohistochemistry studies carried out in the mouse inner ear
showed Bdp1 expression within the endothelial cells in the stria vascularis, as
well as in mesenchyme-derived cells surrounding the cochlear duct. The
identification of the BDP1 mutation increases our knowledge of the molecular
bases of Nonsyndromic Hereditary Hearing Loss and provides new opportunities for 
the diagnosis and treatment of this disease in the Qatari population.

PMCID: PMC3846559
PMID: 24312468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(3):551-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00910-13. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Mapping the protein interaction network for TFIIB-related factor Brf1 in the RNA 
polymerase III preinitiation complex.

Khoo SK(1), Wu CC, Lin YC, Lee JC, Chen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Graduate
Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

TFIIB-related factor Brf1 is essential for RNA polymerase (Pol) III recruitment
and open-promoter formation in transcription initiation. We site specifically
incorporated a nonnatural amino acid cross-linker into Brf1 to map its protein
interaction targets in the preinitiation complex (PIC). Our cross-linking
analysis in the N-terminal domain of Brf1 indicated a pattern of multiple protein
interactions reminiscent of TFIIB in the Pol active-site cleft. In addition to
the TFIIB-like protein interactions, the Brf1 cyclin repeat subdomain is in
contact with the Pol III-specific C34 subunit. With site-directed hydroxyl
radical probing, we further revealed the binding between Brf1 cyclin repeats and 
the highly conserved region connecting C34 winged-helix domains 2 and 3. In
contrast to the N-terminal domain of Brf1, the C-terminal domain contains
extensive binding sites for TBP and Bdp1 to hold together the TFIIIB complex on
the promoter. Overall, the domain architecture of the PIC derived from our
cross-linking data explains how individual structural subdomains of Brf1
integrate the protein network from the Pol III active center to the promoter for 
transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC3911497
PMID: 24277937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Mol Model. 2013 Oct;19(10):4239-49. doi: 10.1007/s00894-013-1862-4. Epub 2013
Jun 9.

Optical chemosensors for Cu(II) ion based on BODIPY derivatives: an experimental 
and theoretical study.

Keawwangchai T(1), Wanno B, Morakot N, Keawwangchai S.

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Excellence for Innovation in Chemistry (PERCH-CIC) and
Supramolecular Chemistry Research Unit, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of
Science, Mahasarakham University, Maha Sarakham, 44150, Thailand,
k.tasawan@gmail.com.

Two BODIPY derivatives for Cu(2+) ion chemosensors containing
4-[2-(diethylamino)-2-oxoethoxy]phenyl (BDP1) and
3,4-bis[2-(diethylamino)-2-oxoethoxy]phenyl (BDP2) were synthesized by coupling
appropriate N,N-diethyl-2-(4-formylphenoxy)acetamide and 2,4-dimethylpyrrole
moieties in the presence of trifluoroacetic acid and anhydrous dichloromethane at
room temperature. The binding abilities between these chemosensors and 50
equivalents of Na(+), K(+), Ag(+), Ca(2+), Fe(2+), Ni(2+), Cu(2+), Zn(2+),
Cd(2+), Hg(2+) and Pb(2+) ions were studied using UV-vis and fluorescence
spectrophotometry. The results show that, compared to other ions, both the UV-vis
absorption and fluorescence emission intensity of BDP2 decreased dramatically
when Cu(2+) ion was added. To explain this behavior, ab initio quantum chemical
calculations were performed using correlated second-order Møller-Plesset
perturbation theory (MP2/LanL2DZ). The calculated orbital energies indicated that
the decrease in UV-vis absorption intensity and the quenching of fluorescene
emission were due to the single-electron reduction of Cu(2+) to Cu(+) ion.

PMID: 23748557  [PubMed]


11. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May;41(9):4743-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt178. Epub 2013 Mar
21.

Translating mRNAs strongly correlate to proteins in a multivariate manner and
their translation ratios are phenotype specific.

Wang T(1), Cui Y, Jin J, Guo J, Wang G, Yin X, He QY, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education
Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and
Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. tongwang@jnu.edu.cn

As a well-known phenomenon, total mRNAs poorly correlate to proteins in their
abundances as reported. Recent findings calculated with bivariate models
suggested even poorer such correlation, whereas focusing on the translating mRNAs
(ribosome nascent-chain complex-bound mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs) subset. In this study, we
analysed the relative abundances of mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs and proteins on genome-wide 
scale, comparing human lung cancer A549 and H1299 cells with normal human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, respectively. As discovered, a strong
correlation between RNC-mRNAs and proteins in their relative abundances could be 
established through a multivariate linear model by integrating the mRNA length as
a key factor. The R(2) reached 0.94 and 0.97 in A549 versus HBE and H1299 versus 
HBE comparisons, respectively. This correlation highlighted that the mRNA length 
significantly contributes to the translational modulation, especially to the
translational initiation, favoured by its correlation with the mRNA translation
ratio (TR) as observed. We found TR is highly phenotype specific, which was
substantiated by both pathway analysis and biased TRs of the splice variants of
BDP1 gene, which is a key transcription factor of transfer RNAs. These findings
revealed, for the first time, the intrinsic and genome-wide translation
modulations at translatomic level in human cells at steady-state, which are
tightly correlated to the protein abundance and functionally relevant to cellular
phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3643591
PMID: 23519614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. BMC Genomics. 2012 Dec 26;13:728. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-728.

Genomic insights of protein arginine methyltransferase Hmt1 binding reveals novel
regulatory functions.

Milliman EJ(1), Hu Z, Yu MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY 14260, USA.

BACKGROUND: Protein arginine methylation is a post-translational modification
involved in important biological processes such as transcription and RNA
processing. This modification is catalyzed by both type I and II protein arginine
methyltransferases (PRMTs). One of the most conserved type I PRMTs is PRMT1, the 
homolog of which is Hmt1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Hmt1 has been shown to play
a role in various gene expression steps, such as promoting the dynamics of
messenger ribonucleoprotein particle (mRNP) biogenesis, pre-mRNA splicing, and
silencing of chromatin. To determine the full extent of Hmt1's involvement during
gene expression, we carried out a genome-wide location analysis for Hmt1.
RESULTS: A comprehensive genome-wide binding profile for Hmt1 was obtained by
ChIP-chip using NimbleGen high-resolution tiling microarrays. Of the
approximately 1000 Hmt1-binding sites found, the majority fall within or proximal
to an ORF. Different occupancy patterns of Hmt1 across genes with different
transcriptional rates were found. Interestingly, Hmt1 occupancy is found at a
number of other genomic features such as tRNA and snoRNA genes, thereby
implicating a regulatory role in the biogenesis of these non-coding RNAs. RNA
hybridization analysis shows that Hmt1 loss-of-function mutants display higher
steady-state tRNA abundance relative to the wild-type. Co-immunoprecipitation
studies demonstrate that Hmt1 interacts with the TFIIIB component Bdp1,
suggesting a mechanism for Hmt1 in modulating RNA Pol III transcription to
regulate tRNA production.
CONCLUSIONS: The genome-wide binding profile of Hmt1 reveals multiple potential
new roles for Hmt1 in the control of eukaryotic gene expression, especially in
the realm of non-coding RNAs. The data obtained here will provide an important
blueprint for future mechanistic studies on the described occupancy relationship 
for genomic features bound by Hmt1.

PMCID: PMC3568405
PMID: 23268696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(13):2715-28. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05151-11. Epub 2011 May 
2.

The TFIIF-like Rpc37/53 dimer lies at the center of a protein network to connect 
TFIIIC, Bdp1, and the RNA polymerase III active center.

Wu CC(1), Lin YC, Chen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Eukaryotic RNA polymerase III (Pol III) relies on a transcription factor
TFIIF-like Rpc37/53 subcomplex for promoter opening, elongation, termination, and
reinitiation. By incorporating the photoreactive amino acid
p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine (BPA) into Rpc37, Rpc53, and the Rpc2 subunit of Pol
III, we mapped protein-protein interactions, revealing the position of Rpc37/53
within the Pol III preinitiation complex (PIC). BPA photo-cross-linking was
combined with site-directed hydroxyl radical probing to localize the Rpc37/53
dimerization module on the lobe/external 2 domains of Rpc2, in similarity to the 
binding of TFIIF on Pol II. N terminal to the dimerization domain, Rpc53 binds
the Pol III-specific subunits Rpc82 and Rpc34, the Pol III stalk, and the
assembly factor TFIIIC, essential for PIC formation. The C-terminal domain of
Rpc37 interacts extensively with Rpc2 and Rpc34 and contains binding sites for
initiation factor Bdp1. We also located the C-terminal domain of Rpc37 within the
Pol III active center in the ternary elongation complex, where it likely
functions in accurate termination. Our work explains how the Rpc37/53 dimer is
anchored on the Pol III core and acts as a hub to integrate a protein network for
initiation and termination.

PMCID: PMC3133384
PMID: 21536656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Apr;39(8):3331-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1257. Epub 2010 Dec
7.

Different sequence signatures in the upstream regions of plant and animal tRNA
genes shape distinct modes of regulation.

Zhang G(1), Lukoszek R, Mueller-Roeber B, Ignatova Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University 
of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Str 24-25, 14476 Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.

In eukaryotes, the transcription of tRNA genes is initiated by the concerted
action of transcription factors IIIC (TFIIIC) and IIIB (TFIIIB) which direct the 
recruitment of polymerase III. While TFIIIC recognizes highly conserved,
intragenic promoter elements, TFIIIB binds to the non-coding 5'-upstream regions 
of the tRNA genes. Using a systematic bioinformatic analysis of 11 multicellular 
eukaryotic genomes we identified a highly conserved TATA motif followed by a
CAA-motif in the tRNA upstream regions of all plant genomes. Strikingly, the
5'-flanking tRNA regions of the animal genomes are highly heterogeneous and lack 
a common conserved sequence signature. Interestingly, in the animal genomes the
tRNA species that read the same codon share conserved motifs in their upstream
regions. Deep-sequencing analysis of 16 human tissues revealed multiple splicing 
variants of two of the TFIIIB subunits, Bdp1 and Brf1, with tissue-specific
expression patterns. These multiple forms most likely modulate the TFIIIB-DNA
interactions and explain the lack of a uniform signature motif in the tRNA
upstream regions of animal genomes. The anticodon-dependent 5'-flanking motifs
provide a possible mechanism for independent regulation of the tRNA transcription
in various human tissues.

PMCID: PMC3082873
PMID: 21138970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Mar 12;11:21. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-21.

Regulation of TFIIIB during F9 cell differentiation.

Athineos D(1), Marshall L, White RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road,
Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.

BACKGROUND: Differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells into parietal
endoderm (PE) provides a tractable model system for studying molecular events
during early and inaccessible stages of murine development. PE formation is
accompanied by extensive changes in gene expression both in vivo and in culture. 
One of the most dramatic is the ~10-fold decrease in transcriptional output by
RNA polymerase (pol) III. This has been attributed to changes in activity of
TFIIIB, a factor that is necessary and sufficient to recruit pol III to
promoters. The goal of this study was to identify molecular changes that can
account for the low activity of TFIIIB following F9 cell differentiation.
RESULTS: Three essential subunits of TFIIIB decrease in abundance as F9 cells
differentiate; these are Brf1 and Bdp1, which are pol III-specific, and TBP,
which is also used by pols I and II. The decreased levels of Brf1 and Bdp1
proteins can be explained by reduced expression of the corresponding mRNAs.
However, this is not the case for TBP, which is regulated post-transcriptionally.
In proliferating cells, pol III transcription is stimulated by the proto-oncogene
product c-Myc and the mitogen-activated protein kinase Erk, both of which bind to
TFIIIB. However, c-Myc levels fall during differentiation and Erk becomes
inactive through dephosphorylation. The diminished abundance of TFIIIB is
therefore likely to be compounded by changes to these positive regulators that
are required for its full activity. In addition, PE cells have elevated levels of
the retinoblastoma protein RB, which is known to bind and repress TFIIIB.
CONCLUSION: The low activity of TFIIIB in PE can be attributed to a combination
of changes, any one of which could be sufficient to inhibit pol III
transcription. Declining levels of essential TFIIIB subunits and of activators
that are required for maximal TFIIIB activity are accompanied by an increase in a
potent repressor of TFIIIB. These events provide fail-safe guarantees to ensure
that pol III output is appropriate to the diminished metabolic requirements of
terminally differentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC2842266
PMID: 20226026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 4;106(31):12682-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904843106. Epub 2009 Jul 20.

The JNKs differentially regulate RNA polymerase III transcription by coordinately
modulating the expression of all TFIIIB subunits.

Zhong S(1), Johnson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, 2011 Zonal
Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

RNA polymerase (pol) III-dependent transcription is subject to stringent
regulation by tumor suppressors and oncogenic proteins and enhanced RNA pol III
transcription is essential for cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. Since
the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) display both oncogenic and tumor suppressor
properties, the roles of these proteins in regulating RNA pol III transcription
were examined. In both mouse and human cells, loss or reduction in JNK1
expression represses RNA pol III transcription. In contrast, loss or reduction in
JNK2 expression induces transcription. The JNKs coordinately regulate expression 
of all 3 TFIIIB subunits. While JNK1 positively regulates TBP expression, the RNA
pol III-specific factors, Brf1 and Bdp1, JNK2 negatively regulates their
expression. Brf1 is coregulated with TBP through the JNK target, Elk-1. Reducing 
Elk-1 expression decreases Brf1 expression. Decreasing JNK1 expression reduces
Elk-1 occupancy at the Brf1 promoter, while decreasing JNK2 expression enhances
recruitment of Elk-1 to the Brf1 promoter. In contrast, regulation of Bdp1 occurs
through JNK-mediated alterations in TBP expression. Altered TBP expression mimics
the effect of reduced JNK1 or JNK2 levels on Bdp1 expression. Decreasing JNK1
expression reduces the occupancy of TBP at the Bdp1 promoter, while decreasing
JNK2 expression enhances recruitment of TBP to the Bdp1 promoter. Together, these
results provide a molecular mechanism for regulating RNA pol III transcription
through the coordinate control of TFIIIB subunit expression and elucidate
opposing functions for the JNKs in regulating a large class of genes that dictate
the biosynthetic capacity of cells.

PMCID: PMC2722300
PMID: 19620725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Biol. 2009 Apr 3;387(3):523-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.02.008. Epub 2009
Feb 11.

Inhibition of RNA polymerase III transcription by BRCA1.

Veras I(1), Rosen EM, Schramm L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, St John's University, Queens, NY 11439,
USA.

RNA polymerase III (RNA pol III) transcribes structural RNAs involved in RNA
processing (U6 snRNA) and translation (tRNA), thereby regulating the growth rate 
of cells. Proper initiation by RNA pol III requires the transcription factor
TFIIIB. Gene-external U6 snRNA transcription requires TFIIIB consisting of Bdp1, 
TBP, and Brf2. Transcription from the gene-internal tRNA promoter requires TFIIIB
composed of Bdp1, TBP, and Brf1. TFIIIB is a target of tumor suppressors,
including PTEN, ARF, p53, and RB, and RB-related pocket proteins. Breast cancer
susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) tumor suppressor plays a role in DNA repair, cell
cycle regulation, apoptosis, genome integrity, and ubiquitination. BRCA1 has a
conserved amino-terminal RING domain, an activation domain 1 (AD1), and an acidic
carboxyl-terminal domain (BRCA1 C-terminal region). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
TFIIB interacts with the BRCA1 C-terminal region domain of Fcp1p, an RNA
polymerase II phosphatase. The TFIIIB subunits Brf1 and Brf2 are structurally
similar to TFIIB. Hence, we hypothesize that RNA pol III may be regulated by
BRCA1 via the TFIIB family members Brf1 and Brf2. Here we report that: (1) BRCA1 
inhibits both VAI (tRNA) and U6 snRNA RNA pol III transcription; (2) the AD1 of
BRCA1 is responsible for inhibition of U6 snRNA transcription, whereas the RING
domain and AD1 of BRCA1 are required for VAI transcription inhibition; and (3)
overexpression of Brf1 and Brf2 alleviates inhibition of U6 snRNA and VAI
transcription by BRCA1. Taken together, these data suggest that BRCA1 is a
general repressor of RNA pol III transcription.

PMID: 19361418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochemistry. 2008 Dec 16;47(50):13197-206. doi: 10.1021/bi801406z.

Structural characterization of the interaction between TFIIIB components Bdp1 and
Brf1.

Saïda F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics, University of California at San Diego, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. fsaida@biomail.ucsd.edu

Transcription factor TFIIIB plays key roles in transcription by RNA polymerase
III. Its three components (TBP, Brf1, and Bdp1) participate in crucial molecular 
events that include RNA polymerase recruitment, formation of the open initiation 
complex, and recycling of transcription. Although the details of the interaction 
among DNA, TBP, and Brf1 have been, in part, revealed through the crystal
structure of their ternary complex, structural details of the Brf1-Bdp1
interaction are lacking. In this paper, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is used 
to map the interaction interface between Bdp1 and Brf1 at single-amino acid
resolution, using minimal functional segments of the two proteins. An NMR-derived
structural model shows that the principal anchorage site of Brf1 is located on a 
convex surface of Bdp1 that encompasses helix 1 and helix 3 of its conserved SANT
domain. The main Bdp1 anchorage site is provided by a small set of residues
belonging to a Brf1 segment of residues 470-495.

PMID: 19086269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Aug 12;9:74. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-74.

Differential expression of the TFIIIB subunits Brf1 and Brf2 in cancer cells.

Cabarcas S(1), Jacob J, Veras I, Schramm L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, St, John's University, 8000 Utopia Parkway,
Queens, NY 11439, USA. stephanie.cabarcas05@stjohns.edu

BACKGROUND: RNA polymerase (pol) III transcription is specifically elevated in a 
variety of cancers and is a target of regulation by a variety of tumor
suppressors and oncogenes. Accurate initiation by RNA pol III is dependent on
TFIIIB. In higher eukaryotes, two forms of TFIIIB have been characterized. TFIIIB
required for proper initiation from gene internal RNA pol III promoters is
comprised of TBP, Bdp1, and Brf1. Proper initiation from gene external RNA pol
III promoters requires TBP, Bdp1, and Brf2. We hypothesized that deregulation of 
RNA polymerase III transcription in cancer may be a consequence of altered TFIIIB
expression
RESULTS: Here, we report: (1) the TFIIIB subunits Brf1 and Brf2 are
differentially expressed in a variety of cancer cell lines: (2) the Brf1 and Brf2
promoters differ in activity in cancer cell lines, and (3) VAI transcription is
universally elevated, as compared to U6, in breast, prostate and cervical cancer 
cells.
CONCLUSION: Deregulation of TFIIIB-mediated transcription may be an important
step in tumor development. We demonstrate that Brf1 and Brf2 mRNA are
differentially expressed in a variety of cancer cells and that the Brf2 promoter 
is more active than the Brf1 promoter in all cell lines tested. We also
demonstrate, that Brf1-dependent VAI transcription was significantly higher than 
the Brf2-dependent U6 snRNA transcription in all cancer cell lines tested. The
data presented suggest that Brf2 protein expression levels correlate with U6
promoter activity in the breast, cervical and prostate cell lines tested.
Interestingly, the Brf1 protein levels did not vary considerably in HeLa, MCF-7
and DU-145 cells, yet Brf1 mRNA expression varied considerably in breast,
prostate and cervical cancer cell lines tested. Thus, Brf1 promoter activity and 
Brf1 protein expression levels did not correlate well with Brf1-dependent
transcription levels. Taken together, we reason that deregulation of Brf1 and
Brf2 expression could be a key mechanism responsible for the observed
deregulation of RNA pol III transcription in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2533013
PMID: 18700021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(18):5764-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01262-07. Epub 2008 Jul 
21.

Different functional modes of p300 in activation of RNA polymerase III
transcription from chromatin templates.

Mertens C(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Transcriptional coactivators that regulate the activity of human RNA polymerase
III (Pol III) in the context of chromatin have not been reported. Here, we
describe a completely defined in vitro system for transcription of a human tRNA
gene assembled into a chromatin template. Transcriptional activation and histone 
acetylation in this system depend on recruitment of p300 by general initiation
factor TFIIIC, thus providing a new paradigm for recruitment of histone-modifying
coactivators. Beyond its role as a chromatin-modifying factor, p300 displays an
acetyltransferase-independent function at the level of preinitiation complex
assembly. Thus, direct interaction of p300 with TFIIIC stabilizes binding of
TFIIIC to core promoter elements and results in enhanced transcriptional activity
on histone-free templates. Additional studies show that p300 is recruited to the 
promoters of actively transcribed tRNA and U6 snRNA genes in vivo. These studies 
identify TFIIIC as a recruitment factor for p300 and thus may have important
implications for the emerging concept that tRNA genes or TFIIIC binding sites act
as chromatin barriers to prohibit spreading of silenced heterochromatin domains.

PMCID: PMC2546916
PMID: 18644873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):4204-14. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01912-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
7.

PTEN represses RNA polymerase III-dependent transcription by targeting the TFIIIB
complex.

Woiwode A(1), Johnson SA, Zhong S, Zhang C, Roeder RG, Teichmann M, Johnson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, Keck School of Medicine and the Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

PTEN, a tumor suppressor whose function is frequently lost in human cancers,
possesses a lipid phosphatase activity that represses phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling, controlling cell growth, proliferation, and survival. 
The potential for PTEN to regulate the synthesis of RNA polymerase (Pol) III
transcription products, including tRNAs and 5S rRNAs, was evaluated. The
expression of PTEN in PTEN-deficient cells repressed RNA Pol III transcription,
whereas decreased PTEN expression enhanced transcription. Transcription
repression by PTEN was uncoupled from PTEN-mediated effects on the cell cycle and
was independent of p53. PTEN acts through its lipid phosphatase activity,
inhibiting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR/S6K pathway to decrease transcription. PTEN, through
the inactivation of mTOR, targets the TFIIIB complex, disrupting the association 
between TATA-binding protein and Brf1. Kinetic analysis revealed that PTEN
initially induces a decrease in the serine phosphorylation of Brf1, leading to a 
selective reduction in the occupancy of all TFIIIB subunits on tRNA(Leu) genes,
whereas prolonged PTEN expression results in the enhanced serine phosphorylation 
of Bdp1. Together, these results demonstrate a new class of genes regulated by
PTEN through its ability to repress the activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR/S6K
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2423115
PMID: 18391023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 21;282(38):27887-96. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

The protein kinase CK2 phosphorylates SNAP190 to negatively regulate SNAPC DNA
binding and human U6 transcription by RNA polymerase III.

Gu L(1), Husain-Ponnampalam R, Hoffmann-Benning S, Henry RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Human U6 small nuclear RNA gene transcription by RNA polymerase III requires the 
general transcription factor SNAP(C), which binds to human small nuclear RNA core
promoter elements and nucleates pre-initiation complex assembly with the
Brf2-TFIIIB complex. Multiple components in this pathway are phosphorylated by
the protein kinase CK2, including the Bdp1 subunit of the Brf2-TFIIIB complex,
and RNA polymerase III, with negative and positive outcomes for U6 transcription,
respectively. However, a role for CK2 phosphorylation of SNAP(C) in U6
transcription has not been defined. In this report, we investigated the role of
CK2 in modulating the transcriptional properties of SNAP(C) and demonstrate that 
within SNAP(C), CK2 phosphorylates the N-terminal half of the SNAP190 subunit at 
two regions (amino acids 20-63 and 514-545) that each contain multiple CK2
consensus sites. SNAP190 phosphorylation by CK2 inhibits both SNAP(C) DNA binding
and U6 transcription activity. Mutational analyses of SNAP190 support a model
wherein CK2 phosphorylation triggers an allosteric inhibition of the SNAP190 Myb 
DNA binding domain.

PMID: 17670747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell. 2007 May 11;26(3):367-79.

Mammalian Maf1 is a negative regulator of transcription by all three nuclear RNA 
polymerases.

Johnson SS(1), Zhang C, Fromm J, Willis IM, Johnson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine and 
the Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, 2011
Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Most eukaryotic transcriptional regulators act in an RNA polymerase
(Pol)-selective manner. Here we show that the human Maf1 protein negatively
regulates transcription by all three nuclear Pols. Changes in Maf1 expression
affect Pol I- and Pol III-dependent transcription in human glioblastoma lines.
These effects are mediated, in part, through the ability of Maf1 to repress
transcription of the TATA binding protein, TBP. Maf1 targets an Elk-1-binding
site in the TBP promoter, and its occupancy of this region is reciprocal with
that of Elk-1. Similarly, Maf1 occupancy of Pol III genes is inversely correlated
with that of the initiation factor TFIIIB and Pol III. The phenotypic
consequences of reducing Maf1 expression include changes in cell morphology and
the accumulation of actin stress fibers, whereas Maf1 overexpression suppresses
anchorage-independent growth. Together with the ability of Maf1 to reduce
biosynthetic capacity, these findings support the idea that Maf1 regulates the
transformation state of cells.

PMID: 17499043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(19):5585-93. Epub 2006 Oct 6.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae RNA polymerase III recruitment factor subunits Brf1 
and Bdp1 impose a strict sequence preference for the downstream half of the TATA 
box.

Tsihlis ND(1), Grove A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA
70803, USA.

Association of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) with its cognate site within
eukaryotic promoters is key to accurate and efficient transcriptional initiation.
To achieve recruitment of Saccharomyces cerevisiae RNA polymerase III, TBP is
associated with two additional factors, Brf1 and Bdp1, to form the initiation
factor TFIIIB. Previous data have suggested that the structure or dynamics of the
TBP-DNA complex may be altered upon entry of Brf1 and Bdp1 into the complex. We
show here, using the altered specificity TBP mutant TBPm3 and an iterative in
vitro selection assay, that entry of Brf1 and Bdp1 into the complex imposes a
strict sequence preference for the downstream half of the TATA box. Notably, the 
selected sequence (TGTAAATA) is a perfect match to the TATA box of the RNA
polymerase III-transcribed U6 small nuclear RNA (SNR6) gene. We suggest that the 
selected T*A base pair step at the downstream end of the 8 bp TBP site may
provide a DNA flexure that promotes TFIIIB-DNA complex formation.

PMCID: PMC1636458
PMID: 17028095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 15;119(Pt 20):4235-46. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits independently of
AP-2 and ARH.

Maurer ME(1), Cooper JA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis requires cargo-specific adaptor proteins that
recognize specific receptors and recruit them into coated pits. ARH [also called 
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) adaptor protein] serves as an adaptor for
LDLR endocytosis in liver. However, ARH is dispensable for LDL uptake by some
other cell types. Here, we show that the adaptor Dab2 plays a major role in LDLR 
internalization in HeLa cells and fibroblasts. Dab2 mediates internalization of
LDLRs but not transferrin receptors independently of ARH and the classic clathrin
adaptor AP-2. If Dab2 is absent, ARH can mediate LDLR endocytosis, but its action
requires AP-2. Furthermore, the rate of LDLR endocytosis is decreased when Dab2
is absent and Dab2, but not ARH, catalyzes the efficient clustering of LDLR into 
coated pits. Dab2 activity requires its binding to clathrin, LDLR and
phospholipids. Dab2 is also involved in moving LDLRs off filopodia. We suggest
that Dab2 is a cargo-specific endocytic adaptor protein, stably associating with 
phospholipids and clathrin to sort LDLR to nascent-coated pits, whereas ARH might
accelerate later steps in LDLR endocytosis in cooperation with AP-2.

PMID: 16984970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):33871-80. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Epstein-Barr virus induces cellular transcription factors to allow active
expression of EBER genes by RNA polymerase III.

Felton-Edkins ZA(1), Kondrashov A, Karali D, Fairley JA, Dawson CW, Arrand JR,
Young LS, White RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ,
United Kingdom.

The EBER genes of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are transcribed by RNA polymerase
(pol) III to produce untranslated RNAs that are implicated in oncogenesis. These 
EBER transcripts are the most highly expressed viral gene products in
EBV-transformed cells. We have identified changes to the cellular transcription
machinery that may contribute to the high levels of EBER RNA. These include
phosphorylation of ATF2, which interacts with EBER promoters. A second is
induction of TFIIIC, a pol III-specific factor that activates EBER genes; all
five subunits of TFIIIC are overexpressed in EBV-positive cells. In addition, EBV
induces BDP1, a subunit of the pol III-specific factor TFIIIB. Although BDP1 is
the only TFIIIB subunit induced by EBV, its induction is sufficient to stimulate 
EBER expression in vivo, implying a limiting function. The elevated levels of
BDP1 and TFIIIC in EBV-positive cells stimulate production of tRNA, 7SL, and 5S
rRNA. Abnormally high expression of these cellular pol III products may
contribute to the ability of EBV to enhance growth potential.

PMID: 16956891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(16):5946-56.

Interactions of Brf1 peptides with the tetratricopeptide repeat-containing
subunit of TFIIIC inhibit and promote preinitiation complex assembly.

Liao Y(1), Moir RD, Willis IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The binding of Brf1 to the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)-containing
transcription factor IIIC (TFIIIC) subunit (Tfc4) represents a rate-limiting step
in the ordered assembly of the RNA polymerase III initiation factor TFIIIB. Tfc4 
contains multiple binding sites for Brf1 within its amino terminus and adjacent
TPR arrays, but the access of Brf1 to these sites is limited by autoinhibition.
Moreover, the Brf1 binding sites in Tfc4 overlap with sites important for the
subsequent recruitment of another TFIIIB subunit, Bdp1, implying that
repositioning of Brf1 is required after its initial interaction with Tfc4. As a
starting point for dissecting the steps in TFIIIC-directed assembly of TFIIIB, we
conducted yeast two-hybrid screens of Brf1 peptide libraries against different
TPR-containing Tfc4 fragments. Short, biochemically active peptides were
identified in three distinct regions of Brf1. Two peptides defined conserved but 
distal regions of Brf1 that participate in stable binding of Brf1 to TFIIIC-DNA. 
Remarkably, a third peptide that binds specifically to TPR6-9 of Tfc4 was found
to promote the formation of both TFIIIC-DNA and Brf1-TFIIIC-DNA complexes and to 
reduce the mobility of these complexes in native gels. The data are consistent
with this peptide causing a conformational change in TFIIIC that overcomes Tfc4
autoinhibition of Brf1 binding and suggest a structural model for the Brf1-Tfc4
interaction.

PMCID: PMC1592789
PMID: 16880507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Gene. 2006 Aug 1;377:96-108. Epub 2006 May 20.

A role for Yin Yang-1 (YY1) in the assembly of snRNA transcription complexes.

Emran F(1), Florens L, Ma B, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Stony Brook University, Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular
Pharmacology, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

The RNA polymerase (pol) II and III human small nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes have
very similar promoters and recruit a number of common factors. In particular,
both types of promoters utilize the small nuclear RNA activating protein complex 
(SNAP(c)) and the TATA box binding protein (TBP) for basal transcription, and are
activated by Oct-1. We find that SNAP(c) purified from cell lines expressing
tagged SNAP(c) subunits is associated with Yin Yang-1 (YY1), a factor implicated 
in both activation and repression of transcription. Recombinant YY1 accelerates
the binding of SNAP(c) to the proximal sequence element, its target within snRNA 
promoters. Moreover, it enhances the formation of a complex on the pol III U6
snRNA promoter containing all the factors (SNAP(c), TBP, TFIIB-related factor 2
(Brf2), and B double prime 1 (Bdp1)) that are sufficient to direct in vitro U6
transcription when complemented with purified pol III, as well as that of a
subcomplex containing TBP, Brf2, and Bdp1. YY1 is found on both the RNA
polymerase II U1 and the RNA polymerase III U6 promoters as determined by
chromatin immunoprecipitations. Thus, YY1 represents a new factor that
participates in transcription complexes formed on both pol II and III promoters.

PMID: 16769183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 19;281(20):14321-9. Epub 2006 Mar 21.

Mapping the principal interaction site of the Brf1 and Bdp1 subunits of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae TFIIIB.

Kassavetis GA(1), Driscoll R, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Center for Molecular Genetics, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0634, USA.
gak@biomail.ucsd.edu

The Brf1 subunit of the central RNA polymerase (pol) III transcription initiation
factor TFIIIB is bipartite; its N-terminal TFIIB-related half is principally
responsible for recruiting pol III to the promoter and for promoter opening near 
the transcriptional start site, whereas its pol III-specific C-terminal half
contributes most of the affinities that hold the three subunits of TFIIIB
together. Here, the principal attachment site of Brf1 for the Bdp1 subunit of
TFIIIB has been mapped by a combination of structure-informed, site-directed
mutagenesis and photochemical protein-DNA cross-linking. A 66-amino acid segment 
of Brf1 is shown to serve as a two-sided adhesive surface, with the side chains
projecting away from its extended interface with TATA-binding protein anchoring
Bdp1 binding. An extensive collection of N-terminal, C-terminal, and internal
deletion proteins has been used to demarcate the interacting Bdp1 domain to a
66-amino acid segment that includes the SANT domain of this subunit and is
phylogenetically the most conserved region of Bdp1.

PMID: 16551611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biol Chem. 2006 Mar;387(3):277-84.

The zinc finger protein ZNF297B interacts with BDP1, a subunit of TFIIIB.

Schoenen F(1), Wirth B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, D-50674 Cologne, Germany.

The human gene BDP1, localized on chromosome 5q13 in close proximity to the
spinal muscular atrophy determining gene SMN, encodes a large protein consisting 
of 2254 amino acids (aa). In the first third of the gene, the subunit of the RNA 
polymerase III (Pol III) transcription factor complex (TFIIIB alpha/beta) is
encoded. To further characterize the function of BDP1, we carried out a yeast
two-hybrid screen using various parts of BDP1. With the clone BDP1-(1-640) we
identified a novel interaction partner, ZNF297B. The ZNF297B gene is localized on
chromosome 9q24 and encodes a zinc finger protein of 467 aa possessing the
typical structure of a transcription factor. The interaction found in yeast was
confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and refined to the N-terminal region of
ZNF297B-(1-127) containing the BTB/POZ domain and the N-terminal end of
BDP1-(1-299). The ZNF297B transcript is 5.7 kb in length and ubiquitously
expressed, with highest levels found in muscles. Immunofluorescence staining
revealed a speckled pattern in the nuclei of HEK293 cells. Due to the essential
role of BDP1 in Pol III transcription, we propose that ZNF297B may also regulate 
these transcriptional pathways.

PMID: 16542149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Anal Biochem. 2006 May 1;352(1):135-41. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

High-throughput fluorescence polarization assay to identify small molecule
inhibitors of BRCT domains of breast cancer gene 1.

Lokesh GL(1), Rachamallu A, Kumar GD, Natarajan A.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Program, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

The C-terminus region of the 1863 residue early onset of breast cancer gene 1
(BRCA1) nuclear protein contains a tandem globular carboxy terminus domain termed
BRCT. The BRCT repeats in BRCA1 are phosphoserine- and/or
phosphothreonine-specific binding modules. The interaction of the BRCT(BRCA1)
domains with phosphorylated BRCA1-associated carboxyl terminal helicase (BACH1)
is cell cycle regulated and is essential for DNA damage-induced checkpoint
control during the transition from the G(2) phase to the M phase of the cell
cycle. Development of a competitive, homogeneous, high-throughput fluorescence
polarization (FP) assay to identify small molecule inhibitors of
BRCT(BRCA1)-BACH1 interaction is reported here. The FP assay was used for
measuring binding affinities and inhibition constants of BACH1 peptides and small
molecule inhibitors of BRCT(BRCA1) domains, respectively. A fluorescently labeled
wild-type BACH1 decapeptide (BDP1) containing the critical phosphoserine, a
phenylalanine at (P+3), and a GST-BRCT fusion protein were used to establish the 
FP assay. BDP1 has a dissociation constant (K(d)) of 1.58+/-0.01microM and a
dynamic range (DeltamP) of 164.9+/-1.9. The assay tolerates 20% dimethyl
sulfoxide, which enables screening poorly soluble compounds. Under optimized
conditions, a Z' factor of 0.87 was achieved in a 384-well format for
high-throughput screening.

PMID: 16500609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(21):9406-18.

Structure-function analysis of the human TFIIB-related factor II protein reveals 
an essential role for the C-terminal domain in RNA polymerase III transcription.

Saxena A(1), Ma B, Schramm L, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Program, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

The transcription factors TFIIB, Brf1, and Brf2 share related N-terminal zinc
ribbon and core domains. TFIIB bridges RNA polymerase II (Pol II) with the
promoter-bound preinitiation complex, whereas Brf1 and Brf2 are involved, as part
of activities also containing TBP and Bdp1 and referred to here as Brf1-TFIIIB
and Brf2-TFIIIB, in the recruitment of Pol III. Brf1-TFIIIB recruits Pol III to
type 1 and 2 promoters and Brf2-TFIIIB to type 3 promoters such as the human U6
promoter. Brf1 and Brf2 both have a C-terminal extension absent in TFIIB, but
their C-terminal extensions are unrelated. In yeast Brf1, the C-terminal
extension interacts with the TBP/TATA box complex and contributes to the
recruitment of Bdp1. Here we have tested truncated Brf2, as well as Brf2/TFIIB
chimeric proteins for U6 transcription and for assembly of U6 preinitiation
complexes. Our results characterize functions of various human Brf2 domains and
reveal that the C-terminal domain is required for efficient association of the
protein with U6 promoter-bound TBP and SNAP(c), a type 3 promoter-specific
transcription factor, and for efficient recruitment of Bdp1. This in turn
suggests that the C-terminal extensions in Brf1 and Brf2 are crucial to specific 
recruitment of Pol III over Pol II.

PMCID: PMC1265830
PMID: 16227591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 25;102(43):15406-11. Epub 2005 Oct 14.

Reconfiguring the connectivity of a multiprotein complex: fusions of yeast
TATA-binding protein with Brf1, and the function of transcription factor IIIB.

Kassavetis GA(1), Soragni E, Driscoll R, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0634, USA. gak@biomail.ucsd.edu

Transcription factor (TF) IIIB, the central transcription initiation factor of
RNA polymerase III (pol III), is composed of three subunits, Bdp1, Brf1 and
TATA-binding protein (TBP), all essential for normal function in vivo and in
vitro. Brf1 is a modular protein: Its N-proximal half is related to TFIIB and
binds similarly to the C-terminal stirrup of TBP; its C-proximal one-third
provides most of the affinity for TBP by binding along the entire length of the
convex surface and N-terminal lateral face of TBP. A structure-informed triple
fusion protein, with TBP core placed between the N- and C-proximal domains of
Brf1, has been constructed. The Brf1-TBP triple fusion protein effectively
replaces both Brf1 and TBP in TFIIIC-dependent and -independent transcription in 
vitro, and forms extremely stable TFIIIB-DNA complexes that are indistinguishable
from wild-type TFIIIB-DNA complexes by chemical nuclease footprinting. Unlike
Brf1 and TBP, the triple fusion protein is able to recruit pol III for TATA
box-directed transcription of linear and supercoiled DNA in the absence of Bdp1. 
The Brf1-TBP triple fusion protein also effectively replaces Brf1 function in
vivo as the intact protein, creating a TBP paralogue in yeast that is privatized 
for pol III transcription.

PMCID: PMC1266137
PMID: 16227432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genes Dev. 2005 Apr 15;19(8):955-64.

TFIIIB subunit Bdp1p is required for periodic integration of the Ty1
retrotransposon and targeting of Isw2p to S. cerevisiae tDNAs.

Bachman N(1), Gelbart ME, Tsukiyama T, Boeke JD.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Retrotransposons are RNA elements that reverse transcribe their RNA genomes and
make a cDNA copy that is inserted back into a new genomic location by the
element-encoded integrase protein. Ty1 is a long terminal repeat (LTR)
retrotransposon in Saccharomyces cerevisiae that inserts into an approximately
700-bp integration window upstream of tRNA genes with a periodicity of
approximately 80 bp. ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling by Isw2 upstream of tRNA 
genes leads to changes in chromatin structure and Ty1 integration site selection.
We show that the N terminus of Bdp1p, a component of the RNA polymerase III
transcription factor TFIIIB, is required for periodic integration of Ty1 into the
integration window. Deletion of the Bdp1p N terminus and mutation of ISW2 result 
in similar disruption of nucleosome positioning upstream of some tRNA genes, and 
the N-terminal domain of Bdp1p is required for targeting of Isw2 complex to tRNA 
genes. This study provides the first example for recruitment of an ATP-dependent 
chromatin-remodeling factor by a general transcription factor in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1080134
PMID: 15833918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell. 2004 Oct 8;16(1):81-92.

CK2 phosphorylation of Bdp1 executes cell cycle-specific RNA polymerase III
transcription repression.

Hu P(1), Samudre K, Wu S, Sun Y, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

RNA polymerase III (pol III) transcription from the human U6 snRNA promoter can
be reconstituted with the recombinant factors SNAPc and Brf2-TFIIIB combined with
purified pol III. In this system, CK2 treatment of the pol III complex is
required for transcription, whereas treatment of Brf2-TFIIIB is inhibitory. Here 
we show that CK2 inhibits Brf2-TFIIIB by specifically phosphorylating its Bdp1
component. Bdp1 is phosphorylated by CK2 during mitosis, and this is accompanied 
by Bdp1 dissociation from the U6 promoter and from chromatin in general and by
transcription repression. Remarkably, whereas inhibition of CK2 in mitotic
extracts restores pol III transcription, inhibition of CK2 in active S phase
extracts debilitates transcription. Thus, CK2 is directed to phosphorylate
different targets within the basal pol III transcription machinery at different
times during the cell cycle, with opposite transcriptional effects.

PMID: 15469824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Sep 14;101(37):13442-7. Epub 2004 Sep 3.

Distinct roles of transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC in RNA polymerase III
transcription reinitiation.

Ferrari R(1), Rivetti C, Acker J, Dieci G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Università degli Studi di
Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze 23/A, 43100 Parma, Italy.

Eukaryotic RNA polymerase (Pol) III is recruited to target promoters by a stable 
preinitiation complex containing transcription factors TFIIIC and TFIIIB. After
the first transcription cycle, reinitiation proceeds through facilitated
recycling, a process by which the terminating Pol III rapidly reloads onto the
same transcription unit. Here, we show that Pol III is repeatedly recaptured in
vitro by the first transcribed gene, even in the presence of a juxtaposed
competitor promoter complex, thus suggesting that facilitated recycling is not
merely due to a stochastic reassociation process favored by the small size of
class III genes. The transcription factor requirements for facilitated
reinitiation were investigated by taking advantage of Pol III templates that
support both TFIIIC-dependent and TFIIIC-independent transcription. A TFIIIC-less
transcription system, in which TFIIIB was reconstituted from recombinant TATA
box-binding protein and Brf1 proteins and a crude fraction containing the Bdp1
component, was sufficient to direct efficient Pol III recycling on short (
approximately 100 bp) class III genes. Unexpectedly, however, on longer (>300 bp)
transcription units, reinitiation in the presence of TFIIIB alone was
compromised, and TFIIIC was further required to reestablish a high reinitiation
rate. Transcription reinitiation was also severely impaired when recombinant Bdp1
protein replaced the corresponding crude fraction in reconstituted TFIIIB. The
data reveal an unexpected complexity in the Pol III reinitiation mechanism and
suggest the existence of a handing-back network between Pol III, TFIIIC, and
TFIIIB on actively transcribed class III genes.

PMCID: PMC518776
PMID: 15347814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):27022-9. Epub 2004 Apr 19.

Transcription factor (TF)-like nuclear regulator, the 250-kDa form of Homo
sapiens TFIIIB", is an essential component of human TFIIIC1 activity.

Weser S(1), Gruber C, Hafner HM, Teichmann M, Roeder RG, Seifart KH, Meissner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps Universität
Marburg, Lahnstrasse 3, D-35037 Marburg, Germany.

The general human RNA polymerase III transcription factor (TF) IIIC1 has hitherto
been ill defined with respect to the polypeptides required for reconstitution of 
its activity. Here we identify Homo sapiens TFIIIB" (HsBdp1) as an essential
component of hTFIIIC1 and hTFIIIC1-like activities. Several forms of HsBdp1 are
described. The 250-kDa form of HsBdp1, also designated the "transcription
factor-like nuclear regulator," strictly co-eluted with TFIIIC1 activity over
multiple chromatographic purification steps as revealed by Western blot with
anti-HsBdp1 antibodies and by MALDI-TOF analysis. In addition, TFIIIC1 activity
could be depleted from partially purified fractions with anti-HsBdp1 antibodies
but not with control antibodies. Moreover, highly purified recombinant HsBdp1
could replace TFIIIC1 activity in reconstituted transcription of the VAI gene in 
vitro. Furthermore, smaller proteins of approximately 90-150 kDa that were
recognized by anti-HsBdp1 antibodies co-eluted with TFIIIC1-like activity.
Finally, cytoplasmic extracts from differentiated mouse F9 fibroblast cells that 
lacked TFIIIC1 activity could be made competent for transcription of the VA1 gene
by the addition of TFIIIC1, TFIIIC1-like, or recombinant HsBdp1. These results
suggest that HsBdp1 proteins represent essential components of TFIIIC1 and
TFIIIC1-like activities.

PMID: 15096501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 May;15(5):2143-55. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

A role for sorting nexin 2 in epidermal growth factor receptor down-regulation:
evidence for distinct functions of sorting nexin 1 and 2 in protein trafficking.

Gullapalli A(1), Garrett TA, Paing MM, Griffin CT, Yang Y, Trejo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cardiovascular Biology Center, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7365, USA.

Sorting nexin 1 (SNX1) and SNX2, homologues of the yeast vacuolar protein-sorting
(Vps)5p, contain a phospholipid-binding motif termed the phox homology (PX)
domain and a carboxyl terminal coiled-coil region. A role for SNX1 in trafficking
of cell surface receptors from endosomes to lysosomes has been proposed; however,
the function of SNX2 remains unknown. Toward understanding the function of SNX2, 
we first examined the distribution of endogenous protein in HeLa cells. We show
that SNX2 resides primarily in early endosomes, whereas SNX1 is found partially
in early endosomes and in tubulovesicular-like structures distributed throughout 
the cytoplasm. We also demonstrate that SNX1 interacts with the mammalian
retromer complex through its amino terminal domain, whereas SNX2 does not.
Moreover, activated endogenous epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
colocalizes markedly with SNX2-positive endosomes, but minimally with
SNX1-containing vesicles. To assess SNX2 function, we examined the effect of a PX
domain-mutated SNX2 that is defective in vesicle localization on EGFR
trafficking. Mutant SNX2 markedly inhibited agonist-induced EGFR degradation,
whereas internalization remained intact. In contrast, SNX1 PX domain mutants
failed to effect EGFR degradation, whereas a SNX1 deletion mutant significantly
inhibited receptor down-regulation. Interestingly, knockdown of SNX1 and SNX2
expression by RNA interference failed to alter agonist-induced EGFR
down-regulation. Together, these findings suggest that both SNX1 and SNX2 are
involved in regulating lysosomal sorting of internalized EGFR, but neither
protein is essential for this process. These studies are the first to demonstrate
a function for SNX2 in protein trafficking.

PMCID: PMC404011
PMID: 14978220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12110-6. Epub 2003 Dec 2.

Negative regulation of HER2 signaling by the PEST-type protein-tyrosine
phosphatase BDP1.

Gensler M(1), Buschbeck M, Ullrich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am
Klopferspitz 18a, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) mediates a variety of complex
cellular functions and in case of deregulation can contribute to
pathophysiological processes. A tight and finely tuned control of RTK activity is
therefore critical for the cell. We investigated the role of the PEST-type
protein-tyrosine phosphatase BDP1 in the regulation of HER2, a member of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family of RTKs. Here we demonstrate that 
HER2 signaling is highly sensitive to BDP1 activity. Overexpression of BDP1
inhibited ligand-induced activation of HER2 but not that of the closely related
EGFR. On the other hand, suppression of endogenous BDP1 expression increased the 
phosphorylation state of HER2. In addition, BDP1 was able to interfere with
downstream signaling events by inhibiting the phosphorylation of the adaptor
protein Gab1 and reducing mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. Supported 
by the finding that BDP1 is coexpressed with HER2 in breast cancer cells, we
suggest that BDP1 is an important regulator of HER2 activity and thus the first
protein-tyrosine phosphatase shown to be involved in HER2 signal attenuation.

PMID: 14660651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. EMBO J. 2003 Nov 3;22(21):5841-50.

TFIIIB is phosphorylated, disrupted and selectively released from tRNA promoters 
during mitosis in vivo.

Fairley JA(1), Scott PH, White RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Mitosis involves a generalized repression of gene expression. In the case of RNA 
polymerase III transcription, this is due to phosphorylation-mediated
inactivation of TFIIIB, an essential complex comprising the TATA-binding protein 
TBP and the TAF subunits Brf1 and Bdp1. In HeLa cells, this repression is
mediated by a mitotic kinase other than cdc2-cyclin B and is antagonized by
protein phosphatase 2A. Brf1 is hyperphosphorylated in metaphase-arrested cells, 
but remains associated with promoters in condensed chromosomes, along with TBP.
In contrast, Bdp1 is selectively released. Repression can be reversed by raising 
the concentration of Brf1 or Bdp1. The data support a model in which
hyperphosphorylation disrupts TFIIIB during mitosis, compromising its ability to 
support transcription.

PMCID: PMC275401
PMID: 14592981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell. 2003 Sep;12(3):699-709.

A minimal RNA polymerase III transcription system from human cells reveals
positive and negative regulatory roles for CK2.

Hu P(1), Wu S, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY 11724, USA .

In higher eukaryotes, RNA polymerase (pol) III is known to use different
transcription factors to recognize three basic types of promoters, but in no case
have these transcription factors been completely defined. We show that a highly
purified pol III complex combined with the recombinant transcription factors
SNAP(c), TBP, Brf2, and Bdp1 directs multiple rounds of transcription initiation 
and termination from the human U6 promoter. The pol III complex contains traces
of CK2, and CK2 associates with the U6 promoter region in vivo. Transcription
requires CK2 phosphorylation of the pol III complex. In contrast, CK2
phosphorylation of TBP, Brf2, and Bdp1 combined is inhibitory. The results define
a minimum core machinery, the ultimate target of regulatory mechanisms, capable
of directing all steps of the transcription process-initiation, elongation, and
termination-by a metazoan RNA polymerase, and suggest positive and negative
regulatory roles for CK2 in transcription by pol III.

PMID: 14527415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. EMBO J. 2003 Oct 1;22(19):5115-24.

A common site on TBP for transcription by RNA polymerases II and III.

Schröder O(1), Bryant GO, Geiduschek EP, Berk AJ, Kassavetis GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Center for Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0634, USA.
olivers@biomail.ucsd.edu

The TATA-binding protein (TBP) is involved in all nuclear transcription. We show 
that a common site on TBP is used for transcription initiation complex formation 
by RNA polymerases (pols) II and III. TBP, the transcription factor IIB
(TFIIB)-related factor Brf1 and the pol III-specific factor Bdp1 constitute
TFIIIB. A photochemical cross-linking approach was used to survey a collection of
human TBP surface residue mutants for their ability to form TFIIIB-DNA complexes 
reliant on only the TFIIB-related part of Brf1. Mutations impairing complex
formation and transcription were identified and mapped on the surface of TBP. The
most severe effects were observed for mutations in the C-terminal stirrup of TBP,
which is the principal site of interaction between TBP and TFIIB. Structural
modeling of the Brf1-TBP complex and comparison with its TFIIB-TBP analog further
rationalizes the close resemblance of the TBP interaction with the N-proximal
part of Brf1 and TFIIB, and establishes the conserved usage of a TBP surface in
pol II and pol III transcription for a conserved function in the initiation of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC204460
PMID: 14517249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Cycle. 2003 Sep-Oct;2(5):442-4.

The TATA-binding protein as a regulator of cellular transformation.

Johnson SA(1), Dubeau L, White RJ, Johnson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine and 
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The TATA-binding protein, TBP, is used by all three RNA polymerases and is
therefore central to the process of gene expression. TBP associates with several 
subsets of proteins, called TATA-binding protein-associated factors (TAFs). This 
results in the formation of at least three distinct complexes, SL1, TFIID, and
TFIIIB, which dictates whether TBP functions in RNA polymerase (pol) I, pol II,
or pol III transcription, respectively. The regulation of gene expression has
focused largely on proteins that serve to modulate the efficiency by which the
general transcription components, such as TBP, interact with promoters. The
possibility of a basal transcription factor, itself, being regulated, and
influencing cellular homeostasis, has not been extensively considered. However,
recent studies have indicated that TBP is indeed regulated, and that modulation
of its cellular concentration has a profound, and surprisingly selective, impact 
on gene expression that can mediate the normal proliferative responses of cells
to growth stimuli as well as the transformation potential of cells.

PMID: 12963838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44467-74. Epub 2003 Aug 20.

The Brf1 and Bdp1 subunits of transcription factor TFIIIB bind to overlapping
sites in the tetratricopeptide repeats of Tfc4.

Liao Y(1), Willis IM, Moir RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

The RNA polymerase III initiation factor TFIIIB is assembled onto DNA through
interactions involving the Tfc4 subunit of the assembly factor TFIIIC and two
subunits of TFIIIB, Brf1 and Bdp1. Tfc4 contains two arrays of tetratricopeptide 
repeats (TPRs), each of which provides a binding site for Brf1. Dominant
mutations in the ligand binding channel of the first TPR array, TPRs1-5, and on
the back side of this array, increase Brf1 binding by Tfc4. Here we examine the
biological importance of the second TPR array, TPRs6 -9. Radical mutations at
phylogenetically conserved residues in the ligand binding channel of TPRs6 -9
impair pol III reporter gene transcription. Biochemical studies on one such
mutation, L469K in TPR7, revealed a defect in the recruitment of Brf1 into
TFIIIB-TFIIIC-DNA complexes and diminished the direct interaction between Tfc4
and Brf1. Multicopy suppression analysis implicates TPR9 in Brf1 binding and
TPRs7 and 8 in binding to more than one ligand. Indeed, the L469K mutation also
decreased the binding affinity for Bdp1 incorporation into TFIIIB-TFIIIC-DNA
complexes and inhibited binary interactions between Bdp1 and Tfc4. The Bdp1
binding domain in Tfc4 was mapped to TPRs1-9, a domain that contains both TPR
arrays and thus overlaps two of the known binding sites for Brf1. The properties 
of the L469K mutation identify both Brf1 and Bdp1 as ligands for the second TPR
array.

PMID: 12930823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 31;548(1-3):33-6.

A gene-specific effect of an internal deletion in the Bdp1 subunit of the RNA
polymerase III transcription initiation factor TFIIIB.

Ishiguro A(1), Kassavetis GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Center for Molecular Genetics, University 
of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0634, USA.
akiraishiguro@brain.riken.go.jp

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae RPR1 gene encodes the RNA subunit of its RNase P,
which processes RNA polymerase (pol) III primary transcripts. RPR1, which is
transcribed by pol III, has been isolated as a multicopy suppressor of a specific
small internal deletion (amino acids 253-269) in the Bdp1 subunit of
transcription factor TFIIIB, the core pol III transcription factor. The selective
effect of this Bdp1 deletion on RPR1 transcription has been analyzed in vitro. It
is shown that TFIIIC-dependent assembly of TFIIIB on the RPR1 promoter is
specifically sensitive to this Bdp1 deletion, leading to gene-specifically
defective single-round and multiple-round transcription.

PMID: 12885403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nature. 2003 Apr 3;422(6931):534-9. Epub 2003 Mar 26.

Crystal structure of a transcription factor IIIB core interface ternary complex.

Juo ZS(1), Kassavetis GA, Wang J, Geiduschek EP, Sigler PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale University, 266
Whitney Avenue, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8114, USA. juo@csb.yale.edu

Transcription factor IIIB (TFIIIB), consisting of the TATA-binding protein (TBP),
TFIIB-related factor (Brf1) and Bdp1, is a central component in basal and
regulated transcription by RNA polymerase III. TFIIIB recruits its polymerase to 
the promoter and subsequently has an essential role in the formation of the open 
initiation complex. The amino-terminal half of Brf1 shares a high degree of
sequence similarity with the polymerase II general transcription factor TFIIB,
but it is the carboxy-terminal half of Brf1 that contributes most of its binding 
affinity with TBP. The principal anchoring region is located between residues 435
and 545 of yeast Brf1, comprising its homology domain II. The same region also
provides the primary interface for assembling Bdp1 into the TFIIIB complex. We
report here a 2.95 A resolution crystal structure of the ternary complex
containing Brf1 homology domain II, the conserved region of TBP and 19 base pairs
of U6 promoter DNA. The structure reveals the core interface for assembly of
TFIIIB and demonstrates how the loosely packed Brf1 domain achieves remarkable
binding specificity with the convex and lateral surfaces of TBP.

PMID: 12660736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):17912-7. Epub 2003 Mar 10.

The role of transcription initiation factor IIIB subunits in promoter opening
probed by photochemical cross-linking.

Kassavetis GA(1), Han S, Naji S, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and the Center for Molecular Genetics,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0634, USA.
gak@uscd.edu

The core transcription initiation factor (TF) IIIB recruits its conjugate RNA
polymerase (pol) III to the promoter and also plays an essential role in promoter
opening. TFIIIB assembled with certain deletion mutants of its Brf1 and Bdp1
subunits is competent in pol III recruitment, but the resulting preinitiation
complex does not open the promoter. Whether Brf1 and Bdp1 participate in opening 
the promoter by direct DNA interaction (as sigma subunits of bacterial RNA
polymerases do) or indirectly by their action on pol III has been approached by
site-specific photochemical protein-DNA cross-linking of TFIIIB-pol III-U6 RNA
gene promoter complexes. Brf1, Bdp1, and several pol III subunits can be
cross-linked to the nontranscribed strand of the U6 promoter at base pair -9/-8
and +2/+3 (relative to the transcriptional start as +1), respectively the
upstream and downstream ends of the DNA segment that opens up into the
transcription bubble. Cross-linking of Bdp1 and Brf1 is detected at 0 degrees C
in closed preinitiation complexes and at 30 degrees C in complexes that are
partly open, but also it is detected in mutant TFIIIB-pol III-DNA complexes that 
are unable to open the promoter. In contrast, promoter opening-defective TFIIIB
mutants generate significant changes of cross-linking of polymerase subunits. The
weight of this evidence argues in favor of an indirect mode of action of TFIIIB
in promoter opening.

PMID: 12637540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Neurosci. 2002 Nov 15;22(22):9776-84.

Rab11a and myosin Vb regulate recycling of the M4 muscarinic acetylcholine
receptor.

Volpicelli LA(1), Lah JJ, Fang G, Goldenring JR, Levey AI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease and Department of Neurology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Agonist-induced internalization followed by subsequent return to the cell surface
regulates G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) activity. Because the cellular
responsiveness to ligand depends on the balance between receptor degradation and 
recycling, it is crucial to identify the molecules involved in GPCR recovery to
the cell surface. In this study, we identify mechanisms involved in the recycling
of the M4 subtype of muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. M4 is highly expressed in
the CNS, plays a role in locomotor activity, and is a novel therapeutic target
for neurologic and psychiatric disorders. Previous studies show that, after
cholinergic stimulation, M4 internalizes from the cell surface to endosomes in
cell culture and the rat brain. Here, we show that, after activation, M4 traffics
to transferrin receptor- and Rab11a-positive perinuclear endosomes. Expression of
the constitutively GDP-bound, inactive mutant Rab11aS25N inhibits M4 trafficking 
to recycling endosomes. Expression of the C-terminal tail of myosin Vb, a Rab11a 
effector, enhances M4 accumulation in perinuclear endosomes. Both Rab11aS25N and 
the myosin Vb tail impair M4 recycling. The results demonstrate that GPCR
recycling is mediated through a discrete pathway using both Rab11a and myosin Vb.

PMID: 12427833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):8067-78.

Redundant cooperative interactions for assembly of a human U6 transcription
initiation complex.

Ma B(1), Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

The core human U6 promoter consists of a proximal sequence element (PSE) located 
upstream of a TATA box. The PSE is recognized by the snRNA-activating protein
complex (SNAP(c)), which consists of five types of subunits, SNAP190, SNAP50,
SNAP45, SNAP43, and SNAP19. The TATA box is recognized by TATA box binding
protein (TBP). In addition, basal U6 transcription requires the SANT domain
protein Bdp1 and the transcription factor IIB-related factor Brf2. SNAP(c) and
mini-SNAP(c), which consists of just SNAP43, SNAP50, and the N-terminal third of 
SNAP190, bind cooperatively with TBP to the core U6 promoter. By generating
complexes smaller than mini-SNAP(c), we have identified a 50-amino-acid region
within SNAP190 that is (i) required for cooperative binding with TBP in the
context of mini-SNAP(c) and (ii) sufficient for cooperative binding with TBP when
fused to a heterologous DNA binding domain. We show that derivatives of
mini-SNAP(c) lacking this region are active for transcription and that with such 
complexes, TBP can still be recruited to the U6 promoter through cooperative
interactions with Brf2. Our results identify complexes smaller than mini-SNAP(c) 
that are transcriptionally active and show that there are at least two redundant 
mechanisms to stably recruit TBP to the U6 transcription initiation complex.

PMCID: PMC134731
PMID: 12391172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 15;21(20):5508-15.

Effects of DNA strand breaks on transcription by RNA polymerase III: insights
into the role of TFIIIB and the polarity of promoter opening.

Kassavetis GA(1), Grove A, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Center for Molecular Genetics, University 
of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0634, USA.
gak@ucsd.edu or agrove@lsu.edu

Certain deletion mutants of the Brf1 and Bdp1 subunits of transcription factor
(TF) IIIB retain the ability to recruit RNA polymerase (pol) III to its
promoters, but fail to support promoter opening: deletions within an internal
Bdp1 segment interfere with initiation of DNA strand separation, and an
N-terminal Brf1 deletion blocks propagation of promoter opening past the
transcriptional start site. The ability of DNA strand breaks to restore pol III
transcription activity to these defective TFIIIB assemblies has been analyzed
using U6 snRNA gene constructs. Breaks in a 21 bp segment spanning the
transcriptional start rescue transcription in DNA strand-specific and
subunit/mutation-specific patterns. A cluster of Bdp1 internal deletions also
reverses the inactivation of transcription with wild-type TFIIIB generated by
certain transcribed (template) strand breaks near the transcriptional start site.
A structure-based model and topological considerations interpret these
observations, explain how Bdp1 and Brf1 help to enforce the general upstream-->
downstream polarity of promoter opening and specify requirements for polarity
reversal.

PMCID: PMC129065
PMID: 12374751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48182-91. Epub 2002 Oct 4.

Multiple mechanisms contribute to the activation of RNA polymerase III
transcription in cells transformed by papovaviruses.

Felton-Edkins ZA(1), White RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom.

RNA polymerase (pol) III transcription is abnormally active in fibroblasts
transformed by polyomavirus (Py) or simian virus 40 (SV40). Several distinct
mechanisms contribute to this effect. In untransformed fibroblasts, the basal pol
III transcription factor (TF) IIIB is repressed through association with the
retinoblastoma protein RB; this restraint is overcome by large T antigens of Py
and SV40. Furthermore, cells transformed by these papovaviruses overexpress the
BDP1 subunit of TFIIIB, at both the protein and mRNA levels. Despite the
overexpression of BDP1, the abundance of the other TFIIIB components is
unperturbed following papovavirus transformation. In contrast, mRNAs encoding all
five subunits of the basal factor TFIIIC2 are found at elevated levels in
fibroblasts transformed by Py or SV40. Thus, both papovaviruses stimulate pol III
transcription by boosting production of selected components of the basal
machinery. Py differs from SV40 in encoding a highly oncogenic middle T antigen
that localizes outside the nucleus and activates several signal transduction
pathways. Middle T can serve as a potent activator of a pol III reporter in
transfected cells. Several distinct mechanisms therefore contribute to the high
levels of pol III transcription that accompany transformation by Py and SV40.

PMID: 12370195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Sep;22(17):6131-41.

A gain-of-function mutation in the second tetratricopeptide repeat of TFIIIC131
relieves autoinhibition of Brf1 binding.

Moir RD(1), Puglia KV, Willis IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

The interaction between the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)-containing subunit of 
TFIIIC, TFIIIC131, and the TFIIB-related factor Brf1 represents a limiting step
in the assembly of the RNA polymerase III (pol III) initiation factor TFIIIB.
This assembly reaction is facilitated by dominant mutations that map in and
around TPR2. Structural modeling of TPR1 to TPR3 from TFIIIC131 shows that one
such mutation, PCF1-2, alters a residue in the ligand-binding groove of the TPR
superhelix whereas another mutation, PCF1-1, changes a surface-accessible residue
on the back side of the TPR superhelix. In this work, we show that the PCF1-1
mutation (H190Y) increases the binding affinity for Brf1, but does not affect the
binding affinity for Bdp1, in the TFIIIC-dependent assembly of TFIIIB.
Interestingly, binding studies with TFIIIC131 fragments indicate that Brf1 does
not interact directly at the site of the PCF1-1 mutation. Rather, the data
suggest that the mutation overcomes the previously documented autoinhibition of
Brf1 binding. These findings together with the results from site-directed
mutagenesis support the hypothesis that gain-of-function mutations at amino acid 
190 in TPR2 stabilize an alternative conformation of TFIIIC131 that promotes its 
interaction with Brf1.

PMCID: PMC134014
PMID: 12167707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):25920-8. Epub 2002 May 6.

Mutational analysis of the transcription factor IIIB-DNA target of Ty3
retroelement integration.

Yieh L(1), Hatzis H, Kassavetis G, Sandmeyer SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697-1700, USA.

The Ty3 retrovirus-like element inserts preferentially at the transcription
initiation sites of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III. The requirements for
transcription factor (TF) IIIC and TFIIIB in Ty3 integration into the two
initiation sites of the U6 gene carried on pU6LboxB were previously examined. Ty3
integrates at low but detectable frequencies in the presence of TFIIIB subunits
Brf1 and TATA-binding protein. Integration increases in the presence of the third
subunit, Bdp1. TFIIIC is not essential, but the presence of TFIIIC specifies an
orientation of TFIIIB for transcriptional initiation and directs integration to
the U6 gene-proximal initiation site. In the current study, recombinant wild type
TATA-binding protein, wild type and mutant Brf1, and Bdp1 proteins and highly
purified TFIIIC were used to investigate the roles of specific protein domains in
Ty3 integration. The amino-terminal half of Brf1, which contains a TFIIB-like
repeat, contributed more strongly than the carboxyl-terminal half of Brf1 to Ty3 
targeting. Each half of Bdp1 split at amino acid 352 enhanced integration. In the
presence of TFIIIB and TFIIIC, the pattern of integration extended downstream by 
several base pairs compared with the pattern observed in vitro in the absence of 
TFIIIC and in vivo, suggesting that TFIIIC may not be present on genes targeted
by Ty3 in vivo. Mutations in Bdp1 that affect its interaction with TFIIIC
resulted in TFIIIC-independent patterns of Ty3 integration. Brf1 zinc ribbon and 
Bdp1 internal deletion mutants that are competent for polymerase III recruitment 
but defective in promoter opening were competent for Ty3 integration irrespective
of the state of DNA supercoiling. These results extend the similarities between
the TFIIIB domains required for transcription and Ty3 integration and also reveal
requirements that are specific to transcription.

PMID: 11994300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(10):3264-75.

Essential roles of Bdp1, a subunit of RNA polymerase III initiation factor
TFIIIB, in transcription and tRNA processing.

Ishiguro A(1), Kassavetis GA, Geiduschek EP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0634, USA.
ishiguro@biomail.ucsd.edu

The essential Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene BDP1 encodes a subunit of RNA
polymerase III (Pol III) transcription factor (TFIIIB); TATA box binding protein 
(TBP) and Brf1 are the other subunits of this three-protein complex. Deletion
analysis defined three segments of Bdp1 that are essential for viability. A
central segment, comprising amino acids 327 to 353, was found to be dispensable, 
and cells making Bdp1 that was split within this segment, at amino acid 352, are 
viable. Suppression of bdp1 conditional viability by overexpressing SPT15 and
BRF1 identified functional interactions of specific Bdp1 segments with TBP and
Brf1, respectively. A Bdp1 deletion near essential segment I was synthetically
lethal with overexpression of PCF1-1, a dominant gain-of-function mutation in the
second tetracopeptide repeat motif (out of 11) of the Tfc4 (tau(131)) subunit of 
TFIIIC. The analysis also identifies a connection between Bdp1 and
posttranscriptional processing of Pol III transcripts. Yeast genomic library
screening identified RPR1 as the specific overexpression suppressor of very slow 
growth at 37 degrees C due to deletion of Bdp1 amino acids 253 to 269. RPR1 RNA, 
a Pol III transcript, is the RNA subunit of RNase P, which trims pre-tRNA
transcript 5' ends. Maturation of tRNA was found to be aberrant in bdp1-Delta
253-269 cells, and RPR1 transcription with the highly resolved Pol III
transcription system in vitro was also diminished when recombinant Bdp1 Delta
253-269 replaced wild-type Bdp1. Physical interaction of RNase P with Bdp1 was
demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation and pull-down assays.

PMCID: PMC133792
PMID: 11971960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Dec 4;316(1):41-4.

Calpain proteolysis of alpha II-spectrin in the normal adult human brain.

Huh GY(1), Glantz SB, Je S, Morrow JS, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, 310 Cedar Street,
New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA.

The proteolysis of alphaII-spectrin by calpain may be physiologically involved
with synaptic remodeling, long-term potentiation, and memory formation. Calpain
activation may also mediate neuronal apoptosis, responses to hypoxic insult, and 
excitotoxic injury. Surprisingly little is known of the activity of these
calpain-mediated processes in the adult human brain. Using an antibody that
specifically recognizes calpain-cleaved alphaII-spectrin, we have mapped the
topographic distribution of the major alphaII-spectrin break-down product
(alphaII-bdp1) in six adult brains examined post-mortem. All brains were from
patients without evident neurological disease. Focally positive alphaII-bdp1 was 
consistently detected in the neuropil of the cortical gray matter, in occasional 
pyramidal neurons, and in rare reactive astrocytes in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus. Cerebellar Purkinje cells were more frequently, and more intensely, 
immunopositive. In all fields, staining was most intense in the soma and
dendrites of neurons. There was no correlation of the frequency of positive cells
with the postmortem interval or clinical condition. While these findings do not
rigorously exclude contributions from postmortem calpain activation, they do
suggest that a low-level of calpain processing of alphaII-spectrin is likely to
be a constitutive process in the adult human brain.

PMID: 11720774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genomics. 2000 Dec 15;70(3):315-26.

The transcription factor-like nuclear regulator (TFNR) contains a novel
55-amino-acid motif repeated nine times and maps closely to SMN1.

Kelter AR(1), Herchenbach J, Wirth B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Wilhelmstrasse 31, Bonn, D-53111, Germany.

The transcription factor-like nuclear regulator (TFNR) is a novel human gene that
maps on 5q13, distal to the duplicated region that includes SMN1, the spinal
muscular atrophy (SMA) determining gene. The location of TFNR allowed us to
design an evolutionary model of the SMA region. The 9.5-kb TFNR transcript is
highly expressed in cerebellum and weakly in all other tissues tested. TFNR
encodes a protein of 2254 amino acids (aa) and contains nine repeats of a novel
55-aa motif, of yet unknown function. The coding region is organized in 32 exons.
Alternative splicing of exon 15 results in a truncated protein of 796 aa. TFNR
comprises a series of polypeptides that range from 55 to 250 kDa.
Immunocytological studies showed that the TFNR protein is present exclusively in 
the nucleus, where it is concentrated in several nuclear structures. Amino acids 
155-474 show significant homology to TFC5, a subunit of the yeast transcription
factor TFIIIB, suggesting that TFNR is a putative transcription factor. Based on 
its proximity to SMN1 and its expression pattern, TFNR may be a candidate gene
for atypical forms of SMA with cerebral atrophy and axonal neuropathy that have
been shown to carry large deletions in the SMA region.

PMID: 11161782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Clin Microbiol. 2000 Jun;38(6):2043-50.

An analytical model applied to a multicenter pneumococcal enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay study.

Plikaytis BD(1), Goldblatt D, Frasch CE, Blondeau C, Bybel MJ, Giebink GS,
Jonsdottir I, Käyhty H, Konradsen HB, Madore DV, Nahm MH, Schulman CA, Holder PF,
Lezhava T, Elie CM, Carlone GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
bdp1@cdc.gov

Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines will eventually be licensed after favorable
results from phase III efficacy trials. After licensure of a conjugate vaccine
for invasive pneumococcal disease in infants, new conjugate vaccines will likely 
be licensed primarily on the basis of immunogenicity data rather than clinical
efficacy. Analytical methods must therefore be developed, evaluated, and
validated to compare immunogenicity results accurately within and between
laboratories for different vaccines. At present no analytical technique is
uniformly accepted and used in vaccine evaluation studies to determine the
acceptable level of agreement between a laboratory result and the assigned value 
for a given serum sample. This multicenter study describes the magnitude of
agreement among 12 laboratories quantifying an identical series of 48
pneumococcal serum specimens from 24 individuals (quality-control sera) by a
consensus immunoglobulin G (IgG) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
developed for this study. After provisional or trial antibody concentrations were
assigned to the quality-control serum samples for this study, four methods for
comparison of a series of laboratory-determined values with the assigned
concentrations were evaluated. The percent error between assigned values and
laboratory-determined concentrations proved to be the most informative of the
four methods. We present guidelines that a laboratory may follow to analyze a
series of quality-control sera to determine if it can reproduce the assigned
antibody concentrations within an acceptable level of tolerance. While this study
focused on a pneumococcal IgG ELISA, the methods that we describe are easily
generalizable to other immunological assays.

PMCID: PMC86724
PMID: 10834951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 21;13(10):2275-9.

Characterization of the PEST family protein tyrosine phosphatase BDP1.

Kim YW(1), Wang H, Sures I, Lammers R, Martell KJ, Ullrich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie,
Martinsried, Germany.

Using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification strategy, we identified a
novel protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) designated Brain Derived Phosphatase 
(BDP1). The full length sequence encoded an open reading frame of 459 amino acids
with no transmembrane domain and had a calculated molecular weight of 50 kDa. The
predicted amino acid sequence contained a PEST motif and accordingly, BDP1 shared
the greatest homology with members of the PTP-PEST family. When transiently
expressed in 293 cells BDP1 hydrolyzed p-Nitrophenylphosphate, confirming it as a
functional protein tyrosine phosphatase. Northern blot analysis indicated that
BDP1 was expressed not only in brain, but also in colon and several different
tumor-derived cell lines. Furthermore, BDP1 was found to differentially
dephosphorylate autophosphorylated tyrosine kinases which are known to be
overexpressed in tumor tissues.

PMID: 8950995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


