
1. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3123-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.109405. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

The nuclear hormone receptor family member NR5A2 controls aspects of multipotent 
progenitor cell formation and acinar differentiation during pancreatic
organogenesis.

Hale MA(1), Swift GH(1), Hoang CQ(1), Deering TG(1), Masui T(1), Lee YK(2), Xue
J(1), MacDonald RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA raymond.macdonald@utsouthwestern.edu.

The orphan nuclear receptor NR5A2 is necessary for the stem-like properties of
the epiblast of the pre-gastrulation embryo and for cellular and physiological
homeostasis of endoderm-derived organs postnatally. Using conditional gene
inactivation, we show that Nr5a2 also plays crucial regulatory roles during
organogenesis. During the formation of the pancreas, Nr5a2 is necessary for the
expansion of the nascent pancreatic epithelium, for the subsequent formation of
the multipotent progenitor cell (MPC) population that gives rise to pre-acinar
cells and bipotent cells with ductal and islet endocrine potential, and for the
formation and differentiation of acinar cells. At birth, the NR5A2-deficient
pancreas has defects in all three epithelial tissues: a partial loss of endocrine
cells, a disrupted ductal tree and a >90% deficit of acini. The acinar defects
are due to a combination of fewer MPCs, deficient allocation of those MPCs to
pre-acinar fate, disruption of acinar morphogenesis and incomplete acinar cell
differentiation. NR5A2 controls these developmental processes directly as well as
through regulatory interactions with other pancreatic transcriptional regulators,
including PTF1A, MYC, GATA4, FOXA2, RBPJL and MIST1 (BHLHA15). In particular,
Nr5a2 and Ptf1a establish mutually reinforcing regulatory interactions and
collaborate to control developmentally regulated pancreatic genes by binding to
shared transcriptional regulatory regions. At the final stage of acinar cell
development, the absence of NR5A2 affects the expression of Ptf1a and its acinar 
specific partner Rbpjl, so that the few acinar cells that form do not complete
differentiation. Nr5a2 controls several temporally distinct stages of pancreatic 
development that involve regulatory mechanisms relevant to pancreatic oncogenesis
and the maintenance of the exocrine phenotype.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197540
PMID: 25063451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Cell Sci. 2014 Mar 1;127(Pt 5):1018-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.138776. Epub 2014 Jan 
10.

RAB26 coordinates lysosome traffic and mitochondrial localization.

Jin RU(1), Mills JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

As they mature, professional secretory cells like pancreatic acinar and gastric
chief cells induce the transcription factor MIST1 (also known as BHLHA15) to
substantially scale up production of large secretory granules in a process that
involves expansion of apical cytoplasm and redistribution of lysosomes and
mitochondria. How a scaling factor like MIST1 rearranges cellular architecture
simply by regulating expression levels of its transcriptional targets is unknown.
RAB26 is a MIST1 target whose role in MIST1-mediated secretory cell maturation is
also unknown. Here, we confirm that RAB26 expression, unlike most Rabs which are 
ubiquitously expressed, is tissue specific and largely confined to
MIST1-expressing secretory tissues. Surprisingly, functional studies showed that 
RAB26 predominantly associated with LAMP1/cathepsin D lysosomes and not directly 
with secretory granules. Moreover, increasing RAB26 expression - by inducing
differentiation of zymogen-secreting cells or by direct transfection - caused
lysosomes to coalesce in a central, perinuclear region. Lysosome clustering in
turn caused redistribution of mitochondria into distinct subcellular
neighborhoods. The data elucidate a novel function for RAB26 and suggest a
mechanism for how cells could increase transcription of key effectors to
reorganize subcellular compartments during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3937772
PMID: 24413166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Pathol. 2012 Nov;228(3):351-65. doi: 10.1002/path.4015. Epub 2012 May 2.

Activation of protein kinase Cd leads to increased pancreatic acinar cell
dedifferentiation in the absence of MIST1.

Johnson CL(1), Peat JM, Volante SN, Wang R, McLean CA, Pin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a 5 year survival rate post-diagnosis
of < 5%. Individuals with chronic pancreatitis (CP) are 20-fold more likely to
develop PDAC, making it a significant risk factor for PDAC. While the
relationship for the increased susceptibility to PDAC is unknown, loss of the
acinar cell phenotype is common to both pathologies. Pancreatic acinar cells can 
dedifferentiate or trans-differentiate into a number of cell types including duct
cells, ß cells, hepatocytes and adipocytes. Knowledge of the molecular pathways
that regulate this plasticity should provide insight into PDAC and CP. MIST1
(encoded by Bhlha15 in mice) is a transcription factor required for complete
acinar cell maturation. The goal of this study was to examine the plasticity of
acinar cells that do not express MIST1 (Mist1(-/-) ). The fate of acinar cells
from C57Bl6 or congenic Mist1(-/-) mice expressing an acinar specific,
tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase mated to Rosa26 reporter LacZ mice
(Mist1(CreERT/-) R26r) was determined following culture in a three-dimensional
collagen matrix. Mist1(CreERT/-) R26r acini showed increased acinar
dedifferentiation, formation of ductal cysts and transient increases in PDX1
expression compared to wild-type acinar cells. Other progenitor cell markers,
including Foxa1, Sox9, Sca1 and Hes1, were elevated only in Mist1(-/-) cultures. 
Analysis of protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms by western blot and
immunofluorescence identified increased PKCe accumulation and nuclear
localization of PKCd that correlated with increased duct formation. Treatment
with rottlerin, a PKCd-specific inhibitor, but not the PKCe-specific antagonist
eV1-2, reduced acinar dedifferentiation, progenitor gene expression and ductal
cyst formation. Immunocytochemistry on CP or PDAC tissue samples showed reduced
MIST1 expression combined with increased nuclear PKCd accumulation. These results
suggest that the loss of MIST1 is a common event during PDAC and CP and events
that affect MIST1 function and expression may increase susceptibility to these
pathologies.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22374815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Bioessays. 2012 Jan;34(1):10-6. doi: 10.1002/bies.201100089. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Scaling factors: transcription factors regulating subcellular domains.

Mills JC(1), Taghert PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. jmills@wustl.edu

Developing cells acquire mature fates in part by selective (i.e. qualitatively
different) expression of a few cell-specific genes. However, all cells share the 
same basic repertoire of molecular and subcellular building blocks. Therefore,
cells must also specialize according to quantitative differences in cell-specific
distributions of those common molecular resources. Here we propose the novel
hypothesis that evolutionarily-conserved transcription factors called scaling
factors (SFs) regulate quantitative differences among mature cell types. SFs: (1)
are induced during late stages of cell maturation; (2) are dedicated to specific 
subcellular domains; and, thus, (3) allow cells to emphasize specific subcellular
features. We identify candidate SFs and discuss one in detail: MIST1 (BHLHA15,
vertebrates)/DIMM (CG8667, Drosophila); professional secretory cells use this SF 
to scale up regulated secretion. Because cells use SFs to develop their mature
properties and also to adapt them to ever-changing environmental conditions, SF
aberrations likely contribute to diseases of adult onset.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3692000
PMID: 22028036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


