
1. Epigenetics. 2016 Jan 2;11(1):11-23. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1117736. Epub
2016 Feb 18.

BDNF rs6265 methylation and genotype interact on risk for schizophrenia.

Ursini G(1,)(2), Cavalleri T(3,)(4), Fazio L(1), Angrisano T(5), Iacovelli L(6), 
Porcelli A(1), Maddalena G(1), Punzi G(1,)(2), Mancini M(1), Gelao B(1), Romano
R(1), Masellis R(1), Calabrese F(7), Rampino A(1), Taurisano P(1), Giorgio AD(8),
Keller S(5), Tarantini L(3,)(4), Sinibaldi L(9), Quarto T(1,)(10), Popolizio
T(8), Caforio G(1), Blasi G(1), Riva MA(7), De Blasi A(11), Chiariotti L(5),
Bollati V(3,)(4), Bertolino A(1,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)a Psychiatric Neuroscience Group, Department of Basic Medical Science,
Neuroscience and Sense Organs, University of Bari 'Aldo Moro' , Bari , Italy.
(2)b Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Johns Hopkins University Medical
Campus , Baltimore , MD , US. (3)c Department of Clinical and Community Sciences,
Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , Italy. (4)d Istituto Di Ricovero e
Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Maggiore Hospital, Mangiagalli and Regina
Elena Foundation , Milan , Italy. (5)e Istituto di Endocrinologia e Oncologia
Sperimentale, IEOS, CNR, and Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie 
Mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli 'Federico II' , Naples. (6)f Department
of Physiology and Pharmacology 'V. Erspamer', University of Rome 'Sapienza' ,
Rome , Italy. (7)g Center of Neuropharmacology; Dipartimento di Scienze
Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari; Università degli Studi di Milano , Milan , Italy.
(8)h Department of Neuroradiology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS) 'Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza' , San Giovanni Rotondo ,
Italy. (9)i Mendel Laboratory, Istituto di Ricoveroe Cura a Carattere Scientifico
(IRCCS) 'Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza' , San Giovanni Rotondo , Italy. (10)j
Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Institute of Behavioral Sciences, University of
Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland. (11)k Department of Molecular Medicine, University
of Rome 'Sapienza' , Rome , Italy.

Epigenetic mechanisms can mediate gene-environment interactions relevant for
complex disorders. The BDNF gene is crucial for development and brain plasticity,
is sensitive to environmental stressors, such as hypoxia, and harbors the
functional SNP rs6265 (Val(66)Met), which creates or abolishes a CpG dinucleotide
for DNA methylation. We found that methylation at the BDNF rs6265 Val allele in
peripheral blood of healthy subjects is associated with hypoxia-related early
life events (hOCs) and intermediate phenotypes for schizophrenia in a distinctive
manner, depending on rs6265 genotype: in ValVal individuals increased methylation
is associated with exposure to hOCs and impaired working memory (WM) accuracy,
while the opposite is true for ValMet subjects. Also, rs6265 methylation and hOCs
interact in modulating WM-related prefrontal activity, another intermediate
phenotype for schizophrenia, with an analogous opposite direction in the 2
genotypes. Consistently, rs6265 methylation has a different association with
schizophrenia risk in ValVals and ValMets. The relationships of methylation with 
BDNF levels and of genotype with BHLHB2 binding likely contribute to these
opposite effects of methylation. We conclude that BDNF rs6265 methylation
interacts with genotype to bridge early environmental exposures to adult
phenotypes, relevant for schizophrenia. The study of epigenetic changes in
regions containing genetic variation relevant for human diseases may have
beneficial implications for the understanding of how genes are actually
translated into phenotypes.

PMID: 26889735  [PubMed - in process]


2. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Jan 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Nr3C1-Bhlhb2 Axis Dysregulation Is Involved in the Development of Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity.

Wu LH(1,)(2), Cheng W(3,)(4), Yu M(3,)(4), He BM(3,)(4), Sun H(3,)(4), Chen
Q(3,)(4), Dong YW(4), Shao XT(3), Cai QQ(4), Peng M(5), Wu XZ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Children's Health Care, The Second Affiliated Hospital & Yu Ying
Children's Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China. jaemny@163.com. 
(2)Department of Clinic Medicine, Zhejiang Medical College, 481 Binwen Road,
Binjiang College Zone, Hangzhou, 310053, China. jaemny@163.com. (3)Department of 
Children's Health Care, The Second Affiliated Hospital & Yu Ying Children's
Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China. (4)Key Lab of
Glycoconjugate Research, Ministry of Public Health, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 138 Yi Xue
Yuan Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. (5)Department of Neonatology, Shanghai First 
Maternity and Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China. (6)Key Lab of Glycoconjugate Research, Ministry of Public Health,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, 138 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. xz_wu@shmu.edu.cn.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a child developmental and
behavioral disorder which seriously hinders their education and development. To
investigate the key regulators in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), the major affected
areas of ADHD, microRNA (miR)-138,138*, 34c*, 296, and 494, were noted for their 
significant downregulation in ADHD model rats spontaneously hypertensive rats
(SHRs) compared to Wistar Kyoto (WKY) rat control. Based on promoter sequence
analysis and activity assay, glucocorticoid receptor (Nr3c1) was identified for
the inhibition of the promoter activity of miR-138-1, 34c*, 296, and 494 genes
and their transcription. In the PFC of ADHD model rats SHR, Nr3c1 expression was 
abnormally elevated and reversely correlated with the levels of miR-138-1, 34c,
296, and 494 expression. Luciferase report assays indicated that all miR-138,
138*, 34c*, 296, and 494 targeted the 3' untranslated region of transcription
factor Bhlhb2 (Bhlhe40) messenger RNA (mRNA) in common and ectopic expression of 
miR-138,138*, 34c*, 296, and 494 further suppressed the expression of Bhlhb2
gene. Consistently, Bhlhb2 expression was significantly higher in PFC of ADHD
model SHR than control. Overexpressed Bhlhb2 in vitro significantly suppressed
PC12 cell differentiation, and silence of Bhlhb2 enhanced the growth of neurite
axon and dendrite. To observe the roles of Bhlhb2 further in vivo, Bhlhb2 was
silenced in the PFC of nine SHR rats. Interestingly, knockdown of Bhlhb2
significantly improved the hyperactivity behaviors in SHRs compared to control.
These findings show that Nr3c1-Bhlhb2 axis dysregulation was involved in the
development of attention deficit and hyperactivity.

PMID: 26820676  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Epigenetics. 2015;10(10):981-93. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1090072.

Regulation of BDNF chromatin status and promoter accessibility in a neural
correlate of associative learning.

Ambigapathy G(1), Zheng Z(1), Keifer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Neuroscience Group; Basic Biomedical Sciences; University of South Dakota;
Sanford School of Medicine ; Vermillion , SD USA.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene expression critically controls
learning and its aberrant regulation is implicated in Alzheimer's disease and a
host of neurodevelopmental disorders. The BDNF gene is target of known DNA
regulatory mechanisms but details of its activity-dependent regulation are not
fully characterized. We performed a comprehensive analysis of the epigenetic
regulation of the turtle BDNF gene (tBDNF) during a neural correlate of
associative learning using an in vitro model of eye blink classical conditioning.
Shortly after conditioning onset, the results from ChIP-qPCR show
conditioning-dependent increases in methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) and
repressor basic helix-loop-helix binding protein 2 (BHLHB2) binding to tBDNF
promoter II that corresponds with transcriptional repression. In contrast,
enhanced binding of ten-eleven translocation protein 1 (Tet1), extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), and cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) to promoter III corresponds with transcriptional activation. These actions
are accompanied by rapid modifications in histone methylation and phosphorylation
status of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II). Significantly, these remarkably
coordinated changes in epigenetic factors for two alternatively regulated tBDNF
promoters during conditioning are controlled by Tet1 and ERK1/2. Our findings
indicate that Tet1 and ERK1/2 are critical partners that, through complementary
functions, control learning-dependent tBDNF promoter accessibility required for
rapid transcription and acquisition of classical conditioning.

PMID: 26336984  [PubMed - in process]


4. Development. 2014 Nov;141(21):4168-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.109918.

Arid3b is essential for second heart field cell deployment and heart patterning.

Uribe V(1), Badía-Careaga C(1), Casanova JC(1), Domínguez JN(2), de la Pompa
JL(1), Sanz-Ezquerro JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Desarrollo y Reparación Cardiovascular, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3, Madrid
28029, Spain. (2)Departamento de Biología Experimental, Facultad de Ciencias
Experimentales, Universidad de Jaén, CU Las Lagunillas, Jáen 23071, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Desarrollo y Reparación Cardiovascular, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3, Madrid
28029, Spain Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología (CSIC), Darwin, 3, Madrid 28049, Spain jjsanz@cnb.csic.es.

Arid3b, a member of the conserved ARID family of transcription factors, is
essential for mouse embryonic development but its precise roles are poorly
understood. Here, we show that Arid3b is expressed in the myocardium of the
tubular heart and in second heart field progenitors. Arid3b-deficient embryos
show cardiac abnormalities, including a notable shortening of the poles, absence 
of myocardial differentiation and altered patterning of the atrioventricular
canal, which also lacks epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Proliferation and
death of progenitors as well as early patterning of the heart appear normal.
However, DiI labelling of second heart field progenitors revealed a defect in the
addition of cells to the heart. RNA microarray analysis uncovered a set of
differentially expressed genes in Arid3b-deficient tissues, including Bhlhb2, a
regulator of cardiomyocyte differentiation, and Lims2, a gene involved in cell
migration. Arid3b is thus required for heart development by regulating the
motility and differentiation of heart progenitors. These findings identify Arid3b
as a candidate gene involved in the aetiology of human congenital malformations.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25336743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:317-38. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00009-9.

Stra13 and Sharp-1, the non-grouchy regulators of development and disease.

Ow JR(1), Tan YH(2), Jin Y(2), Bahirvani AG(2), Taneja R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; National University of Singapore Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; National University of Singapore Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: phsrt@nus.edu.sg.

Stra13 and Sharp-1 are transcriptional repressors that share domain structure
similarity with members of the basic helix-loop-helix-Orange subfamily. In
contrast to other members that include Hes and Hey proteins, transcriptional
repression mediated by Stra13 and Sharp-1 does not involve recruitment of the
corepressor Groucho. Both proteins undergo sumoylation at evolutionarily
conserved sites, and this posttranslational modification serves as a platform for
association with chromatin-modifying enzymes including histone deacetylases and
histone methyltransferases. In addition to being widely expressed during
embryonic development and in adult tissues, the expression of both genes is
induced by a number of stimuli. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function studies
have demonstrated their function in cellular differentiation and regeneration, in
regulation of circadian rhythms, immune homeostasis, and metabolism. Given their 
diverse physiological functions in several tissues, it is not surprising that
deregulated expression of Stra13 and Sharp-1 is apparent in human pathologies.
Here, we review our current understanding of their cellular functions that
suggest a requirement in maintenance of tissue homeostasis.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Acta Naturae. 2014 Apr;6(2):71-83.

Analysis of the placental tissue transcriptome of normal and preeclampsia
complicated pregnancies.

Trifonova EA(1), Gabidulina TV(2), Ershov NI(3), Serebrova VN(4), Vorozhishcheva 
AY(5), Stepanov VA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of
Medical Sciences, Nab. Ushayky 10, 634050, Tomsk, Russia ; Tomsk State
University, Lenina Avenue, 36, 634050, Tomsk, Russia. (2)Siberian State Medical
University, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moskovsky Trakt, 2,
634050, Tomsk, Russia. (3)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Prosp. Lavrentieva 10, 630090, Novosibirsk, Russia. 
(4)Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of
Medical Sciences, Nab. Ushayky 10, 634050, Tomsk, Russia. (5)City Clinical
Hospital <U+2116> 1, Ul. Khitarova, 32, 654000, Novokuznetsk, Russia.

Preeclampsia is one of the most severe gestational complications which is one of 
the leading causes of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. A growth in
the incidence of severe and combined forms of the pathology has been observed in 
recent years. According to modern concepts, inadequate cytotrophoblast invasion
into the spiral arteries of the uterus and development of the
ischemia-reperfusion syndrome in the placental tissue play the leading role in
the development of preeclampsia, which is characterized by multipleorgan failure.
In this regard, our work was aimed at studying the patterns of placental tissue
transcriptome that are specific to females with PE and with physiological
pregnancy, as well as identifying the potential promising biomarkers and
molecular mechanisms of this pathology. We have identified 63 genes whose
expression proved to differ significantly in the placental tissue of females with
PE and with physiological pregnancy. A cluster of differentially expressed genes 
(DEG) whose expression level is increased in patients with preeclampsia includes 
not only the known candidate genes that have been identified in many other
genome-wide studies (e.g., LEP, BHLHB2, SIGLEC6, RDH13, BCL6), but also new genes
(ANKRD37, SYDE1, CYBA, ITGB2, etc.), which can be considered as new biological
markers of preeclampsia and are of further interest. The results of a functional 
annotation of DEG show that the development of preeclampsia may be related to a
stress response, immune processes, the regulation of cell-cell interactions,
intracellular signaling cascades, etc. In addition, the features of the
differential gene expression depending on preeclampsia severity were revealed. We
have found evidence of the important role of the molecular mechanisms responsible
for the failure of immunological tolerance and initiation of the pro-inflammatory
cascade in the development of severe preeclampsia. The results obtained elaborate
the concept of the pathophysiology of preeclampsia and contain the information
necessary to work out measures for targeted therapy of this disease. ;

PMCID: PMC4115229
PMID: 25093114  [PubMed]


7. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Aug;53(4):626-36. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0229-3. Epub 2014 
Jan 18.

Genomic organization and identification of promoter regions for the BDNF gene in 
the pond turtle Trachemys scripta elegans.

Ambigapathy G(1), Zheng Z, Keifer J.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Group, Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences, University of South
Dakota Sanford School of Medicine, 414 E. Clark St., Vermillion, SD, 57010, USA, 
ganesh.ambigapathy@usd.edu.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is an important regulator of neuronal
development and synaptic function. The BDNF gene undergoes significant
activity-dependent regulation during learning. Here, we identified the BDNF
promoter regions, transcription start sites, and potential regulatory sequences
for BDNF exons I-III that may contribute to activity-dependent gene and protein
expression in the pond turtle Trachemys scripta elegans (tBDNF). By using
transfection of BDNF promoter/luciferase plasmid constructs into human
neuroblastoma SHSY5Y cells and mouse embryonic fibroblast NIH3T3 cells, we
identified the basal regulatory activity of promoter sequences located upstream
of each tBDNF exon, designated as pBDNFI-III. Further, through chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, we detected CREB binding directly to exon I
and exon III promoters, while BHLHB2, but not CREB, binds within the exon II
promoter. Elucidation of the promoter regions and regulatory protein binding
sites in the tBDNF gene is essential for understanding the regulatory mechanisms 
that control tBDNF gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4103967
PMID: 24443176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2015 Jan;70(1):20-32. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glt212. 
Epub 2014 Jan 7.

A transcriptional roadmap to the senescence and differentiation of human oral
keratinocytes.

Jang da H(1), Bhawal UK(2), Min HK(3), Kang HK(1), Abiko Y(2), Min BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry and Program in Cancer and Developmental
Biology, Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, School of
Dentistry, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo, Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul. (4)Department of Oral
Biochemistry and Program in Cancer and Developmental Biology, Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, School of Dentistry, Seoul, Korea.
bmmin@snu.ac.kr.

Human epithelial cells undergo morphological and molecular changes leading to
terminal differentiation and replicative senescence after a finite number of cell
divisions during serial subculture. However, the target genes and their
functional significance in the senescence and differentiation in normal human
oral keratinocytes have been poorly defined. Here, we demonstrated normal human
oral keratinocytes transcriptional signature profiling to senescence and
differentiation. Using microarray analysis, our findings indicated that the gene 
expression profiles induced by serial subculture are distinct classes of gene.
The greatest number of these altered genes was identified as being related to
biological pathways of transport, cell proliferation, cell cycle, defense and
immune response, cell death, transcription, apoptosis, and inflammatory response,
suggesting that the serial subculture is able to induce a multitude of specific
gene expression changes during senescence and differentiation. Several highly
upregulated genes (IL-1ß, S100A8, S100A9, MMP1, MMP9, IL-8, BHLHB2, HES1, and
TWIST1) in response to the serial subculture in normal human oral keratinocytes
were observed. In vitro and in vivo studies also exhibited a close relationship
between senescence and differentiation of primary oral keratinocytes and
expression of inflammatory molecules. These results suggest a new approach to
determine the biological events underlying the pathogenesis of oral keratinocyte 
aging.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24398559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Jun;42(6):1468-76. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142313.

Clonal B cells of HCV-associated mixed cryoglobulinemia patients contain
exhausted marginal zone-like and CD21 low cells overexpressing Stra13.

Visentini M(1), Cagliuso M, Conti V, Carbonari M, Cibati M, Siciliano G,
Cristofoletti C, Russo G, Casato M, Fiorilli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

A clonal population of B cells expressing a V(H) 1-69-encoded idiotype
accumulates in hepatitis C virus (HCV) associated mixed cryoglobulinemia (MC).
These cells are phenotypically heterogeneous, resembling either typical marginal 
zone (MZ) B cells (IgM(+) IgD(+) CD27(+) CD21(+) ) or the exhausted CD21(low) B
cells that accumulate in HIV infection or in common variable immunodeficiency. We
show that both the MZ-like and the CD21(low) V(H) 1-69(+) B cells of MC patients 
are functionally exhausted, since they fail to respond to TLR and BCR ligands.
The proliferative defect of V(H) 1-69(+) B cells can be overcome by
co-stimulation of TLR9 and BCR in the presence of interleukin(IL)-2 and IL-10.
The MZ-like V(H) 1-69(+) B cells do not express the inhibitory receptors
distinctive of CD21(low) B cells, but display constitutive activation of
extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) and attenuated BCR/ERK signaling.
These cells also express abundant transcripts of Stra13 (DEC1, Bhlhb2, Sharp2,
Clast5), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that acts as a powerful
negative regulator of B-cell proliferation and homeostasis. Our findings suggest 
that MZ B cells activated by HCV undergo functional exhaustion associated with
BCR signaling defects and overexpression of a key antiproliferative gene, and may
subsequently become terminally spent CD21(low) B cells. Premature exhaustion may 
serve to prevent the outgrowth of chronically stimulated MZ B cells.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22678901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Dec;20(12):998-1003. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01388.x.

Centella asiatica extracts modulate hydrogen peroxide-induced senescence in human
dermal fibroblasts.

Kim YJ(1), Cha HJ, Nam KH, Yoon Y, Lee H, An S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Skin Care and Beauty, Osan University, Osan Cosmetology Research
Institute, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea.

Centella asiatica (C. asiatica) is a pharmacological plant in South Asia. It has 
been demonstrated that C. asiatica extracts containing various pentacyclic
triterpenes exert healing effects, especially wound healing and collagen
synthesis in skin. However, there are few studies on the effect of C. asiatica
extracts on stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS). To determine whether H(2)
O(2) -induced senescence is affected by C. asiatica extracts, we performed
senescence analysis on cultured human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs). We also analysed
whole gene expression level using microarrays and showed that 39 mRNAs are
differentially expressed in H(2) O(2) -induced HDFs with and without treatment
with C. asiatica extracts. These genes regulate apoptosis, gene silencing, cell
growth, transcription, senescence, DNA replication and the spindle checkpoint.
Differential expression of FOXM1, E2F2, MCM2, GDF15 and BHLHB2 was confirmed
using semi-quantitative PCR. In addition, C. asiatica extracts rescued the H(2)
O(2) -induced repression of replication in HDFs. Therefore, the findings
presented here suggest that C. asiatica extracts might regulate SIPS by
preventing repression of DNA replication and mitosis-related gene expression.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22092576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Oncogene. 2012 May 10;31(19):2461-70. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.425. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Hypoxia and MITF control metastatic behaviour in mouse and human melanoma cells.

Cheli Y(1), Giuliano S, Fenouille N, Allegra M, Hofman V, Hofman P, Bahadoran P, 
Lacour JP, Tartare-Deckert S, Bertolotto C, Ballotti R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U895, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire, Equipe 1, Biology
and Pathologies of Melanocytes, Equipe Labellisée par la Ligue Contre le Cancer, 
Nice, France.

Melanomas are very aggressive neoplasms with notorious resistance to
therapeutics. It was recently proposed that the remarkable phenotypic plasticity 
of melanoma cells allows for the rapid development of both resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs and invasive properties. Indeed, the capacity of melanoma 
cells to form distant metastases is the main cause of mortality in melanoma
patients. Therefore, the identification of the mechanism controlling melanoma
phenotype is of paramount importance. In the present report, we show that
deletion of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), the master
gene in melanocyte differentiation, is sufficient to increase the metastatic
potential of mouse and human melanoma cells. MITF silencing also increases
fibronectin and Snail, two mesenchymal markers that might explain the increased
invasiveness in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, ablation of this population by
Forskolin-induced differentiation or MITF-forced expression significantly
decreases tumour and metastasis formation, suggesting that eradication of
low-MITF cells might improve melanoma treatment. Moreover, we demonstrate that a 
hypoxic microenvironment decreases MITF expression through an indirect,
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1)a-dependant transcriptional mechanism, and
increases the tumourigenic and metastatic properties of melanoma cells. We
identified Bhlhb2, a new factor in melanoma biology, as the mediator of
hypoxia/HIF1a inhibitory effect on MITF expression. Our results reveal a
hypoxia-HIF1a-BHLHB2-MITF cascade controlling the phenotypic plasticity in
melanoma cells and favouring metastasis development. Targeting this pathway might
be helpful in the design of new anti-melanoma therapies.

PMID: 21996743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;19(4):1005-9.

[Transcriptional regulation of BHLHB2 induced by PML-RARa].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia XH(1), Yang WT, Zhu XH, Yang XW, Zhang J, Wang KK.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Objective of this study was to investigate the transcriptional regulation of
BHLHB2 gene by the PML-RARa fusion protein in APL cells and reveal the
pathogenesis of APL. RT-PCR was performed to detect the expression change of
BHLHB2 before and after the induction of PML-RARa in PR9 cells, and its
expression level after the treatment of ATRA in PR9 and APL patient derived NB4
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-based PCR was used to analyze whether
the BHLHB2 promoter could be bound by PML-RARa in vivo. A large-scale gene
expression profile dataset was used to observe the expression pattern of BHLHB2
in AML. The results showed that the expression level of BHLHB2 was significantly 
reduced with the induction of PML-RARa and ATRA could reverse this inhibition in 
both PR9 and NB4 cells and increase the expression of BHLHB2. However, the
expression of BHLHB2 could not be induced by ATRA in U937 cells which do not
express PML-RARa. Mechanism study revealed that PML-RARa could bound to the
promoter of BHLHB2 in vivo to regulate the the expression of BHLHB2. It was found
that the expression of BHLHB2 was relatively lower in APL as compared with other 
subtypes of AML and normal bone marrow cells. It is concluded that BHLHB2 is the 
target of PML-RARa, and the expression of BHLHB2 is inhibited by PML-RARa through
binding to its promoter in APL.

PMID: 21867633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023046. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

SUMOylation of DEC1 protein regulates its transcriptional activity and enhances
its stability.

Hong Y(1), Xing X, Li S, Bi H, Yang C, Zhao F, Liu Y, Ao X, Chang AK, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian, China.

Differentiated embryo-chondrocyte expressed gene 1 (DEC1, also known as sharp2,
stra13, or BHLHB2) is a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix protein that is involved
in many aspects of gene regulation through acting as a transcription factor.
Changes in DEC1 expression levels have been implicated in the development of
cancers. Using COS-7 cell, we showed that DEC1 can be modified by the small
ubiquitin-like modifiers, SUMO1, 2 and 3. Two major SUMOylation sites (K(159) and
K(279)) were identified in the C-terminal domain of DEC1. Substitution of either 
K(159) or K(279) with arginine reduced DEC1 SUMOylation, but substitution of both
K(159) and K(279) abolished SUMOylation, and more protein appeared to be retained
in the cytoplasm compared to wild-type DEC1. The expression of DEC1 was
up-regulated after serum starvation as previously reported, but at the same time,
serum starvation also led to more SUMOylation of DEC1. In MCF-7 cells SUMOylation
also stabilized DEC1 through inhibiting its ubiquitination. Moreover, SUMOylation
of DEC1 promoted its repression of CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcriptional activity 
through recruitment of histone deacetylase1. These findings suggested that
posttranslational modification of DEC1 in the form of SUMOylation may serve as a 
key factor that regulates the function of DEC1 in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3148244
PMID: 21829689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Jul;10(7):1137-48. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-1028. Epub
2011 May 6.

Expression signatures of the lipid-based Akt inhibitors phosphatidylinositol
ether lipid analogues in NSCLC cells.

Zhang C(1), Elkahloun AG, Liao H, Delaney S, Saber B, Morrow B, Prendergast GC,
Hollander MC, Gills JJ, Dennis PA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, 37 Convent Dr., Rm. 1118B, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Activation of the serine/threonine kinase Akt contributes to the formation,
maintenance, and therapeutic resistance of cancer, which is driving development
of compounds that inhibit Akt. Phosphatidylinositol ether lipid analogues (PIA)
are analogues of the products of phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) that inhibit
Akt activation, translocation, and the proliferation of a broad spectrum of
cancer cell types. To gain insight into the mechanism of PIAs, time-dependent
transcriptional profiling of five active PIAs and the PI3K inhibitor LY294002
(LY) was conducted in non-small cell lung carcinoma cells using high-density
oligonucleotide arrays. Gene ontology analysis revealed that genes involved in
apoptosis, wounding response, and angiogenesis were upregulated by PIAs, whereas 
genes involved in DNA replication, repair, and mitosis were suppressed. Genes
that exhibited early differential expression were partitioned into three groups; 
those induced by PIAs only (DUSP1, KLF6, CENTD2, BHLHB2, and PREX1), those
commonly induced by PIAs and LY (TRIB1, KLF2, RHOB, and CDKN1A), and those
commonly suppressed by PIAs and LY (IGFBP3, PCNA, PRIM1, MCM3, and HSPA1B).
Increased expression of the tumor suppressors RHOB (RhoB), KLF6 (COPEB), and
CDKN1A (p21Cip1/Waf1) was validated as an Akt-independent effect that contributed
to PIA-induced cytotoxicity. Despite some overlap with LY, active PIAs have a
distinct expression signature that contributes to their enhanced cytotoxicity.

© 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC3132820
PMID: 21551261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Pathol. 2011 Jul;224(3):420-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2878. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor DEC1 negatively regulates cyclin D1.

Bhawal UK(1), Sato F, Arakawa Y, Fujimoto K, Kawamoto T, Tanimoto K, Ito Y,
Sasahira T, Sakurai T, Kobayashi M, Kashima I, Kijima H, Kuniyasu H, Abiko Y,
Kato Y, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Occlusion Medicine and Open Research Center, Kanagawa
Dental College, Yokosuka, Japan. bhawal.ujjal.kumar@nihon-u.ac.jp

DEC1 (also known as Stra13/Bhlhb2/Sharp2) and DEC2 (also known as Bhlhb3/Sharp1) 
are two paralogous basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional regulators which
exhibit a robust circadian gene expression pattern in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) and in peripheral organs. DEC1 has been suggested to play key roles in
mammalian cell differentiation, the cell cycle and circadian regulation, hypoxia 
response, and carcinogenesis. Here we show that DEC1 overexpression exhibits
delayed wound healing and reduces cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
DEC1 strongly repressed the promoter activity of cyclin D1. We further identify a
possible DEC-response element in the cyclin D1 promoter region, and confirmed the
direct binding of DEC1 to that element. Forced expression of DEC1 efficiently
repressed the cyclin D1 promoter and expression. Our clinical data provide the
first evidence that there is a strong inverse correlation between DEC1 and cyclin
D1 expression in oral cancer, and DEC1 expression significantly correlated with
clinicopathological parameters. We suggest that radiation-induced DEC1
overexpression and Akt phosphorylation in cancer cells are mediated via PI-3K
signalling. Overexpression of DEC1 activates the PI-3K/Akt signalling pathway
through reactive oxygen species (ROS).

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21506129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Endod. 2010 Nov;36(11):1831-8. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2010.08.028. Epub 2010 Sep
19.

Gene expression profiling concerning mineralization in human dental pulp cells
treated with mineral trioxide aggregate.

Kim YB(1), Shon WJ, Lee W, Kum KY, Baek SH, Bae KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry, School of Dentistry & Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: This study investigated changes in gene expressions related to
mineralization when mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) is applied in vitro to human
dental pulp cells (HDPCs).
METHODS: MTA in a Teflon tube (diameter 10 mm, height 2 mm) was applied to HDPCs.
Empty tube-applied HDPCs were used as negative control. Total RNA was extracted
at 6, 24, and 72 hours after MTA application for microarray analysis. The results
were confirmed selectively by performing reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction for genes that showed changes of more than 2-fold or less than half.
RESULTS: Of the 24,546 genes, 109 genes were up-regulated more than 2-fold (eg,
THBS1, VCAN, BHLHB2, FN1, COL10A1, TUFT1, and HMOX1), and 69 genes were
down-regulated below 50% (eg, DCN, SOCS2, and IL8).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that rather than being a bio-inert material,
MTA affects pulp cells in various ways. MTA appears to affect mineralization and 
induces slight inflammation and protective role against slight inflammation.

Copyright © 2010 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 20951296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Arch Oral Biol. 2011 Feb;56(2):177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2010.09.009.

Early proliferation alteration and differential gene expression in human
periodontal ligament cells subjected to cyclic tensile stress.

Wang Y(1), Li Y, Fan X, Zhang Y, Wu J, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China 
Stomatology Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: The study was aimed to provide insights into genes governing the early
stages of cell proliferation ability alteration and mechano-response in human
periodontal ligament cells (PDLCs) induced by short-term cyclic tensile stress.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Primary human PDLCs were subjected to cyclic tensile
stress (0.5 Hz, 5000 µstrain) for 2h through a four-point bending strain system. 
After that, cell viability and proliferation ability were examined by MTT
[3(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay and flow
cytometry. Furthermore, the gene expression profile was investigated by
microarray analysis, and the reliability of which was verified by quantitative
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: MTT assay and flow cytometry demonstrated that mechanical stress
inhibited functional expression and slowed down proliferation of cells.
Microarray analysis showed that 110 genes related to cyclic tensile stress were
identified in total. Amongst them, ninety-seven were up-regulated, whilst 13 were
down-regulated. Eleven genes (KLF10, ETS1, CKS2, DUSP6, KIF23, MAPK6, SERTAD1,
IRF1, MAPRE1, CCNB1 and BCAR3) regarding cell cycle arrest were identified. Seven
up-regulated genes (PTGS2, KLF10, CDC42EP2, BHLHB2, SPRY2, IER3 and CCL2) were
verified by quantitative RT-PCR, which supported the microarray results.
CONCLUSION: Cell cycle arrest and the slow-down proliferation can benefit PDLCs
to have more time to respond to mechanical stimuli, and the differential gene
expression reflects the behaviour of cells. Those genes in response to cyclic
tensile stress were identified in human PDLCs, some of which are related with the
mechano-induced cell cycle arrest.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):R1489-99. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00697.2009. Epub 2010 Oct 6.

Late-gestational systemic hypoxia leads to a similar early gene response in mouse
placenta and developing brain.

Trollmann R(1), Rehrauer H, Schneider C, Krischke G, Huemmler N, Keller S,
Rascher W, Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
regina.trollmann@uk-erlangen.de

Late-gestational intrauterine hypoxia represents a well-known risk factor of
acquired perinatal brain injury. Cell type and age-specific sensitivity of
hypoxia-responsive genes to low-oxygen partial pressure is to be considered in
the screening for early indicators of fetoplacental tissue hypoxia. To identify
early hypoxia-induced alterations in gene expression during late-gestational
hypoxia (6% O(2), 6 h; gestational day 20) we compared primary mouse placenta and
brain transcriptomes using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Upregulation
of candidate marker genes for hypoxia was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. Both developing brain and placenta were highly responsive
to systemic hypoxia at the level of gene expression involving hypoxia-inducible
transcription factor (HIF)-dependent genes and immediate early genes (IEG) (Fos, 
Jun, Egr1, Bhlhb2), apoptosis-promoting factors (Bnip3, Dusp1, Ier3) that were
all upregulated, and genes modulating RNA binding and translation (Rbm3, Thap2,
Lig4, Rbm12b) that mainly were downregulated. Functional activity of the HIF
system was obvious from elevated expression of various known HIF target genes
(Adm, Vegf, Hk2, Pdk1, Bnip3, Ier3, Dusp-1), indicating immediate availability
among early response to acute hypoxia. In addition, genes not yet described as
being hypoxia related were identified that are involved in angiogenesis/cell
differentiation (Gna13, Gab2), mRNA processing, and embryonic development. RT-PCR
of placenta and brain tissues confirmed upregulation of selected HIF target genes
and IEG. These data indicate that the early hypoxia-induced genomic response of
the placenta mirrors that of developing brain in a temporally parallel manner.
Our observations implicate future diagnostic options to identify fetal and
cerebral tissue hypoxia.

PMID: 20926767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Nov 29;42A(4):259-66. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00098.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Angiotensin II-regulated transcription regulatory genes in adrenal
steroidogenesis.

Romero DG(1), Gomez-Sanchez EP, Gomez-Sanchez CE.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi 39216,
USA. dromero@umc.edu

Transcription regulatory genes are crucial modulators of cell physiology and
metabolism whose intracellular levels are tightly controlled in response to
extracellular stimuli. We previously reported a set of 29 transcription
regulatory genes modulated by angiotensin II in H295R human adrenocortical cells 
and their roles in regulating the expression of the last and unique enzymes of
the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid biosynthetic pathways, 11ß-hydroxylase
and aldosterone synthase, respectively, using gene expression reporter assays. To
study the effect of this set of transcription regulatory genes on adrenal
steroidogenesis, H295R cells were transfected by high-efficiency nucleofection
and aldosterone and cortisol were measured in cell culture supernatants under
basal and angiotensin II-stimulated conditions. BCL11B, BHLHB2, CITED2, ELL2,
HMGA1, MAFF, NFIL3, PER1, SERTAD1, and VDR significantly stimulated aldosterone
secretion, while EGR1, FOSB, and ZFP295 decreased aldosterone secretion. BTG2,
HMGA1, MITF, NR4A1, and ZFP295 significantly increased cortisol secretion, while 
BCL11B, NFIL3, PER1, and SIX2 decreased cortisol secretion. We also report the
effect of some of these regulators on the expression of endogenous aldosterone
synthase and 11ß-hydroxylase under basal and angiotensin II-stimulated
conditions. In summary, this study reports for the first time the effects of a
set of angiotensin II-modulated transcription regulatory genes on aldosterone and
cortisol secretion and the expression levels of the last and unique enzymes of
the mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid biosynthetic pathways. Abnormal
regulation of mineralocorticoid or glucocorticoid secretion is involved in
several pathophysiological conditions. These transcription regulatory genes may
be involved in adrenal steroidogenesis pathologies; thus they merit additional
study as potential candidates for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3008366
PMID: 20876845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Oct 22;401(3):422-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.09.070. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Hypoxia inducible BHLHB2 is a novel and independent prognostic marker in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Wang W(1), Reiser-Erkan C, Michalski CW, Raggi MC, Quan L, Yupei Z, Friess H,
Erkan M, Kleeff J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

AIMS: The cyclic adenosine monophosphate-inducible basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) 
domain containing class-B2 transcriptional factor BHLHB2 is differentially
expressed in a number of human malignancies. In the present study, the
expression, regulation, functions and prognostic impact of BHLHB2 in pancreatic
cancer were investigated.
METHODS: Expression analyses were carried out in tissues of the normal pancreas
(n=10) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (n=77) as well as in eight pancreatic
cancer cell lines using quantitative RT-PCR, semiquantitative
immunohistochemistry, and immunoblot analyses. In vitro functional experiments
were conducted using siRNA transfection, hypoxia, serum starvation, apoptosis
induction with gemcitabine and actinomycin-D, and invasion assays. Survival
analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier method. Prognostic factors were
determined in a multivariable analysis using a Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: BHLHB2 mRNA and protein expressions were strongly induced by hypoxia and
by serum starvation in pancreatic cancer cell lines. BHLHB2 silencing with RNAi
had no significant effects on growth and invasion but increased apoptosis
resistance against gemcitabine by reducing caspace-3 cleavage. In BHLHB2 silenced
cells the ED50 of gemcitabine increased from 13.95 ± 1.353 to 38.70 ± 5.262 nM
(p<0.05). Ex vivo, the weak/absent nuclear staining in normal pancreatic ducts
and acinar cells was replaced by moderate to strong nuclear/cytoplasmic staining 
in PanIN lesions and pancreatic cancer cells. Patients with weak/absent nuclear
BHLHB2 staining had significantly worse median survival compared to those with
strong staining (13 months vs. 27 months, p=0.03). In a multivariable analysis,
BHLHB2 staining was an independent prognostic factor (Hazard-Ratio=2.348, 95%
CI=1.250-4.411, p=0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxia-inducible BHLHB2 expression is a novel independent
prognostic marker in pancreatic cancer patients and indicates increased
chemosensitivity towards gemcitabine.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20863812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2011 May;29(3):351-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2010.07.234.
Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Changes in gene expression after phencyclidine administration in developing rats:
a potential animal model for schizophrenia.

Liu F(1), Zou X, Sadovova N, Zhang X, Shi L, Guo L, Qian F, Wen Z, Patterson TA, 
Hanig JP, Paule MG, Slikker W Jr, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurotoxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research/U.S.
Food & Drug Administration, 3900 NCTR Road, Jefferson, AR 72079-9502, USA.

Repeated administration of phencyclidine (PCP), an N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor antagonist, during development, may result in neuronal damage that leads
to behavioral deficits in adulthood. The present study examined the potential
neurotoxic effects of PCP exposure (10mg/kg) in rats on postnatal days (PNDs) 7, 
9 and 11 and the possible underlying mechanism(s) for neurotoxicity. Brain tissue
was harvested for RNA extraction and morphological assessments. RNA was collected
from the frontal cortex for DNA microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR. Gene
expression profiling was determined using Illumina Rat Ref-12 Expression
BeadChips containing 22,226 probes. Based on criteria of a fold-change greater
than 1.4 and a P-value less than 0.05, 19 genes including NMDAR1
(N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor) and four pro-apoptotic genes were up-regulated,
and 25 genes including four anti-apoptotic genes were down-regulated, in the
PCP-treated group. In addition, the schizophrenia-relevant genes, Bdnf
(Brain-derived neurotrophic factor) and Bhlhb2 (basic helix-loop-helix domain
containing, class B, 2), were significantly different between the PCP and the
control groups. Quantitative RT-PCR confirmed the microarray results. Elevated
neuronal cell death was further confirmed using Fluoro-Jade C staining. These
findings support the hypothesis that neurodegeneration caused by PCP occurs, at
least in part, through the up-regulation of NMDA receptors, which makes neurons
possessing these receptors more vulnerable to endogenous glutamate. The changes
in schizophrenia-relevant genes after repeated PCP exposure during development
may provide important information concerning the validation of an animal model
for this disorder.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20691775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Viral Hepat. 2011 Sep;18(9):653-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2010.01346.x. Epub
2010 Jul 19.

Knockdown of HBV surface antigen gene expression by a lentiviral microRNA-based
system inhibits HBV replication and HCC growth.

Xiangji L(1), Feng X, Qingbao C, Weifeng T, Xiaoqing J, Baihe Z, Feng S, Hongyang
W, Mengchao W.

Author information: 
(1)Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

Current options for the treatment of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections, a common
liver cancer risk factor, are limited. While RNA interference (RNAi) technologies
have been shown to inhibit HBV replication, the consequent effects on
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell growth are not fully understood. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the effect of RNAi-mediated decrease in the HBV
surface antigen (HBsAg) gene on HBV replication and HCC growth. A lentiviral
microRNA-based system expressing siRNAs targeting the HBsAg gene (LVshHBS) was
developed and transfected into HepG2.2.15 cells (HBV stably expressing line). We 
found that LVshHBS significantly inhibited the HBsAg mRNA and protein levels in
the HepG2.2.15 cells, while HBsAg secretion into the culture supernatant
decreased by 70%. BALB/c (nu/nu) mice were injected with HepG2.2.15 cells
transduced with LVshHBS or control vectors to investigate the effect of
inhibiting the HBsAg on the development of tumour growth in a human HCC nude mice
model. Compared with the control, the tumour growth in nude mice was
significantly decreased after injection with LVshHBS. Microarray analysis of
tumour-related genes in LVshHBS-transduced HepG2.2.15 cells showed that the
expressions of genes involved in cell cycle, differentiation and oncogenesis such
as ACP2, BHLHB2, CLK3, CTSC, FOS, NR1D1, PIM1 and SEPT6 genes were downregulated,
while that of the E2F3 gene was upregulated. In conclusion, lentiviral
microRNA-based RNAi against the HBsAg gene not only inhibits HBV replication but 
also inhibits the growth of HCC. Downregulation of growth-related genes is
implicated in this mechanism of inhibition.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20642484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genes Cells. 2010 Apr 1;15(4):315-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01381.x. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

Anti-apoptotic effect of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
DEC2 in human breast cancer cells.

Liu Y(1), Sato F, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Morohashi S, Akasaka H, Kondo J, Wu Y, 
Noshiro M, Kato Y, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Bioscience, Hirosaki University Graduate School of
Medicine, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.

DEC1 (BHLHB2/Stra13/Sharp2) and DEC2 (BHLHB3/Sharp1) are basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors that are involved in circadian rhythms,
differentiation and the responses to hypoxia. We examined whether DEC1 and DEC2
are involved in apoptosis regulation, in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. We
found that siRNA-mediated knockdown of DEC2 resulted in marked enhancement of
apoptosis compared with that in control cells transfected with nonspecific siRNA.
However, knockdown of DEC1 by siRNA did not affect cell survival. Knockdown of
DEC2 affected the expression of mRNA or proteins related to apoptosis, such as
Fas, c-Myc, caspase-8, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and Bax. We also
showed that tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) up-regulates the expression
of DEC1 and DEC2. DEC2 over-expression caused by the transfection of an
expression vector reduced the amounts of cleaved PARP and caspase-8 induced by
TNF-alpha treatment, whereas DEC1 over-expression increased it. Finally, we
revealed that treatment with double knockdown against both DEC1 and DEC2
decreased the amounts of cleaved PARP and caspase-8 induced by DEC2 siRNA with or
without TNF-alpha. These data indicate that DEC2 has an anti-apoptotic effect,
whereas DEC1 has a pro-apoptotic effect, which are involved in the balance of
survival of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 20236182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 May;35(6):1279-89. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.230. Epub 
2010 Jan 13.

Differential association of circadian genes with mood disorders: CRY1 and NPAS2
are associated with unipolar major depression and CLOCK and VIP with bipolar
disorder.

Soria V(1), Martínez-Amorós E, Escaramís G, Valero J, Pérez-Egea R, García C,
Gutiérrez-Zotes A, Puigdemont D, Bayés M, Crespo JM, Martorell L, Vilella E,
Labad A, Vallejo J, Pérez V, Menchón JM, Estivill X, Gratacòs M, Urretavizcaya M.

Author information: 
(1)CIBERSAM (CIBER en Salud Mental), Mood Disorders Clinical and Research Unit,
Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Disruptions in circadian rhythms have been described in mood disorders (MD), but 
the involvement of genetic variation in genes pertaining to the molecular
circadian machinery in the susceptibility to MD has not been conclusively
determined. We examined 209 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering 19
circadian genes (ADCYAP1, ARNTL, ARNTL2, BHLHB2, BHLHB3, CLOCK, CRY1, CRY2,
CSNK1E, DBP, NPAS2, NR1D1, PER1, PER2, PER3, RORA, TIMELESS, VIP, and VIPR2) in a
sample of 534 MD patients (335 with unipolar major mood depression (MDD) and 199 
with bipolar disorder (BD)) and 440 community-based screened controls. Nominally,
statistically significant associations were found in 15 circadian genes. The
gene-wide test, corrected for the number of SNPs analyzed in each gene,
identified significant associations in CRY1 (rs2287161), NPAS2 (rs11123857), and 
VIPR2 (rs885861) genes with the combined MD sample. In the MDD subsample, the
same SNPs in CRY1 and NPAS2 of the combined sample remained associated, whereas
in the BD subsample CLOCK (rs10462028) and VIP (rs17083008) were specifically
associated. The association with an SNP located 3' near CRY1 gene in MDD remained
statistically significant after permutation correction at experiment level
(p=0.007). Significant additive effects were found between the SNPs that were
statistically significant at the gene-wide level. We also found evidence of
associations between two-marker haplotypes in CRY1 and NPAS2 genes and MD. Our
data support the contribution of the circadian system to the genetic
susceptibility to MD and suggest that different circadian genes may have specific
effects on MD polarity.

PMCID: PMC3055337
PMID: 20072116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(5):1182-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00690-09. Epub 2009 Dec
22.

A new role for sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 transcription factors 
in the regulation of muscle mass and muscle cell differentiation.

Lecomte V(1), Meugnier E, Euthine V, Durand C, Freyssenet D, Nemoz G, Rome S,
Vidal H, Lefai E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U870, F-69921 Oullins Cedex, France.

The role of the transcription factors sterol regulatory element binding protein
1a (SREBP-1a) and SREBP-1c in the regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid
metabolism has been well studied; however, little is known about their specific
function in muscle. In the present study, analysis of recent microarray data from
muscle cells overexpressing SREBP1 suggested that they may play a role in the
regulation of myogenesis. We then demonstrated that SREBP-1a and -1c inhibit
myoblast-to-myotube differentiation and also induce in vivo and in vitro muscle
atrophy. Furthermore, we have identified the transcriptional repressors BHLHB2
and BHLHB3 as mediators of these effects of SREBP-1a and -1c in muscle. Both
repressors are SREBP-1 target genes, and they affect the expression of numerous
genes involved in the myogenic program. Our findings identify a new role for
SREBP-1 transcription factors in muscle, thus linking the control of muscle mass 
to metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC2820883
PMID: 20028734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 9;4(10):e7395. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007395.

Molecular signatures reveal circadian clocks may orchestrate the homeorhetic
response to lactation.

Casey T(1), Patel O, Dykema K, Dover H, Furge K, Plaut K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan, USA. ande1218@msu.edu

Genes associated with lactation evolved more slowly than other genes in the
mammalian genome. Higher conservation of milk and mammary genes suggest that
species variation in milk composition is due in part to the environment and that 
we must look deeper into the genome for regulation of lactation. At the onset of 
lactation, metabolic changes are coordinated among multiple tissues through the
endocrine system to accommodate the increased demand for nutrients and energy
while allowing the animal to remain in homeostasis. This process is known as
homeorhesis. Homeorhetic adaptation to lactation has been extensively described; 
however how these adaptations are orchestrated among multiple tissues remains
elusive. To develop a clearer picture of how gene expression is coordinated
across multiple tissues during the pregnancy to lactation transition, total RNA
was isolated from mammary, liver and adipose tissues collected from rat dams (n =
5) on day 20 of pregnancy and day 1 of lactation, and gene expression was
measured using Affymetrix GeneChips. Two types of gene expression analysis were
performed. Genes that were differentially expressed between days within a tissue 
were identified with linear regression, and univariate regression was used to
identify genes commonly up-regulated and down-regulated across all tissues. Gene 
set enrichment analysis showed genes commonly up regulated among the three
tissues enriched gene ontologies primary metabolic processes, macromolecular
complex assembly and negative regulation of apoptosis ontologies. Genes enriched 
in transcription regulator activity showed the common up regulation of 2 core
molecular clock genes, ARNTL and CLOCK. Commonly down regulated genes enriched
Rhythmic process and included: NR1D1, DBP, BHLHB2, OPN4, and HTR7, which regulate
intracellular circadian rhythms. Changes in mammary, liver and adipose
transcriptomes at the onset of lactation illustrate the complexity of homeorhetic
adaptations and suggest that these changes are coordinated through molecular
clocks.

PMCID: PMC2754660
PMID: 19816599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Leuk Res. 2010 Apr;34(4):521-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.020. Epub 2009 Jul
15.

Multiple mechanisms induce ectopic expression of LYL1 in subsets of T-ALL cell
lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for lymphocytic
differentiation. Here, we have analyzed the complete bHLH family in T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines by expression profiling. Differential
expression was detected for BHLHB2, HES1, HES4, HEY1, ID1, ID2, ID3, LYL1 and
TAL1, highlighting dysregulation of family members with inhibitory activity.
Subsequently we focused on the mechanisms responsible for aberrant expression of 
LYL1 in comparison to TAL1. Quantitative genomic PCR indicated microdeletions
upstream of both, TAL1 and LYL1, targeting STIL/SIL and TRMT1, respectively.
Additionally, one LYL1-expressing cell line exhibited amplification of TRMT1.
While deletion of STIL correlated with expression of the STIL-TAL1 fusion
transcript, no TRMT-LYL1 fusion transcripts were detected in parallel with
genomic rearrangements thereof. Sequence analysis of the LYL1 promoter region
revealed potential binding sites for transcription factors HOXA10, LMO2 and
NKX2-5. Overexpression analysis, reporter gene assays and chromatin
immuno-precipitation confirmed their activating impact on LYL1 expression. In
conclusion, we identified multiple mechanisms which activate LYL1 in leukemic
cells, including structural genomic alterations, namely microdeletion or
amplification, together with the involvement of prominent oncogenic transcription
factors.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19608273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Diabetologia. 2009 Sep;52(9):1899-912. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1442-4. Epub 2009 
Jul 10.

Microarray analysis of genes with impaired insulin regulation in the skeletal
muscle of type 2 diabetic patients indicates the involvement of basic
helix-loop-helix domain-containing, class B, 2 protein (BHLHB2).

Rome S(1), Meugnier E, Lecomte V, Berbe V, Besson J, Cerutti C, Pesenti S,
Granjon A, Disse E, Clement K, Lefai E, Laville M, Vidal H.

Author information: 
(1)INRA 1235, INSERM 870, INSA-Lyon, Régulations Métaboliques Nutrition et
Diabète, Université de Lyon, Oullins, 69600, France. srome@univ-lyon1.fr

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: One of the major processes by which insulin exerts its multiple 
biological actions is through gene expression regulation. Thus, the
identification of transcription factors affected by insulin in target tissues
represents an important challenge. The aim of the present study was to gain a
greater insight into this issue through the identification of transcription
factor genes with insulin-regulated expression in human skeletal muscle.
METHODS: Using microarray analysis, we defined the sets of genes modulated during
a 3 h hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp (2 mU min(-1) kg(-1)) in the skeletal
muscle of insulin-sensitive control volunteers and in moderately obese
insulin-resistant type 2 diabetic patients.
RESULTS: Of the 1,529 and 1,499 genes regulated during the clamp in control and
diabetic volunteers, respectively, we identified 30 transcription factors with
impaired insulin-regulation in type 2 diabetic patients. Analysis of the
promoters of the genes encoding these factors revealed a possible contribution of
the transcriptional repressor basic helix-loop-helix domain-containing, class B, 
2 protein (BHLHB2), insulin regulation of which is strongly altered in the muscle
of diabetic patients. Gene ontology analysis of BHLHB2 target genes, identified
after BHLHB2 overexpression in human primary myotubes, demonstrated that about
10% of the genes regulated in vivo during hyperinsulinaemia are potentially under
the control of this repressor. The data also suggested that BHLHB2 is situated at
the crossroads of a complex transcriptional network that is able to modulate
major metabolic and biological pathways in skeletal muscle, including the
regulation of a cluster of genes involved in muscle development and contraction.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We have identified BHLHB2 as a potential novel
mediator of insulin transcriptional action in human skeletal muscle.

PMID: 19590847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochem J. 2009 Aug 13;422(2):343-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090072.

P/CAF rescues the Bhlhe40-mediated repression of MyoD transactivation.

Hsiao SP(1), Huang KM, Chang HY, Chen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National Central University, 300 Jhongda Road,
Jhongli 32054, Taiwan.

Previously, we found that MRFs (myogenic regulatory factors) regulated the
expression of PGC-1alpha (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor gamma
co-activator 1alpha) by targeting a short region, from nt -49 to +2 adjacent to
the transcription initiation site, that contained two E-boxes. However, only the 
E2-box had significant affinity for MRFs, and the E1-box was predicted to be the 
target of Bhlhe40 (basic helix-loop-helix family, member e40, also known as
Stra13, Bhlhb2, DEC1 and Sharp2), a transcriptional repressor implicated in the
regulation of several physiological processes. In the present study, by using
EMSA (electrophoresis mobility-shift assay), we confirmed that Bhlhe40 targeted
the E1-box and formed a complex with the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor MyoD (myogenic differentiation factor D) on the PGC-1alpha core promoter. 
We demonstrate that Bhlhe40 binds to the promoters of PGC-1alpha and myogenic
genes in vivo and that Bhlhe40 represses the MyoD-mediated transactivation of
these promoters. Furthermore, we found that this repression could be relieved by 
P/CAF (p300/CBP-associated factor) in a dose-dependent manner, but not by CBP
[CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding protein)-binding protein]. Bhlhe40
interacted with P/CAF and this interaction disrupted the interaction between
P/CAF and MyoD. These results suggest that Bhlhe40 functions as a repressor of
MyoD by binding to adjacent E-boxes and sequestering P/CAF from MyoD.

PMID: 19522704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Jun;32(6):999-1003.

Pax6-5a promotes neuronal differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells.

Shimizu N(1), Watanabe H, Kubota J, Wu J, Saito R, Yokoi T, Era T, Iwatsubo T,
Watanabe T, Nishina S, Azuma N, Katada T, Nishina H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Medical Research
Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pax6 genes are highly conserved and important for eye development. Vertebrates
predominantly produce two alternatively spliced Pax6 isoforms, Pax6 and Pax6-5a. 
Pax6-5a differs from Pax6 by the presence of 14 additional amino acids encoded by
exon 5a. These additional amino acids occur in the Pax6 paired domain and thus
influence its DNA-binding properties. However, little is known about Pax6-5a's
physiological functions. Here we establish murine embryonic stem (ES) cell lines 
in which expression of either the human Pax6 or Pax6-5a isoform is negatively
controlled by tetracycline. We report that, in contrast to Pax6 expression,
Pax6-5a expression strongly induces ES cells to differentiate into neurons.
Moreover, using DNA microarray analysis, we have identified the transcription
factor basic helix loop-helix domain containing, class b2 (bHLHb2) in
Pax6-5a-expressing ES cells. Our Pax6 isoform-expressing ES cell lines may serve 
as useful models for identifying Pax6-regulated genes that are important for
neurogenesis and/or eye development.

PMID: 19483305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2009 Mar-Apr;43(2):339-47.

[Technology of analysis of epigenetic and structural changes of epithelial tumors
genome with NotI-microarrays by the example of human chromosome].

[Article in Russian]

Pavlova TV, Kashuba VI, Muravenko OV, Yenamandra SP, Ivanova TA, Zabarovskaia VI,
Rakhmanaliev ER, Petrenko LA, Pronina IV, Loginov VI, Iurkevich OIu, Kiselev LL, 
Zelenin AV, Zabarovskii ER.

New comparative genome hybridization technology on NotI-microarrays is presented 
(Karolinska Institute International Patent WO02/086163). The method is based on
comparative genome hybridization of NotI-probes from tumor and normal genomic DNA
with the principle of new DNA NotI-microarrays. Using this method 181 NotI
linking loci from human chromosome 3 were analyzed in 200 malignant tumor samples
from different organs: kidney, lung, breast, ovary, cervical, prostate. Most
frequently (more than in 30%) aberrations--deletions, methylation,--were
identified in NotI-sites located in MINT24, BHLHB2, RPL15, RARbeta1, ITGA9,
RBSP3, VHL, ZIC4 genes, that suggests they probably are involved in cancer
development. Methylation of these genomic loci was confirmed by
methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing. The results demonstrate
perspective of using this method to solve some oncogenomic problems.

PMID: 19425501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Cells. 2009 Jan;14(1):29-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01247.x. Epub
2008 Nov 21.

Liver X receptors (LXRalpha and LXRbeta) are potent regulators for hepatic Dec1
expression.

Noshiro M(1), Usui E, Kawamoto T, Sato F, Nakashima A, Ueshima T, Honda K,
Fujimoto K, Honma S, Honma K, Makishima M, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
noshiro@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

DEC1 (BHLHB2/Stra13/Sharp2)-a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor-is
known to be involved in various biological phenomena including clock systems and 
metabolism. In the clock systems, Dec1 expression is dominantly up-regulated by
CLOCK : BMAL1 heterodimer, and it exhibits circadian rhythm in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)-the central circadian pacemaker-and other
peripheral tissues. Recent studies have shown that the strong circadian
rhythmicity of Dec1 in the SCN was abolished by Clock mutation, whereas that in
the liver was affected, but not abolished, by Clock mutation. Moreover, feeding
conditions affected hepatic Dec1 expression, which indicates that Dec1 expression
is closely linked with the metabolic functions of the liver. Among
ligand-activated nuclear receptors examined, LXRalpha and LXRbeta with
T0901317-agonist for LXR-were found to be potent enhancers for Dec1 promoter
activity, and a higher expression level of LXRalpha protein was detected in the
liver than in the kidney and heart. T0901317 increased the levels of endogenous
Dec1 transcript in hepatoma cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated 
that LXRalpha bound to the Dec1 promoter, and an LXRalpha-binding site was
identified. These observations indicate that hepatic DEC1 mediates the
ligand-dependent LXR signal to regulate the expression of genes involved in the
hepatic clock system and metabolism.

PMID: 19032342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biol Reprod. 2009 Mar;80(3):440-8. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.072983. Epub 2008 
Oct 22.

Fetal exposure to cocaine causes programming of Prkce gene repression in the left
ventricle of adult rat offspring.

Zhang H(1), Meyer KD, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Biology, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Loma 
Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, California, USA.

Previous studies demonstrated that maternal cocaine administration caused a
significant decrease in protein kinase C epsilon (PRKCE) abundance in the left
ventricle and an increase in susceptibility of the heart to ischemic injury in
adult male offspring. The present study tested the hypothesis that epigenetic
modification has a key role in cocaine-mediated programming of cardiac Prkce gene
repression. Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were administered saline or cocaine (30 
mg/kg/day i.p.) from Days 15 to 21 of gestational age, and hearts of 3-mo-old
adult offspring were studied. Cocaine exposure significantly decreased Prkce mRNA
levels in the left ventricle of male but not female offspring. CpG dinucleotides 
identified in Bhlhb2, Pparg, E2f, and Egr1 binding sites at the Prkce gene
promoter were densely methylated in males and females and were unaffected by
cocaine exposure. In contrast, methylation of CpGs in the two Sp1 binding sites
(-346 and -268) was low and was significantly increased by cocaine exposure in
male offspring. In females, methylation of the Sp1 binding site at -268 but not
-346 was increased. Reporter gene assays showed that both Sp1 binding sites had a
strong stimulatory role in Prkce gene activity. Methylation of the Sp1 binding
sites significantly decreased SP1 binding to the Prkce promoter. Cocaine exposure
did not affect nuclear SP1 protein levels but decreased the SP1 binding affinity 
to its binding site at -268. The results demonstrate an epigenetic mechanism of
DNA methylation in programming of cardiac Prkce gene repression, linking fetal
cocaine exposure and pathophysiological consequences in the heart of adult male
offspring in a gender-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC2710387
PMID: 18945988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Nov;295(5):E1032-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90510.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 26.

Relationship between AMPK and the transcriptional balance of clock-related genes 
in skeletal muscle.

Vieira E(1), Nilsson EC, Nerstedt A, Ormestad M, Long YC, Garcia-Roves PM,
Zierath JR, Mahlapuu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Circadian clocks coordinate physiological, behavioral, and biochemical events
with predictable daily environmental changes by a self-sustained transcriptional 
feedback loop. CLOCK and ARNTL are transcriptional activators that regulate Per
and Cry gene expression. PER and CRY inhibit their own transcription, and their
turnover allows this cycle to restart. The transcription factors BHLHB2 and
BHLHB3 repress Per activation, whereas orphan nuclear receptors of the NR1D and
ROR families control Arntl expression. Here we show the AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK)gamma(3) subunit is involved in the regulation of peripheral
circadian clock function. AMPKgamma3 knockout (Prkag3(-/-)) mice or wild-type
littermates were injected with saline or an AMPK activator,
5-amino-4-imidazole-carboxamide riboside (AICAR), and white glycolytic
gastrocnemius muscle was removed for gene expression analysis. Genes involved in 
the regulation of circadian rhythms (Cry2, Nr1d1, and Bhlhb2) were differentially
regulated in response to AICAR in wild-type mice but remained unaltered in
Prkag3(-/-) mice. Basal expression of Per1 was higher in Prkag3(-/-) mice
compared with wild-type mice. Distinct diurnal changes in the respiratory
exchange ratio (RER) between the light and dark phase of the day were observed in
wild-type mice but not Prkag3(-/-) mice. In summary, the expression profile of
clock-related genes in skeletal muscle in response to AICAR, as well as the
diurnal shift in energy utilization, is impaired in AMPKgamma(3) subunit knockout
mice. Our results indicate AMPK heterotrimeric complexes containing the
AMPKgamma(3) subunit may play a specific role in linking circadian oscillators
and energy metabolism in skeletal muscle.

PMID: 18728219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 12;374(1):95-100. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.06.101. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

Regulation of lipogenesis via BHLHB2/DEC1 and ChREBP feedback looping.

Iizuka K(1), Horikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genomics, The Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi-shi Gunma 371-8512, Japan.

BHLHB2/DEC1 is a transcription factor implicated in cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and metabolism, and is also known to play an important role in the
regulation of the mammalian circadian rhythm. However, its precise role in
metabolism remains unclear. We investigated the link between BHLHB2 and ChREBP, a
glucose-activated transcription factor involved in the regulation of lipogenesis.
Glucose stimulation and overexpression of dominant active ChREBP induced Bhlhb2
mRNA expression in rat hepatocytes. Deletion studies showed that ChoRE (-160 to
-143bp) in the mouse Bhlhb2 promoter region is functional in vivo. Overexpression
of BHLHB2 inhibited glucose and ChREBP-mediated induction of rat Fasn and liver
pyruvate kinase (Lpk) mRNA. ChIP assay demonstrated that BHLHB2 bound to ChoRE in
the Fasn, Lpk, and Bhlhb2 promoter regions in vivo. In conclusion, BHLHB2 and
ChREBP constitute a novel feedback loop involved in the regulation of
lipogenesis.

PMID: 18602890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 May;294(5):E910-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00607.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 11.

Effect of acute physiological hyperinsulinemia on gene expression in human
skeletal muscle in vivo.

Coletta DK(1), Balas B, Chavez AO, Baig M, Abdul-Ghani M, Kashyap SR, Folli F,
Tripathy D, Mandarino LJ, Cornell JE, Defronzo RA, Jenkinson CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Centre, San Antonio, TX, USA. richardsond2@uthscsa.edu

This study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that short-term exposure (4 h)
to physiological hyperinsulinemia in normal, healthy subjects without a family
history of diabetes would induce a low grade inflammatory response independently 
of glycemic status. Twelve normal glucose tolerant subjects received a 4-h
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp with biopsies of the vastus lateralis muscle.
Microarray analysis identified 121 probe sets that were significantly altered in 
response to physiological hyperinsulinemia while maintaining euglycemia. In
normal, healthy human subjects insulin increased the mRNAs of a number of
inflammatory genes (CCL2, CXCL2 and THBD) and transcription factors (ATF3,
BHLHB2, HES1, KLF10, JUNB, FOS, and FOSB). A number of other genes were
upregulated in response to insulin, including RRAD, MT, and SGK. CITED2, a known 
coactivator of PPARalpha, was significantly downregulated. SGK and CITED2 are
located at chromosome 6q23, where we previously detected strong linkage to
fasting plasma insulin concentrations. We independently validated the mRNA
expression changes in an additional five subjects and closely paralleled the
results observed in the original 12 subjects. A saline infusion in healthy,
normal glucose-tolerant subjects without family history of diabetes demonstrated 
that the genes altered during the euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp were due to
hyperinsulinemia and were unrelated to the biopsy procedure per se. The results
of the present study demonstrate that insulin acutely regulates the levels of
mRNAs involved in inflammation and transcription and identifies several candidate
genes, including HES1 and BHLHB2, for further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3581328
PMID: 18334611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Neurosci. 2008 Jan 30;28(5):1118-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2262-07.2008.

BHLHB2 controls Bdnf promoter 4 activity and neuronal excitability.

Jiang X(1), Tian F, Du Y, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Tessarollo L, Wu X, Pan H, Hu 
XZ, Xu K, Kenney H, Egan SE, Turley H, Harris AL, Marini AM, Lipsky RH.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Genetics, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), via activation of TrkB receptors,
mediates vital physiological functions in the brain, ranging from neuronal
survival to synaptic plasticity, and has been implicated in the pathophysiology
of neurodegenerative disorders. Although transcriptional regulation of the BDNF
gene (Bdnf) has been extensively studied, much remains to be understood. We
discovered a sequence within Bdnf promoter 4 that binds the basic
helix-loop-helix protein BHLHB2 and is a target for BHLHB2-mediated
transcriptional repression. NMDA receptor activation de-repressed promoter
4-mediated transcription and correlated with reduced occupancy of the promoter by
BHLHB2 in cultured hippocampal neurons. Bhlhb2 gene -/- mice showed increased
hippocampal exon 4-specific Bdnf mRNA levels compared with +/+ littermates under 
basal and activity-dependent conditions. Bhlhb2 knock-out mice also showed
increased status epilepticus susceptibility, suggesting that BHLHB2 alters
neuronal excitability. Together, these results support a role for BHLHB2 as a new
modulator of Bdnf transcription and neuronal excitability.

PMID: 18234890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genes Cells. 2008 Feb;13(2):131-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01153.x.

Basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor DEC2 negatively regulates
vascular endothelial growth factor expression.

Sato F(1), Bhawal UK, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Imaizumi T, Imanaka T, Kondo J,
Koyanagi S, Noshiro M, Yoshida H, Kusumi T, Kato Y, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki
036-8562, Japan. fsato@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

DEC1 (BHLHB2/Sharp2/Stra13) and DEC2 (BHLHB3/Sharp1) are basic-helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors, involved in cellular differentiation, responses to 
hypoxia and circadian rhythms. We recently showed that the expression of DEC1 and
DEC2 was up-regulated by hypoxia; however, the functions of these two factors
under hypoxic conditions have not been elucidated in detail. It is well
established that the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is
up-regulated by hypoxia, and the expression of VEGF in response to hypoxia
depends on transcriptional activation by a heterodimer comprising
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 1 (ARNT1). In the present study, we showed that DEC2, but not DEC1, 
suppressed VEGF gene expression under hypoxic conditions. DEC2 protein was
co-immunoprecipitated with HIF-1alpha but not with ARNT1. The binding of
HIF-1alpha to the hypoxia response element (HRE) in the VEGF promoter was
decreased by DEC2 over-expression, and increased by DEC2 knockdown. We also
showed that the circadian expression of VEGF showed a reciprocal pattern to that 
of DEC2 in cartilage. DEC2 had a circadian oscillation in implanted Sarcoma 180
cells. We conclude that DEC2 negatively regulates VEGF expression and plays an
important role in the pathological conditions in which VEGF is involved.

PMID: 18233956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1047-55. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30714.

Clock genes may influence bipolar disorder susceptibility and dysfunctional
circadian rhythm.

Shi J(1), Wittke-Thompson JK, Badner JA, Hattori E, Potash JB, Willour VL,
McMahon FJ, Gershon ES, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Several previous studies suggest that dysfunction of circadian rhythms may
increase susceptibility to bipolar disorder (BP). We conducted an association
study of five circadian genes (CRY2, PER1-3, and TIMELESS) in a family collection
of 36 trios and 79 quads (Sample I), and 10 circadian genes (ARNTL, ARNTL2,
BHLHB2, BHLHB3, CLOCK, CRY1, CSNK1D, CSNK1E, DBP, and NR1D1) in an extended
family collection of 70 trios and 237 quads (Sample II), which includes the same 
114 families but not necessarily the same individuals as Sample I. In Sample II, 
the Sibling-Transmission Disequilibrium Test (sib-tdt) analysis showed nominally 
significant association of BP with three SNPs within or near the CLOCK gene
(rs534654, P = 0.0097; rs6850524, P = 0.012; rs4340844, P = 0.015). In addition, 
SNPs in the ARNTL2, CLOCK, DBP, and TIMELESS genes and haplotypes in the ARNTL,
CLOCK, CSNK1E, and TIMELESS genes showed suggestive evidence of association with 
several circadian phenotypes identified in BP patients. However, none of these
associations reached gene-wide or experiment-wide significance after correction
for multiple-testing. A multi-locus interaction between rs6442925 in the 5'
upstream of BHLHB2, rs1534891 in CSNK1E, and rs534654 near the 3' end of the
CLOCK gene, however, is significantly associated with BP (P = 0.00000172). It
remains significant after correcting for multiple testing using the False
Discovery Rate method. Our results indicate an interaction between three
circadian genes in susceptibility to bipolar disorder.

PMCID: PMC2574897
PMID: 18228528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Environ Health Perspect. 2007 Oct;115(10):1460-6.

Identification of gene markers for formaldehyde exposure in humans.

Li GY(1), Lee HY, Shin HS, Kim HY, Lim CH, Lee BH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Formaldehyde (FA) is classified as a human carcinogen and has been
linked to increased leukemia rates in some epidemiologic studies. Inhalation of
FA induces sensory irritation at relatively low concentrations. However, little
is known concerning the cellular alterations observed after FA exposure in
humans.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to profile global gene expression in Hs 680.Tr human
tracheal fibroblasts exposed to FA and to develop biomarkers for the evaluation
of FA exposure in humans.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used gene expression analysis, and identified 54 genes
designated as FA responsive. On the basis of these data, we conducted an
exploratory analysis of the expression of these genes in human subjects exposed
to high or low levels of FA. We monitored FA exposure by measuring the urinary
concentration of thiazolidine-4-carboxylate (TZCA), a stable and quantitative
cysteinyl adduct of FA. Nine genes were selected for real-time PCR analysis; of
these, BHLHB2, CCNL1, SE20-4, C8FW, PLK2, and SGK showed elevated expression in
subjects with high concentrations of TZCA.
CONCLUSION: The identification of gene marker candidates in vitro using
microarray analysis and their validation using human samples obtained from
exposed subjects is a good tool for discovering genes of potential mechanistic
interest and biomarkers of exposure. Thus, these genes are differentially
expressed in response to FA and are potential effect biomarkers of FA exposure.

PMCID: PMC2022670
PMID: 17938736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Jun 19;30(1):26-34. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Adrenal transcription regulatory genes modulated by angiotensin II and their role
in steroidogenesis.

Romero DG(1), Rilli S, Plonczynski MW, Yanes LL, Zhou MY, Gomez-Sanchez EP,
Gomez-Sanchez CE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Jackson, Mississippi, USA. dromero@medicine.umsmed.edu

Transcription regulatory genes are crucial modulators of cell physiology and
metabolism whose intracellular levels are tightly controlled to respond to
extracellular stimuli. We studied transcription regulatory genes modulated by
angiotensin II, one of the most important regulators of adrenal cortical cell
function, and their role in adrenal steroidogenesis in H295R human adrenocortical
cells. Angiotensin II-modulated transcription regulatory genes were identified
with high-density oligonucleotide microarrays and the results validated by
real-time RT-PCR. Cotransfection reporter assays were performed in H295R cells to
analyze the role of these transcription regulatory genes in the control of the
expression of 11beta-hydroxylase and aldosterone synthase, the last and unique
enzymes of the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid biosynthetic pathways,
respectively. We selected a subset of the most regulated genes for reporter
plasmid studies to determine the effect on these enzymes. BHLHB2, BTG2, and SALL1
decreased expression of both enzymes, whereas CITED2, EGR2, ELL2, FOS, FOSB,
HDAC5, MAFF, MITF, NFIL3, NR4A1, NR4A2, NR4A3, PER1, and VDR increased expression
for both enzymes. By the ratio of aldosterone synthase to 11beta-hydroxylase
expression, NFIL3, NR4A1, NR4A2, and NR4A3 show the greatest selectivity toward
upregulating expression of the mineralocorticoid biosynthetic pathway
preferentially. In summary, this study reports for the first time a set of
transcription regulatory genes that are modulated by angiotensin II and their
role in adrenal gland steroidogenesis. Abnormal regulation of the
mineralocorticoid or glucocorticoid biosynthesis pathways is involved in several 
pathophysiological conditions; hence the modulated transcription regulatory genes
described may correlate with adrenal steroidogenesis pathologies.

PMID: 17327493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Anim Sci. 2007 Feb;85(2):395-403.

Identification of differentially expressed transcripts in bovine rumen and
abomasum using a differential display method.

Roh SG(1), Kuno M, Hishikawa D, Hong YH, Katoh K, Obara Y, Hidari H, Sasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Production Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Shinshu
University, Nagano-ken 399-4598, Japan. sangroh@shinshu-u.ac.jp

The rumen has several important physiological functions: absorption, transport,
metabolic activity, and protection. To clarify the molecular basis underlying the
physiological function of the rumen, reticulum, omasum, and abomasum, we used
mRNA differential display to isolate and identify differentially expressed genes 
in these tissues. We isolated 18 transcripts that coexpressed in the rumen,
reticulum, and omasum. Five genes, ribosomal protein 19 (RPS19), basic
helix-loop-helix domain containing class B2 (BHLHB2), NADH dehydrogenase
flavoprotein 2 (NDUFV2), exosome component 9 (EXOSC9), and ribosomal protein 23
(RPS23), were highly expressed in the rumen of adult Holstein and Japanese Black 
cattle. Significant differences of expression were observed in the abomasum
compared with the rumen, reticulum, and omasum. To investigate the expression
pattern of these genes during the neonatal growth stage, the relative levels of
gene expression were analyzed in the rumen and abomasum of 3-wk-, 13-wk-, and 18-
to 20-mo-old Holstein cattle. The expression level of RPS19 did not change with
age in the rumen and abomasum. The levels of BHLHB2, NDUFV2, and EXOSC9 mRNA in
the abomasum decreased (P < 0.05) after weaning and declined (P < 0.05) further
in adults; in contrast, expression in the rumen was not altered. Interestingly,
the levels of RPS23 mRNA in the rumen increased (P < 0.05) after weaning and
further increased in the adult; however, the level of expression of this gene
decreased (P < 0.05) in the abomasum with weaning and age. This indicates that
the 4 tissues, especially the rumen and abomasum, have different developmental
pathways after birth and subsequent onset of rumination.

PMID: 17235024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Gene Expr. 2006;13(3):191-203.

Gene expression profile of B 16(F10) murine melanoma cells exposed to hypoxic
conditions in vitro.

Olbryt M(1), Jarzab M, Jazowiecka-Rakus J, Simek K, Szala S, Sochanik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Poland. molbryt@io.gliwice.pl

Hypoxia is an important feature of tumor microenvironment, exerting far-reaching 
effects on cells and contributing to cancer progression. Previous studies have
established substantial differences in hypoxia response between various cell
lines. Investigating this phenomenon in melanoma cells contributes to a better
understanding of cell lineage-specific hypoxia response and could point out novel
hypoxia-regulated genes. We investigated transcriptional activity of B 16(F10)
murine melanoma cells cultured for 24 h under hypoxic (nominal 1% O2, 15 samples 
including controls) and hypoxia-mimicking conditions (cobalt chloride, 100 or 200
microM, 6 samples including controls). Gene expression profiles were analyzed
using MG-U74Av2 oligonucleotide microarrays. Data analysis revealed 2541
probesets (FDR <5%) for 1% oxygen experiment and 364 probesets (FDR <5%) for
cobalt chloride, which showed differences in expression levels. Analysis of
hypoxia-regulated genes (true hypoxia, 1% O2) by stringent Family-Wise Error Rate
estimation indicated 454 significantly changed transcripts (p < 0.05). The most
upregulated genes were Lgals3, Selenbpl, Nppb (more than ten-fold increase). We
observed significant differences in expression levels of genes regulating
glycolysis (Pfkp, Hk2, Aldo3, Eno2), apoptosis (Bnip3, Bnip31, Cdknla),
transcription (Bhlhb2, Sap30, Atf3, Mxil), angiogenesis (Vegfa, Adm, Anxa2,
Ctgf), adhesion (Pkp2, Itga4, Mcam), migration (Cnn2, Tmsb4x), and other
processes. Both true hypoxia and hypoxia mimicry induced HIF-1-regulated genes.
However, unsupervised analysis (Singular Value Decomposition) revealed distinct
differences in gene expression between these two experimental conditions.
Contrary to hypoxia, cobalt chloride caused suppression of gene expression rather
than stimulation, especially concerning transcripts related to proliferation,
immune response, DNA repair, and melanin biosynthesis.

PMID: 17193925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Front Biosci. 2005 Sep 1;10:3151-71.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, BHLHB2 and BHLHB3; their gene
expressions are regulated by multiple extracellular stimuli.

Yamada K(1), Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, 
Japan. kazuya@fmsrsa.fukui-med.ac.jp

The E box sequence (5'-CANNTG-3') is found in the transcriptional regulatory
region of a number of genes. Of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins
binding to the E box sequence, class B of bHLH proteins, BHLHB2 (also referred to
as the DEC1/Eip1/SHARP-2/Stra13/Clast5) and BHLHB3 (also referred to as the
DEC2/SHARP-1/SHARP1), are transcription factors that contain a unique orange
domain. These transcription factors repress the transcription of target genes not
only via binding to the E box sequence but also via protein-protein interactions 
with other transcription factors. Both the BHLHB2 and BHLHB3 genes are widely
expressed in both embryonic and adult tissues. Their gene expressions are
regulated in a cell type-specific manner by various extracellular stimuli, such
as growth factors, serum starvation, hypoxia, hormones, nutrient, cytokines,
light, and infection. Therefore, these transcription factors play pivotal roles
in multiple signaling pathways that impact many biological processes including
development, cell differentiation, cell growth, cell death, oncogenesis, immune
systems, circadian rhythm, and homeostasis. The structural features, functions,
and biological roles of the novel bHLH transcription factors, BHLHB2 and BHLHB3, 
are discussed along with the mechanisms in which the genes encoding these factors
are regulated.

PMID: 15970569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Feb 10;20(3):244-55. Epub 2004 Dec 14.

Live Staphylococcus aureus and bacterial soluble factors induce different
transcriptional responses in human airway cells.

Moreilhon C(1), Gras D, Hologne C, Bajolet O, Cottrez F, Magnone V, Merten M,
Groux H, Puchelle E, Barbry P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire UMR 6097 Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne,
France.

To characterize the response of respiratory epithelium to infection by
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), human airway cells were incubated for 1 to 24 
h with a supernatant of a S. aureus culture (bacterial supernatant), then
profiled with a pangenomic DNA microarray. Because an upregulation of many genes 
was noticed around 3 h, three independent approaches were then used to
characterize the host response to a 3-h contact either with bacterial supernatant
or with live bacteria: 1) a DNA microarray containing 4,200 sequence-verified
probes, 2) a semiquantitative RT-PCR with a set of 537 pairs of validated
primers, or 3) ELISA assay of IL-8, IL-6, TNFalpha, and PGE(2). Among others,
Fos, Jun, and EGR-1 were upregulated by the bacterial supernatant and by live
bacteria. Increased expression of bhlhb2 and Mig-6, promoter regions which harbor
HIF responding elements, was explained by an increased expression of the
HIF-1alpha protein. Activation of the inducible form of cyclooxygenase, COX-2,
and of the interleukins IL-1, IL-6, and IL-8, as well as of the NF-kappaB
pathway, was observed preferentially in cells in contact with bacterial
supernatant. Early infection was characterized by an upregulation of
anti-apoptotic genes and a downregulation of pro-apoptotic genes. This correlated
with a necrotic, rather than apoptotic cell death. Overall, this first global
description of an airway epithelial infection by S. aureus demonstrates a larger 
global response to bacterial supernatant (in term of altered genes and variation 
factors) than to exponentially growing live bacteria.

PMID: 15598879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Clin Genet. 2004 Jun;65(6):496-500.

Candidate genes for recessive non-syndromic mental retardation on chromosome 3p
(MRT2A).

Higgins JJ(1), Pucilowska J, Lombardi RQ, Rooney JP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Child Neurology, Mid-Hudson Family Health
Institute, 279 Main Street, New Paltz, NY 12561, USA. jhiggins@fpinstitute.org

A mild type of autosomal recessive, non-syndromic mental retardation (NSMR) is
linked to loci on chromosome 3p. This report delimits the MRT2A minimal critical 
region to 4.2 Mb between loci D3S3630 and D3S1304. This interval contains nine
genes (IL5RA, TRNT1, LRRN1, SETMAR, SUMF1, ITPR1, BHLHB2, EDEM, and MRPS36P1).
The results suggest that a mutation does not exist in these genes and that an
unknown transcript in the region contributes to the cognitive deficits in NSMR.

PMID: 15151510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Feb 5;121(1-2):1-11.

Profiling of genes associated with transcriptional responses in mouse hippocampus
after transient forebrain ischemia using high-density oligonucleotide DNA array.

Nagata T(1), Takahashi Y, Sugahara M, Murata A, Nishida Y, Ishikawa K, Asai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Medicine, Nihon University, School of Medicine, 30-1
Oyaguchikami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan. tnagata@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

Several cascades of changes in gene expression have been shown to be involved in 
the neuronal injury after transient cerebral ischemia; however, little is known
about the profile of genes showing alteration of expression in a mouse model of
transient forebrain ischemia. We analyzed the gene expression profile in the
mouse hippocampus during 24 h of reperfusion, after 20 min of transient forebrain
ischemia, using a high-density oligonucleotide DNA array. Using statistical
filtration (Welch's ANOVA and Welch's t-test), we identified 25 genes with a more
than 3.0-fold higher or lower level of expression on average, with statistical
significance set at p<0.05, in at least one ischemia-reperfusion group than in
the sham group. Using unsupervised clustering methods (hierarchical clustering
and k-means clustering algorithms), we identified four types of gene expression
pattern that may be associated with the response of cell populations in the
hippocampus to an ischemic insult in this mouse model. Functional classification 
of the 25 genes demonstrated alterations of expression of several kinds of
biological pathways, regulating transcription (Bhlhb2, Jun, c-fos, Egr1, Egr2,
Fosb, Junb, Ifrd1, Neurod6), the cell cycle (c-fos, Fosb, Jun, Junb, Dusp1),
stress response (Dusp1, Dnajb1, Dnaja4), chaperone activity (Dnajb1, Dnaja4) and 
cell death (Ptgs2, Gadd45g, Tdag51), in the mouse hippocampus by 24 h of
reperfusion. Using hierarchical clustering analysis, we also found that the same 
25 genes clearly discriminated between the sham group and the
ischemia-reperfusion groups. The alteration of expression of 25 genes identified 
in this study suggests the involvement of these genes in the transcriptional
response of cell populations in the mouse hippocampus after transient forebrain
ischemia.

PMID: 14969731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 20;277(51):50112-20. Epub 2002 Oct 15.

Basic helix-loop-helix protein DEC1 promotes chondrocyte differentiation at the
early and terminal stages.

Shen M(1), Yoshida E, Yan W, Kawamoto T, Suardita K, Koyano Y, Fujimoto K,
Noshiro M, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

The mRNA level of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor DEC1
(BHLHB2)/Stra13/Sharp2 was up-regulated during chondrocyte differentiation in
cultures of ATDC5 cells and growth plate chondrocytes, and in growth plate
cartilage in vivo. Forced expression of DEC1 in ATDC5 cells induced chondrogenic 
differentiation, and insulin increased this effect of DEC1 overexpression.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) and PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) suppressed DEC1
expression and the differentiation of ATDC5 cells, but DEC1 overexpression
antagonized this inhibitory action of PTH/PTHrP. Transforming growth factor-beta 
or bone morphogenetic protein-2, as well as insulin, induced DEC1 expression in
ATDC5 cultures where it induced chondrogenic differentiation. In pellet cultures 
of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells exposed to transforming growth factor-beta 
and insulin, DEC1 was induced at the earliest stage of chondrocyte
differentiation and also at the hypertrophic stage. Overexpression of DEC1 in the
mesenchymal cells induced the mRNA expressions of type II collagen, Indian
hedgehog, and Runx2, as well as cartilage matrix accumulation; overexpression of 
DEC1 in growth plate chondrocytes at the prehypertrophic stage increased the mRNA
levels of Indian hedgehog, Runx2, and type X collagen, and also increased
alkaline phosphatase activity and mineralization. To our knowledge, DEC1 is the
first transcription factor that can promote both chondrogenic differentiation and
terminal differentiation.

PMID: 12384505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Cell Biol. 2001 May;80(5):329-34.

Induction of basic helix-loop-helix protein DEC1 (BHLHB2)/Stra13/Sharp2 in
response to the cyclic adenosine monophosphate pathway.

Shen M(1), Kawamoto T, Teramoto M, Makihira S, Fujimoto K, Yan W, Noshiro M, Kato
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Faculty of Dentistry, Japan.

DEC1 (BHLHB2)/Stra13/Sharp2, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
has been suggested to be involved in the control of proliferation and/or
differentiation of several cells including nerve cells, fibroblasts and
chondrocytes. In the present study, we examined the effect of parathyroid hormone
(PTH), dibutyryl cAMP (Bt2cAMP) and forskolin on the expression of DEC1 in
various cells. In rabbit chondrocyte cultures, PTH or Bt2cAMP increased the DEC1 
mRNA level within 1 h. Thereafter, the DEC1 mRNA level rapidly decreased to the
basal level at 3 h, and increased at 6-24 h. In cultures of a mouse embryo
prechondrogenic cell line ATDC5, PTH or forskolin, an activator of adenylate
cyclase, also increased the DEC1 mRNA level within 1 h. Furthermore, in all
evaluated cell lines of human fibroblasts, canine epithelial cells, human
carcinoma, human glioblastoma and human melanoma, Bt2cAMP increased the DEC1 mRNA
level within 1-3 h. Studies with actinomycin D and cycloheximide indicated that
the enhancement of DEC1 mRNA by cAMP was not due to mRNA stabilization and did
not require new protein synthesis. These findings suggest that DEC1 is a novel
direct target for cAMP in wide types of cells, and that the bHLH protein is
involved in the control of gene expression in cAMP-activated cells.

PMID: 11432722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biochem. 2001 Mar;129(3):391-6.

Gene structure and chromosomal location of a human bHLH transcriptional factor
DEC1 x Stra13 x SHARP-2/BHLHB2.

Teramoto M(1), Nakamasu K, Noshiro M, Matsuda Y, Gotoh O, Shen M, Tsutsumi S,
Kawamoto T, Iwamoto Y, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Dentistry, Kasumi, 
Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

DEC1/BHLHB2 is a novel cAMP-inducible basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcriptional factor isolated from human chondrocyte cultures by the
subtraction method [Shen et al. (1997) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 236,
294--298]. DEC1 seems to be involved in controlling the
proliferation/differentiation of some cell lineages. We determined the structure 
of the human DEC1 gene and its chromosomal locus. Phylogenetic analysis and
comparison of the gene structure showed that the DEC1 protein is a member of a
new subgroup of the proline bHLH protein family that diverged earlier than other 
proline bHLH proteins including HES, hairy and E(spl). The human DEC1 gene spans 
approximately 5.7 kb and contains 5 exons. The putative promoter region contains 
multiple GC boxes but no TATA box. A primer extension study showed multiple
transcriptional initiation sites. In the 5'-flanking region of the DEC1 gene,
several transcriptional factor binding sites, including a cAMP-responsive element
(CRE), were found using the transcription factor database. The DEC1 gene locates 
at Chromosome 3p25.3--26 by the FISH method. This is the first study to determine
the genomic structure of the DEC1 gene subgroup.

PMID: 11226878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


