
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 7;112(27):E3582-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423989112. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Enhanced memory consolidation in mice lacking the circadian modulators Sharp1 and
-2 caused by elevated Igf2 signaling in the cortex.

Shahmoradi A(1), Radyushkin K(1), Rossner MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine,
37075 Göttingen, Germany; (2)Department of Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute of
Experimental Medicine, 37075 Göttingen, Germany; Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig
Maximilian University, 80336 Munich, Germany moritz.rossner@med.uni-muenchen.de.

The bHLH transcription factors SHARP1 and SHARP2 are partially redundant
modulators of the circadian system. SHARP1/DEC2 has been shown to control sleep
length in humans and sleep architecture is also altered in double mutant mice
(S1/2(-/-)). Because of the importance of sleep for memory consolidation, we
investigated the role of SHARP1 and SHARP2 in cognitive processing. S1/2(-/-)
mice show enhanced cortex (Cx)-dependent remote fear memory formation as well as 
improved reversal learning, but do not display alterations in hippocampus
(Hi)-dependent recent fear memory formation. SHARP1 and SHARP2 single null
mutants do not display any cognitive phenotype supporting functional redundancy
of both factors. Molecular and biochemical analyses revealed elevated
insulin-related growth factor 2 (IGF2) signaling and increased phosphorylation of
MAPK and S6 in the Cx but not the Hi of S1/2(-/-) mice. No changes were detected 
in single mutants. Moreover, adeno-associated virus type 2-mediated IGF2
overexpression in the anterior cingulate cortex enhanced remote fear memory
formation and the analysis of forebrain-specific double null mutants of the
Insulin and IGF1 receptors revealed their essential function for memory
formation. Impaired fear memory formation in aged S1/2(-/-) mice indicates that
elevated IGF2 signaling in the long term, however, has a negative impact on
cognitive processing. In summary, we conclude that the bHLH transcription factors
SHARP1 and SHARP2 are involved in cognitive processing by controlling Igf2
expression and associated signaling cascades. Our analyses provide evidence that 
the control of sleep and memory consolidation may share common molecular
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4500222
PMID: 26100875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Dec 12;455(3-4):390-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.030. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor DEC2 negatively regulates 
Twist1 through an E-box element.

Suzuki M(1), Sato F(2), Bhawal UK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba 271-8587, Japan. (2)First Department of Pathology, Wakayama Medical
University School of Medicine, Wakayama 641-0012, Japan. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at
Matsudo, Chiba 271-8587, Japan. Electronic address:
bhawal.ujjal.kumar@nihon-u.ac.jp.

Differentiated embryo chondrocyte 2 (DEC2/Sharp-1/Bhlhe41), a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, has been shown to regulate the
transcription of target genes by binding to their E-box elements. We identified a
possible DEC2-response element (consensus E-box: CACGTG) in the promoter region
of Twist1. Forced expression of DEC2 significantly repressed Twist1 promoter
activity under normoxia and under hypoxia as assessed by a luciferase reporter
assay. In addition, over-expression of DEC2 repressed Twist1 mRNA expression
assessed by quantitative real-time PCR. Site-directed mutagenesis studies showed 
that mutagenesis of the consensus E-box sequence eliminated the ability of DEC2
to reduce the Twist1 promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays confirmed that the DEC2-mediated repression is primarily achieved by
binding to the E-box in the Twist1 promoter. Knockdown of DEC2 by siRNA
significantly attenuated the repression of Twist1 expression. DEC2 and Twist1
exhibit inversed protein expression patterns during development of mouse tongue
embryo tissue. Given the fact that DEC2 protein is emerging as an important
regulator in a vast array of cellular events, including cell differentiation,
maturation of lymphocytes and the molecular clock, our study elucidates an
important mechanism by which DEC2 regulates cellular function by modulating the
expression of Twist1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 23;9(10):e110310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110310.
eCollection 2014.

Mice lacking the circadian modulators SHARP1 and SHARP2 display altered sleep and
mixed state endophenotypes of psychiatric disorders.

Baier PC(1), Brzózka MM(2), Shahmoradi A(3), Reinecke L(3), Kroos C(3), Wichert
SP(2), Oster H(4), Wehr MC(2), Taneja R(5), Hirrlinger J(6), Rossner MJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany; Department of
Clinical Neurophysiology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Research Group Gene Expression, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Göttingen, Germany. (4)Circadian Rhythms Group, Max Planck Institute of
Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany; Medical Department I, University of
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (5)Department of Physiology, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (6)Research Group Gene Expression, Max Planck
Institute of Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany; Carl-Ludwig Institute of 
Physiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (7)Department of Psychiatry,
Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany; Research Group Gene Expression,
Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.

Increasing evidence suggests that clock genes may be implicated in a spectrum of 
psychiatric diseases, including sleep and mood related disorders as well as
schizophrenia. The bHLH transcription factors SHARP1/DEC2/BHLHE41 and
SHARP2/DEC1/BHLHE40 are modulators of the circadian system and
SHARP1/DEC2/BHLHE40 has been shown to regulate homeostatic sleep drive in humans.
In this study, we characterized Sharp1 and Sharp2 double mutant mice (S1/2-/-)
using online EEG recordings in living animals, behavioral assays and global gene 
expression profiling. EEG recordings revealed attenuated sleep/wake amplitudes
and alterations of theta oscillations. Increased sleep in the dark phase is
paralleled by reduced voluntary activity and cortical gene expression signatures 
reveal associations with psychiatric diseases. S1/2-/- mice display alterations
in novelty induced activity, anxiety and curiosity. Moreover, mutant mice exhibit
impaired working memory and deficits in prepulse inhibition resembling symptoms
of psychiatric diseases. Network modeling indicates a connection between neural
plasticity and clock genes, particularly for SHARP1 and PER1. Our findings
support the hypothesis that abnormal sleep and certain (endo)phenotypes of
psychiatric diseases may be caused by common mechanisms involving components of
the molecular clock including SHARP1 and SHARP2.

PMCID: PMC4207740
PMID: 25340473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:339-72. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00010-5.

DEC1/STRA13/SHARP2 and DEC2/SHARP1 coordinate physiological processes, including 
circadian rhythms in response to environmental stimuli.

Kato Y(1), Kawamoto T(2), Fujimoto K(2), Noshiro M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Basic Life Sciences, Institute 
of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
Electronic address: ykato@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Dental and Medical 
Biochemistry, Basic Life Sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Daily physiological and behavioral rhythms are regulated by endogenous circadian 
molecular clocks. Clock proteins DEC1 (BHLHe40) and DEC2 (BHLHe41) belong to the 
basic helix-loop-helix protein superfamily, which contains other clock proteins
CLOCK and BMAL1. DEC1 and DEC2 are induced by CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer via the
CACGTG E-box in the promoter and, thereafter, suppress their own expression by
competing with CLOCK:BMAL1 for the DNA binding. This negative feedback DEC loop
together with the PER loop involving PER and CRY, the other negative clock
regulators, maintains the circadian rhythm of Dec1 and Dec2 expression. DEC1 is
induced by light pulse and adjusts the circadian phase of the central clock in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus, whereas DEC1 upregulation by TGF-ß resets the
circadian phase of the peripheral clocks in tissues. Furthermore, DEC1 and DEC2
modulate the clock output signals to control circadian rhythms in behavior and
metabolism. In addition to the functions in the clocks, DEC1 and DEC2 are
involved in hypoxia responses, immunological reactions, and carcinogenesis. These
DEC actions are mediated by the direct binding to the E-box elements in target
genes or by protein-protein interactions with transcription factors such as
HIF-1a, RXRa, MyoD, and STAT. Notably, numerous growth factors, hormones, and
cytokines, along with ionizing radiation and DNA-damaging agents, induce Dec1
and/or Dec2 in a tissue-specific manner. These findings suggest that DEC1 and
DEC2 play a critical role in animal adaptation to various environmental stimuli.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:317-38. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00009-9.

Stra13 and Sharp-1, the non-grouchy regulators of development and disease.

Ow JR(1), Tan YH(2), Jin Y(2), Bahirvani AG(2), Taneja R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; National University of Singapore Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; National University of Singapore Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: phsrt@nus.edu.sg.

Stra13 and Sharp-1 are transcriptional repressors that share domain structure
similarity with members of the basic helix-loop-helix-Orange subfamily. In
contrast to other members that include Hes and Hey proteins, transcriptional
repression mediated by Stra13 and Sharp-1 does not involve recruitment of the
corepressor Groucho. Both proteins undergo sumoylation at evolutionarily
conserved sites, and this posttranslational modification serves as a platform for
association with chromatin-modifying enzymes including histone deacetylases and
histone methyltransferases. In addition to being widely expressed during
embryonic development and in adult tissues, the expression of both genes is
induced by a number of stimuli. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function studies
have demonstrated their function in cellular differentiation and regeneration, in
regulation of circadian rhythms, immune homeostasis, and metabolism. Given their 
diverse physiological functions in several tissues, it is not surprising that
deregulated expression of Stra13 and Sharp-1 is apparent in human pathologies.
Here, we review our current understanding of their cellular functions that
suggest a requirement in maintenance of tissue homeostasis.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 8;289(32):22358-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571950. Epub 2014
Jun 18.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) protein-specific protease 1 de-SUMOylates
Sharp-1 protein and controls adipocyte differentiation.

Liu B(1), Wang T(1), Mei W(2), Li D(2), Cai R(2), Zuo Y(1), Cheng J(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key
Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation and State Key Laboratory
of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (2)From the Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor
Microenvironment and Inflammation and. (3)From the Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and
Inflammation and State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai
Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200025, China jkcheng@shsmu.edu.cn.

Adipocyte differentiation is regulated by a transcriptional cascade that mainly
includes CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family members and the nuclear receptor
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). Here we show the defects in
adipocyte differentiation as well as PPAR<U+03B3> expression in Senp1(-/-) mouse
embryonic fibroblast cells induced by adipogenic stimuli. We further determine
that SENP1 is a specific de-SUMOylation protease for Sharp-1, a repressor for
PPAR<U+03B3> transcription and adipogenesis. SENP1 enhances adipogenesis through
de-SUMOylation of Sharp-1, which then releases Sharp-1 repression of PPAR<U+03B3>
expression and adipocyte differentiation. These results reveal SENP1 as a novel
regulator in adipogenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4139243
PMID: 24942744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Leukemia. 2014 Jul;28(7):1564-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.82. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Unique BHLHB3 overexpression in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with
t(6;11)(q27;q23).

Coenen EA(1), Zwaan CM(2), Stary J(3), Baruchel A(4), de Haas V(5), Stam RW(1),
Reinhardt D(6), Kaspers GJ(7), Arentsen-Peters ST(1), Meyer C(8), Marschalek
R(8), Nigro LL(9), Dworzak M(10), Pieters R(2), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC/Sophia Children's Hospital,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)1] Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus
MC/Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2] Dutch Childhood
Oncology Group (DCOG), The Hague, The Netherlands. (3)Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague,
Czech Republic. (4)Pediatric Hematology, Hôpital Robert Debré AP-HP and
University ParisDiderot, Paris, France. (5)Dutch Childhood Oncology Group (DCOG),
The Hague, The Netherlands. (6)AML-BFM Study Group, Hannover, Germany.
(7)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (8)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, ZAFES, Diagnostic Center of 
Acute Leukemia (DCAL), Frankfurt, Germany. (9)Center of Pediatric Hematology
Oncology, Azienda Policlinico, Catania, Italy. (10)St Anna Children's Hospital
and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

PMID: 24561520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Horm Metab Res. 2014 Jun;46(6):397-403. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1363981. Epub 2014
Jan 20.

Insulin stimulates the expression of the SHARP-1 gene via multiple signaling
pathways.

Takagi K(1), Asano K(1), Haneishi A(1), Ono M(2), Komatsu Y(2), Yamamoto T(3),
Tanaka T(3), Ueno H(4), Ogawa W(5), Tomita K(3), Noguchi T(3), Yamada K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutritional Science, Faculty of Human Health Science,
Matsumoto University, Matsumoto, Nagano-, Japan. (2)Matsumoto University Graduate
School of Health Science, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Osaka Ohtani -University, Tondabayashi, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathophysiology, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Medicine, -Yahata-nishi-ku,
Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine,
Division of Diabetes and -Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Kobe University Graduate
School of -Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

The rat enhancer of split- and hairy-related protein-1 (SHARP-1) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor. An issue of whether SHARP-1 is an
insulin-inducible transcription factor was examined. Insulin rapidly increased
the level of SHARP-1 mRNA both in vivo and in vitro. Then, signaling pathways
involved with the increase of SHARP-1 mRNA by insulin were determined in H4IIE
rat hepatoma cells. Pretreatments with LY294002, wortmannin, and staurosporine
completely blocked the induction effect, suggesting the involvement of both
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-K) and protein kinase C (PKC) pathways. In fact, 
overexpression of a dominant negative form of atypical protein kinase C lambda
(aPKC<U+03BB>) significantly decreased the induction of the SHARP-1 mRNA. In addition,
inhibitors for the small GTPase Rac or Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) also blocked
the induction of SHARP-1 mRNA by insulin. Overexpression of a dominant negative
form of Rac1 prevented the activation by insulin. Furthermore, actinomycin D and 
cycloheximide completely blocked the induction of SHARP-1 mRNA by insulin.
Finally, when a SHARP-1 expression plasmid was transiently transfected with
various reporter plasmids into H4IIE cells, the promoter activity of PEPCK
reporter plasmid was specifically decreased. Thus, we conclude that insulin
induces the SHARP-1 gene expression at the transcription level via a both PI
3-K/aPKC<U+03BB>/JNK- and a PI 3-K/Rac/JNK-signaling pathway; protein synthesis is
required for this induction; and that SHARP-1 is a potential repressor of the
PEPCK gene expression.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24446161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Cell Sci. 2014 Feb 1;127(Pt 3):599-608. doi: 10.1242/jcs.136648. Epub 2013 Dec 
19.

Sharp-1 regulates TGF-ß signaling and skeletal muscle regeneration.

Acharjee S(1), Chung TK, Gopinadhan S, Shankar SR, Wang Y, Li L, Vercherat C,
Gulbagci NT, Rossner M, Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Sharp-1 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional repressor that is
involved in a number of cellular processes. Our previous studies have
demonstrated that Sharp-1 is a negative regulator of skeletal myogenesis and it
blocks differentiation of muscle precursor cells by modulating the activity of
MyoD. In order to understand its role in pre- and post-natal myogenesis, we
assessed skeletal muscle development and freeze-injury-induced regeneration in
Sharp-1-deficient mice. We show that embryonic skeletal muscle development is not
impaired in the absence of Sharp-1; however, post-natally, the regenerative
capacity is compromised. Although the initial phases of injury-induced
regeneration proceed normally in Sharp-1(-/-) mice, during late stages, the
mutant muscle exhibits necrotic fibers, calcium deposits and fibrosis. TGF-ß
expression, as well as levels of phosphorylated Smad2 and Smad3, are sustained in
the mutant tissue and treatment with decorin, which blocks TGF-ß signaling,
improves the histopathology of Sharp-1(-/-) injured muscles. In vitro, Sharp-1
associates with Smad3, and its overexpression inhibits TGF-ß- and Smad3-mediated 
expression of extracellular matrix genes in myofibroblasts. These results
demonstrate that Sharp-1 regulates muscle regenerative capacity, at least in
part, by modulation of TGF-ß signaling.

PMID: 24357723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Dec;27(6):478-89. doi: 10.1177/0748730412462838.

Tissue-specific interaction of Per1/2 and Dec2 in the regulation of fibroblast
circadian rhythms.

Tsang AH(1), Sánchez-Moreno C, Bode B, Rossner MJ, Garaulet M, Oster H.

Author information: 
(1)Circadian Rhythms Group, Göttingen, Germany.

In mammals, the molecular circadian clockwork is comprised of interlocked
transcriptional-translational feedback loops (TTLs). Three Period (Per1-3) and 2 
Dec (Dec1/2) genes interact in regulating the activity of the transcriptional
activators CLOCK/NPAS2 and BMAL1. While deletion of Per1 and Per2 in mice results
in behavioral arrhythmicity, Dec deletion has less dramatic effects on activity
rhythms, affecting primarily phase of entrainment and free-running period. In
intact animals, clock gene mutant phenotypes are often masked due to
intercellular coupling mechanisms that stabilize cellular rhythms. Therefore, to 
study Per/Dec genetic interaction at the cellular level, we isolated fibroblasts 
from different tissues of Per1, Per2, and Dec2 single and double mutant mice. We 
show that in the cellular TTL, Pers and Dec2 act in a principally synergistic
way, but tissue-specific differences in this interaction are seen. A rescue of
rhythmicity in Per2 mutant cells after additional deletion of Dec2 was observed, 
indicating that in the absence of Per2, DEC2 destabilizes TTL function. Rhythm
power in Per1/Dec2 and Per2/Dec2 double mutants was strongly reduced, suggesting 
that interaction of Dec2 with both Per genes is important for stabilizing clock
period. Contrary to what was observed for behavior, nonsynergistic effects of
Dec2 and Per1/2 mutations were observed on cellular clock phase regulation that
do not correlate with period effects. Our data reveal cell type-specific
interactions of Per1/2 and Dec2 in the regulation of period, phase, and rhythm
sustainment, emphasizing the differential organization of the mammalian clock
machinery in different tissues.

PMID: 23223373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Food Chem. 2012 Sep 15;134(2):783-8. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.02.181. Epub
2012 Mar 7.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate stimulates both AMP-activated protein kinase and
nuclear factor-kappa B signaling pathways.

Asano K(1), Takagi K, Haneishi A, Nakamura S, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutritional Science, Faculty of Human Health Science,
Matsumoto University, 2095-1 Niimura, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-1295, Japan.

We previously reported that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) increased the
level of SHARP-1 mRNA via a phosphoinositide 3-kinase/atypical protein kinase C
lambda signaling pathway in rat H4IIE hepatoma cells. In the present study, we
investigated other signaling pathway(s). Treating with either compound-C,
BAY11-7082, or both, partially blocked the up-regulation of the SHARP-1 gene by
EGCG. This suggests that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)- and nuclear
factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-signaling pathways were additively involved in the
induction mediated by EGCG. Indeed, an AMPK activator induced a level of SHARP-1 
mRNA. Although actinomycin D partially blocked the EGCG-induction of that SHARP-1
mRNA level, the nucleotide sequence between -1501 and -1 in the rat SHARP-1 gene 
did not positively respond to EGCG and NF-<U+03BA>B, respectively. Thus, we conclude
that EGCG stimulates multiple signaling pathways in the SHARP-1 gene expression
at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels and that there is no
regulatory region susceptible to EGCG and NF-<U+03BA>B in the examined region.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23107691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Dec;23(24):4778-85. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0311. Epub 2012
Oct 19.

G9a mediates Sharp-1-dependent inhibition of skeletal muscle differentiation.

Ling BM(1), Gopinadhan S, Kok WK, Shankar SR, Gopal P, Bharathy N, Wang Y, Taneja
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore 117597.

Sharp-1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is a potent repressor of 
skeletal muscle differentiation and is dysregulated in muscle pathologies.
However, the mechanisms by which it inhibits myogenesis are not fully understood.
Here we show that G9a, a lysine methyltransferase, is involved in
Sharp-1-mediated inhibition of muscle differentiation. We demonstrate that G9a
directly interacts with Sharp-1 and enhances its ability to transcriptionally
repress the myogenin promoter. Concomitant with a differentiation block,
G9a-dependent histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylation (H3K9me2) and MyoD methylation
are apparent upon Sharp-1 overexpression in muscle cells. RNA
interference-mediated reduction of G9a or pharmacological inhibition of its
activity erases these repressive marks and rescues the differentiation defect
imposed by Sharp-1. Our findings provide new insights into Sharp-1-dependent
regulation of myogenesis and identify epigenetic mechanisms that could be
targeted in myopathies characterized by elevated Sharp-1 levels.

PMCID: PMC3521685
PMID: 23087213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Cells. 2012 Feb;17(2):109-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01574.x.

Regulation of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Dec1 and Dec2 by RORa 
and their roles in adipogenesis.

Ozaki N(1), Noshiro M, Kawamoto T, Nakashima A, Honda K, Fukuzaki-Dohi U, Honma
S, Fujimoto K, Tanimoto K, Tanne K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Developmental Biology, Hiroshima
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

DEC1 and DEC2, members of the basic helix-loop-helix superfamily, are involved in
various biological phenomena including clock systems, cell differentiation and
metabolism. In clock systems, Dec1 and Dec2 expression are up-regulated by the
CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer via E-box (CACGTG), exhibiting a circadian rhythm in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the central circadian pacemaker and other
peripheral tissues. In this study, using assays of luciferase reporters,
electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we identified
novel nuclear receptor response elements, ROR response elements (RORE), in Dec1
and Dec2 promoters. These ROREs responded to the transcriptional activator RORa, 
but not to the repressor REVERBa, although the Bmal1 promoter responded to both
RORa and REVERBa. Therefore, RORa, but not REVERBa, is involved in the regulation
of Dec1 and Dec2 expression without significantly affecting their rhythmicity.
Since RORa, DEC1 and DEC2 reportedly suppressed adipogenic differentiation, we
examined expression of Rora, Dec1, Dec2 and other clock-controlled genes in
differentiating 3T3-L1 adipocytes. The results suggested that RORa suppresses
adipogenic differentiation at a later stage of differentiation by RORE-mediated
stimulation of Dec1 and Dec2 expression.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2012 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22244086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Dec;26(6):530-40. doi: 10.1177/0748730411419782.

Genetic interaction of Per1 and Dec1/2 in the regulation of circadian locomotor
activity.

Bode B(1), Shahmoradi A, Taneja R, Rossner MJ, Oster H.

Author information: 
(1)Circadian Rhythms Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Apr;27(2):180. Taneja, Reshma [added].

In mammals, 24-h rhythms are controlled by a hierarchical system of endogenous
clocks, with a circadian pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of
the hypothalamus that synchronizes peripheral oscillators throughout the body.
The molecular clock machinery is regulated by interlocked transcriptional
translational feedback loops (TTLs). The core TTL includes the transcriptional
modulators PER (1-3) and CRY (1/2) that feed back on their own expression by
interaction with CLOCK/BMAL1. An accessory loop involving the transcription
factors DEC1 and DEC2 has been described that also impinges on
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transactivation. In Drosophila, the DEC ortholog CWO shows
synergistic activity to PER. This prompted the authors to analyze PER1-DEC
interaction in the mammalian SCN. They generated Per1/Dec double and triple
mutant mice to monitor activity rhythms under entrained and free-running
conditions. Furthermore, they analyzed expression of the clock genes Per2,
Rev-Erba, and Bmal1 in wild-type and Per1/Dec mutant SCN by in situ
hybridization. The experiments reveal a critical role for Per1-Dec interaction in
regulating activity phase under entrained conditions. In constant darkness, a
synergistic function for Per1 and Dec1/2 in period regulation was found,
correlating with disrupted clock gene mRNA levels in the SCN. Luciferase reporter
gene assays indicate an activatory function of DECs on Bmal1 expression.
Together, the results suggest a partially redundant and bidirectional regulatory 
function for the 2 Dec genes in the TTL and a conservation of Per-Dec (Cwo)
synergism between vertebrate and invertebrate clocks.

PMID: 22215611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Agric Food Chem. 2011 Dec 28;59(24):13360-4. doi: 10.1021/jf204016k. Epub 2011 
Nov 30.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate enhances the expression of an insulin-inducible
transcription factor gene via a phosphoinositide 3-kinase/atypical protein kinase
C lambda pathway.

Asano K(1), Takagi K, Haneishi A, Yamamoto T, Tanaka T, Noguchi T, Nakamura S,
Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutritional Science, Faculty of Human Health Science,
Matsumoto University, 2095-1 Niimura, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-1295, Japan.

The rat enhancer of split- and hairy-related protein-1 (SHARP-1) is an
insulin-inducible transcriptional repressor. In this study, we examined issues of
whether (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a green tea polyphenol, regulates 
the expression of the rat SHARP-1 gene and which signaling pathway mediates the
regulation. When H4IIE cells were treated with EGCG, SHARP-1 mRNA levels rapidly 
increased. Pretreatments with inhibitors for either phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI
3-K) or protein kinase C partially blocked EGCG induction. Atypical protein
kinase C lambda (aPKC<U+03BB>) is known as a downstream target of PI 3-K in the liver.
When a dominant-negative form of aPKC<U+03BB> was expressed, the EGCG-induced SHARP-1
mRNAs was inhibited. Finally, Western blot analysis revealed that EGCG rapidly
and temporarily stimulates aPKC<U+03BB> phosphorylation. Thus, we conclude that EGCG
induces SHARP-1 gene expression via a PI 3-K/aPKC<U+03BB> signaling pathway.

PMID: 22085033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Chronobiol Int. 2011 Nov;28(9):737-50. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.607374.

Advanced light-entrained activity onsets and restored free-running
suprachiasmatic nucleus circadian rhythms in per2/dec mutant mice.

Bode B(1), Taneja R, Rossner MJ, Oster H.

Author information: 
(1)Circadian Rhythms Group , Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Chronobiol Int. 2012 Apr;29(3):377. Taneja, Reshma [added].

Many behavioral and physiological processes display diurnal (24-h) rhythms
controlled by an internal timekeeping system?the circadian clock. In mammals, a
circadian pacemaker is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
hypothalamus and synchronizes peripheral oscillators found in most other tissues 
with the external light-dark (LD) cycle. At the molecular level, circadian clocks
are regulated by transcriptional translational feedback loops (TTLs) involving a 
set of clock genes. The mammalian core TTL includes the transcriptional
modulators PER?(1?3) and CRY?(1/2) that inhibit their own expression by
interaction with CLOCK/NPAS2 and BMAL1 (ARNTL). The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors DEC1 (BHLHE40) and DEC2 (BHLHE41) can interact with this
core TTL, forming an accessory feedback mechanism. The authors measured circadian
locomotor behavior and clock gene expression in the SCN of Per2/Dec double- and
triple-mutant mice to analyze the functional interaction of PER2 and DEC feedback
on circadian pacemaker function in the SCN. The data suggest a synergistic
interaction of Per2 and Dec1/2 in activity entrainment to a standard LD cycle,
correlating with a cumulative deficiency in negative-masking capacities in
Per2/Dec double- and triple-mutant mice and suggesting an involvement of
Per2-Dec1/2 interactivity in activity-onset regulation and masking under LD, but 
not under constant conditions. In contrast, under constant darkness (DD)
conditions, a deletion of either Dec1 or Dec2 partially rescued the Per2 mutant
short-period/arrhythmicity phenotype, accompanied by a restoration of time-of-day
effects on clock gene expression in the SCN. Together, these results show an
interaction of Per2 and Dec1/2 feedback processes in the SCN with differential
modes of interactivity under entrained and free-run conditions. (Author
correspondence: henrik.oster@mpibpc.mpg.de ).

PMID: 22080784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 23;413(2):376-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.110. Epub 2011 Aug 27.

Berberine exerts anti-adipogenic activity through up-regulation of C/EBP
inhibitors, CHOP and DEC2.

Pham TP(1), Kwon J, Shin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine and Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon-Si, Kyonggi-Do,
Republic of Korea.

Berberine exerts an anti-adipogenic activity that is associated with the
down-regulation of C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3>. Stimulation of AMP-activated kinase (AMPK)
caused by inhibition of mitochondrial respiration has been suggested to underlie 
such molecular regulation. In the present study, we show that berberine
up-regulated the expression of two different sets of C/EBP inhibitors, CHOP and
DEC2, while down-modulating C/EBPa, PPAR<U+03B3> and other adipogenic markers and
effectors in differentiating 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and mature adipocytes. Data
also suggested that the berberine-induced up-regulation of CHOP and DEC2 was
attributable to selective activation of an unfolded protein response (UPR) and
modified extracellular environment, respectively. As a result, the
anti-adipogenic activity of berberine was diminished remarkably by adjusting the 
differentiation culture media and limitedly but consistently by knockdown of CHOP
expression. Together, up-regulation of C/EBP inhibitors appears to underlie the
berberine-induced repression of C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> and, so, the inhibition of
adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21893041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Jul;33(5):360-8. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e3182002f9f.

ASPS-1, a novel cell line manifesting key features of alveolar soft part sarcoma.

Kenney S(1), Vistica DT, Stockwin LH, Burkett S, Hollingshead MG, Borgel SD,
Butcher DO, Schrump DS, Shoemaker RH.

Author information: 
(1)Screening Technologies Branch, Developmental Therapeutics Program, National
Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

In vitro growth of alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) and establishment of an ASPS
cell line, ASPS-1, are described in this study. Using a recently developed
xenograft model of ASPS derived from a lymph node metastasis, organoid nests
consisting of 15 to 25 ASPS cells were isolated from ASPS xenograft tumors by
capture on 70 µm filters and plated in vitro. After attachment to the substratum,
these nests deposited small aggregates of ASPS cells. These cells grew slowly and
were expanded over a period of 3 years and have maintained characteristics
consistent with those of both the original ASPS tumor from the patient and the
xenograft tumor including (1) presence of the alveolar soft part
locus-transcription factor E3 type 1 fusion transcript and nuclear expression of 
the alveolar soft part locus-transcription factor E3 type 1 fusion protein; (2)
maintenance of the t(X;17)(p11;q25) translocation characteristic of ASPS; and (3)
expression of upregulated ASPS transcripts involved in angiogenesis (ANGPTL2,
HIF-1-a, MDK, c-MET, VEGF, and TIMP-2), cell proliferation (PRL, PCSK1),
metastasis (ADAM9), as well as the transcription factor BHLHB3 and the
muscle-specific transcripts TRIM63 and ITGß1BP3. This ASPS cell line forms
colonies in soft agar and retains the ability to produce highly vascularized ASPS
tumors in NOD.SCID/NCr mice. Immunohistochemistry of selected ASPS markers on
these tumors indicated similarity to those of the original patient tumor as well 
as to the xenografted ASPS tumor. We anticipate that this ASPS cell line will
accelerate investigations into the biology of ASPS including identification of
new therapeutic approaches for treatment of this slow growing soft tissue
sarcoma.

PMID: 21552147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Pathol. 2011 Jul;224(3):420-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2878. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor DEC1 negatively regulates cyclin D1.

Bhawal UK(1), Sato F, Arakawa Y, Fujimoto K, Kawamoto T, Tanimoto K, Ito Y,
Sasahira T, Sakurai T, Kobayashi M, Kashima I, Kijima H, Kuniyasu H, Abiko Y,
Kato Y, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Occlusion Medicine and Open Research Center, Kanagawa
Dental College, Yokosuka, Japan. bhawal.ujjal.kumar@nihon-u.ac.jp

DEC1 (also known as Stra13/Bhlhb2/Sharp2) and DEC2 (also known as Bhlhb3/Sharp1) 
are two paralogous basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional regulators which
exhibit a robust circadian gene expression pattern in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) and in peripheral organs. DEC1 has been suggested to play key roles in
mammalian cell differentiation, the cell cycle and circadian regulation, hypoxia 
response, and carcinogenesis. Here we show that DEC1 overexpression exhibits
delayed wound healing and reduces cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
DEC1 strongly repressed the promoter activity of cyclin D1. We further identify a
possible DEC-response element in the cyclin D1 promoter region, and confirmed the
direct binding of DEC1 to that element. Forced expression of DEC1 efficiently
repressed the cyclin D1 promoter and expression. Our clinical data provide the
first evidence that there is a strong inverse correlation between DEC1 and cyclin
D1 expression in oral cancer, and DEC1 expression significantly correlated with
clinicopathological parameters. We suggest that radiation-induced DEC1
overexpression and Akt phosphorylation in cancer cells are mediated via PI-3K
signalling. Overexpression of DEC1 activates the PI-3K/Akt signalling pathway
through reactive oxygen species (ROS).

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21506129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Exp Biol. 2011 Apr 15;214(Pt 8):1257-63. doi: 10.1242/jeb.052100.

Significant dissociation of expression patterns of the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors Dec1 and Dec2 in rat kidney.

Wu T(1), Ni Y, Zhuge F, Sun L, Xu B, Kato H, Fu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Zhejiang University of
Technology, Zhaohui Xincun, Hangzhou 310032, China.

Dec1 and Dec2 are regulators of the mammalian molecular clock that show robust
circadian rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and various peripheral tissues. 
Although the expression of Dec1 and Dec2 is altered by multiple stimuli in
different organs, their transcriptional regulatory mechanisms have not been fully
elucidated for the kidney. In the present study, we describe for the first time
significant dissociation of expression patterns with arrhythmic expression of
Dec1 and rhythmic expression of Dec2 in rat kidney under a normal light-dark (LD)
cycle. Daytime restricted feeding (RF) significantly altered the expression
patterns of these two clock genes, and even induced circadian expression of Dec1 
with an amplitude of 2.2 on day 3 and 4.2 on day 7. However, when a reversed
feeding schedule was coupled with a reversed LD cycle, the expression of Dec1 but
not Dec2 reverted to being arrhythmic. Moreover, exogenous injection of the
glucocorticoid analogue dexamethasone (Dex) at certain times of the day resulted 
in rhythmic expression of Dec1, which was similar to that seen following RF for 7
days. In contrast, endogenous disruption of glucocorticoids by adrenalectomy
abolished RF-induced rhythmic expression of Dec1 in the kidney. These
observations suggest the existence of a glucocorticoid gating mechanism in the
circadian expression of Dec1 in rat kidney.

PMID: 21430201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Genes Cells. 2010 Apr 1;15(4):315-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01381.x. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

Anti-apoptotic effect of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
DEC2 in human breast cancer cells.

Liu Y(1), Sato F, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Morohashi S, Akasaka H, Kondo J, Wu Y, 
Noshiro M, Kato Y, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Bioscience, Hirosaki University Graduate School of
Medicine, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.

DEC1 (BHLHB2/Stra13/Sharp2) and DEC2 (BHLHB3/Sharp1) are basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors that are involved in circadian rhythms,
differentiation and the responses to hypoxia. We examined whether DEC1 and DEC2
are involved in apoptosis regulation, in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. We
found that siRNA-mediated knockdown of DEC2 resulted in marked enhancement of
apoptosis compared with that in control cells transfected with nonspecific siRNA.
However, knockdown of DEC1 by siRNA did not affect cell survival. Knockdown of
DEC2 affected the expression of mRNA or proteins related to apoptosis, such as
Fas, c-Myc, caspase-8, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and Bax. We also
showed that tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) up-regulates the expression
of DEC1 and DEC2. DEC2 over-expression caused by the transfection of an
expression vector reduced the amounts of cleaved PARP and caspase-8 induced by
TNF-alpha treatment, whereas DEC1 over-expression increased it. Finally, we
revealed that treatment with double knockdown against both DEC1 and DEC2
decreased the amounts of cleaved PARP and caspase-8 induced by DEC2 siRNA with or
without TNF-alpha. These data indicate that DEC2 has an anti-apoptotic effect,
whereas DEC1 has a pro-apoptotic effect, which are involved in the balance of
survival of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 20236182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 May;35(6):1279-89. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.230. Epub 
2010 Jan 13.

Differential association of circadian genes with mood disorders: CRY1 and NPAS2
are associated with unipolar major depression and CLOCK and VIP with bipolar
disorder.

Soria V(1), Martínez-Amorós E, Escaramís G, Valero J, Pérez-Egea R, García C,
Gutiérrez-Zotes A, Puigdemont D, Bayés M, Crespo JM, Martorell L, Vilella E,
Labad A, Vallejo J, Pérez V, Menchón JM, Estivill X, Gratacòs M, Urretavizcaya M.

Author information: 
(1)CIBERSAM (CIBER en Salud Mental), Mood Disorders Clinical and Research Unit,
Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Disruptions in circadian rhythms have been described in mood disorders (MD), but 
the involvement of genetic variation in genes pertaining to the molecular
circadian machinery in the susceptibility to MD has not been conclusively
determined. We examined 209 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering 19
circadian genes (ADCYAP1, ARNTL, ARNTL2, BHLHB2, BHLHB3, CLOCK, CRY1, CRY2,
CSNK1E, DBP, NPAS2, NR1D1, PER1, PER2, PER3, RORA, TIMELESS, VIP, and VIPR2) in a
sample of 534 MD patients (335 with unipolar major mood depression (MDD) and 199 
with bipolar disorder (BD)) and 440 community-based screened controls. Nominally,
statistically significant associations were found in 15 circadian genes. The
gene-wide test, corrected for the number of SNPs analyzed in each gene,
identified significant associations in CRY1 (rs2287161), NPAS2 (rs11123857), and 
VIPR2 (rs885861) genes with the combined MD sample. In the MDD subsample, the
same SNPs in CRY1 and NPAS2 of the combined sample remained associated, whereas
in the BD subsample CLOCK (rs10462028) and VIP (rs17083008) were specifically
associated. The association with an SNP located 3' near CRY1 gene in MDD remained
statistically significant after permutation correction at experiment level
(p=0.007). Significant additive effects were found between the SNPs that were
statistically significant at the gene-wide level. We also found evidence of
associations between two-marker haplotypes in CRY1 and NPAS2 genes and MD. Our
data support the contribution of the circadian system to the genetic
susceptibility to MD and suggest that different circadian genes may have specific
effects on MD polarity.

PMCID: PMC3055337
PMID: 20072116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(5):1182-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00690-09. Epub 2009 Dec
22.

A new role for sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 transcription factors 
in the regulation of muscle mass and muscle cell differentiation.

Lecomte V(1), Meugnier E, Euthine V, Durand C, Freyssenet D, Nemoz G, Rome S,
Vidal H, Lefai E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U870, F-69921 Oullins Cedex, France.

The role of the transcription factors sterol regulatory element binding protein
1a (SREBP-1a) and SREBP-1c in the regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid
metabolism has been well studied; however, little is known about their specific
function in muscle. In the present study, analysis of recent microarray data from
muscle cells overexpressing SREBP1 suggested that they may play a role in the
regulation of myogenesis. We then demonstrated that SREBP-1a and -1c inhibit
myoblast-to-myotube differentiation and also induce in vivo and in vitro muscle
atrophy. Furthermore, we have identified the transcriptional repressors BHLHB2
and BHLHB3 as mediators of these effects of SREBP-1a and -1c in muscle. Both
repressors are SREBP-1 target genes, and they affect the expression of numerous
genes involved in the myogenic program. Our findings identify a new role for
SREBP-1 transcription factors in muscle, thus linking the control of muscle mass 
to metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC2820883
PMID: 20028734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. FEBS Lett. 2010 Feb 5;584(3):619-24. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.12.011. Epub
2009 Dec 17.

Sharp-1 modulates the cellular response to DNA damage.

Liu JJ(1), Chung TK, Li J, Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

DNA damage checkpoints are essential for maintenance of genome integrity. We
report here that inducible overexpression of the transcription factor Sharp-1
results in an S and G2/M cell cycle arrest, concomitant with the upregulation of 
Brca1 and GADD45alpha expression. In addition, we show that endogenous Sharp-1
mRNA is increased by DNA-damaging agents. Consistently, Sharp-1 overexpressing
cells exhibit reduced apoptosis in response to chemotherapeutic drugs along with 
lower p53 expression and activity. Our studies identify a novel function for
Sharp-1 in cell cycle arrest and DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Inappropriate
Sharp-1 expression may therefore be associated with tumorigenesis.

2009 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2812643
PMID: 20006609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nat Immunol. 2009 Dec;10(12):1260-6. doi: 10.1038/ni.1821. Epub 2009 Nov 1.

Requirement for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Dec2 in initial
TH2 lineage commitment.

Yang XO(1), Angkasekwinai P, Zhu J, Peng J, Liu Z, Nurieva R, Liu X, Chung Y,
Chang SH, Sun B, Dong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

How naive CD4(+) T cells commit to the T helper type 2 (T(H)2) lineage is poorly 
understood. Here we show that the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
Dec2 was selectively expressed in T(H)2 cells. CD4(+) T cells from Dec2-deficient
mice showed defective T(H)2 differentiation in vitro and in vivo in an asthma
model and in response to challenge with a parasite antigen. Dec2 promoted
expression of interleukin 4 (IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13 during early T(H)2
differentiation and directly bound to and activated transcription of genes
encoding the transcription factors JunB and GATA-3. As GATA-3 induces Dec2
expression, our findings also indicate a feed-forward regulatory circuit during
T(H)2 differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2784129
PMID: 19881507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6320-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900975. Epub 2009
Oct 30.

Dec2 promotes Th2 cell differentiation by enhancing IL-2R signaling.

Liu Z(1), Li Z, Mao K, Zou J, Wang Y, Tao Z, Lin G, Tian L, Ji Y, Wu X, Zhu X,
Sun S, Chen W, Xiang C, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China.

Th cell differentiation is precisely regulated by thousands of genes at different
stages. In the present study, we demonstrate that Dec2, a transcription factor
belonging to the bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) superfamily, is progressively
induced during the course of Th2 differentiation, especially at the late stage.
The up-regulated Dec2 can strongly promote Th2 development under Th2-inducing
conditions, as evidenced by retrovirus-mediated gene transfer or transgenic
manipulation. In addition, an enhancement of Th2 responses is also detectable in 
Dec2 transgenic mice in vivo. Conversely, RNA interference-mediated suppression
of endogenous Dec2 could attenuate Th2 differentiation. Finally, we show that the
enhanced Th2 development is at least in part due to substantial up-regulation of 
CD25 expression elicited by Dec2, thereby resulting in hyperresponsiveness to
IL-2 stimulation.

PMID: 19880450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 13;106(41):17582-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909733106. Epub 2009 Oct 5.

Glucocorticoid regulation of the circadian clock modulates glucose homeostasis.

So AY(1), Bernal TU, Pillsbury ML, Yamamoto KR, Feldman BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, 513 Parnassus Drive, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Circadian clock genes are regulated by glucocorticoids; however, whether this
regulation is a direct or secondary effect and the physiological consequences of 
this regulation were unknown. Here, we identified glucocorticoid response
elements (GREs) at multiple clock genes and showed that 3 were directly regulated
by the glucocorticoid receptor. We determined that a GRE within the core clock
gene Per2 was continuously occupied during rhythmic expression and essential for 
glucocorticoid regulation of that gene in vivo. We further demonstrated that mice
with a genomic deletion spanning this GRE expressed elevated leptin levels and
were protected from glucose intolerance and insulin resistance on glucocorticoid 
treatment but not from muscle wasting. We conclude that Per2 is an integral
component of a particular glucocorticoid regulatory pathway and that
glucocorticoid regulation of the peripheral clock is selectively required for
some actions of glucocorticoids.

PMCID: PMC2757402
PMID: 19805059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Pharmacol. 2009 Dec;76(6):1360-9. doi: 10.1124/mol.109.057000. Epub 2009 Sep 
28.

The basic helix-loop-helix proteins differentiated embryo chondrocyte (DEC) 1 and
DEC2 function as corepressors of retinoid X receptors.

Cho Y(1), Noshiro M, Choi M, Morita K, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Kato Y, Makishima 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Nihon University 
School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix proteins differentiated embryo chondrocyte 1 (DEC1)
and DEC2 are involved in circadian rhythm control. Because the metabolism of
dietary nutrients has been linked to circadian regulation, we examined the effect
of DEC1 and DEC2 on the function of the metabolite-sensing nuclear receptors,
ligand-dependent transcription factors, including retinoid X receptor (RXR) and
liver X receptor (LXR). Transfection assays showed that DEC1 and DEC2 repressed
ligand-dependent transactivation by RXR. Knockdown of endogenous DEC1 and DEC2
expression with small interfering RNAs augmented ligand-dependent RXRalpha
transactivation. DEC1 and DEC2 interacted directly with RXRalpha, and ligand
addition enhanced their association. DEC1 and DEC2 modified interaction of
RXRalpha with cofactor proteins. Transfection assays using DEC1 and DEC2 mutants 
revealed that the C-terminal region of DEC2 is required for repression and that
an LXXLL motif in DEC1 and DEC2 is necessary for RXRalpha repression. DEC1 and
DEC2 repressed the induction of LXR target genes, associated with the promoter of
an LXR target gene, and dissociated from the promoter with ligand treatment.
Knockdown of endogenous DEC1 and DEC2 enhanced the LXR target gene expression in 
hepatocytes. Expression of Dec1, Dec2, and Srebp-1c showed a circadian rhythm in 
the liver of mice, whereas that of Lxralpha, Lxrbeta, and Rxralpha was not
rhythmic. DEC1 and DEC2 also repressed the transactivation of other RXR
heterodimers, such as farnesoid X receptor, vitamin D receptor, and retinoic acid
receptor. Thus, the repressor function of DEC1 and DEC2 may be extended to other 
RXR heterodimer nuclear receptors.

PMID: 19786558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Science. 2009 Aug 14;325(5942):866-70. doi: 10.1126/science.1174443.

The transcriptional repressor DEC2 regulates sleep length in mammals.

He Y(1), Jones CR, Fujiki N, Xu Y, Guo B, Holder JL Jr, Rossner MJ, Nishino S, Fu
YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco, Mission
Bay, 1550 Fourth Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 Aug 14;325(5942):825-6.

Sleep deprivation can impair human health and performance. Habitual total sleep
time and homeostatic sleep response to sleep deprivation are quantitative traits 
in humans. Genetic loci for these traits have been identified in model organisms,
but none of these potential animal models have a corresponding human genotype and
phenotype. We have identified a mutation in a transcriptional repressor
(hDEC2-P385R) that is associated with a human short sleep phenotype. Activity
profiles and sleep recordings of transgenic mice carrying this mutation showed
increased vigilance time and less sleep time than control mice in a zeitgeber
time- and sleep deprivation-dependent manner. These mice represent a model of
human sleep homeostasis that provides an opportunity to probe the effect of sleep
on human physical and mental health.

PMCID: PMC2884988
PMID: 19679812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Science. 2009 Aug 14;325(5942):825-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1178713.

Physiology. How much sleep do we need?

Hor H(1), Tafti M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Comment on
    Science. 2009 Aug 14;325(5942):866-70.

PMID: 19679803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5664-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3820. Epub 
2009 Jul 7.

Computational identification of a p38SAPK-regulated transcription factor network 
required for tumor cell quiescence.

Adam AP(1), George A, Schewe D, Bragado P, Iglesias BV, Ranganathan AC, Kourtidis
A, Conklin DS, Aguirre-Ghiso JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health and Center for
Excellence in Cancer Genomics, SUNY-Albany, Rensselaer, New York, USA.

The stress-activated kinase p38 plays key roles in tumor suppression and
induction of tumor cell dormancy. However, the mechanisms behind these functions 
remain poorly understood. Using computational tools, we identified a
transcription factor (TF) network regulated by p38alpha/beta and required for
human squamous carcinoma cell quiescence in vivo. We found that p38
transcriptionally regulates a core network of 46 genes that includes 16 TFs.
Activation of p38 induced the expression of the TFs p53 and BHLHB3, while
inhibiting c-Jun and FoxM1 expression. Furthermore, induction of p53 by p38 was
dependent on c-Jun down-regulation. Accordingly, RNAi down-regulation of BHLHB3
or p53 interrupted tumor cell quiescence, while down-regulation of c-Jun or FoxM1
or overexpression of BHLHB3 in malignant cells mimicked the onset of quiescence. 
Our results identify components of the regulatory mechanisms driving p38-induced 
cancer cell quiescence. These may regulate dormancy of residual disease that
usually precedes the onset of metastasis in many cancers.

PMCID: PMC2720524
PMID: 19584293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. EMBO Rep. 2009 Jan;10(1):79-86. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.207. Epub 2008 Nov 21.

SHARP1/DEC2 inhibits adipogenic differentiation by regulating the activity of
C/EBP.

Gulbagci NT(1), Li L, Ling B, Gopinadhan S, Walsh M, Rossner M, Nave KA, Taneja
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

SHARP1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is expressed in many cell 
types; however, the mechanisms by which it regulates cellular differentiation
remain largely unknown. Here, we show that SHARP1 negatively regulates
adipogenesis. Although expression of the early marker CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta (C/EBPbeta) is not altered, its crucial downstream targets
C/EBPalpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) are
downregulated by SHARP1. Protein interaction studies confirm that SHARP1
interacts with and inhibits the transcriptional activity of both C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPalpha, and enhances the association of C/EBPbeta with histone deacetylase 1 
(HDAC1). Consistently, in SHARP1-expressing cells, HDAC1 and the histone
methyltransferase G9a are retained at the C/EBP regulatory sites on the
C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma2 promoters during differentiation, resulting in
inhibition of their expression. Interestingly, treatment with troglitazone
results in displacement of HDAC1 and G9a, and rescues the differentiation defect 
of SHARP1-overexpressing cells. Our data indicate that SHARP1 inhibits
adipogenesis through the regulation of C/EBP activity, which is essential for
PPARgamma-ligand-dependent displacement of co-repressors from adipogenic
promoters.

PMCID: PMC2613201
PMID: 19029947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Nov;36(20):6372-85. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn620. Epub 2008
Oct 5.

Stra13/DEC1 and DEC2 inhibit sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c in a
hypoxia-inducible factor-dependent mechanism.

Choi SM(1), Cho HJ, Cho H, Kim KH, Kim JB, Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) is a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) homodimeric transactivator, which induces itself and
several lipogenic enzymes, notably fatty acid synthase (FAS). We demonstrated
that hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) represses the SREBP-1c gene by inducing
Stimulated with retinoic acid (Stra)13/Differentiated embryo chondrocyte 1(DEC1) 
and its isoform, DEC2. Stra13/DEC1 and DEC2 are bHLH homodimeric transcription
repressors. We found that both Stra13 and DEC2 inhibit SREBP-1c-induced
transcription by competing with SREBP-1c for binding to the E-box in the SREBP-1c
promoter and/or by interacting with SREBP-1c protein. DEC2 is instantly and
temporarily induced in acute hypoxia, while Stra13 is induced in prolonged
hypoxia. This expression profile reflects the finding that Stra13 represses DEC2,
thus maintains low level of DEC2 in prolonged hypoxia. DEC2-siRNA restores the
hypoxic repression but Stra13-siRNA fails to do so, suggesting that DEC2 is the
major initiator of hypoxic repression of SREBP-1c, whereas Stra13 substitutes for
DEC2 in prolonged hypoxia. Our findings imply that Stra13 and DEC2 are the
mediators to repress SREBP-1c gene in response to hypoxia. By doing so, HIF and
its targets, Stra13 and DEC2 reduce the ATP consuming anabolic lipogenesis prior 
to the actual decrease of ATP acting as a feed-forward mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2582599
PMID: 18838394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Nov;295(5):E1032-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90510.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 26.

Relationship between AMPK and the transcriptional balance of clock-related genes 
in skeletal muscle.

Vieira E(1), Nilsson EC, Nerstedt A, Ormestad M, Long YC, Garcia-Roves PM,
Zierath JR, Mahlapuu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Circadian clocks coordinate physiological, behavioral, and biochemical events
with predictable daily environmental changes by a self-sustained transcriptional 
feedback loop. CLOCK and ARNTL are transcriptional activators that regulate Per
and Cry gene expression. PER and CRY inhibit their own transcription, and their
turnover allows this cycle to restart. The transcription factors BHLHB2 and
BHLHB3 repress Per activation, whereas orphan nuclear receptors of the NR1D and
ROR families control Arntl expression. Here we show the AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK)gamma(3) subunit is involved in the regulation of peripheral
circadian clock function. AMPKgamma3 knockout (Prkag3(-/-)) mice or wild-type
littermates were injected with saline or an AMPK activator,
5-amino-4-imidazole-carboxamide riboside (AICAR), and white glycolytic
gastrocnemius muscle was removed for gene expression analysis. Genes involved in 
the regulation of circadian rhythms (Cry2, Nr1d1, and Bhlhb2) were differentially
regulated in response to AICAR in wild-type mice but remained unaltered in
Prkag3(-/-) mice. Basal expression of Per1 was higher in Prkag3(-/-) mice
compared with wild-type mice. Distinct diurnal changes in the respiratory
exchange ratio (RER) between the light and dark phase of the day were observed in
wild-type mice but not Prkag3(-/-) mice. In summary, the expression profile of
clock-related genes in skeletal muscle in response to AICAR, as well as the
diurnal shift in energy utilization, is impaired in AMPKgamma(3) subunit knockout
mice. Our results indicate AMPK heterotrimeric complexes containing the
AMPKgamma(3) subunit may play a specific role in linking circadian oscillators
and energy metabolism in skeletal muscle.

PMID: 18728219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 23;3(7):e2762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002762.

Disturbed clockwork resetting in Sharp-1 and Sharp-2 single and double mutant
mice.

Rossner MJ(1), Oster H, Wichert SP, Reinecke L, Wehr MC, Reinecke J, Eichele G,
Taneja R, Nave KA.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.
rossner@em.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: The circadian system provides the basis to anticipate and cope with
daily recurrent challenges to maintain the organisms' homeostasis.
De-synchronization of circadian feedback oscillators in humans causes 'jet lag', 
likely contributes to sleep-, psychiatric-, metabolic disorders and even cancer. 
However, the molecular mechanisms leading to the disintegration of
tissue-specific clocks are complex and not well understood.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Based on their circadian expression and cell
culture experiments, the basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors
SHARP-1(Dec2) and SHARP-2(Stra13/Dec1) were proposed as novel negative regulators
of the molecular clock. To address their function in vivo, we generated Sharp-1
and Sharp-2 single and double mutant mice. Our experiments reveal critical roles 
for both factors in regulating period length, tissue-specific control of clock
gene expression and entrainment to external cues. Light-pulse experiments and
rapid delays of the light-dark cycle (experimental jet lag) unravel complementary
functions for SHARP-1 and SHARP-2 in controlling activity phase resetting
kinetics. Moreover, we show that SHARP-1 and 2 can serve dual functions as
repressors and co-activators of mammalian clock gene expression in a
context-specific manner. This correlates with increased amplitudes of Per2
expression in the cortex and liver and a decrease in the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
(SCN) of double mutant mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The existence of separate mechanisms regulating phase
of entrainment, rhythm amplitude and period length has been postulated before.
The differential effects of Sharp-deficiency on rhythmicity and behavioral
re-entrainment, coupled to tissue-dependent regulatory functions, provide a new
mechanistic basis to further understand the complex process of clock
synchronizations.

PMCID: PMC2447179
PMID: 18648504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1184-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.009. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Altered Stra13 and Dec2 circadian gene expression in hypoxic cells.

Guillaumond F(1), Lacoche S, Dulong S, Grechez-Cassiau A, Filipski E, Li XM, Lévi
F, Berra E, Delaunay F, Teboul M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, CNRS FRE3094, 28 Av. Valrose, 06108 Nice,
France.

The circadian system regulates rhythmically most of the mammalian physiology in
synchrony with the environmental light/dark cycle. Alteration of circadian clock 
gene expression has been associated with tumour progression but the molecular
links between the two mechanisms remain poorly defined. Here we show that Stra13 
and Dec2, two circadian transcriptional regulators which play a crucial role in
cell proliferation and apoptosis are overexpressed and no longer rhythmic in
serum shocked fibroblasts treated with CoCl(2,) a substitute of hypoxia. This
effect is associated with a loss of circadian expression of the clock genes
Rev-erbalpha and Bmal1, and the clock-controlled gene Dbp. Consistently,
cotransfection assays demonstrate that STRA13 and DEC2 both antagonize
CLOCK:BMAL1 dependent transactivation of the Rev-erbalpha and Dbp promoters.
Using a transplantable osteosarcoma tumour model, we show that hypoxia is
associated with altered circadian expression of Stra13, Dec2, Rev-erbalpha, Bmal1
and Dbp in vivo. These observations collectively support the notion that
overexpression of Stra13 and Dec2 links hypoxia signalling to altered circadian
clock gene expression.

PMID: 18342625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genes Cells. 2008 Feb;13(2):131-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01153.x.

Basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor DEC2 negatively regulates
vascular endothelial growth factor expression.

Sato F(1), Bhawal UK, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Imaizumi T, Imanaka T, Kondo J,
Koyanagi S, Noshiro M, Yoshida H, Kusumi T, Kato Y, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki
036-8562, Japan. fsato@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

DEC1 (BHLHB2/Sharp2/Stra13) and DEC2 (BHLHB3/Sharp1) are basic-helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors, involved in cellular differentiation, responses to 
hypoxia and circadian rhythms. We recently showed that the expression of DEC1 and
DEC2 was up-regulated by hypoxia; however, the functions of these two factors
under hypoxic conditions have not been elucidated in detail. It is well
established that the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is
up-regulated by hypoxia, and the expression of VEGF in response to hypoxia
depends on transcriptional activation by a heterodimer comprising
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 1 (ARNT1). In the present study, we showed that DEC2, but not DEC1, 
suppressed VEGF gene expression under hypoxic conditions. DEC2 protein was
co-immunoprecipitated with HIF-1alpha but not with ARNT1. The binding of
HIF-1alpha to the hypoxia response element (HRE) in the VEGF promoter was
decreased by DEC2 over-expression, and increased by DEC2 knockdown. We also
showed that the circadian expression of VEGF showed a reciprocal pattern to that 
of DEC2 in cartilage. DEC2 had a circadian oscillation in implanted Sarcoma 180
cells. We conclude that DEC2 negatively regulates VEGF expression and plays an
important role in the pathological conditions in which VEGF is involved.

PMID: 18233956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1047-55. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30714.

Clock genes may influence bipolar disorder susceptibility and dysfunctional
circadian rhythm.

Shi J(1), Wittke-Thompson JK, Badner JA, Hattori E, Potash JB, Willour VL,
McMahon FJ, Gershon ES, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Several previous studies suggest that dysfunction of circadian rhythms may
increase susceptibility to bipolar disorder (BP). We conducted an association
study of five circadian genes (CRY2, PER1-3, and TIMELESS) in a family collection
of 36 trios and 79 quads (Sample I), and 10 circadian genes (ARNTL, ARNTL2,
BHLHB2, BHLHB3, CLOCK, CRY1, CSNK1D, CSNK1E, DBP, and NR1D1) in an extended
family collection of 70 trios and 237 quads (Sample II), which includes the same 
114 families but not necessarily the same individuals as Sample I. In Sample II, 
the Sibling-Transmission Disequilibrium Test (sib-tdt) analysis showed nominally 
significant association of BP with three SNPs within or near the CLOCK gene
(rs534654, P = 0.0097; rs6850524, P = 0.012; rs4340844, P = 0.015). In addition, 
SNPs in the ARNTL2, CLOCK, DBP, and TIMELESS genes and haplotypes in the ARNTL,
CLOCK, CSNK1E, and TIMELESS genes showed suggestive evidence of association with 
several circadian phenotypes identified in BP patients. However, none of these
associations reached gene-wide or experiment-wide significance after correction
for multiple-testing. A multi-locus interaction between rs6442925 in the 5'
upstream of BHLHB2, rs1534891 in CSNK1E, and rs534654 near the 3' end of the
CLOCK gene, however, is significantly associated with BP (P = 0.00000172). It
remains significant after correcting for multiple testing using the False
Discovery Rate method. Our results indicate an interaction between three
circadian genes in susceptibility to bipolar disorder.

PMCID: PMC2574897
PMID: 18228528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncogene. 2008 Jun 12;27(26):3761-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1211038. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

BHLHB3: a candidate tumor suppressor in lung cancer.

Falvella FS(1), Colombo F, Spinola M, Campiglio M, Pastorino U, Dragani TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Laboratories, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

BHLHB3 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain-containing protein that acts as 
a transcriptional repressor. We found that BHLHB3 transcript levels were low in
three human lung cancer cell lines and downregulated in human lung
adenocarcinomas as compared to normal lung tissue. BHLHB3 gene overexpression
inhibited colony formation of A549, NCI-H520 and NCI-H596 lung cancer cells. The 
reduced colony growth was likely due to inhibition of cell proliferation as
suggested by the downregulation of cyclin D1 (CCND1) expression in NCI-H520 cells
transfected to overexpress the BHLHB3 gene; no evidence of apoptosis was
observed. These results point to the potential role of the BHLHB3 protein as a
tumor suppressor for lung cancer.

PMID: 18223678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Jun;19(6):925-32.

Transcriptional repression by the basic helix-loop-helix protein Dec2: multiple
mechanisms through E-box elements.

Fujimoto K(1), Hamaguchi H, Hashiba T, Nakamura T, Kawamoto T, Sato F, Noshiro M,
Bhawal UK, Suardita K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Dec2, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) superfamily, has been shown
to function as a transcriptional repressor and is implicated in cell
proliferation and differentiation. In addition, Dec2 transcripts exhibit a
striking circadian oscillation in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To identify the
molecular mechanisms by which Dec2 regulates gene expression, we carried out
structure-function analyses. Gel retardation and luciferase assays showed that
Dec2, as well as its related protein Dec1, preferentially binds to class B E-box 
elements (CACGTG) as a homodimer and represses the transcription of target genes 
in a histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent manner. Functional studies with the
GAL4-DNA binding domain fusion proteins identified the domain responsible for the
repression activity of Dec2 in its C-terminal region, which is also necessary to 
recruit HDAC1. In addition, the basic and HLH domains of Dec2 were required for
DNA binding and homodimerization, respectively. In contrast, Dec proteins
repressed a MyoD-activated promoter activity of muscle creatine kinase gene
through class A E-box in an HDAC1-independent manner. Dec2 formed a heterodimer
with MyoD through the basic and HLH domains. Consistent with this, both the basic
and HLH domains were required for the ability of Dec2 to inhibit the
transcriptional activity of MyoD. These findings indicate that Dec2 employs
multiple mechanisms, including DNA-binding and protein-protein interactions, to
achieve E-box-dependent transcriptional repressions.

PMID: 17487425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Chronobiol Int. 2007;24(2):195-213.

Molecular circadian rhythms in central and peripheral clocks in mammals.

Dardente H(1), Cermakian N.

Author information: 
(1)Douglas Hospital Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

The last decade has seen tremendous progress in our understanding of the
organization and function of the circadian clock. A number of so-called clock
genes were discovered, and these genes and their protein products were shown to
organize into feedback loops to give a near 24 h rhythmicity. However, the
mechanism is much more complicated. First, many new clock components have been
identified, increasing both our understanding and the overall complexity of the
mechanism. Second, there is now evidence that transcription may not play a
central role in determining the functioning of the clock: the identification of
post-translational modifications of the clock proteins has revealed new levels of
control. Finally, chromatin remodeling seems to be crucial in the regulation of
the expression of major clock components. This review describes the recent
advances in our knowledge of the molecular clockwork in mammals; in particular,
the contribution of new clock components and of post-transcriptional and
post-translational events to circadian timekeeping are discussed.

PMID: 17453843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Lung Cancer. 2007 Apr;56(1):1-7. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

Common polymorphisms in D12S1034 flanking genes RASSF8 and BHLHB3 are not
associated with lung adenocarcinoma risk.

Falvella FS(1), Spinola M, Manenti G, Conti B, Pastorino U, Skaug V, Haugen A,
Dragani TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Laboratories, Istituto Nazionale
Tumori, Via G. Venezian 1, 20133 Milan, Italy.

The reported association between D12S1034 and lung adenocarcinoma (ADCA) risk
[Yanagitani N, Kohno T, Sunaga N, et al. Localization of a human lung
adenocarcinoma susceptibility locus, possibly syntenic to the mouse Pas1 locus,
in the vicinity of the D12S1034 locus on chromosome 12p11.2-p12.1.
Carcinogenesis. 2002;23:1177-83] prompted us to carry out a case-control study in
lung ADCA and healthy control subjects to test possible involvement of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in D12S1034 flanking genes RASSF8 and
BHLHB3, whose minimal distances from D12S1034 are approximately 16-24 kb. RASSF8 
contains a RAS-associated domain and is a candidate tumor suppressor, whereas
BHLHB3 is a basic helix-loop-helix domain-containing protein that functions as a 
transcriptional repressor. We observed no significant association between common 
SNPs in RASSF8 (rs1546550 in the 3'-UTR and 3 intronic SNPs) and BHLHB3
(Ala298Val and rs1048155 in the 3'-UTR) with lung ADCA risk. However, patient
groups carrying one or two copies of the BHLHB3 Val298 variation (i.e., Ala/Val
or Val/Val genotypes) had a higher proportion of short-term survivors (hazard
ratio, 1.8; 95% confidence interval, 1.2-2.7) compared with those carrying the
Ala/Ala genotype. A replication study in an independent Norwegian lung cancer
population of multiple cancer histotypes failed to replicate the significant
association of BHLHB3 Ala298Val with survival; such association, however, was
confirmed by analysis of ADCA only from both populations. Our results suggest
that BHLHB3 variants may affect lung ADCA prognosis.

PMID: 17194498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Jun;17(6):1053-6.

57Arg in the bHLH transcription factor DEC2 is essential for the suppression of
CLOCK/BMAL2-mediated transactivation.

Kondo J(1), Sato F, Fujimoto K, Kusumi T, Imanaka T, Kawamoto T, Uk B, Noshiro M,
Kato Y, Sato T, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, DEC2 and DEC1, play
critical roles in the circadian rhythm of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). It
is known that mammalian circadian rhythms are regulated by molecular clockwork
systems based on a negative-feedback loop, and CLOCK/BMAL1 and CLOCK/BMAL2
enhance DEC2 transcription via CACGTG E-boxes. To understand the role of arginine
57 ((57)Arg) within the basic region of DEC2, we examined the effect of
substituting this residue into DEC2 on CLOCK/BMAL2-mediated transactivation. A
luciferase assay showed that substituting (57)Arg for Ala or Lys in DEC2
diminished the suppressive activity of wild-type DEC2 on CLOCK/ BMAL2-mediated
transactivation, while substituting (48)Pro for Ala in DEC2 did not alter it, and
the same was true for wild-type DEC2. We also showed that proteins which were
wild-type and substitution mutants of DEC2 were expressed at nearly equivalent
levels by Western blotting. These findings demonstrate that (57)Arg in the basic 
region of DEC2 is essential for its activity in suppressing CLOCK/BMAL2-mediated 
transactivation.

PMID: 16685415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Immunol Rev. 2006 Apr;210:86-104.

Microarray-based understanding of normal and malignant plasma cells.

De Vos J(1), Hose D, Rème T, Tarte K, Moreaux J, Mahtouk K, Jourdan M,
Goldschmidt H, Rossi JF, Cremer FW, Klein B.

Author information: 
(1)IRB, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Plasma cells (PCs) develop from B lymphocytes following stimulation by antigen
and express a genetic program aimed at the synthesis of immunoglobulins. This
program includes the induction of genes coding for transcription factors such as 
PRDM1, X-box-binding protein 1 and BHLHB3, cell-surface molecules such as
CD138/syndecan-1, and for the unfolded protein response. We review how the
microarray technology has recently contributed to the understanding of the
biology of this rare but essential cell population and its transformation into
premalignant and malignant PCs.

PMCID: PMC1955683
PMID: 16623766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Dent Res. 2005 Dec;84(12):1193-7.

Clock gene expression in the submandibular glands.

Furukawa M(1), Kawamoto T, Noshiro M, Honda KK, Sakai M, Fujimoto K, Honma S,
Honma K, Hamada T, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Clock genes, which mediate molecular circadian rhythms, are expressed in a
circadian fashion in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and in various peripheral
tissues. To establish a molecular basis for circadian regulation in the salivary 
glands, we examined expression profiles of clock-related genes and salivary
gland-characteristic genes. Clock-related genes-including Per1, Per2, Cry1,
Bmal1, Dec1, Dec2, Dbp, and Reverbalpha-showed robust circadian expression
rhythms in the submandibular glands in 12:12-hour light-dark conditions. In
addition, a robust circadian rhythm was observed in amylase 1 mRNA levels,
whereas the expression of other salivary-gland-characteristic genes examined was 
not rhythmic. The Clock mutation resulted in increased or decreased mRNA levels
of Per2, Bmal1, Dec1, Dec2, and Dbp, and in Cry1-/- background, Cry2 disruption
also increased or decreased mRNA levels of these clock-related genes and the
amylase 1 gene. These findings indicate that the Clock- and Cry-dependent
molecular clock system is active in the salivary glands.

PMID: 16304453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Rhythms. 2005 Oct;20(5):404-18.

Tissue-specific disruption of rhythmic expression of Dec1 and Dec2 in clock
mutant mice.

Noshiro M(1), Furukawa M, Honma S, Kawamoto T, Hamada T, Honma K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan. noshiro@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

DEC1 and DEC2-basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors-exhibit a circadian
expression in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and other peripheral tissues and seem
to play roles in regulating the mammalian circadian rhythm by suppressing the
CLOCK/BMAL1-activated promoters of Per1, Dec1, and Dec2. The authors present data
on the expression patterns of mRNA for Dec1, Dec2, Per2, Dbp, and Npas2 in
various tissues of wild-type and homozygous Clock mutant mice (Clock/Clock). The 
Clock mutation resulted in extreme reduction of Dec1 expression in kidney, heart,
and skeletal muscle but not in liver, whereas it strongly repressed Dec2
expression in liver, kidney, and heart, while Dec2 expression in skeletal muscle 
remained rhythmic. Per2 also showed the tissue-dependent disruption of the
rhythmicity by Clock mutation, whereas rhythmic expression of Dbp in Clock mutant
mice disappeared in all tissues examined. Npas2, a structurally and functionally 
related gene to Clock, showed significant levels of expression in the liver and
kidney with a robust rhythmicity, which was also affected by Clock mutation.
These marked changes in the Dec1 and Dec2 expression, as well as in the Per2,
Dbp, and Npas2 expression in the periphery by Clock mutation, indicated that
CLOCK plays a major role in the expression of these genes in most tissues.
However, circadian expression of Dec1 in liver and kidney and that of Dec2 in
skeletal muscle of Clock mutant mice suggested that CLOCK-independent circadian
regulation operates in some tissues.

PMID: 16267380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Front Biosci. 2005 Sep 1;10:3151-71.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, BHLHB2 and BHLHB3; their gene
expressions are regulated by multiple extracellular stimuli.

Yamada K(1), Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, 
Japan. kazuya@fmsrsa.fukui-med.ac.jp

The E box sequence (5'-CANNTG-3') is found in the transcriptional regulatory
region of a number of genes. Of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins
binding to the E box sequence, class B of bHLH proteins, BHLHB2 (also referred to
as the DEC1/Eip1/SHARP-2/Stra13/Clast5) and BHLHB3 (also referred to as the
DEC2/SHARP-1/SHARP1), are transcription factors that contain a unique orange
domain. These transcription factors repress the transcription of target genes not
only via binding to the E box sequence but also via protein-protein interactions 
with other transcription factors. Both the BHLHB2 and BHLHB3 genes are widely
expressed in both embryonic and adult tissues. Their gene expressions are
regulated in a cell type-specific manner by various extracellular stimuli, such
as growth factors, serum starvation, hypoxia, hormones, nutrient, cytokines,
light, and infection. Therefore, these transcription factors play pivotal roles
in multiple signaling pathways that impact many biological processes including
development, cell differentiation, cell growth, cell death, oncogenesis, immune
systems, circadian rhythm, and homeostasis. The structural features, functions,
and biological roles of the novel bHLH transcription factors, BHLHB2 and BHLHB3, 
are discussed along with the mechanisms in which the genes encoding these factors
are regulated.

PMID: 15970569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52643-52. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

Sharp-1/DEC2 inhibits skeletal muscle differentiation through repression of
myogenic transcription factors.

Azmi S(1), Ozog A, Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029-6574, USA.

Skeletal muscle differentiation is regulated by the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family of transcription factors. The myogenic bHLH factors form heterodimers with
the ubiquitously expressed bHLH E-proteins and bind E-box (CANNTG) sites present 
in the promoters of several muscle-specific genes. Our previous studies have
shown that the bHLH factor Sharp-1 is expressed in skeletal muscle and interacts 
with MyoD and E-proteins. However, its role in regulation of myogenic
differentiation remains unknown. We report here that endogenous Sharp-1 is
expressed in proliferating C2C12 myoblasts and is down-regulated during myogenic 
differentiation. Constitutive expression of Sharp-1 in C2C12 myoblasts promotes
cell cycle exit causing a decrease in cyclin D1 expression but blocks terminal
differentiation. Although MyoD expression is not inhibited, the induction of
differentiation-specific genes such as myogenin, MEF2C, and myosin heavy chain is
impaired by Sharp-1 overexpression. We demonstrate that the interaction of
Sharp-1 with MyoD and E-proteins results in reduced DNA binding and
transactivation from MyoD-dependent E-box sites. Re-expression of MyoD
approximately E47 rescues the differentiation defect imposed by Sharp-1,
suggesting that myogenic bHLH factors function downstream of Sharp-1. Our data
suggest that protein-protein interactions between Sharp-1, MyoD, and E47
resulting in interference with MyoD function underlies Sharp-1-mediated
repression of myogenic differentiation.

PMID: 15448136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem J. 2004 Sep 15;382(Pt 3):895-904.

DNA binding, but not interaction with Bmal1, is responsible for DEC1-mediated
transcription regulation of the circadian gene mPer1.

Li Y(1), Song X, Ma Y, Liu J, Yang D, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI
02881, USA.

DEC1 (differentially expressed in chondrocytes 1) and DEC2 are E-box-binding
transcription factors and exhibit a circadian expression pattern. Recently, both 
proteins were found to repress the Clock/Bmal1-activated E-box promoters (e.g.
mPer1). Yeast two-hybrid assay detected interactions between Bmal1 and DECs. It
was hypothesized that DEC-mediated repression on the mPer1 promoter is achieved
by binding to E-box elements and interacting with Bmal1. In the present study, we
report that E-box binding rather than Bmal1 interaction is responsible for the
observed repression. In the absence of Clock/Bmal1, both DEC1 and DEC2 markedly
repressed the mPer1 promoter reporter; however, DNA-binding mutants showed no
repressive activity. Similarly, DEC1, but not its DNA-binding mutants, repressed 
the Clock/Bmal1-induced activation. In addition, DEC1(R58P), a DNA-binding mutant
with Bmal1 interactivity, repressed neither the mPer1 reporter directly nor the
Clock/Bmal1-induced activation, providing direct evidence that DNA binding,
rather than Bmal1 interactions, is responsible for the repression on the mPer1
promoter. Furthermore, disruption of the Sp1 site in the proximal promoter of
mPer1 increased the repression of DEC1 proteins. Previous studies with mouse DEC2
showed that this factor interacts with Sp1. These findings suggest that DEC
proteins regulate the expression of mPer1 through E-box binding and Sp1
interaction. Alterations on circadian systems are increasingly recognized as
important risk factors for disease initiation and progression, and the expression
of Dec genes is rapidly induced by environmental stimuli and is highly increased 
in tumour tissues. Therefore de-regulated expression of DEC genes probably alters
normal circadian rhythms and contributes significantly to the pathogenesis of
many diseases including cancer.

PMCID: PMC1133965
PMID: 15193144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 15;382(Pt 1):43-50.

Expression of the gene for Dec2, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
is regulated by a molecular clock system.

Hamaguchi H(1), Fujimoto K, Kawamoto T, Noshiro M, Maemura K, Takeda N, Nagai R, 
Furukawa M, Honma S, Honma K, Kurihara H, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan.

Dec2, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix superfamily, is a recently confirmed
regulatory protein for the clockwork system. Transcripts of Dec2, as well as
those of its related gene Dec1, exhibit a striking circadian oscillation in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and Dec2 inhibits transcription from the Per1 promoter
induced by Clock/Bmal1 [Honma, Kawamoto, Takagi, Fujimoto, Sato, Noshiro, Kato
and Honma (2002) Nature (London) 419, 841-844]. It is known that mammalian
circadian rhythms are controlled by molecular clockwork systems based on
negative-feedback loop(s), but the molecular mechanisms for the circadian
regulation of Dec2 gene expression have not been clarified. We show here that
transcription of the Dec2 gene is regulated by several clock molecules and a
negative-feedback loop. Luciferase and gel retardation assays showed that
expression of Dec2 was negatively regulated by binding of Dec2 or Dec1 to two
CACGTG E-boxes in the Dec2 promoter. Forced expression of Clock/Bmal1 and
Clock/Bmal2 markedly increased Dec2 mRNA levels, and up-regulated the
transcription of the Dec2 gene through the CACGTG E-boxes. Like Dec, Cry and Per 
also suppressed Clock/Bmal-induced transcription from the Dec2 promoter.
Moreover, the circadian expression of Dec2 transcripts was abolished in the
kidney of Clock/Clock mutant mice. These findings suggest that the Clock/Bmal
heterodimer enhances Dec2 transcription via the CACGTG E-boxes, whereas the
induced transcription is suppressed by Dec2, which therefore must contribute to
its own rhythmic expression. In addition, Cry and Per may also modulate Dec2
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1133913
PMID: 15147242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Rhythms. 2004 Apr;19(2):126-34.

Dec1 and Dec2 expression is disrupted in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of Clock
mutant mice.

Butler MP(1), Honma S, Fukumoto T, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Noshiro M, Kato Y,
Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

DEC1 and DEC2 are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that functionally 
resemble negative feedback components of the mammalian circadian clock. The genes
Dec1 and Dec2 are expressed rhythmically in the rat suprachiasmatic nuclei, and
Dec1 expression is stimulated by light in a time-dependent manner with the
kinetics of an immediate early gene. DEC1 and DEC2 can inhibit CLOCK:BMAL1
transactivation of the clock gene Per1, suggesting that these transcription
factors may help regulate circadian timing. The authors present data on the
expression pattern of Dec1 and Dec2 in wild-type and homozygous Clock mutant
mice. In the suprachiasmatic nuclei, the Clock mutation significantly reduces the
expression of Dec1 and Dec2. Dec1 becomes arrhythmic; Dec2 remains weakly
rhythmic in a 12L:12D light-dark cycle but is arrhythmic in constant darkness. A 
robust attenuation of the Dec1 and Dec2 signals in Clock mutant mice was detected
in all brain areas examined. These data point to up-regulation of Dec1 and Dec2
by Clock in vivo.

PMID: 15038852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):20098-109. Epub 2003 Mar 25.

mSharp-1/DEC2, a basic helix-loop-helix protein functions as a transcriptional
repressor of E box activity and Stra13 expression.

Azmi S(1), Sun H, Ozog A, Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029-6574, USA.

Transcription factors belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family play 
critical roles in the regulation of cellular differentiation of distinct cell
types. In this study, we have characterized the DNA-binding and transcriptional
properties of the bHLH factor mSharp-1/DEC2. mSharp-1 belongs to the
Hairy/Enhancer of Split subfamily of bHLH factors and exhibits the highest
structural and sequence identity with Stra13. We show that mSharp-1 specifically 
binds to the E box motif (CANNTG) as a homodimer and acts as a potent
transcriptional repressor of MyoD- and E12-induced E box activity and
differentiation. The inhibitory activity of mSharp-1 occurs through several
mechanisms including occupancy of E box sites by mSharp-1 homodimers and by
direct physical interaction with MyoD and E proteins. Furthermore, by using gel
mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, we have
identified Stra13 as a target for mSharp-1-mediated repression. We demonstrate
that transcriptional repression of Stra13 depends, in part, on binding of
mSharp-1 to three conserved E box motifs in the Stra13 proximal promoter.
Moreover, mSharp-1 directly interacts with the transcriptional activator Sp1 and 
impairs Sp1 induction of Stra13 promoter. Our results suggest that mSharp-1
functions as a transcriptional repressor by DNA binding dependent and independent
mechanisms.

PMID: 12657651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neuroreport. 2002 Dec 20;13(18):2385-8.

Neuronal injury affects expression of helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Kabos P(1), Kabosova A, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute, CSMC Burns and
Allen Research Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of medicine,
8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. kabosp@cshs.org

Helix-loop-helix transcription (HLH) factors regulate several stages of neuronal 
development including differentiation of individual populations of neurons and
neurite growth. Here we demonstrate that axonal injury of corticospinal and
dorsal root ganglion neurons induces changes in the expression of several HLH
transcription factors that function as negative regulators of neurogenesis and
neurite outgrowth. However, the expression of HLH transcription factors that
stimulate neurogenesis is not affected by the axonal injury. Expression of HES,
SHARP and Id family members is suppressed shortly after axonal injury and
expression returns to normal levels after 14 days. We hypothesize that
down-regulation of these HLH transcription factors is required for initiation of 
regenerative response to axonal injury.

PMID: 12499834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nature. 2002 Oct 24;419(6909):841-4.

Dec1 and Dec2 are regulators of the mammalian molecular clock.

Honma S(1), Kawamoto T, Takagi Y, Fujimoto K, Sato F, Noshiro M, Kato Y, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Oct 24;419(6909):798-9.

The circadian rhythms in mammals are regulated by a pacemaker located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus. Four clock-gene families have been
found to be involved in a transcription-translation feedback loop that generates 
the circadian rhythm at the intracellular level. The proteins Clock and Bmal1
form a heterodimer which activates the transcription of the Per gene from the
E-box elements in its promoter region. Protein products of Per act together with 
Cry proteins to inhibit Per transcription, thus closing the autoregulatory
feedback loop. We found that Dec1 and Dec2, basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors, repressed Clock/Bmal1-induced transactivation of the mouse Per1 promoter
through direct protein-protein interactions with Bmal1 and/or competition for
E-box elements. Dec1 and Dec2 are expressed in the suprachiasmic nucleus in a
circadian fashion, with a peak in the subjective day. A brief light pulse induced
Dec1 but not Dec2 expression in the suprachiasmic nucleus in a phase-dependent
manner. Dec1 and Dec2 are regulators of the mammalian molecular clock, and form a
fifth clock-gene family.

PMID: 12397359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 15;21(20):5417-26.

SHARP is a novel component of the Notch/RBP-Jkappa signalling pathway.

Oswald F(1), Kostezka U, Astrahantseff K, Bourteele S, Dillinger K, Zechner U,
Ludwig L, Wilda M, Hameister H, Knöchel W, Liptay S, Schmid RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, University of Ulm,
Robert-Koch-Strasse 8, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

Notch proteins are the receptors for an evolutionarily highly conserved
signalling pathway that regulates numerous cell fate decisions during
development. Signal transduction involves the presenilin-dependent intracellular 
processing of Notch and nuclear translocation of the intracellular domain of
Notch, Notch-IC. Notch-IC associates with the DNA-binding protein
RBP-Jkappa/CBF-1 to activate transcription of Notch target genes. In the absence 
of Notch signalling, RBP-Jkappa/CBF-1 acts as a transcriptional repressor through
the recruitment of histone deacetylase (HDAC) corepressor complexes. We
identified SHARP as an RBP-Jkappa/CBF-1-interacting corepressor in a yeast
two-hybrid screen. In cotransfection experiments, SHARP-mediated repression was
sensitive to the HDAC inhibitor TSA and facilitated by SKIP, a highly conserved
SMRT and RBP-Jkappa-interacting protein. SHARP repressed Hairy/Enhancer of split 
(HES)-1 promoter activity, inhibited Notch-1-mediated transactivation and rescued
Notch-1-induced inhibition of primary neurogenesis in Xenopus laevis embryos.
Based on our data, we propose a model in which SHARP is a novel component of the 
HDAC corepressor complex, recruited by RBP-Jkappa to repress transcription of
target genes in the absence of activated Notch.

PMCID: PMC129081
PMID: 12374742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mech Dev. 2002 Jun;114(1-2):181-5.

Embryonic expression of mSharp-1/mDEC2, which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor.

Azmi S(1), Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemisty and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Box 1020, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

We describe the expression pattern of mouse Sharp-1 (mSharp-1), a member of the
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors. mSharp-1 belongs
to the Hairy/Enhancer of Split (E(Spl)) subfamily of bHLH factors that are key
targets of the Notch signaling pathway and exhibits the highest sequence identity
with Stra13. RNA in situ hybridization analysis from embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) to 
E16.5 revealed specific expression of mSharp-1 in several developing organs
during mouse embryogenesis. In early stage embryos (E8.5-E12.5), mSharp-1 is
expressed in specific dorsal regions of the developing brain, the heart, the
developing eye and olfactory system, as well as in the limb buds. At later stages
(E12.5-E16.5), mSharp-1 is also expressed in the liver, prevertebrae, and the
developing adrenal and thyroid glands. The diversity of its expression pattern
suggests that mSharp-1 may regulate the differentiation of several cell types
during vertebrate development.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12175508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 4;276(18):14821-8. Epub 2001 Feb 5.

The basic helix-loop-helix protein, sharp-1, represses transcription by a histone
deacetylase-dependent and histone deacetylase-independent mechanism.

Garriga-Canut M(1), Roopra A, Buckley NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Schools of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty
of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.

Many aspects of neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation are controlled by basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins. One such factor is SHARP-1, initially
identified on the basis of its sequence similarity to hairy. Unlike hairy, and
atypically for bHLHs, SHARP-1 is expressed late in development, suggestive of a
role in terminal aspects of differentiation. Nevertheless, the role of SHARP-1
and the identity of its target genes remain unknown. During the course of a
one-hybrid screen for transcription factors that bind to regulatory domains of
the M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor gene, we isolated the bHLH transcription
factor SHARP-1. In this study, we investigated the functional role of SHARP-1 in 
regulating transcription. Fusion proteins of SHARP-1 tethered to the gal4 DNA
binding domain repress both basal and activated transcription when recruited to
either a TATA-containing or a TATAless promoter. Furthermore, we identified two
independent repression domains that operate via distinct mechanisms. Repression
by a domain in the C terminus is sensitive to the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A, whereas repression by the bHLH domain is insensitive to TSA.
Furthermore, overexpression of SHARP-1 represses transcription from the M(1)
promoter. This study represents the first report to assign a function to, and to 
identify a target gene for, the bHLH transcription factor SHARP-1.

PMID: 11278948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 12;280(1):164-71.

Molecular cloning and characterization of DEC2, a new member of basic
helix-loop-helix proteins.

Fujimoto K(1), Shen M, Noshiro M, Matsubara K, Shingu S, Honda K, Yoshida E,
Suardita K, Matsuda Y, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hiroshima University School of Dentistry, 1-2-3
Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

DEC1 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein related to Drosophila Hairy,
Enhancer of split and HES, and involved in the control of proliferation and/or
differentiation of chondrocytes, neurons, etc. We report here the identification 
and characterization of human, mouse and rat DEC2, a novel member of the DEC
subfamily. DEC2 had high (97%) and moderate (52%) similarities in the bHLH region
and the Orange domain with DEC1, respectively. However, DEC2, but not DEC1, had
alanine and glycine-rich regions in the C-terminal half. Unlike Hairy, Enhancer
of split and HES, DEC2 lacked the WRPW motif for interaction with the corepressor
Groucho. The DEC2 gene was mapped to human chromosome 12p11.23-p12.1, mouse
chromosome 6 G2-G3 and rat chromosome 4q43 distal-q4, where the conserved linkage
homology has been identified among these species. Unlike DEC1, which was broadly 
expressed in many tissues, DEC2 showed a more restricted pattern of mRNA
expression. The DEC subfamily proteins may play an important role in tissue
development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1997;10(3-4):460-75.

SHARPs: mammalian enhancer-of-split- and hairy-related proteins coupled to
neuronal stimulation.

Rossner MJ(1), Dörr J, Gass P, Schwab MH, Nave KA.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

Corrected and republished from
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 1997;9(5-6):460-75.

In the mammalian central nervous system, a diverse group of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins is involved in the determination of progenitor
cells and, subsequently, in regulating neuronal differentiation. Here we report
the identification of a novel subfamily of bHLH proteins, defined by two
mammalian enhancer-of-split- and hairy-related proteins, termed SHARP-1 and
SHARP-2. In contrast to known bHLH genes, detectable transcription of SHARP genes
begins at the end of embryonic development marking differentiated neurons that
have reached a final position, and increases as postnatal development proceeds.
In the adult, SHARP genes are expressed in subregions of the CNS that have been
associated with adult plasticity. In PC12 cells, a model system to study neurite 
outgrowth, SHARP genes can be induced by NGF with the kinetics of an
immediate-early gene. Similarly, within 1 h after the administration of kalnic
acid in vivo, SHARP-2 is induced in neurons throughout the rat cerebral cortex.
This suggests that neuronal bHLH proteins are also involved in the "adaptive"
changes of mature CNS neurons which are coupled to glutamatergic stimulation.

PMID: 9532582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1997;9(5-6):460-75.

SHARPs: mammalian enhancer-of-split- and hairy-related proteins coupled to
neuronal stimulation.

Rossner MJ(1), Dörr J, Gass P, Schwab MH, Nave KA.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

Corrected and republished in
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 1997;10(3-4):460-75.

In the mammalian central nervous system, a diverse group of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins is involved in the determination of progenitor
cells and, subsequently, in regulating neuronal differentiation. Here we report
the identification of a novel subfamily of bHLH proteins, defined by two
mammalian enhancer-of-split- and hairy-related proteins, termed SHARP-1 and
SHARP-2. In contrast to known bHLH genes, detectable transcription of SHARP genes
begins at the end of embryonic development marking differentiated neurons that
have reached a final position, and increases as postnatal development proceeds.
In the adult, SHARP genes are expressed in subregions of the CNS that have been
associated with adult plasticity. In PC12 cells, a model system to study neurite 
outgrowth, SHARP genes can be induced by NGF with the kinetics of an
immediate-early gene. Similarly, within 1 h after the administration of kainic
acid in vivo, SHARP-2 is induced in neurons throughout the rat cerebral cortex.
This suggests that neuronal bHLH proteins are also involved in the "adaptive"
changes of mature CNS neurons which are coupled to glutamatergic stimulation.

PMID: 9361282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


