
1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Feb 29. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13363. [Epub ahead of print]

Structural and Biochemical Characterization of EDTA Monooxygenase and its
Physical Interaction with a Partner Flavin Reductase.

Jun SY(1), Lewis KM(1), Youn B(1,)(2), Xun L(3), Kang C(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164-4630.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan, South
Korea. (3)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, 
WA, 99164-4660.

Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) is currently the most abundant organic
pollutant due to its recalcitrance and extensive use. Only a few bacteria can
degrade it, using EDTA monooxygenase (EmoA) to initiate the degradation. EmoA is 
an FMNH2 -dependent monooxygenase that requires an NADH:FMN oxidoreductase (EmoB)
to provide FMNH2 as a cosubstrate. Although EmoA has been identified from
Chelativorans (ex. Mesorhizobium) sp. BNC1, its catalytic mechanism is unknown.
Crystal structures of EmoA revealed a domain-like insertion into a TIM-barrel,
which might serve as a flexible lid for the active site. Docking of MgEDTA(2-)
into EmoA identified an intricate hydrogen bond network connected to Tyr(71) ,
which should potentially lower its pKa. Tyr(71) , along with nearby Glu(70) and a
peroxy flavin, facilitates a keto-enol transition of the leaving acetyl group of 
EDTA. Further, for the first time, the physical interaction between EmoA and EmoB
was observed by ITC, molecular docking and enzyme kinetic assay, which enhanced
both EmoA and EmoB activities probably through coupled channeling of FMNH2 . This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26928990  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mech Dev. 2016 Feb 29. pii: S0925-4773(16)30005-3. doi:
10.1016/j.mod.2016.02.002. [Epub ahead of print]

The importance of basonuclin 2 in adult mice and its relation to basonuclin 1.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Delhomme B(2), Hervé F(3), Nondier I(4), Petit JM(5), Araki
M(6), Araki K(7), Djian P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris,
France. Electronic address: amandine.vanhoutteghem@parisdescartes.fr.
(2)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris,
France. Electronic address: brigitte.delhomme@parisdescartes.fr. (3)Laboratoire
de Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
Electronic address: francoise.herve@parisdescartes.fr. (4)Laboratoire de
Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
Electronic address: isabelle.nondier@parisdescartes.fr. (5)Service Central de
Microscopie, Centre Universitaire des Saints Pères, Université Paris Descartes,
45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France. (6)Institute of Resource
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1, Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811,
Japan. Electronic address: maraki@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (7)Institute of Resource 
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1, Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811,
Japan. Electronic address: arakimi@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (8)Laboratoire de
Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
Electronic address: philippe.djian@parisdescartes.fr.

BNC2 is an extremely conserved zinc finger protein with important functions in
the development of craniofacial bones and male germ cells. Because disruption of 
the Bnc2 gene in mice causes neonatal lethality, the function of the protein in
adult animals has not been studied. Until now BNC2 was considered to have a wider
tissue distribution than its paralog, BNC1, but the precise cell types expressing
Bnc2 are largely unknown. We identify here the cell types containing BNC2 in the 
mouse and we show the unexpected presence of BNC1 in many BNC2-containing cells. 
BNC1 and BNC2 are colocalized in male and female germ cells, ovarian epithelial
cells, sensory neurons, hair follicle keratinocytes and connective cells of organ
capsules. In many cell lineages, the two basonuclins appear and disappear
synchronously. Within the male germ cell lineage, BNC1 and BNC2 are found in
prospermatogonia and undifferentiated spermatogonia, and disappear abruptly from 
differentiating spermatogonia. During oogenesis, the two basonuclins accumulate
specifically in maturing oocytes. During the development of hair follicles, BNC1 
and BNC2 concentrate in the primary hair germs. As follicle morphogenesis
proceeds, cells possessing BNC1 and BNC2 invade the dermis and surround the
papilla. During anagen, BNC1 and BNC2 are largely restricted to the basal layer
of the outer root sheath and the matrix. During catagen, the compartment of cells
possessing BNC1 and BNC2 regresses, and in telogen, the two basonuclins are
confined to the secondary hair germ. During the next anagen, the
BNC1/BNC2-containing cell population regenerates the hair follicle. By examining 
Bnc2(-/-) mice that have escaped the neonatal lethality usually associated with
lack of BNC2, we demonstrate that BNC2 possesses important functions in many of
the cell types where it resides. Hair follicles of postnatal Bnc2(-/-) mice do
not fully develop during the first cycle and thereafter remain blocked in
telogen. It is concluded that the presence of BNC2 in the secondary hair germ is 
required to regenerate the transient segment of the follicle. Postnatal Bnc2(-/-)
mice also show severe dwarfism, defects in oogenesis and alterations of palatal
rugae. Although the two basonuclins possess very similar zinc fingers and are
largely coexpressed, BNC1 cannot substitute for BNC2. This is shown
incontrovertibly in knockin mice expressing Bnc1 instead of Bnc2 as these mice
invariably die at birth with craniofacial abnormalities undistinguishable from
those of Bnc2(-/-) mice. The function of the basonuclins in the secondary hair
germ is of particular interest.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923665  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Endocrinology. 2016 Apr;157(4):1630-43. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1851. Epub 2016 Feb 
16.

Obesity-Dependent Increases in Oocyte mRNAs Are Associated With Increases in
Proinflammatory Signaling and Gut Microbial Abundance of Lachnospiraceae in
Female Mice.

Xie F(1), Anderson CL(1), Timme KR(1), Kurz SG(1), Fernando SC(1), Wood JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science (F.X., K.R.T., S.G.K., S.C.F., J.R.W.),
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0908; School of
Biological Sciences (C.L.A., S.C.F.), University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska 68588-0118; and Food Science and Technology Department (S.C.F.),
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0919.

RNAs stored in the metaphase II-arrested oocyte play important roles in
successful embryonic development. Their abundance is defined by transcriptional
activity during oocyte growth and selective degradation of transcripts during
LH-induced oocyte maturation. Our previous studies demonstrated that mRNA
abundance is increased in mature ovulated oocytes collected from obese humans and
mice and therefore may contribute to reduced oocyte developmental competence
associated with metabolic dysfunction. In the current study mouse models of
diet-induced obesity were used to determine whether obesity-dependent increases
in proinflammatory signaling regulate ovarian abundance of oocyte-specific mRNAs.
The abundance of oocyte-specific Bnc1, Dppa3, and Pou5f1 mRNAs as well as markers
of proinflammatory signaling were significantly increased in ovaries of obese
compared with lean mice which were depleted of fully grown preovulatory
follicles. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses also demonstrated increased
association of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
with the Pou5f1 promoter in ovaries of obese mice suggesting that proinflammatory
signaling regulates transcription of this gene in the oocyte. The cecum microbial
content of lean and obese female mice was subsequently examined to identify
potential relationships between microbial composition and proinflammatory
signaling in the ovary. Multivariate Association with Linear Models identified
significant positive correlations between cecum abundance of the bacterial family
Lachnospiraceae and ovarian abundance of Tnfa as well as Dppa3, Bnc1, and Pou5f1 
mRNAs. Together, these data suggest that diet-induced changes in gut microbial
composition may be contributing to ovarian inflammation which in turn alters
ovarian gene expression and ultimately contributes to obesity-dependent reduction
in oocyte quality and development of infertility in obese patients.

PMID: 26881311  [PubMed - in process]


4. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jan 25;17(2). pii: E153. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020153.

Decreased Expression of BNC1 and BNC2 Is Associated with Genetic or Epigenetic
Regulation in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Wu Y(1), Zhang X(2), Liu Y(3), Lu F(4), Chen X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic
Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. 
yaliwu@bjmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease
Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China. xiaoleizhang8802@bjmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of
Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic Medical Science,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.
luzernliu@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease
Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China. lu.fengmin@hsc.pku.edu.cn. (5)Department of Microbiology
&amp; Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. xm_chen6176@bjmu.edu.cn.

The aberrant expression of transcription factor Basonuclin (BNC) had been
reported in different kinds of tumors. Here, we investigated the expression and
methylation status of two Basonuclin homologs, BNC1 and BNC2 in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We found that the expression levels of both BNC1 and BNC2 were
down-regulated in HCC cell lines and primary HCC tissues. The frequency and
intensity of BNC1 promoter hypermethylation in tumor tissues was significantly
higher than that in adjacent non-tumor tissues. 5-Aza-2'-Deoxycytidine treatment 
could significantly increase the BNC1 expression in the methylated HCC cell
lines, which implicated that epigenetic modification contributed to the
down-regulation of BNC1. In addition, BNC1 hypermethylation in tumor tissues was 
more likely to happen in female patients. No methylation of the BNC2 promoter was
found in HCC tumor tissues. However, a frequent deletion of the BNC2 gene was
observed, which indicated that the chromosomal loss of the BNC2 gene might be one
important reason for its lower expression level in HCC. Our results suggested
that BNC1 and BNC2 were down-regulated in HCC which may provide new insight into 
the tumorigenesis of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4783887
PMID: 26821013  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 20;10(8):e0133836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133836.
eCollection 2015.

Comprehensive DNA Methylation Analysis Reveals a Common Ten-Gene Methylation
Signature in Colorectal Adenomas and Carcinomas.

Patai ÁV(1), Valcz G(2), Hollósi P(3), Kalmár A(1), Péterfia B(2), Patai Á(4),
Wichmann B(2), Spisák S(5), Barták BK(1), Leiszter K(1), Tóth K(1), Sipos F(1),
Kovalszky I(6), Péter Z(1), Miheller P(1), Tulassay Z(7), Molnár B(7).

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Molecular Medicine Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest,
Hungary. (3)1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary; Tumor Progression Research Group,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology and Medicine, Markusovszky University Teaching Hospital,
Szombathely, Hungary. (5)Molecular Medicine Research Group, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, Budapest, Hungary; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)1st Department of
Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary. (7)2nd Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;
Molecular Medicine Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest,
Hungary.

Microarray analysis of promoter hypermethylation provides insight into the role
and extent of DNA methylation in the development of colorectal cancer (CRC) and
may be co-monitored with the appearance of driver mutations. Colonic biopsy
samples were obtained endoscopically from 10 normal, 23 adenoma (17 low-grade
(LGD) and 6 high-grade dysplasia (HGD)), and 8 ulcerative colitis (UC) patients
(4 active and 4 inactive). CRC samples were obtained from 24 patients (17
primary, 7 metastatic (MCRC)), 7 of them with synchronous LGD. Field effects were
analyzed in tissues 1 cm (n = 5) and 10 cm (n = 5) from the margin of CRC. Tissue
materials were studied for DNA methylation status using a 96 gene panel and for
KRAS and BRAF mutations. Expression levels were assayed using whole genomic mRNA 
arrays. SFRP1 was further examined by immunohistochemistry. HT29 cells were
treated with 5-aza-2' deoxycytidine to analyze the reversal possibility of DNA
methylation. More than 85% of tumor samples showed hypermethylation in 10 genes
(SFRP1, SST, BNC1, MAL, SLIT2, SFRP2, SLIT3, ALDH1A3, TMEFF2, WIF1), whereas the 
frequency of examined mutations were below 25%. These genes distinguished
precancerous and cancerous lesions from inflamed and healthy tissue. The mRNA
alterations that might be caused by systematic methylation could be partly
reversed by demethylation treatment. Systematic changes in methylation patterns
were observed early in CRC carcinogenesis, occuring in precursor lesions and CRC.
Thus we conclude that DNA hypermethylation is an early and systematic event in
colorectal carcinogenesis, and it could be potentially reversed by systematic
demethylation therapy, but it would need more in vitro and in vivo experiments to
support this theory.

PMCID: PMC4546193
PMID: 26291085  [PubMed - in process]


6. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 May 27;7(1):57. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0089-x.
eCollection 2015.

The GALNT9, BNC1 and CCDC8 genes are frequently epigenetically dysregulated in
breast tumours that metastasise to the brain.

Pangeni RP(1), Channathodiyil P(1), Huen DS(2), Eagles LW(1), Johal BK(2), Pasha 
D(2), Hadjistephanou N(2), Nevell O(2), Davies CL(2), Adewumi AI(2), Khanom H(2),
Samra IS(2), Buzatto VC(2), Chandrasekaran P(2), Shinawi T(3), Dawson TP(4),
Ashton KM(4), Davis C(4), Brodbelt AR(5), Jenkinson MD(5), Bièche I(6), Latif
F(3), Darling JL(1), Warr TJ(1), Morris MR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumour Research Centre, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, UK. 
(2)School of Biology, Chemistry and Forensic Sciences, University of
Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, UK. (3)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised
Medicine, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK. (4)Department of Neurosciences, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Royal Preston Hospital, Fulwood, Preston, UK. (5)The Walton
Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Lower Lane, Liverpool, UK. (6)Department of
Genetics, Institute Curie, Paris, France. (7)Brain Tumour Research Centre,
University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, UK ; School of Biology, Chemistry and
Forensic Sciences, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, UK ; Centre for
Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, School of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Tumour metastasis to the brain is a common and deadly development in 
certain cancers; 18-30 % of breast tumours metastasise to the brain. The
contribution that gene silencing through epigenetic mechanisms plays in these
metastatic tumours is not well understood.
RESULTS: We have carried out a bioinformatic screen of genome-wide breast tumour 
methylation data available at The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and a broad
literature review to identify candidate genes that may contribute to breast to
brain metastasis (BBM). This analysis identified 82 candidates. We investigated
the methylation status of these genes using Combined Bisulfite and Restriction
Analysis (CoBRA) and identified 21 genes frequently methylated in BBM. We have
identified three genes, GALNT9, CCDC8 and BNC1, that were frequently methylated
(55, 73 and 71 %, respectively) and silenced in BBM and infrequently methylated
in primary breast tumours. CCDC8 was commonly methylated in brain metastases and 
their associated primary tumours whereas GALNT9 and BNC1 were methylated and
silenced only in brain metastases, but not in the associated primary breast
tumours from individual patients. This suggests differing roles for these genes
in the evolution of metastatic tumours; CCDC8 methylation occurs at an early
stage of metastatic evolution whereas methylation of GANLT9 and BNC1 occurs at a 
later stage of tumour evolution. Knockdown of these genes by RNAi resulted in a
significant increase in the migratory and invasive potential of breast cancer
cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that GALNT9 (an initiator of
O-glycosylation), CCDC8 (a regulator of microtubule dynamics) and BNC1 (a
transcription factor with a broad range of targets) may play a role in the
progression of primary breast tumours to brain metastases. These genes may be
useful as prognostic markers and their products may provide novel therapeutic
targets.

PMCID: PMC4457099
PMID: 26052355  [PubMed]


7. Oncogene. 2015 Feb 26;34(9):1185-95. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.54. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

Basonuclin-1 modulates epithelial plasticity and TGF-ß1-induced loss of
epithelial cell integrity.

Feuerborn A(1), Mathow D(1), Srivastava PK(2), Gretz N(3), Gröne HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Centre 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Physiological Genomics and Medicine, MRC Clinical
Sciences, Imperial College, London, UK. (3)Department of Medical Research,
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Research Centre (ZMF), University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.

Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) is a multifunctional cytokine and
critically involved in the progression of a variety of cancers. TGF-ß1 signaling 
can impair tumor development by its anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
features. In contrast, it may actively promote tumor progression and cancer cell 
dissemination by inducing a gradual switch from epithelial towards
mesenchymal-like cell features (EMT-like), including decreased intercellular
adhesion. Here, we show that expression of the transcription factor Basonuclin-1 
(Bnc1) modulates TGF-ß1-induced epithelial dedifferentiation of mammary
epithelial cells. RNAi-mediated repression of Bnc1 resulted in enhanced
intercellular adhesion and strongly impaired TGF-ß1-dependent sheet
disintegration and cell scattering. In contrast, forced expression of Bnc1
modifies plasma membrane/cytoskeletal dynamics and seemingly interferes with the 
initiation of sustainable cell-cell contacts. Follow-up analyses revealed that
Bnc1 affects the expression of numerous TGF-ß1-responsive genes including
distinct EMT-related transcription factors, some of which modulate the expression
of Bnc1 themselves. These results suggest that Bnc1 is part of a transcription
factor network related to epithelial plasticity with reciprocal feedback-loop
connections on which Smad-factors integrate TGF-ß1 signaling. Our study
demonstrates that Bnc1 regulates epithelial plasticity of mammary epithelial
cells and influences outcome of TGF-ß1 signaling.

PMID: 24662832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 May;13(5):1165-83. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.034215. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

Evidence for proteomic and metabolic adaptations associated with alterations of
seed yield and quality in sulfur-limited Brassica napus L.

D'Hooghe P(1), Dubousset L, Gallardo K, Kopriva S, Avice JC, Trouverie J.

Author information: 
(1)Normandie University, F-14032 Caen, France;

In Brassica napus, seed yield and quality are related to sulfate availability,
but the seed metabolic changes in response to sulfate limitation remain largely
unknown. To address this question, proteomics and biochemical studies were
carried out on mature seeds obtained from plants grown under low sulfate applied 
at the bolting (LS32), early flowering (LS53), or start of pod filling (LS70)
stage. The protein quality of all low-sulfate seeds was reduced and associated
with a reduction of S-rich seed storage protein accumulation (as Cruciferin Cru4)
and an increase of S-poor seed storage protein (as Cruciferin BnC1). This
compensation allowed the protein content to be maintained in LS70 and LS53 seeds 
but was not sufficient to maintain the protein content in LS32 seeds. The lipid
content and quality of LS53 and LS32 seeds were also affected, and these effects 
were primarily associated with a reduction of C18-derivative accumulation.
Proteomics changes related to lipid storage, carbohydrate metabolism, and energy 
(reduction of caleosins, phosphoglycerate kinase, malate synthase, ATP-synthase
ß-subunit, and thiazole biosynthetic enzyme THI1 and accumulation of
ß-glucosidase and citrate synthase) provide insights into processes that may
contribute to decreased oil content and altered lipid composition (in favor of
long-chain fatty acids in LS53 and LS32 seeds). These data indicate that
metabolic changes associated with S limitation responses affect seed storage
protein composition and lipid quality. Proteins involved in plant stress
response, such as dehydroascorbate reductase and Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase, were
also accumulated in LS53 and LS32 seeds, and this might be a consequence of
reduced glutathione content under low S availability. LS32 treatment also
resulted in (i) reduced germination vigor, as evidenced by lower germination
indexes, (ii) reduced seed germination capacity, related to a lower seed
viability, and (iii) a strong decrease of glyoxysomal malate synthase, which is
essential for the use of fatty acids during seedling establishment.

PMCID: PMC4014277
PMID: 24554741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85621. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085621. eCollection
2014.

Tumor-specific hypermethylation of epigenetic biomarkers, including SFRP1,
predicts for poorer survival in patients from the TCGA Kidney Renal Clear Cell
Carcinoma (KIRC) project.

Ricketts CJ(1), Hill VK(2), Linehan WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America. (2)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

The recent publication of the TCGA Kidney Renal Clear Cell Carcinoma (KIRC)
project has provided an immense wealth and breadth of data providing an
invaluable tool for confirmation and expansion upon previous observations in a
large data set containing multiple data types including DNA methylation, somatic 
mutation, and clinical information. In clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC)
many genes have been demonstrated to be epigenetically inactivated by promoter
hypermethylated and in a small number of cases to be associated with clinical
outcome. This study created two cohorts based on the Illumina BeadChip array used
to confirm the frequency of tumor-specific hypermethylation of these published
hypermethylated genes, assess the impact of somatic mutation or chromosomal loss 
and provide the most comprehensive assessment to date of the association of this 
hypermethylation with patient survival. Hypermethylation of the Fibrillin 2
(FBN2) gene was the most consistent epigenetic biomarker for CCRCC across both
cohorts in 40.2% or 52.5% of tumors respectively. Hypermethylation of the
secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) gene and the basonuclin 1 (BNC1) gene
were both statistically associated with poorer survival in both cohorts (SFRP1 - 
p =<U+200A><0.0001 or 0.0010 and BNC1 - p =<U+200A><0.0001 or 0.0380) and represented better
independent markers of survival than tumor stage, grade or dimension in one
cohort and tumor stage or dimension in the other cohort. Loss of the SFRP1
protein can potentially activate the WNT pathway and this analysis highlighted
hypermethylation of several other WNT pathway regulating genes and demonstrated a
poorer survival outcome for patients with somatic mutation of these genes. The
success of demethylating drugs in hematological malignances and the current
trials in solid tumors suggest that the identification of clinically relevant
hypermethylated genes combined with therapeutic advances may improve the
effectiveness and usefulness of such drugs in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3893219
PMID: 24454902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 1;19(23):6544-55. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3224.
Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Novel methylation biomarker panel for the early detection of pancreatic cancer.

Yi JM(1), Guzzetta AA, Bailey VJ, Downing SR, Van Neste L, Chiappinelli KB,
Keeley BP, Stark A, Herrera A, Wolfgang C, Pappou EP, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA,
Goggins MG, Herman JG, Wang TH, Baylin SB, Ahuja N.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Oncology, Surgery, Urology, and Mechanic
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University; Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine; Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman
Pancreatic Research Center, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland; MDxHealth, Ghent, Belgium; and Research Institute, Dongnam Institute of
Radiological and Medical Sciences (DIRAMS), Busan, South Korea.

PURPOSE: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths and there
currently is no reliable modality for the early detection of this disease. Here, 
we identify cancer-specific promoter DNA methylation of BNC1 and ADAMTS1 as a
promising biomarker detection strategy meriting investigation in pancreatic
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used a genome-wide pharmacologic transcriptome approach
to identify novel cancer-specific DNA methylation alterations in pancreatic
cancer cell lines. Of eight promising genes, we focused our studies on BNC1 and
ADAMTS1 for further downstream analysis, including methylation and expression. We
used a nanoparticle-enabled methylation on beads (MOB) technology to detect
early-stage pancreatic cancers by analyzing DNA methylation in patient serum.
RESULTS: We identified two novel genes, BNC1 (92%) and ADAMTS1 (68%), that showed
a high frequency of methylation in pancreatic cancers (n = 143), up to 100% in
PanIN-3 and 97% in stage I invasive cancers. Using the nanoparticle-enabled MOB
technology, these alterations could be detected in serum samples (n = 42) from
patients with pancreatic cancer, with a sensitivity for BNC1 of 79% [95%
confidence interval (CI), 66%-91%] and for ADAMTS1 of 48% (95% CI, 33%-63%),
whereas specificity was 89% for BNC1 (95% CI, 76%-100%) and 92% for ADAMTS1 (95% 
CI, 82%-100%). Overall sensitivity using both markers is 81% (95% CI, 69%-93%)
and specificity is 85% (95% CI, 71%-99%).
CONCLUSIONS: Promoter DNA methylation of BNC1 and ADAMTS1 is a potential
biomarker to detect early-stage pancreatic cancers. Assaying the promoter
methylation status of these genes in circulating DNA from serum is a promising
strategy for early detection of pancreatic cancer and has the potential to
improve mortality from this disease.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4310572
PMID: 24088737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2013 Dec;16(4):292-300. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2013.21.
Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Identification of novel DNA-methylated genes that correlate with human prostate
cancer and high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Devaney JM(1), Wang S, Funda S, Long J, Taghipour DJ, Tbaishat R, Furbert-Harris 
P, Ittmann M, Kwabi-Addo B.

Author information: 
(1)Children's National Medical Center, Center for Genetic Medicine Research,
Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) harbors a myriad of genomic and epigenetic
defects. Cytosine methylation of CpG-rich promoter DNA is an important mechanism 
of epigenetic gene inactivation in PCa. There is considerable amount of data to
suggest that DNA methylation-based biomarkers may be useful for the early
detection and diagnosis of PCa. In addition, candidate gene-based studies have
shown an association between specific gene methylation and alterations and
clinicopathologic indicators of poor prognosis in PCa.
METHODS: To more comprehensively identify DNA methylation alterations in PCa
initiation and progression, we examined the methylation status of 485<U+2009>577 CpG
sites from regions with a broad spectrum of CpG densities, interrogating both
gene-associated and non-associated regions using the recently developed Illumina 
450K methylation platform.
RESULTS: In all, we selected 33 promoter-associated novel CpG sites that were
differentially methylated in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and
PCa in comparison with benign prostate tissue samples (false discovery
rate-adjusted P-value <0.05; ß-value <U+E2F6>0.2; fold change >1.5). Of the 33 genes,
hierarchical clustering analysis demonstrated BNC1, FZD1, RPL39L, SYN2, LMX1B,
CXXC5, ZNF783 and CYB5R2 as top candidate novel genes that are frequently
methylated and whose methylation was associated with inactivation of gene
expression in PCa cell lines. Pathway analysis of the genes with altered
methylation patterns identified the involvement of a cancer-related network of
genes whose activity may be regulated by TP53, MYC, TNF, IL1 and 6, IFN-<U+03B3> and FOS
in prostate pathogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our genome-wide methylation profile shows epigenetic dysregulation of
important regulatory signals in prostate carcinogenesis.

PMID: 23896626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jul 11;587(14):2099-104. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.049. Epub
2013 May 23.

HSF2BP represses BNC1 transcriptional activity by sequestering BNC1 to the
cytoplasm.

Wu Y(1), Liao S, Wang X, Wang S, Wang M, Han C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Basonuclin (BNC1), a zinc finger transcriptional factor, is essential for mouse
spermatogenesis. However, the regulatory mechanisms of BNC1 in spermatogenesis
are poorly understood. In this study, we identified HSF2BP, a testis-specific
binding protein of HSF2, as a binding partner of BNC1 by using yeast two-hybrid
screening. HSF2BP could interact with and inhibit BNC1 transcriptional activity
without affecting its expression level. Moreover, coexpression of HSF2BP with
BNC1 resulted in a striking redistribution of BNC1 to the cytoplasm. These data
suggest that HSF2BP may play a pivotal role in regulating BNC1 transcriptional
activity and subcellular localization during spermatogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):650-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101135.

De novo copy number variants are associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Yu L(1), Wynn J, Ma L, Guha S, Mychaliska GB, Crombleholme TM, Azarow KS, Lim FY,
Chung DH, Potoka D, Warner BW, Bucher B, LeDuc CA, Costa K, Stolar C, Aspelund G,
Arkovitz MS, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect with
significant morbidity and mortality. Although the aetiology of CDH remains poorly
understood, studies from animal models and patients with CDH suggest that genetic
factors play an important role in the development of CDH. Chromosomal anomalies
have been reported in CDH.
METHODS: In this study, the authors investigated the frequency of chromosomal
anomalies and copy number variants (CNVs) in 256 parent-child trios of CDH using 
clinical conventional cytogenetic and microarray analysis. The authors also
selected a set of CDH related training genes to prioritise the genes in those
segmental aneuploidies and identified the genes and gene sets that may contribute
to the aetiology of CDH.
RESULTS: The authors identified chromosomal anomalies in 16 patients (6.3%) of
the series including three aneuploidies, two unbalanced translocation, and 11
patients with de novo CNVs ranging in size from 95 kb to 104.6 Mb. The authors
prioritised the genes in the CNV segments and identified KCNA2, LMNA, CACNA1S,
MYOG, HLX, LBR, AGT, GATA4, SOX7, HYLS1, FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6, COL4A1,
COL4A2, HOMER2, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 as genes that may be involved in diaphragm
development. Gene enrichment analysis identified the most relevant gene ontology 
categories as those involved in tissue development (p=4.4×10(-11)) or regulation 
of multicellular organismal processes (p=2.8×10(-10)) and 'receptor binding'
(p=8.7×10(-14)) and 'DNA binding transcription factor activity' (p=4.4×10(-10)).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings support the role of chromosomal anomalies in
CDH and provide a set of candidate genes including FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6,
COL4A1, COL4A2, SOX7, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 for further analysis in CDH.

PMCID: PMC3696999
PMID: 23054247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genesis. 2012 Jul;50(7):517-24. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22014. Epub 2012 Feb 20.

BNC1 is required for maintaining mouse spermatogenesis.

Zhang X(1), Chou W, Haig-Ladewig L, Zeng W, Cao W, Gerton G, Dobrinski I, Tseng
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
mszhxh@gmail.com

Basonuclin (BNC1) is a zinc finger protein expressed primarily in gametogenic
cells and proliferative keratinocytes. Our previous work suggested that BNC1 is
present in spermatogonia, spermatocytes, and spermatids, but absent in the
Sertoli cells. BNC1's role in spermatogenesis is unknown. Here, we show that BNC1
is required for the maintenance of spermatogenesis. Bnc1-null male mice were
sub-fertile, losing germ cells progressively with age. The Bnc1-null seminiferous
epithelia began to degenerate before 8 weeks of age and eventually became Sertoli
cell-only. Sperm count and motility also declined with age. Furthermore, Bnc1
heterozygotes, although fertile, showed a significant drop in sperm count and in 
testis weight by 24 weeks of age, suggesting a dosage effect of Bnc1 on testis
development. In conclusion, our data demonstrate for the first time BNC1's
essential role in maintaining mouse spermatogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3399937
PMID: 22266914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Eur J Cancer. 2012 Jun;48(9):1401-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2011.06.032. Epub 2011
Jul 7.

p63 Transcriptionally regulates BNC1, a Pol I and Pol II transcription factor
that regulates ribosomal biogenesis and epithelial differentiation.

Boldrup L(1), Coates PJ, Laurell G, Nylander K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences/Pathology, Building 6M, 2nd floor, Umeå
University, SE-901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

The p53-family member, p63 is a transcription factor that influences cellular
adhesion, motility, proliferation, survival and apoptosis, and has a major role
in regulating epithelial stem cells. Expression of p63 is often dysregulated in
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck. In this study we show that p63
induces the expression of the basal epithelial transcription factor, Basonuclin
1. Basonuclin 1 is an unusual transcription factor that interacts with a subset
of promoters of genes that are transcribed by both RNA polymerase-I and -II and
has roles in maintaining ribosomal biogenesis and the proliferative potential of 
immature epithelial cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays
demonstrate that Basonuclin 1 is a direct transcriptional target of p63 and we
also show that up-regulation of Basonuclin 1 is a common event in squamous cell
carcinomas of the head and neck. These data identify a new transcriptional
programme mediated by p63 regulation of the Basonuclin 1 transcription factor in 
squamous cell carcinomas and provide a novel link of p63 with the regulation of
ribosomal biogenesis in epithelial cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 19;29(33):4725-31. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.223. Epub 2010 Jun 7.

Global analysis of CpG methylation reveals epigenetic control of the
radiosensitivity in lung cancer cell lines.

Kim EH(1), Park AK, Dong SM, Ahn JH, Park WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Epigenetic regulation by CpG methylation has an important role in tumorigenesis
as well as in the response to cancer therapy. To analyze the mechanism of
epigenetic control of radiosensitivity, the CpG methylation profiles of
radiosensitive H460 and radioresistant H1299 human non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines were analyzed using microarray profiling. These analyses
revealed 1091 differentially methylated genes (DMG) (absolute difference of mean 
beta-values, |Deltabeta |>0.5), including genes involved in cell adhesion, cell
communication, signal transduction and transcriptional regulation. Among the 747 
genes hypermethylated in radioresistant H1299 cells, CpG methylation of SERPINB5 
and S100A6 in radioresistant H1299 cells was confirmed by methylation-specific
PCR. Reverse transcriptase-PCR showed higher expression of these two genes in
radiosensitive H460 cells compared with radioresistant H1299 cells.
Downregulation of SERPINB5 or S100A6 by small interfering RNA in H460 cells
increased the resistance of these cells to ionizing radiation. In contrast,
promoter CpG sites of 344 genes, including CAT and BNC1, were hypomethylated in
radioresistant H1299 cells. Suppression of CAT or BNC1 mRNA expression in H1299
cells also reduced the resistance of these cells to ionizing radiation. Thus, we 
identified DMGs by genome-wide CpG methylation profiling in two NSCLC cell lines 
with different responses to ionizing radiation, and our data indicated that these
differences may be critical for epigenetic regulation of radiosensitivity in lung
cancer cells.

PMID: 20531302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Epigenetics. 2010 Aug 16;5(6):499-508. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of chronic lymphocytic leukemia allows
identification of epigenetically repressed molecular pathways with clinical
impact.

Tong WG(1), Wierda WG, Lin E, Kuang SQ, Bekele BN, Estrov Z, Wei Y, Yang H,
Keating MJ, Garcia-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

We performed a genome-wide analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) using methylated CpG island amplification (MCA)
coupled with a promoter microarray. We identified 280 potential targets of
aberrant DNA methylation in CLL. These genes were located more frequently in
chromosomes 19 (16%, p=0.001), 16 (11%, p=0.001), 17 (10%, p=0.02) and 11 (9%,
p=0.02) and could be grouped in several functional networks. Methylation status
was confirmed for 22 of these genes (SOX11, DLX1, FAM62C, SOX14, RSPO1, ADCY5,
HAND2,SPOCK, MLL, ING1, PRIMA1, BCL11B, LTBP2, BNC1, NR2F2, SALL1, GALGT2, LHX1, 
DLX4, KLK10, TFAP2 and APP) in 78 CLL patients by pyrosequencing. As a proof of
principle, we analyzed the expression of 2 genes, PRIMA1 and APP, in primary
cells and of GALGT2, TFAP2C and PRIMA1 in leukemia cells. There was an inverse
association between methylation and gene expression. This could be reversed by
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in cell lines. Treatment in a clinical
trial with 5-azacitidine resulted in decreased methylation of LINE, DLX4 and
SALL1 in the peripheral blood B-cells of patients with CLL. IgVH mutational
status or ZAP-70 expression were not associated with specific methylation
profiles. By multivariate analysis, methylation of LINE and APP was associated
with shorter overall survival (p = 0.045 and 0.0035, respectively). This study
demonstrates that aberrant DNA methylation is common and has potential prognostic
and therapeutic value in CLL.

PMCID: PMC3322493
PMID: 20484983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 8;29(14):2104-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.493. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

Identification of candidate tumour suppressor genes frequently methylated in
renal cell carcinoma.

Morris MR(1), Ricketts C, Gentle D, Abdulrahman M, Clarke N, Brown M, Kishida T, 
Yao M, Latif F, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Renal Molecular Oncology Group, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK.

Promoter region hyermethylation and transcriptional silencing is a frequent cause
of tumour suppressor gene (TSG) inactivation in many types of human cancers.
Functional epigenetic studies, in which gene expression is induced by treatment
with demethylating agents, may identify novel genes with tumour-specific
methylation. We used high-density gene expression microarrays in a functional
epigenetic study of 11 renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cell lines. Twenty-eight genes 
were then selected for analysis of promoter methylation status in cell lines and 
primary RCC. Eight genes (BNC1, PDLIM4, RPRM, CST6, SFRP1, GREM1, COL14A1 and
COL15A1) showed frequent (>30% of RCC tested) tumour-specific promoter region
methylation. Hypermethylation was associated with transcriptional silencing.
Re-expression of BNC1, CST6, RPRM and SFRP1 suppressed the growth of RCC cell
lines and RNA interference knock-down of BNC1, SFRP1 and COL14A1 increased the
growth of RCC cell lines. Methylation of BNC1 or COL14A1 was associated with a
poorer prognosis independent of tumour size, stage or grade. The identification
of these epigenetically inactivated candidate RCC TSGs can provide insights into 
renal tumourigenesis and a basis for developing novel therapies and biomarkers
for prognosis and detection.

PMCID: PMC3021900
PMID: 20154727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS Genet. 2009 Nov;5(11):e1000744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000744. Epub 2009
Nov 26.

Basonuclin-2 requirements for zebrafish adult pigment pattern development and
female fertility.

Lang MR(1), Patterson LB, Gordon TN, Johnson SL, Parichy DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Relatively little is known about the generation of adult form. One complex adult 
trait that is particularly amenable to genetic and experimental analysis is the
zebrafish pigment pattern, which undergoes extensive remodeling during
post-embryonic development to form adult stripes. These stripes result from the
arrangement of three classes of neural crest-derived pigment cells, or
chromatophores: melanophores, xanthophores, and iridophores. Here, we analyze the
zebrafish bonaparte mutant, which has a normal early pigment pattern but exhibits
a severe disruption to the adult stripe pattern. We show that the bonaparte
mutant phenotype arises from mutations in basonuclin-2 (bnc2), encoding a highly 
conserved, nuclear-localized zinc finger protein of unknown function. We show
that bnc2 acts non-autonomously to the melanophore lineage and is expressed by
hypodermal cells adjacent to chromatophores during adult pigment pattern
formation. In bonaparte (bnc2) mutants, all three types of chromatophores
differentiate but then are lost by extrusion through the skin. We further show
that while bnc2 promotes the development of two genetically distinct populations 
of melanophores in the body stripes, chromatophores of the fins and scales remain
unaffected in bonaparte mutants, though a requirement of fin chromatophores for
bnc2 is revealed in the absence of kit and colony stimulating factor-1 receptor
activity. Finally, we find that bonaparte (bnc2) mutants exhibit dysmorphic
ovaries correlating with infertility and bnc2 is expressed in somatic ovarian
cells, whereas the related gene, bnc1, is expressed within oocytes; and we find
that both bnc2 and bnc1 are expressed abundantly within the central nervous
system. These findings identify bnc2 as an important mediator of adult pigment
pattern formation and identify bonaparte mutants as an animal model for
dissecting bnc2 functions.

PMCID: PMC2776513
PMID: 19956727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Epigenetics. 2009 Apr 1;4(3):185-93. Epub 2009 Apr 12.

Epigenetic analysis of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Dunwell TL(1), Hesson LB, Pavlova T, Zabarovska V, Kashuba V, Catchpoole D,
Chiaramonte R, Brini AT, Griffiths M, Maher ER, Zabarovsky E, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, Medical School, University of Birmingham,
Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.

We used a chromosome 3 wide NotI microarray for identification of epigenetically 
inactivated genes in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Three novel
genes demonstrated frequent methylation in childhood ALL. PPP2R3A (protein
phosphatase 2, regulatory subunit B", alpha) was frequently methylated in T (69%)
and B (82%)-ALL. Whilst FBLN2 (fibulin 2) and THRB (thyroid hormone receptor,
beta) showed frequent methylation in B-ALL (58%; 56% respectively), but were less
frequently methylated in T-ALL (17% for both genes). Recently it was demonstrated
that BNC1 (Basonuclin 1) and MSX1 (msh homeobox 1) were frequently methylated
across common epithelial cancers. In our series of childhood ALL BNC1 was
frequently methylated in both T (77%) and B-ALL (79%), whilst MSX1 showed T-ALL
(25%) specific methylation. The methylation of the above five genes was cancer
specific and expression of the genes could be restored in methylated leukemia
cell lines treated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. This is the first report
demonstrating frequent epigenetic inactivation of PPP2R3A, FBLN2, THRB, BNC1 and 
MSX1 in leukemia. The identification of frequently methylated genes showing
cancer specific methylation will be useful in developing early cancer detection
screens and for targeted epigenetic therapies.

PMID: 19430199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 17;283(42):28710-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804535200. Epub 2008
Aug 12.

Crystal structures of NADH:FMN oxidoreductase (EmoB) at different stages of
catalysis.

Nissen MS(1), Youn B, Knowles BD, Ballinger JW, Jun SY, Belchik SM, Xun L, Kang
C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4660, USA.

EDTA has become a major organic pollutant in the environment because of its
extreme usage and resistance to biodegradation. Recently, two critical enzymes,
EDTA monooxygenase (EmoA) and NADH:FMN oxidoreductase (EmoB), belonging to the
newly established two-component flavin-diffusible monooxygenase family, were
identified in the EDTA degradation pathway in Mesorhizobium sp. BNC1. EmoA is an 
FMNH2-dependent enzyme that requires EmoB to provide FMNH2 for the conversion of 
EDTA to ethylenediaminediacetate. To understand the molecular basis of this
FMN-mediated reaction, the crystal structures of the apo-form, FMN.FMN complex,
and FMN.NADH complex of EmoB were determined at 2.5 angstroms resolution. The
structure of EmoB is a homotetramer consisting of four alpha/beta-single-domain
monomers of five parallel beta-strands flanked by five alpha-helices, which is
quite different from those of other known two-component flavin-diffusible
monooxygenase family members, such as PheA2 and HpaC, in terms of both tertiary
and quaternary structures. For the first time, the crystal structures of both the
FMN.FMN and FMN.NADH complexes of an NADH:FMN oxidoreductase were determined. Two
stacked isoalloxazine rings and nicotinamide/isoalloxazine rings were at a proper
distance for hydride transfer. The structures indicated a ping-pong reaction
mechanism, which was confirmed by activity assays. Thus, the structural data
offer detailed mechanistic information for hydride transfer between NADH to an
enzyme-bound FMN and between the bound FMNH2 and a diffusible FMN.

PMCID: PMC2661417
PMID: 18701448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Protein Expr Purif. 2008 Mar;58(1):42-52. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2007.11.002. Epub
2007 Nov 17.

Expression and purification of BmrI restriction endonuclease and its N-terminal
cleavage domain variants.

Bao Y(1), Higgins L, Zhang P, Chan SH, Laget S, Sweeney S, Lunnen K, Xu SY.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, Inc., 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, USA.

BmrI (ACTGGG N5/N4) is one of the few metal-independent restriction endonucleases
(REases) found in bacteria. The BmrI restriction-modification system was cloned
by the methylase selection method, inverse PCR, and PCR. BmrI REase shows
significant amino acid sequence identity to BfiI and a putative endonuclease
MspBNCORF3798 from the sequenced Mesorhizobium sp. BNC1 genome. The
EDTA-resistant BmrI REase was successfully over-expressed in a pre-modified E.
coli strain from pET21a or pBAC-expIQ vectors. The recombinant BmrI REase shows
strong promiscuous activity (star activity) in NEB buffers 1, 4, and an EDTA
buffer. Star activity was diminished in buffers with 100-150 mM NaCl and 10 mM
MgCl(2). His-tagged BmrI192, the N-terminal cleavage domain of BmrI, was
expressed in E. coli and purified from inclusion bodies. The refolded BmrI192
protein possesses non-specific endonuclease activity. BmrI192 variants with a
single Ser to Cys substitution (S76C or S90C) and BmrI200 (T200C) with a single
Cys at the C-terminal end were also constructed and purified. BmrI200 digests
both single-strand (ss) and double-strand (ds) DNA and the nuclease activity on
ss DNA is at least 5-fold higher than that on ds DNA. The Cys-containing BmrI192 
and BmrI200 nuclease variants may be useful for coupling to other DNA binding
elements such as synthetic zinc fingers, thio-containing locked nucleic acids
(LNA) or peptide nucleic acids (PNA).

PMCID: PMC2275207
PMID: 18164625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 31;2(10):e1087.

Basonuclin-null mutation impairs homeostasis and wound repair in mouse corneal
epithelium.

Zhang X(1), Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

At least two cellular processes are required for corneal epithelium homeostasis
and wound repair: cell proliferation and cell-cell adhesion. These processes are 
delicately balanced to ensure the maintenance of normal epithelial function.
During wound healing, these processes must be reprogrammed in coordination to
achieve a rapid re-epithelialization. Basonuclin (Bnc1) is a cell-type-specific
transcription factor expressed mainly in the proliferative keratinocytes of
stratified epithelium (e.g., corneal epithelium, epidermis and esophageal
epithelium) and the gametogenic cells in testis and ovary. Our previous work
suggested that basonuclin could regulate transcription of ribosomal RNA genes
(rDNA) and genes involved in chromatin structure, transcription regulation,
cell-cell junction/communication, ion-channels and intracelllular transportation.
However, basonuclin's role in keratinocytes has not been demonstrated in vivo.
Here we show that basonuclin-null mutation disrupts corneal epithelium
homeostasis and delays wound healing by impairing cell proliferation. In
basonuclin-null cornea epithelium, RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription is
perturbed. This perturbation is unique because it affects transcripts from a
subset of rDNA. Basonuclin-null mutation also perturbs RNA polymerase II (Pol II)
transcripts from genes encoding chromatin structure proteins histone 3 and HMG2, 
transcription factor Gli2, gap-junction protein connexin 43 and adheren
E-cadherin. In most cases, a concerted change in mRNA and protein level is
observed. However, for E-cadherin, despite a notable increase in its mRNA level, 
its protein level was reduced. In conclusion, our study establishes basonuclin as
a regulator of corneal epithelium homeostasis and maintenance. Basonuclin likely 
coordinates functions of a subset of ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA) and a group of
protein coding genes in cellular processes critical for the regulation of cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2034529
PMID: 17971852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 19;2(9):e902.

Basonuclin regulates a subset of ribosomal RNA genes in HaCaT cells.

Zhang S(1), Wang J, Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Basonuclin (Bnc1), a cell-type-specific ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene regulator, is
expressed mainly in keratinocytes of stratified epithelium and gametogenic cells 
of testis and ovary. Previously, basonuclin was shown in vitro to interact with
rRNA gene (rDNA) promoter at three highly conserved sites. Basonuclin's high
affinity binding site overlaps with the binding site of a dedicated and
ubiquitous Pol I transcription regulator, UBF, suggesting that their binding
might interfere with each other if they bind to the same promoter. Knocking-down 
basonuclin in mouse oocytes eliminated approximately one quarter of RNA
polymerase I (Pol I) transcription foci, without affecting the BrU incorporation 
of the remaining ones, suggesting that basonuclin might regulate a subset of
rDNA. Here we show, via chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), that basonuclin is 
associated with rDNA promoters in HaCaT cells, a spontaneously established human 
keratinocyte line. Immunoprecipitation data suggest that basonuclin is in a
complex that also contains the subunits of Pol I (RPA194, RPA116), but not UBF.
Knocking-down basonuclin in HaCaT cells partially impairs the association of
RPA194 to rDNA promoter, but not that of UBF. Basonuclin-deficiency also reduces 
the amount of 47S pre-rRNA, but this effect can be seen only after
cell-proliferation related rRNA synthesis has subsided at a higher cell density. 
DNA sequence of basonuclin-bound rDNA promoters shows single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that differ from those associated with UBF-bound promoters, 
suggesting that basonuclin and UBF interact with different subsets of promoters. 
In conclusion, our results demonstrate basonuclin's functional association with
rDNA promoters and its interaction with Pol I in vivo. Our data also suggest that
basonuclin-Pol I complex transcribes a subset of rDNA.

PMCID: PMC1975673
PMID: 17878937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Bacteriol. 2007 Nov;189(22):7991-7. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Evidence that bacterial ABC-type transporter imports free EDTA for metabolism.

Zhang H(1), Herman JP, Bolton H Jr, Zhang Z, Clark S, Xun L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4234, USA.

EDTA, a common chelating agent, is becoming a major organic pollutant in the form
of metal-EDTA complexes in surface waters, partly due to its recalcitrance to
biodegradation. Even an EDTA-degrading bacterium, BNC1, does not degrade stable
metal-EDTA complexes. In the present study, an ABC-type transporter was
identified for possible uptake of EDTA because the transporter genes and the EDTA
monooxygenase gene were expressed from a single operon in BNC1. The ABC-type
transporter had a periplasmic-binding protein (EppA) that should confer the
substrate specificity for the transporter; therefore, EppA was produced in
Escherichia coli, purified, and characterized. EppA was shown to bind free EDTA
with a dissociation constant as low as 25 nM by using isothermal titration
calorimetry. When unstable metal-EDTA complexes, e.g., (Mg-EDTA)(2-), were added 
to the EppA solution, binding was also observed. However, experimental data and
theoretical analysis supported EppA binding only of free EDTA. When stable
metal-EDTA complexes, e.g., (Cu-EDTA)(2-), were titrated into the EppA solution, 
no binding was observed. Since EDTA monooxygenase in the cytoplasm uses some of
the stable metal-EDTA complexes as substrates, we suggest that the lack of EppA
binding and EDTA uptake are responsible for the failure of BNC1 cells to degrade 
the stable complexes.

PMCID: PMC2168656
PMID: 17873047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biodegradation. 2008 Feb;19(1):41-52. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Bacterial growth yields on EDTA, NTA, and their biodegradation intermediates.

Yuan Z(1), VanBriesen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering, University 
of Colorado at Boulder, Engineering Center ECOT 441, UCB 428, Boulder, CO 80309, 
USA. zhiwen.yuan@colorado.edu

Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) are widely
used anthropogenic chelating agents for control of metal speciation and are
ubiquitous in natural waters and wastewaters. This is the first report of
systematic measurement of the growth yields of a mixed culture (BNC1-BNC2) on
EDTA and its biodegradation intermediates, and of Aminobacter aminovorans (aka
Chelatobacter heintzii) ATCC 29600 on NTA and its biodegradation intermediates.
The yields measured for BNC1-BNC2 co-culture were 75.0 g of cell dry weight (CDW)
(mole of EDTA)(-1), 68.6 g of CDW (mole of ED3 A)(-1), 51.2 g of CDW (mole of
N,N'-EDDA)(-1), 34.5 g of CDW (mole of ED)(-1), 26.3 g of CDW (mole of IDA)(-1), 
12.2 g of CDW (mole of glycine)(-1), and 9.7 g of CDW (mole of glyoxylate)(-1).
The yields measured for A. aminovorans were 44.3 g of CDW (mole of NTA)(-1), 37.9
g of CDW (mole of IDA)(-1), 15.2 g of CDW (mole of glycine)(-1), and 10.4 g of
CDW (mole of glyoxylate)(-1). The biodegradation pathways of EDTA, NTA, and
several of their metabolic intermediates include reactions catalyzed by oxygenase
enzymes, which may reduce energy available for cell synthesis. Comparison of
measured yields with predicted yields indicates that the effect of oxygenase
reaction on cell yield can be quantified experimentally as well as modeled based 
on thermodynamics.

PMID: 17404695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS Med. 2006 Dec;3(12):e486.

A genome-wide screen for promoter methylation in lung cancer identifies novel
methylation markers for multiple malignancies.

Shames DS(1), Girard L, Gao B, Sato M, Lewis CM, Shivapurkar N, Jiang A, Perou
CM, Kim YH, Pollack JR, Fong KM, Lam CL, Wong M, Shyr Y, Nanda R, Olopade OI,
Gerald W, Euhus DM, Shay JW, Gazdar AF, Minna JD.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2006 Dec;3(12):e479.

BACKGROUND: Promoter hypermethylation coupled with loss of heterozygosity at the 
same locus results in loss of gene function in many tumor cells. The "rules"
governing which genes are methylated during the pathogenesis of individual
cancers, how specific methylation profiles are initially established, or what
determines tumor type-specific methylation are unknown. However, DNA methylation 
markers that are highly specific and sensitive for common tumors would be useful 
for the early detection of cancer, and those required for the malignant phenotype
would identify pathways important as therapeutic targets.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: In an effort to identify new cancer-specific methylation
markers, we employed a high-throughput global expression profiling approach in
lung cancer cells. We identified 132 genes that have 5' CpG islands, are induced 
from undetectable levels by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in multiple non-small cell
lung cancer cell lines, and are expressed in immortalized human bronchial
epithelial cells. As expected, these genes were also expressed in normal lung,
but often not in companion primary lung cancers. Methylation analysis of a subset
(45/132) of these promoter regions in primary lung cancer (n = 20) and adjacent
nonmalignant tissue (n = 20) showed that 31 genes had acquired methylation in the
tumors, but did not show methylation in normal lung or peripheral blood cells. We
studied the eight most frequently and specifically methylated genes from our lung
cancer dataset in breast cancer (n = 37), colon cancer (n = 24), and prostate
cancer (n = 24) along with counterpart nonmalignant tissues. We found that seven 
loci were frequently methylated in both breast and lung cancers, with four
showing extensive methylation in all four epithelial tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: By using a systematic biological screen we identified multiple genes
that are methylated with high penetrance in primary lung, breast, colon, and
prostate cancers. The cross-tumor methylation pattern we observed for these novel
markers suggests that we have identified a partial promoter hypermethylation
signature for these common malignancies. These data suggest that while tumors in 
different tissues vary substantially with respect to gene expression, there may
be commonalities in their promoter methylation profiles that represent targets
for early detection screening or therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC1716188
PMID: 17194187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genomics. 2007 Jan;89(1):44-58. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

The human basonuclin 2 gene has the potential to generate nearly 90,000 mRNA
isoforms encoding over 2000 different proteins.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des Saints-Pères, Université
René Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, France.

The number of mRNAs and proteins that can be produced from a single gene is known
to be increased by the number of start sites and by multiple splicing of
products. A few genes have been found to generate extraordinarily large numbers
of splicing isoforms. In the human, the largest number, nearly 2000 mRNA
isoforms, has been reported for the neurexin 3alpha gene. However, the biological
significance of alternative splicing often remains unclear because many
alternative transcripts contain early translational stops and are thought to be
rapidly degraded. We demonstrate here that human basonuclin 2 (bn2; approved gene
symbol BNC2) transcripts are initiated from six promoters, are alternatively
spliced at multiple positions, and are polyadenylated at four sites.
Characterization of nearly 100 bn2 mRNA isoforms suggests that each promoter,
splice site, and poly(A) addition site is used independently. The bn2 gene has
therefore the potential to generate up to 90,000 mRNA isoforms encoding more than
2000 different proteins. Because alternative exons affect the position of the
first methionine codon, the length of the coding region, and the position of the 
translational stop, the encoded proteins range in size from 43 to 1211 amino
acids and some bear no sequence similarity to others. PCR analysis and transient 
expression in HeLa cells show that the major bn2 mRNA isoforms are stable and are
translated into equally stable proteins, even when the mRNA bears an early
translational stop.

PMID: 16942855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 6;348(4):1261-71. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Search for basonuclin target genes.

Wang J(1), Zhang S, Schultz RM, Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Basonuclin (Bnc 1) is a transcription factor that has an unusual ability to
interact with promoters of both RNA polymerases I and II. The action of
basonuclin is mediated through three pairs of evolutionarily conserved zinc
fingers, which produce three DNase I footprints on the promoters of rDNA and the 
basonuclin gene. Using these DNase footprints, we built a computational model for
the basonuclin DNA-binding module, which was used to identify in silico potential
RNA polymerase II target genes in the human and mouse promoter databases. The
target genes of basonuclin show that it regulates the expression of proteins
involved in chromatin structure, transcription/DNA-binding, ion-channels,
adhesion/cell-cell junction, signal transduction, and intracellular transport.
Our results suggest that basonuclin, like MYC, may coordinate transcriptional
activities among the three RNA polymerases. But basonuclin regulates a
distinctive set of pathways, which differ from that regulated by MYC.

PMCID: PMC1630671
PMID: 16919236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 15;103(33):12423-8. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Basonuclins 1 and 2, whose genes share a common origin, are proteins with widely 
different properties and functions.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des
Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 75006 Paris, France.

Basonuclin (bn) 1 possesses three separated pairs of zinc fingers and a nuclear
localization signal. It is largely confined to the basal cells of stratified
squamous epithelia and to reproductive germ cells. bn1 can shuttle between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm, and its location is correlated with the proliferative 
potential of the cell. The recently discovered bn2 also possesses three separated
pairs of zinc fingers and a nuclear localization signal. Conservation of the zinc
fingers and the nuclear localization signal by bn1 and bn2 indicates a common
origin. However, in contrast to bn1, bn2 is found in virtually every cell type
and is confined to the nucleus. Bn2 but not bn1 colocalizes with SC35 in nuclear 
speckles and, therefore, is likely to have a function in nuclear processing of
mRNA.

PMCID: PMC1567895
PMID: 16891417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int Wound J. 2004 Jun;1(2):135-40.

Re-epithelialisation and the possible involvement of the transcription factor,
basonuclin.

Matsuzaki K(1), Inoue H, Kumagai N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, St Marianna University
School of Medicine, Miyamae-Ku, Kawasaki, Japan. k4matsu@marianna-u.ac.jp

This article briefly summarises the basic mechanism of re-epithelialisation and
discusses the possible role of the cell-type-specific transcription factor,
basonuclin. Re-epithelialisation is initiated by a signal resulting from the
absence of neighbouring cells at the wound edge. Basal cells at the wound edge
become flattened and lose their intercellular desmosomes and substratum
attachment. The amount of cytoplasmic actinomyosin filaments that insert into the
new adhesion complexes is increased, and contraction of those filaments produces 
cell movement. The epithelial cells at the wound edge migrate on a provisional
matrix using the newly expressed integrin receptors. Once re-epithelialisation is
complete, the epithelial cells revert to the normal phenotype of basal epidermal 
cells, firmly attach to the newly developed basement membrane zone through
hemidesmosomes and resume standard differentiation. Protein synthesis increases
in the epidermal cells at the wound edge during re-epithelialisation. Active
protein synthesis requires accelerated transcription of ribosomal RNA genes. The 
transcription factor basonuclin binds to the ribosomal RNA gene promoter and
increases the transcription of the genes. Therefore, it is speculated that
basonuclin in epithelial cells is required in the process of
re-epithelialisation.

PMID: 16722885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 2006 May;133(10):2053-62. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Basonuclin: a novel mammalian maternal-effect gene.

Ma J(1), Zeng F, Schultz RM, Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, PA 19104, USA.

Basonuclin is a zinc-finger protein found in abundance in oocytes. It qualifies
as a maternal-effect gene because the source of pre-implantation embryonic
basonuclin is maternal. Using a transgenic-RNAi approach, we knocked down
basonuclin specifically in mouse oocytes, which led to female sub-fertility.
Basonuclin deficiency in oocytes perturbed both RNA polymerase I- and II-mediated
transcription, and oocyte morphology was affected (as evidenced by cytoplasmic
and cell surface abnormalities). Some of the affected oocytes, however, could
still mature to and arrest at metaphase II, and be ovulated. Nevertheless,
fertilized basonuclin-deficient eggs failed to develop beyond the two-cell stage,
and this pre-implantation failure accounted for the sub-fertility phenotype.
These results suggest that basonuclin is a new member of the mammalian
maternal-effect genes and, interestingly, differs from the previously reported
mammalian maternal-effect genes in that it also apparently perturbs oogenesis.

PMID: 16624857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Feb;125(2):273-81.

Identification of basogranulin (BB1) as a novel immunohistochemical marker of
basophils in normal bone marrow and patients with myeloproliferative disorders.

Agis H(1), Krauth MT, Böhm A, Mosberger I, Müllauer L, Simonitsch-Klupp I, Walls 
AF, Horny HP, Valent P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

In myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), basophils typically increase in number in
the bone marrow (BM) and blood. In chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), basophilia is 
a diagnostic and prognostic variable. However, no reliable approach for routine
detection and enumeration of basophils in BM sections is available. We applied
the antibasogranulin antibody BB1 on paraffin-embedded BM sections in 21 control 
samples (normal BM), 45 patients with CML, 9 with chronic idiopathic
myelofibrosis, 11 with polycythemia vera, 19 with essential thrombocythemia, and 
7 with indolent systemic mastocytosis. As assessed by immunostaining of serial BM
sections, BB1+ cells coexpressed myeloperoxidase, histidine decarboxylase, and
leukosialin but did not express B- or T-cell-restricted antigens. BB1+ BM cells
were found to be highly elevated in patients with CML compared with normal BM or 
other MPDs, with maximum counts found in accelerated phase CML (median, 160
cells/mm(2)). In summary, BB1 (basogranulin) is a new immunohistochemical
basophil marker that should allow quantification of basophils in CML at diagnosis
and during therapy.

PMID: 16393678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 1;102(44):15797-802. Epub 2005 Oct 24.

Structure of the metal-independent restriction enzyme BfiI reveals fusion of a
specific DNA-binding domain with a nonspecific nuclease.

Grazulis S(1), Manakova E, Roessle M, Bochtler M, Tamulaitiene G, Huber R,
Siksnys V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Protein-DNA Interaction, Institute of Biotechnology, Graiciuno
8, LT-02241 Vilnius, Lithuania. grazulis@ibt.lt

Among all restriction endonucleases known to date, BfiI is unique in cleaving DNA
in the absence of metal ions. BfiI represents a different evolutionary lineage of
restriction enzymes, as shown by its crystal structure at 1.9-A resolution. The
protein consists of two structural domains. The N-terminal catalytic domain is
similar to Nuc, an EDTA-resistant nuclease from the phospholipase D superfamily. 
The C-terminal DNA-binding domain of BfiI exhibits a beta-barrel-like structure
very similar to the effector DNA-binding domain of the Mg(2+)-dependent
restriction enzyme EcoRII and to the B3-like DNA-binding domain of plant
transcription factors. BfiI presumably evolved through domain fusion of a
DNA-recognition element to a nonspecific nuclease akin to Nuc and elaborated a
mechanism to limit DNA cleavage to a single double-strand break near the specific
recognition sequence. The crystal structure suggests that the interdomain linker 
may act as an autoinhibitor controlling BfiI catalytic activity in the absence of
a specific DNA sequence. A psi-blast search identified a BfiI homologue in a
Mesorhizobium sp. BNC1 bacteria strain, a plant symbiont isolated from an
EDTA-rich environment.

PMCID: PMC1266039
PMID: 16247004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2005 Apr;45(2):195-200.

[Cloning, deletion and functional analysis of noeA from Sinorhizobium meliloti
042BM].

[Article in Chinese]

Du BH(1), Jiang JQ, Li XH, Wang L, Yang SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Microbial Resources and Application of Agriculture
Ministry, Department of Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China.

042BM noeA was obtained by PCR. It is identical to that of S. meliloti 1021 at
99% level, and similarity of their NoeA is 97%. In addition, it was found that
this protein shares significant homology with the SAM-dependent methyltransferase
of Mesorhizobium sp. BNC1 (32% similarity), and the similarity of its 303-362
region to the 160- 220 region of Ll11 methyltransferases of E. coli (PrmA) is
41%. Compared to 042BM, the noeA deletion mutant 042BMA-Km showed different
degrees of increase in number of nodule, fresh weight of nodule and plant top dry
weight on alfalfa cultivars of Putong Zihua, Baoding, Ningxia, Baifa and Aohan,
but decrease on Milu. However, this mutant has no significant change in ability
to nodulate cultivars of Huanghou and Zahua. Hence, noeA is involved in alfalfa
cultivar-specific nodulation.

PMID: 15989259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5651-8.

Gli proteins up-regulate the expression of basonuclin in Basal cell carcinoma.

Cui C(1), Elsam T, Tian Q, Seykora JT, Grachtchouk M, Dlugosz A, Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Tumorigenesis is frequently accompanied by enhanced rRNA transcription, but the
signaling mechanisms responsible for such enhancement remain unclear. Here, we
report evidence suggesting a novel link between deregulated Hedgehog signaling
and the augmented rRNA transcription in cancer. Aberrant activation of the
Hedgehog pathway in keratinocytes is a hallmark of basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
the most common cancer in light-skinned individuals. We show that Gli proteins,
downstream effectors of the Hedgehog pathway, increase expression of a novel rRNA
gene (rDNA) transcription factor, basonuclin, whose expression is markedly
elevated in BCCs. The promoter of the human basonuclin gene contains a
Gli-binding site, which is required for Gli protein binding and transcriptional
activation. We show also that the level of 47S pre-rRNA is much higher in BCCs
than in normal epidermis, suggesting an accelerated rRNA transcription in the
neoplastic cells. Within BCC, those cells expressing the highest level of
basonuclin also exhibit the greatest increase in 47S pre-rRNA, consistent with a 
role for basonuclin in increasing rRNA transcription in these cells. Our data
suggest that Hedgehog-Gli pathway enhances rRNA transcription in BCC by
increasing basonuclin gene expression.

PMID: 15313903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 9;101(10):3468-73. Epub 2004 Feb 26.

Basonuclin 2: an extremely conserved homolog of the zinc finger protein
basonuclin.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des
Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 75006 Paris, France.

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein specific to basal keratinocytes and germ
cells. In keratinocytes, basonuclin behaves as a stem cell marker and is thought 
to be a transcription factor that maintains proliferative capacity and prevents
terminal differentiation. The human gene is located on chromosome 15. We have
discovered in the chicken the existence of basonuclin 2, a basonuclin homolog. We
also report the entire sequence of mouse and human basonuclin 2; the
corresponding genes are located on mouse chromosome 4 and human chromosome 9.
Although the amino acid sequence of basonuclin 2 differs extensively from that of
basonuclin 1, the two proteins share essential features. Both contain three
paired zinc fingers, a nuclear localization signal, and a serine stripe. The
basonuclin 2 mRNA has a wider tissue distribution than the basonuclin 1 mRNA: it 
is particularly abundant in testis, kidney, uterus, and intestine. The extreme
conservation of the basonuclin 2 amino acid sequence across vertebrates suggests 
that basonuclin 2 serves an important function, presumably as a regulatory
protein of DNA transcription.

PMCID: PMC373485
PMID: 14988505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2002 Oct 1;254(1):158-64.

Study of the catalytic behavior of montmorillonite/iron(III) and Mn(III) cationic
porphyrins.

Machado AM(1), Wypych F, Drechsel SM, Nakagaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal do Paraná, C.P. 19081, CEP,
Curitiba, PR, 81531-990, Brazil.

Two samples of montmorillonite (one of Brazilian origin, BNC1 clay, and the other
STX-1, supplied by the Clay Mineral Society Repository (University of Missouri,
USA) were allowed to react with biomimetic metalloporphyrins of Fe(III) and
Mn(III) in cationic form. The compounds were characterized by several techniques,
showing that the metalloporphyrins molecules were adsorbed at the surface of the 
clay platelet crystals. The catalytic activities of the intercalated complexes
for the oxidation of alkane were dependent upon the concentration of the
porphyrin immobilized in the clay and factors such as the metal ion species in
the porphyrins, choice of solvent, and concentration of the iodosylbenzene
oxidant. Good selectivity to cyclohexanol instead of cyclohexanone was observed
for the catalytic oxidation of cyclohexane by iodosylbenzene.

PMID: 12702437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Feb 19;99(4):2338-43.

Heteromultimers of DEG/ENaC subunits form H+-gated channels in mouse sensory
neurons.

Benson CJ(1), Xie J, Wemmie JA, Price MP, Henss JM, Welsh MJ, Snyder PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Psychiatry, and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
chris-benson@uiowa.edu

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4752.

Acidic extracellular solution activates transient H(+)-gated currents in dorsal
root ganglion (DRG) neurons. The biophysical properties of three
degenerin/epithelial sodium (DEG/ENaC) channel subunits (BNC1, ASIC, and DRASIC),
and their expression in DRG, suggest that they might underlie these H(+)-gated
currents and function as sensory transducers. However, it is uncertain which of
these DEG/ENaC subunits generate the currents, and whether they function as
homomultimers or heteromultimers. We found that the biophysical properties of
transient H(+)-gated currents from medium to large mouse DRG neurons differed
from BNC1, ASIC, or DRASIC expressed individually, but were reproduced by
coexpression of the subunits together. To test the contribution of each subunit, 
we studied DRG from three strains of mice, each bearing a targeted disruption of 
BNC1, ASIC, or DRASIC. Deletion of any one subunit did not abolish H(+)-gated
currents, but altered currents in a manner consistent with heteromultimerization 
of the two remaining subunits. These data indicate that combinations of two or
more DEG/ENaC subunits coassemble as heteromultimers to generate transient
H(+)-gated currents in mouse DRG neurons.

PMCID: PMC122366
PMID: 11854527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 1;361(Pt 3):443-50.

Interaction of the synaptic protein PICK1 (protein interacting with C kinase 1)
with the non-voltage gated sodium channels BNC1 (brain Na+ channel 1) and ASIC
(acid-sensing ion channel).

Hruska-Hageman AM(1), Wemmie JA, Price MP, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, U.S.A.

Neuronal members of the degenerin/epithelial Na(+) channel (DEG/ENaC) family of
cation channels include the mammalian brain Na(+) channel 1 (BNC1), acid-sensing 
ion channel (ASIC) and dorsal-root acid-sensing ion channel (DRASIC). Their
response to acidic pH, their sequence similarity to nematode proteins involved in
mechanotransduction and their modulation by neuropeptides suggest that they may
function as receptors for a number of different stimuli. Using the yeast
two-hybrid assay, we found that the PDZ domain-containing protein PICK1 (protein 
interacting with C kinase) interacts specifically with the C-termini of BNC1 and 
ASIC, but not DRASIC or the related alphaENaC or betaENaC. In both the yeast
two-hybrid system and mammalian cells, deletion of the BNC1 and ASIC C-termini
abolished the interaction with PICK1. Likewise, mutating the PDZ domain in PICK1 
abolished its interaction with BNC1 and ASIC. In addition, in a heterologous
expression system PICK1 altered the distribution of BNC1 channels; this effect
was dependent on the PDZ domain of PICK1 and the C-terminus of BNC1. We found
crude synaptosomal fractions of brain to be enriched in ASIC, suggesting a
possible synaptic localization. Moreover, in transfected hippocampal neurons ASIC
co-localized with PICK1 in a punctate pattern at synapses. These data suggest
that PICK1 binds ASIC and BNC1 via its PDZ domain. This interaction may be
important for the localization and/or function of these channels in both the
central and peripheral nervous systems.

PMCID: PMC1222326
PMID: 11802773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 22;98(11):6459-63. Epub 2001 May 15.

DEG/ENaC ion channels involved in sensory transduction are modulated by cold
temperature.

Askwith CC(1), Benson CJ, Welsh MJ, Snyder PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Several DEG/ENaC cation channel subunits are expressed in the tongue and in
cutaneous sensory neurons, where they are postulated to function as receptors for
salt and sour taste and for touch. Because these tissues are exposed to large
temperature variations, we examined how temperature affects DEG/ENaC channel
function. We found that cold temperature markedly increased the constitutively
active Na(+) currents generated by epithelial Na(+) channels (ENaC). Half-maximal
stimulation occurred at 25 degrees C. Cold temperature did not induce current
from other DEG/ENaC family members (BNC1, ASIC, and DRASIC). However, when these 
channels were activated by acid, cold temperature potentiated the currents by
slowing the rate of desensitization. Potentiation was abolished by a "Deg"
mutation that alters channel gating. Temperature changes in the physiologic range
had prominent effects on current in cells heterologously expressing acid-gated
DEG/ENaC channels, as well as in dorsal root ganglion sensory neurons. The
finding that cold temperature modulates DEG/ENaC channel function may provide a
molecular explanation for the widely recognized ability of temperature to modify 
taste sensation and mechanosensation.

PMCID: PMC33490
PMID: 11353858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Feb;67(2):696-701.

Identification, purification, and characterization of iminodiacetate oxidase from
the EDTA-degrading bacterium BNC1.

Liu Y(1), Louie TM, Payne J, Bohuslavek J, Bolton H Jr, Xun L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164-4234, USA.

Microbial degradation of synthetic chelating agents, such as EDTA and
nitrilotriacetate (NTA), may help immobilizing radionuclides and heavy metals in 
the environment. The EDTA- and NTA-degrading bacterium BNC1 uses EDTA
monooxygenase to oxidize NTA to iminodiacetate (IDA) and EDTA to
ethylenediaminediacetate (EDDA). IDA- and EDDA-degrading enzymes have not been
purified and characterized to date. In this report, an IDA oxidase was purified
to apparent homogeneity from strain BNC1 by using a combination of eight
purification steps. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
revealed a single protein band of 40 kDa, and by using size exclusion
chromatography, we estimated the native enzyme to be a homodimer. Flavin adenine 
dinucleotide was determined as its prosthetic group. The purified enzyme oxidized
IDA to glycine and glyoxylate with the consumption of O2. The temperature and pH 
optima for IDA oxidation were 35 degrees C and 8, respectively. The apparent Km
for IDA was 4.0 mM with a kcat of 5.3 s(-1). When the N-terminal amino acid
sequence was determined, it matched exactly with that encoded by a previously
sequenced hypothetical oxidase gene of BNC1. The gene was expressed in
Escherichia coli, and the gene product as a C-terminal fusion with a His tag was 
purified by a one-step nickel affinity chromatography. The purified fusion
protein had essentially the same enzymatic activity and properties as the native 
IDA oxidase. IDA oxidase also oxidized EDDA to ethylenediamine and glyoxylate.
Thus, IDA oxidase is likely the second enzyme in both NTA and EDTA degradation
pathways in strain BNC1.

PMCID: PMC92637
PMID: 11157233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Feb;67(2):688-95.

Cloning, sequencing, and characterization of a gene cluster involved in EDTA
degradation from the bacterium BNC1.

Bohuslavek J(1), Payne JW, Liu Y, Bolton H Jr, Xun L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164, USA.

EDTA is a chelating agent, widely used in many industries. Because of its ability
to mobilize heavy metals and radionuclides, it can be an environmental pollutant.
The EDTA monooxygenases that initiate EDTA degradation have been purified and
characterized in bacterial strains BNC1 and DSM 9103. However, the genes encoding
the enzymes have not been reported. The EDTA monooxygenase gene was cloned by
probing a genomic library of strain BNC1 with a probe generated from the
N-terminal amino acid sequence of the monooxygenase. Sequencing of the cloned DNA
fragment revealed a gene cluster containing eight genes. Two of the genes, emoA
and emoB, were expressed in Escherichia coli, and the gene products, EmoA and
EmoB, were purified and characterized. Both experimental data and sequence
analysis showed that EmoA is a reduced flavin mononucleotide-utilizing
monooxygenase and that EmoB is an NADH:flavin mononucleotide oxidoreductase. The 
two-enzyme system oxidized EDTA to ethylenediaminediacetate (EDDA) and
nitrilotriacetate (NTA) to iminodiacetate (IDA) with the production of
glyoxylate. The emoA and emoB genes were cotranscribed when BNC1 cells were grown
on EDTA. Other genes in the cluster encoded a hypothetical transport system, a
putative regulatory protein, and IDA oxidase that oxidizes IDA and EDDA. We
concluded that this gene cluster is responsible for the initial steps of EDTA and
NTA degradation.

PMCID: PMC92636
PMID: 11157232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2001 Feb;128(3):407-16.

Function of basonuclin in increasing transcription of the ribosomal RNA genes
during mouse oogenesis.

Tian Q(1), Kopf GS, Brown RS, Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Active protein synthesis during early oogenesis requires accelerated
transcription of ribosomal RNA genes (rDNAs). In response to this demand, rDNAs
are amplified more than 1000-fold early in Xenopus oogenesis. Here, we report
evidence that rDNA is not amplified in mouse oocytes, but these cells may instead
employ the zinc-finger protein basonuclin, a putative rDNA transcription factor, 
to enhance rRNA synthesis. This conclusion is based on observations that
basonuclin is localized in the nucleolus in the mouse oocyte early in its growth 
phase, when rRNA transcription is highly active; and that the binding sites of
basonuclin zinc fingers on the human and mouse rDNA promoters are homologous. In 
a co-transfection assay, basonuclin can elevate transcription from an rDNA
promoter, and its zinc-finger domain can inhibit RNA polymerase I transcription, 
as detected by a run-on assay, in growing mouse oocytes.

PMID: 11152639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nature. 2000 Oct 26;407(6807):1007-11.

The mammalian sodium channel BNC1 is required for normal touch sensation.

Price MP(1), Lewin GR, McIlwrath SL, Cheng C, Xie J, Heppenstall PA, Stucky CL,
Mannsfeldt AG, Brennan TJ, Drummond HA, Qiao J, Benson CJ, Tarr DE, Hrstka RF,
Yang B, Williamson RA, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 2002 Jul 18;418(6895):352.

Of the vertebrate senses, touch is the least understood at the molecular level
The ion channels that form the core of the mechanosensory complex and confer
touch sensitivity remain unknown. However, the similarity of the brain sodium
channel 1 (BNC1) to nematode proteins involved in mechanotransduction indicated
that it might be a part of such a mechanosensor. Here we show that disrupting the
mouse BNC1 gene markedly reduces the sensitivity of a specific component of
mechanosensation: low-threshold rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors. In rodent
hairy skin these mechanoreceptors are excited by hair movement. Consistent with
this function, we found BNC1 in the lanceolate nerve endings that lie adjacent to
and surround the hair follicle. Although BNC1 has been proposed to have a role in
pH sensing, the acid-evoked current in cultured sensory neurons and the response 
of acid-stimulated nociceptors were normal in BNC1 null mice. These data identify
the BNC1 channel as essential for the normal detection of light touch and
indicate that BNC1 may be a central component of a mechanosensory complex.

PMID: 11069180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Exp Dermatol. 2000 Jun;9(3):178-84.

Alternative subcellular locations of keratinocyte basonuclin.

Iuchi S(1), Easley K, Matsuzaki K, Weiner L, O'Connor N, Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein present in the basal cell layer of the
epidermis and in hair follicles. Human basal epidermal cells are often
heterogeneous with respect to a nuclear or cytoplasmic location of basonuclin and
the protein may be concentrated in either compartment. In mouse and rat
epidermis, although clusters of basonuclin may be seen in some basal cell nuclei,
the protein is mainly concentrated in the cytoplasm. When epidermis whose basal
cells contain predominantly cytoplasmic basonuclin is disaggregated and the cells
are cultivated in the presence of supporting 3T3 cells, the basonuclin of the
growing keratinocyte colonies is strongly concentrated in the cell nuclei.
Transfer of the cells to culture medium without supporting 3T3 cells results in a
predominantly cytoplasmic concentration of the basonuclin. This translocation is 
reversible, since addition of supporting 3T3 cells restores most basonuclin to
the nucleus. The nuclear location is associated with more rapid cell growth. We
conclude that different states of the keratinocyte require greater or less
activity of basonuclin, and the subcellular location of the protein is probably
related to the magnitude of its action on the cells.

PMID: 10839715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Differentiation. 1999 Dec;65(4):221-7.

Basonuclin in murine corneal and lens epithelia correlates with cellular
maturation and proliferative ability.

Tseng H(1), Matsuzaki K, Lavker RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein with highly restricted tissue distribution.
It has been found in abundance only in keratinocytes of stratified epithelia and 
the germ cells of the testis and ovary. We studied the expression pattern of
basonuclin in relation to cellular proliferation and differentiation in murine
corneal and lens epithelia, two self-renewing tissues in the eye which contain
cells that proliferate throughout life. Mouse corneal and lens epithelial cells
at various stages of development were labeled with BrdU for 90 min to detect
cells in S phase and to establish proliferative rates. Whole eyes of mouse or rat
were processed for frozen sections and cellular basonuclin was detected by either
a rabbit antimouse- or a rabbit anti-human-basonuclin antibody. Basonuclin was
expressed in virtually all cells in the basal layer of corneal epithelium and in 
the pre-equatorial lens epithelium, the respective proliferative compartments of 
adult corneal and lens epithelia. Basonuclin expression in corneal epithelium
began at post-natal life day 4, first in a few cells and then spread to virtually
all basal cells at day 20. Basonuclin was consistently absent in limbal
epithelium. Lens basonuclin, which was detected earlier than that of the cornea, 
was confined to the pre-equatorial epithelium and was absent in equatorial cells 
that expressed p57KIP2, an early differentiation marker for these cells. An
important distinction between corneal and lens basonuclin is that the former is
predominantly nuclear whereas the latter cytoplasmic.

PMID: 10653358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):35-44.

A GC-rich sequence within the 5' untranslated region of human basonuclin mRNA
inhibits its translation.

Tang W(1), Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104, USA.

By the method of RNase protection, the 5' ends of the basonuclin mRNA were mapped
to four sites distributed over 400 bases of the genomic sequence, a result
implying four different basonuclin transcripts within the cell. Despite the
heterogeneity at the 5' end, all four basonuclin mRNA shared the same translation
initiation codon. However, only two transcripts contained, in their 5'
untranslated region (UTR), a GC-rich sequence of approx. 180 bases. The ability
of this GC-rich sequence to form a large and stable secondary structure was
suggested by experimental results from primer extension, RNase resistance, and
computer analysis of the sequence. In vitro study showed that translation of
basonuclin RNA containing this putative structure could not be initiated
efficiently from the first two AUGs, whereas those that lacked it could.

PMID: 10524234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Cell Sci. 1999 Sep;112 Pt 18:3039-47.

Basonuclin is associated with the ribosomal RNA genes on human keratinocyte
mitotic chromosomes.

Tseng H(1), Biegel JA, Brown RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cancer Center, and Division of Human Genetics,
the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
htsengpe@mail.med

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein mainly expressed in keratinocytes of the
basal layer of epidermis and the outer root sheath of hair follicles. It is also 
found in abundance in the germ cells of testis and ovary. In cultured
keratinocytes, basonuclin is associated with chromatin in all phases of the cell 
cycle, including mitosis. By immunocytochemical methods, we demonstrate here that
in mitosis basonuclin is associated with the short arms of the acrocentric
chromosomes and with other loci on many metaphase chromosomes of human
keratinocytes. Using the evolutionarily highly conserved N-terminal pair of zinc 
fingers in an electrophoresis mobility shift assay, we demonstrate that the DNA
target sequences of basonuclin on the acrocentric chromosomes are likely to be
within the promoter region of the 45S rRNA gene transcription unit. DNase I
footprinting shows that basonuclin zinc fingers interact with the upstream
control element of this promoter, which is necessary for the high level of
transcription of the rRNA genes. This result suggests that basonuclin may be a
tissue-specific transcription factor for the ribosomal RNA genes.

PMID: 10462520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 17;96(17):9628-32.

Basonuclin, a zinc finger protein of keratinocytes and reproductive germ cells,
binds to the rRNA gene promoter.

Iuchi S(1), Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue,
Boston MA 02115, USA.

Basonuclin is a protein containing three pairs of C(2)H(2) zinc fingers. The
protein has been found in the basal (germinal) cell layer of stratified squamous 
epithelia, such as the epidermis, and in germ cells of the testis and ovary. We
show here that the human protein has specific affinity for a segment of the
promoter of the gene for rRNA. Basonuclin interacts with two separate parts of
the promoter, each possessing dyad symmetry. The upstream part, but not the
downstream part, is known to bind UBF1, a transcription factor for rDNA.
Basonuclin is likely to be a cell-type-specific regulatory protein for rDNA
transcription.

PMCID: PMC22260
PMID: 10449744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 28;274(22):15500-4.

Paradoxical stimulation of a DEG/ENaC channel by amiloride.

Adams CM(1), Snyder PM, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine and
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City,
Iowa 52242, USA.

Extracellular amiloride inhibits all known DEG/ENaC ion channels, including BNC1,
a proton-activated human neuronal cation channel. Earlier studies showed that
protons cause a conformational change that activates BNC1 and exposes residue 430
to the extracellular solution. Here we demonstrate that, in addition to blocking 
BNC1, amiloride also exposes residue 430. This result suggested that, like
protons, amiloride might be capable of activating the channel. To test this
hypothesis, we introduced a mutation in the BNC1 pore that reduces amiloride
block, and found that amiloride stimulated these channels. Amiloride inhibition
was voltage-dependent, suggesting block within the pore, whereas stimulation was 
not, suggesting binding to an extracellular site. These data show that amiloride 
can have two distinct effects on BNC1, and they suggest two different interaction
sites. The results suggest that extracellular amiloride binding may have a
stimulatory effect similar to that of protons in BNC1 or extracellular ligands in
other DEG/ENaC channels.

PMID: 10336442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biophys J. 1999 Mar;76(3):1377-83.

Tetraethylammonium block of the BNC1 channel.

Adams CM(1), Price MP, Snyder PM, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Internal Medicine and
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City,
Iowa 52242 USA.

The brain Na+ channel-1 (BNC1, also known as MDEG1 or ASIC2) is a member of the
DEG/ENaC cation channel family. Mutation of a specific residue (Gly430) that lies
N-terminal to the second membrane-spanning domain activates BNC1 and converts it 
from a Na+-selective channel to one permeable to both Na+ and K+. Because all K+ 
channels are blocked by tetraethylammonium (TEA), we asked if TEA would inhibit
BNC1 with a mutation at residue 430. External TEA blocked BNC1 when residue 430
was a Val or a Thr. Block was steeply voltage-dependent and was reduced when
current was outward, suggesting multi-ion block within the channel pore. Block
was dependent on the size of the quaternary ammonium; the smaller
tetramethylammonium blocked with similar properties, whereas the larger
tetrapropylammonium had little effect. When residue 430 was Phe, the effects of
tetramethylammonium and tetrapropylammonium were not altered. In contrast, block 
by TEA was much less voltage-dependent, suggesting that the Phe mutation
introduced a new TEA binding site located approximately 30% of the way across the
electric field. These results provide insight into the structure and function of 
BNC1 and suggest that TEA may be a useful tool to probe function of this channel 
family.

PMCID: PMC1300116
PMID: 10049320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Differentiation. 1998 Sep;63(5):263-72.

Basonuclin as a cell marker in the formation and cycling of the murine hair
follicle.

Weiner L(1), Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Basonuclin, a zinc-finger protein, is found in stratified squamous epithelia and 
hair follicles. In the basal keratinocytes of mouse epidermis, basonuclin is
detected mainly in the cytoplasm. During the development of murine hair
follicles, this protein concentrates in the nuclei of the basal cells that form
the primary hair germs. As follicle morphogenesis proceeds, the epithelial cells 
possessing nuclear basonuclin invade the dermis and surround the follicular
papilla. In mature anagen follicles, nuclear basonuclin is principally restricted
to the basal layers of the outer root sheath and bulbar matrix; these regions are
known to contain cells capable of proliferation, and to lack the features of
terminal differentiation. During catagen, the compartment of cells containing
nuclear basonuclin regresses, and in telogen, only a small number of these cells 
remain to form the secondary hair germ at the follicle base. During the next
anagen, this basonuclin-containing population expands and regenerates the
hair-producing portion of the follicle. It is concluded that in all hair cycles, 
the transient segment of the follicle originates from germinative cells
possessing nuclear basonuclin.

PMID: 9810705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 13;273(46):30204-7.

Protons activate brain Na+ channel 1 by inducing a conformational change that
exposes a residue associated with neurodegeneration.

Adams CM(1), Snyder PM, Price MP, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Departments of Internal Medicine and
Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City,
Iowa 52242, USA.

BNC1 is a mammalian neuronal cation channel in the novel DEG/ENaC ion channel
family. BNC1 channels are transiently activated by extracellular protons and are 
constitutively activated by insertion of large residues, such as valine, in place
of Gly-430; residue 430 is a site where analogous mutations in some
Caenorhabditis elegans family members cause a swelling neurodegeneration.
Mutation of Gly-430 to a small amino acid, cysteine, neither generated
constitutive currents nor allowed modification of this residue by
sulfhydryl-reactive methanethiosulfonate (MTS) compounds. However, when protons
activated the channel, Cys-430 became accessible to extracellular MTS reagents,
which modified Cys-430 to generate constitutive currents. Fluorescent MTS
reagents also labeled Cys-430 in activated channels. These data indicate that
protons induce a reversible conformational change that activates BNC1 thereby
exposing residue 430 to the extracellular solution. Once Cys-430 is modified with
a large chemical group, the channel is prevented from relaxing back to the
inactive state. These results link ligand-dependent activation and activation by 
mutations that cause neurodegeneration.

PMID: 9804777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Front Biosci. 1998 Sep 1;3:D985-8.

Basonuclin, a zinc finger protein associated with epithelial expansion and
proliferation.

Tseng H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein first described as a keratinoycte specific
protein present in various stratified squamous epithelia found in epidermis,
esophagis, cornea and virgina. Recent studies showed that its distribution also
includes the germ cells of testis and ovary. The presence of basonuclin appeared 
always related to the cellular proliferative ability not just cell division, for 
it was found both in dividing and quiescent cells. Basonuclin disappeared when a 
cell became post-mitotic. This review examines the latest findings about the
distribution, molecular and cellular biology of basonuclin and discusses its
possible role in cell proliferation.

PMID: 9727087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biol Reprod. 1998 Aug;59(2):388-94.

Translocation of the zinc finger protein basonuclin from the mouse germ cell
nucleus to the midpiece of the spermatozoon during spermiogenesis.

Mahoney MG(1), Tang W, Xiang MM, Moss SB, Gerton GL, Stanley JR, Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Basonuclin was first described as a human keratinocyte zinc finger protein
present in the nuclei of proliferative basal keratinocytes in the epidermis. It
disappears from keratinocytes that have lost their proliferative ability and have
entered terminal differentiation. We now report that basonuclin is present also
in the germ cells of the mouse testis and ovary. Immunocytochemical staining
detected basonuclin in the nuclei of spermatogonia and spermatocytes at various
developmental stages. During spermiogenesis, it relocated from the nucleus to the
midpiece of the flagellum of the spermatozoa. In the ovary, basonuclin was found 
mainly in the nuclei of developing oocytes. The dual presence of basonuclin in
differentiated spermatozoa and oocytes suggests that it may play a role in their 
differentiation and the early development of an embryo.

PMID: 9687312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Bacteriol. 1998 Aug;180(15):3823-7.

Purification and characterization of EDTA monooxygenase from the EDTA-degrading
bacterium BNC1.

Payne JW(1), Bolton H Jr, Campbell JA, Xun L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington
99164-4233, USA.

Erratum in
    J Bacteriol 1998 Nov;180(21):5808.

The synthetic chelating agent EDTA can mobilize radionuclides and heavy metals in
the environment. Biodegradation of EDTA should reduce this mobilization. Although
several bacteria have been reported to mineralize EDTA, little is known about the
biochemistry of EDTA degradation. Understanding the biochemistry will facilitate 
the removal of EDTA from the environment. EDTA-degrading activities were detected
in cell extracts of bacterium BNC1 when flavin mononucleotide (FMN), NADH, and O2
were present. The degradative enzyme system was separated into two different
enzymes, EDTA monooxygenase and an FMN reductase. EDTA monooxygenase oxidized
EDTA to glyoxylate and ethylenediaminetriacetate (ED3A), with the coconsumption
of FMNH2 and O2. The FMN reductase provided EDTA monooxygenase with FMNH2 by
reducing FMN with NADH. The FMN reductase was successfully substituted in the
assay mixture by other FMN reductases. EDTA monooxygenase was purified to greater
than 95% homogeneity and had a single polypeptide with a molecular weight of
45,000. The enzyme oxidized both EDTA complexed with various metal ions and
uncomplexed EDTA. The optimal conditions for activity were pH 7.8 and 35
degreesC. Kms were 34.1 microM for uncomplexed EDTA and 8.5 microM for MgEDTA2-; 
this difference in Km indicates that the enzyme has greater affinity for
MgEDTA2-. The enzyme also catalyzed the release of glyoxylate from
nitrilotriacetate and diethylenetriaminepentaacetate. EDTA monooxygenase belongs 
to a small group of FMNH2-utilizing monooxygenases that attack carbon-nitrogen,
carbon-sulfur, and carbon-carbon double bonds.

PMCID: PMC107365
PMID: 9683478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):681-4.

Electrophysiological and biochemical evidence that DEG/ENaC cation channels are
composed of nine subunits.

Snyder PM(1), Cheng C, Prince LS, Rogers JC, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Members of the DEG/ENaC protein family form ion channels with diverse functions. 
DEG/ENaC subunits associate as hetero- and homomultimers to generate channels;
however the stoichiometry of these complexes is unknown. To determine the subunit
stoichiometry of the human epithelial Na+ channel (hENaC), we expressed the three
wild-type hENaC subunits (alpha, beta, and gamma) with subunits containing
mutations that alter channel inhibition by methanethiosulfonates. The data
indicate that hENaC contains three alpha, three beta, and three gamma subunits.
Sucrose gradient sedimentation of alphahENaC translated in vitro, as well as
alpha-, beta-, and gammahENaC coexpressed in cells, was consistent with complexes
containing nine subunits. FaNaCh and BNC1, two related DEG/ENaC channels,
produced complexes of similar mass. Our results suggest a novel nine-subunit
stoichiometry for the DEG/ENaC family of ion channels.

PMID: 9422716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Gene. 1997 Aug 11;195(1):87-92.

Conservation of human and mouse basonuclins as a guide to important features of
the protein.

Matsuzaki K(1), Iuchi S, Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The nucleotide sequence of mouse basonuclin has been determined from its cDNA by 
PCR and compared with the previously known sequence of human basonuclin. Overall,
there is 88% identity in the encoded amino acid sequences, but some regions have 
been much more conserved than others. Zinc fingers 2 and 6, the region containing
the nuclear localization signal and the region containing the serine stripe
encode identical amino acid sequences in the two species, but differ by numerous 
silent nucleotide substitutions, suggesting that these regions are likely to be
important for the functions of the protein common to the two species. Similarly, 
zinc fingers 1 and 5 diverge at only a single amino acid residue. In contrast,
other regions of the sequence have diverged considerably, such as zinc fingers 3 
and 4. The region adjacent to the N-terminus is very divergent and this aids in
locating the translation start site. The highly conserved regions are likely to
be essential for the common function of the proteins, and the more divergent
regions may be either unconstrained or adapted to different requirements in the
two species.

PMID: 9300825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 22;94(15):7948-53.

Nuclear localization of basonuclin in human keratinocytes and the role of
phosphorylation.

Iuchi S(1), Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue,
Boston MA 02115, USA.

Basonuclin is a zinc-finger protein found in basal cells of the epidermis. In
human keratinocyte cultures, basonuclin is susceptible to serine-phosphorylation 
and the addition of the phosphatase inhibitor, okadaic acid, promotes
accumulation of basonuclin in the cytoplasm. The region of basonuclin containing 
the nuclear localization signal of basonuclin is necessary for nuclear
localization of the protein and Ser-541, located immediately C-terminal to the
nuclear localization signal, is the principal phosphorylation site in vitro. A
nearly complete basonuclin transiently expressed in cultured keratinocytes
localizes predominantly in the nucleus, but substitution of aspartic acid for
Ser-541 promotes cytoplasmic localization. The same substitution of Ser-537 has a
similar but weaker effect. Substitution of both serine residues by alanine leads 
to nuclear localization. These results show that nuclear localization of
basonuclin depends on serine dephosphorylation, primarily of Ser-541. Different
subcellular locations of basonuclin in different keratinocyte subtypes are
therefore most likely to be controlled by the state of phosphorylation of
Ser-541.

PMCID: PMC21535
PMID: 9223293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Cell Biol. 1997 May 5;137(3):657-69.

An unexpected localization of basonuclin in the centrosome, mitochondria, and
acrosome of developing spermatids.

Yang Z(1), Gallicano GI, Yu QC, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein that was thought to be restricted to
keratinocytes of stratified squamous epithelia. In epidermis, basonuclin is
associated with the nuclei of mitotically active basal cells but not in
terminally differentiating keratinocytes. We report here the isolation of a novel
form of basonuclin, which we show is also expressed in stratified epithelia. Most
unexpectedly, we find both forms in testis, where a surprising localization
pattern was uncovered. While basonuclin RNA expression occurs in mitotically
active germ cells, protein was not detected until the meiotic stage, where
basonuclin localized to the appendage of the distal centriole of spermatocytes
and spermatids. Near the end of spermiogenesis, basonuclin also accumulated in
the acrosome and mitochondrial sheath surrounding the flagellum. Intriguingly, a 
perfect six-amino acid residue mitochondrial targeting sequence (Komiya, T., N.
Hachiya, M. Sakaguchi, T. Omura, and K. Mihara. 1994. J. Biol. Chem.
269:30893-30897; Shore, G.C., H.M. McBride, D.G. Millar, N.A. Steenaart, and M.
Nguyen. 1995. Eur. J. Biochem. 227: 9-18; McBride, H.M., I.S. Goping, and G.C.
Shore. 1996. J. Cell. Biol. 134:307-313) is present in basonuclin 1a but not in
the 1b form. Moreover, three distinct affinity-purified peptide antibodies gave
this unusual pattern of basonuclin antibody staining, which was confirmed by cell
fractionation studies. Our findings suggest a unique role for basonuclin in
centrosomes within the developing spermatid, and a role for one of the protein
forms in germ cell mitochondrial function. Its localization with the acrosome
suggests that it may also perform a special function during or shortly after
fertilization.

PMCID: PMC2139879
PMID: 9151672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 1997 Mar 25;188(1):1-7.

The human basonuclin gene.

Teumer J(1), Tseng H, Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The human gene for basonuclin, a zinc-finger protein of keratinocytes, has been
cloned, sequenced and assigned to chromosome 15. The transcription unit spans
nearly 29 kb of sequence. The coding region is distributed over five exons, and
the three pairs of zinc fingers are encoded by the last two. The 5' flanking
sequence and first exon are unusually rich in G+C and in CpG dinucleotides. This 
region contains numerous target sites for the transcription factor Sp1.

PMID: 9099851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):7879-82.

Cloning and expression of a novel human brain Na+ channel.

Price MP(1), Snyder PM, Welsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

We have cloned a novel cDNA from human brain which encodes a
non-voltage-dependent Na+ channel (BNC1). BNC1 has some sequence similarity
(24-28%) with a new channel family that includes subunits of the mammalian
epithelial Na+ channel, the Caenorhabditis elegans degenerins, and the Helix
aspersa FMRF-amide-gated Na+ channel. Like other family members it is inhibited
by amiloride. However, its predicted structure differs from other family members,
its discrimination between Na+ and Li+ is different, and in contrast to other
mammalian family members, coexpression with other cloned subunits of the family
does not increase current. BNC1 has a unique pattern of expression with
transcripts detected only in adult human brain and in spinal cord. Thus, BNC1 is 
the first cloned member of a new subfamily of mammalian Na+ channels. The
function of BNC1 as a non-voltage-gated Na+ channel in human brain suggests it
may play a novel role in neurotransmission.

PMID: 8626462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Plant Cell Rep. 1994 Dec;14(2-3):125-30. doi: 10.1007/BF00233775.

Far upstream activating promoter regions are responsible for expression of the
BnC1 cruciferin gene from Brassica napus.

Bilodeau P(1), Lafontaine JG, Bellemare G.

Author information: 
(1)Departement de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences et de Génie, Université Laval, 
G1K 7P4, Québec (Québec), Canada.

Cruciferin is the major seed storage protein in Brassica napus. As much as 1.9
kbp of the BnC1 cruciferin gene promoter have been sequenced and analyzed.
Promoter fragments with 5' deletions from -2500 to -v202 were fused with the
ß-glucuronidase reporter gene and used for Nicotiana tabacum transformation.
ß-glucuronidase could be specifically expressed in transgenic tobacco seeds under
the control of the BnC1 promoter and regulatory elements were found to be
dispersed over 1903 bp. An almost 5-fold increase in ß-glucuronidase expression
was obtained when the promoter length was increased from -379 to -498, and
another 10-fold increase was observed when sequences between -1266 and -1903 were
added. Histochemical analysis shows that the region between -844 and -1266
directs the expression of the chimeric gene specifically to the root apical
meristem.

PMID: 24192879  [PubMed]


65. J Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;126(2):495-506.

Association of basonuclin with ability of keratinocytes to multiply and with
absence of terminal differentiation.

Tseng H(1), Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115.

Basonuclin is a protein possessing three pairs of zinc fingers and a nuclear
localization signal. Expression of the gene is largely confined to keratinocytes 
of stratified squamous epithelia and hair follicles. In the epidermis and in
stratified epidermal cultures, basonuclin is present in the nuclei of cells in or
close to the basal layer but not in the nuclei of cells in more superficial
layers. The Ki-67 protein, a nuclear marker for any stage of the multiplication
cycle is present in only a subclass of basonuclin-containing cells. In cultured
keratinocytes, the disappearance of basonuclin mRNA is associated with loss of
colony-forming ability and the appearance of mRNA for involucrin, a protein
characteristic of terminal differentiation. In hair follicles, the largest
reservoir of basonuclin-containing cells is the outer root sheath, which contains
precursors of differentiated cells of the hair shaft and of the epidermis.
Basonuclin is not a cell cycle marker but is likely instead to be a regulatory
molecular whose presence in the keratinocyte is linked to the maintenance of
proliferative capacity and prevention of terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2200026
PMID: 8034748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Nov 1;89(21):10311-5.

Basonuclin: a keratinocyte protein with multiple paired zinc fingers.

Tseng H(1), Green H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115.

A cDNA clone has been prepared from mRNA of cultured human keratinocytes. The
sequence of the cDNA reveals that in the C-terminal two-thirds of the
corresponding protein (basonuclin), there are three separated pairs of adjacent
zinc fingers. The amino acid sequence of each pair is homologous to that of the
single pair of zinc fingers of the Drosophila transcription factor encoded by
disco. Near the C-terminal end of basonuclin and on the surface of a putative
alpha-helix, there is a stripe of serine residues similar to that of the
transcription factor PRDII-BF1. Basonuclin possesses a sequence of six amino
acids quite similar to one present in the myogenic family of proteins, including 
Myf5; this sequence is located in the omega loop of the myogenic proteins but
within a zinc finger of the keratinocyte protein. As basonuclin is present mainly
in the nuclei of the basal cell layer, its regulatory function is likely to be
exerted prior to the process of terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC50328
PMID: 1332044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1992 Feb;58(2):671-6.

Total degradation of EDTA by mixed cultures and a bacterial isolate.

Nörtemann B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Technical Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Paderborn,
Warburger Strasse 100, D-4790 Paderborn, Germany.

A bacterial mixed culture, which was obtained from sewage by a special enrichment
procedure, utilized EDTA as the sole source of carbon and nitrogen for growth.
High concentrations of mineral salts, particularly CaCl(2), or the use of a
mineral base without nitrogen protected the cells from inactivation after
transfer into fresh medium containing 200-mg/liter (0.67 mM) EDTA. The chemical
speciation did not influence the biodegradability of EDTA. However, when resting 
cells of the mixed culture were incubated with EDTA in the presence of an
equivalent molar amount of FeCl(3), the reaction came to a halt before the
complete consumption of the substrate. A gram-negative isolate from the mixed
population, BNC1, also metabolized EDTA in monoculture. Growth of the pure
culture was promoted by biotin or folic acid but was always accompanied by the
accumulation of unidentified metabolites and was slow (mu(max), 0.024 h) compared
with that of the original community (mu(max), 0.036 h).

PMCID: PMC195300
PMID: 16348653  [PubMed]


