
1. Mech Dev. 2016 Feb 29. pii: S0925-4773(16)30005-3. doi:
10.1016/j.mod.2016.02.002. [Epub ahead of print]

The importance of basonuclin 2 in adult mice and its relation to basonuclin 1.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Delhomme B(2), Hervé F(3), Nondier I(4), Petit JM(5), Araki
M(6), Araki K(7), Djian P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris,
France. Electronic address: amandine.vanhoutteghem@parisdescartes.fr.
(2)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris,
France. Electronic address: brigitte.delhomme@parisdescartes.fr. (3)Laboratoire
de Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
Electronic address: francoise.herve@parisdescartes.fr. (4)Laboratoire de
Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
Electronic address: isabelle.nondier@parisdescartes.fr. (5)Service Central de
Microscopie, Centre Universitaire des Saints Pères, Université Paris Descartes,
45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France. (6)Institute of Resource
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1, Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811,
Japan. Electronic address: maraki@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (7)Institute of Resource 
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1, Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811,
Japan. Electronic address: arakimi@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (8)Laboratoire de
Physiologie Cérébrale, UMR8118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France.
Electronic address: philippe.djian@parisdescartes.fr.

BNC2 is an extremely conserved zinc finger protein with important functions in
the development of craniofacial bones and male germ cells. Because disruption of 
the Bnc2 gene in mice causes neonatal lethality, the function of the protein in
adult animals has not been studied. Until now BNC2 was considered to have a wider
tissue distribution than its paralog, BNC1, but the precise cell types expressing
Bnc2 are largely unknown. We identify here the cell types containing BNC2 in the 
mouse and we show the unexpected presence of BNC1 in many BNC2-containing cells. 
BNC1 and BNC2 are colocalized in male and female germ cells, ovarian epithelial
cells, sensory neurons, hair follicle keratinocytes and connective cells of organ
capsules. In many cell lineages, the two basonuclins appear and disappear
synchronously. Within the male germ cell lineage, BNC1 and BNC2 are found in
prospermatogonia and undifferentiated spermatogonia, and disappear abruptly from 
differentiating spermatogonia. During oogenesis, the two basonuclins accumulate
specifically in maturing oocytes. During the development of hair follicles, BNC1 
and BNC2 concentrate in the primary hair germs. As follicle morphogenesis
proceeds, cells possessing BNC1 and BNC2 invade the dermis and surround the
papilla. During anagen, BNC1 and BNC2 are largely restricted to the basal layer
of the outer root sheath and the matrix. During catagen, the compartment of cells
possessing BNC1 and BNC2 regresses, and in telogen, the two basonuclins are
confined to the secondary hair germ. During the next anagen, the
BNC1/BNC2-containing cell population regenerates the hair follicle. By examining 
Bnc2(-/-) mice that have escaped the neonatal lethality usually associated with
lack of BNC2, we demonstrate that BNC2 possesses important functions in many of
the cell types where it resides. Hair follicles of postnatal Bnc2(-/-) mice do
not fully develop during the first cycle and thereafter remain blocked in
telogen. It is concluded that the presence of BNC2 in the secondary hair germ is 
required to regenerate the transient segment of the follicle. Postnatal Bnc2(-/-)
mice also show severe dwarfism, defects in oogenesis and alterations of palatal
rugae. Although the two basonuclins possess very similar zinc fingers and are
largely coexpressed, BNC1 cannot substitute for BNC2. This is shown
incontrovertibly in knockin mice expressing Bnc1 instead of Bnc2 as these mice
invariably die at birth with craniofacial abnormalities undistinguishable from
those of Bnc2(-/-) mice. The function of the basonuclins in the secondary hair
germ is of particular interest.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923665  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Invest Dermatol. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S0022-202X(16)00363-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2016.01.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Susceptibility Loci for Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Asgari MM(1), Wang W(2), Ioannidis NM(3), Itnyre J(2), Hoffmann T(4), Jorgenson
E(5), Whittemore AS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Oakland, California, USA. (2)Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (3)Department of Health
Research and Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA; Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and
Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA. (5)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Oakland, California, USA. (6)Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. Electronic address:
alicesw@stanford.edu.

We report a genome-wide association study of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
conducted among non-Hispanic white members of the Kaiser Permanente Northern
California health care system. The study includes a genome-wide screen of 61,457 
members (6,891 cases and 54,566 controls) genotyped on the Affymetrix Axiom
European array and a replication phase involving an independent set of 6,410
additional members (810 cases and 5,600 controls). Combined analysis of screening
and replication phases identified 10 loci containing single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with P-values < 5 × 10(-8). Six loci contain genes in the
pigmentation pathway; SNPs at these loci appear to modulate squamous cell
carcinoma risk independently of the pigmentation phenotypes. Another locus
contains HLA class II genes studied in relation to elevated squamous cell
carcinoma risk following immunosuppression. SNPs at the remaining three loci
include an intronic SNP in FOXP1 at locus 3p13, an intergenic SNP at 3q28 near
TP63, and an intergenic SNP at 9p22 near BNC2. These findings provide insights
into the genetic factors accounting for inherited squamous cell carcinoma
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26829030  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jan 25;17(2). pii: E153. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020153.

Decreased Expression of BNC1 and BNC2 Is Associated with Genetic or Epigenetic
Regulation in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Wu Y(1), Zhang X(2), Liu Y(3), Lu F(4), Chen X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic
Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. 
yaliwu@bjmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease
Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China. xiaoleizhang8802@bjmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of
Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic Medical Science,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.
luzernliu@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Microbiology &amp; Infectious Disease
Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China. lu.fengmin@hsc.pku.edu.cn. (5)Department of Microbiology
&amp; Infectious Disease Center, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. xm_chen6176@bjmu.edu.cn.

The aberrant expression of transcription factor Basonuclin (BNC) had been
reported in different kinds of tumors. Here, we investigated the expression and
methylation status of two Basonuclin homologs, BNC1 and BNC2 in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We found that the expression levels of both BNC1 and BNC2 were
down-regulated in HCC cell lines and primary HCC tissues. The frequency and
intensity of BNC1 promoter hypermethylation in tumor tissues was significantly
higher than that in adjacent non-tumor tissues. 5-Aza-2'-Deoxycytidine treatment 
could significantly increase the BNC1 expression in the methylated HCC cell
lines, which implicated that epigenetic modification contributed to the
down-regulation of BNC1. In addition, BNC1 hypermethylation in tumor tissues was 
more likely to happen in female patients. No methylation of the BNC2 promoter was
found in HCC tumor tissues. However, a frequent deletion of the BNC2 gene was
observed, which indicated that the chromosomal loss of the BNC2 gene might be one
important reason for its lower expression level in HCC. Our results suggested
that BNC1 and BNC2 were down-regulated in HCC which may provide new insight into 
the tumorigenesis of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4783887
PMID: 26821013  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2016 Jan 27. pii: jnnp-2015-312272. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2015-312272. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome-wide association study of sporadic brain arteriovenous malformations.

Weinsheimer S(1), Bendjilali N(2), Nelson J(3), Guo DE(3), Zaroff JG(4), Sidney
S(4), McCulloch CE(5), Al-Shahi Salman R(6), Berg JN(7), Koeleman BP(8), Simon
M(9), Bostroem A(9), Fontanella M(10), Sturiale CL(11), Pola R(12), Puca A(11),
Lawton MT(13), Young WL(3), Pawlikowska L(14), Klijn CJ(15), Kim H(16); GEN-AVM
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Center, Sct. Hans MHS-Capital Region of Denmark, Institute of
Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark. (2)Department of Mathematics, Rowan
University, Glassboro, New Jersey, USA. (3)Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, Center for Cerebrovascular Research, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA. (4)Division of Research, Kaiser
Permanente of Northern California, Oakland, California, USA. (5)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA. (6)Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK. (7)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Dundee, Dundee, 
UK. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (9)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn Medical Center,
Bonn, Germany. (10)Division of Neurosurgery, University of Torino, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (11)Institute of Neurosurgery, Catholic University of
Rome, Rome, Italy. (12)Institute of Medicine, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy. (13)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA. (14)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, 
Center for Cerebrovascular Research, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA. (15)Department of Neurology, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (16)Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, Center for Cerebrovascular Research, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA Institute
for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of sporadic brain arteriovenous malformations
(BAVMs) remains unknown, but studies suggest a genetic component. We estimated
the heritability of sporadic BAVM and performed a genome-wide association study
(GWAS) to investigate association of common single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) with risk of sporadic BAVM in the international, multicentre Genetics of
Arteriovenous Malformation (GEN-AVM) consortium.
METHODS: The Caucasian discovery cohort included 515 BAVM cases and 1191 controls
genotyped using Affymetrix genome-wide SNP arrays. Genotype data were imputed to 
1000 Genomes Project data, and well-imputed SNPs (>0.01 minor allele frequency)
were analysed for association with BAVM. 57 top BAVM-associated SNPs (51 SNPs
with p<10(-05) or p<10(-04) in candidate pathway genes, and 6 candidate BAVM
SNPs) were tested in a replication cohort including 608 BAVM cases and 744
controls.
RESULTS: The estimated heritability of BAVM was 17.6% (SE 8.9%, age and
sex-adjusted p=0.015). None of the SNPs were significantly associated with BAVM
in the replication cohort after correction for multiple testing. 6 SNPs had a
nominal p<0.1 in the replication cohort and map to introns in EGFEM1P, SP4 and
CDKAL1 or near JAG1 and BNC2. Of the 6 candidate SNPs, 2 in ACVRL1 and MMP3 had a
nominal p<0.05 in the replication cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: We performed the first GWAS of sporadic BAVM in the largest BAVM
cohort assembled to date. No GWAS SNPs were replicated, suggesting that common
SNPs do not contribute strongly to BAVM susceptibility. However, heritability
estimates suggest a modest but significant genetic contribution.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26818729  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cancer Genet. 2015 Sep;208(9):434-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.05.029. Epub 
2015 May 21.

Homozygous losses detected by array comparative genomic hybridization in
multiplex urothelial carcinomas of the bladder.

Beothe T(1), Zubakov D(2), Kovacs G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(2)Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus University Medical Centre,
Rotterdam, Netherlands. (3)Department of Urology, Medical School, University of
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary; Medical Faculty, Ruprecht-Karls University, Heidelberg,
Germany. Electronic address: G.Kovacs@gmx.de.

Urothelial carcinomas (UCs) may present at first as a solitary or multifocal
neoplasm. We applied high resolution array comparative genomic hybridization to
24 solitary and 32 multiplex UCs and used the hidden Markov model algorithm to
identify the copy number changes at the probe level. Copy number losses and
homozygous deletions at the chromosome 9p region affecting the CDKN2A and MTAP
genes were the most frequent alterations in both groups of tumors. We have
delineated two new tumor suppressor gene regions at chromosome 9p that harbor the
PTPRD and BNC2 genes. Copy number losses at chromosomal regions 2q, 8p, and 18p
occurred preferentially in solitary UCs, whereas multiplex UCs displayed loss of 
large chromosomal regions at 9q, 10q, 11q, 18q, and 21q. Homozygous deletions
harboring loci of cell adhesion genes such as claudins, desmocollins, and
desmogleins were seen exclusively in multiplex UCs. Amplifications occurred only 
in invasive G3 UCs irrespective of staging. Our study suggests that solitary and 
multiplex UCs may have divergent genetic pathways. The biallelic inactivation of 
cellular adhesion genes by homozygous deletions in multiplex UCs may explain the 
frequent intravesical spreading of tumor cells.<U+2009>.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26235493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug 6;97(2):337-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.06.012. Epub
2015 Jul 23.

A Functional SNP in BNC2 Is Associated with Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis.

Ogura Y(1), Kou I(2), Miura S(3), Takahashi A(4), Xu L(5), Takeda K(1), Takahashi
Y(1), Kono K(6), Kawakami N(7), Uno K(8), Ito M(9), Minami S(10), Yonezawa I(11),
Yanagida H(12), Taneichi H(13), Zhu Z(5), Tsuji T(7), Suzuki T(8), Sudo H(9),
Kotani T(10), Watanabe K(14), Hosogane N(14), Okada E(15), Iida A(2), Nakajima
M(2), Sudo A(16), Chiba K(17), Hiraki Y(3), Toyama Y(14), Qiu Y(5), Shukunami
C(18), Kamatani Y(4), Kubo M(19), Matsumoto M(14), Ikegawa S(20).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bone and Joint Diseases, Center for Integrative Sciences, RIKEN,
Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine,
Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Bone and Joint Diseases,
Center for Integrative Sciences, RIKEN, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (3)Department of
Cellular Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center
for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (5)Department 
of Spine Surgery, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University Medical School,
Nanjing 210008, China. (6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Eiju General
Hospital, Tokyo 110-8645, Japan. (7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Meijo
Hospital, Nagoya 460-0001, Japan. (8)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kobe
Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, Kobe 654-0155, Japan.
(9)Department of Advanced Medicine for Spine and Spinal Cord Disorders, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-8648, Japan. (10)Department 
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seirei Sakura Citizen Hospital, Sakura 285-8765, Japan.
(11)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Juntendo University
Tokyo 113-8431, Japan. (12)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Fukuoka Children's 
Hospital, Fukuoka 810-0063, Japan. (13)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School 
of Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan. (14)Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan. (15)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Saiseikai Central Hospital, Tokyo
108-0073, Japan. (16)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Mie
University, Tsu 514-8507, Japan. (17)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kitasato 
University Kitasato Institute Hospital, Tokyo 108-8642, Japan. (18)Department of 
Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Division of Basic Life Sciences, Institute of
Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
(19)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (20)Laboratory of Bone and Joint
Diseases, Center for Integrative Sciences, RIKEN, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
Electronic address: sikegawa@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is the most common spinal deformity. We
previously conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) and detected two loci
associated with AIS. To identify additional loci, we extended our GWAS by
increasing the number of cohorts (2,109 affected subjects and 11,140 control
subjects in total) and conducting a whole-genome imputation. Through the extended
GWAS and replication studies using independent Japanese and Chinese populations, 
we identified a susceptibility locus on chromosome 9p22.2 (p = 2.46 × 10(-13);
odds ratio = 1.21). The most significantly associated SNPs were in intron 3 of
BNC2, which encodes a zinc finger transcription factor, basonuclin-2. Expression 
quantitative trait loci data suggested that the associated SNPs have the
potential to regulate the BNC2 transcriptional activity and that the
susceptibility alleles increase BNC2 expression. We identified a functional SNP, 
rs10738445 in BNC2, whose susceptibility allele showed both higher binding to a
transcription factor, YY1 (yin and yang 1), and higher BNC2 enhancer activity
than the non-susceptibility allele. BNC2 overexpression produced body curvature
in developing zebrafish in a gene-dosage-dependent manner. Our results suggest
that increased BNC2 expression is implicated in the etiology of AIS.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573260
PMID: 26211971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015 May 21;17(19):12908-18. doi: 10.1039/c5cp00381d.

Theoretical study of electronic and tribological properties of h-BNC2/graphene,
h-BNC2/h-BN and h-BNC2/h-BNC2 bilayers.

Ansari N(1), Nazari F, Illas F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic Sciences,
Zanjan 45137-66731, Iran. nazari@iasbs.ac.ir.

Density functional theory based methods are used to investigate the interlayer
sliding energy landscape (ISEL), binding energy and interlayer spacing between
h-BNC2/graphene (I), h-BNC2/h-BN (II) and h-BNC2/h-BNC2 (III) bilayer structures 
for three, six and fourteen different stacking patterns, respectively. Our
results show that, in the studied cases, increasing the atomic variety of the
ingredient monolayers leads to an ISEL corrugation increase as well. For the
studied bilayers the ISEL is obtained by means of the registry index. For
sufficiently large flakes of h-BNC2 on graphene sheets with the largest
incommensurability and the least monolayer anisotropy, a robust superlubricity
occurs regardless of the relative interlayer orientation. On the other hand, for 
the h-BNC2/h-BNC2 bilayer exhibiting the least incommensurability and the most
monolayer anisotropy, the occurrence of robust superlubricity depends on the
relative interlayer orientation.

PMID: 25909457  [PubMed]


8. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):945-52. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3557. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

An integrated analysis of the effects of microRNA and mRNA on esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.

Yang Y(1), Li D(2), Yang Y(1), Jiang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital Affiliated Tongji 
University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Linyi
Tumor Hospital, Linyi, Shandong 276001, P.R. China.

Esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC) is an aggressive type of cancer with poor 
prognosis and leading to decreased quality of life. The identification of
patients at increased risk of esophageal squamous cell cancer may improve current
understanding of the role of micro (mi)RNA in tumorigenesis, since the miRNA
pattern of these patients may be associated with tumorigenesis. In the present
study, the miRNA and mRNA expression profiles of ESCC tissue samples and adjacent
normal control tissue samples were obtained from two dependent GEO series.
Bioinformatics analyses, including the use of the Gene Oncology and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes databases, were used to identify genes and
pathways, which were specifically associated with miRNA-associated ESCC oncology.
A total of 17 miRNAs and 1,670 probes were differentially expressed in the two
groups, and the differentially expressed miRNA and target interactions were
analyzed. The mRNA of miRNA target genes were found to be involve 49 GO terms and
14 pathways. Of the genes differentially expressed between the two groups,
miRNA-181a, miRNA-202, miRNA-155, FNDC3B, BNC2 and MBD2 were the most
significantly altered and may be important in the regulatory network. In the
present study, a novel pattern of differential miRNA-target expression was
constructed, which with further investigation, may provide novel targets for
diagnosing and understanding the mechanism of ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4438920
PMID: 25823933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. JAMA Dermatol. 2015 Jul;151(7):753-60. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.2.

Immunologic Overlap of Helper T-Cell Subtypes 17 and 22 in Erythrodermic
Psoriasis and Atopic Dermatitis.

Moy AP(1), Murali M(2), Kroshinsky D(3), Duncan LM(1), Nazarian RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Service, Dermatopathology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston. (2)Pathology Service, Dermatopathology Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston2Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston.

IMPORTANCE: Psoriasis and atopic dermatitis (AD) are inflammatory diseases
thought to be mediated by helper T-cell subtypes 1 and 2 (TH1 and TH2),
respectively. Although psoriasis and AD show histopathologic differences during
chronic disease, they are difficult to distinguish histologically during
erythrodermic exacerbations.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the immune phenotype of helper T cells can
differentiate erythrodermic psoriasis and erythrodermic AD by studying skin
biopsy specimens of patients with psoriasis and AD during erythrodermic and
chronic disease phases.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We conducted a retrospective study using
biopsy samples of psoriasis, AD, and erythroderma belonging to the surgical
pathology files of the James Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories, Massachusetts
General Hospital, and collected from January 1, 2004, through December 31, 2011. 
Samples were obtained from patients with chronic psoriasis (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), chronic AD
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20), erythroderma subsequently diagnosed as psoriasis (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>7), and
erythroderma subsequently diagnosed as AD (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5). We evaluated
immunohistochemical stains for CD3 and dual stains for CD4 and T-bet, GATA
binding protein 3 (GATA3), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3), or basonuclin 2 (BNC2), which are transcription factors reported to be
specific and mutually exclusive for TH1, TH2, TH17, and TH22 cells, respectively.
Two investigators independently counted CD3+ cells and dual-labeled CD4+/T-bet+, 
CD4+/GATA3+, CD4+/STAT3+, and CD4+/BNC2+ cells in 5 consecutive high-power
fields.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We evaluated the percentage of TH1, TH2, TH17, and
TH22 cells in CD3+ T cells and the TH1:TH2 ratio in chronic psoriasis, chronic
AD, erythrodermic psoriasis, and erythrodermic AD.
RESULTS: We found a significant difference in the TH1:TH2 ratio between chronic
psoriasis and chronic AD (0.26 and 0.09, respectively; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.005). However, we
detected no significant difference in the percentage of TH1 (6.5% and 4.8%), TH2 
(55.2% and 64.6%), TH17 (14.7% and 30.4%), and TH22 (3.8% and 3.3%) cells of CD3+
T cells or in the TH1:TH2 ratio (0.16 and 0.07) within biopsy specimens from
patients with erythrodermic psoriasis and AD, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study confirms the TH1- and TH2-skewed phenotype 
of chronic psoriasis and chronic AD, respectively. However, the immune phenotype,
as determined by immunohistochemical analysis, cannot discriminate between these 
inflammatory diseases in the erythrodermic phase. These findings advance our
understanding of the pathophysiological characteristics of erythroderma,
psoriasis, and AD and may influence therapeutic decisions.

PMID: 25760640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Jul;135(7):1735-42. doi: 10.1038/jid.2015.62. Epub 2015
Feb 23.

A Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies the Skin Color Genes IRF4, MC1R, ASIP,
and BNC2 Influencing Facial Pigmented Spots.

Jacobs LC(1), Hamer MA(1), Gunn DA(2), Deelen J(3), Lall JS(2), van Heemst D(4), 
Uh HW(5), Hofman A(6), Uitterlinden AG(7), Griffiths CE(8), Beekman M(3),
Slagboom PE(3), Kayser M(9), Liu F(9), Nijsten T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Dermatology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2] Netherlands Genomics Initiative (NGI)-sponsored
Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging (NCHA), Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Unilever, R&D, Colworth Science Park, Sharnbrook, Bedfordshire, UK. (3)1]
Netherlands Genomics Initiative (NGI)-sponsored Netherlands Consortium for
Healthy Aging (NCHA), Leiden, The Netherlands [2] Department of Molecular
Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (6)Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (7)1] Netherlands Genomics Initiative (NGI)-sponsored Netherlands
Consortium for Healthy Aging (NCHA), Leiden, The Netherlands [2] Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands [3] Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (8)Dermatology Centre, Salford
Royal NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Salford, UK. (9)Department 
of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Facial pigmented spots are a common skin aging feature, but genetic
predisposition has yet to be thoroughly investigated. We conducted a genome-wide 
association study for pigmented spots in 2,844 Dutch Europeans from the Rotterdam
Study (mean age: 66.9±8.0 years; 47% male). Using semi-automated image analysis
of high-resolution digital facial photographs, facial pigmented spots were
quantified as the percentage of affected skin area (mean women: 2.0% ±0.9, men:
0.9% ±0.6). We identified genome-wide significant association with pigmented
spots at three genetic loci: IRF4 (rs12203592, P=1.8 × 10(-27)), MC1R (compound
heterozygosity score, P=2.3 × 10(-24)), and RALY/ASIP (rs6059655, P=1.9 ×
10(-9)). In addition, after adjustment for the other three top-associated loci
the BNC2 locus demonstrated significant association (rs62543565, P=2.3 × 10(-8)).
The association signals observed at all four loci were successfully replicated
(P<0.05) in an independent Dutch cohort (Leiden Longevity Study n=599). Although 
the four genes have previously been associated with skin color variation and skin
cancer risk, all association signals remained highly significant (P<2 × 10(-8))
when conditioning the association analyses on skin color. We conclude that
genetic variations in IRF4, MC1R, RALY/ASIP, and BNC2 contribute to the acquired 
amount of facial pigmented spots during aging, through pathways independent of
the basal melanin production.

PMID: 25705849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Reprod. 2015 Mar;30(3):499-506. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu364. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Molecular basis of non-syndromic hypospadias: systematic mutation screening and
genome-wide copy-number analysis of 62 patients.

Kon M(1), Suzuki E(2), Dung VC(3), Hasegawa Y(4), Mitsui T(5), Muroya K(6), Ueoka
K(7), Igarashi N(8), Nagasaki K(9), Oto Y(10), Hamajima T(11), Yoshino K(12),
Igarashi M(2), Kato-Fukui Y(2), Nakabayashi K(13), Hayashi K(13), Hata K(13),
Matsubara Y(14), Moriya K(5), Ogata T(15), Nonomura K(5), Fukami M(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan Department of Renal and
Genitourinary Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo
060-8638, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research
Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (3)Department 
of Endocrinology, The Vietnam National Hospital of Pediatrics, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's
Medical Center, Tokyo 183-8561, Japan. (5)Department of Renal and Genitourinary
Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638,
Japan. (6)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kanagawa Children's Medical
Center, Yokohama 232-0066, Japan. (7)Division of Urology, National Center for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics,
Toyama Prefectural Central Hospital, Toyama 930-0975, Japan. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, Niigata University School of Medicine, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital,
Koshigaya 343-0845, Japan. (11)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Aichi
Children's Health and Medical Center, Obu 474-8710, Japan. (12)Department of
Urology, Aichi Children's Health and Medical Center, Obu 474-8710, Japan.
(13)Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (14)National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (15)Department of Molecular
Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo 157-8535, Japan Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. (16)Department of Molecular Endocrinology,
National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535,
Japan fukami-m@ncchd.go.jp.

STUDY QUESTION: What percentage of cases with non-syndromic hypospadias can be
ascribed to mutations in known causative/candidate/susceptibility genes or
submicroscopic copy-number variations (CNVs) in the genome?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Monogenic and digenic mutations in known causative genes and
cryptic CNVs account for >10% of cases with non-syndromic hypospadias. While
known susceptibility polymorphisms appear to play a minor role in the development
of this condition, further studies are required to validate this observation.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Fifteen causative, three candidate, and 14 susceptible
genes, and a few submicroscopic CNVs have been implicated in non-syndromic
hypospadias.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Systematic mutation screening and genome-wide
copy-number analysis of 62 patients.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: The study group consisted of 57
Japanese and five Vietnamese patients with non-syndromic hypospadias. Systematic 
mutation screening was performed for 25 known causative/candidate/susceptibility 
genes using a next-generation sequencer. Functional consequences of nucleotide
alterations were assessed by in silico assays. The frequencies of polymorphisms
in the patient group were compared with those in the male general population.
CNVs were analyzed by array-based comparative genomic hybridization and
characterized by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Seven of 62 patients with anterior or
posterior hypospadias carried putative pathogenic mutations, such as hemizygous
mutations in AR, a heterozygous mutation in BNC2, and homozygous mutations in
SRD5A2 and HSD3B2. Two of the seven patients had mutations in multiple genes. We 
did not find any rare polymorphisms that were abundant specifically in the
patient group. One patient carried mosaic dicentric Y chromosome.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The patient group consisted solely of Japanese 
and Vietnamese individuals and clinical and hormonal information of the patients 
remained rather fragmentary. In addition, mutation analysis focused on
protein-altering substitutions.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our data provide evidence that pathogenic
mutations can underlie both mild and severe hypospadias and that HSD3B2 mutations
cause non-syndromic hypospadias as a sole clinical manifestation. Most
importantly, this is the first report documenting possible oligogenicity of
non-syndromic hypospadias.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This study was funded by the Grant-in-Aid from
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology; by the
Grant-in-Aid from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science; by the Grants
from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, from the National Center for
Child Health and Development and from the Takeda Foundation. The authors have no 
competing interests to disclose.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25605705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Aug;26(8):2042-53. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013111239. Epub 2014 
Nov 26.

A Three-Gene Assay for Monitoring Immune Quiescence in Kidney Transplantation.

Roedder S(1), Li L(2), Alonso MN(3), Hsieh SC(1), Vu MT(1), Dai H(1), Sigdel
TK(1), Bostock I(4), Macedo C(5), Metes D(5), Zeevi A(5), Shapiro R(5),
Salvatierra O(3), Scandling J(3), Alberu J(4), Engleman E(3), Sarwal MM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Transplant Surgery, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California; (2)Department of
Biostatistics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York; (3)Department 
of Pathology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California; (4)Department of
Surgery, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán,
Mexico City, Mexico; and. (5)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (6)Department of Surgery, Division of
Transplant Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California; minnie.sarwal@ucsf.edu.

Organ transplant recipients face life-long immunosuppression and consequently are
at high risk of comorbidities. Occasionally, kidney transplant recipients develop
a state of targeted immune quiescence (operational tolerance) against an
HLA-mismatched graft, allowing them to withdraw all immunosuppression and retain 
stable graft function while resuming immune responses to third-party antigens.
Methods to better understand and monitor this state of alloimmune quiescence by
transcriptional profiling may reveal a gene signature that identifies patients
for whom immunosuppression could be titrated to reduce patient and graft
morbidities. Therefore, we investigated 571 unique peripheral blood samples from 
348 HLA-mismatched renal transplant recipients and 101 nontransplant controls in 
a four-stage study including microarray, quantitative PCR, and flow cytometry
analyses. We report a refined and highly validated (area under the curve, 0.95;
95% confidence interval, 0.92 to 0.97) peripheral blood three-gene assay (KLF6,
BNC2, CYP1B1) to detect the state of operational tolerance by quantitative PCR.
The frequency of predicted alloimmune quiescence in stable renal transplant
patients receiving long-term immunosuppression (n=150) was 7.3% by the three-gene
assay. Targeted cell sorting of peripheral blood from operationally tolerant
patients showed a significant shift in the ratio of circulating monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells with significantly different expression of the genes constituting
the three-gene assay. Our results suggest that incorporation of patient screening
by specific cellular and gene expression assays may support the safety of drug
minimization trials and protocols.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4520154 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25429124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Development. 2014 Nov;141(22):4298-310. doi: 10.1242/dev.112888. Epub 2014 Oct
24.

The zinc-finger protein basonuclin 2 is required for proper mitotic arrest,
prevention of premature meiotic initiation and meiotic progression in mouse male 
germ cells.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Messiaen S(2), Hervé F(1), Delhomme B(1), Moison D(2), Petit 
JM(3), Rouiller-Fabre V(2), Livera G(2), Djian P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de physiologie cérébrale, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Université Paris Descartes, UMR 8118, Paris, France. (2)Laboratoire
de développement des gonades, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
INSERM U967, CEA/DSV/iRCM/SCSR, Fontenay-aux-Roses F-92265, France. (3)Service
central de microscopie, Centre Universitaire des Saints-Pères, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France. (4)Laboratoire de physiologie cérébrale, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université Paris Descartes, UMR 8118,
Paris, France philippe.djian@parisdescartes.fr.

Absence of mitosis and meiosis are distinguishing properties of male germ cells
during late fetal and early neonatal periods. Repressors of male germ cell
meiosis have been identified, but mitotic repressors are largely unknown, and no 
protein repressing both meiosis and mitosis is known. We demonstrate here that
the zinc-finger protein BNC2 is present in male but not in female germ cells. In 
testis, BNC2 exists as several spliced isoforms and presumably binds to DNA.
Within the male germ cell lineage, BNC2 is restricted to prospermatogonia and
undifferentiated spermatogonia. Fetal prospermatogonia that lack BNC2 multiply
excessively on embryonic day (E)14.5 and reenter the cell cycle prematurely.
Mutant prospermatogonia also engage in abnormal meiosis; on E17.5, Bnc2(-/-)
prospermatogonia start synthesizing the synaptonemal protein SYCP3, and by the
time of birth, many Bnc2(-/-) prospermatogonia have accumulated large amounts of 
nonfilamentous SYCP3, thus appearing to be blocked at leptonema. Bnc2(-/-)
prospermatogonia do not undergo proper male differentiation, as they lack almost 
all the mRNA for the male-specific methylation protein DNMT3L and have increased 
levels of mRNAs that encode meiotic proteins, including STRA8. Bnc2(-/-)
prospermatogonia can produce spermatogonia, but these enter meiosis prematurely
and undergo massive apoptotic death during meiotic prophase. This study
identifies BNC2 as a major regulator of male germ stem cells, which is required
for repression of meiosis and mitosis in prospermatogonia, and for meiosis
progression during spermatogenesis. In view of the extreme evolutionary
conservation of BNC2, the findings described here are likely to apply to many
species.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25344072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Hum Mutat. 2014 Dec;35(12):1524-31. doi: 10.1002/humu.22706.

A genetic variant in the seed region of miR-4513 shows pleiotropic effects on
lipid and glucose homeostasis, blood pressure, and coronary artery disease.

Ghanbari M(1), de Vries PS, de Looper H, Peters MJ, Schurmann C, Yaghootkar H,
Dörr M, Frayling TM, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, van Meurs JB, Erkeland SJ, Franco
OH, Dehghan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands; Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) play a crucial role in the regulation of diverse biological
processes by post-transcriptional modulation of gene expression. Genetic
polymorphisms in miRNA-related genes can potentially contribute to a wide range
of phenotypes. The effect of such variants on cardiometabolic diseases has not
yet been defined. We systematically investigated the association of genetic
variants in the seed region of miRNAs with cardiometabolic phenotypes, using the 
thus far largest genome-wide association studies on 17 cardiometabolic
traits/diseases. We found that rs2168518:G>A, a seed region variant of miR-4513, 
associates with fasting glucose, low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, total
cholesterol, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and risk of coronary artery
disease. We experimentally showed that miR-4513 expression is significantly
reduced in the presence of the rs2168518 mutant allele. We sought to identify
miR-4513 target genes that may mediate these associations and revealed five genes
(PCSK1, BNC2, MTMR3, ANK3, and GOSR2) through which these effects might be taking
place. Using luciferase reporter assays, we validated GOSR2 as a target of
miR-4513 and further demonstrated that the miRNA-mediated regulation of this gene
is changed by rs2168518. Our findings indicate a pleiotropic effect of miR-4513
on cardiometabolic phenotypes and may improve our understanding of the
pathophysiology of cardiometabolic diseases.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 25256095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Nov 1;23(21):5750-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu289. Epub 2014 Jun 
10.

Human skin color is influenced by an intergenic DNA polymorphism regulating
transcription of the nearby BNC2 pigmentation gene.

Visser M(1), Palstra RJ(1), Kayser M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC University Medical Centre
Rotterdam, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC University Medical Centre Rotterdam,
Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands m.kayser@erasmusmc.nl.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found to be statistically significant when
associated with human diseases, and other phenotypes are most often located in
non-coding regions of the genome. One example is rs10765819 located in the first 
intron of the BNC2 gene previously associated with (saturation of) human skin
color. Here, we demonstrate that a nearby intergenic SNP (rs12350739) in high
linkage disequilibrium with rs10756819 is likely the causal DNA variant for the
observed BNC2 skin color association. The highly conserved region surrounding
rs12350739 functions as an enhancer element regulating BNC2 transcription in
human melanocytes, while the activity of this enhancer element depends on the
allelic status of rs12350739. When the rs12350739-AA allele is present, the
chromatin at the region surrounding rs12350739 is inaccessible and the enhancer
element is only slightly active, resulting in low expression of BNC2,
corresponding with light skin pigmentation. When the rs12350739-GG allele is
present however, the chromatin at the region surrounding rs12350739 is more
accessible and the enhancer is active, resulting in a higher expression of BNC2, 
corresponding with dark skin pigmentation. Overall, we demonstrate the
identification of the functional DNA variant that explains the BNC2 skin color
association signal, providing another important step towards further
understanding human pigmentation genetics beyond statistical association. We thus
deliver a clear example of how an intergenic non-coding DNA variant modulates the
regulatory potential of the enhancer element it is located within, which in turn 
results in allele-dependent differential gene expression affecting variation in
common human traits.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24916375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genet Epidemiol. 2014 Jul;38(5):457-66. doi: 10.1002/gepi.21815. Epub 2014 May
22.

Genome-wide investigation of regional blood-based DNA methylation adjusted for
complete blood counts implicates BNC2 in ovarian cancer.

Winham SJ(1), Armasu SM, Cicek MS, Larson MC, Cunningham JM, Kalli KR, Fridley
BL, Goode EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota,
United States of America.

Due to its potential as a biomarker for early cancer detection, blood-based DNA
methylation (DNAm) is of interest in cancer research. Specifically, highly
predictive mechanisms for early detection of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) are 
desired, so previous studies have compared DNAm between EOC cases and controls.
However, case-control studies are confounded by the distribution of white blood
cell types through an immune response induced by the cancer. Rather than
determining the distribution of the cell types manually or investigating isolated
cell types, an alternative approach involves the use of complete blood count
(CBC), which is routinely collected. In the analysis of an EOC case-control study
of DNAm, we incorporate CBC measures to adjust for this confounding and compare
DNAm between 242 EOC cases and 181 age-matched controls (assayed on the Illumina 
Infinium HumanMethylation27 or HumanMethylation450 Beadchips), at both the
individual CpG and CpG island levels. We found that adjustment for leukocyte
distribution using CBC measurements dramatically reduced confounding, with 62
single CpG sites found to be associated with EOC status after adjustment (P <
5E-8). Additionally, regional DNAm was assessed by applying principal components 
analysis to CpG islands. The top associated CpG island (P = 7E-6) was located in 
the promoter/transcription start site of the human basonuclin 2 gene (BNC2), a
known susceptibility gene for EOC risk identified through GWAS. Follow-up studies
are necessary to establish the role of BNC2 in blood-based DNA and EOC, including
prospective studies to validate this region as a potential biomarker and
predictor of EOC susceptibility.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4071957
PMID: 24853948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genomics. 2014 Apr;103(4):252-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.02.005. Epub 2014 Mar
4.

An eQTL analysis of the human glioblastoma multiforme genome.

Shpak M(1), Hall AW(2), Goldberg MM(3), Derryberry DZ(2), Ni Y(2), Iyer VR(4),
Cowperthwaite MC(5).

Author information: 
(1)NeuroTexas Institute, St. David's Healthcare, Austin, TX 78705, USA; Center
for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA;
Fresh Pond Research Institute, Cambridge MA 02140, USA. Electronic address:
shpak.max@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
(3)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX
78712, USA. (4)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas,
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
(5)Texas Advanced Computing Center, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78758, USA.

In this paper we use eQTL mapping to identify associations between gene
dysregulation and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes in glioblastoma 
multiforme (GBM). A set of 532,954 SNPs was evaluated as predictors of the
expression levels of 22,279 expression probes. We identified SNPs associated with
fold change in expression level rather than raw expression levels in the tumor.
Following adjustment for false discovery rate, the complete set of probes yielded
9257 significant associations (p<0.05). We found 18 eQTLs that were missense
mutations. Many of the eQTLs in the non-coding regions of a gene, or linked to
nearby genes, had large numbers of significant associations (e.g. 321 for RNASE3,
101 for BNC2). Functional enrichment analysis revealed that the expression probes
in significant associations were involved in signal transduction, transcription
regulation, membrane function, and cell cycle regulation. These results suggest
several loci that may serve as hubs in gene regulatory pathways associated with
GBM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Jul 12;13:150. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-150.

Exploring signatures of positive selection in pigmentation candidate genes in
populations of East Asian ancestry.

Hider JL(1), Gittelman RM, Shah T, Edwards M, Rosenbloom A, Akey JM, Parra EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Mississauga,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Currently, there is very limited knowledge about the genes involved
in normal pigmentation variation in East Asian populations. We carried out a
genome-wide scan of signatures of positive selection using the 1000 Genomes Phase
I dataset, in order to identify pigmentation genes showing putative signatures of
selective sweeps in East Asia. We applied a broad range of methods to detect
signatures of selection including: 1) Tests designed to identify deviations of
the Site Frequency Spectrum (SFS) from neutral expectations (Tajima's D, Fay and 
Wu's H and Fu and Li's D* and F*), 2) Tests focused on the identification of
high-frequency haplotypes with extended linkage disequilibrium (iHS and Rsb) and 
3) Tests based on genetic differentiation between populations (LSBL). Based on
the results obtained from a genome wide analysis of 25 kb windows, we constructed
an empirical distribution for each statistic across all windows, and identified
pigmentation genes that are outliers in the distribution.
RESULTS: Our tests identified twenty genes that are relevant for pigmentation
biology. Of these, eight genes (ATRN, EDAR, KLHL7, MITF, OCA2, TH, TMEM33 and
TRPM1,) were extreme outliers (top 0.1% of the empirical distribution) for at
least one statistic, and twelve genes (ADAM17, BNC2, CTSD, DCT, EGFR, LYST, MC1R,
MLPH, OPRM1, PDIA6, PMEL (SILV) and TYRP1) were in the top 1% of the empirical
distribution for at least one statistic. Additionally, eight of these genes
(BNC2, EGFR, LYST, MC1R, OCA2, OPRM1, PMEL (SILV) and TYRP1) have been associated
with pigmentary traits in association studies.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a number of putative pigmentation genes showing
extremely unusual patterns of genetic variation in East Asia. Most of these genes
are outliers for different tests and/or different populations, and have already
been described in previous scans for positive selection, providing strong support
to the hypothesis that recent selective sweeps left a signature in these regions.
However, it will be necessary to carry out association and functional studies to 
demonstrate the implication of these genes in normal pigmentation variation.

PMCID: PMC3727976
PMID: 23848512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS Genet. 2013 May;9(5):e1003561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003561. Epub 2013 
May 30.

Interactions with iridophores and the tissue environment required for patterning 
melanophores and xanthophores during zebrafish adult pigment stripe formation.

Patterson LB(1), Parichy DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Jan;28(1):2-4.

Skin pigment patterns of vertebrates are a classic system for understanding
fundamental mechanisms of morphogenesis, differentiation, and pattern formation, 
and recent studies of zebrafish have started to elucidate the cellular
interactions and molecular mechanisms underlying these processes. In this
species, horizontal dark stripes of melanophores alternate with light
interstripes of yellow or orange xanthophores and iridescent iridophores. We
showed previously that the highly conserved zinc finger protein Basonuclin-2
(Bnc2) is required in the environment in which pigment cells reside to promote
the development and maintenance of all three classes of pigment cells; bnc2
mutants lack body stripes and interstripes. Previous studies also revealed that
interactions between melanophores and xanthophores are necessary for organizing
stripes and interstripes. Here we show that bnc2 promotes melanophore and
xanthophore development by regulating expression of the growth factors Kit ligand
a (Kitlga) and Colony stimulating factor-1 (Csf1), respectively. Yet, we found
that rescue of melanophores and xanthophores was insufficient for the recovery of
stripes in the bnc2 mutant. We therefore asked whether bnc2-dependent iridophores
might contribute to stripe and interstripe patterning as well. We found that
iridophores themselves express Csf1, and by ablating iridophores in wild-type and
mutant backgrounds, we showed that iridophores contribute to organizing both
melanophores and xanthophores during the development of stripes and interstripes.
Our results reveal an important role for the cellular environment in promoting
adult pigment pattern formation and identify new components of a pigment-cell
autonomous pattern-generating system likely to have broad implications for
understanding how pigment patterns develop and evolve.

PMCID: PMC3667786
PMID: 23737760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Basic Microbiol. 2014 Mar;54(3):170-9. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201200158. Epub 2013
Apr 2.

Studies on salinization in Haryana soils on free-living nitrogen-fixing bacterial
populations and their activity.

Kayasth M(1), Gera R, Dudeja SS, Sharma PK, Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar,
125004, India.

A total of 26 soil samples from saline soils of Haryana were collected. Based on 
their electrical conductivity (EC) values, which varied from 1.04 to
21.00<U+2009>dS<U+2009>m(-1), the soils were categorized into non-saline soils (EC
0-2<U+2009>dS<U+2009>m(-1)), weakly saline soils (EC 2-4<U+2009>dS<U+2009>m(-1)), saline soils (EC
4-8<U+2009>dS<U+2009>m(-1)), strongly saline soils (EC 8-16<U+2009>dS<U+2009>m(-1)), and very strongly saline
soils (EC >16<U+2009>dS<U+2009>m(-1)). The pH values of these soil samples ranged from 6.03 to 
8.62, while organic C, total N, and available P were in the range of 0.06-0.94%, 
0.07-0.15%, and 0.11-0.29<U+2009>µg<U+2009>g(-1) soil, respectively. As a measure of the impact
of salinity on free-living N(2) fixers and their activity, the total bacterial
populations on four media (Jensen's nitrogen-free medium, malate medium, Burk's
medium, and soil extract agar medium) decreased from 6.12 to 3.70<U+2009>log<U+2009>CFU<U+2009>g(-1)
soil with increasing salinity level. PCR amplification of the nifH region of the 
DNA from 234 selected morphotypes from all the media showed the presence of nifH 
in 71 isolates. Out of these, 37% of the isolates were obtained using Jensen's
medium; 35, 28, and 21% of the isolates were obtained using soil extract medium, 
Burk's medium, and malate medium, respectively. The majority of the free-living
N(2) fixers (67%) were Gram negative. Apart from the acetylene reduction assay
(ARA) activity in these isolates, other beneficial traits like ammonia excretion 
and indole acetic acid (IAA) production were also present. A decreasing trend in 
the activities was observed with increasing salinity levels. Isolates JN6, BP8,
and MJ4 showed the highest ARA activity, ammonia excretion, and IAA production.
The performance of isolates like BNC2 with good ARA activity, ammonia excretion, 
and IAA production and isolated from a very strongly saline soil should be
further evaluated under high-saline conditions.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23553356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Phys Condens Matter. 2013 Jan 16;25(2):025304. doi:
10.1088/0953-8984/25/2/025304. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Density functional study of structural defects in h-BNC2 sheets.

Srivastava P(1), Sen P.

Author information: 
(1)Harish-Chandra Research Institute, Jhunsi, Allahabad, India.

Structure, energetics, electronic and magnetic properties of single and double
vacancies and Stone-Wales defects in h-BNC(2) sheets have been calculated using
the planewave pseudopotential method within density functional theory. The
formation energy of a defect strongly depends on its location within the sheet.
In some cases, though not all, the energy ordering of various defects can be
rationalized in terms of the strengths of various bonds that are broken or
created during the defect formation. Single vacancy defects have rather low
migration barriers, and the energy cost of double vacancies is smaller than that 
of two isolated single vacancies. Barriers of formation for Stone-Wales defects
at the interfaces are large, but those for healing these defects are quite small.
Therefore, they can heal easily even at moderate temperatures. Thus, double
vacancies are the most likely defect structures in these sheets. Many of the
defects possess finite magnetic moments. Unlike BN sheets and graphene, some of
the double vacancies and Stone-Wales defects are also found to possess finite
moment.

PMID: 23220908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hum Genet. 2013 Feb;132(2):147-58. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1232-9. Epub 2012 Oct 
11.

Comprehensive candidate gene study highlights UGT1A and BNC2 as new genes
determining continuous skin color variation in Europeans.

Jacobs LC(1), Wollstein A, Lao O, Hofman A, Klaver CC, Uitterlinden AG, Nijsten
T, Kayser M, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Natural variation in human skin pigmentation is primarily due to genetic causes
rooted in recent evolutionary history. Genetic variants associated with human
skin pigmentation confer risk of skin cancer and may provide useful information
in forensic investigations. Almost all previous gene-mapping studies of human
skin pigmentation were based on categorical skin color information known to
oversimplify the continuous nature of human skin coloration. We digitally
quantified skin color into hue and saturation dimensions for 5,860 Dutch
Europeans based on high-resolution skin photographs. We then tested an extensive 
list of 14,185 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 281 candidate genes potentially
involved in human skin pigmentation for association with quantitative skin color 
phenotypes. Confirmatory association was revealed for several known skin color
genes including HERC2, MC1R, IRF4, TYR, OCA2, and ASIP. We identified two new
skin color genes: genetic variants in UGT1A were significantly associated with
hue and variants in BNC2 were significantly associated with saturation. Overall, 
digital quantification of human skin color allowed detecting new skin color
genes. The variants identified in this study may also contribute to the risk of
skin cancer. Our findings are also important for predicting skin color in
forensic investigations.

PMID: 23052946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):260-83. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dms002. Epub
2012 Feb 26.

Aetiology of hypospadias: a systematic review of genes and environment.

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Franke B, Knoers NV, Roeleveld N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. l.vanderzanden@ebh.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external 
genitalia. Most cases have an unknown aetiology, which is probably a mix of
monogenic and multifactorial forms, implicating both genes and environmental
factors. This review summarizes current knowledge about the aetiology of
hypospadias.
METHODS: Pubmed was used to identify studies on hypospadias aetiology published
between January 1995 and February 2011. Reference lists of the selected
manuscripts were also searched to identify additional studies, including those
published before 1995.
RESULTS: The search provided 922 articles and 169 articles were selected for this
review. Studies screening groups of patients with hypospadias for single gene
defects found mutations in WT1, SF1, BMP4, BMP7, HOXA4, HOXB6, FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD3B2, SRD5A2, ATF3, MAMLD1, MID1 and BNC2. However, most investigators are
convinced that single mutations do not cause the majority of isolated hypospadias
cases. Indeed, associations were found with polymorphisms in FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD17B3, SRD5A2, ESR1, ESR2, ATF3, MAMLD1, DGKK, MID1, CYP1A1, GSTM1 and GSTT1.
In addition, gene expression studies indentified CTGF, CYR61 and EGF as candidate
genes. Environmental factors consistently implicated in hypospadias are low
birthweight, maternal hypertension and pre-eclampsia, suggesting that placental
insufficiency may play an important role in hypospadias aetiology. Exogenous
endocrine-disrupting chemicals have the potential to induce hypospadias but it is
unclear whether human exposure is high enough to exert this effect. Other
environmental factors have also been associated with hypospadias but, for most,
the results are inconsistent.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a number of contributors to the aetiology of hypospadias
have been identified, the majority of risk factors remain unknown.

PMID: 22371315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2011 Dec 28;13(48):21593-9. doi: 10.1039/c1cp21974j. Epub
2011 Nov 9.

First-principles study of electronic and magnetic properties of transition metal 
adsorbed h-BNC2 sheets.

Srivastava P(1), Deshpande M, Sen P.

Author information: 
(1)Harish-Chandra Research Institute, Chhatnag Road, Jhunsi, Allahabad, India.

Adsorption of Fe, Co and Ni atoms on a hybrid hexagonal sheet of graphene and
boron nitride is studied using density functional methods. Most favorable
adsorption sites for these adatoms are identified for different widths of the
graphene and boron nitride regions. Electronic structure and magnetic properties 
of the TM-adsorbed sheets are then studied in detail. The TM atoms change the
electronic structure of the sheet significantly, and the resulting system can be 
a magnetic semiconductor, semi-metal, or a non-magnetic semiconductor depending
on the TM chosen. This gives tunability of properties which can be useful in
novel electronics applications. Finally, barriers for diffusion of the adatoms on
the sheet are calculated, and their tendency to agglomerate on the sheet is
estimated.

PMID: 22068843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Intern Med. 2012 May;271(5):499-509. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02449.x.
Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Genetic polymorphisms in oestrogen receptor-binding sites affect clinical
outcomes in patients with prostate cancer receiving androgen-deprivation therapy.

Huang CN(1), Huang SP, Pao JB, Hour TC, Chang TY, Lan YH, Lu TL, Lee HZ, Juang
SH, Wu PP, Huang CY, Hsieh CJ, Bao BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology Cancer Center, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence indicates that oestrogens have significant
direct effects on normal prostate development and carcinogenesis. The majority of
the biological activities of oestrogens are mediated through the oestrogen
receptor (ER), which functions as a hormone-inducible transcription factor to
regulate target gene expression by binding to oestrogen response elements (EREs) 
in the regulatory regions of target genes. Sequence variants in EREs might affect
the ER-ERE interaction and subsequent physiological activities. Therefore, we
tested whether common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) inside EREs are
related to the clinical outcomes of androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) in men
with prostate cancer.
METHODS: We systematically evaluated 49 ERE SNPs predicted using a genome-wide
database in a cohort of 601 men with advanced prostate cancer treated with ADT.
The prognostic significance of these SNPs on disease progression, prostate
cancer-specific mortality (PCSM) and all-cause mortality (ACM) after ADT was
assessed using Kaplan-Meier analysis and a Cox regression model.
RESULTS: Based on multiple hypothesis testing, BNC2 rs16934641 was found to be
associated with disease progression; in addition, TACC2 rs3763763 was associated 
with PCSM, and ALPK1 rs2051778 and TACC2 rs3763763 were associated with ACM.
These SNPs remained significant in multivariate analyses that included known
clinicopathological predictors. Moreover, a combined genotype effect on ACM was
observed when ALPK1 rs2051778 and TACC2 rs3763763 were analysed in combination.
Patients with a greater number of unfavourable genotypes had a shorter time to
ACM during ADT (P for trend <0.001).
CONCLUSION: The incorporation of ERE SNPs into models with known predictors might
improve outcome prediction in patients with prostate cancer receiving ADT.

© 2011 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

PMID: 21880074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21731. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021731. Epub 2011 Jul 7.

Genetic variation on 9p22 is associated with abnormal ovarian ultrasound results 
in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial.

Wentzensen N(1), Black A, Jacobs K, Yang HP, Berg CD, Caporaso N, Peters U,
Ragard L, Buys SS, Chanock S, Hartge P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America. wentzenn@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: A recent ovarian cancer genome-wide association study (GWAS)
identified a locus on 9p22 associated with reduced ovarian cancer risk. The
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers localize to the BNC2 gene, which has
been associated with ovarian development.
METHODS: We analyzed the association of 9p22 SNPs with transvaginal ultrasound
(TVU) screening results and CA-125 blood levels from participants without ovarian
cancer in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial
(PLCO); 1,106 women with adequate ultrasound screening results and available
genotyping information were included in the study.
RESULTS: We observed a significantly increased risk of abnormal suspicious TVU
results for seven SNPs on 9p22, with odds ratios between 1.68 (95% CI: 1.04-2.72)
for rs4961501 and 2.10 (95% CI: 1.31-3.38) for rs12379183. Associations were
restricted to abnormal suspicious findings at the first TVU screen. We did not
observe an association between 9p22 SNPs and CA-125 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that 9p22 SNPs, which were found to be
associated with decreased risk of ovarian cancer in a recent GWAS, are associated
with sonographically detectable ovarian abnormalities. Our results corroborate
the relevance of the 9p22 locus for ovarian biology. Further studies are required
to understand the complex relationship between screening abnormalities and
ovarian carcinogenesis and to evaluate whether this locus can influence the risk 
stratification of ovarian cancer screening.

PMCID: PMC3131287
PMID: 21750727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Reprod. 2011 Aug;26(8):2253-7. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der169. Epub 2011 Jun 4.

Ovarian cancer-associated polymorphisms in the BNC2 gene among women with
endometriosis.

Sundqvist J(1), Falconer H, Seddighzadeh M, Vodolazkaia A, Fassbender A, Kyama C,
Bokor A, Stephansson O, Gemzell-Danielsson K, D'Hooghe TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Division of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Endometriosis is a common benign gynaecological disease.
Epidemiological studies have demonstrated associations between endometriosis and 
ovarian cancer. Recent genome-wide association studies of ovarian cancer have
identified several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the Basonuclin 2
(BNC2) gene. In this study, we investigated these polymorphism in women with
endometriosis.
METHODS: Six SNPs in and upstream of the BNC2 gene (rs3814113, rs4445329,
rs10962656, rs12379183, rs10756819 and rs1339552) were investigated using TaqMan 
allelic discrimination analysis in a Caucasian population (cases: 798, controls: 
351). Allelic frequencies were used as main outcome measure.
RESULTS: No associations were observed between the analysed SNPs and
endometriosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the analysed polymorphisms in the BNC2 gene
are unlikely to contribute to the previously reported risk of ovarian cancer in
women with endometriosis.

PMID: 21642636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 May;19(5):540-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.245. Epub 2011 Feb 
2.

Human balanced translocation and mouse gene inactivation implicate Basonuclin 2
in distal urethral development.

Bhoj EJ(1), Ramos P, Baker LA, Garg V, Cost N, Nordenskjöld A, Elder FF, Bleyl
SB, Bowles NE, Arrington CB, Delhomme B, Vanhoutteghem A, Djian P, Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development and Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2):249. Garg, Vidu [added].

We studied a man with distal hypospadias, partial anomalous pulmonary venous
return, mild limb-length inequality and a balanced translocation involving
chromosomes 9 and 13. To gain insight into the etiology of his birth defects, we 
mapped the translocation breakpoints by high-resolution comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH), using chromosome 9- and 13-specific tiling arrays to analyze
genetic material from a spontaneously aborted fetus with unbalanced segregation
of the translocation. The chromosome 13 breakpoint was ~400 <U+2009>kb away from the
nearest gene, but the chromosome 9 breakpoint fell within an intron of Basonuclin
2 (BNC2), a gene that encodes an evolutionarily conserved nuclear zinc-finger
protein. The BNC2/Bnc2 gene is abundantly expressed in developing mouse and human
periurethral tissues. In all, 6 of 48 unrelated subjects with distal hypospadias 
had nine novel nonsynonymous substitutions in BNC2, five of which were
computationally predicted to be deleterious. In comparison, two of 23 controls
with normal penile urethra morphology, each had a novel nonsynonymous
substitution in BNC2, one of which was predicted to be deleterious. Bnc2(-/-)
mice of both sexes displayed a high frequency of distal urethral defects;
heterozygotes showed similar defects with reduced penetrance. The association of 
BNC2 disruption with distal urethral defects and the gene's expression pattern
indicate that it functions in urethral development.

PMCID: PMC3083624
PMID: 21368915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Feb 4;12:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-20.

Evaluation of four novel genetic variants affecting hemoglobin A1c levels in a
population-based type 2 diabetes cohort (the HUNT2 study).

Hertel JK(1), Johansson S, Ræder H, Platou CG, Midthjell K, Hveem K, Molven A,
Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Chronic hyperglycemia confers increased risk for long-term
diabetes-associated complications and repeated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) measures
are a widely used marker for glycemic control in diabetes treatment and
follow-up. A recent genome-wide association study revealed four genetic loci,
which were associated with HbA1c levels in adults with type 1 diabetes. We aimed 
to evaluate the effect of these loci on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,486 subjects with type 2 diabetes from a Norwegian
population-based cohort (HUNT2) for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
located near the BNC2, SORCS1, GSC and WDR72 loci. Through regression models, we 
examined their effects on HbA1c and non-fasting glucose levels individually and
in a combined genetic score model.
RESULTS: No significant associations with HbA1c or glucose levels were found for 
the SORCS1, BNC2, GSC or WDR72 variants (all P-values > 0.05). Although the
observed effects were non-significant and of much smaller magnitude than
previously reported in type 1 diabetes, the SORCS1 risk variant showed a
direction consistent with increased HbA1c and glucose levels, with an observed
effect of 0.11% (P = 0.13) and 0.13 mmol/l (P = 0.43) increase per risk allele
for HbA1c and glucose, respectively. In contrast, the WDR72 risk variant showed a
borderline association with reduced HbA1c levels (ß = -0.21, P = 0.06), and
direction consistent with decreased glucose levels (ß = -0.29, P = 0.29). The
allele count model gave no evidence for a relationship between increasing number 
of risk alleles and increasing HbA1c levels (ß = 0.04, P = 0.38).
CONCLUSIONS: The four recently reported SNPs affecting glycemic control in type 1
diabetes had no apparent effect on HbA1c in type 2 diabetes individually or by
using a combined genetic score model. However, for the SORCS1 SNP, our findings
do not rule out a possible relationship with HbA1c levels. Hence, further studies
in other populations are needed to elucidate whether these novel sequence
variants, especially rs1358030 near the SORCS1 locus, affect glycemic control in 
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3044669
PMID: 21294870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nature. 2010 Oct 28;467(7319):1099-103. doi: 10.1038/nature09525.

Fine-scale recombination rate differences between sexes, populations and
individuals.

Kong A(1), Thorleifsson G, Gudbjartsson DF, Masson G, Sigurdsson A, Jonasdottir
A, Walters GB, Jonasdottir A, Gylfason A, Kristinsson KT, Gudjonsson SA, Frigge
ML, Helgason A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland. kong@decode.is

Meiotic recombinations contribute to genetic diversity by yielding new
combinations of alleles. Recently, high-resolution recombination maps were
inferred from high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data using
linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns that capture historical recombination
events. The use of these maps has been demonstrated by the identification of
recombination hotspots and associated motifs, and the discovery that the PRDM9
gene affects the proportion of recombinations occurring at hotspots. However,
these maps provide no information about individual or sex differences. Moreover, 
locus-specific demographic factors like natural selection can bias LD-based
estimates of recombination rate. Existing genetic maps based on family data avoid
these shortcomings, but their resolution is limited by relatively few meioses and
a low density of markers. Here we used genome-wide SNP data from 15,257
parent-offspring pairs to construct the first recombination maps based on
directly observed recombinations with a resolution that is effective down to 10
kilobases (kb). Comparing male and female maps reveals that about 15% of hotspots
in one sex are specific to that sex. Although male recombinations result in more 
shuffling of exons within genes, female recombinations generate more new
combinations of nearby genes. We discover novel associations between
recombination characteristics of individuals and variants in the PRDM9 gene and
we identify new recombination hotspots. Comparisons of our maps with two LD-based
maps inferred from data of HapMap populations of Utah residents with ancestry
from northern and western Europe (CEU) and Yoruba in Ibadan, Nigeria (YRI) reveal
population differences previously masked by noise and map differences at regions 
previously described as targets of natural selection.

PMID: 20981099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nat Genet. 2010 Oct;42(10):874-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.668. Epub 2010 Sep 19.

A genome-wide association study identifies susceptibility loci for ovarian cancer
at 2q31 and 8q24.

Goode EL, Chenevix-Trench G, Song H, Ramus SJ, Notaridou M, Lawrenson K,
Widschwendter M, Vierkant RA, Larson MC, Kjaer SK, Birrer MJ, Berchuck A,
Schildkraut J, Tomlinson I, Kiemeney LA, Cook LS, Gronwald J, Garcia-Closas M,
Gore ME, Campbell I, Whittemore AS, Sutphen R, Phelan C, Anton-Culver H, Pearce
CL, Lambrechts D, Rossing MA, Chang-Claude J, Moysich KB, Goodman MT, Dörk T,
Nevanlinna H, Ness RB, Rafnar T, Hogdall C, Hogdall E, Fridley BL, Cunningham JM,
Sieh W, McGuire V, Godwin AK, Cramer DW, Hernandez D, Levine D, Lu K, Iversen ES,
Palmieri RT, Houlston R, van Altena AM, Aben KK, Massuger LF, Brooks-Wilson A,
Kelemen LE, Le ND, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Medrek K, Stafford A, Easton DF,
Tyrer J, Bolton KL, Harrington P, Eccles D, Chen A, Molina AN, Davila BN, Arango 
H, Tsai YY, Chen Z, Risch HA, McLaughlin J, Narod SA, Ziogas A, Brewster W,
Gentry-Maharaj A, Menon U, Wu AH, Stram DO, Pike MC; Wellcome Trust Case-Control 
Consortium, Beesley J, Webb PM; Australian Cancer Study (Ovarian Cancer);
Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group; Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium
(OCAC), Chen X, Ekici AB, Thiel FC, Beckmann MW, Yang H, Wentzensen N, Lissowska 
J, Fasching PA, Despierre E, Amant F, Vergote I, Doherty J, Hein R, Wang-Gohrke
S, Lurie G, Carney ME, Thompson PJ, Runnebaum I, Hillemanns P, Dürst M,
Antonenkova N, Bogdanova N, Leminen A, Butzow R, Heikkinen T, Stefansson K, Sulem
P, Besenbacher S, Sellers TA, Gayther SA, Pharoah PD; Ovarian Cancer Association 
Consortium (OCAC).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Nov;10(11):743.

Ovarian cancer accounts for more deaths than all other gynecological cancers
combined. To identify common low-penetrance ovarian cancer susceptibility genes, 
we conducted a genome-wide association study of 507,094 SNPs in 1,768 individuals
with ovarian cancer (cases) and 2,354 controls, with follow up of 21,955 SNPs in 
4,162 cases and 4,810 controls, leading to the identification of a confirmed
susceptibility locus at 9p22 (in BNC2). Here, we report on nine additional
candidate loci (defined as having P = 10<U+207B>4) identified after stratifying cases by
histology, which we genotyped in an additional 4,353 cases and 6,021 controls. We
confirmed two new susceptibility loci with P = 5 × 10<U+207B>8 (8q24, P = 8.0 × 10<U+207B>¹5
and 2q31, P = 3.8 × 10<U+207B>¹4) and identified two additional loci that approached
genome-wide significance (3q25, P = 7.1 × 10<U+207B>8 and 17q21, P = 1.4 × 10<U+207B>7). The
associations of these loci with serous ovarian cancer were generally stronger
than with other cancer subtypes. Analysis of HOXD1, MYC, TIPARP and SKAP1 at
these loci and of BNC2 at 9p22 supports a functional role for these genes in
ovarian cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3020231
PMID: 20852632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jun 24;6(6):e1000993. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000993.

Web-based, participant-driven studies yield novel genetic associations for common
traits.

Eriksson N(1), Macpherson JM, Tung JY, Hon LS, Naughton B, Saxonov S, Avey L,
Wojcicki A, Pe'er I, Mountain J.

Author information: 
(1)23andMe, Mountain View, California, United States of America. nick@23andme.com

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2010 Jun;6(6):e1000965.

Despite the recent rapid growth in genome-wide data, much of human variation
remains entirely unexplained. A significant challenge in the pursuit of the
genetic basis for variation in common human traits is the efficient, coordinated 
collection of genotype and phenotype data. We have developed a novel research
framework that facilitates the parallel study of a wide assortment of traits
within a single cohort. The approach takes advantage of the interactivity of the 
Web both to gather data and to present genetic information to research
participants, while taking care to correct for the population structure inherent 
to this study design. Here we report initial results from a participant-driven
study of 22 traits. Replications of associations (in the genes OCA2, HERC2,
SLC45A2, SLC24A4, IRF4, TYR, TYRP1, ASIP, and MC1R) for hair color, eye color,
and freckling validate the Web-based, self-reporting paradigm. The identification
of novel associations for hair morphology (rs17646946, near TCHH; rs7349332, near
WNT10A; and rs1556547, near OFCC1), freckling (rs2153271, in BNC2), the ability
to smell the methanethiol produced after eating asparagus (rs4481887, near
OR2M7), and photic sneeze reflex (rs10427255, near ZEB2, and rs11856995, near
NR2F2) illustrates the power of the approach.

PMCID: PMC2891811
PMID: 20585627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS Genet. 2009 Nov;5(11):e1000744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000744. Epub 2009
Nov 26.

Basonuclin-2 requirements for zebrafish adult pigment pattern development and
female fertility.

Lang MR(1), Patterson LB, Gordon TN, Johnson SL, Parichy DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Relatively little is known about the generation of adult form. One complex adult 
trait that is particularly amenable to genetic and experimental analysis is the
zebrafish pigment pattern, which undergoes extensive remodeling during
post-embryonic development to form adult stripes. These stripes result from the
arrangement of three classes of neural crest-derived pigment cells, or
chromatophores: melanophores, xanthophores, and iridophores. Here, we analyze the
zebrafish bonaparte mutant, which has a normal early pigment pattern but exhibits
a severe disruption to the adult stripe pattern. We show that the bonaparte
mutant phenotype arises from mutations in basonuclin-2 (bnc2), encoding a highly 
conserved, nuclear-localized zinc finger protein of unknown function. We show
that bnc2 acts non-autonomously to the melanophore lineage and is expressed by
hypodermal cells adjacent to chromatophores during adult pigment pattern
formation. In bonaparte (bnc2) mutants, all three types of chromatophores
differentiate but then are lost by extrusion through the skin. We further show
that while bnc2 promotes the development of two genetically distinct populations 
of melanophores in the body stripes, chromatophores of the fins and scales remain
unaffected in bonaparte mutants, though a requirement of fin chromatophores for
bnc2 is revealed in the absence of kit and colony stimulating factor-1 receptor
activity. Finally, we find that bonaparte (bnc2) mutants exhibit dysmorphic
ovaries correlating with infertility and bnc2 is expressed in somatic ovarian
cells, whereas the related gene, bnc1, is expressed within oocytes; and we find
that both bnc2 and bnc1 are expressed abundantly within the central nervous
system. These findings identify bnc2 as an important mediator of adult pigment
pattern formation and identify bonaparte mutants as an animal model for
dissecting bnc2 functions.

PMCID: PMC2776513
PMID: 19956727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. BMC Evol Biol. 2009 Nov 25;9:271. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-9-271.

The evolution of Brassica napus FLOWERING LOCUS T paralogues in the context of
inverted chromosomal duplication blocks.

Wang J(1), Long Y, Wu B, Liu J, Jiang C, Shi L, Zhao J, King GJ, Meng J.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, PR China. wjing@webmail.hzau.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: The gene FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) and its orthologues play a central
role in the integration of flowering signals within Arabidopsis and other diverse
species. Multiple copies of FT, with different cis-intronic sequence, exist and
appear to operate harmoniously within polyploid crop species such as Brassica
napus (AACC), a member of the same plant family as Arabidopsis.
RESULTS: We have identified six BnFT paralogues from the genome of B. napus and
mapped them to six distinct regions, each of which is homologous to a common
ancestral block (E) of Arabidopsis chromosome 1. Four of the six regions were
present within inverted duplicated regions of chromosomes A7 and C6. The coding
sequences of BnFT paralogues showed 92-99% identities to each other and 85-87%
identity with that of Arabidopsis. However, two of the paralogues on chromosomes 
A2 and C2, BnA2.FT and BnC2.FT, were found to lack the distinctive CArG box that 
is located within intron 1 that has been shown in Arabidopsis to be the binding
site for theFLC protein. Three BnFT paralogues (BnA2.FT, BnC6.FT.a and BnC6.FT.b)
were associated with two major QTL clusters for flowering time. One of the QTLs
encompassing two BnFT paralogues (BnC6.FT.a and BnC6.FT.b) on chromosome C6 was
resolved further using near isogenic lines, specific alleles of which were both
shown to promote flowering. Association analysis of the three BnFT paralogues
across 55 cultivars of B. napus showed that the alleles detected in the original 
parents of the mapping population used to detect QTL (NY7 and Tapidor) were
ubiquitous amongst spring and winter type cultivars of rapeseed. It was inferred 
that the ancestral FT homologues in Brassica evolved from two distinct copies,
one of which was duplicated along with inversion of the associated chromosomal
segment prior to the divergence of B. rapa (AA) and B. oleracea (CC). At least
ten such inverted duplicated blocks (IDBs) were identified covering a quarter of 
the whole B. napus genome.
CONCLUSION: Six orthologues of Arabidopsis FT were identified and mapped in the
genome of B. napus which sheds new light on the evolution of paralogues in
polyploidy species. The allelic variation of BnFT paralogues results in
functional differences affecting flowering time between winter and spring type
cultivars of oil seed Brassica. The prevalent inverted duplicated blocks, two of 
which were located by four of the six BnFT paralogues, contributed to gene
duplications and might represent predominant pathway of evolution in Brassica.

PMCID: PMC2794288
PMID: 19939256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):539-49. doi: 10.2337/db09-0653. Epub 2009 Oct 29.

A genome-wide association study identifies a novel major locus for glycemic
control in type 1 diabetes, as measured by both A1C and glucose.

Paterson AD(1), Waggott D, Boright AP, Hosseini SM, Shen E, Sylvestre MP, Wong I,
Bharaj B, Cleary PA, Lachin JM; MAGIC (Meta-Analyses of Glucose and
Insulin-related traits Consortium), Below JE, Nicolae D, Cox NJ, Canty AJ, Sun L,
Bull SB; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Canada. andrew.paterson@utoronto.ca

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):332-4.

OBJECTIVE: Glycemia is a major risk factor for the development of long-term
complications in type 1 diabetes; however, no specific genetic loci have been
identified for glycemic control in individuals with type 1 diabetes. To identify 
such loci in type 1 diabetes, we analyzed longitudinal repeated measures of A1C
from the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study using
the mean of quarterly A1C values measured over 6.5 years, separately in the
conventional (n = 667) and intensive (n = 637) treatment groups of the DCCT. At
loci of interest, linear mixed models were used to take advantage of all the
repeated measures. We then assessed the association of these loci with capillary 
glucose and repeated measures of multiple complications of diabetes.
RESULTS: We identified a major locus for A1C levels in the conventional treatment
group near SORCS1 (10q25.1, P = 7 x 10(-10)), which was also associated with mean
glucose (P = 2 x 10(-5)). This was confirmed using A1C in the intensive treatment
group (P = 0.01). Other loci achieved evidence close to genome-wide significance:
14q32.13 (GSC) and 9p22 (BNC2) in the combined treatment groups and 15q21.3
(WDR72) in the intensive group. Further, these loci gave evidence for association
with diabetic complications, specifically SORCS1 with hypoglycemia and BNC2 with 
renal and retinal complications. We replicated the SORCS1 association in Genetics
of Diabetes in Kidneys (GoKinD) study control subjects (P = 0.01) and the BNC2
association with A1C in nondiabetic individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: A major locus for A1C and glucose in individuals with diabetes is
near SORCS1. This may influence the design and analysis of genetic studies
attempting to identify risk factors for long-term diabetic complications.

PMCID: PMC2809960
PMID: 19875614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Cancer. 2009 Nov 15;125(10):2349-59. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24620.

Chromosomal abnormalities and novel disease-related regions in progression from
Barrett's esophagus to esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Akagi T(1), Ito T, Kato M, Jin Z, Cheng Y, Kan T, Yamamoto G, Olaru A, Kawamata
N, Boult J, Soukiasian HJ, Miller CW, Ogawa S, Meltzer SJ, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a metaplastic condition caused by chronic
gastroesophageal reflux which represents an early step in the development of
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Single-nucleotide polymorphism microarray
(SNP-chip) analysis is a novel, precise, high-throughput approach to examine
genomic alterations in neoplasia. Using 250K SNP-chips, we examined the
neoplastic progression of BE to EAC, studying 11 matched sample sets: 6 sets of
normal esophagus (NE), BE and EAC, 4 of NE and BE and 1 of NE and EAC. Six (60%) 
of 10 total BE samples and 4 (57%) of 7 total EAC samples exhibited 1 or more
genomic abnormalities comprising deletions, duplications, amplifications and
copy-number-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CNN-LOH). Several shared
abnormalities were identified, including chromosome 9p CNN-LOH [2 BE samples
(20%)], deletion of CDKN2A [4 BE samples (40%)] and amplification of 17q12-21.2
involving the ERBB2, RARA and TOP2A genes [3.1 Mb, 2 EAC (29%)]. Interestingly, 1
BE sample contained a homozygous deletion spanning 9p22.3-p22.2 (1.2 Mb): this
region harbors only 1 known gene, basonuclin 2 (BNC2). Real-time PCR analysis
confirmed the deletion of this gene and decreased the expression of BNC2 mRNA in 
the BE sample. Furthermore, transfection and stable expression of BNC2 caused
growth arrest of OE33 EAC cells, suggesting that BNC2 functions as a tumor
suppressor gene in the esophagus and that deletion of this gene occurs during the
development of EAC. Thus, this SNP-chip analysis has identified several early
cytogenetic events and novel candidate cancer-related genes that are potentially 
involved in the evolution of BE to EAC.

PMCID: PMC2766567
PMID: 19670330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neuro Oncol. 2009 Dec;11(6):803-18. doi: 10.1215/15228517-2009-013.

Characterization of novel and complex genomic aberrations in glioblastoma using a
32K BAC array.

Nord H(1), Hartmann C, Andersson R, Menzel U, Pfeifer S, Piotrowski A, Bogdan A, 
Kloc W, Sandgren J, Olofsson T, Hesselager G, Blomquist E, Komorowski J, von
Deimling A, Bruder CE, Dumanski JP, Díaz de Ståhl T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Glioblastomas (GBs) are malignant CNS tumors often associated with devastating
symptoms. Patients with GB have a very poor prognosis, and despite treatment,
most of them die within 12 months from diagnosis. Several pathways, such as the
RAS, tumor protein 53 (TP53), and phosphoinositide kinase 3 (PIK3) pathways, as
well as the cell cycle control pathway, have been identified to be disrupted in
this tumor. However, emerging data suggest that these aberrations represent only 
a fraction of the genetic changes involved in gliomagenesis. In this study, we
have applied a 32K clone-based genomic array, covering 99% of the current
assembly of the human genome, to the detailed genetic profiling of a set of 78
GBs. Complex patterns of aberrations, including high and narrow copy number
amplicons, as well as a number of homozygously deleted loci, were identified.
Amplicons that varied both in number (three on average) and in size (1.4 Mb on
average) were frequently detected (81% of the samples). The loci encompassed not 
only previously reported oncogenes (EGFR, PDGFRA, MDM2, and CDK4) but also
numerous novel oncogenes as GRB10, MKLN1, PPARGC1A, HGF, NAV3, CNTN1, SYT1, and
ADAMTSL3. BNC2, PTPLAD2, and PTPRE, on the other hand, represent novel candidate 
tumor suppressor genes encompassed within homozygously deleted loci. Many of
these genes are already linked to several forms of cancer; others represent new
candidate genes that may serve as prognostic markers or even as therapeutic
targets in the future. The large individual variation observed between the
samples demonstrates the underlying complexity of the disease and strengthens the
demand for an individualized therapy based on the genetic profile of the patient.

PMCID: PMC2802400
PMID: 19304958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biodegradation. 2008 Feb;19(1):41-52. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Bacterial growth yields on EDTA, NTA, and their biodegradation intermediates.

Yuan Z(1), VanBriesen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering, University 
of Colorado at Boulder, Engineering Center ECOT 441, UCB 428, Boulder, CO 80309, 
USA. zhiwen.yuan@colorado.edu

Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) are widely
used anthropogenic chelating agents for control of metal speciation and are
ubiquitous in natural waters and wastewaters. This is the first report of
systematic measurement of the growth yields of a mixed culture (BNC1-BNC2) on
EDTA and its biodegradation intermediates, and of Aminobacter aminovorans (aka
Chelatobacter heintzii) ATCC 29600 on NTA and its biodegradation intermediates.
The yields measured for BNC1-BNC2 co-culture were 75.0 g of cell dry weight (CDW)
(mole of EDTA)(-1), 68.6 g of CDW (mole of ED3 A)(-1), 51.2 g of CDW (mole of
N,N'-EDDA)(-1), 34.5 g of CDW (mole of ED)(-1), 26.3 g of CDW (mole of IDA)(-1), 
12.2 g of CDW (mole of glycine)(-1), and 9.7 g of CDW (mole of glyoxylate)(-1).
The yields measured for A. aminovorans were 44.3 g of CDW (mole of NTA)(-1), 37.9
g of CDW (mole of IDA)(-1), 15.2 g of CDW (mole of glycine)(-1), and 10.4 g of
CDW (mole of glyoxylate)(-1). The biodegradation pathways of EDTA, NTA, and
several of their metabolic intermediates include reactions catalyzed by oxygenase
enzymes, which may reduce energy available for cell synthesis. Comparison of
measured yields with predicted yields indicates that the effect of oxygenase
reaction on cell yield can be quantified experimentally as well as modeled based 
on thermodynamics.

PMID: 17404695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Apr 13;355(3):619-25. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Simple repeat evolution includes dramatic primary sequence changes that conserve 
folding potential.

Riley DE(1), Jeon JS, Krieger JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
dri@u.washington.edu

We previously demonstrated that many "weak-folding" simple repeats were replaced 
during evolution by alternative weak-folding repeats. This suggested repeat
selection at the level of higher order structure potential. Here, we demonstrate 
similar phenomena for "strong-folding" simple repeats in non-coding DNA. The
Rabgap1 gene's 3' UTR contained the self-complementary repeat (AT)n in Homo
sapiens but, in Mus musculus, this site was occupied by the complementary repeats
(GT)n and (AC)n. Similarly, primate Plag1 UTRs contained various (GT)n-(AC)n
palindromes but in rodents, this site was occupied by (AT)n, preserving folding
potential more than primary sequence. The Znf516, Senp1, Rock2, and other UTRs
exhibited similar replacements. In the Bnc2 UTR, (AT)n was replaced by sequences 
that evolved with approximate symmetry about a central axis, a pattern difficult 
to explain without invoking selection to preserve secondary structure. These
observations reflect a predictable evolutionary pattern for some common
non-coding genomic sequences.

PMID: 17320822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Genomics. 2007 Jan;89(1):44-58. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

The human basonuclin 2 gene has the potential to generate nearly 90,000 mRNA
isoforms encoding over 2000 different proteins.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des Saints-Pères, Université
René Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, France.

The number of mRNAs and proteins that can be produced from a single gene is known
to be increased by the number of start sites and by multiple splicing of
products. A few genes have been found to generate extraordinarily large numbers
of splicing isoforms. In the human, the largest number, nearly 2000 mRNA
isoforms, has been reported for the neurexin 3alpha gene. However, the biological
significance of alternative splicing often remains unclear because many
alternative transcripts contain early translational stops and are thought to be
rapidly degraded. We demonstrate here that human basonuclin 2 (bn2; approved gene
symbol BNC2) transcripts are initiated from six promoters, are alternatively
spliced at multiple positions, and are polyadenylated at four sites.
Characterization of nearly 100 bn2 mRNA isoforms suggests that each promoter,
splice site, and poly(A) addition site is used independently. The bn2 gene has
therefore the potential to generate up to 90,000 mRNA isoforms encoding more than
2000 different proteins. Because alternative exons affect the position of the
first methionine codon, the length of the coding region, and the position of the 
translational stop, the encoded proteins range in size from 43 to 1211 amino
acids and some bear no sequence similarity to others. PCR analysis and transient 
expression in HeLa cells show that the major bn2 mRNA isoforms are stable and are
translated into equally stable proteins, even when the mRNA bears an early
translational stop.

PMID: 16942855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 15;103(33):12423-8. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Basonuclins 1 and 2, whose genes share a common origin, are proteins with widely 
different properties and functions.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des
Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 75006 Paris, France.

Basonuclin (bn) 1 possesses three separated pairs of zinc fingers and a nuclear
localization signal. It is largely confined to the basal cells of stratified
squamous epithelia and to reproductive germ cells. bn1 can shuttle between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm, and its location is correlated with the proliferative 
potential of the cell. The recently discovered bn2 also possesses three separated
pairs of zinc fingers and a nuclear localization signal. Conservation of the zinc
fingers and the nuclear localization signal by bn1 and bn2 indicates a common
origin. However, in contrast to bn1, bn2 is found in virtually every cell type
and is confined to the nucleus. Bn2 but not bn1 colocalizes with SC35 in nuclear 
speckles and, therefore, is likely to have a function in nuclear processing of
mRNA.

PMCID: PMC1567895
PMID: 16891417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 7;103(10):3704-9. Epub 2006 Feb 27.

Genomic anatomy of the Tyrp1 (brown) deletion complex.

Smyth IM(1), Wilming L, Lee AW, Taylor MS, Gautier P, Barlow K, Wallis J, Martin 
S, Glithero R, Phillimore B, Pelan S, Andrew R, Holt K, Taylor R, McLaren S,
Burton J, Bailey J, Sims S, Squares J, Plumb B, Joy A, Gibson R, Gilbert J, Hart 
E, Laird G, Loveland J, Mudge J, Steward C, Swarbreck D, Harrow J, North P,
Leaves N, Greystrong J, Coppola M, Manjunath S, Campbell M, Smith M, Strachan G, 
Tofts C, Boal E, Cobley V, Hunter G, Kimberley C, Thomas D, Cave-Berry L, Weston 
P, Botcherby MR, White S, Edgar R, Cross SH, Irvani M, Hummerich H, Simpson EH,
Johnson D, Hunsicker PR, Little PF, Hubbard T, Campbell RD, Rogers J, Jackson IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, United
Kingdom.

Chromosome deletions in the mouse have proven invaluable in the dissection of
gene function. The brown deletion complex comprises >28 independent genome
rearrangements, which have been used to identify several functional loci on
chromosome 4 required for normal embryonic and postnatal development. We have
constructed a 172-bacterial artificial chromosome contig that spans this
22-megabase (Mb) interval and have produced a contiguous, finished, and manually 
annotated sequence from these clones. The deletion complex is strikingly
gene-poor, containing only 52 protein-coding genes (of which only 39 are
supported by human homologues) and has several further notable genomic features, 
including several segments of >1 Mb, apparently devoid of a coding sequence. We
have used sequence polymorphisms to finely map the deletion breakpoints and
identify strong candidate genes for the known phenotypes that map to this region,
including three lethal loci (l4Rn1, l4Rn2, and l4Rn3) and the fitness mutant
brown-associated fitness (baf). We have also characterized misexpression of the
basonuclin homologue, Bnc2, associated with the inversion-mediated coat color
mutant white-based brown (B(w)). This study provides a molecular insight into the
basis of several characterized mouse mutants, which will allow further dissection
of this region by targeted or chemical mutagenesis.

PMCID: PMC1450144
PMID: 16505357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 9;101(10):3468-73. Epub 2004 Feb 26.

Basonuclin 2: an extremely conserved homolog of the zinc finger protein
basonuclin.

Vanhoutteghem A(1), Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 2228 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Institut Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Vivant des
Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 75006 Paris, France.

Basonuclin is a zinc finger protein specific to basal keratinocytes and germ
cells. In keratinocytes, basonuclin behaves as a stem cell marker and is thought 
to be a transcription factor that maintains proliferative capacity and prevents
terminal differentiation. The human gene is located on chromosome 15. We have
discovered in the chicken the existence of basonuclin 2, a basonuclin homolog. We
also report the entire sequence of mouse and human basonuclin 2; the
corresponding genes are located on mouse chromosome 4 and human chromosome 9.
Although the amino acid sequence of basonuclin 2 differs extensively from that of
basonuclin 1, the two proteins share essential features. Both contain three
paired zinc fingers, a nuclear localization signal, and a serine stripe. The
basonuclin 2 mRNA has a wider tissue distribution than the basonuclin 1 mRNA: it 
is particularly abundant in testis, kidney, uterus, and intestine. The extreme
conservation of the basonuclin 2 amino acid sequence across vertebrates suggests 
that basonuclin 2 serves an important function, presumably as a regulatory
protein of DNA transcription.

PMCID: PMC373485
PMID: 14988505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


