
1. APMIS. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.1111/apm.12512. [Epub ahead of print]

BPTF, a chromatin remodeling-related gene, exhibits frameshift mutations in
gastric and colorectal cancers.

Lee JH(1), Kim MS(1), Yoo NJ(1), Lee SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. suhulee@catholic.ac.kr.

PMID: 26899553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 5;7:10153. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10153.

BPTF is required for c-MYC transcriptional activity and in vivo tumorigenesis.

Richart L(1), Carrillo-de Santa Pau E(1), Río-Machín A(2), de Andrés MP(1),
Cigudosa JC(2), Lobo VJ(1), Real FX(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, Cancer Cell Biology Programme, Spanish
National Cancer Research Center-CNIO, Madrid 28029, Spain. (2)Molecular
Cytogenetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Center-CNIO, Madrid 28029, Spain. (3)Departament de Ciències
Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

c-MYC oncogene is deregulated in most human tumours. Histone marks associated
with transcriptionally active genes define high-affinity c-MYC targets. The
mechanisms involved in their recognition by c-MYC are unknown. Here we report
that c-MYC interacts with BPTF, a core subunit of the NURF chromatin-remodelling 
complex. BPTF is required for the activation of the full c-MYC transcriptional
programme in fibroblasts. BPTF knockdown leads to decreased c-MYC recruitment to 
DNA and changes in chromatin accessibility. In Bptf-null MEFs, BPTF is necessary 
for c-MYC-driven proliferation, G1-S progression and replication stress, but not 
for c-MYC-driven apoptosis. Bioinformatics analyses unveil that BPTF levels
correlate positively with c-MYC-driven transcriptional signatures. In vivo, Bptf 
inactivation in pre-neoplastic pancreatic acinar cells significantly delays
tumour development and extends survival. Our findings uncover BPTF as a crucial
c-MYC co-factor required for its biological activity and suggest that the
BPTF-c-MYC axis is a potential therapeutic target in cancer.

PMID: 26729287  [PubMed - in process]


3. PLoS Genet. 2015 Oct 6;11(10):e1005555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005555.
eCollection 2015.

Chromatin-Remodelling Complex NURF Is Essential for Differentiation of Adult
Melanocyte Stem Cells.

Koludrovic D(1), Laurette P(2), Strub T(3), Keime C(2), Le Coz M(4), Coassolo
S(2), Mengus G(2), Larue L(5), Davidson I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France; Beaston
Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (2)Department of
Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire 
et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France. (3)Department of Oncological
Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United
States of America. (4)Institut Curie CNRS UMR3347, INSERM U1021, Bat 110, Orsay, 
France. (5)Institut Curie CNRS UMR3347, INSERM U1021, Bat 110, Orsay, France;
Equipes labélisées Ligue Contre le Cancer, Orsay and Strasbourg, France.
(6)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France; Equipes
labélisées Ligue Contre le Cancer, Orsay and Strasbourg, France.

MIcrophthalmia-associated Transcription Factor (MITF) regulates melanocyte and
melanoma physiology. We show that MITF associates the NURF chromatin-remodelling 
factor in melanoma cells. ShRNA-mediated silencing of the NURF subunit BPTF
revealed its essential role in several melanoma cell lines and in untransformed
melanocytes in vitro. Comparative RNA-seq shows that MITF and BPTF co-regulate
overlapping gene expression programs in cell lines in vitro. Somatic and specific
inactivation of Bptf in developing murine melanoblasts in vivo shows that Bptf
regulates their proliferation, migration and morphology. Once born, Bptf-mutant
mice display premature greying where the second post-natal coat is white. This
second coat is normally pigmented by differentiated melanocytes derived from the 
adult melanocyte stem cell (MSC) population that is stimulated to proliferate and
differentiate at anagen. An MSC population is established and maintained
throughout the life of the Bptf-mutant mice, but these MSCs are abnormal and at
anagen, give rise to reduced numbers of transient amplifying cells (TACs) that do
not express melanocyte markers and fail to differentiate into mature melanin
producing melanocytes. MSCs display a transcriptionally repressed chromatin state
and Bptf is essential for reactivation of the melanocyte gene expression program 
at anagen, the subsequent normal proliferation of TACs and their differentiation 
into mature melanocytes.

PMCID: PMC4595011
PMID: 26440048  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33878-92. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5302.

BPTF promotes tumor growth and predicts poor prognosis in lung adenocarcinomas.

Dai M(1), Lu JJ(2), Guo W(1), Yu W(1), Wang Q(3), Tang R(1), Tang Z(1), Xiao
Y(1), Li Z(1), Sun W(1), Sun X(1), Qin Y(1), Huang W(4,)(5), Deng WG(4,)(5), Wu
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital & Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Central 
Hospital, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. (2)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital,Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China. (3)The Second Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, China. (4)Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of
Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine,
Guangzhou, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Targeted Drug for Tumors of
Guangdong Province, Guangzhou Double Bioproduct Inc., Guangzhou, China.

BPTF, a subunit of NURF, is well known to be involved in the development of
eukaryotic cell, but little is known about its roles in cancers, especially in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here we showed that BPTF was specifically
overexpressed in NSCLC cell lines and lung adenocarcinoma tissues. Knockdown of
BPTF by siRNA significantly inhibited cell proliferation, induced cell apoptosis 
and arrested cell cycle progress from G1 to S phase. We also found that BPTF
knockdown downregulated the expression of the phosphorylated Erk1/2, PI3K and Akt
proteins and induced the cleavage of caspase-8, caspase-7 and PARP proteins,
thereby inhibiting the MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling and activating apoptotic
pathway. BPTF knockdown by siRNA also upregulated the cell cycle inhibitors such 
as p21 and p18 but inhibited the expression of cyclin D, phospho-Rb and
phospho-cdc2 in lung cancer cells. Moreover, BPTF knockdown by its specific shRNA
inhibited lung cancer growth in vivo in the xenografts of A549 cells accompanied 
by the suppression of VEGF, p-Erk and p-Akt expression. Immunohistochemical assay
for tumor tissue microarrays of lung tumor tissues showed that BPTF
overexpression predicted a poor prognosis in the patients with lung
adenocarcinomas. Therefore, our data indicate that BPTF plays an essential role
in cell growth and survival by targeting multiply signaling pathways in human
lung cancers.

PMCID: PMC4741809
PMID: 26418899  [PubMed - in process]


5. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Oct 16;10(10):2246-56. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00483. Epub 
2015 Jul 28.

Dual Screening of BPTF and Brd4 Using Protein-Observed Fluorine NMR Uncovers New 
Bromodomain Probe Molecules.

Urick AK(1), Hawk LM(1), Cassel MK(1), Mishra NK(1), Liu S(2), Adhikari N(3),
Zhang W(2), dos Santos CO(4), Hall JL(3), Pomerantz WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota , 207 Pleasant St. SE,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States. (2)Department of Chemistry,
University of Massachusetts Boston , 100 Morrissey Boulevard, Boston,
Massachusetts 02125, United States. (3)Lillehei Heart Institute , Department of
Medicine, 2231 6th Street SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States.
(4)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 
11724, United States.

Bromodomain-containing protein dysregulation is linked to cancer, diabetes, and
inflammation. Selective inhibition of bromodomain function is a newly proposed
therapeutic strategy. We describe a (19)F NMR dual screening method for small
molecule discovery using fluorinated tryptophan resonances on two
bromodomain-containing proteins. The chemical shift dispersion of (19)F
resonances within fluorine-labeled proteins enables the simultaneous analysis of 
two fluorinated bromodomains by NMR. A library of 229 small molecules was
screened against the first bromodomain of Brd4 and the BPTF bromodomain. We
report the first small molecule selective for BPTF over Brd4, termed AU1. The Kd 
= 2.8 µM for AU1, which is active in a cell-based reporter assay. No binding is
detected with Brd4. Three new Brd4 inhibitors with submicromolar affinity were
also discovered. Brd4 hits were validated in a thermal stability assay and
potency determined via fluorescence anisotropy. The speed, ease of
interpretation, and low protein concentration needed for protein-observed (19)F
NMR experiments in a multiprotein format offers a new method to discover and
characterize selective ligands for bromodomain-containing proteins.

PMID: 26158404  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Neurosci. 2015 Jun 3;35(22):8493-506. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0377-15.2015.

The Chromatin Remodeling Protein Bptf Promotes Posterior Neuroectodermal Fate by 
Enhancing Smad2-Activated wnt8a Expression.

Ma Y(1), Liu X(1), Liu Z(1), Wei S(1), Shang H(1), Xue Y(2), Cao Y(1), Meng A(3),
Wang Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, and. (2)Tsinghua-Peking
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
China. (3)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China qiangwang@ioz.ac.cn
mengam@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane 
Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China,
and qiangwang@ioz.ac.cn mengam@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

During vertebrate embryogenesis, the neuroectoderm is induced from dorsal
ectoderm and then partitioned into anterior and posterior neuroectodermal domains
by posteriorizing signals, such as Wnt and fibroblast growth factor. However,
little is known about epigenetic regulation of posteriorizing gene expression.
Here, we report a requirement of the chromatin remodeling protein Bptf for
neuroectodermal posteriorization in zebrafish embryos. Knockdown of bptf leads to
an expansion of the anterior neuroectoderm at the expense of the posterior
ectoderm. Bptf functionally and physically interacts with p-Smad2, which is
activated by non-Nodal TGF-ß signaling, to promote the expression of wnt8a, a
critical gene for neural posteriorization. Bptf and Smad2 directly bind to and
activate the wnt8a promoter through recruiting NURF remodeling complex. When bptf
function or TGF-ß signal transduction is inhibited, the nucleosome density on the
wnt8a promoter is increased. We propose that Bptf and TGF-ß/Smad2 mediate
nucleosome remodeling to regulate wnt8a expression and hence neural
posteriorization.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/358493-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 26041917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2015 Jun;12(3):317-28. doi: 10.1586/14789450.2015.1033409.
Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Functional proteomics of the epigenetic regulators ASXL1, ASXL2 and ASXL3: a
convergence of proteomics and epigenetics for translational medicine.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Omics Network, National Cancer Center - Japan, 5-1-1 Tsukiji
Chuo Ward, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

ASXL1, ASXL2 and ASXL3 are epigenetic scaffolds for BAP1, EZH2, NCOA1, nuclear
receptors and WTIP. Here, functional proteomics of the ASXL family members are
reviewed with emphasis on mutation spectra, the ASXM2 domain and the plant
homeodomain (PHD) finger. Copy number gains of ASXL1 occur in chromosome 20q11.2 
duplication syndrome and cervical cancer. Truncation mutations of ASXLs occur in 
autism, Bohring-Opitz and related syndromes, hematological malignancies and solid
tumors, such as prostate cancer, breast cancer and high-grade glioma, which are
gain- or loss-of-function mutations. The ASXM2 domain is a binding module for
androgen receptor and estrogen receptor a, while the PHD finger is a ligand of
WTIP LIM domains and a putative chromatin-binding module. Phylogenetic analyses
of 139 human PHD fingers revealed that ASXL PHD fingers cluster with those of
BPTF, DIDO, ING1, KDM5A (JARID1A), KMT2E (MLL5), PHF2, PHF8 and PHF23. The cell
context-dependent epigenetic code of ASXLs should be deciphered to develop
therapeutics for human diseases.

PMID: 25835095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jan 15;8(1):714-21. eCollection 2015.

Upregulated MiR-1269 in hepatocellular carcinoma and its clinical significance.

Gan TQ(1), Tang RX(2), He RQ(1), Dang YW(2), Xie Y(2), Chen G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region,
P. R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVES: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that have been
increasingly shown important roles in various classes of cancers. However,
miR-1269 has not been comprehensively studied in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
Thus, the purpose of the study was to evaluate the relationship between the
expression of miR-1269 and clinicopathological parameters in HCC patients, and to
predict its potential target genes.
METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from 95 pairs of HCC and matching adjacent
non-cancerous tissues. The level of miR-1269 expression was detected by using
quantitative real-time RT-PCR and calculated with the 2(-<U+0394>Cq) method. Eighteen
online biological databases were used for targets prediction.
RESULTS: MiR-1269 expression was up-regulated in HCC tissues (1.9264±0.7160)
compared to their non-tumor livers (1.5518±0.7273, P < 0.001). Level of miR-1269 
was positively correlated to tumor nodes (r = 0.206, P = 0.046), metastasis (r = 
0.203, P = 0.049), portal vein tumor embolus (r = 0.247, P = 0.016),
vaso-invasion (r = 0.273, P = 0.008), tumor capsular infiltration (r = 0.407, P <
0.001) and expression of MTDH (r = 0.211, P = 0.005). Finally, 7 databases could 
be applied for the target prediction successfully. There were 9 targeted genes
which had been shown concurrently by at least 4 databases: AGAP1, AGK, BPTF,
C16orf74, DACT1, LIX1L, RBMS3, ZNF706 and BMPER.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-1269 may be possibly involved in the tumorigenesis and progress 
of HCC. MiR-1269 could also act as a potential biomarker for the prognosis
prediction for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4358503
PMID: 25785048  [PubMed]


9. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Aug;141(8):1465-74. doi: 10.1007/s00432-015-1937-y.
Epub 2015 Feb 26.

The prognostic significance of bromodomain PHD-finger transcription factor in
colorectal carcinoma and association with vimentin and E-cadherin.

Xiao S(1), Liu L, Lu X, Long J, Zhou X, Fang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated Nanhua Hospital of University of
South China, 336 South Dongfeng Road, Hengyang, 421002, Hunan Province, China,
cramp800@163.com.

PURPOSE: Bromodomain PHD-finger transcription factor (BPTF) is a
chromatin-mediated regulation of transcription factor, playing an important role 
in embryogenesis and differentiation. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has
a pivotal role in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression, sharing the similar
characteristic with BPTF. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine the
expression and clinical value of BPTF and the correlation with EMT markers in
patients with CRC.
METHODS: Real-time PCR and Western blot were performed to evaluate the mRNA and
protein expression levels of BPTF in 20 pairs of fresh-frozen CRC and non-tumor
adjacent tissues (NATs). The expressions of BPTF, vimentin and E-cadherin were
examined by immunohistochemical staining in 105 cases of paraffin-embedded
primary CRC specimens. In addition, the clinicopathological significance and the 
prognostic value of BPTF, vimentin and E-cadherin expression were further
determined. Then, the correlation of BPTF with vimentin and E-cadherin was also
explored.
RESULTS: BPTF mRNA and protein expression were significantly overexpressed in CRC
tissues when compared with paired NATs (P < 0.01). The expression levels of BPTF 
and vimentin in CRC paraffin-embedded specimens were significantly higher than
the expression in NATs (P < 0.01), while the expressions of E-cadherin in tumors 
were obviously lower than in NATs (P < 0.01). Tumors with high expression of BPTF
and vimentin, as well as low expression of E-cadherin, were significantly
correlated with various adverse clinicopathological factors (P < 0.05). The CRC
patients with a high BPTF or vimentin expression had shorter overall survival
than those with lower expression (P < 0.05). Furthermore, univariate analysis and
multivariate analysis showed that high BPTF expression was an independent
prognostic factor for patients with CRC. The last and more interesting Spearman
rank correlation analysis and microscopic observation found that the expression
of BPTF obviously correlated with the expression of EMT markers vimentin and
E-cadherin.
CONCLUSION: Our results strongly suggested that the high BPTF expression was
significantly correlated with tumor progression and may be a potent prognostic
marker of CRC. Moreover, BPTF expression was significantly associated with EMT
markers vimentin and E-cadherin.

PMID: 25716692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Feb 23;107(5). pii: djv034. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv034.

The role of BPTF in melanoma progression and in response to BRAF-targeted
therapy.

Dar AA(1), Nosrati M(1), Bezrookove V(1), de Semir D(1), Majid S(1), Thummala
S(1), Sun V(1), Tong S(1), Leong SP(1), Minor D(1), Billings PR(1), Soroceanu
L(1), Debs R(1), Miller JR 3rd(1), Sagebiel RW(1), Kashani-Sabet M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Melanoma Research and Treatment (AAD, MN, VB, DdS, ST, VS, ST,
SPLL, DM, JRMIII, RWS, MKS), California Pacific Medical Center Research
Institute, San Francisco, CA (AAD, MN, VB, DdS, ST, VS, ST, SPLL, DM, LS, RD,
JRMIII, RWS, MKS); Department of Urology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA (SM); Life
Technologies, Inc. Carlsbad, CA (PRB). (2)Center for Melanoma Research and
Treatment (AAD, MN, VB, DdS, ST, VS, ST, SPLL, DM, JRMIII, RWS, MKS), California 
Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA (AAD, MN, VB, DdS,
ST, VS, ST, SPLL, DM, LS, RD, JRMIII, RWS, MKS); Department of Urology, Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center and University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA (SM); Life Technologies, Inc. Carlsbad, CA (PRB). kashani@cpmcri.org.

BACKGROUND: Bromodomain PHD finger transcription factor (BPTF) plays an important
role in chromatin remodeling, but its functional role in tumor progression is
incompletely understood. Here we explore the oncogenic effects of BPTF in
melanoma.
METHODS: The consequences of differential expression of BPTF were explored using 
shRNA-mediated knockdown in several melanoma cell lines. Immunoblotting was used 
to assess the expression of various proteins regulated by BPTF. The functional
role of BPTF in melanoma progression was investigated using assays of colony
formation, invasion, cell cycle, sensitivity to selective BRAF inhibitors, and in
xenograft models of melanoma progression (n = 12 mice per group). The biomarker
role of BPTF in melanoma progression was assessed using fluorescence in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemical analyses. All statistical tests were
two-sided.
RESULTS: shRNA-mediated BPTF silencing suppressed the proliferative capacity (by 
65.5%) and metastatic potential (by 66.4%) of melanoma cells. Elevated BPTF copy 
number (mean = 3) was observed in 28 of 77 (36.4%) melanomas. BPTF overexpression
predicted poor survival in a cohort of 311 melanoma patients (distant
metastasis-free survival P = .03, and disease-specific survival P = .008), and
promoted resistance to BRAF inhibitors in melanoma cell lines. Metastatic
melanoma tumors progressing on BRAF inhibitors contained low BPTF-expressing,
apoptotic tumor cell subclones, indicating the continued presence of
drug-responsive subclones within tumors demonstrating overall resistance to
anti-BRAF agents.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate multiple protumorigenic functions for BPTF
and identify it as a novel target for anticancer therapy. They also suggest the
combination of BPTF targeting with BRAF inhibitors as a novel therapeutic
strategy for melanomas with mutant BRAF.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4555639
PMID: 25713167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell. 2014 Oct 23;159(3):543-57. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.033.

Enhancer interaction networks as a means for singular olfactory receptor
expression.

Markenscoff-Papadimitriou E(1), Allen WE(2), Colquitt BM(1), Goh T(3), Murphy
KK(4), Monahan K(3), Mosley CP(3), Ahituv N(4), Lomvardas S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (2)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (4)Department of
Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (5)Neuroscience Graduate
Program, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA;
Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158, USA. Electronic address: sl682@columbia.edu.

The transcriptional activation of one out of ?2800 olfactory receptor (OR)
alleles is a poorly understood process. Here, we identify a plethora of putative 
OR enhancers and study their in vivo activity in olfactory neurons. Distinguished
by an unusual epigenetic signature, candidate OR enhancers are characterized by
extensive interchromosomal interactions associated with OR transcription and
share a similar pattern of transcription factor footprints. In particular, we
establish the role of the transcription factor Bptf as a facilitator of both
enhancer interactions and OR transcription. Our observations agree with the model
whereby OR transcription occurs in the context of multiple interacting enhancers.
Disruption of these interchromosomal interactions results in weak and multigenic 
OR expression, suggesting that the rare coincidence of numerous enhancers over a 
stochastically chosen OR may account for the singularity and robustness in OR
transcription.

PMCID: PMC4243057
PMID: 25417106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dig Dis Sci. 2015 Apr;60(4):910-8. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3411-0. Epub 2014 Nov 
2.

BPTF Associated with EMT Indicates Negative Prognosis in Patients with
Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Xiao S(1), Liu L, Fang M, Zhou X, Peng X, Long J, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated Nanhua Hospital of University of
South China, 336 South Dongfeng Road, Hengyang, 421002, Hunan Province, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays an important role 
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) dissemination. Bromodomain PHD-finger
transcription factor (BPTF) could regulate embrogenesis and stem cell
differentiation, and it may be involved in tumor progression and EMT. In this
study, we aimed to determine BPTF, E-cadherin and vimentin expression in tumor
tissues and the clinical significance in relation to HCC.
METHODS: The BPTF, vimentin and E-cadherin expression of 106 HCC tissue samples
was examined by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: BPTF and vimentin showed high expression and E-cadherin showed low
expression in HCC. BPTF is associated with the tumor number, vascular invasion,
Edmondson-Steiner grade, TNM stage and recurrence (P < 0.05). Vimentin is
positively correlated with tumor size, tumor number, vascular invasion,
Edmondson-Steiner grade, TNM stage and recurrence (P < 0.05). E-cadherin is
negatively correlated with tumor number, Edmondson-Steiner grade, TNM stage and
recurrence (P < 0.05). Survival analysis has shown that high expression of BPTF
and vimentin indicates poorer overall and disease-free survival (P < 0.05).
Multivariate analysis shows that BPTF is an independent marker for survival
prediction (P = 0.015). Additionally, high BPTF expression is correlated with
high vimentin expression and low E-cadherin expression (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: High BPTF expression may be an independent marker for survival
prediction in HCC patients and is probably involved in EMT.

PMID: 25362514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(1):224-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00553-14. Epub 2014 Oct
27.

Functional interactions between NURF and Ctcf regulate gene expression.

Qiu Z(1), Song C(1), Malakouti N(1), Murray D(1), Hariz A(1), Zimmerman M(1),
Gygax D(1), Alhazmi A(1), Landry JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, VCU Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, USA. (2)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
VCU Institute of Molecular Medicine, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth 
University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, USA jwlandry2@vcu.edu.

Gene expression frequently requires chromatin-remodeling complexes, and it is
assumed that these complexes have common gene targets across cell types. Contrary
to this belief, we show by genome-wide expression profiling that Bptf, an
essential and unique subunit of the nucleosome-remodeling factor (NURF),
predominantly regulates the expression of a unique set of genes between diverse
cell types. Coincident with its functions in gene expression, we observed that
Bptf is also important for regulating nucleosome occupancy at nucleosome-free
regions (NFRs), many of which are located at sites occupied by the multivalent
factors Ctcf and cohesin. NURF function at Ctcf binding sites could be direct,
because Bptf occupies Ctcf binding sites in vivo and has physical interactions
with CTCF and the cohesin subunit SA2. Assays of several Ctcf binding sites using
reporter assays showed that their regulatory activity requires Bptf in two
different cell types. Focused studies at H2-K1 showed that Bptf regulates the
ability of Klf4 to bind near an upstream Ctcf site, possibly influencing gene
expression. In combination, these studies demonstrate that gene expression as
regulated by NURF occurs partly through physical and functional interactions with
the ubiquitous and multivalent factors Ctcf and cohesin.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4295392
PMID: 25348714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Feb;42(2):507-16. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3794-1. Epub 2014
Oct 17.

Loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 13q33-34 region and molecular analysis of
ING1 and p53 genes in bladder carcinoma.

Igci M(1), Arslan A, Erturhan S, Igci YZ, Pala E, Gogebakan B, Karakok M, Cakmak 
EA, Cengiz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Gaziantep,
27310, Gaziantep, Turkey, mehriigci@gmail.com.

Cancer is a consequence of accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations in 
the cell which can lead to activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes (TSG). Since members of ING family were discovered as TSGs in
different cancer types, it was aimed to analyze the chromosome 13q33-34 region,
ING1 and p53 genes in bladder cancer. 30 paired normal and tumor tissues were
investigated in terms of microdeletion of chromosome 13q33-34 region, ING1
expression and mutation status of ING1 and p53 genes. Because there is no data
available about the transcription factors which bind to ING1 promoter, the
promoter sequence was analyzed via Genomatix-MatInspector and TFSEARCH softwares.
Used DS markers were D13S285, D13S1315, D13S796, D13S278, D13S158, and D13S779
where loss of heterozygosity (LOH) results were as 23.3, 20, 6.7, 3.3, 6.7, and 0
%, respectively. The highest LOH scores were obtained with markers D13S285 and
D13S1315 which are flanking the ING1. Seven of 30 cases showed alteration in
expression (p > 0.05). However, no mutation was detected in the exons of ING1.
One patient showed a two-nucleotide deletion in p53 gene. However no significant 
TSG activity of ING1 was observed while higher activity was reported in different
cancer types. As for the LOH data 13q33-34 region may contain different candidate
TSGs like COL4A1, COL4A2 and SOX1. As a result of computational promoter
analysis, some factors like ABL, E2F, HIF1, SOX, P53, BPTF, NRSF, c-Rel and c-ETS
were associated with the promoter region. Molecular analysis of ING1 promoter
warrants further analysis.

PMID: 25324173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. ACS Chem Biol. 2014 Dec 19;9(12):2755-60. doi: 10.1021/cb5007344. Epub 2014 Oct
27.

Fluorinated aromatic amino acids are sensitive 19F NMR probes for
bromodomain-ligand interactions.

Mishra NK(1), Urick AK, Ember SW, Schönbrunn E, Pomerantz WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota , 207 Pleasant St. SE,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States.

We describe a (19)F NMR method for detecting bromodomain-ligand interactions
using fluorine-labeled aromatic amino acids due to the conservation of aromatic
residues in the bromodomain binding site. We test the sensitivity, accuracy, and 
speed of this method with small molecule ligands (+)-JQ1, BI2536, Dinaciclib,
TG101348, and acetaminophen using three bromodomains Brd4, BrdT, and BPTF.
Simplified (19)F NMR spectra allowed for simultaneous testing of multiple
bromodomains to assess selectivity and identification of a new BPTF ligand.
Fluorine labeling only modestly affected the Brd4 structure and function assessed
by isothermal titration calorimetry, circular dichroism, and X-ray
crystallography. The speed, ease of interpretation, and low concentration of
protein needed for binding experiments affords a new method to discover and
characterize both native and new ligands.

PMCID: PMC4273984
PMID: 25290579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Cancer. 2014 May 19;14:342. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-342.

Genome instability in blood cells of a BRCA1+ breast cancer family.

Xiao F, Kim YC, Snyder C, Wen H, Chen PX, Luo J, Becirovic D, Downs B, Cowan KH, 
Lynch H(1), Wang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
htlynch@creighton.edu.

BACKGROUND: BRCA1 plays an essential role in maintaining genome stability.
Inherited BRCA1 germline mutation (BRCA1+) is a determined genetic predisposition
leading to high risk of breast cancer. While BRCA1+ induces breast cancer by
causing genome instability, most of the knowledge is known about somatic genome
instability in breast cancer cells but not germline genome instability.
METHODS: Using the exome-sequencing method, we analyzed the genomes of blood
cells in a typical BRCA1+ breast cancer family with an exon 13-duplicated founder
mutation, including six breast cancer-affected and two breast cancer unaffected
members.
RESULTS: We identified 23 deleterious mutations in the breast cancer-affected
family members, which are absent in the unaffected members. Multiple mutations
damaged functionally important and breast cancer-related genes, including
transcriptional factor BPTF and FOXP1, ubiquitin ligase CUL4B, phosphorylase
kinase PHKG2, and nuclear receptor activator SRA1. Analysis of the mutations
between the mothers and daughters shows that most mutations were germline
mutation inherited from the ancestor(s) while only a few were somatic mutation
generated de novo.
CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that BRCA1+ can cause genome instability with
both germline and somatic mutations in non-breast cells.

PMCID: PMC4031489
PMID: 24884718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014 Jun;23(6):986-96. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-1251. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Associations between 25 lung cancer risk-related SNPs and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon-induced genetic damage in coke oven workers.

Dai X(1), Deng S(1), Wang T(1), Qiu G(1), Li J(1), Yang B(1), Feng W(1), He X(1),
Deng Q(1), Ye J(1), Zhang W(1), He M(1), Zhang X(1), Guo H(1), Wu T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Key Laboratory of Environment and Health and State Key 
Laboratory of Environmental Health for Incubation, School of Public Health,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology; and
Institute of Industrial Health, Wuhan Iron and Steel (group) Corporation, Wuhan, 
Hubei, China. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Key Laboratory of Environment and Health 
and State Key Laboratory of Environmental Health for Incubation, School of Public
Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology;
and Institute of Industrial Health, Wuhan Iron and Steel (group) Corporation,
Wuhan, Hubei, China wut@mails.tjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) associated with lung cancer. However,
whether these SNPs are associated with genetic damage, a crucial event in cancer 
initiation and evolution, is still unknown. We aimed to establish associations
between these SNPs and genetic damage caused by the ubiquitous carcinogens,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).
METHODS: We cross-sectionally investigated the associations between SNPs from
published GWAS for lung cancer in Asians and PAH-induced genetic damage in 1,557 
coke oven workers in China. Urinary PAH metabolites, plasma
benzo[a]pyrene-r-7,t-8,c-10-tetrahydrotetrol-albumin (BPDE-Alb) adducts, urinary 
8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), and micronuclei (MN) frequency were determined 
by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, sandwich ELISA, high-performance liquid 
chromatography, and cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay, respectively.
RESULTS: 13q12.12-rs753955C was suggestively associated with elevated 8-OHdG
levels (P = 0.003). Higher 8-OHdG levels were observed in individuals with rare
allele homozygotes (CC) than in TT homozygotes (ß, 0.297; 95% confidence
interval, 0.124-0.471; P = 0.001). 9p21-rs1333040C, 10p14-rs1663689G, and
15q25.1-rs3813572G were significantly associated with lower MN frequency (P
values were 0.002, 0.001, and 0.005, respectively). 10p14-rs1663689G polymorphism
downregulated the relationship of the total concentration of PAH metabolites to
8-OHdG levels (Pinteraction = 0.002). TERT-rs2736100G and VTI1A-rs7086803A
aggravated the relationship of BPDE-Alb adducts to MN frequency, whereas
BPTF-rs7216064G attenuated that correlation (all Pinteraction < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Lung cancer risk-associated SNPs and their correlations with PAH
exposure were associated with 8-OHdG levels and MN frequency.
IMPACT: Lung cancer risk-associated SNPs might influence one's susceptibility to 
genetic damage caused by PAHs. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 23(6); 986-96.
©2014 AACR.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24692499  [PubMed - in process]


18. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014 Jan 1;134:362-9. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.11.008.
Epub 2013 Nov 16.

DSM-5 cannabis use disorder: a phenotypic and genomic perspective.

Agrawal A(1), Lynskey MT(2), Bucholz KK(3), Kapoor M(3), Almasy L(4), Dick DM(5),
Edenberg HJ(6), Foroud T(6), Goate A(3), Hancock DB(7), Hartz S(3), Johnson
EO(7), Hesselbrock V(8), Kramer JR(9), Kuperman S(10), Nurnberger JI Jr(6),
Schuckit M(11), Bierut LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, St. Louis,
MO, USA. Electronic address: arpana@wustl.edu. (2)Washington University School of
Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, St. Louis, MO, USA; King's College, Institute
of Psychiatry, London, UK. (3)Washington University School of Medicine,
Department of Psychiatry, St. Louis, MO, USA. (4)Texas Biomedical Research
Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA. (5)Virginia Commonwealth University, Virginia
Institute of Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics, VA, USA. (6)Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (7)RTI International, Behavioral and
Health Epidemiology Program, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. (8)University of
Connecticut, Department of Psychiatry, Farmington, CT, USA. (9)University of Iowa
School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Iowa City, IA, USA. (10)University 
of Iowa Hospitals, Division of Child Psychiatry, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(11)University of California at San Diego, Department of Psychiatry, San Diego,
CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: We explore the factor structure of DSM-5 cannabis use disorders,
examine its prevalence across European- and African-American respondents as well 
as its genetic underpinnings, utilizing data from a genome-wide study of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We also estimate the heritability of DSM-5
cannabis use disorders explained by these common SNPs.
METHODS: Data on 3053 subjects reporting a lifetime history of cannabis use were 
utilized. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were conducted to create a
factor score, which was used in a genome-wide association analysis. p-values from
the single SNP analysis were examined for evidence of gene-based association. The
aggregate effect of all SNPs was also estimated using Genome-Wide Complex Traits 
Analysis.
RESULTS: The unidimensionality of DSM-5 cannabis use disorder criteria was
demonstrated. Comparing DSM-IV to DSM-5, a decrease in prevalence of cannabis use
disorders was only noted in European-American respondents and was exceedingly
modest. For the DSM-5 cannabis use disorders factor score, no SNP surpassed the
genome-wide significance testing threshold. However, in the European-American
subsample, gene-based association testing resulted in significant associations in
3 genes (C17orf58, BPTF and PPM1D) on chromosome 17q24. In aggregate, 21% of the 
variance in DSM-5 cannabis use disorders was explained by the genome-wide SNPs;
however, this estimate was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: DSM-5 cannabis use disorder represents a unidimensional construct,
the prevalence of which is only modestly elevated above the DSM-IV version.
Considerably larger sample sizes will be required to identify individual SNPs
associated with cannabis use disorders and unequivocally establish its polygenic 
underpinnings.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3943464
PMID: 24315570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Oct 16;6(1):34. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-34.

Gene dysregulation by histone variant H2A.Z in bladder cancer.

Kim K, Punj V, Choi J, Heo K, Kim JM, Laird PW, An W.

BACKGROUND: The incorporation of histone variants into nucleosomes is one of the 
main strategies that the cell uses to regulate the structure and function of
chromatin. Histone H2A.Z is an evolutionarily conserved histone H2A variant that 
is preferentially localized within nucleosomes at the transcriptional start site 
(TSS). H2A.Z reorganizes the local chromatin structure and recruits the
transcriptional machinery for gene activation. High expression of H2A.Z has been 
reported in several types of cancers and is causally linked to genomic
instability and tumorigenesis. However, it is not entirely clear how H2A.Z
overexpression in cancer cells establishes aberrant chromatin states and promotes
gene expression.
RESULTS: Through integration of genome-wide H2A.Z ChIP-seq data with microarray
data, we demonstrate that H2A.Z is enriched around the TSS of cell cycle
regulatory genes in bladder cancer cells, and this enrichment is correlated with 
the elevated expression of cancer-promoting genes. RNAi-mediated knockdown of
H2A.Z in the cancer cells causes transcriptional suppression of multiple cell
cycle regulatory genes with a distinct decrease in cell proliferation. H2A.Z
nucleosomes around the TSS have higher levels of H3K4me2/me3, which coincides
with the recruitment of two chromatin factors, WDR5 and BPTF. The observed
recruitment is functional, as the active states of H2A.Z target genes are largely
erased by suppressing the expression of WDR5 or BPTF, effects resembling H2A.Z
knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that H2A.Z is overexpressed in bladder cancer cells and 
contributes to cancer-related transcription pathways. We also provide evidence in
support of the engagement of H3K4me2/me3 and WDR5/BPTF in H2A.Z-induced cancer
pathogenesis. Further studies are warranted to understand how H2A.Z
overexpression contributes to the recruitment of the full repertoire of
transcription machinery to target genes in bladder cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3853418
PMID: 24279307  [PubMed]


20. Nat Genet. 2013 Dec;45(12):1464-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2799. Epub 2013 Oct 13.

Recurrent inactivation of STAG2 in bladder cancer is not associated with
aneuploidy.

Balbás-Martínez C(1), Sagrera A, Carrillo-de-Santa-Pau E, Earl J, Márquez M,
Vazquez M, Lapi E, Castro-Giner F, Beltran S, Bayés M, Carrato A, Cigudosa JC,
Domínguez O, Gut M, Herranz J, Juanpere N, Kogevinas M, Langa X, López-Knowles E,
Lorente JA, Lloreta J, Pisano DG, Richart L, Rico D, Salgado RN, Tardón A,
Chanock S, Heath S, Valencia A, Losada A, Gut I, Malats N, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, CNIO (Spanish 
National Cancer Research Centre), Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2013 Dec;10(12):675.
    Urology. 2014 Apr;83(4):691-2.

Urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) is heterogeneous at the clinical, pathological
and genetic levels. Tumor invasiveness (T) and grade (G) are the main factors
associated with outcome and determine patient management. A discovery exome
sequencing screen (n = 17), followed by a prevalence screen (n = 60), identified 
new genes mutated in this tumor coding for proteins involved in chromatin
modification (MLL2, ASXL2 and BPTF), cell division (STAG2, SMC1A and SMC1B) and
DNA repair (ATM, ERCC2 and FANCA). STAG2, a subunit of cohesin, was significantly
and commonly mutated or lost in UBC, mainly in tumors of low stage or grade, and 
its loss was associated with improved outcome. Loss of expression was often
observed in chromosomally stable tumors, and STAG2 knockdown in bladder cancer
cells did not increase aneuploidy. STAG2 reintroduction in non-expressing cells
led to reduced colony formation. Our findings indicate that STAG2 is a new UBC
tumor suppressor acting through mechanisms that are different from its role in
preventing aneuploidy.

PMCID: PMC3840052
PMID: 24121791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Dec;41(22):10170-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt811. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

The splicing landscape is globally reprogrammed during male meiosis.

Schmid R(1), Grellscheid SN, Ehrmann I, Dalgliesh C, Danilenko M, Paronetto MP,
Pedrotti S, Grellscheid D, Dixon RJ, Sette C, Eperon IC, Elliott DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK,
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1
3BZ, UK, School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Durham University, Durham,
DH1 3LE, UK, Department of Health Sciences, University of 00135 Rome 'Foro
Italico', Rome, Italy, Laboratories of Neuroembryology and of Cellular and
Molecular Neurobiology, Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, 00143 Rome, Italy,
Department of Public Health and Cell Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
00133 Rome, Italy, Institute of Particle Physics Phenomenology, Durham
University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK and Life Technologies Ltd., Paisley PA4 9RF, UK.

Meiosis requires conserved transcriptional changes, but it is not known whether
there is a corresponding set of RNA splicing switches. Here, we used RNAseq of
mouse testis to identify changes associated with the progression from mitotic
spermatogonia to meiotic spermatocytes. We identified ~150 splicing switches,
most of which affect conserved protein-coding exons. The expression of many key
splicing regulators changed in the course of meiosis, including downregulation of
polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTBP1) and heterogeneous nuclear RNP A1,
and upregulation of nPTB, Tra2ß, muscleblind, CELF proteins, Sam68 and T-STAR.
The sequences near the regulated exons were significantly enriched in target
sites for PTB, Tra2ß and STAR proteins. Reporter minigene experiments
investigating representative exons in transfected cells showed that PTB binding
sites were critical for splicing of a cassette exon in the Ralgps2 mRNA and a
shift in alternative 5' splice site usage in the Bptf mRNA. We speculate that
nPTB might functionally replace PTBP1 during meiosis for some target exons, with 
changes in the expression of other splicing factors helping to establish meiotic 
splicing patterns. Our data suggest that there are substantial changes in the
determinants and patterns of alternative splicing in the mitotic-to-meiotic
transition of the germ cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3905889
PMID: 24038356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2013 Sep;70:33-42. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.05.001. Epub
2013 May 17.

Analysis of rice Snf2 family proteins and their potential roles in epigenetic
regulation.

Hu Y(1), Zhu N, Wang X, Yi Q, Zhu D, Lai Y, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Jingchu University of Technology, 448000 Jingmen, China. feng2602@sina.com

Snf2 family proteins are ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling factors that control 
many aspects of DNA events such as transcription, replication, homologous
recombination and DNA repair. In animals several members in this family have been
revealed to control gene expression in concert with other epigenetic mechanisms
including histone modification, histone variants and DNA methylation. Their
function in regulating genome expression in plant has hardly been disclosed
before except in Arabidopsis. Here we identified 40 members of this family in the
rice (Oryza Sativa) genome and constructed a phylogenetic tree together with
Arabidopsis 41 Snf2 proteins. Sequence alignment of the Snf2 helicase regions
revealed conserved motifs and blocks in most proteins. Expression profile
analysis indicates that many rice Snf2 family genes show a tissue-specific
expression pattern and some of them respond to abiotic stresses including
drought, salt and cold. The results provide a basis for further analysis of their
roles in epigenetic regulation to control rice development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Jun 24;14(7):753-63. doi: 10.1038/ncb2520.

Diverse epigenetic strategies interact to control epidermal differentiation.

Mulder KW(1), Wang X, Escriu C, Ito Y, Schwarz RF, Gillis J, Sirokmány G, Donati 
G, Uribe-Lewis S, Pavlidis P, Murrell A, Markowetz F, Watt FM.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research
Institute, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. klaas.mulder@cancer.org.uk

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;14(7):652-3.

It is becoming clear that interconnected functional gene networks, rather than
individual genes, govern stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. To identify 
epigenetic factors that impact on human epidermal stem cells we performed
siRNA-based genetic screens for 332 chromatin modifiers. We developed a Bayesian 
mixture model to predict putative functional interactions between epigenetic
modifiers that regulate differentiation. We discovered a network of genetic
interactions involving EZH2, UHRF1 (both known to regulate epidermal
self-renewal), ING5 (a MORF complex component), BPTF and SMARCA5 (NURF complex
components). Genome-wide localization and global mRNA expression analysis
revealed that these factors impact two distinct but functionally related gene
sets, including integrin extracellular matrix receptors that mediate anchorage of
epidermal stem cells to their niche. Using a competitive epidermal reconstitution
assay we confirmed that ING5, BPTF, SMARCA5, EZH2 and UHRF1 control
differentiation under physiological conditions. Thus, regulation of distinct gene
expression programs through the interplay between diverse epigenetic strategies
protects epidermal stem cells from differentiation.

PMID: 22729083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jun 21;586(13):1783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.063. Epub
2012 May 21.

PHD finger of the SUMO ligase Siz/PIAS family in rice reveals specific binding
for methylated histone H3 at lysine 4 and arginine 2.

Shindo H(1), Suzuki R, Tsuchiya W, Taichi M, Nishiuchi Y, Yamazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan.

We determined the three-dimensional structure of the PHD finger of the rice
Siz/PIAS-type SUMO ligase, OsSiz1, by NMR spectroscopy and investigated binding
ability for a variety of methylated histone H3 tails, showing that OsSiz1-PHD
primarily recognizes dimethylated Arg2 of the histone H3 and that methylations at
Arg2 and Lys4 reveal synergy effect on binding to OsSiz1-PHD. The K4 cage of
OsSiz1-PHD for trimethylated Lys4 of H3K4me3 was similar to that of the BPTF-PHD 
finger, while the R2 pocket for Arg2 was different. It is intriguing that the PHD
module of Siz/PIAS plays an important role, with collaboration with the DNA
binding domain SAP, in gene regulation through SUMOylation of a variety of
effectors associated with the methylated arginine-riched chromatin domains.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22626555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1050-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.134098.111. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Primate segmental duplication creates novel promoters for the LRRC37 gene family 
within the 17q21.31 inversion polymorphism region.

Bekpen C(1), Tastekin I, Siswara P, Akdis CA, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research, Davos, Switzerland.
cemalettin.bekpen@boun.edu.tr

The LRRC37 gene family maps to a complex region of the human genome and has been 
subjected to multiple rounds of segmental duplication. We investigate the
expression and regulation of this gene family in multiple tissues and organisms
and show a testis-specific expression of this gene family in mouse but a more
ubiquitous pattern of expression among primates. Evolutionary and phylogenetic
analyses support a model in which new alternative promoters have been acquired
during primate evolution. We identify two promoters, Cl8 and particularly Cl3,
both of which are highly active in the cerebellum and fetal brain in human and
have been duplicated from a promoter region of two unrelated genes, BPTF and
DND1, respectively. Two of these more broadly expressed gene family members,
LRRC37A1 and A4, define the boundary of a common human inversion polymorphism
mapping to chromosome 17q21.31 (the MAPT locus)-a region associated with risk for
frontal temporal dementia, Parkinsonism, and intellectual disability. We propose 
that the regulation of the LRRC37 family occurred in a stepwise manner, acquiring
foreign promoters from BPTF and DND1 via segmental duplication. This unusual
evolutionary trajectory altered the regulation of the LRRC37 family, leading to
increased expression in the fetal brain and cerebellum.

PMCID: PMC3371713
PMID: 22419166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Blood. 2011 Aug 4;118(5):1386-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-319111. Epub 2011
Jun 8.

Chromatin boundaries require functional collaboration between the hSET1 and NURF 
complexes.

Li X(1), Wang S, Li Y, Deng C, Steiner LA, Xiao H, Wu C, Bungert J, Gallagher PG,
Felsenfeld G, Qiu Y, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Chromatin insulators protect erythroid genes from being silenced during
erythropoiesis, and the disruption of barrier insulator function in erythroid
membrane gene loci results in mild or severe anemia. We showed previously that
the USF1/2-bound 5'HS4 insulator mediates chromatin barrier activity in the
erythroid-specific chicken ß-globin locus. It is currently not known how
insulators establish such a barrier. To understand the function of USF1, we
purified USF1-associated protein complexes and found that USF1 forms a
multiprotein complex with hSET1 and NURF, thus exhibiting histone H3K4
methyltransferase- and ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling activities,
respectively. Both SET1 and NURF are recruited to the 5'HS4 insulator by USF1 to 
retain the active chromatin structure in erythrocytes. Knock-down of NURF
resulted in a rapid loss of barrier activity accompanied by an alteration of
nucleosome positioning, increased occupancy of the nucleosome-free linker region 
at the insulator site, and increased repressive H3K27me3 levels in the vicinity
of the HS4 insulator. Furthermore, suppression of SET1 reduced barrier activity, 
decreased H3K4me2 and acH3K9/K14, and diminished the recruitment of BPTF at
several erythroid-specific barrier insulator sites. Therefore, our data reveal a 
synergistic role of hSET1 and NURF in regulating the USF-bound barrier insulator 
to prevent erythroid genes from encroachment of heterochromatin.

PMCID: PMC3152501
PMID: 21653943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell. 2011 May 27;145(5):692-706. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.053. Epub 2011 May 
19.

Recognition of a mononucleosomal histone modification pattern by BPTF via
multivalent interactions.

Ruthenburg AJ(1), Li H, Milne TA, Dewell S, McGinty RK, Yuen M, Ueberheide B, Dou
Y, Muir TW, Patel DJ, Allis CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University,
1230 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10065, USA.

Little is known about how combinations of histone marks are interpreted at the
level of nucleosomes. The second PHD finger of human BPTF is known to
specifically recognize histone H3 when methylated on lysine 4 (H3K4me2/3). Here, 
we examine how additional heterotypic modifications influence BPTF binding. Using
peptide surrogates, three acetyllysine ligands are indentified for a PHD-adjacent
bromodomain in BPTF via systematic screening and biophysical characterization.
Although the bromodomain displays limited discrimination among the three possible
acetyllysines at the peptide level, marked selectivity is observed for only one
of these sites, H4K16ac, in combination with H3K4me3 at the mononucleosome level.
In support, these two histone marks constitute a unique trans-histone
modification pattern that unambiguously resides within a single nucleosomal unit 
in human cells, and this module colocalizes with these marks in the genome.
Together, our data call attention to nucleosomal patterning of covalent marks in 
dictating critical chromatin associations.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3135172
PMID: 21596426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 May 1;50(9):1186-95. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.01.033. Epub 2011 Feb 2.

Molecular cross-talk between the NRF2/KEAP1 signaling pathway, autophagy, and
apoptosis.

Stepkowski TM(1), Kruszewski MK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology, Center for Radiobiology and
Biological Dosimetry, 03-195 Warsaw, Poland. t.stepkowski@ichtj.waw.pl

Oxidative stress, perturbations in the cellular thiol level and redox balance,
affects many cellular functions, including signaling pathways. This, in turn, may
cause the induction of autophagy or apoptosis. The NRF2/KEAP1 signaling pathway
is the main pathway responsible for cell defense against oxidative stress and
maintaining the cellular redox balance at physiological levels. The relation
between NRF2/KEAP1 signaling and regulation of apoptosis and autophagy is not
well understood. In this hypothesis article we discuss how KEAP1 protein and its 
direct interactants (such as PGAM5, prothymosin a, FAC1 (BPTF), and p62) provide 
a molecular foundation for a possible cross-talk between NRF2/KEAP1, apoptosis,
and autophagy pathways. We present a hypothesis for how NRF2/KEAP1 may interfere 
with the cellular apoptosis-regulatory machinery through activation of the ASK1
kinase by a KEAP1 binding partner-PGAM5. Based on very recent experimental
evidence, new hypotheses for a cross-talk between NF-<U+03BA>B and the NRF2/KEAP1
pathway in the context of autophagy-related "molecular hub" protein p62 are also 
presented. The roles of KEAP1 molecular binding partners in apoptosis regulation 
during carcinogenesis and in neurodegenerative diseases are also discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 1;25(3):275-86. doi: 10.1101/gad.2007311.

Chromatin remodeling complex NURF regulates thymocyte maturation.

Landry JW(1), Banerjee S, Taylor B, Aplan PD, Singer A, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jwlandry2@vcu.edu

The maturation of T cells requires signaling from both cytokine and T-cell
receptors to gene targets in chromatin, but how chromatin architecture influences
this process is largely unknown. Here we show that thymocyte maturation
post-positive selection is dependent on the nucleosome remodeling factor (NURF). 
Depletion of Bptf (bromodomain PHD finger transcription factor), the largest NURF
subunit, in conditional mouse mutants results in developmental arrest beyond the 
CD4(+) CD8(int) stage without affecting cellular proliferation, cellular
apoptosis, or coreceptor gene expression. In the Bptf mutant, specific subsets of
genes important for thymocyte development show aberrant expression. We also
observed defects in DNase I-hypersensitive chromatin structures at Egr1, a
prototypical Bptf-dependent gene that is required for efficient thymocyte
development. Moreover, chromatin binding of the sequence-specific factor Srf
(serum response factor) to Egr1 regulatory sites is dependent on Bptf function.
Physical interactions between NURF and Srf suggest a model in which Srf recruits 
NURF to facilitate transcription factor binding at Bptf-dependent genes. These
findings provide evidence for causal connections between NURF, transcription
factor occupancy, and gene regulation during thymocyte development.

PMCID: PMC3034902
PMID: 21289071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Curr Biol. 2011 Jan 11;21(1):53-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.11.058. Epub 2010 Dec 
17.

Influence of combinatorial histone modifications on antibody and effector protein
recognition.

Fuchs SM(1), Krajewski K, Baker RW, Miller VL, Strahl BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) 
function in a combinatorial fashion to regulate the diverse activities associated
with chromatin. Yet how these patterns of histone PTMs influence the adapter
proteins known to bind them is poorly understood. In addition, how
histone-specific antibodies are influenced by these same patterns of PTMs is
largely unknown. Here we examine the binding properties of histone-specific
antibodies and histone-interacting proteins using peptide arrays containing a
library of combinatorially modified histone peptides. We find that
modification-specific antibodies are more promiscuous in their PTM recognition
than expected and are highly influenced by neighboring PTMs. Furthermore, we find
that the binding of histone-interaction domains from BPTF, CHD1, and RAG2 to H3
lysine 4 trimethylation is also influenced by combinatorial PTMs. These results
provide further support for the histone code hypothesis and raise specific
concerns with the quality of the currently available modification-specific
histone antibodies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3019281
PMID: 21167713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 11;5(3):e9657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009657.

A novel translocation breakpoint within the BPTF gene is associated with a
pre-malignant phenotype.

Buganim Y(1), Goldstein I, Lipson D, Milyavsky M, Polak-Charcon S, Mardoukh C,
Solomon H, Kalo E, Madar S, Brosh R, Perelman M, Navon R, Goldfinger N, Barshack 
I, Yakhini Z, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Partial gain of chromosome arm 17q is an abundant aberrancy in various cancer
types such as lung and prostate cancer with a prominent occurrence and prognostic
significance in neuroblastoma--one of the most common embryonic tumors. The
specific genetic element/s in 17q responsible for the cancer-promoting effect of 
these aberrancies is yet to be defined although many genes located in 17q have
been proposed to play a role in malignancy. We report here the characterization
of a naturally-occurring, non-reciprocal translocation der(X)t(X;17) in human
lung embryonal-derived cells following continuous culturing. This aberrancy was
strongly correlated with an increased proliferative capacity and with an acquired
ability to form colonies in vitro. The breakpoint region was mapped by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to the 17q24.3 locus. Further
characterization by a custom-made comparative genome hybridization array (CGH)
localized the breakpoint within the Bromodomain PHD finger Transcription Factor
gene (BPTF), a gene involved in transcriptional regulation and chromatin
remodeling. Interestingly, this translocation led to elevation in the mRNA levels
of the endogenous BPTF. Knock-down of BPTF restricted proliferation suggesting a 
role for BPTF in promoting cellular growth. Furthermore, the BPTF chromosomal
region was found to be amplified in various human tumors, especially in
neuroblastomas and lung cancers in which 55% and 27% of the samples showed gain
of 17q24.3, respectively. Additionally, 42% percent of the cancer cell lines
comprising the NCI-60 had an abnormal BPTF locus copy number. We suggest that
deregulation of BPTF resulting from the translocation may confer the cells with
the observed cancer-promoting phenotype and that our cellular model can serve to 
establish causality between 17q aberrations and carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2836376
PMID: 20300178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000574. Epub 2009 
Jul 24.

Alternative splicing of NURF301 generates distinct NURF chromatin remodeling
complexes with altered modified histone binding specificities.

Kwon SY(1), Xiao H, Wu C, Badenhorst P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, United 
Kingdom.

Drosophila NURF is an ISWI-containing chromatin remodeling complex that catalyzes
ATP-dependent nucleosome sliding. By sliding nucleosomes, NURF can alter
chromatin structure and regulate transcription. NURF301/BPTF is the only
NURF-specific subunit of NURF and is instrumental in recruiting the complex to
target genes. Here we demonstrate that three NURF301 isoforms are expressed and
that these encode functionally distinct NURF chromatin remodeling complexes.
Full-length NURF301 contains a C-terminal bromodomain and juxtaposed PHD finger
that bind histone H3 trimethylated at Lys4 (H3K4me3) and histone H4 acetylated at
Lys16 (H4K16Ac) respectively. However, a NURF301 isoform that lacks these
C-terminal domains is also detected. This truncated NURF301 isoform assembles a
complex containing ISWI, NURF55, and NURF38, indicating that a second class of
NURF remodeling complex, deficient in H3K4me3 and H4K16Ac recognition, exists. By
comparing microarray expression profiles and phenotypes of null Nurf301 mutants
with mutants that remove the C-terminal PHD fingers and bromodomain, we show that
full-length NURF301 is not essential for correct expression of the majority of
NURF gene targets in larvae. However, full-length NURF301 is required for
spermatogenesis. Mutants that lack full-length NURF exhibit a spermatocyte arrest
phenotype and fail to express a subset of spermatid differentiation genes. Our
data reveal that variants of the NURF ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex 
that recognize post-translational histone modifications are important regulators 
of primary spermatocyte differentiation in Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC2705796
PMID: 19629165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Plant J. 2009 May;58(3):511-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03795.x. Epub 2009 
Jan 18.

Arabidopsis ING and Alfin1-like protein families localize to the nucleus and bind
to H3K4me3/2 via plant homeodomain fingers.

Lee WY(1), Lee D, Chung WI, Kwon CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon 305-701, Korea.

In yeast and animals, tri- and dimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4
(H3K4me3/2) are markers of transcriptionally active genes that have recently been
shown to be primary ligands for the plant homeodomain (PHD) finger. However, PHD 
fingers able to bind to H3K4me3/2 have not been identified in plants. Here, we
identify 83 canonical PHD fingers in the Arabidopsis proteome database that are
supported by both SMART and Pfam prediction. Among these, we focus on PHD fingers
in ING (inhibitor of growth) homologues (AtING) and Alfin1-like (AL) proteins,
which are highly similar to those in human ING2 and bromodomain PHD finger
transcription factor (BPTF), based on predicted tertiary structures. ING proteins
are found in yeast, animals and plants, whereas AL proteins exist only in plants.
In vitro binding experiments indicated that PHD fingers in AtING and AL proteins 
in Arabidopsis can bind to H3K4me3, and, to a lesser extent, to H3K4me2. In
addition, mutational analysis confirmed that a predicted aromatic cage and a
specific conserved acidic residue are both crucial for binding to H3K4me3/2.
Finally, we demonstrate that AtING and AL proteins are nuclear proteins that are 
expressed in various tissues of the Arabidopsis plant. Thus, we propose that ING 
and AL proteins are nuclear proteins that are involved in chromatin regulation by
binding to H3K4me3/2, the active histone markers, in plants.

PMID: 19154204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS Genet. 2008 Oct;4(10):e1000241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000241. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Essential role of chromatin remodeling protein Bptf in early mouse embryos and
embryonic stem cells.

Landry J(1), Sharov AA, Piao Y, Sharova LV, Xiao H, Southon E, Matta J,
Tessarollo L, Zhang YE, Ko MS, Kuehn MR, Yamaguchi TP, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Heath, Bethesda, MD, USA. landrjos@mail.nih.gov

We have characterized the biological functions of the chromatin remodeling
protein Bptf (Bromodomain PHD-finger Transcription Factor), the largest subunit
of NURF (Nucleosome Remodeling Factor) in a mammal. Bptf mutants manifest growth 
defects at the post-implantation stage and are reabsorbed by E8.5. Histological
analyses of lineage markers show that Bptf(-/-) embryos implant but fail to
establish a functional distal visceral endoderm. Microarray analysis at early
stages of differentiation has identified Bptf-dependent gene targets including
homeobox transcriptions factors and genes essential for the development of
ectoderm, mesoderm, and both definitive and visceral endoderm. Differentiation of
Bptf(-/-) embryonic stem cell lines into embryoid bodies revealed its requirement
for development of mesoderm, endoderm, and ectoderm tissue lineages, and
uncovered many genes whose activation or repression are Bptf-dependent. We also
provide functional and physical links between the Bptf-containing NURF complex
and the Smad transcription factors. These results suggest that Bptf may
co-regulate some gene targets of this pathway, which is essential for
establishment of the visceral endoderm. We conclude that Bptf likely regulates
genes and signaling pathways essential for the development of key tissues of the 
early mouse embryo.

PMCID: PMC2570622
PMID: 18974875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(22):6819-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01058-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
15.

Transcriptional regulator BPTF/FAC1 is essential for trophoblast differentiation 
during early mouse development.

Goller T(1), Vauti F, Ramasamy S, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Braunschweig, Spielmann Str. 7,
38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

The putative transcriptional regulator BPTF/FAC1 is expressed in embryonic and
extraembryonic tissues of the early mouse conceptus. The extraembryonic
trophoblast lineage in mammals is essential to form the fetal part of the
placenta and hence for the growth and viability of the embryo in utero. Here, we 
describe a loss-of-function allele of the BPTF/FAC1 gene that causes embryonic
lethality in the mouse. BPTF/FAC1-deficient embryos form apparently normal
blastocysts that implant and develop epiblast, visceral endoderm, and
extraembryonic ectoderm including trophoblast stem cells. Subsequent development 
of mutants, however, is arrested at the early gastrula stage (embryonic day 6.5),
and virtually all null embryos die before midgestation. Most notably, the
ectoplacental cone is drastically reduced or absent in mutants, which may cause
the embryonic lethality. Development of the mutant epiblast is also affected, as 
the anterior visceral endoderm and the primitive streak do not form correctly,
while brachyury-expressing mesodermal cells arise but are delayed. The mutant
phenotype suggests that gastrulation is initiated, but no complete
anteroposterior axis of the epiblast appears. We conclude that BPTF/FAC1 is
essential in the extraembryonic lineage for correct development of the
ectoplacental cone and fetomaternal interactions. In addition, BPTF/FAC1 may also
play a role either directly or indirectly in anterior-posterior patterning of the
epiblast.

PMCID: PMC2573307
PMID: 18794365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Cell. 2007 Nov 30;28(4):677-91.

Structural basis for lower lysine methylation state-specific readout by MBT
repeats of L3MBTL1 and an engineered PHD finger.

Li H(1), Fischle W, Wang W, Duncan EM, Liang L, Murakami-Ishibe S, Allis CD,
Patel DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10021, USA.

Human L3MBTL1, which contains three malignant brain tumor (MBT) repeats, binds
monomethylated and dimethylated lysines, but not trimethylated lysines, in
several histone sequence contexts. In crystal structures of L3MBTL1 complexes,
the monomethyl- and dimethyllysines insert into a narrow and deep cavity of
aromatic residue-lined pocket 2, while a proline ring inserts into shallower
pocket 1. We have also engineered a single Y to E substitution within the
aromatic cage of the BPTF PHD finger, resulting in a reversal of binding
preference from trimethyl- to dimethyllysine in an H3K4 sequence context. In both
the "cavity insertion" (L3MBTL1) and "surface groove" (PHD finger) modes of
methyllysine recognition, a carboxylate group both hydrogen bonds and ion pairs
to the methylammonium proton. Our structural and binding studies of these two
modules provide insights into the molecular principles governing the decoding of 
lysine methylation states, thereby highlighting a methylation state-specific
layer of histone mark readout impacting on epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC4689580
PMID: 18042461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell. 2007 Nov 30;28(4):665-76.

Recognition of trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4 facilitates the recruitment of
transcription postinitiation factors and pre-mRNA splicing.

Sims RJ 3rd(1), Millhouse S, Chen CF, Lewis BA, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P,
Manley JL, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 4 (H3K4me3) localizes near the 5' region
of genes and is tightly associated with active loci. Several proteins, such as
CHD1, BPTF, JMJD2A, and the ING tumor suppressor family, directly recognize this 
lysine methyl mark. However, how H3K4me3 recognition participates in active
transcription remains poorly characterized. Here we identify specific
CHD1-interacting proteins via H3K4me3 affinity purification, including numerous
factors mediating postinitiation events. Conventional biochemical purification
revealed a stable complex between CHD1 and components of the spliceosome.
Depletion of CHD1 in extracts dramatically reduced splicing efficiency in vitro, 
indicating a functional link between CHD1 and the spliceosome. Knockdown of CHD1 
and H3K4me3 levels by siRNA reduced association of U2 snRNP components with
chromatin and, more importantly, altered the efficiency of pre-mRNA splicing on
active genes in vivo. These findings suggest that methylated H3K4 serves to
facilitate the competency of pre-mRNA maturation through the bridging of
spliceosomal components to H3K4me3 via CHD1.

PMCID: PMC2276655
PMID: 18042460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nature. 2007 Aug 9;448(7154):718-22.

Recognition of unmethylated histone H3 lysine 4 links BHC80 to LSD1-mediated gene
repression.

Lan F(1), Collins RE, De Cegli R, Alpatov R, Horton JR, Shi X, Gozani O, Cheng X,
Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Ave Louis Pasteur, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Histone methylation is crucial for regulating chromatin structure, gene
transcription and the epigenetic state of the cell. LSD1 is a lysine-specific
histone demethylase that represses transcription by demethylating histone H3 on
lysine 4 (ref. 1). The LSD1 complex contains a number of proteins, all of which
have been assigned roles in events upstream of LSD1-mediated demethylation apart 
from BHC80 (also known as PHF21A), a plant homeodomain (PHD) finger-containing
protein. Here we report that, in contrast to the PHD fingers of the bromodomain
PHD finger transcription factor (BPTF) and inhibitor of growth family 2 (ING2),
which bind methylated H3K4 (H3K4me3), the PHD finger of BHC80 binds unmethylated 
H3K4 (H3K4me0), and this interaction is specifically abrogated by methylation of 
H3K4. The crystal structure of the PHD finger of BHC80 bound to an unmodified H3 
peptide has revealed the structural basis of the recognition of H3K4me0.
Knockdown of BHC80 by RNA inhibition results in the de-repression of LSD1 target 
genes, and this repression is restored by the reintroduction of wild-type BHC80
but not by a PHD-finger mutant that cannot bind H3. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
showed that BHC80 and LSD1 depend reciprocally on one another to associate with
chromatin. These findings couple the function of BHC80 to that of LSD1, and
indicate that unmodified H3K4 is part of the 'histone code'. They further raise
the possibility that the generation and recognition of the unmodified state on
histone tails in general might be just as crucial as post-translational
modifications of histone for chromatin and transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC2702779
PMID: 17687328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nature. 2006 Jul 6;442(7098):91-5. Epub 2006 May 21.

Molecular basis for site-specific read-out of histone H3K4me3 by the BPTF PHD
finger of NURF.

Li H(1), Ilin S, Wang W, Duncan EM, Wysocka J, Allis CD, Patel DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jul 6;442(7098):31-2.

Mono-, di- and trimethylated states of particular histone lysine residues are
selectively found in different regions of chromatin, thereby implying specialized
biological functions for these marks ranging from heterochromatin formation to
X-chromosome inactivation and transcriptional regulation. A major challenge in
chromatin biology has centred on efforts to define the connection between
specific methylation states and distinct biological read-outs impacting on
function. For example, histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 4 (H3K4me3) is
associated with transcription start sites of active genes, but the molecular
'effectors' involved in specific recognition of H3K4me3 tails remain poorly
understood. Here we demonstrate the molecular basis for specific recognition of
H3(1-15)K4me3 (residues 1-15 of histone H3 trimethylated at K4) by a plant
homeodomain (PHD) finger of human BPTF (bromodomain and PHD domain transcription 
factor), the largest subunit of the ATP-dependent chromatin-remodelling complex, 
NURF (nucleosome remodelling factor). We report on crystallographic and NMR
structures of the bromodomain-proximal PHD finger of BPTF in free and
H3(1-15)K4me3-bound states. H3(1-15)K4me3 interacts through anti-parallel
beta-sheet formation on the surface of the PHD finger, with the long side chains 
of arginine 2 (R2) and K4me3 fitting snugly in adjacent pre-formed surface
pockets, and bracketing an invariant tryptophan. The observed stapling role by
non-adjacent R2 and K4me3 provides a molecular explanation for H3K4me3 site
specificity. Binding studies establish that the BPTF PHD finger exhibits a modest
preference for K4me3- over K4me2-containing H3 peptides, and discriminates
against monomethylated and unmodified counterparts. Furthermore, we identified
key specificity-determining residues from binding studies of H3(1-15)K4me3 with
PHD finger point mutants. Our findings call attention to the PHD finger as a
previously uncharacterized chromatin-binding module found in a large number of
chromatin-associated proteins.

PMCID: PMC4690523
PMID: 16728978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nature. 2006 Jul 6;442(7098):86-90. Epub 2006 May 21.

A PHD finger of NURF couples histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation with chromatin
remodelling.

Wysocka J(1), Swigut T, Xiao H, Milne TA, Kwon SY, Landry J, Kauer M, Tackett AJ,
Chait BT, Badenhorst P, Wu C, Allis CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jul 6;442(7098):31-2.

Lysine methylation of histones is recognized as an important component of an
epigenetic indexing system demarcating transcriptionally active and inactive
chromatin domains. Trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) marks
transcription start sites of virtually all active genes. Recently, we reported
that the WD40-repeat protein WDR5 is important for global levels of H3K4me3 and
control of HOX gene expression. Here we show that a plant homeodomain (PHD)
finger of nucleosome remodelling factor (NURF), an ISWI-containing ATP-dependent 
chromatin-remodelling complex, mediates a direct preferential association with
H3K4me3 tails. Depletion of H3K4me3 causes partial release of the NURF subunit,
BPTF (bromodomain and PHD finger transcription factor), from chromatin and
defective recruitment of the associated ATPase, SNF2L (also known as ISWI and
SMARCA1), to the HOXC8 promoter. Loss of BPTF in Xenopus embryos mimics WDR5
loss-of-function phenotypes, and compromises spatial control of Hox gene
expression. These results strongly suggest that WDR5 and NURF function in a
common biological pathway in vivo, and that NURF-mediated ATP-dependent chromatin
remodelling is directly coupled to H3K4 trimethylation to maintain Hox gene
expression patterns during development. We also identify a previously unknown
function for the PHD finger as a highly specialized methyl-lysine-binding domain.

PMID: 16728976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genomics. 2000 Jan 1;63(1):35-9.

Identification and characterization of BPTF, a novel bromodomain transcription
factor.

Jones MH(1), Hamana N, Shimane M.

Author information: 
(1)Chugai Research Institute for Molecular Medicine, 153-2 Nagai, Niihari,
Ibaraki, 300-4101, Japan.

The bromodomain is a 110-amino-acid conserved structural region associated with
proteins that regulate signal-dependent, nonbasal transcription. The bromodomain 
can regulate histone acetyl transferase activity and interacts specifically with 
acetylated lysine residues. A key role for bromodomain proteins in maintaining
normal proliferation is indicated by the implication of several bromodomain
proteins in cancer, with four of these identified at translocation breakpoints.
We searched EST databases for novel bromodomain genes. The sequence from one EST 
was used to initiate generation of a full-length clone from a testis cDNA
library. The completed sequence encodes a predicted protein of 2781 amino acids, 
which, in addition to the bromodomain, harbors further motifs characteristic of a
transcriptional coactivator: two PHD fingers and an extensive glutamine-rich
acidic domain. There are several other regions that are conserved with the
Caenorhabditis elegans putative protein F26H11, which may be functionally
homologous. The novel gene, called BPTF, is expressed in all tissues examined as 
a 10.5-kb transcript. The protein has extensive identity with the smaller FAC1
protein, suggesting that the two either are derived from the same locus or are
synonymous. BPTF has been mapped to 17q23. Functional domains found within BPTF
are consistent with a role for this protein in hormonally regulated,
chromatin-mediated regulation of transcription.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10662542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Hyg (Lond). 1975 Apr;74(2):245-50.

The role of wild ruminants in the epidemiology of bovine petechial fever.

Snodgrass DR, Karstad LH, Cooper JE.

After experimental inoculation of Cytoecetes ondiri, the agent of bovine
petechial fever (BPF), multiplication occurred in impala, bushbuck, Thomson's
gazelles and wildebeest, as shown by infectivity studies and clinical findings.
Similar attempts to infect one eland failed. As a sequel to this, blood and
spleen samples were collected from four species of wild ruminants in an area
where BPTF was endemic. Isolations of C. ondiri were made from three of five
bushbuck, but not from any other species.

PMCID: PMC2130378
PMID: 1054728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


