
1. Endocr Pathol. 2016 Mar 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma: a Rare Primary Thyroid Tumor with Confirmation 
of WWTR1 and CAMTA1 Rearrangements.

Shah AA(1), Ohori NP(2), Yip L(3), Coyne C(4), Antonescu CR(5), Seethala RR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Presbyterian
Rm. A609 200 Lothrop St, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. akeeshaashah@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Presbyterian
Rm. A609 200 Lothrop St, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. (3)Department of Surgery,
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (4)Division of
Endocrinology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

We report a rare case of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma as a primary thyroid
tumor. To our knowledge, there are only two prior unequivocal cases of primary
thyroid epithelioid hemangioendothelioma reported in the English literature. This
is the first case in the thyroid with molecular confirmation.

PMID: 27026033  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Cytogenet. 2016 Feb 3;9:10. doi: 10.1186/s13039-016-0219-y. eCollection 2016.

CANPMR syndrome and chromosome 1p32-p31 deletion syndrome coexist in two related 
individuals affected by simultaneous haplo-insufficiency of CAMTA1 and NIFA
genes.

Coci EG(1), Koehler U(2), Liehr T(3), Stelzner A(1), Fink C(4), Langen H(1),
Riedel J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Social Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, General Hospital of
Celle, 29221 Celle, Germany. (2)Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, 80335 Munich,
Germany. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena
University Hospital, 07743 Jena, Germany. (4)Department of Radiology, General
Hospital of Celle, 29223 Celle, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Non-progressive cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation (CANPMR,
OMIM 614756) and chromosome 1p32-p31 deletion syndrome (OMIM 613735) are two very
rare inherited disorders, which are caused by mono-allelic deficiency
(haplo-insufficiency) of calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1)
and, respectively, nuclear factor 1 A (NFIA) genes. The yet reported patients
affected by mono-allelic CAMTA1 dysfunction presented with neonatal hypotonia,
delayed and ataxic gait, cerebellar atrophy, psychological delay and speech
impairment, while individuals carrying a disrupted NFIA allele suffered from
agenesis/hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly, developmental delay
and urinary tract abnormalities. Both disorders were not seen in one patient
together before.
RESULTS: In this study two related individuals affected by a complex clinical
syndrome, characterized by cognitive, neurological and nephrological features
were studied for the underlying genetic disorder(s) by molecular cytogenetics.
The two individuals present dysmorphic facies, macrocephaly, generalized ataxia, 
mild tremor, strabismus, mild mental retardation and kidney hypoplasia. Moreover,
neuro-radiological studies showed hypoplasia of corpus callosum. Genetic
investigations revealed a paracentric inversion in the short arm of one
chromosome 1 with breakpoints within CAMTA1 and NFIA coding sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of two
patients harboring the simultaneous mono-allelic disruptions and consequent
haplo-insufficiencies of two genes due to an inversion event. Disruption of
CAMTA1 and NFIA genes led to neuro-psychological and nephrological dysfunctions, 
which comprised clinical features of CANPMR syndrome as well as chromosome
1p32-p31 deletion syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4741010
PMID: 26848311  [PubMed]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16;7(7):7480-8. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7060.

Epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas with TFE3 gene translocations are compossible
with CAMTA1 gene rearrangements.

Lee SJ(1), Yang WI(1), Chung WS(2), Kim SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon,
South Korea.

Epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas (EHEs) are vascular tumors of intermediate
malignancy that can undergo high-grade malignant transformations. EHEs have been 
characterized by tumor-specific WW domain-containing transcription regulator
1(WWTR1)-calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) translocations,
and recently, a novel Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1)-transcription factor E3
(TFE3) gene fusion was identified in EHEs. In this study, we examined the
expression levels of TFE3 and CAMTA1 via immunohistochemical staining and
identified chromosomal alterations using fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) assays and RT-PCR tests. Although all of the EHEs were CAMTA1-positive in 
immunohistochemical staining, only five out of 18 EHEs (27.78%) positively
expressed nuclear TFE3. The five TFE3-positive EHEs exhibited TFE3 gene
break-apart in FISH assays. YAP1-TFE3 gene fusions were confirmed by RT-PCR.
Interestingly, we observed CAMTA1 gene break-apart in all of the five
TFE3-positive EHEs via FISH assays, and four out of the five TFE3-positive EHEs
exhibited WWTR1-CAMTA1 gene fusions via RT-PCR. These results indicate that these
two chromosomal alterations are not mutually exclusive but compossible in EHEs.
Finally, primary tumor sites in TFE3-positive EHEs consistently contained single 
masses (P = 0.0359) with larger sizes (P = 0.0550) compared to TFE3-negative
EHEs. Similar to previous reports, we observed well-formed vessels more
frequently in TFE3-positive EHEs than in TFE3-negative EHEs (P = 0.0441). In
addition, TFE3-positive EHEs tended to more frequently demonstrate high-grade
nuclear atypia (P = 0.0654) and hypercellularity (P=0.0987) than TFE3-negative
EHEs. Thus, we have now established two clinically distinct subgroups of EHEs:
TFE3-positive and TFE3-negative EHEs.

PMID: 26840265  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Thorac Oncol. 2016 Feb;11(2):142-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jtho.2015.11.005.

The 2015 World Health Organization Classification of Tumors of the Pleura:
Advances since the 2004 Classification.

Galateau-Salle F(1), Churg A(2), Roggli V(3), Travis WD(4); World Health
Organization Committee for Tumors of the Pleura.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Caen, Caen, France; 
Department of Biopathology, Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, France. (2)Department of
Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. Electronic address: travisw@mskcc.org.

A new World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Tumors of the Pleura has 
recently been published. While the histologic classification of pleural malignant
mesothelioma remains the same in the 2015 WHO classification as it was in the
2004 classification, multiple new observations have been recorded. First, more
detailed study has been performed of histologic subtyping of epithelioid
mesothelioma. In particular, it has been recognized that the pleomorphic subtype 
is associated with a poor prognosis, similar to that of sarcomatoid malignant
mesothelioma. Second, there is improved understanding of the role of
immunohistochemistry in distinguishing mesothelioma from carcinomas of various
sites. Third, the criteria for distinguishing malignant mesothelioma from
reactive mesothelial proliferations has been further refined. Fourth, additional 
studies of sarcomatoid mesothelioma have defined the frequency and spectrum of
various histologic and immunohistochemical features, including heterologous
elements. Finally, pleural well-differentiated papillary mesotheliomas are better
defined and cases with invasive foci are recognized. In addition, several
promising observations in mesothelioma pathology and genetics have been made in
the past decade. These are now the subject of further investigation to determine 
if they can be validated in ways that will significantly impact clinical
practice. These include a preliminary study of grading, suggesting that nuclear
atypia and mitotic count are independent prognostic markers. The discovery of
inactivating mutations in the BRCA1-associated protein 1 gene in sporadic and
hereditary mesothelioma has opened up a variety of novel molecular, clinical, and
diagnostic investigations. One possible diagnostic application includes the
setting of separating mesothelioma from reactive mesothelial proliferations,
where it may play a role in conjunction with p16 FISH. Another useful discovery
was that the NAB2-STAT6 fusion is characteristic of solitary fibrous tumors. This
led to development of a STAT6 antibody that is a reliable immunohistochemical
marker for solitary fibrous tumors. Genetic studies also led to the finding that 
WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusions are useful diagnostic markers for epithelioid
hemangioendotheliomas, which can present as pleural-based masses. Finally,
desmoid type fibromatosis, a locally aggressive tumor that can present in the
pleura, has been shown to frequently have CTNNB1 gene mutations and express
ß-catenin by immunohistochemistry.

Copyright © 2015 International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26811225  [PubMed - in process]


5. Histopathology. 2016 Jan 13. doi: 10.1111/his.12930. [Epub ahead of print]

Advances in the Clinicopathologic and Molecular Classification of Cutaneous
Mesenchymal Neoplasms.

Costigan DC(1), Doyle LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, St. James's Hospital and Trinity College Dublin,
Dublin 8, Ireland. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

In recent years, there have been several important refinements in the
classification of cutaneous mesenchymal neoplasms, including the description of
new tumour types, along with the identification of novel and recurrent molecular 
genetic findings. In addition to providing new insights into tumour biology, many
of these advances have had significant clinical consequences with regards to
diagnostics, management and prognostication. Newly described entities include
pseudomyogenic haemangioendothelioma, haemosiderotic fibrolipomatous tumour and
fibroblastic connective tissue naevus, which are reviewed in the context of
principal differential diagnoses and significant clinical implications. Genetic
characterization of several soft tissue tumour types that occur in the skin has
resulted in the identification of diagnostically useful markers: ALK gene
rearrangement with corresponding ALK protein expression by immunohistochemistry
in epithelioid fibrous histiocytoma; WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene with CAMTA1 protein
expression in epithelioid haemangioendothelioma; MYC amplification and
overexpression in radiation-associated angiosarcoma; and EWSR1 gene rearrangement
in cutaneous myoepithelial tumours. Finally, the classification of intradermal
smooth muscle tumours and unclassified/pleomorphic dermal sarcoma has been
refined, resulting in both improved classification and prognostication. Many of
the tumour types listed above are encountered not only by specialist
dermatopathologists, but also by practicing general surgical pathologists, and
therefore this review should provide a widely applicable update on the histologic
and molecular classification of cutaneous mesenchymal neoplasms, along with the
appropriate use of ancillary diagnostic tests, in particular
immunohistochemistry, in the evaluation of such lesions and their histologic
mimics. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26763770  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 1;14(4):15471-81. doi: 10.4238/2015.November.30.25.

Quantitative candidate gene association studies of metabolic traits in Han
Chinese type 2 diabetes patients.

Wei FJ(1), Cai CY(1), Yu P(1), Lv J(1), Ling C(1), Shi WT(1), Jiao HX(1), Chang
BC(2), Yang FH(1), Tian Y(1), Li MS(1), Wang YH(1), Zou L(1), Shi JM(1), Chen
LM(2), Li WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (2)Metabolic Diseases Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (3)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China liweidong98@tmu.edu.cn.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified many loci associated with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hyperuricemia, and obesity in various ethnic
populations. However, quantitative traits have been less well investigated in Han
Chinese T2DM populations. We investigated the association between candidate gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and metabolic syndrome-related
quantitative traits in Han Chinese T2DM subjects. Unrelated Han Chinese T2DM
patients (1975) were recruited. Eighty-six SNPs were genotyped and tested for
association with quantitative traits including lipid profiles, blood pressure,
body mass index (BMI), serum uric acid (SUA), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), plasma
glucose [fasting plasma glucose (FPG)], plasma glucose 120 min post-OGTT (P2PG;
OGTT = oral glucose tolerance test), and insulin resistance-related traits. We
found that CAMTA1, ABI2, VHL, KAT2B, PKHD1, ESR1, TOX, SLC30A8, SFI1, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with HbA1c, FPG, and/or P2PG; GCK, HHEX, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, and TBX5 polymorphisms were associated with insulin resistance-related
traits; ABCG2, SLC2A9, and PKHD1 polymorphisms were associated with SUA; CAMTA1, 
VHL, KAT2B, PON1, NUB1, SLITRK5, SMAD3, FTO, FANCA, and PCSK2 polymorphisms were 
associated with blood lipid traits; CAMTA1, SPAG16, TOX, KCNQ1, ACACB, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with blood pressure; and UBE2E3, SPAG16, SLC2A9,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, SMAD3, and PNPLA3 polymorphisms were associated with
BMI (all P values <0.05). Some of the candidate genes were associated with
metabolic and anthropometric traits in T2DM in Han Chinese. Although none of
these associations reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 x 10(-8)), genes and
loci identified in this study are worthy of further replication and
investigation.

PMID: 26634513  [PubMed - in process]


7. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Jan;40(1):94-102. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000511.

Nuclear Expression of CAMTA1 Distinguishes Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma From 
Histologic Mimics.

Doyle LA(1), Fletcher CD, Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) is a malignant endothelial neoplasm
characterized by recurrent translocations involving chromosomal regions 1p36.3
and 3q25, resulting in the formation of a WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene in
approximately 90% of cases; a small subset (<5%) have a YAP1-TFE3 fusion gene.
The WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene leads to overexpression of both genes. WWTR1 protein
is expressed in many different cell types, whereas CAMTA1 expression is normally 
limited to the brain. A prior study using a polyclonal antibody directed against 
regions within the C-terminus of CAMTA1 reported widespread expression in both
normal tissues and diverse tumor types. In contrast, a recent study using a
different polyclonal antibody directed against the C-terminus of CAMTA1 suggested
that this other antibody is a potentially useful diagnostic marker for EHE. Our
study aimed to validate this finding in a large series of EHE cases and to
determine whether CAMTA1 is expressed in other epithelioid mesenchymal tumors
that may mimic EHE. Protein expression of CAMTA1 was evaluated in whole-tissue
sections of 204 tumors using a polyclonal anti-CAMTA1 antibody: 59 EHE (48
conventional, 11 "malignant"; 4 with known TFE3 gene rearrangement); 70 other
epithelioid vascular tumors; and 75 nonendothelial epithelioid mesenchymal
neoplasms. In total, 51/59 cases (86%) of EHE showed diffuse nuclear staining for
CAMTA1, including 44/48 cases (92%) with conventional histology and 7/11 cases
(64%) with "malignant" histology. Of the 8 CAMTA1-negative tumors, 6 were
positive for TFE3. With the exception of 1 case previously diagnosed as
epithelioid angiosarcoma on core biopsy, all other tumor types examined were
negative for CAMTA1. In conclusion, in keeping with the reported frequency of
WWTR1-CAMTA1 in EHE, nuclear CAMTA1 expression is identified in the majority of
EHE cases, whereas other epithelioid mesenchymal neoplasms are negative for
CAMTA1. These findings support the diagnostic utility of immunohistochemistry for
CAMTA1 in distinguishing EHE from histologic mimics, in particular benign
epithelioid vascular tumors, epithelioid angiosarcoma, and epithelioid sarcoma,
an important distinction given the differences in biological potential and
clinical course.

PMID: 26414223  [PubMed - in process]


8. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1856(1):121-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2015.05.006.
Epub 2015 Jun 4.

The Hippo signal transduction pathway in soft tissue sarcomas.

Mohamed AD(1), Tremblay AM(2), Murray GI(3), Wackerhage H(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD Scotland, UK.
(2)Stem Cell Program, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of
Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA;
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (3)School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD Scotland, UK. (4)School of Medical
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD Scotland, UK. Electronic address:
h.wackerhage@abdn.ac.uk.

Sarcomas are rare cancers (1% of all solid tumours) usually of mesenchymal
origin. Here, we review evidence implicating the Hippo pathway in soft tissue
sarcomas. Several transgenic mouse models of Hippo pathway members (Nf2, Mob1,
LATS1 and YAP1 mutants) develop various types of sarcoma. Despite that, Hippo
member genes are rarely point mutated in human sarcomas. Instead, WWTR1-CAMTA1
and YAP1-TFE3 fusion genes are found in almost all cases of epithelioid
haemangioendothelioma. Also copy number gains of YAP1 and other Hippo members
occur at low frequencies but the most likely cause of perturbed Hippo signalling 
in sarcoma is the cross-talk with commonly mutated cancer genes such as KRAS,
PIK3CA, CTNNB1 or FBXW7. Current Hippo pathway-targeting drugs include compounds 
that target the interaction between YAP and TEAD G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCR) and the mevalonate pathway (e.g. statins). Given that many Hippo
pathway-modulating drugs are already used in patients, this could lead to early
clinical trials testing their efficacy in different types of sarcoma.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26050962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Sep;54(9):542-54. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22267. Epub
2015 May 29.

Whole-exome sequencing defines the mutational landscape of pheochromocytoma and
identifies KMT2D as a recurrently mutated gene.

Juhlin CC(1,)(2,)(3), Stenman A(3), Haglund F(3), Clark VE(4), Brown TC(1,)(2),
Baranoski J(4), Bilguvar K(5), Goh G(6,)(7), Welander J(8), Svahn F(3),
Rubinstein JC(1,)(2), Caramuta S(3), Yasuno K(4,)(6), Günel M(4), Bäckdahl M(9), 
Gimm O(8,)(10), Söderkvist P(8), Prasad ML(11), Korah R(1,)(2), Lifton
RP(6,)(7,)(12), Carling T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Endocrine Neoplasia Laboratory, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
06520. (2)Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(3)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, CCK, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale Program in 
Brain Tumor Research, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (5)Department of
Genetics and Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT. (6)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (7)Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (8)Department
of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping, SE-58185, Sweden. (9)Department of Molecular Medicine and 
Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden. (10)Department of Surgery, County Council of Östergötland, Linköping,
SE-58185, Sweden. (11)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT. (12)Yale Center for Mendelian Genomics, New Haven, CT.

As subsets of pheochromocytomas (PCCs) lack a defined molecular etiology, we
sought to characterize the mutational landscape of PCCs to identify novel gene
candidates involved in disease development. A discovery cohort of 15 PCCs wild
type for mutations in PCC susceptibility genes underwent whole-exome sequencing, 
and an additional 83 PCCs served as a verification cohort for targeted sequencing
of candidate mutations. A low rate of nonsilent single nucleotide variants (SNVs)
was detected (6.1/sample). Somatic HRAS and EPAS1 mutations were observed in one 
case each, whereas the remaining 13 cases did not exhibit variants in established
PCC genes. SNVs aggregated in apoptosis-related pathways, and mutations in COSMIC
genes not previously reported in PCCs included ZAN, MITF, WDTC1, and CAMTA1. Two 
somatic mutations and one constitutional variant in the well-established cancer
gene lysine (K)-specific methyltransferase 2D (KMT2D, MLL2) were discovered in
one sample each, prompting KMT2D screening using focused exome-sequencing in the 
verification cohort. An additional 11 PCCs displayed KMT2D variants, of which two
were recurrent. In total, missense KMT2D variants were found in 14 (11 somatic,
two constitutional, one undetermined) of 99 PCCs (14%). Five cases displayed
somatic mutations in the functional FYR/SET domains of KMT2D, constituting 36% of
all KMT2D-mutated PCCs. KMT2D expression was upregulated in PCCs compared to
normal adrenals, and KMT2D overexpression positively affected cell migration in a
PCC cell line. We conclude that KMT2D represents a recurrently mutated gene with 
potential implication for PCC development.

© 2015 The Authors. Genes, Chromosomes & Cancer Published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMCID: PMC4755142
PMID: 26032282  [PubMed - in process]


10. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 May 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma of the Maxillary Sinus.

Avadhani V(1), Loftus PA, Meltzer D, Wang B, Tabaee A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New 
York, NY, USA.

The clinical course and pathologic features of a 72 year old female who presented
with epistaxis are presented. Radiographic findings were notable for a large,
soft tissue lesion filling the maxillary sinus with significant bony erosion and 
expansion. The patient was ultimately diagnosed with epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma (EHE) and underwent endoscopic resection. She has no
evidence of local, regional or distant recurrence 14 months post-surgery. The
rarity of this neoplasm, the unusual anatomic location and non-specific symptoms 
present diagnostic and management challenges. Epithelioid vascular tumors
encompass a spectrum of benign and malignant tumors. EHE itself is thought to
have an intermediate malignant behavior pattern, though cases with indolent
behavior have been reported. Differentiation of EHE from other lesions has
historically based on histopathology. Additionally, recent studies have described
a recurrent genetic fusion WWTR1-CAMTA1 in EHE, involving t(1;3) (p36;q25). This 
represents the second reported case of EHE arising in a paranasal sinus. The
histopathologic findings of this lesion are reviewed.

PMID: 25963905  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 18;35(7):929-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.148. Epub 2015 May 11.

Mechanism of action of a WWTR1(TAZ)-CAMTA1 fusion oncoprotein.

Tanas MR(1,)(2), Ma S(1), Jadaan FO(1), Ng CK(3), Weigelt B(3), Reis-Filho JS(3),
Rubin BP(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA. (2)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology Institute, Lerner Research
Institute, Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

The WWTR1 (protein is known as TAZ)-CAMTA1 (WC) fusion gene defines epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma, a malignant vascular cancer. TAZ (transcriptional
coactivator with PDZ binding motif) is a transcriptional coactivator and end
effector of the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway. It is inhibited by
phosphorylation by the Hippo kinases LATS1 and LATS2. Such phosphorylation causes
cytoplasmic localization, 14-3-3 protein binding and the phorphorylation of a
terminal phosphodegron promotes ubiquitin-dependent degradation (the
phosphorylation of the different motifs has several effects). CAMTA1 is a
putative tumor suppressive transcription factor. Here we demonstrate that
TAZ-CAMTA1 (TC) fusion results in its nuclear localization and constitutive
activation. Consequently, cells expressing TC display a TAZ-like transcriptional 
program that causes resistance to anoikis and oncogenic transformation. Our
findings elucidate the mechanistic basis of TC oncogenic properties, highlight
that TC is an important model to understand how the Hippo pathway can be
inhibited in cancer, and provide approaches for targeting this chimeric protein.

PMID: 25961935  [PubMed - in process]


12. Histopathology. 2015 Dec;67(6):827-35. doi: 10.1111/his.12713. Epub 2015 May 22.

CAMTA1 is a useful immunohistochemical marker for diagnosing epithelioid
haemangioendothelioma.

Shibuya R(1), Matsuyama A(1), Shiba E(1), Harada H(1), Yabuki K(1), Hisaoka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

AIMS: The diagnosis of epithelioid haemangioendothelioma (EHE) is usually
straightforward, based on characteristic histological features. However, it is
sometimes difficult to differentiate EHE from a variety of other tumours with
epithelioid morphology. The WW domain-containing transcription regulator
1-calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (WWTR1-CAMTA1) fusion gene,
resulting in the overexpression of CAMTA1, is demonstrated in approximately 90%
of EHEs, and the yes-associated protein 1-transcription factor E3 (YAP1-TFE3)
fusion gene, associated with the strong and diffuse nuclear expression of TFE3,
is present in another small subset of EHEs. The aim of our study was to examine
CAMTA1 expression in EHEs and a variety of other tumours to evaluate its
diagnostic utility, and to analyse TFE3 expression status in EHEs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on 16 EHEs, including
five cases with CAMTA1 rearrangement and 276 non-EHE tumours. Fourteen of 16 EHEs
and only one case of ductal carcinoma of the breast were positive for CAMTA1 and 
its expression was focal and weak in the latter (sensitivity 87.5%, specificity
99.6%). TFE3 expression was expressed focally and weakly in three (19%) EHEs (two
with the CAMTA1 rearrangement).
CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear CAMTA1 expression is sensitive and highly specific for EHE
and can be applied to diagnostic immunohistochemistry in epithelioid tumours.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25879300  [PubMed - in process]


13. Histopathology. 2015 Nov;67(5):699-708. doi: 10.1111/his.12697. Epub 2015 May 14.

Molecular characterization of epithelioid haemangioendotheliomas identifies novel
WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion variants.

Patel NR(1,)(2), Salim AA(3), Sayeed H(1,)(2), Sarabia SF(1,)(2), Hollingsworth
F(1,)(2), Warren M(4), Jakacky J(1,)(2), Tanas M(5), Oliveira AM(6), Rubin BP(7),
Lazar AJ(3), López-Terrada D(1,)(2), Wang WL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (7)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic and the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine
of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

AIMS: Epithelioid haemangioendothelioma (EHE) is a malignant vascular neoplasm.
Subsets have been characterized previously by translocations resulting in either 
WWTR1-CAMTA1 or YAP1-TFE3 fusion. We sought to develop molecular and
immunohistochemical (IHC) assays to aid in the diagnosis and characterization of 
EHE.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fifty-two formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cases
diagnosed between 2002 and 2014 were retrieved from the pathology files of our
institutions. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays
were optimized to detect WWTR1-CAMTA1 and YAP1-TFE3 fusion transcripts in FFPE
tissue and transcription factor E3 (TFE3) protein accumulation was examined by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). RNA was extracted from 33 adequate samples, with more
recent cases providing a greater yield of high quality RNA. Fourteen of 18
informative cases were positive for WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion transcripts, four of
which showed higher-grade cytological features termed by some as 'malignant EHE'.
Novel in-frame fusion transcripts were identified in four cases by direct
sequencing. IHC revealed variable nuclear TFE3 staining in six of 17 cases; three
with patchy staining showed WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion. One of 18 informative cases was 
positive for YAP1-TFE3 fusion and showed strong nuclear TFE3 staining by IHC.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the high incidence of WWTR1-CAMTA1 and YAP1-TFE3
rearrangements in EHE and indicates that the staining pattern for TFE3 IHC is
critical for specificity.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25817592  [PubMed - in process]


14. Virchows Arch. 2015 Apr;466(4):473-8. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1730-y. Epub 2015
Feb 14.

YAP1-TFE3 epithelioid hemangioendothelioma: a case without vasoformation and a
new transcript variant.

Puls F(1), Niblett A, Clarke J, Kindblom LG, McCulloch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology, Royal Orthopaedic Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK, florian.puls@nhs.net.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a rare vascular tumor of borderline
malignancy characterized by recurrent WWTR1-CAMTA1 gene fusions in approximately 
90 % of cases. In addition, a recurrent YAP1-TFE3 gene fusion has been identified
in WWTR1-CAMTA1 negative epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas. This subset has been 
reported as having a distinct morphology with more obvious vasoformation,
voluminous eosinophilic cytoplasm, and TFE3 positivity on immunohistochemistry.
We report a case of a YAP1-TFE3 translocated epithelioid hemangioendothelioma
arising in a groin lymph node in a 29-year-old male. Plump spindle cell
morphology and absence of vasoformation made correct diagnosis particularly
difficult. Immunohistochemistry showed nuclear positivity for both ERG and TFE3, 
fluorescence in situ hybridization showed break apart for TFE3 and RT-PCR
identified a YAP1 exon1 to TFE3 exon 6 transcript, a previously unreported fusion
variant. Awareness of this solid morphology and variant fusion will aid in
identification of future cases of this rare vascular tumor.

PMID: 25680571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Turk Patoloji Derg. 2015;31(1):80. doi: 10.5146/tjpath.2014.01287.

CAMTA1 immunostaining is not useful in differentiating epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma from its potential mimickers.

Wiwanitkit V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Visiting Professor, Hainan Medical University, China.

Comment on
    Turk Patoloji Derg. 2014;30(3):159-65.

PMID: 25560612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mamm Genome. 2015 Feb;26(1-2):94-107. doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9550-y. Epub 2014
Dec 10.

Determining differentially expressed miRNAs and validating miRNA--target
relationships using the SPRET/Ei mouse strain.

Timmermans S(1), Van Hauwermeiren F, Puimège L, Dejager L, Van Wonterghem E,
Vanhooren V, Mestdagh P, Libert C, Vandenbroucke RE.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Research Center (IRC), VIB-Ghent University, Technologiepark 927,
Zwijnaarde, 9052, Ghent, Belgium, steven.timmermans@irc.VIB-UGent.be.

Micro RNAs (miRs) are involved in many biological processes. The challenge of
identifying genes influenced by miRs is evidenced by the relatively few validated
miR-target interactions. In this work, we used the Mus spretus SPRET/Ei strain as
an in vivo system to identify new miR-target relations. Mus spretus diverged from
Mus musculus over one million years ago, making it genetically and phenotypically
divergent. SPRET/Ei mice are resistant to inflammation and several cancers,
making them attractive for different research fields. Their phenotype is unique
and is considerably different from that of almost all other laboratory mouse
strains. We exploited the characteristics of SPRET/Ei mice as a tool to identify 
miR-target relationships. Hepatic genes and miRs differentially expressed between
C57BL/6 and SPRET/Ei mice at basal levels were identified with an Affymetrix
microarray and a multiplex qPCR, respectively. A total of 955 genes and 38 miRs
were identified as differentially expressed. Increased miR expression might
result in downregulation of its target mRNA and vice versa. Subsequently, we used
our miR and mRNA data to identify possible in vivo miR-target interactions.
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) analysis revealed 380 possible miR-target
interactions. Five miRs were selected for experimental validation by in vivo
overexpression of the miRs. This resulted in the confirmation of six previously
unknown miR-target interactions: miR-146a, Zdhhc2; miR-150, Elovl3, Kcnk5, and
Nrd1d2; miR-155, Camta1; and miR-592, Steap2. In conclusion, we show that
SPRET/Ei mice can be used as a platform for miR-target identification in vivo,
and we used this platform to identify and experimentally confirm miR-target
interactions.

PMID: 25491574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Feb;8(1):159-67. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000554. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

Genetic evidence for PLASMINOGEN as a shared genetic risk factor of coronary
artery disease and periodontitis.

Schaefer AS, Bochenek G, Jochens A, Ellinghaus D, Dommisch H,
Güzeldemir-Akçakanat E, Graetz C, Harks I, Jockel-Schneider Y, Weinspach K, Meyle
J, Eickholz P, Linden GJ, Cine N, Nohutcu R, Weiss E, Houri-Haddad Y, Iraqi F,
Folwaczny M, Noack B, Strauch K, Gieger C, Waldenberger M, Peters A, Wijmenga C, 
Yilmaz E, Lieb W, Rosenstiel P, Doerfer C, Bruckmann C, Erdmann J, König I,
Jepsen S, Loos BG, Schreiber S.

BACKGROUND: Genetic studies demonstrated the presence of risk alleles in the
genes ANRIL and CAMTA1/VAMP3 that are shared between coronary artery disease
(CAD) and periodontitis. We aimed to identify further shared genetic risk factors
to better understand conjoint disease mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In-depth genotyping of 46 published CAD risk loci of
genome-wide significance in the worldwide largest case-control sample of the
severe early-onset phenotype aggressive periodontitis (AgP) with the Illumina
Immunochip (600 German AgP cases, 1448 controls) and the Affymetrix 500K array
set (283 German AgP cases and 972 controls) highlighted ANRIL as the major risk
gene and revealed further associations with AgP for the gene PLASMINOGEN (PLG;
rs4252120: P=5.9×10(-5); odds ratio, 1.27; 95% confidence interval, 1.3-1.4
[adjusted for smoking and sex]; 818 cases; 5309 controls). Subsequent combined
analyses of several genome-wide data sets of CAD and AgP suggested TGFBRAP1 to be
associated with AgP (rs2679895: P=0.0016; odds ratio, 1.27 [95% confidence
interval, 1.1-1.5]; 703 cases; 2.143 controls) and CAD (P=0.0003; odds ratio,
0.84 [95% confidence interval, 0.8-0.9]; n=4117 cases; 5824 controls). The study 
further provides evidence that in addition to PLG, the currently known shared
susceptibility loci of CAD and periodontitis, ANRIL and CAMTA1/VAMP3, are
subjected to transforming growth factor-ß regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: PLG is the third replicated shared genetic risk factor of
atherosclerosis and periodontitis. All known shared risk genes of CAD and
periodontitis are members of transforming growth factor-ß signaling.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25466412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Jan;39(1):132-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000346.

Thoracic epithelioid malignant vascular tumors: a clinicopathologic study of 52
cases with emphasis on pathologic grading and molecular studies of WWTR1-CAMTA1
fusions.

Anderson T(1), Zhang L, Hameed M, Rusch V, Travis WD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology Department of Surgery, Thoracic Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Malignant thoracic epithelioid vascular tumors are an uncommon and heterogenous
group of tumors that include low-grade to intermediate-grade epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma (EHE) and high-grade epithelioid angiosarcoma (EAS). We
examine the morphologic and immunohistochemical features of 52 malignant
epithelioid vascular tumors (10 low-grade EHE, 29 intermediate-grade EHE, and 13 
EAS) involving the thorax (lung, pleura, mediastinum, heart, great vessels)
including cases with exclusively thoracic disease (35) and with multiorgan
disease including the thorax (17). Intermediate-grade EHE differs from low-grade 
EHE by the presence of necrosis, increased mitotic activity, and increased
atypia. Morphologic features such as intranuclear inclusions, intracytoplasmic
vacuoles, and stromal changes (chondroid, myxoid, or hyalinized stroma) are seen 
more frequently in EHE, whereas blood lakes, proliferation of slit-like vessels, 
and prominent nucleoli favor EAS. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
showed CAMTA1-WWTR1 fusions in 4/7 low-grade and 23/23 intermediate-grade EHE
(P<0.001). In EAS, CAMTA1 rearrangement was negative in all cases, whereas a
WWTR1 complex abnormality was found in 1/5 cases (P<0.001). This offers an
objective means of differentiating intermediate-grade EHE from EAS, especially on
limited biopsies. All cases show expression of at least 1 vascular marker, which 
allows differentiation from primary thoracic epithelial malignancies, although
keratin expression is a potential pitfall with 29% of EHE and 25% of EAS showing 
keratin expression. Survival analysis shows that higher tumor grade for all
tumors (P=0.026) as well as lung and pleural tumors only (P=0.010) and the
presence of pleural involvement in lung and/or pleural tumors (P=0.042) correlate
with poor prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4268225
PMID: 25353289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Turk Patoloji Derg. 2014;30(3):159-65. doi: 10.5146/tjpath.2014.01272.

CAMTA1 immunostaining is not useful in differentiating epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma from its potential mimickers.

Yusifli Z(1), Kösemehmetoglu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, ANKARA,
TURKEY.

Comment in
    Turk Patoloji Derg. 2015;31(1):80.

OBJECTIVE: Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a rare member of vascular tumors
of intermediate malignancy. Recently, presence of t(1;3) translocation and
WWTR1/CAMTA1 gene fusion, which enhances CAMTA1 expression, are found to be
specific to this tumor. We investigated the CAMTA1 immune expression profile of
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma and its potential mimickers using a commercially
available CAMTA1 antibody.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Standard whole sections from the formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded blocks of 12 epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas, 10 angiosarcomas, 9
epithelioid sarcomas, 8 malignant melanomas, 8 signet ring carcinomas, 7 lobular 
carcinomas of breast, 2 epithelioid mesotheliomas, 2 rhabdoid tumors and 12
miscellaneous hemangiomas were immunostained for anti-CAMTA1 (ab64119, 1:200;
Abcam) after pretreatment with citrate pH 6.0 for 20 minutes using Leica Bond
detection kit with DAB chromogen. Strong nuclear CAMTA1 expression was scored for
its extent as 'negative' ( < 5% positive), '+1' (5-25% positive), '2+' (25-50%
positive) and '3+' ( > 50% positive).
RESULTS: In 60 out of 70 cases (86%) either 2+ or 3+ strong nuclear staining was 
seen. Eighty-three % of epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas, 100% of angiosarcomas,
89% of epithelioid sarcomas, 89% of malignant melanomas, 63% of signet ring
carcinomas, 71% of lobular carcinomas of breast, 100% of epithelioid
mesotheliomas, 50% of rhabdoid tumors and 100% of hemangiomas were stained.
Besides neurons, CAMTA1 expression was also observed in squamous epithelium, skin
adnexa, breast lobules, prostate glands, bile ducts, colonic mucosa and gastric
pits.
CONCLUSION: Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, its potential morphological
mimickers and other benign or malignant vascular tumors showed strong and diffuse
CAMTA1 expression, nullifying the potential use of CAMTA1 immunohistochemistry as
an adjunct in the differential diagnosis.

PMID: 25110239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 5;111(31):11521-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1411251111. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Ataxia and Purkinje cell degeneration in mice lacking the CAMTA1 transcription
factor.

Long C(1), Grueter CE(1), Song K(1), Qin S(1), Qi X(1), Kong YM(1), Shelton
JM(2), Richardson JA(3), Zhang CL(1), Bassel-Duby R(1), Olson EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology. (2)Internal Medicine, and. (3)Pathology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390.

Members of the calmodulin-binding transcription activator (CAMTA) family of
proteins function as calcium-sensitive regulators of gene expression in
multicellular organisms ranging from plants to humans. Here, we show that global 
or nervous system deletion of CAMTA1 in mice causes severe ataxia with Purkinje
cell degeneration and cerebellar atrophy, partially resembling the consequences
of haploinsufficiency of the human CAMTA1 locus. Gene-expression analysis
identified a large collection of neuronal genes that were dysregulated in the
brains of CAMTA1-mutant mice, and elucidation of a consensus sequence for binding
of CAMTA proteins to DNA revealed the association of CAMTA-binding sites with
many of these genes. We conclude that CAMTA1 plays an essential role in the
control of Purkinje cell function and survival. CAMTA1-mutant mice provide a
model to study the molecular mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases and for
screening potential therapeutic interventions for such disorders.

PMCID: PMC4128133
PMID: 25049392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Plant J. 2014 Oct;80(1):82-92. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12620. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

A key general stress response motif is regulated non-uniformly by CAMTA
transcription factors.

Benn G(1), Wang CQ, Hicks DR, Stein J, Guthrie C, Dehesh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Plants cope with environmental challenges by rapidly triggering and synchronizing
mechanisms governing stress-specific and general stress response (GSR) networks. 
The GSR acts rapidly and transiently in response to various stresses, but the
underpinning mechanisms have remained elusive. To define GSR regulatory
components we have exploited the Rapid Stress Response Element (RSRE), a
previously established functional GSR motif, using Arabidopsis plants expressing 
a 4xRSRE::Luciferase (RSRE::LUC) reporter. Initially, we searched public
microarray datasets and found an enrichment of RSRE in promoter sequences of
stress genes. Next, we treated RSRE::LUC plants with wounding and a range of
rapidly stress-inducible hormones and detected a robust LUC activity solely in
response to wounding. Application of two Ca(2+) burst inducers, flagellin22
(flg22) and oligogalacturonic acid, activated RSRE strongly and systemically,
while the Ca(2+) chelator ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA) significantly
reduced wound induction of RSRE::LUC. In line with the signaling function of
Ca(2+) in transduction events leading to activation of RSRE, we examined the role
of CALMODULIN-BINDING TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATORs (CAMTAs) in RSRE induction.
Transient expression assays displayed CAMTA3 induction of RSRE and not that of
the mutated element mRSRE. Treatment of selected camta mutant lines integrated
into RSRE::LUC parent plant, with wounding, flg22, and freezing, established a
differential function of these CAMTAs in potentiating the activity of RSRE. Wound
response studies using camta double mutants revealed a cooperative function of
CAMTAs2 and 4 with CAMTA 3 in the RSRE regulation. These studies provide insights
into governing components of transduction events and reveal transcriptional
modules that tune the expression of a key GSR motif.

© 2014 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4172554
PMID: 25039701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Diagn Pathol. 2014 Jul 1;9:131. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-9-131.

Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma: clinicopathologic, immunhistochemical, and
molecular genetic analysis of 39 cases.

Flucke U(1), Vogels RJ, de Saint Aubain Somerhausen N, Creytens DH, Riedl RG, van
Gorp JM, Milne AN, Huysentruyt CJ, Verdijk MA, van Asseldonk MM, Suurmeijer AJ,
Bras J, Palmedo G, Groenen PJ, Mentzel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, P,O, Box 9101,
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. uta.flucke@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a malignant, often indolent
vascular tumor which occurs at various anatomic sites. Based on a reciprocal
translocation t (1;3)(p36;q25), a consistent WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene has been
found. An alternate YAP1-TFE3 fusion has been detected in a small and distinct
subset of cases.
METHODS: Thirty-nine tumors, from 24 females and 15 males with an age range 9-85 
years, were located in soft tissue (head and neck [8], trunk [5], upper
extremities [3], lower extremities [2], mediastinal [1], and paratesticular [1]),
lymph node (1), breast (1), skin (2), bone (6), lung (7), and liver (2). The
cases were investigated using a panel of immunohistochemical markers. The
aforementioned fusion-genes were examined using RT-PCR and/or FISH in order to
validate their diagnostic value.
RESULTS: Follow-up available for 17 patients ranged from 3 months to 7 years
(median interval 1.5 years). Eleven patients were alive without disease, 2
patients were alive with disease after 1.5 and 2 years, respectively. Four
patients died of disease after 4 months (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1), 5 months (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>2), and 1.5 years 
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1).The size, known for 30 lesions, was >3 cm in 9 of them. Histologically,
all lesions had classical features, at least focally. Four tumors counted >3
mitoses/50 HPF. Immunohistochemically, all cases tested stained positive for ERG 
(21), FLI1 (5) and CD31 (39). CD34 and D2-40 positivity was seen in 81% and 71%
of the examined cases, respectively. 11/35 cases expressed pan-keratin and 6/20
cases CK8.18. TFE3 showed a nuclear reaction in 21/24 cases, irrespective of TFE3
rearrangement.Molecular genetically, 35/35 cases revealed one of the fusion genes
by FISH and/or RT-PCR with WWTR1-CAMTA1 in 33 cases and YAP1-TFE3 in 2 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the high diagnostic value of FISH and
RT-PCR in detecting the fusion genes of EHE. The immunohistochemical utility of
TFE3 appears questionable in this study.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/4010279141259481.

PMCID: PMC4100035
PMID: 24986479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Pineal Res. 2014 Sep;57(2):185-91. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12155. Epub 2014 Jul 29.

The cysteine2/histidine2-type transcription factor ZINC FINGER OF ARABIDOPSIS
THALIANA 6-activated C-REPEAT-BINDING FACTOR pathway is essential for
melatonin-mediated freezing stress resistance in Arabidopsis.

Shi H(1), Chan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Specialty Agriculture, Wuhan
Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is not only a widely known animal
hormone, but also an important regulator in plant development and multiple
abiotic stress responses. Recently, it has been revealed that melatonin
alleviated cold stress through mediating several cold-related genes, including
C-REPEAT-BINDING FACTORs (CBFs)/Drought Response Element Binding factors (DREBs),
COR15a, and three transcription factors (CAMTA1, ZINC FINGER OF ARABIDOPSIS
THALIANA 10 (ZAT10), and ZAT12). In this study, we quantified the endogenous
melatonin level in Arabidopsis plant leaves and found the endogenous melatonin
levels were significantly induced by cold stress (4 °C) treatment. In addition,
we found one cysteine2/histidine2-type zinc finger transcription factor, ZAT6,
was involved in melatonin-mediated freezing stress response in Arabidopsis.
Interestingly, exogenous melatonin enhanced freezing stress resistance was
largely alleviated in AtZAT6 knockdown plants, but was enhanced in AtZAT6
overexpressing plants. Moreover, the expression levels of AtZAT6 and AtCBFs were 
commonly upregulated by cold stress (4 °C) and exogenous melatonin treatments,
and modulation of AtZAT6 expression significantly affected the induction AtCBFs
transcripts by cold stress (4 °C) and exogenous melatonin treatments. Taken
together, AtZAT6-activated CBF pathway might be essential for melatonin-mediated 
freezing stress response in Arabidopsis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24962049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Pathology. 2014 Jun;46(4):355-8. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0000000000000106.

Epithelioid haemangioendothelioma of the uterine cervix with CAMTA1/WWTR1
translocation.

Matsika A(1), Anderson JK, Bligh JF, Whitehouse AL.

Author information: 
(1)1Anatomical Pathology, Pathology Queensland and University of Queensland,
Brisbane 2Cytogenetics Department 3Histopathology Department, Sullivan and
Nicolaides Pathology, Taringa, Qld, Australia.

PMID: 24798168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Clin Genet. 2015 May;87(5):478-82. doi: 10.1111/cge.12407. Epub 2014 May 20.

Intragenic CAMTA1 deletions are associated with a spectrum of neurobehavioral
phenotypes.

Shinawi M(1), Coorg R, Shimony JS, Grange DK, Al-Kateb H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Intragenic copy number variations involving the CAMTA1 (calmodulin-binding
transcription activator 1) gene have recently been reported in four unrelated
families with intellectual disability (ID), ataxia, behavioral- and
cerebellar-abnormalities. We report a detailed phenotypic and molecular
characterization of three individuals with novel intragenic CAMTA1 deletions from
two unrelated families and compare the findings to those of previously reported
patients. Our patients had deletions of exons 6-11 and presented with ID,
developmental delay (DD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and
constipation. Two individuals from one family had also unsteady gait. Consistent 
phenotypes associated with CAMTA1 intragenic rearrangements include ID, speech
problems and some dysmorphic features whereas neurobehavioral abnormalities are
variable. We did not observe obvious phenotypic differences between patients with
in-frame and those with frameshift rearrangements. There is an increased evidence
that CAMTA1 has a role in brain and cerebellar function. CAMTA1 should be added
to the growing list of genes associated with ID/DD, especially when behavioral
problems, cerebellar signs, and/or dysmorphism are also present.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24738973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Lung Cancer. 2014 Mar;83(3):411-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.12.015. Epub 2014 
Jan 7.

Pleural epithelioid hemangioendothelioma harboring CAMTA1 rearrangement.

Ha SY(1), Choi IH(1), Han J(2), Choi YL(1), Cho JH(3), Lee KJ(4), Sun JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: hanjho@skku.edu. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Republic of
Korea. (5)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Republic of Korea.

Pleural epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) is a very rare disease with
adverse clinical outcomes. Recently, CAMTA1 rearrangement has been introduced as 
a consistent genetic abnormality in EHEs of different anatomical locations. We
report a 71-year-old man with pleural EHE harboring CAMTA1 rearrangement
confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization on paraffin embedded tissue.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24461304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mod Pathol. 2014 Jan;27 Suppl 1:S30-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.176.

Malignant vascular tumors--an update.

Antonescu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

Although benign hemangiomas are among the most common diagnoses amid connective
tissue tumors, sarcomas showing endothelial differentiation (ie, angiosarcoma and
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma) represent under 1% of all sarcoma diagnoses,
and thus it is likely that fewer than 500 people in the United States are
affected each year. Differential diagnosis of malignant vascular tumors can be
often quite challenging, either at the low end of the spectrum, distinguishing an
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma from an epithelioid hemangioma, or at the
high-grade end of the spectrum, between an angiosarcoma and a malignant
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma. Within this differential diagnosis both
clinico-radiological features (ie, size and multifocality) and
immunohistochemical markers (ie, expression of endothelial markers) are often
similar and cannot distinguish between benign and malignant vascular lesions.
Molecular ancillary tests have long been needed for a more objective diagnosis
and classification of malignant vascular tumors, particularly within the
epithelioid phenotype. As significant advances have been recently made in
understanding the genetic signatures of vascular tumors, this review will take
the opportunity to provide a detailed update on these findings. Specifically,
this article will focus on the following aspects: (1) pathological and molecular 
features of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, including the more common
WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion, as well as the recently described YAP1-TFE3 fusion,
identified in a morphological variant of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma; (2)
discuss the heterogeneity of angiosarcoma clinical, morphological and genetic
spectrum, with particular emphasis of MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in
radiation-induced angiosarcoma; and (3) provide a practical guide in the
differential diagnosis of epithelioid vascular tumors using molecular testing.

PMID: 24384851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Pineal Res. 2014 Apr;56(3):238-45. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12115. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Role of melatonin in alleviating cold stress in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Bajwa VS(1), Shukla MR, Sherif SM, Murch SJ, Saxena PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Agriculture, Gosling Research Institute for Plant
Preservation, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.

Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) has been implicated in abiotic and
biotic stress tolerance in plants. However, information on the effects of
melatonin in cold-stress tolerance in vivo is limited. In this study, the effect 
of melatonin was investigated in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana challenged 
with a cold stress at 4°C for 72 and 120 hr. Melatonin-treated plants (10 and 30 
µm) had significantly higher fresh weight, primary root length, and shoot height 
compared with the nontreated plants. To aid in the understanding of the role of
melatonin in alleviating cold stress, we investigated the effects of melatonin
treatment on the expression of cold-related genes. Melatonin up-regulated the
expression of C-repeat-binding factors (CBFs)/Drought Response Element Binding
factors (DREBs), a cold-responsive gene, COR15a, a transcription factor involved 
in freezing and drought-stress tolerance CAMTA1 and transcription activators of
reactive oxygen species (ROS)-related antioxidant genes, ZAT10 and ZAT12,
following cold stress. The up-regulation of cold signaling genes by melatonin may
stimulate the biosynthesis of cold-protecting compounds and contribute to the
increased growth of plants treated with exogenous melatonin under cold stress.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24350934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Brain Dev. 2014 Sep;36(8):711-5. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.09.008. Epub 2013
Oct 18.

Neuropsychological and neuroimaging phenotype induced by a CAMTA1 mutation.

Magnin E(1), Blagosklonov O(2), Sylvestre G(3), Minot D(4), Thevenon J(5), Faivre
L(5), Boulahdour H(2), Thauvin-Robinet C(5), Rumbach L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Besançon University Hospital, France; Memory Center
(CMRR), Besançon University Hospital, France; Department of Functional
Neuro-imaging, Besançon University Hospital, France. Electronic address:
eloi.magnin@laposte.net. (2)Department of Nuclear Medicine and EA 4662
"Nanomedicine Lab, Imagery and Therapeutics", Franche-Comté University Besançon
University Hospital, France. (3)Memory Center (CMRR), Besançon University
Hospital, France. (4)Genetic Center and Reference Center «Anomalies du
Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs», Dijon University Hospital, France.
(5)Genetic Center and Reference Center «Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes
Malformatifs», Dijon University Hospital, France; EA 4271 "Génétique des
Anomalies du Développement", IFR 100-Santé STIC, Bourgogne University, Dijon,
France. (6)Department of Neurology, Besançon University Hospital, France; Memory 
Center (CMRR), Besançon University Hospital, France; Clinical Investigation
Centre, INSERM CIT 808, Besançon University Hospital, France.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: CAMTA1 mutations have recently been reported in families with
intellectual disability and/or non-progressive congenital ataxias. The objective 
of this study was to describe the neuropsychological and neuroimaging phenotype
of CAMTA1 mutation.
METHODS: We performed neuropsychological examinations, MRI and FDG-PET imaging in
three patients with autosomal dominant mild intellectual disabilities and ataxia 
induced by a CAMTA1 intragenic deletion at 1p36.31p36.23.
RESULTS: Neuropsychological tests showed similar findings in two patients, with
low information processing speed, slow memory consolidation, phonological
disorders, working memory deficits, but mainly preserved executive function.
Bilateral parietal and medial temporal abnormalities were found on brain MRI.
Diffuse parieto-occipital and local left temporo-parietal decrease of FDG uptake 
was observed on PET images.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that CAMTA1 mutation may induce an unusual
neuropsychological profile and parieto-temporal developmental abnormalities. We
recommend screening for CAMTA1 mutations in patients with autosomal dominant mild
intellectual disability presenting with similar a phenotype.

Copyright © 2013 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24145135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Pathol Int. 2013 Oct;63(10):502-5. doi: 10.1111/pin.12097. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma with extensive cystic change and CAMTA1
rearrangement.

Lee SE(1), Park HY, Kim S, Bang H, Min JH, Choi YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) is a rare vascular neoplasm that has the
ability to recur locally and metastasize. Thus, it is important to distinguish
this tumor from other epithelioid vascular neoplasms. A 47-year-old man presented
to our hospital with a pelvic mass with severe ischialgia and weight loss.
Surgical resection was performed, and the mass was found to have dark red
multiloculated cysts with hemorrhage and calcification. The histopathologic
examination showed a central sclerotic, hypocellular zone and a peripheral
cellular zone. Only the peripheral portion of the wall revealed nested tumor
cells in light blue myxoid stroma. These tumors are typically composed of short
strands or cords of bland epithelioid cells with occasional intracytoplasmic
lumens embedded in a myxohyalinized stroma. The tumor cells were positive for
CD31 and CD34 and negative for factor VIII-related antigen, CK (AE1/AE3) and
S-100. The tumor nuclei showed distinct break-apart signals with individual green
and/or red signals, indicating the presence of CAMTA1 rearrangement. In this
study, we report a case of EHE that was difficult to diagnose based on histology 
alone. Therefore, we also performed fluorescence in situ hybridization, and found
that the tumor harbored a CAMTA1 gene rearrangement, which confirmed the
diagnosis.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24134632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 30;288(35):25414-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.460287. Epub
2013 Jul 12.

MicroRNA-124 suppresses the transactivation of nuclear factor of activated T
cells by targeting multiple genes and inhibits the proliferation of pulmonary
artery smooth muscle cells.

Kang K(1), Peng X, Zhang X, Wang Y, Zhang L, Gao L, Weng T, Zhang H, Ramchandran 
R, Raj JU, Gou D, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Microbial Genetic
Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, China.

Abnormal proliferation and phenotypic modulation of pulmonary artery smooth
muscle cells (PASMC) contributes to the pathogenesis of numerous cardiovascular
disorders, including pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). The nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT) signaling pathway is linked to PASMC proliferation and
PAH. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that function in diverse
biological processes. To systemically identify the specific miRNAs that regulate 
the NFAT pathway, a human primary miRNA library was applied for cell-based high
throughput screening with the NFAT luciferase reporter system. Eight miRNAs were 
found to modulate NFAT activity efficiently. Of them, miR-124 robustly inhibited 
NFAT reporter activity and decreased both the dephosphorylation and the nuclear
translocation of NFAT. miR-124 also inhibited NFAT-dependent transcription of
IL-2 in Jurkat T cells. miR-124 exerted its effects by targeting multiple genes, 
including a known component of the NFAT pathway, NFATc1, and two new regulators
of NFAT signaling, CAMTA1 (calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1) and
PTBP1 (polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 1). Physiologically, miR-124 was
down-regulated by hypoxia in human PASMC, consistent with the activation of NFAT 
during this process. Down-regulation of miR-124 was also observed in 3-week
hypoxia-treated mouse lungs. Furthermore, the overexpression of miR-124 not only 
inhibited human PASMC proliferation but also maintained its differentiated
phenotype by repressing the NFAT pathway. Taken together, our data provide the
first evidence that miR-124 acts as an inhibitor of the NFAT pathway.
Down-regulation of miR-124 in hypoxia-treated PASMC and its antiproliferative and
prodifferentiation effects imply a potential value for miR-124 in the treatment
of PAH.

PMCID: PMC3757204
PMID: 23853098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Nov 15;22(22):4516-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt299. Epub 2013 Jun
27.

The large non-coding RNA ANRIL, which is associated with atherosclerosis,
periodontitis and several forms of cancer, regulates ADIPOR1, VAMP3 and C11ORF10.

Bochenek G(1), Häsler R, El Mokhtari NE, König IR, Loos BG, Jepsen S, Rosenstiel 
P, Schreiber S, Schaefer AS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel,
Germany.

The long non-coding RNA ANRIL is the best replicated genetic risk locus of
coronary artery disease (CAD) and periodontitis (PD), and is independently
associated with a variety of other immune-mediated and metabolic disorders and
several forms of cancer. Recent studies showed a correlation of decreased
concentrations of proximal ANRIL transcripts with homozygous carriership of the
CAD and PD main risk alleles. To elucidate the relation of these transcripts to
disease manifestation, we constructed a short hairpin RNA in a stable inducible
knock-down system of T-Rex 293 HEK cell lines, specifically targeting the
proximal transcripts EU741058 and DQ485454. By genome-wide expression profiling
using Affymetrix HG1.0 ST Arrays, we identified the transcription of ADIPOR1,
VAMP3 and C11ORF10 to be correlated with decreased ANRIL expression in a
time-dependent manner. We validated these findings on a transcriptional and
translational level in different cell types. Exploration of the identified genes 
for the presence of disease associated variants, using Affymetrix 500K genotyping
and Illumina custom genotyping arrays, highlighted a region upstream of VAMP3
within CAMTA1 to be associated with increased risk of CAD [rs10864294 P = 0.015, 
odds ratio (OR) = 1.30, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.1-1.6, 1471 cases, 2737 
controls] and aggressive PD (AgP; P = 0.008, OR = 1.31, 95% CI = 1.1-1.6, 864
cases, 3664 controls). In silico replication in a meta-analysis of 14 genome-wide
association studies of CAD of the CARDIoGRAM Consortium identified rs2301462,
located on the same haplotype block, as associated with P = 0.001 upon adjustment
for sex and age. Our results give evidence that specific isoforms of ANRIL
regulate key genes of glucose and fatty acid metabolism.

PMID: 23813974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Aug;52(8):775-84. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22073. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Novel YAP1-TFE3 fusion defines a distinct subset of epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma.

Antonescu CR(1), Le Loarer F, Mosquera JM, Sboner A, Zhang L, Chen CL, Chen HW,
Pathan N, Krausz T, Dickson BC, Weinreb I, Rubin MA, Hameed M, Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA. antonesc@mskcc.org

Conventional epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas (EHE) have a distinctive
morphologic appearance and are characterized by a recurrent t(1;3) translocation,
resulting in a WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene. We have recently encountered a
fusion-negative subset characterized by a somewhat different morphology,
including focally well-formed vasoformative features, which was further
investigated for recurrent genetic abnormalities. Based on a case showing strong 
transcription factor E3 (TFE3) immunoreactivity, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis for TFE3 gene rearrangement was applied to the
index case as well as to nine additional cases, selected through negative
WWTR1-CAMTA1 screening. A control group, including 18 epithelioid hemangiomas,
nine pseudomyogenic HE, and three epithelioid angiosarcomas, was also tested.
TFE3 gene rearrangement was identified in 10 patients, with equal gender
distribution and a mean age of 30 years old. The lesions were located in somatic 
soft tissue in six cases, lung in three and one in bone. One case with available 
frozen tissue was tested by RNA sequencing and FusionSeq data analysis to detect 
novel fusions. A YAP1-TFE3 fusion was thus detected, which was further validated 
by FISH and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). YAP1 gene
rearrangements were then confirmed in seven of the remaining nine TFE3-rearranged
EHEs by FISH. No TFE3 structural abnormalities were detected in any of the
controls. The TFE3-rearranged EHEs showed similar morphologic features with at
least focally, well-formed vascular channels, in addition to a variably solid
architecture. All tumors expressed endothelial markers, as well as strong nuclear
TFE3. In summary, we are reporting a novel subset of EHE occurring in young
adults, showing a distinct phenotype and YAP1-TFE3 fusions.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4089994
PMID: 23737213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Plant J. 2013 Aug;75(3):364-76. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12205. Epub 2013 May 11.

Roles of CAMTA transcription factors and salicylic acid in configuring the
low-temperature transcriptome and freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis.

Kim Y(1), Park S, Gilmour SJ, Thomashow MF.

Author information: 
(1)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA.

Previous studies in Arabidopsis thaliana established roles for CALMODULIN BINDING
TRANSCRIPTION ACTIVATOR 3 (CAMTA3) in the rapid cold induction of CRT/DRE BINDING
FACTOR (CBF) genes CBF1 and CBF2, and the repression of salicylic acid (SA)
biosynthesis at warm temperature. Here we show that CAMTA1 and CAMTA2 work in
concert with CAMTA3 at low temperature (4°C) to induce peak transcript levels of 
CBF1, CBF2 and CBF3 at 2 h, contribute to up-regulation of approximately 15% of
the genes induced at 24 h, most of which fall outside the CBF pathway, and
increase plant freezing tolerance. In addition, CAMTA1, CAMTA2 and CAMTA3
function together to inhibit SA biosynthesis at warm temperature (22°C). However,
SA levels increase in Arabidopsis plants that are exposed to low temperature for 
more than 1 week. We show that this chilling-induced SA biosynthesis proceeds
through the isochorismate synthase (ICS) pathway, with cold induction of ICS1
(which encodes ICS), and two genes encoding transcription factors that positively
regulate ICS1 - CBP60g and SARD1 -, paralleling SA accumulation. The three CAMTA 
proteins effectively repress the accumulation of ICS1, CBP60g and SARD1
transcripts at warm temperature but not at low temperature. This impairment of
CAMTA function may involve post-transcriptional regulation, as CAMTA transcript
levels did not decrease at low temperature. Salicylic acid biosynthesis at low
temperature did not contribute to freezing tolerance, but had a major role in
configuring the transcriptome, including the induction of 'defense response'
genes, suggesting the possible existence of a pre-emptive defense strategy
programmed by prolonged chilling temperatures.

© 2013 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23581962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 2;14:216. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-216.

CAMTA 1 regulates drought responses in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Pandey N(1), Ranjan A, Pant P, Tripathi RK, Ateek F, Pandey HP, Patre UV, Sawant 
SV.

Author information: 
(1)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-National Botanical Research
Institute, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow 226001, India.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors (TF) play a crucial role in regulating gene
expression and are fit to regulate diverse cellular processes by interacting with
other proteins. A TF named calmodulin binding transcription activator (CAMTA) was
identified in Arabidopsis thaliana (AtCAMTA1-6). To explore the role of CAMTA1 in
drought response, the phenotypic differences and gene expression was studied
between camta1 and Col-0 under drought condition.
RESULTS: In camta1, root development was abolished showing high-susceptibility to
induced osmotic stress resulting in small wrinkled rosette leaves and stunted
primary root. In camta1 under drought condition, we identified growth
retardation, poor WUE, low photosystem II efficiency, decline in RWC and higher
sensitivity to drought with reduced survivability. The microarray analysis of
drought treated camta1 revealed that CAMTA1 regulates "drought recovery" as most 
indicative pathway along with other stress response, osmotic balance, apoptosis, 
DNA methylation and photosynthesis. Interestingly, majority of positively
regulated genes were related to plasma membrane and chloroplast. Further, our
analysis indicates that CAMTA1 regulates several stress responsive genes
including RD26, ERD7, RAB18, LTPs, COR78, CBF1, HSPs etc. and promoter of these
genes were enriched with CAMTA recognition cis-element. CAMTA1 probably regulate 
drought recovery by regulating expression of AP2-EREBP transcription factors and 
Abscisic acid response.
CONCLUSION: CAMTA1 rapidly changes broad spectrum of responsive genes of membrane
integrity and photosynthetic machinery by generating ABA response for challenging
drought stress. Our results demonstrate the important role of CAMTA1 in
regulating drought response in Arabidopsis, thus could be genetically engineered 
for improving drought tolerance in crop.

PMCID: PMC3621073
PMID: 23547968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057462. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Delineating the cytogenomic and epigenomic landscapes of glioma stem cell lines.

Baronchelli S(1), Bentivegna A, Redaelli S, Riva G, Butta V, Paoletta L,
Isimbaldi G, Miozzo M, Tabano S, Daga A, Marubbi D, Cattaneo M, Biunno I, Dalprà 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of Milan-Bicocca,
Monza, Italy.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common and malignant type of glioma, is
characterized by a poor prognosis and the lack of an effective treatment, which
are due to a small sub-population of cells with stem-like properties, termed
glioma stem cells (GSCs). The term "multiforme" describes the histological
features of this tumor, that is, the cellular and morphological heterogeneity. At
the molecular level multiple layers of alterations may reflect this heterogeneity
providing together the driving force for tumor initiation and development. In
order to decipher the common "signature" of the ancestral GSC population, we
examined six already characterized GSC lines evaluating their cytogenomic and
epigenomic profiles through a multilevel approach (conventional cytogenetic,
FISH, aCGH, MeDIP-Chip and functional bioinformatic analysis). We found several
canonical cytogenetic alterations associated with GBM and a common minimal
deleted region (MDR) at 1p36.31, including CAMTA1 gene, a putative tumor
suppressor gene, specific for the GSC population. Therefore, on one hand our data
confirm a role of driver mutations for copy number alterations (CNAs) included in
the GBM genomic-signature (gain of chromosome 7- EGFR gene, loss of chromosome
13- RB1 gene, loss of chromosome 10-PTEN gene); on the other, it is not obvious
that the new identified CNAs are passenger mutations, as they may be necessary
for tumor progression specific for the individual patient. Through our approach, 
we were able to demonstrate that not only individual genes into a pathway can be 
perturbed through multiple mechanisms and at different levels, but also that
different combinations of perturbed genes can incapacitate functional modules
within a cellular networks. Therefore, beyond the differences that can create
apparent heterogeneity of alterations among GSC lines, there's a sort of
selective force acting on them in order to converge towards the impairment of
cell development and differentiation processes. This new overview could have a
huge importance in therapy.

PMCID: PMC3585345
PMID: 23468990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cancer Res. 2012 Dec 1;72(23):6079-88. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2230. Epub
2012 Nov 20.

1p36 tumor suppression--a matter of dosage?

Henrich KO(1), Schwab M, Westermann F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Genetics B030, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany. k.henrich@dkfz.de

A broad range of human malignancies is associated with nonrandom 1p36 deletions, 
suggesting the existence of tumor suppressors encoded in this region. Evidence
for tumor-specific inactivation of 1p36 genes in the classic "two-hit" manner is 
scarce; however, many tumor suppressors do not require complete inactivation but 
contribute to tumorigenesis by partial impairment. We discuss recent data derived
from both human tumors and functional cancer models indicating that the 1p36
genes CHD5, CAMTA1, KIF1B, CASZ1, and miR-34a contribute to cancer development
when reduced in dosage by genomic copy number loss or other mechanisms. We
explore potential interactions among these candidates and propose a model where
heterozygous 1p36 deletion impairs oncosuppressive pathways via simultaneous
downregulation of several dosage-dependent tumor suppressor genes.

PMID: 23172308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Dent Res. 2012 Jul;91(7 Suppl):21S-28S.

Genome-wide association study of periodontal pathogen colonization.

Divaris K(1), Monda KL, North KE, Olshan AF, Lange EM, Moss K, Barros SP, Beck
JD, Offenbacher S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill, 228 Brauer Hall, CB#7450, NC 27599, USA.

Pathological shifts of the human microbiome are characteristic of many diseases, 
including chronic periodontitis. To date, there is limited evidence on host
genetic risk loci associated with periodontal pathogen colonization. We conducted
a genome-wide association (GWA) study among 1,020 white participants of the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study, whose periodontal diagnosis ranged
from healthy to severe chronic periodontitis, and for whom "checkerboard" DNA-DNA
hybridization quantification of 8 periodontal pathogens was performed. We
examined 3 traits: "high red" and "high orange" bacterial complexes, and "high"
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa) colonization. Genotyping was performed
on the Affymetrix 6.0 platform. Imputation to 2.5 million markers was based on
HapMap II-CEU, and a multiple-test correction was applied (genome-wide threshold 
of p < 5 × 10(-8)). We detected no genome-wide significant signals. However, 13
loci, including KCNK1, FBXO38, UHRF2, IL33, RUNX2, TRPS1, CAMTA1, and VAMP3,
provided suggestive evidence (p < 5 × 10(-6)) of association. All associations
reported for "red" and "orange" complex microbiota, but not for Aa, had the same 
effect direction in a second sample of 123 African-American participants. None of
these polymorphisms was associated with periodontitis diagnosis. Investigations
replicating these findings may lead to an improved understanding of the complex
nature of host-microbiome interactions that characterizes states of health and
disease.

PMCID: PMC3383103
PMID: 22699663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Oct 1;30(28):3525-32. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Clinical significance of tumor-associated inflammatory cells in metastatic
neuroblastoma.

Asgharzadeh S(1), Salo JA, Ji L, Oberthuer A, Fischer M, Berthold F, Hadjidaniel 
M, Liu CW, Metelitsa LS, Pique-Regi R, Wakamatsu P, Villablanca JG, Kreissman SG,
Matthay KK, Shimada H, London WB, Sposto R, Seeger RC.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.
sasgharzadeh@chla.usc.edu

PURPOSE: Children diagnosed at age = 18 months with metastatic MYCN-nonamplified 
neuroblastoma (NBL-NA) are at high risk for disease relapse, whereas those
diagnosed at age < 18 months are nearly always cured. In this study, we
investigated the hypothesis that expression of genes related to tumor-associated 
inflammatory cells correlates with the observed differences in survival by age at
diagnosis and contributes to a prognostic signature.
METHODS: Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in localized and metastatic
neuroblastomas (n = 71) were assessed by immunohistochemistry. Expression of 44
genes representing tumor and inflammatory cells was quantified in 133 metastatic 
NBL-NAs to assess age-dependent expression and to develop a logistic regression
model to provide low- and high-risk scores for predicting progression-free
survival (PFS). Tumors from high-risk patients enrolled onto two additional
studies (n = 91) served as independent validation cohorts.
RESULTS: Metastatic neuroblastomas had higher infiltration of TAMs than
locoregional tumors, and metastatic tumors diagnosed in patients at age = 18
months had higher expression of inflammation-related genes than those in patients
diagnosed at age < 18 months. Expression of genes representing TAMs
(CD33/CD16/IL6R/IL10/FCGR3) contributed to 25% of the accuracy of a novel 14-gene
tumor classification score. PFS at 5 years for children diagnosed at age = 18
months with NBL-NA with a low- versus high-risk score was 47% versus 12%, 57%
versus 8%, and 50% versus 20% in three independent clinical trials, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that interactions between tumor and inflammatory
cells may contribute to the clinical metastatic neuroblastoma phenotype, improve 
prognostication, and reveal novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3675667
PMID: 22927533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038454. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Calcium dependent CAMTA1 in adult stem cell commitment to a myocardial lineage.

Muller-Borer B(1), Esch G, Aldina R, Woon W, Fox R, Bursac N, Hiller S, Maeda N, 
Shepherd N, Jin JP, Hutson M, Anderson P, Kirby ML, Malouf NN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, East Carolina University, Greenville,
North Carolina, United States of America. mullerborerb@ecu.edu

The phenotype of somatic cells has recently been found to be reversible. Direct
reprogramming of one cell type into another has been achieved with transduction
and over expression of exogenous defined transcription factors emphasizing their 
role in specifying cell fate. To discover early and novel endogenous
transcription factors that may have a role in adult-derived stem cell acquisition
of a cardiomyocyte phenotype, mesenchymal stem cells from human and mouse bone
marrow and rat liver were co-cultured with neonatal cardiomyocytes as an in vitro
cardiogenic microenvironment. Cell-cell communications develop between the two
cell types as early as 24 hrs in co-culture and are required for elaboration of a
myocardial phenotype in the stem cells 8-16 days later. These intercellular
communications are associated with novel Ca(2+) oscillations in the stem cells
that are synchronous with the Ca(2+) transients in adjacent cardiomyocytes and
are detected in the stem cells as early as 24-48 hrs in co-culture. Early and
significant up-regulation of Ca(2+)-dependent effectors, CAMTA1 and RCAN1 ensues 
before a myocardial program is activated. CAMTA1 loss-of-function minimizes the
activation of the cardiac gene program in the stem cells. While the expression of
RCAN1 suggests involvement of the well-characterized calcineurin-NFAT pathway as 
a response to a Ca(2+) signal, the CAMTA1 up-regulated expression as a response
to such a signal in the stem cells was unknown. Cell-cell communications between 
the stem cells and adjacent cardiomyocytes induce Ca(2+) signals that activate a 
myocardial gene program in the stem cells via a novel and early Ca(2+)-dependent 
intermediate, up-regulation of CAMTA1.

PMCID: PMC3371086
PMID: 22715383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Med Genet. 2012 Jun;49(6):400-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100856.

Intragenic CAMTA1 rearrangements cause non-progressive congenital ataxia with or 
without intellectual disability.

Thevenon J(1), Lopez E, Keren B, Heron D, Mignot C, Altuzarra C, Béri-Dexheimer
M, Bonnet C, Magnin E, Burglen L, Minot D, Vigneron J, Morle S, Anheim M, Charles
P, Brice A, Gallagher L, Amiel J, Haffen E, Mach C, Depienne C, Doummar D, Bonnet
M, Duplomb L, Carmignac V, Callier P, Marle N, Mosca-Boidron AL, Roze V, Aral B, 
Razavi F, Jonveaux P, Faivre L, Thauvin-Robinet C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence, Anomalies du Développement et
Syndromes Malformatifs, Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France.

BACKGROUND: Non-progressive congenital ataxias (NPCA) with or without
intellectual disability (ID) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous
conditions. As a consequence, the identification of the genes responsible for
these phenotypes remained limited.
OBJECTIVE: Identification of a new gene responsible for NPCA and ID. Methods
Following the discovery of three familial or sporadic cases with an intragenic
calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) rearrangement identified by
an array-CGH and recruited from a national collaboration, the authors defined the
clinical and molecular characteristics of such rearrangements, and searched for
patients with point mutations by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Intragenic copy number variations of CAMTA1 were all located in the CG-1
domain of the gene. It segregated with autosomal dominant ID with non-progressive
congenital cerebellar ataxia (NPCA) in two unrelated families, and was de novo
deletion located in the same domain in a child presenting with NPCA. In the
patients with ID, the deletion led to a frameshift, producing a truncated
protein, while this was not the case for the patient with isolated childhood
ataxia. Brain MRI of the patients revealed a pattern of progressive atrophy of
cerebellum medium lobes and superior vermis, parietal lobes and hippocampi. DNA
sequencing of the CG-1 domain in 197 patients with sporadic or familial
non-syndromic intellectual deficiency, extended to full DNA sequencing in 50
patients with ID and 47 additional patients with childhood ataxia, identified no 
pathogenic mutation.
CONCLUSION: The authors have evidence that loss-of-function of CAMTA1, a
brain-specific calcium responsive transcription factor, is responsible for NPCA
with or without ID. Accession numbers CAMTA1 reference sequence used was
ENST00000303635. Protein sequence was ENSP00000306522.

PMID: 22693284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jan-Feb;205(1-2):12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.10.008.

Monoclonality of multifocal epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of the liver by
analysis of WWTR1-CAMTA1 breakpoints.

Errani C(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Healey JH, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Orthopaedic Surgery Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

Similar to other vascular tumors, epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) can have
multifocal presentation in up to 50% of cases. However, whether multifocal EHE
represents an unusual pattern of metastasis or multiple separate primary tumors
remains to be elucidated. Our recent identification of a WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion as
the genetic hallmark of EHE irrespective of anatomic location was used to clarify
this question by comparing the similarity of translocation breakpoints. In our
previous study, we found variability of the fusion transcripts of the
t(1;3)(p36;q25) translocation among different patients with EHE. Thus, we
undertook a molecular analysis of six samples from two patients with multicentric
hepatic EHE to test our hypothesis that the presence of identical breakpoints in 
WWTR1 and CAMTA1 support the monoclonal nature of multifocal EHE. Using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and subsequent sequencing, we
confirmed an identical WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion transcript product from different
nodules in each patient. Our results confirm that multifocal EHE are monoclonal
and thus represent metastatic implants of the same neoplastic clone rather than a
"field-effect" or synchronous occurrence of multiple neoplastic clones.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3361903
PMID: 22429593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 Jul;47(3):649-58. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9702-4. Epub 2012 
Jan 5.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 2 (STAT2) metabolism coupling
postmitotic outgrowth to visual and sound perception network in human left
cerebrum by biocomputation.

Wang L(1), Huang J, Jiang M, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Center, School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China. wanglin98@tsinghua.org.cn

We constructed the high-expression signal transducer and activator of
transcription 2 (STAT2) metabolism coupling postmitotic outgrowth to visual and
sound perception network in human left cerebrum compared with low-expression
(fold change =2) chimpanzee left cerebrum in GEO data set by using integration of
gene regulatory network inference method with gene ontology (GO) analysis of
STAT2-activated up- and downstream network. Our result showed that upstream
RECQL, PDIA2, ENOSF1, THBS4, RASGRP1, PER2, PDE8A, ORC2L, DCI, OGG1_2, SMA4,
GPD1, etc. activated STAT2, and downstream STAT2-activated GSTM3_1, GOSR1,
SH3BGR, OSBPL8, PHYH, SAPS2, C21orf33, PDIA2, TRAPPC6A, ENOSF1, CAMTA1, GTF2I_2, 
etc. in human left cerebrum. STAT2-activated network enhanced regulation of small
GTPase-mediated signal transduction, regulation of transcription, regulation of
mitosis, regulation of cell growth, positive regulation of phosphoinositide
3-kinase cascade, positive regulation of fat cell differentiation, negative
regulation of DNA replication, negative regulation of progression through cell
cycle, cyclic nucleotide metabolism, lipid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism,
vitamin A metabolism, N-acetylglucosamine metabolism, UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine
metabolism, fatty acid transport, intracellular protein transport,
vesicle-mediated transport, lipid transport, retrograde transport, Ras protein
signal transduction, Wnt receptor signaling pathway, nervous system development, 
cell extension, cell adhesion, cell differentiation, circadian rhythm, generation
of precursor metabolites and energy, establishment of blood-nerve barrier, visual
perception, sensory perception of sound, and poly-N-acetyllactosamine
biosynthesis, as a result of inducing metabolism coupling postmitotic outgrowth
to visual and sound perception in human left cerebrum.

PMID: 22219046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Psychogeriatrics. 2011 Sep;11(3):135-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00357.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 15.

CAMTA1 T polymorphism is associated with neuropsychological test performance in
older adults with cardiovascular disease.

Miller LA(1), Gunstad J, Spitznagel MB, McCaffery J, McGeary J, Poppas A, Paul
RH, Sweet LH, Cohen RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Kent State University, Kent Institute for Clinical
and Translational Research, Summa Health System, Akron, Ohio 44242, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease has long been associated with poor
neurocognitive outcome, with multiple pathophysiological mechanisms that are
linked to cognitive impairment in older adults. Although less frequently
examined, insulin dysregulation is known to affect vascular function and the
associated brain dysfunction in cardiovascular disease. Accordingly, genetic
factors tied to insulin regulation may make certain people with cardiovascular
disease more susceptible to cognitive dysfunction. Specifically, the
calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) genotype, which has been
examined as a risk factor for Type 2 diabetes and has been linked to reduced
episodic memory performance in healthy young adults, is a potential candidate
gene.
METHODS: Blood samples were obtained from 113 older adults with cardiovascular
disease who also underwent neuropsychological testing. Carriers of either one or 
two copies of the T allele of CAMTA1 were categorized into one group (n = 63),
whereas non-carriers were categorized into a second group (n = 50).
RESULTS: Analyses showed that carriers of the T allele performed more poorly on
tests of attention, executive function, and psychomotor speed, but not on tests
of memory. Carriers of the T allele also performed more poorly on a measure of
global cognitive function.
CONCLUSIONS: Results indicate that CAMTA1 genotype is associated with cognitive
function in older adults with cardiovascular disease, because carriers of the T
allele performed more poorly on tests of attention, executive function, and
psychomotor speed. Contrary to expectations, there were no differences in memory 
performance among carriers and non-carriers of the T allele. Given these mixed
findings, further studies are necessary to elucidate the association between
CAMTA1 and cognition, particularly gene expression and neuroimaging studies.

© 2011 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2011 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

PMID: 21951953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2012 May;470(5):1498-506. doi: 10.1007/s11999-011-2070-0. 
Epub 2011 Sep 24.

Epithelioid hemangioma of bone and soft tissue: a reappraisal of a controversial 
entity.

Errani C(1), Zhang L, Panicek DM, Healey JH, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The controversy surrounding diagnosis of an epithelioid hemangioma
(EH), particularly when arising in skeletal locations, stems not only from its
overlapping features with other malignant vascular neoplasms, but also from its
somewhat aggressive clinical characteristics, including multifocal presentation
and occasional lymph node involvement. Specifically, the distinction from
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) has been controversial. The recurrent
t(1;3)(p36;q25) chromosomal translocation, resulting in WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion,
recently identified in EHE of various anatomic sites, but not in EH or other
epithelioid vascular neoplasms, suggests distinct pathogeneses.
QUESTION/PURPOSES: We investigated the clinicopathologic and radiologic
characteristics of bone and soft tissue EHs in patients treated at our
institution with available tissue for molecular testing.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seventeen patients were selected after confirming the
pathologic diagnosis and fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis for the
WWTR1 and/or CAMTA1 rearrangements. Four patients had multifocal presentation.
Most patients with EH of bone were treated by intralesional curettage. None of
the patients died of disease and only four patients had a local recurrence.
RESULTS: Our results, using molecular testing to support the pathologic diagnosis
of EH, reinforce prior data that EH is a benign lesion characterized by an
indolent clinical course with an occasional multifocal presentation and rare
metastatic potential to locoregional lymph nodes.
CONCLUSION: These findings highlight the importance of distinguishing EH from
other malignant epithelioid vascular tumors as a result of differences in their
management and clinical outcome.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV, prognostic study. See Guidelines for Authors for a
complete description of levels of evidence.

PMCID: PMC3314752
PMID: 21948309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 31;3(98):98ra82. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002409.

Identification of a disease-defining gene fusion in epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma.

Tanas MR(1), Sboner A, Oliveira AM, Erickson-Johnson MR, Hespelt J, Hanwright PJ,
Flanagan J, Luo Y, Fenwick K, Natrajan R, Mitsopoulos C, Zvelebil M, Hoch BL,
Weiss SW, Debiec-Rychter M, Sciot R, West RB, Lazar AJ, Ashworth A, Reis-Filho
JS, Lord CJ, Gerstein MB, Rubin MA, Rubin BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Anatomic Pathology, Lerner Research
Institute, Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2011 Aug 31;3(98):98ps37.

Integrating transcriptomic sequencing with conventional cytogenetics, we
identified WWTR1 (WW domain-containing transcription regulator 1) (3q25) and
CAMTA1 (calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1) (1p36) as the two genes
involved in the t(1;3)(p36;q25) chromosomal translocation that is characteristic 
of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE), a vascular sarcoma. This WWTR1/CAMTA1 
gene fusion is under the transcriptional control of the WWTR1 promoter and
encodes a putative chimeric transcription factor that joins the amino terminus of
WWTR1, a protein that is highly expressed in endothelial cells, in-frame to the
carboxyl terminus of CAMTA1, a protein that is normally expressed only in brain. 
Thus, CAMTA1 expression is activated inappropriately through a promoter-switch
mechanism. The gene fusion is present in virtually all EHEs tested but is absent 
from all other vascular neoplasms, demonstrating it to be a disease-defining
genetic alteration. A sensitive and specific break-apart fluorescence in situ
hybridization assay was also developed to detect the translocation and will
assist in the evaluation of this diagnostically challenging neoplasm. The
chimeric WWTR1/CAMTA1 transcription factor may represent a therapeutic target for
EHE and offers the opportunity to shed light on the functions of two poorly
characterized proteins.

PMID: 21885404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. EMBO J. 2011 Aug 19;30(20):4309-22. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.301.

CAMTA1 is a novel tumour suppressor regulated by miR-9/9* in glioblastoma stem
cells.

Schraivogel D(1), Weinmann L, Beier D, Tabatabai G, Eichner A, Zhu JY, Anton M,
Sixt M, Weller M, Beier CP, Meister G.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Center Regensburg (BZR), University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.

Cancer stem cells or cancer initiating cells are believed to contribute to cancer
recurrence after therapy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short RNA molecules with
fundamental roles in gene regulation. The role of miRNAs in cancer stem cells is 
only poorly understood. Here, we report miRNA expression profiles of glioblastoma
stem cell-containing CD133(+) cell populations. We find that miR-9, miR-9(*)
(referred to as miR-9/9(*)), miR-17 and miR-106b are highly abundant in CD133(+) 
cells. Furthermore, inhibition of miR-9/9(*) or miR-17 leads to reduced
neurosphere formation and stimulates cell differentiation. Calmodulin-binding
transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) is a putative transcription factor, which
induces the expression of the anti-proliferative cardiac hormone natriuretic
peptide A (NPPA). We identify CAMTA1 as an miR-9/9(*) and miR-17 target. CAMTA1
expression leads to reduced neurosphere formation and tumour growth in nude mice,
suggesting that CAMTA1 can function as tumour suppressor. Consistently, CAMTA1
and NPPA expression correlate with patient survival. Our findings could provide a
basis for novel strategies of glioblastoma therapy.

PMCID: PMC3199389
PMID: 21857646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Aug;50(8):644-53. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20886. Epub
2011 May 16.

A novel WWTR1-CAMTA1 gene fusion is a consistent abnormality in epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma of different anatomic sites.

Errani C(1), Zhang L, Sung YS, Hajdu M, Singer S, Maki RG, Healey JH, Antonescu
CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

The classification of epithelioid vascular tumors remains challenging, as there
is considerable morphological overlap between tumor subtypes, across the spectrum
from benign to malignant categories. A t(1;3)(p36.3;q25) translocation was
reported in two cases of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE), however, no
follow-up studies have been performed to identify the gene fusion or to assess
its prevalence in a larger cohort of patients. We undertook a systematic
molecular analysis of 17 EHE, characterized by classic morphological and
immunophenotypic features, from various anatomical locations and with different
malignant potential. For comparison, we analyzed 13 epithelioid hemangiomas, five
epithelioid angiosarcomas, and four epithelioid sarcoma-like EHE. A fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) positional cloning strategy, spanning the
cytogenetically defined regions on chromosomes 1p36.3 and 3q25, confirmed
rearrangements in two candidate genes from these loci in all EHE cases tested.
None of the other benign or malignant epithelioid vascular tumors examined
demonstrated these abnormalities. Subsequent reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed in three EHE the WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion product.
CAMTA1 and WWTR1 have been previously shown to play important roles in
oncogenesis. Our results demonstrate the presence of a WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion in all
EHE tested from bone, soft tissue, and visceral location (liver, lung) in keeping
with a unique and specific pathological entity. Thus, FISH or RT-PCR analysis for
the presence of WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion may serve as a useful molecular diagnostic
tool in challenging diagnoses.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3264678
PMID: 21584898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Jul;112(7):1844-56. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23106.

MicroRNA expression during osteogenic differentiation of human multipotent
mesenchymal stromal cells from bone marrow.

Gao J(1), Yang T, Han J, Yan K, Qiu X, Zhou Y, Fan Q, Ma B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shanxi 710038, PR China.

MicroRNAs comprise a group of non-coding small RNAs (17-25<U+2009>nt) involved in
post-transcriptional regulation that have been identified in various plants and
animals. Studies have demonstrated that miRNAs are associated with stem cell
self-renewal and differentiation and play a key role in controlling stem cell
activities. However, the identification of specific miRNAs and their regulatory
roles in the differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) have
so far been poorly defined. We isolated and cultured human MSCs and
osteo-differentiated MSCs from four individual donors. miRNA expression in MSCs
and osteo-differentiated MSCs was investigated using miRNA microarrays. miRNAs
that were commonly expressed in all three MSC preparations and miRNAs that were
differentially expressed between MSCs and osteo-differentiated MSCs were
identified. Four underexpressed (hsa-miR-31, hsa-miR-106a, hsa-miR-148a, and
hsa-miR-424) and three novel overexpressed miRNAs (hsa-miR-30c, hsa-miR-15b, and 
hsa-miR-130b) in osteo-differentiated MSCs were selected and their expression
were verified in samples from the fourth individual donors. The putative targets 
of the miRNAs were predicted using bioinformatic analysis. The four miRNAs that
were underexpressed in osteo-differentiated MSCs were predicted to target RUNX2, 
CBFB, and BMPs, which are involved in bone formation; while putative targets for 
miRNAs overexpressed in osteo-differentiated MSCs were MSC maker (e.g., CD44,
ITGB1, and FLT1), stemness-maintaining factor (e.g., FGF2 and CXCL12), and genes 
related to cell differentiation (e.g., BMPER, CAMTA1, and GDF6). Finally,
hsa-miR-31 was selected for target verification and function analysis. The
results of this study provide an experimental basis for further research on miRNA
functions during osteogenic differentiation of human MSCs.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21416501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;71(8):3142-51. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3014. Epub
2011 Mar 8.

CAMTA1, a 1p36 tumor suppressor candidate, inhibits growth and activates
differentiation programs in neuroblastoma cells.

Henrich KO(1), Bauer T, Schulte J, Ehemann V, Deubzer H, Gogolin S, Muth D,
Fischer M, Benner A, König R, Schwab M, Westermann F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Genetics B030, Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology 
G340, German Cancer Research Center, Bioquant, Heidelberg, Germany.
k.henrich@dkfz.de

A distal portion of human chromosome 1p is often deleted in neuroblastomas and
other cancers and it is generally assumed that this region harbors one or more
tumor suppressor genes. In neuroblastoma, a 261 kb region at 1p36.3 that
encompasses the smallest region of consistent deletion pinpoints the locus for
calmodulin binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1). Low CAMTA1 expression is
an independent predictor of poor outcome in multivariate survival analysis, but
its potential functionality in neuroblastoma has not been explored. In this
study, we used inducible cell models to analyze the impact of CAMTA1 on
neuroblastoma biology. In neuroblastoma cells that expressed little endogenous
CAMTA1, its ectopic expression slowed cell proliferation, increasing the relative
proportion of cells in G(1)/G(0) phases of the cell cycle, inhibited
anchorage-independent colony formation, and suppressed the growth of tumor
xenografts. CAMTA1 also induced neurite-like processes and markers of neuronal
differentiation in neuroblastoma cells. Further, retinoic acid and other
differentiation- inducing stimuli upregulated CAMTA1 expression in neuroblastoma 
cells. Transciptome analysis revealed 683 genes regulated on CAMTA1 induction and
gene ontology analysis identified genes consistent with CAMTA1-induced
phenotypes, with a significant enrichment for genes involved in neuronal function
and differentiation. Our findings define properties of CAMTA1 in growth
suppression and neuronal differentiation that support its assignment as a 1p36
tumor suppressor gene in neuroblastoma.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21385898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 May;110(5):1160-70. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00973.2010. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Genomic predictors of the maximal O2 uptake response to standardized exercise
training programs.

Bouchard C(1), Sarzynski MA, Rice TK, Kraus WE, Church TS, Sung YJ, Rao DC,
Rankinen T.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genomics Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge,
LA 70808, USA. claude.bouchard@pbrc.edu

Comment in
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 May;110(5):1150-1.

Low cardiorespiratory fitness is a powerful predictor of morbidity and
cardiovascular mortality. In 473 sedentary adults, all whites, from 99 families
of the Health, Risk Factors, Exercise Training, and Genetics (HERITAGE) Family
Study, the heritability of gains in maximal O(2) uptake (VO(2max)) after exposure
to a standardized 20-wk exercise program was estimated at 47%. A genome-wide
association study based on 324,611 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was
undertaken to identify SNPs associated with improvements in VO(2max) Based on
single-SNP analysis, 39 SNPs were associated with the gains with P < 1.5 ×
10(-4). Stepwise multiple regression analysis of the 39 SNPs identified a panel
of 21 SNPs that accounted for 49% of the variance in VO(2max) trainability.
Subjects who carried =9 favorable alleles at these 21 SNPs improved their
VO(2max) by 221 ml/min, whereas those who carried =19 of these alleles gained, on
average, 604 ml/min. The strongest association was with rs6552828, located in the
acyl-CoA synthase long-chain member 1 (ACSL1) gene, which accounted by itself for
~6% of the training response of VO(2max). The genes nearest to the SNPs that were
the strongest predictors were PR domain-containing 1 with ZNF domain (PRDM1);
glutamate receptor, ionotropic, N-methyl-D-aspartate 3A (GRIN3A); K(+) channel,
voltage gated, subfamily H, member 8 (KCNH8); and zinc finger protein of the
cerebellum 4 (ZIC4). The association with the SNP nearest to ZIC4 was replicated 
in 40- to 65-yr-old, sedentary, overweight, and dyslipidemic subjects trained in 
Studies of a Targeted Risk Reduction Intervention Through Defined Exercise
(STRRIDE; n = 183). Two SNPs were replicated in sedentary obese white women
exercise trained in the Dose Response to Exercise (DREW) study (n = 112):
rs1956197 near dishevelled associated activator of morphogenesis 1 (DAAM1) and
rs17117533 in the vicinity of necdin (NDN). The association of SNPs rs884736 in
the calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) locus and rs17581162
~68 kb upstream from regulator of G protein signaling 18 (RGS18) with the gains
in VO(2max) in HERITAGE whites were replicated in HERITAGE blacks (n = 247).
These genomic predictors of the response of Vo(2max) to regular exercise provide 
new targets for the study of the biology of fitness and its adaptation to regular
exercise. Large-scale replication studies are warranted.

PMCID: PMC3098655
PMID: 21183627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Oct;5(10):1311-4. doi: 10.4161/psb.5.10.13158. Epub 2010
Oct 1.

How calmodulin binding transcription activators (CAMTAs) mediate auxin responses.

Galon Y(1), Snir O, Fromm H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Ecology of Plants, Faculty of Life
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Israel.

Phenotypic plasticity is an adaptive feature of all organisms, which, in land
plants, entails changes in orientation of growth (tropism), patterns of
development, organ architecture, timing of developmental processes, and resource 
allocation. However, little is known about the molecular components that
integrate exogenous environmental cues with internal hormonal signaling pathways.
This addendum describes a role for calcium-regulated calmodulin-binding
transcription 1 (CAMTA1) in auxin signaling and stress responses. We discuss
possible mechanisms that may underlie this role of CAMTA1, and speculate on the
more general roles of CAMTAs in auxin responses and phenotypic plasticity.

© 2010 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3115376
PMID: 20930517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Planta. 2010 Jun;232(1):165-78. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1153-6. Epub 2010 Apr 10.

Calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 mediates auxin signaling and
responds to stresses in Arabidopsis.

Galon Y(1), Aloni R, Nachmias D, Snir O, Feldmesser E, Scrase-Field S, Boyce JM, 
Bouché N, Knight MR, Fromm H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University,
Tel Aviv, Israel. galonyae@post.tau.ac.il

Auxin is a key plant hormone that regulates various aspects of plant development.
However, the mechanisms integrating auxin growth effects with stress responses
are not fully understood. In this study, we investigated the possible role of
calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1), an Arabidopsis thaliana
calcium/calmodulin-binding transcription activator, in auxin signaling and its
responses to different stresses. Plants harboring the AtCAMTA1 promoter fused to 
the GUS reporter gene revealed cell-specific expression patterns reminiscent of
auxin responses. The responsiveness of CAMTA1 to auxin was further assessed by
chemical disturbances in polar auxin transport, and by RT-PCR analysis of gene
expression of dissected leaf sections from plants exposed to the auxin transport 
inhibitor NPA. Furthermore, the intensity and cell-specific expression patterns
of CAMTA1 changed significantly and differentially on exposure to increasing salt
concentrations and heat. Transcriptome analysis of a camta1 T-DNA insertion
mutant revealed 63 up-regulated genes, of which 17 are associated with auxin
signaling. Finally, analysis of hypocotyl elongation in the presence and absence 
of auxin revealed that camta1 T-DNA insertion mutants and CAMTA1-repressor lines 
are hyper-responsive to auxin compared to wild-type seedlings. Thus, CAMTA1
participates in auxin signaling and responds to abiotic stresses.

PMID: 20383645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Plant Cell. 2009 Mar;21(3):972-84. doi: 10.1105/tpc.108.063958. Epub 2009 Mar 6.

Roles for Arabidopsis CAMTA transcription factors in cold-regulated gene
expression and freezing tolerance.

Doherty CJ(1), Van Buskirk HA, Myers SJ, Thomashow MF.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University-Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2009 Mar;21(3):697.

The Arabidopsis thaliana CBF cold response pathway plays a central role in cold
acclimation. It is characterized by rapid cold induction of genes encoding the
CBF1-3 transcription factors, followed by expression of the CBF gene regulon,
which imparts freezing tolerance. Our goal was to further the understanding of
the cis-acting elements and trans-acting factors involved in expression of CBF2. 
We identified seven conserved DNA motifs (CM), CM1 to 7, that are present in the 
promoters of CBF2 and another rapidly cold-induced gene encoding a transcription 
factor, ZAT12. The results presented indicate that in the CBF2 promoter, CM4 and 
CM6 have negative regulatory activity and that CM2 has both negative and positive
activity. A Myc binding site in the CBF2 promoter was also found to have positive
regulatory effects. Moreover, our results indicate that members of the calmodulin
binding transcription activator (CAMTA) family of transcription factors bind to
the CM2 motif, that CAMTA3 is a positive regulator of CBF2 expression, and that
double camta1 camta3 mutant plants are impaired in freezing tolerance. These
results establish a role for CAMTA proteins in cold acclimation and provide a
possible point of integrating low-temperature calcium and calmodulin signaling
with cold-regulated gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2671710
PMID: 19270186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Nov-Dec;51(6):679-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2008.06.004. Epub
2008 Jul 11.

Complex constitutional subtelomeric 1p36.3 deletion/duplication in a mentally
retarded child with neonatal neuroblastoma.

Isidor B(1), Le Cunff M, Boceno M, Boisseau P, Thomas C, Rival JM, David A, Le
Caignec C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes,
Nantes Cedex 1, France.

Monosomy 1p36 is one of the most frequent subtelomeric microdeletion syndromes
characterized by distinct craniofacial features and developmental delay/mental
retardation. Other common symptoms include hypotonia, seizures, brain
abnormalities, visual, auditory and heart defects. Neuroblastoma is a rare
feature since to our knowledge only two patients with "pure" 1p36 deletion have
been described. We report on a child with developmental delay and facial
dysmorphy who developed neuroblastoma at 1 month of age. No primary site outside 
of the liver could be demonstrated and the tumour regressed spontaneously.
Standard karyotyping was normal while subtelomeric screening using Multiplex
Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) method revealed a constitutional de
novo subtelomeric 1p36 deletion. Subsequent Agilent 244K oligonucleotide
array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis showed a complex 1p36.3 deletion/duplication
rearrangement. Among the best candidate genes predisposing to the development of 
neuroblastoma located in 1p36, the AJAP1 gene is the only gene present in the
duplication while CHD5, TNFRSF25 and CAMTA1 are located outside of the
rearrangement. Therefore, a gene-dosage effect involving a gene located in the
duplication including AJAP1 might explain the neuroblastoma observed in our
patient. The rearrangement might equally interfere with the expression of a gene 
located outside of it (including CHD5 located 1Mb away from the rearrangement)
playing a role in the tumorigenesis. In conclusion, this study illustrates the
complexity of such rearrangement characterized by array CGH and strengthens that 
constitutional 1p36.3 rearrangement predisposes to the development of
neuroblastoma.

PMID: 18672103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 Mar;86(3):341-8. doi: 10.1007/s00109-007-0295-x. Epub 2008
Jan 22.

Analysis of novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes in a general French population:
the D.E.S.I.R. study.

Cauchi S(1), Proença C, Choquet H, Gaget S, De Graeve F, Marre M, Balkau B,
Tichet J, Meyre D, Vaxillaire M, Froguel P; D.E.S.I.R. Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.

Recently, Genome Wide Association (GWA) studies identified novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), highly associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in 
several case-control studies of European descent. However, the impact of these
markers on glucose homeostasis in a population-based study remains to be
clarified. The French prospective D.E.S.I.R. study (N = 4,707) was genotyped for 
22 polymorphisms within 14 loci showing nominal to strong association with T2D in
recently published GWA analyses (CDKAL1, IGFBP2, CDKN2A/2B, EXT2, HHEX,
LOC646279, SLC30A8, MMP26, KCTD12, LDLR, CAMTA1, LOC38776, NGN3 and CXCR4). We
assessed their effects on quantitative traits related to glucose homeostasis in
4,283 normoglycemic middle-aged participants at baseline and their contribution
to T2D incidence during 9 years of follow-up. Individuals carrying T2D risk
alleles of CDKAL1 or SLC30A8 had lower fasting plasma insulin level (rs7756992 P 
= 0.003) or lower basal insulin secretion (rs13266634 P = 0.0005), respectively, 
than non-carriers. Furthermore, NGN3 and MMP26 risk alleles associated with
higher fasting plasma glucose levels (rs10823406 P = 0.01 and rs2499953 P = 0.04,
respectively). However, for these SNPs, only modest associations were found with 
a higher incidence of T2D: hazard ratios of 2.03 [1.00-4.11] for MMP26 (rs2499953
P = 0.05) and 1.33 [1.02-1.73] for NGN3 (rs10823406 P = 0.03). We confirmed
deleterious effects of SLC30A8, CDKAL1, NGN3 and MMP26 risk alleles on glucose
homeostasis in the D.E.S.I.R. prospective cohort. However, in contrast to TCF7L2,
the contribution of novel loci to T2D incidence seems only modest in the general 
middle-aged French population and should be replicated in larger cohorts.

PMID: 18210030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun 1;104(3):805-17. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21668.

MicroRNAs play a role in the development of human hematopoietic stem cells.

Liao R(1), Sun J, Zhang L, Lou G, Chen M, Zhou D, Chen Z, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of recently discovered noncoding RNA genes that
post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression. It is becoming clear that miRNAs
play an important role in the regulation of gene translation during development. 
However, in mammals, expression data are principally based on whole tissue
analysis and are still very incomplete. We isolated CD34(+)CD38(-) hematopoietic 
stem cells (HSCs) from human umbilical cord blood, on the basis of cell-surface
markers using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Also, CD34(+)
subpopulation was FACS isolated as the control. Next, using microarray containing
oligonucleotides corresponding to 517 miRNAs from human, mouse, and rat genomes, 
we obtained miRNA gene expression profiles of both subpopulations. We focused on 
the HSCs correlative miRNAs with comparison to the control. The miRNAs of
particular interest were confirmed by real-time RT-PCR. HSCs-overexpressed
hsa-miR-520h and underexpressed hsa-miR-129 were selected for target prediction
and analysis. The result showed that EIF2C3 and CAMTA1, genes related to miRNAs
processing or transcription regulation, were proved to be real targets for
hsa-miR-129. And ABCG2, involved in stemness maintaining, a real target for
hsa-miR-520h. Finally, we chose hsa-miR-520h, enriched in HSCs but low in CD34(+)
cells, for functional characterization, because of its possible role in
differentiation of HSCs by regulating ABCG2. As a result, hsa-miR-520h
transduction into CD34(+) cells greatly increased number of different progenitor 
colonies in Colony-Forming-Cell assays, suggesting that hsa-miR-520h may promote 
differentiation of HSCs into progenitor cells by inhibiting ABCG2 expression.
This study paves the way for identifying HSC-specific miRNAs and their roles in
HSC development.

PMID: 18189265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Sep;37(9):2378-89.

DNA demethylation in the human FOXP3 locus discriminates regulatory T cells from 
activated FOXP3(+) conventional T cells.

Baron U(1), Floess S, Wieczorek G, Baumann K, Grützkau A, Dong J, Thiel A, Boeld 
TJ, Hoffmann P, Edinger M, Türbachova I, Hamann A, Olek S, Huehn J.

Author information: 
(1)Epiontis GmbH, Berlin, Germany.

The transcription factor FOXP3 is critical for development and function of
regulatory T cells (Treg). Their number and functioning appears to be crucial in 
the prevention of autoimmunity and allergy, but also to be a negative prognostic 
marker for various solid tumors. Although expression of the transcription factor 
FOXP3 currently constitutes the best-known marker for Treg, in humans, transient 
expression is also observed in activated non-Treg. Extending our recent findings 
for the murine foxp3 locus, we observed epigenetic modification of several
regions in the human FOXP3 locus exclusively occurring in Treg. Importantly,
activated conventional CD4(+) T cells and TGF-beta-treated cells displayed no
FOXP3 DNA demethylation despite expression of FOXP3, whereas subsets of Treg
stable even upon extended in vitro expansion remained demethylated. To
investigate whether a whole set of genes might be epigenetically imprinted in the
Treg lineage, we conducted a genome-wide differential methylation hybridization
analysis. Several genes were found displaying differential methylation between
Treg and conventional T cells, but none beside FOXP3 turned out to be entirely
specific to Treg when tested on a broad panel of cells and tissues. We conclude
that FOXP3 DNA demethylation constitutes the most reliable criterion for natural 
Treg available at present.

PMID: 17694575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. FEBS Lett. 2007 Aug 21;581(21):3893-8. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

CAMTAs: calmodulin-binding transcription activators from plants to human.

Finkler A(1), Ashery-Padan R, Fromm H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University,
Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Recently, a novel family of calmodulin-binding transcription activators (CAMTAs) 
was reported in various eukaryotes. All CAMTAs share a similar domain
organization, with a novel type of sequence-specific DNA-binding domain
(designated CG-1). This domain could bind DNA directly and activate
transcription, or interact with other transcription factors, not through DNA
binding, thus acting as a co-activator of transcription. Investigations of CAMTAs
in various organisms imply a broad range of functions from sensory mechanisms to 
embryo development and growth control, highlighted by the apparent involvement of
mammalian CAMTA2 in cardiac growth, and of CAMTA1 in tumor suppression and memory
performance.

PMID: 17689537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2008 Jan 31;27(6):803-10. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Expression and sequence analysis of candidates for the 1p36.31 tumor suppressor
gene deleted in neuroblastomas.

Okawa ER(1), Gotoh T, Manne J, Igarashi J, Fujita T, Silverman KA, Xhao H, Mosse 
YP, White PS, Brodeur GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of
Pediatrics, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

Neuroblastomas are characterized by 1p deletions, suggesting that a tumor
suppressor gene (TSG) resides in this region. We have mapped the smallest region 
of deletion (SRD) to a 2 Mb region of 1p36.31 using microsatellite and single
nucleotide polymorphisms. We have identified 23 genes in this region, and we have
analysed these genes for mutations and RNA expression patterns to identify
candidate TSGs. We sequenced the coding exons of these genes in 30 neuroblastoma 
cell lines. Although rare mutations were found in 10 of the 23 genes, none showed
a pattern of genetic change consistent with homozygous inactivation. We examined 
the expression of these 23 genes in 20 neuroblastoma cell lines, and most showed 
readily detectable expression, and no correlation with 1p deletion. However, 7
genes showed uniformly low expression in the lines, and 2 genes (CHD5, RNF207)
had virtually absent expression, consistent with the expected pattern for a TSG. 
Our mutation and expression analysis in neuroblastoma cell lines, combined with
expression analysis in normal tissues, putative function and prior implication in
neuroblastoma pathogenesis, suggests that the most promising TSG deleted from the
1p36 SRD is CHD5, but TNFRSF25, CAMTA1 and AJAP1 are also viable candidates.

PMID: 17667943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 20;282(29):21253-8. Epub 2007 May 30.

A potential dimerization region of dCAMTA is critical for termination of fly
visual response.

Gong P(1), Han J, Reddig K, Li HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

CAMTAs are a group of Ca(2+)/calmodulin binding transcription activators that are
implicated in brain tumor suppression, cardiac hypertrophy, and plant sensory
responses. The sole fly CAMTA, dCAMTA, stimulates expression of an F-box gene,
dFbxl4, to potentiate rhodopsin deactivation, which enables rapid termination of 
fly visual responses. Here we report that a dCAMTA fragment associated with a
full-length protein in co-transfected human embryonic kidney 293 cells. The
interaction site was mapped to a region within the DNA-binding CG-1 domain. With 
this potential dimerization site mutated, the full-length dCAMTA had defective
nuclear localization. In transgenic flies, this mutant dCAMTA variant failed to
stimulate expression of dFbxl4 and rescue the slow termination of light response 
phenotype of a dCAMTA null mutant fly. Our data suggest that dCAMTA may function 
as a dimer during fly visual regulation and that the CG-1 domain may mediate
dimerization of CAMTA transcription factors.

PMID: 17537720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jun 15;16(12):1469-77. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

Calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) alleles predispose human
episodic memory performance.

Huentelman MJ(1), Papassotiropoulos A, Craig DW, Hoerndli FJ, Pearson JV, Huynh
KD, Corneveaux J, Hänggi J, Mondadori CR, Buchmann A, Reiman EM, Henke K, de
Quervain DJ, Stephan DA.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenomics Division, The Translational Genomics Research Institute, 445 N
Fifth Street, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.

Little is known about the genes and proteins involved in the process of human
memory. To identify genetic factors related to human episodic memory performance,
we conducted an ultra-high-density genome-wide screen at > 500 000 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a sample of normal young adults stratified for
performance on an episodic recall memory test. Analysis of this data identified
SNPs within the calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) gene that
were significantly associated with memory performance. A follow up study, focused
on the CAMTA1 locus in an independent cohort consisting of cognitively normal
young adults, singled out SNP rs4908449 with a P-value of 0.0002 as the most
significant associated SNP in the region. These validated genetic findings were
further supported by the identification of CAMTA1 transcript enrichment in
memory-related human brain regions and through a functional magnetic resonance
imaging experiment on individuals matched for memory performance that identified 
CAMTA1 allele-specific upregulation of medial temporal lobe brain activity in
those individuals harboring the 'at-risk' allele for poorer memory performance.
The CAMTA1 locus encodes a purported transcription factor that interfaces with
the calcium-calmodulin system of the cell to alter gene expression patterns. Our 
validated genomic and functional biological findings described herein suggest a
role for CAMTA1 in human episodic memory.

PMID: 17470457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur J Cancer. 2007 Feb;43(3):607-16. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

Allelic variants of CAMTA1 and FLJ10737 within a commonly deleted region at 1p36 
in neuroblastoma.

Henrich KO(1), Claas A, Praml C, Benner A, Mollenhauer J, Poustka A, Schwab M,
Westermann F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumour Genetics B030, German Cancer Research Center DKFZ, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. k.henrich@dkfz.de

Deletion of a distal portion of 1p is seen in a wide range of human malignancies,
including neuroblastoma. Here, a 1p36.3 commonly deleted region of 216 kb has
been defined encompassing two genes, CAMTA1 and FLJ10737. Low expression of
CAMTA1 has been recently shown to be an independent predictor of poor outcome in 
neuroblastoma patients. The present study surveys CAMTA1 and FLJ10737 for genetic
alterations by fluorescence-based single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) 
using a panel of DNAs from 88 neuroblastomas, their matching blood samples and 97
unaffected individuals. Nucleotide variants encoding amino acid substitutions
were found in both genes. One CAMTA1 variant (T1336I) was not detected in 97
unaffected individuals, another (N1177K) resides in a conserved domain of the
CAMTA1 protein and was found hemizygous in six neuroblastomas. We found no
evidence for somatic mutations in FLJ10737 or CAMTA1. Further investigations are 
needed to address the functional impact of the identified variants and their
possible significance for neuroblastoma.

PMID: 17222547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Gastroenterology. 2006 Dec;131(6):1913-24. Epub 2006 Oct 15.

Recurrent genomic alterations with impact on survival in colorectal cancer
identified by genome-wide array comparative genomic hybridization.

Kim MY(1), Yim SH, Kwon MS, Kim TM, Shin SH, Kang HM, Lee C, Chung YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea,
Socho-gu, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although genetic aspects of tumorigenesis in colorectal cancer
(CRC) have been well studied, reliable biomarkers predicting prognosis are
scarce. We aimed to identify recurrently altered genomic regions (RAR) in CRC
with high resolution, to investigate their implications on survival and to
explore novel cancer-related genes in prognosis-associated RARs.
METHODS: A 1-Mb resolution microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization
(array CGH) was applied to 59 CRCs. RARs, defined as genomic alterations,
detected in more than 10 cases were identified and analyzed for their association
with survival. Expression levels of genes in prognosis-associated RARs were
examined by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven RARs were identified. Eleven high-level amplifications and 
2 homozygous deletions also were detected, but they were not as common as RARs.
Multivariate analysis revealed RAR-L1 (loss on 1p36; hazard ratio = 8.15, P =
.002) and RAR-L20 (loss on 21q22; hazard ratio = 3.53, P = .034) are independent 
indicators of poor prognosis. Expression of CAMTA1, located in RAR-L1, was
reduced frequently in CRCs, and low CAMTA1 expression was associated
significantly with poor prognosis, which indicates that CAMTA1 may play a role as
a tumor suppressor in CRC. Five pairs of RARs were correlated significantly to
each other and 3 pairs share genes involved in the same biological functions,
suggesting possible collaborative roles in tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified recurrent genomic changes in 59 CRCs. RARs could be
more important in sporadic tumors where the effect of genomic changes on
tumorigenesis is relatively smaller than in familial cancer. Our results and
analysis strategy will be helpful to elucidate pathogenesis of CRCs or to develop
biomarkers for predicting prognosis.

PMID: 17087931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 1;12(1):131-8.

Reduced expression of CAMTA1 correlates with adverse outcome in neuroblastoma
patients.

Henrich KO(1), Fischer M, Mertens D, Benner A, Wiedemeyer R, Brors B, Oberthuer
A, Berthold F, Wei JS, Khan J, Schwab M, Westermann F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Genetics B030, Molecular Genetics B060, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany. k.henrich@dkfz.de

PURPOSE: A distal portion of 1p is frequently deleted in human neuroblastomas,
and it is generally assumed that this region harbors at least one gene relevant
for neuroblastoma development. A 1p36.3 commonly deleted region, bordered by
D1S2731 and D1S214 has been defined. The present study surveys whether expression
of genes mapping to this region is associated with tumor behavior.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Candidate genes localized within the deleted region were
identified by sequence data analysis. Their expression was assessed in a cohort
of 49 primary neuroblastomas using cDNA microarray analysis. Gene expression
patterns associated with known prognostic markers and patient outcome were
further evaluated by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR in a cohort
of 102 neuroblastomas.
RESULTS: The commonly deleted region spans 261 kb and encompasses two genes,
FLJ10737 and CAMTA1. We found no evidence for an association of FLJ10737
expression with established prognostic variables or outcome. In contrast, low
CAMTA1 expression characterized tumors with 1p deletion, MYCN amplification, and 
advanced tumor stages 3 and 4. Moreover, low CAMTA1 expression was significantly 
associated with poor outcome (P < 0.001). In multivariate analysis of event-free 
survival, the prognostic information of low CAMTA1 expression was independent of 
1p status, MYCN status, tumor stage, and age of the patient at diagnosis (hazard 
ratio, 3.52; 95% confidence interval, 1.21-10.28; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that assessment of CAMTA1 expression may improve
the prognostic models for neuroblastoma and that it will be important to define
the biological function of CAMTA1 in this disease.

PMID: 16397034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1119-28.

Allelic losses at 1p36 and 19q13 in gliomas: correlation with histologic
classification, definition of a 150-kb minimal deleted region on 1p36, and
evaluation of CAMTA1 as a candidate tumor suppressor gene.

Barbashina V(1), Salazar P, Holland EC, Rosenblum MK, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

PURPOSE: Allelic loss at 1p is seen in 70% to 85% of oligodendrogliomas
(typically in association with 19q allelic loss) and 20-30% of astrocytomas.
Because most 1p deletions in gliomas involve almost the entire chromosome arm,
narrowing the region of the putative tumor suppressor gene has been difficult. To
better define the histologic correlates of different patterns of 1p and 19q loss,
we evaluated 1p/19q status in a large group of gliomas. This also allowed us to
define a very small minimal deleted region (MDR) on 1p36.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Among 205 consecutive cases of glioma studied for 1p loss of
heterozygosity (LOH), 112 tumors were evaluated for both 1p and 19q LOH using at 
least three polymorphic markers on 1p and 19q each. The latter group included
both low-grade tumors (oligodendroglioma, diffuse astrocytoma, and
"oligoastrocytoma") and high-grade tumors (anaplastic oligodendrogliomas,
anaplastic astrocytomas, anaplastic oligoastrocytomas). Tumors with small
segmental 1p losses (defined as LOH at some loci with retention of heterozygosity
at other loci) were studied using a more extensive panel of markers to define the
1p MDR. The candidate gene was screened for mutations and its expression was
studied by qualitative and quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR and Northern
blotting.
RESULTS: Allelic losses on 1p and 19q, either separately or combined, were more
common in classic oligodendrogliomas than in either astrocytomas or
oligoastrocytomas (P < 0.0001). Classic oligodendrogliomas showed 1p loss in 35
of 42 (83%) cases, 19q loss in 28 of 39 (72%), and these were combined in 27 of
39 (69%) cases. There was no significant difference in 1p/19q LOH status between 
low-grade and anaplastic oligodendrogliomas. In contrast, no astrocytomas and
only 6 of 30 (20%) oligoastrocytic tumors had combined 1p/19q loss. Although
rare, 1p deletions were more often segmental in astrocytomas (5 of 6, 83%) than
in oligodendrogliomas (3 of 35, 9%; P = 0.006). Eleven tumors (6
oligodendrogliomas or having oligodendroglial components, 5 purely astrocytic)
with small segmental 1p losses underwent further detailed LOH mapping. All
informative tumors in the oligodendroglial group and 2 of 3 informative
astrocytomas showed LOH at 1p36.23, with a 150-kb MDR located between D1S2694 and
D1S2666, entirely within the CAMTA1 transcription factor gene. Mutation analysis 
of the exons encoding conserved regions of CAMTA1 showed no somatic mutations in 
10 gliomas, including 6 cases with and 4 cases without 1p LOH. CAMTA1 is normally
expressed predominantly in non-neoplastic adult brain tissue. Relative to the
latter, the expression level of CAMTA1 was low in oligodendroglial tumors and was
further halved in cases with 1p deletion compared with those without 1p deletion 
(Mann-Whitney, P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm the strong association of combined 1p/19q loss with
classic oligodendroglioma histology and identify a very small segment of 1p36
located within CAMTA1 that was deleted in all oligodendroglial tumors with 1p
LOH. This MDR also overlaps the neuroblastoma 1p36 MDR. CAMTA1 shows no evidence 
of inactivation by somatic mutations but its expression is reduced by half in
cases with 1p LOH, suggesting that the functional effects of CAMTA1
haploinsufficiency warrant further investigation.

PMID: 15709179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Oncol. 2004 Jun;24(6):1407-12.

Cell cycle-dependent transcriptional regulation of calmodulin-binding
transcription activator 1 in neuroblastoma cells.

Nakatani K(1), Nishioka J, Itakura T, Nakanishi Y, Horinouchi J, Abe Y, Wada H,
Nobori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mie University School of Medicine, Mie
514-8507, Japan. nakatani@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

A deletion of the short arm on human chromosome 1 is a common genetic abnormality
in neuroblastoma, which is a highly malignant tumor in young childhood. Recently,
calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 (CAMTA1) gene was identified at 1p36
and considered as a candidate tumor suppressor of neuroblastoma. In the present
study, we demonstrate that the expression levels of CAMTA1 mRNA were high in
N-type neuroblastoma cell lines but low in S-type neuroblastoma cell lines. This 
result suggested that CAMTA1 could associate with the differentiation of
neuroblastoma cells. Moreover, we examined the relationship between the
expression of CAMTA1 and cell cycle progression in N-type neuroblastoma SK-N-SH
cells. During cell cycle synchronization, cell cycle phases were checked by flow 
cytometry and Western blot analysis of cell cycle-related proteins. Then, the
expression of CAMTA1 mRNA was determined by RT-PCR in each phase of the cell
cycle. CAMTA1 mRNA showed a cell cycle-dependent expression, resulting in high
levels of expression in S and M phases. Moreover, microscopic analysis revealed
that the cell cycle-dependent expression of CAMTA1 protein is in agreement with
mRNA expression. Taken together, CAMTA1 is expressed in S and M phases and
decreased in post-mitosis. These results suggest that CAMTA1 may participate in
induction of cell differentiation and cell cycle regulation.

PMID: 15138581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int J Oncol. 2003 Oct;23(4):1219-24.

Identification and characterization of FLJ10737 and CAMTA1 genes on the commonly 
deleted region of neuroblastoma at human chromosome 1p36.31-p36.23.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Tumor suppressor genes of neuroblastoma are located at human chromosome 1p36,
4p16, 11q23.3, and 14q32. We have previously cloned and characterized MFRP and
RNF26 genes at 11q23.3. Here, we searched for genes within the 1p36.31-p36.23
commonly deleted region between microsatellite markers D1S2731 and D1S2666 by
using bioinformatics. D1S2731 was located within FLJ10737 gene, consisting of 16 
exons. D1S2666 was located within CAMTA1 gene, consisting of 23 exons. FLJ10737
and CAMTA1 genes were located in the head-to-head manner with an interval of
about 83 kb. Exons 1-10 of FLJ10737 gene as well as exons 1-5 of CAMTA1 gene were
located within the 1p36.31-p36.23 commonly deleted region. FLJ10737 (559 aa) was 
found to consist of the DnaJ domain, bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS),
FADH domain, and FEMCA domain. Mouse E030019A03, zebrafish MGC55845, Drosophila
CG8531 and Arabidopsis At2g35720 were homologs of human FLJ10737. FADH domain was
conserved among vertebrate FLJ10737 orthologs as well as human AD-015, mouse
Histocompatibility 47, and rat Ratsg2. KIAA0833 was the representative human
CAMTA1 cDNA. Nucleotide sequence of mouse Camta1 cDNA was determined in silico by
assembling nucleotide sequences of BY733411, BU610694 ESTs and AK122383 cDNA.
Human CAMTA1 (1673 aa) and mouse Camta1 (1682 aa) showed 94.1% total-amino-acid
identity. CAMTA1 was a Calmodulin-binding transcription activator (CAMTA) family 
protein, consisting of CG-1 domain, TIG domain, ankyrin repeats, and IQ motifs.
FLJ10737 and CAMTA1 genes on 1p36.31-p36.23 are candidate tumor suppressor genes 
of neuroblastoma.

PMID: 12964007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


