
1. J Hypertens. 2016 May;34(5):942-9. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000873.

A functional variant in the coding region of CAMTA2 is associated with left
ventricular hypertrophy by affecting the activation of Nkx2.5-dependent
transcription.

Song WH(1), Lin YH, Sun K, Zhang YH, Song Y, Hou LB, Zhang CN, Hui RT, Chen JZ.

Author information: 
(1)aInternal Medicine bSino-German Laboratory for Molecular Medicine cNational
Clinical Research Center of Cardiovascular Diseases, State Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China *Wei-hua Song and Ya-hui Lin contributed
equally to the writing of this article.

OBJECTIVE: The calmodulin-binding transcription activator 2 (CAMTA2) promotes
transcription of genes involved in cardiac hypertrophy through its interaction
with Nkx2.5 and is an indispensable transcription coactivator for cardiac
hypertrophy. We hypothesized that variants in the coding region of CAMTA2 would
affect its function and confer a risk of cardiac hypertrophy.
METHODS: The effects of the variant rs238234 on the activity of the atrial
natriuretic factor promoter and on the cardiomyocytes hypertrophy were assessed
in the H9C2 cell line and primary neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, respectively.
Furthermore, the association of this variant with left ventricular hypertrophy
(LVH) was tested in hypertensive patients with and without hypertrophy (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>325
and 697), and this analysis was replicated in an independent population of 987
hypertensive patients without hypertrophy and 463 hypertensive patients with
hypertrophy.
RESULTS: We found that the G allele of rs238234 activated the atrial natriuretic 
factor promoter more strongly than the C allele. The cell size of cardiomyocytes 
was larger in the presence of the Ad-CAMTA2 G allele, and the G allele was
associated with significantly increased susceptibility to LVH in hypertensive
[odds ratio (OR), 1.29; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.009]. In the discovery cohort, after adjusting for 
age and sex, the GG genotype was significantly associated with increased LVH risk
(OR, 1.75; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.015). There was little attenuation of the ORs (1.62; P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05)
when adjusting for BMI, heart rate, blood pressure, smoking, and drinking and
further adjusting all covariates including lipid levels and other major risk
factors. However, the GC genotype did not show any association with LVH using
three regressive models. Replication in the second study yielded similar results.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence that the rs238234 GG genotype in the
coding region of CAMTA2 may increase the risk of LVH by affecting the activation 
of Nkx2.5-dependent transcription.

PMID: 26886562  [PubMed - in process]


2. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 11;9(12):e114616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114616.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of genomic alterations in pancreatic cancer using array-based
comparative genomic hybridization.

Liang JW(1), Shi ZZ(2), Shen TY(2), Che X(1), Wang Z(1), Shi SS(3), Xu X(4), Cai 
Y(4), Zhao P(1), Wang CF(1), Zhou ZX(1), Wang MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Abdominal Surgical Oncology, Cancer Hospital and Institute,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (2)Faculty of Medicine, Kunming University of Science and Technology,
Kunming, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital and Institute,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Genomic aberration is a common feature of human cancers and also is
one of the basic mechanisms that lead to overexpression of oncogenes and
underexpression of tumor suppressor genes. Our study aims to identify frequent
genomic changes in pancreatic cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used array comparative genomic hybridization (array
CGH) to identify recurrent genomic alterations and validated the protein
expression of selected genes by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Sixteen gains and thirty-two losses occurred in more than 30% and 60% of
the tumors, respectively. High-level amplifications at 7q21.3-q22.1 and 19q13.2
and homozygous deletions at 1p33-p32.3, 1p22.1, 1q22, 3q27.2, 6p22.3, 6p21.31,
12q13.2, 17p13.2, 17q21.31 and 22q13.1 were identified. Especially, amplification
of AKT2 was detected in two carcinomas and homozygous deletion of CDKN2C in other
two cases. In 15 independent validation samples, we found that AKT2 (19q13.2) and
MCM7 (7q22.1) were amplified in 6 and 9 cases, and CAMTA2 (17p13.2) and PFN1
(17p13.2) were homozygously deleted in 3 and 1 cases. AKT2 and MCM7 were
overexpressed, and CAMTA2 and PFN1 were underexpressed in pancreatic cancer
tissues than in morphologically normal operative margin tissues. Both GISTIC and 
Genomic Workbench software identified 22q13.1 containing APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B as
the only homozygous deletion region. And the expression levels of APOBEC3A and
APOBEC3B were significantly lower in tumor tissues than in morphologically normal
operative margin tissues. Further validation showed that overexpression of PSCA
was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis, and overexpression of
HMGA2 was significantly associated with invasive depth of pancreatic cancer.
CONCLUSION: These recurrent genomic changes may be useful for revealing the
mechanism of pancreatic carcinogenesis and providing candidate biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC4263743
PMID: 25502777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 5;111(31):11521-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1411251111. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Ataxia and Purkinje cell degeneration in mice lacking the CAMTA1 transcription
factor.

Long C(1), Grueter CE(1), Song K(1), Qin S(1), Qi X(1), Kong YM(1), Shelton
JM(2), Richardson JA(3), Zhang CL(1), Bassel-Duby R(1), Olson EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology. (2)Internal Medicine, and. (3)Pathology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390.

Members of the calmodulin-binding transcription activator (CAMTA) family of
proteins function as calcium-sensitive regulators of gene expression in
multicellular organisms ranging from plants to humans. Here, we show that global 
or nervous system deletion of CAMTA1 in mice causes severe ataxia with Purkinje
cell degeneration and cerebellar atrophy, partially resembling the consequences
of haploinsufficiency of the human CAMTA1 locus. Gene-expression analysis
identified a large collection of neuronal genes that were dysregulated in the
brains of CAMTA1-mutant mice, and elucidation of a consensus sequence for binding
of CAMTA proteins to DNA revealed the association of CAMTA-binding sites with
many of these genes. We conclude that CAMTA1 plays an essential role in the
control of Purkinje cell function and survival. CAMTA1-mutant mice provide a
model to study the molecular mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases and for
screening potential therapeutic interventions for such disorders.

PMCID: PMC4128133
PMID: 25049392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Plant J. 2013 Aug;75(3):364-76. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12205. Epub 2013 May 11.

Roles of CAMTA transcription factors and salicylic acid in configuring the
low-temperature transcriptome and freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis.

Kim Y(1), Park S, Gilmour SJ, Thomashow MF.

Author information: 
(1)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824, USA.

Previous studies in Arabidopsis thaliana established roles for CALMODULIN BINDING
TRANSCRIPTION ACTIVATOR 3 (CAMTA3) in the rapid cold induction of CRT/DRE BINDING
FACTOR (CBF) genes CBF1 and CBF2, and the repression of salicylic acid (SA)
biosynthesis at warm temperature. Here we show that CAMTA1 and CAMTA2 work in
concert with CAMTA3 at low temperature (4°C) to induce peak transcript levels of 
CBF1, CBF2 and CBF3 at 2 h, contribute to up-regulation of approximately 15% of
the genes induced at 24 h, most of which fall outside the CBF pathway, and
increase plant freezing tolerance. In addition, CAMTA1, CAMTA2 and CAMTA3
function together to inhibit SA biosynthesis at warm temperature (22°C). However,
SA levels increase in Arabidopsis plants that are exposed to low temperature for 
more than 1 week. We show that this chilling-induced SA biosynthesis proceeds
through the isochorismate synthase (ICS) pathway, with cold induction of ICS1
(which encodes ICS), and two genes encoding transcription factors that positively
regulate ICS1 - CBP60g and SARD1 -, paralleling SA accumulation. The three CAMTA 
proteins effectively repress the accumulation of ICS1, CBP60g and SARD1
transcripts at warm temperature but not at low temperature. This impairment of
CAMTA function may involve post-transcriptional regulation, as CAMTA transcript
levels did not decrease at low temperature. Salicylic acid biosynthesis at low
temperature did not contribute to freezing tolerance, but had a major role in
configuring the transcriptome, including the induction of 'defense response'
genes, suggesting the possible existence of a pre-emptive defense strategy
programmed by prolonged chilling temperatures.

© 2013 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23581962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Rev Neurol. 2011 Feb 1;52(3):189-91.

[Deletion of the LIS1, ASPA, TRPV1 and CAMTA2 genes in region 17p13.3 in a
patient with Miller-Dieker syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Laurito S, Goldschmidt E, Marquez M, Roque M.

PMID: 21287497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEBS Lett. 2007 Aug 21;581(21):3893-8. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

CAMTAs: calmodulin-binding transcription activators from plants to human.

Finkler A(1), Ashery-Padan R, Fromm H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University,
Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Recently, a novel family of calmodulin-binding transcription activators (CAMTAs) 
was reported in various eukaryotes. All CAMTAs share a similar domain
organization, with a novel type of sequence-specific DNA-binding domain
(designated CG-1). This domain could bind DNA directly and activate
transcription, or interact with other transcription factors, not through DNA
binding, thus acting as a co-activator of transcription. Investigations of CAMTAs
in various organisms imply a broad range of functions from sensory mechanisms to 
embryo development and growth control, highlighted by the apparent involvement of
mammalian CAMTA2 in cardiac growth, and of CAMTA1 in tumor suppression and memory
performance.

PMID: 17689537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;18(6):715-22. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Coactivator control of cardiovascular growth and remodeling.

Liu N(1), Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Transcriptional coactivators enhance gene expression by associating with
sequence-specific transcription factors and serve as the primary targets of
developmental and physiological signals in diverse biological processes. Recent
studies have revealed key roles for transcriptional coactivators in the control
of gene expression during development, growth and remodeling of the
cardiovascular system. Based on the importance of the cardiovascular coactivators
identified to date, coactivator control is emerging as a central regulatory
mechanism in development and homeostasis of the cardiovascular system and other
tissues.

PMID: 17046230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell. 2006 May 5;125(3):453-66.

The transcriptional coactivator CAMTA2 stimulates cardiac growth by opposing
class II histone deacetylases.

Song K(1), Backs J, McAnally J, Qi X, Gerard RD, Richardson JA, Hill JA,
Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 May 5;125(3):427-9.

Postnatal cardiac myocytes respond to diverse signals by hypertrophic growth and 
activation of a fetal gene program. In an effort to discover regulators of
cardiac hypertrophy, we performed a eukaryotic expression screen for activators
of the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene, a cardiac-specific marker of
hypertrophic signaling. We discovered that a family of transcriptional
coactivators, called CAMTAs, promotes cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and activates the
ANF gene, at least in part, by associating with the cardiac homeodomain protein
Nkx2-5. The transcriptional activity of CAMTAs is governed by association with
class II histone deacetylases (HDACs), which negatively regulate cardiac growth. 
Mice homozygous for a mutation in a CAMTA gene are defective in cardiac growth in
response to pressure overload and neurohumoral signaling, whereas mice lacking
HDAC5, a class II HDAC, are sensitized to the prohypertrophic actions of CAMTA.
These findings reveal a transcriptional regulatory mechanism that modulates
cardiac growth and gene expression by linking hypertrophic signals to the cardiac
genome.

PMID: 16678093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell. 2006 May 5;125(3):427-9.

CAMTA in cardiac hypertrophy.

Schwartz RJ(1), Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biosciences and Technology, The Texas A&M University System
Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. rschwartz@ibt.tamhsc.edu

Comment on
    Cell. 2006 May 5;125(3):453-66.

In this issue of Cell, the Calmodulin binding transcription activator 2 (CAMTA2),
is shown by Song et al. (2006) to be an indispensable transcription coactivator
for cardiac hypertrophy. CAMTA2 is activated by the dissociation of class II
histone deacetylase 5 and promotes transcription of genes involved in cardiac
hypertrophy through its interaction with Nkx2-5.

PMID: 16678087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


