
1. J Neurosci. 2016 Feb 3;36(5):1698-710. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1240-15.2016.

Remyelinating Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cell miRNAs from the Sfmbt2 Cluster
Promote Cell Cycle Arrest and Differentiation.

Kuypers NJ(1), Bankston AN(2), Howard RM(2), Beare JE(3), Whittemore SR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, Departments of Anatomical
Sciences and Neurobiology and. (2)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center,
Neurological Surgery, and. (3)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center,
Cardiovascular Innovation Institute, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, Kentucky 40292. (4)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center,
Departments of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology and Neurological Surgery, and
swhittemore@louisville.edu.

Oligodendrocyte (OL) loss contributes to the functional deficits underlying
diseases with a demyelinating component. Remyelination by oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs) can restore these deficits. To understand the role that
microRNAs (miRNAs) play in remyelination, 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide
3'-phosphodiesterase-EGFP(+) mice were treated with cuprizone, and OPCs were
sorted from the corpus callosum. Microarray analysis revealed that Sfmbt2 family 
miRNAs decreased during cuprizone treatment. One particular Sfmbt2 miRNA,
miR-297c-5p, increased during mouse OPC differentiation in vitro and during
callosal development in vivo. When overexpressed in both mouse embryonic
fibroblasts and rat OPCs (rOPCs), cell cycle analysis revealed that miR-297c-5p
promoted G1/G0 arrest. Additionally, miR-297c-5p transduction increased the
number of O1(+) rOPCs during differentiation. Luciferase reporter assays
confirmed that miR-297c-5p targets cyclin T2 (CCNT2), the regulatory subunit of
positive transcription elongation factor b, a complex that inhibits OL
maturation. Furthermore, CCNT2-specific knockdown promoted rOPC differentiation
while not affecting cell cycle status. Together, these data support a dual role
for miR-297c-5p as both a negative regulator of OPC proliferation and a positive 
regulator of OL maturation via its interaction with CCNT2.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT:
This work describes the role of oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) microRNAs
(miRNAs) during remyelination and development in vivo and differentiation in
vitro. This work highlights the importance of miRNAs to OPC biology and describes
miR-297c-5p, a novel regulator of OPC function. In addition, we identified CCNT2 
as a functional target, thus providing a mechanism by which miR-297c-5p imparts
its effects on differentiation. These data are important, given our lack of
understanding of OPC miRNA regulatory networks and their potential clinical
value. Therefore, efforts to understand the role of miR-297c-5p in pathological
conditions and its potential for facilitating repair may provide future
therapeutic strategies to treat demyelination.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/361698-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4737778 [Available on 2016-08-03]
PMID: 26843650  [PubMed - in process]


2. Prostate. 2016 Apr;76(5):479-90. doi: 10.1002/pros.23139. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Genetic variants in cell cycle control pathway confer susceptibility to
aggressive prostate carcinoma.

Kibel AS(1), Ahn J(2), Isikbay M(1), Klim A(3), Wu WS(3), Hayes RB(2), Isaacs
WB(4), Daw EW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Environmental
Medicine, NYU School of Medicine, New York, New York. (3)Division of Urologic
Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(4)Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland. (5)Departments of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri.

BACKGROUND: Because a significant number of patients with prostate cancer (PCa)
are diagnosed with disease unlikely to cause harm, genetic markers associated
with clinically aggressive PCa have potential clinical utility. Since cell cycle 
checkpoint dysregulation is crucial for the development and progression of
cancer, we tested the hypothesis that common germ-line variants within cell cycle
genes were associated with aggressive PCa.
METHODS: Via a two-stage design, 364 common sequence variants in 88 genes were
tested. The initial stage consisted of 258 aggressive PCa patients and 442
controls, and the second stage added 384 aggressive PCa Patients and 463
controls. European-American and African-American samples were analyzed
separately. In the first stage, SNPs were typed by Illumina Goldengate assay
while in the second stage SNPs were typed by Pyrosequencing assays. Genotype
frequencies between cases and controls were compared using logistical regression 
analysis with additive, dominant and recessive models.
RESULTS: Eleven variants within 10 genes (CCNC, CCND3, CCNG1, CCNT2, CDK6, MDM2, 
SKP2, WEE1, YWHAB, YWHAH) in the European-American population and nine variants
in 7 genes (CCNG1, CDK2, CDK5, MDM2, RB1, SMAD3, TERF2) in the African-American
population were found to be associated with aggressive PCa using at least one
model. Of particular interest, CCNC (rs3380812) was associated with risk in
European-American cohorts from both institutions. CDK2 (rs1045435) and CDK5
(rs2069459) were associated with risk in the African-American cohorts from both
institutions. Lastly, variants within MDM2 and CCNG1 were protective for
aggressive PCa in both ethnic groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that polymorphisms within cell cycle genes are
associated with clinically aggressive PCa. Validation of these markers in
additional populations is necessary, but these markers may help identify patients
at risk for potentially lethal carcinoma. Prostate 76:479-490, 2016. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26708993  [PubMed - in process]


3. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting polyamine biosynthetic pathway through RNAi causes the abrogation of
MCF 7 breast cancer cell line.

Gupta ED(1), Pachauri M, Ghosh PC, Rajam MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Delhi South Campus, Benito Juarez Road, 
New Delhi, 110021, India.

The diamine putrescine and polyamines, spermidine (triamine) and spermine
(tetraamine) are small organic polycations that play an indispensable role in key
cellular processes such as the regulation of growth, differentiation, and
macromolecular functions. Elevated levels of polyamines (PAs) have been shown to 
be one of the major factors involved in carcinogenesis. In this study, specific
silencing of the expression of three genes of PA biosynthesis pathway, ornithine 
decarboxylase (ODC), S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (SAMDC), and spermidine
synthase (SPDSYN) was achieved using RNA interference in MCF 7 breast cancer cell
line. For optimizing the effective small interfering nucleic acid (siNA), three
variants of ODC siNA [siRNA, locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified siRNA, and
siHybrid (RNA and DNA hybrid)] were used and a dose- and time-dependent study was
conducted. The PA biosynthetic genes were targeted individually and in
combination. RNAi-mediated reduction in the expression of PA biosynthesis genes
resulted in distorted cell morphology, reduced cancer cell viability, and
migration characteristic. The most promising results were observed with the
combined treatment of siSPDSYN and siODC with 83 % cell growth inhibition. On
analyzing the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression profile of the cell cycle and
apoptosis-related genes, it was observed that RNAi against PA biosynthetic genes 
downregulated the expression of CDK8, CCNE2, CCNH, CCNT1, CCNT2, CCNF, PCNA,
CCND1, and CDK2, and upregulated the expression of E2F4, BAX, FAS, TP53, CDKN1A, 
BAK1, CDKN1B, ATM, GRANB, and ATR genes when compared with control-transfected
cells. These results suggest that the targeting polyamine biosynthesis through
RNAi approach could be a promising strategy for breast cancer therapy and might
be extended for therapy of other cancers.

PMID: 26277788  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1491-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323535111. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

An RNAi screen for Aire cofactors reveals a role for Hnrnpl in polymerase release
and Aire-activated ectopic transcription.

Giraud M(1), Jmari N, Du L, Carallis F, Nieland TJ, Perez-Campo FM, Bensaude O,
Root DE, Hacohen N, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Aire induces the expression of a large set of autoantigen genes in the thymus,
driving immunological tolerance in maturing T cells. To determine the full
spectrum of molecular mechanisms underlying the Aire transactivation function, we
screened an AIRE-dependent gene-expression system with a genome-scale lentiviral 
shRNA library, targeting factors associated with chromatin architecture/function,
transcription, and mRNA processing. Fifty-one functional allies were identified, 
with a preponderance of factors that impact transcriptional elongation compared
with initiation, in particular members of the positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) involved in the release of "paused" RNA polymerases (CCNT2 and 
HEXIM1); mRNA processing and polyadenylation factors were also highlighted
(HNRNPL/F, SFRS1, SFRS3, and CLP1). Aire's functional allies were validated on
transfected and endogenous target genes, including the generation of lentigenic
knockdown (KD) mice. We uncovered the effect of the splicing factor Hnrnpl on
Aire-induced transcription. Transcripts sensitive to the P-TEFb inhibitor
flavopiridol were reduced by Hnrnpl knockdown in thymic epithelial cells,
independently of their dependence on Aire, therefore indicating a general effect 
of Hnrnpl on RNA elongation. This conclusion was substantiated by demonstration
of HNRNPL interactions with P-TEFb components (CDK9, CCNT2, HEXIM1, and the small
7SK RNA). Aire-containing complexes include 7SK RNA, the latter interaction
disrupted by HNRNPL knockdown, suggesting that HNRNPL may partake in delivering
inactive P-TEFb to Aire. Thus, these results indicate that mRNA processing
factors cooperate with Aire to release stalled polymerases and to activate
ectopic expression of autoantigen genes in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3910647
PMID: 24434558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. FEBS Lett. 2011 Aug 4;585(15):2493-500. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.06.031. Epub 
2011 Jul 2.

Cyclin T2: a novel miR-15a target gene involved in early spermatogenesis.

Teng Y(1), Wang Y, Fu J, Cheng X, Miao S, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are posttranscriptional modulators of gene expression that
play important roles in various biological processes. Spermatogenesis is a highly
regulated process in which diploid spermatogonia eventually differentiate into
haploid spermatozoa. In this study, we identified four differentially expressed
miRNAs between two premeiotic male germ cells, made predictions about their
putative targets, and confirmed cyclin T2 (Ccnt2) as a direct target of miR-15a. 
We also report that miR-15a inhibited muscle differentiation at least in part by 
targeting Ccnt2, which represents a novel interaction. Subsequently, miR-15a and 
Ccnt2 were profiled in developing mice testes to observe their inverse
correlations in the postnatal 3-week period to understand their roles in
spermatogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21740905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 8;395(1):28-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.10.055. Epub 2009
Oct 31.

Specificity of Hexim1 and Hexim2 complex formation with cyclin T1/T2, importin
alpha and 7SK snRNA.

Czudnochowski N(1), Vollmuth F, Baumann S, Vogel-Bachmayr K, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Physikalische Biochemie, Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, D-44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) stimulates the transition
from transcription initiation to productive elongation by phosphorylation of the 
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. P-TEFb consists of the cyclin-dependent
kinase Cdk9 and a T-type cyclin and is regulated by the small nuclear RNA 7SK and
the coupling protein Hexim1 or Hexim2. In this study, we analyzed the tripartite 
protein-RNA complex formation between Hexim, Cyclin T and 7SK snRNA. Using
isothermal titration calorimetry, we observed higher affinities for Cyclin
T1-Hexim1 and Cyclin T2-Hexim2 complex formations compared with the interactions 
in reverse. Importin alpha, which is part of the Ran-mediated nuclear import
pathway, bound Hexim1 and Hexim2 with dissociation constants of 2.0 and 0.5 muM, 
respectively. Furthermore, tripartite complex formations between Cyclin T, Hexim 
and Importin alpha showed the suitability of a collaborative nuclear import
pathway for Cyclin T. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using radioactively
labelled full-length 7SK snRNA revealed a tight association of the RNA to Cyclin 
T1-Hexim1 with dissociation constants lower than 0.3 muM. Similar binding
affinities were recorded for both Hexim orthologues to a 66-mer double-stranded
5' hairpin loop encompassing nucleotides 23-88 of 7SK, while a 39-mer fragment,
resulting from different RNA folding predictions, did not bind as tightly. These 
results provide the molecular basis for the generation of a core complex for the 
inhibition of P-TEFb.

PMID: 19883659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(12):3280-5. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00172-09. Epub 2009 Apr
13.

Cyclin T2 is essential for mouse embryogenesis.

Kohoutek J(1), Li Q, Blazek D, Luo Z, Jiang H, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Research Institute, Hudcova 70, 621 00, Brno, Czech Republic.
kohoutek@vri.cz

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is essential for the
elongation of transcription and cotranscriptional processing by RNA polymerase
II. In mammals, it contains predominantly the C-type cyclin cyclin T1 (CycT1) or 
CycT2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9). To determine if these cyclins have
redundant functions or affect distinct sets of genes, we genetically inactivated 
the CycT2 gene (Ccnt2) using the beta-galactosidase-neomycin gene (beta-geo) gene
trap technology in the mouse. Visualizing beta-galactosidase during mouse
embryogenesis revealed that CycT2 is expressed abundantly during embryogenesis
and throughout the organism in the adult. This finding was reflected in the
expression of CycT2 in all adult tissues and organs. However, despite numerous
matings of heterozygous mice, we observed no CycT2(-/-) embryos, pups, or adult
mice. This early lethality could have resulted from decreased expression of
critical genes, which were revealed by short interfering RNAs against CycT2 in
embryonic stem cells. Thus, CycT1 and CycT2 are not redundant, and these
different P-TEFb complexes regulate subsets of distinct genes that are important 
for embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2698739
PMID: 19364821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. EMBO J. 2008 Jul 9;27(13):1907-18. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.121. Epub 2008 Jun 19.

The structure of P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T1), its complex with flavopiridol and
regulation by phosphorylation.

Baumli S(1), Lolli G, Lowe ED, Troiani S, Rusconi L, Bullock AN, Debreczeni JE,
Knapp S, Johnson LN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) (CDK9/cyclin T (CycT))
promotes mRNA transcriptional elongation through phosphorylation of elongation
repressors and RNA polymerase II. To understand the regulation of a
transcriptional CDK by its cognate cyclin, we have determined the structures of
the CDK9/CycT1 and free cyclin T2. There are distinct differences between
CDK9/CycT1 and the cell cycle CDK CDK2/CycA manifested by a relative rotation of 
26 degrees of CycT1 with respect to the CDK, showing for the first time
plasticity in CDK cyclin interactions. The CDK9/CycT1 interface is relatively
sparse but retains some core CDK-cyclin interactions. The CycT1 C-terminal helix 
shows flexibility that may be important for the interaction of this region with
HIV TAT and HEXIM. Flavopiridol, an anticancer drug in phase II clinical trials, 
binds to the ATP site of CDK9 inducing unanticipated structural changes that bury
the inhibitor. CDK9 activity and recognition of regulatory proteins are governed 
by autophosphorylation. We show that CDK9/CycT1 autophosphorylates on Thr186 in
the activation segment and three C-terminal phosphorylation sites.
Autophosphorylation on all sites occurs in cis.

PMCID: PMC2486423
PMID: 18566585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Mol Biol. 2007 Mar 30;367(3):630-46. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Developmental regulators containing the I-mfa domain interact with T cyclins and 
Tat and modulate transcription.

Wang Q(1), Young TM, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103-2714, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complexes, composed of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T1 or T2, are engaged by many
cellular transcription regulators that activate or inhibit transcription from
specific promoters. The related I-mfa (inhibitor of MyoD family a) and HIC (human
I-mfa-domain-containing) proteins function in myogenic differentiation and
embryonic development by participating in the Wnt signaling pathway. We report
that I-mfa is a novel regulator of P-TEFb. Both HIC and I-mfa interact through
their homologous I-mfa domains with cyclin T1 and T2 at two binding sites. One
site is the regulatory histidine-rich domain that interacts with CDK9 substrates 
including RNA polymerase II. The second site contains a lysine and arginine-rich 
motif that is highly conserved between the two T cyclins. This site overlaps and 
includes the previously identified Tat/TAR recognition motif of cyclin T1
required for activation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
transcription. HIC and I-mfa can serve as substrates for P-TEFb. Their I-mfa
domains also bind the activation domain of HIV-1 Tat and inhibit Tat- and
P-TEFb-dependent transcription from the HIV-1 promoter. This transcriptional
repression is cell-type specific and can operate via Tat and cyclin T1. Genomic
and sequence comparisons indicate that the I-mf and HIC genes, as well as
flanking genes, diverged from a duplicated chromosomal region. Our findings link 
I-mfa and HIC to viral replication, and suggest that P-TEFb is modulated in the
Wnt signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC1868487
PMID: 17289077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jan;14(1):192-5. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Abrogation of signal-dependent activation of the cdk9/cyclin T2a complex in human
RD rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Simone C, Giordano A.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jan;14(1):196.

PMID: 16841087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Eur J Histochem. 2006 Jan-Mar;50(1):19-23.

Involvement of cdks and cyclins in muscle differentiation.

De Falco M(1), De Luca A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Section of Evolutionary and Comparative
Biology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Myocyte differentiation is due to transcription of genes that characterize the
phenotypic and biochemical identity of differentiated muscle cells. These are the
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) MyoD, Myf5, myogenin and MRF4. Overexpression 
of cdk/cyclins has been reported to inhibit the activity of MyoD and prevent
myogenic differentiation by different modalities. Unlike other cdk/cyclin
complexes, overexpression of cdk9/cyclin T2a, enhances MyoD function and promotes
myogenic differentiation. In addition, cyclin T2a interacting with a novel
partner, PKN alpha, is able to strongly enhance the expression of myogenic
differentiation markers, such as myogenin and Myosin Heavy Chain. So, cyclin T2a 
could stimulate myogenic differentiation interacting with different kinase
partners Cdk9 or PKN alpha in a synergistic or antagonistic way.

PMID: 16584981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;207(1):232-7.

Pkn is a novel partner of cyclin T2a in muscle differentiation.

Cottone G(1), Baldi A, Palescandolo E, Manente L, Penta R, Paggi MG, De Luca A.

Author information: 
(1)Department for the Development of Therapeutic Programs, Center for
Experimental Research, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

With the aim to find novel partners of human Cyclin T2a, we performed a
two-hybrid screening in yeast using the full-length cDNA of this cyclin as bait, 
and a human heart cDNA library as preys source. Upon several interesting genes
selected, our attention has been focused on the cDNA coding for PKNalpha, a fatty
acid- and Rho-activated serine/threonine protein kinase, having a catalytic
domain homologous to protein kinase C family. Co-immunoprecipitation and in vitro
pull-down assays independently confirmed the interaction between the two
proteins. Luciferase assays, performed on NIH3T3 cell extracts after transfection
with a MyoD-responsive promoter, pointed out that PKNalpha was able to enhance
MyoD-dependent transcription, and that this effect was further increased when
cyclin T2a was co-overexpressed. Finally, overexpression of both Cyclin T2a and
PKNalpha in C2C12 cells strongly enhanced the expression of myogenic
differentiation markers, such as Myogenin and Myosin Heavy Chain, during
starvation-induced differentiation. Taken together, our data strengthen the
hypothesis that Cyclin T2a plays a role in muscle differentiation, and propose
PKNalpha as a novel partner of Cyclin T2a in this process.

PMID: 16331689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Feb;79(2):388-96. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Cyclin T1 but not cyclin T2a is induced by a post-transcriptional mechanism in
PAMP-activated monocyte-derived macrophages.

Liou LY(1), Haaland RE, Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is an RNA polymerase II
elongation factor which exists as multiple complexes in human cells. These
complexes contain cyclin-dependent kinase 9 as the catalytic subunit and
different cyclin subunits-cyclin T1, T2a, T2b, or K. Cyclin T1 is targeted by the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Tat protein to activate transcription of the
HIV provirus. Expression of this P-TEFb subunit is highly regulated in
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs). Cyclin T1 is induced early during
differentiation and is shut off later by proteasome-mediated proteolysis. Cyclin 
T1 can be reinduced by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or HIV
infection. In this study, we analyzed regulation of P-TEFb in MDMs by examining
7SK small nuclear RNA and the HEXIM1 protein; these factors associate with P-TEFb
and are thought to regulate its function. 7SK and HEXIM1 were induced early
during differentiation, and this correlates with increased overall transcription.
7SK expression remained high, but HEXIM1 was shut off later during
differentiation by proteasome-mediated proteolysis. Significantly, the cyclin T2a
subunit of P-TEFb was not shut off during differentiation, and it was not induced
by activation. Induction of cyclin T1 by PAMPs was found to be a slow process and
did not involve an increase in cyclin T1 mRNA levels. Treatment of MDMs with
PAMPs or a proteasome inhibitor induced cyclin T1 to a level equivalent to
treatment with both agents together, suggesting that PAMPs and proteasome
inhibitors act at a similar rate-limiting step. It is therefore likely that
cyclin T1 induction by PAMPs is the result of a reduction in proteasome-mediated 
proteolysis.

PMID: 16330531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10675-83.

Runx1 binds positive transcription elongation factor b and represses
transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II: possible mechanism of CD4
silencing.

Jiang H(1), Zhang F, Kurosu T, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Russell Medical 
Research Center, University of California at San Francisco, 94143-0703, USA.

Runx1 binds the silencer and represses CD4 transcription in immature thymocytes. 
In this study, we found that Runx1 inhibits P-TEFb, which contains CycT1, CycT2, 
or CycK and Cdk9 and stimulates transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) in eukaryotic cells. Indeed, its inhibitory domain, spanning positions
371 to 411, not only bound CycT1 but was required for silencing CD4 transcription
in vivo. Our chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Runx1 inhibits
the elongation but not initiation of transcription and that RNAPII is engaged at 
the CD4 promoter but is unable to elongate in CD4(-) CD8(+) thymoma cells. These 
results suggest that active repression by Runx1 occurs by blocking the elongation
by RNAPII, which may contribute to CD4 silencing during T-cell development.

PMCID: PMC1316947
PMID: 16314494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Gene. 2004 Dec 8;343(1):173-9.

Transcriptional activity and substrate recognition of cyclin T2 from P-TEFb.

Kurosu T(1), Zhang F, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, University
of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0703, USA.

Transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is regulated by the
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which contains Cdk9 and a
C-type cyclin (CycT1, CycT2a, CycT2b, or CycK). Whereas their N-terminal cylin
boxes are almost identical, the C-terminal sequences of CycT1 and CycT2 are
divergent. Previously, a histidine-rich stretch in CycT1 was found to bind the
CTD of RNAPII and direct the transcriptional activity of this P-TEFb complex when
tethered artificially to DNA. The global repressor PIE-1 from C. elegans blocked 
its effects. In this study, C-terminal truncations of CycT2 past its
histidine-rich stretch, to a leucine-rich region next to its cyclin boxes, still 
maintained appreciable transcriptional activity. Moreover, this domain bound
RNAPII via its CTD and PIE-1 blocked its effects. Thus, CycT2 not only contains
two domains that target RNAPII but this substrate recognition is necessary for
its transcriptional activity via DNA.

PMID: 15563843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Nov;64(5):1101-8.

Acquired cellular resistance to flavopiridol in a human colon carcinoma cell line
involves up-regulation of the telomerase catalytic subunit and telomere
elongation. Sensitivity of resistant cells to combination treatment with a
telomerase inhibitor.

Incles CM(1), Schultes CM, Kelland LR, Neidle S.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Pharmacy, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX, UK.
stephen.neidle@ulsop.ac.uk

Flavopiridol is a broad-spectrum inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases and of
global transcription via the inhibition of positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb). Although flavopiridol is currently undergoing phase II
clinical trials, acquired cellular resistance to the compound during treatment is
a potential problem, as it is with almost all current anticancer agents. A HCT116
human colon carcinoma cell line with an acquired 8-fold resistance to
flavopiridol has been established. We report here that there are changes in these
resistant cells in terms of telomere length and telomerase activity, whereas no
change in the expression of the P-TEFb subunits CDK9, cyclin T1, cyclin T2a, or
cyclin T2b was observed. The level of mRNA expression for the telomerase
catalytic subunit hTERT was increased over 2-fold in the resistant cells, and
mean telomere length was found to be 2 kb longer than the parental length,
although telomerase activity was unchanged. The level of mRNA expression for the 
telomeric binding protein Pot1 was also increased. We also report that treatment 
of HCT116 cells with a combination of the G-quadruplex interacting telomerase
inhibitor BRACO-19 and flavopiridol results in a 3-fold decrease in population
doubling and prevents recovery from treatment with either compound alone.
Treatment of flavopiridol-resistant cells with BRACO-19 alone also led to rapid
inhibition of cell growth, which is not observed in the parental line. The
finding that only the resistant line, with up-regulated telomerase, responds to
this G-quadruplex inhibitor is consistent with the hypothesis that the mechanism 
of BRACO-19 down-regulation of cell growth directly involves the targeting of
telomeres and telomerase.

PMID: 14573759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jul;23(14):4859-69.

MAQ1 and 7SK RNA interact with CDK9/cyclin T complexes in a
transcription-dependent manner.

Michels AA(1), Nguyen VT, Fraldi A, Labas V, Edwards M, Bonnet F, Lania L,
Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Laboratoire de Régulation de
l'Expression Génétique, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):9405.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) comprises a cyclin (T1 or T2)
and a kinase, cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), which phosphorylates the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. P-TEFb is essential for
transcriptional elongation in human cells. A highly specific interaction among
cyclin T1, the viral protein Tat, and the transactivation response (TAR) element 
RNA determines the productive transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus
genome. In growing HeLa cells, half of P-TEFb is kinase inactive and binds to the
7SK small nuclear RNA. We now report on a novel protein termed MAQ1 (for ménage à
quatre) that is also present in this complex. Since 7SK RNA is required for MAQ1 
to associate with P-TEFb, a structural role for 7SK RNA is proposed. Inhibition
of transcription results in the release of both MAQ1 and 7SK RNA from P-TEFb.
Thus, MAQ1 cooperates with 7SK RNA to form a novel type of CDK inhibitor.
According to yeast two-hybrid analysis and immunoprecipitations from extracts of 
transfected cells, MAQ1 binds directly to the N-terminal cyclin homology region
of cyclins T1 and T2. Since Tat also binds to this cyclin T1 N-terminal domain
and since the association between 7SK RNA/MAQ1 and P-TEFb competes with the
binding of Tat to cyclin T1, we speculate that the TAR RNA/Tat lentivirus system 
has evolved to subvert the cellular 7SK RNA/MAQ1 system.

PMCID: PMC162212
PMID: 12832472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 13;21(26):4158-65.

Physical interaction between pRb and cdk9/cyclinT2 complex.

Simone C(1), Bagella L, Bellan C, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19107, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (cdk9) is a multifunctional kinase with roles in
different cellular pathways such as transcriptional elongation, differentiation
and apoptosis. Cdk9/cyclin T differs functionally from other cdk/cyclin complexes
that regulate cell cycle progression, but maintains structural affinity with
those complexes. In addition, previous reports have demonstrated that the cdk9
complex is able to phosphorylate p56/pRb in vitro. In this report we show in
vitro and in vivo interaction between cdk9/cyclinT2 and the protein product of
the retinoblastoma gene (pRb) in human cell lines. The interaction involves the
region composed of residues 129-195 of cdk9, cyclinT2 (1-642 aa) and the
C-terminal domain of pRb (835-928 aa). We located the minimal region of cdk9
phosphorylation on the C-terminus of pRb, by identifying the residues between 793
and 834. This region contains at least three proline-directed serines (sp), S795,
S807 and S811, which have been reported to be phosphorylated in vivo and which
could be targeted by the cdk9 complex. These data suggest that, in
logarithmically growing cells, cdk9/cyclin T2 and pRb are located in a nuclear
multiprotein complex probably involved in transduction of cellular signals to the
basal transcription machinery and that one of these signals could be the cdk9
phosphorylation of pRb.

PMID: 12037672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 13;21(26):4137-48.

Activation of MyoD-dependent transcription by cdk9/cyclin T2.

Simone C(1), Stiegler P, Bagella L, Pucci B, Bellan C, De Falco G, De Luca A,
Guanti G, Puri PL, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19122, USA.

Myogenic transcription is repressed in myoblasts by serum-activated
cyclin-dependent kinases, such as cdk2 and cdk4. Serum withdrawal promotes
muscle-specific gene expression at least in part by down-regulating the activity 
of these cdks. Unlike the other cdks, cdk9 is not serum- or cell cycle-regulated 
and is instead involved in the regulation of transcriptional elongation by
phosphorylating the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. While
ectopic expression of cdk2 together with its regulatory subunits (cyclins E and
A) inhibits myogenic transcription, overproduction of cdk9 and its associated
cyclin (cyclin T2a) strengthens MyoD-dependent transcription and stimulates
myogenic differentiation in both MyoD-converted fibroblasts and C2C12 muscle
cells. Conversely, inhibition of cdk9 activity by a dominant negative form
(cdk9-dn) represses the myogenic program. Cdk9, cyclinT2 and MyoD can be detected
in a multimeric complex in C2C12 cells, with the minimal cdk9-binding region of
MyoD mapping within 101-161 aa of the bHLH region. Finally, cdk9 can
phosphorylate MyoD in vitro, suggesting the possibility that cdk9/cycT2a
regulation of muscle differentiation includes the direct enzymatic activity of
the kinase on MyoD.

PMID: 12037670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nature. 2001 Nov 15;414(6861):322-5.

7SK small nuclear RNA binds to and inhibits the activity of CDK9/cyclin T
complexes.

Nguyen VT(1), Kiss T, Michels AA, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 
75230 Paris cedex 05, France.

The transcription of eukaryotic protein-coding genes involves complex regulation 
of RNA polymerase (Pol) II activity in response to physiological conditions and
developmental cues. One element of this regulation involves phosphorylation of
the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest polymerase subunit by a
transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, which comprises the kinase CDK9 and
cyclin T1 or T2 (ref. 1). Here we report that in human HeLa cells more than half 
of the P-TEFb is sequestered in larger complexes that also contain 7SK RNA, an
abundant, small nuclear RNA (snRNA) of hitherto unknown function. P-TEFb and 7SK 
associate in a specific and reversible manner. In contrast to the smaller P-TEFb 
complexes, which have a high kinase activity, the larger 7SK/P-TEFb complexes
show very weak kinase activity. Inhibition of cellular transcription by chemical 
agents or ultraviolet irradiation trigger the complete disruption of the
P-TEFb/7SK complex, and enhance CDK9 activity. The transcription-dependent
interaction of P-TEFb with 7SK may therefore contribute to an important feedback 
loop modulating the activity of RNA Pol II.

PMID: 11713533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


