
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 24;11(3):e0152254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152254.
eCollection 2016.

P-TEFb Kinase Activity Is Essential for Global Transcription, Resumption of
Meiosis and Embryonic Genome Activation in Pig.

Oqani RK(1), Lin T(1), Lee JE(1), Choi KM(2), Shin HY(1), Jin DI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science & Biotechnology, Research Center for Transgenic
Cloned Pigs, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 305-764, Republic of Korea.
(2)Optipharm Inc, Cheongju, Chungbuk, 361-954, Republic of Korea.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is a RNA polymerase II
carboxyl-terminal domain (Pol II CTD) kinase that phosphorylates Ser2 of the CTD 
and promotes the elongation phase of transcription. Despite the fact that P-TEFb 
has role in many cellular processes, the role of this kinase complex remains to
be understood in mammalian early developmental events. In this study, using
immunocytochemical analyses, we found that the P-TEFb components, CDK9, Cyclin T1
and Cyclin T2 were localized to nuclear speckles, as well as in nucleolar-like
bodies in pig germinal vesicle oocytes. Using nascent RNA labeling and small
molecule inhibitors, we showed that inhibition of CDK9 activity abolished the
transcription of GV oocytes globally. Moreover, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, in absence of CDK9 kinase activity the production of ribosomal
RNAs was impaired. We also presented the evidences indicating that P-TEFb kinase 
activity is essential for resumption of oocyte meiosis and embryo development.
Treatment with CDK9 inhibitors resulted in germinal vesicle arrest in maturing
oocytes in vitro. Inhibition of CDK9 kinase activity did not interfere with in
vitro fertilization and pronuclear formation. However, when in vitro produced
zygotes were treated with CDK9 inhibitors, their development beyond the 4-cell
stage was impaired. In these embryos, inhibition of CDK9 abrogated global
transcriptional activity and rRNA production. Collectively, our data suggested
that P-TEFb kinase activity is crucial for oocyte maturation, embryo development 
and regulation of RNA transcription in pig.

PMCID: PMC4807088
PMID: 27011207  [PubMed - in process]


2. Genom Data. 2016 Feb 4;7:250-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2016.01.019. eCollection
2016.

Genome-wide analysis of KAP1, the 7SK snRNP complex, and RNA polymerase II.

McNamara RP(1), Guzman C(1), Reeder JE(2), D'Orso I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The transition of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) from transcription initiation into
productive elongation in eukaryotic cells is regulated by the P-TEFb kinase,
which phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of paused Pol II at promoter-proximal 
regions. Our recent study found that P-TEFb (in an inhibited state bound to the
7SK snRNP complex) interacts with the KAP1/TRIM28 transcriptional regulator, and 
that KAP1 and the 7SK snRNP co-occupy most gene promoters containing paused Pol
II. Here we provide a detailed experimental description and analysis of the
ChIP-seq datasets that have been deposited into Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO):
GS72622, so that independent groups can replicate and expand upon these findings.
We propose these datasets would provide valuable information for researchers
studying mechanisms of transcriptional regulation including Pol II pausing and
pause release.

PMCID: PMC4778668
PMID: 26981421  [PubMed]


3. Nat Cell Biol. 2016 Apr;18(4):371-81. doi: 10.1038/ncb3326. Epub 2016 Mar 14.

C/EBPa creates elite cells for iPSC reprogramming by upregulating Klf4 and
increasing the levels of Lsd1 and Brd4.

Di Stefano B(1,)(2), Collombet S(3), Jakobsen JS(4,)(5,)(6), Wierer M(7), Sardina
JL(1,)(2), Lackner A(1,)(2), Stadhouders R(1,)(2), Segura-Morales C(1,)(2),
Francesconi M(1,)(2), Limone F(1,)(2), Mann M(7), Porse B(4,)(5,)(6), Thieffry
D(3), Graf T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain. (2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
(UPF), Barcelona 08003, Spain. (3)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale
Supérieure (IBENS), CNRS UMR8197, INSERM U1024, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL
Research University, F-75005 Paris, France. (4)The Finsen Laboratory,
Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes
Vej 5, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark. (5)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre
(BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark.
(6)Danish Stem Cell Center (DanStem), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, 3B Blegdamsvej, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark. (7)Max Planck Institute of 
Biochemistry, 82152 Munich, Germany.

Reprogramming somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is
typically inefficient and has been explained by elite-cell and stochastic models.
We recently reported that B cells exposed to a pulse of C/EBPa (Ba' cells) behave
as elite cells, in that they can be rapidly and efficiently reprogrammed into
iPSCs by the Yamanaka factors OSKM. Here we show that C/EBPa
post-transcriptionally increases the abundance of several hundred proteins,
including Lsd1, Hdac1, Brd4, Med1 and Cdk9, components of chromatin-modifying
complexes present at super-enhancers. Lsd1 was found to be required for B cell
gene silencing and Brd4 for the activation of the pluripotency program. C/EBPa
also promotes chromatin accessibility in pluripotent cells and upregulates Klf4
by binding to two haematopoietic enhancers. Ba' cells share many properties with 
granulocyte/macrophage progenitors, naturally occurring elite cells that are
obligate targets for leukaemic transformation, whose formation strictly requires 
C/EBPa.

PMID: 26974661  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7718. [Epub ahead of print]

Genomic characterization of patient-derived xenograft models established from
fine needle aspirate biopsies of a primary pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and
from patient-matched metastatic sites.

Allaway RJ(1), Fischer DA(2), de Abreu FB(3), Gardner TB(4), Gordon SR(4), Barth 
RJ(2,)(5), Colacchio TA(2,)(5), Wood M(1,)(6), Kacsoh BZ(7), Bouley SJ(1), Cui
J(7), Hamilton J(1,)(8), Choi JA(1), Lange JT(1), Peterson JD(3), Padmanabhan
V(3), Tomlinson CR(1,)(5,)(8), Tsongalis GJ(3,)(5), Suriawinata AA(3), Greene
CS(5,)(7,)(9), Sanchez Y(1,)(5), Smith KD(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine,
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, Division of
Surgical Oncology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH
03756, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, Section of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
(5)Dartmouth-Hitchcock Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
(6)Current location: Department of Pathology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. (7)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine, 
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03756, USA. (8)Department of Medicine,
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (9)Institute for
Quantitative Biomedical Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA.

N-of-1 trials target actionable mutations, yet such approaches do not test
genomically-informed therapies in patient tumor models prior to patient
treatment. To address this, we developed patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models
from fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsies (FNA-PDX) obtained from primary
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) at the time of diagnosis. Here, we
characterize PDX models established from one primary and two metastatic sites of 
one patient. We identified an activating KRAS G12R mutation among other mutations
in these models. In explant cells derived from these PDX tumor models with a KRAS
G12R mutation, treatment with inhibitors of CDKs (including CDK9) reduced
phosphorylation of a marker of CDK9 activity (phospho-RNAPII CTD Ser2/5) and
reduced viability/growth of explant cells derived from PDAC PDX models.
Similarly, a CDK inhibitor reduced phospho-RNAPII CTD Ser2/5, increased
apoptosis, and inhibited tumor growth in FNA-PDX and patient-matched
metastatic-PDX models. In summary, PDX models can be constructed from FNA
biopsies of PDAC which in turn can enable genomic characterization and
identification of potential therapies.

PMID: 26934555  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Mol Biol. 2016 Feb 12. pii: S0022-2836(16)00111-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2016.02.006. [Epub ahead of print]

The RNA Polymerase II CTD: The Increasing Complexity of a Low-Complexity Protein 
Domain.

Jeronimo C(1), Collin P(1), Robert F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(2)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada;
Département de Médecine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada.
Electronic address: francois.robert@ircm.qc.ca.

The largest subunit of RNA polymerase II contains a C-terminal domain (CTD) that 
plays key roles in coordinating transcription with co-transcriptional events. The
heptapeptide repeats that form the CTD are dynamically phosphorylated on serine, 
tyrosine and threonine residues during the various steps of transcription,
thereby regulating the recruitment of various proteins involved in gene
expression. In this "Perspective," we review the recent literature related to the
function of the CTD, to CTD kinases (Kin28, CDK7, CDK9, CDK12, ERK1/2 and DYRK1A)
and to CTD phosphatases (Rtr1, RPAP2, Ssu72, Fcp1 and Gcl7). We discuss
unresolved and controversial issues and try to provide constructive suggestions. 
This review also highlights emerging themes in the CTD field, such as crosstalk
and feedback mechanisms, as well as gene-specific and tissue-specific functions
of the CTD. Finally, promising therapeutic avenues for a recently developed CTD
kinase inhibitor are discussed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876604  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.8. [Epub ahead of print]

HPV16 oncogene expression levels during early cervical carcinogenesis are
determined by the balance of epigenetic chromatin modifications at the integrated
virus genome.

Groves IJ(1), Knight EL(1), Ang QY(1), Scarpini CG(1), Coleman N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

In cervical squamous cell carcinomas, high-risk human papillomavirus (HRHPV) DNA 
is usually integrated into host chromosomes. Multiple integration events are
thought to be present within the cells of a polyclonal premalignant lesion and
the features that underpin clonal selection of one particular integrant remain
poorly understood. We previously used the W12 model system to generate a panel of
cervical keratinocyte clones, derived from cells of a low-grade premalignant
lesion naturally infected with the major HRHPV type, HPV16. The cells were
isolated regardless of their selective advantage and differed only by the site of
HPV16 integration into the host genome. We used this resource to test the
hypothesis that levels of HPV16 E6/E7 oncogene expression in premalignant cells
are regulated epigenetically. We performed a comprehensive analysis of the
epigenetic landscape of the integrated HPV16 DNA in selected clones, in which
levels of virus oncogene expression per DNA template varied ~6.6-fold. Across the
cells examined, higher levels of virus expression per template were associated
with more open chromatin at the HPV16 long control region, together with greater 
loading of chromatin remodelling enzymes and lower nucleosome occupancy. There
were higher levels of histone post-translational modification hallmarks of
transcriptionally active chromatin and lower levels of repressive hallmarks.
There was greater abundance of the active/elongating form of the RNA
polymerase-II enzyme (RNAPII-Ser2P), together with CDK9, the component of
positive transcription elongation factor b complex responsible for Ser2
phosphorylation. The changes observed were functionally significant, as cells
with higher HPV16 expression per template showed greater sensitivity to depletion
and/or inhibition of histone acetyltransferases and CDK9 and less sensitivity to 
histone deacetylase inhibition. We conclude that virus gene expression per
template following HPV16 integration is determined through multiple layers of
epigenetic regulation, which are likely to contribute to selection of individual 
cells during cervical carcinogenesis.Oncogene advance online publication, 15
February 2016; doi:10.1038/onc.2016.8.

PMID: 26876196  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Eur Cell Mater. 2016;30:200-9.

Inhibition of CDK9 prevents mechanical injury-induced inflammation, apoptosis and
matrix degradation in cartilage explants.

Hu Z(1), Yik JH, Cissell DD, Michelier PV, Athanasiou KA, Haudenschild DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016 PR China; University of
California Davis, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Lawrence J. Ellison
Musculoskeletal Research Center, Research Building 1 Suite 2000, 4635 Second
Avenue, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Joint injury often leads to post-traumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA). Acute injury
responses to trauma induce production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and catabolic
enzymes, which promote chondrocyte apoptosis and degrade cartilage to potentiate 
PTOA development. Recent studies show that the rate-limiting step for
transcriptional activation of injury response genes is controlled by
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), and thus it is an attractive target for
limiting the injury response. Here, we determined the effects of CDK9 inhibition 
in suppressing the injury response in mechanically-injured cartilage explants.
Bovine cartilage explants were injured by a single compressive load of 30 %
strain at 100 %/s, and then treated with the CDK9 inhibitor Flavopiridol. To
assess acute injury responses, we measured the mRNA expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, catabolic enzymes, and apoptotic genes by RT-PCR, and
chondrocyte viability and apoptosis by TUNEL staining. For long-term outcome,
cartilage matrix degradation was assessed by soluble glycosaminoglycan release,
and by determining the mechanical properties with instantaneous and relaxation
moduli. Our data showed CDK9 inhibitor markedly reduced injury-induced
inflammatory cytokine and catabolic gene expression. CDK9 inhibitor also
attenuated chondrocyte apoptosis and reduced cartilage matrix degradation.
Lastly, the mechanical properties of the injured explants were preserved by CDK9 
inhibitor. Our results provide a temporal profile connecting the chain of events 
from mechanical impact, acute injury responses, to the subsequent induction of
chondrocyte apoptosis and cartilage matrix deterioration. Thus, CDK9 is a
potential disease-modifying agent for injury response after knee trauma to
prevent or delay PTOA development.

PMCID: PMC4750484
PMID: 26859911  [PubMed - in process]


8. RNA Biol. 2016 Mar 3;13(3):265-71. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1142037. Epub 2016 
Feb 6.

The point of no return: The poly(A)-associated elongation checkpoint.

Tellier M(1), Ferrer-Vicens I(1), Murphy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford , Oxford OX1 3RE 
, UK.

Cyclin-dependent kinases play critical roles in transcription by RNA polymerase
II (pol II) and processing of the transcripts. For example, CDK9 regulates
transcription of protein-coding genes, splicing, and 3' end formation of the
transcripts. Accordingly, CDK9 inhibitors have a drastic effect on the production
of mRNA in human cells. Recent analyses indicate that CDK9 regulates
transcription at the early-elongation checkpoint of the vast majority of pol
II-transcribed genes. Our recent discovery of an additional CDK9-regulated
elongation checkpoint close to poly(A) sites adds a new layer to the control of
transcription by this critical cellular kinase. This novel poly(A)-associated
checkpoint has the potential to powerfully regulate gene expression just before a
functional polyadenylated mRNA is produced: the point of no return. However, many
questions remain to be answered before the role of this checkpoint becomes clear.
Here we speculate on the possible biological significance of this novel mechanism
of gene regulation and the players that may be involved.

PMID: 26853452  [PubMed - in process]


9. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2016;136(2):151-6. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.15-00226-2.

Functional Analysis of GATA4 Complex, a Cardiac Hypertrophy-response
Transcriptional Factor, Using a Proteomics Approach.

Sunagawa Y(1), Katanasaka Y, Wada H, Hasegawa K, Morimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka.

  Various stresses on the heart, such as myocardial infarction and hemodynamic
overload, activate the sympathetic nervous system and the renin-angiotensin
system, ultimately reach the nuclei of cardiomyocytes, and change the pattern of 
gene expression associated with cardiac hypertrophy. Although present
pharmacological therapy for heart failure targets such extracellular molecules,
mortality due to heart failure is still high. A zinc finger protein, GATA4, is
one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription factors, forms a functional
protein complex with an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase, p300, and regulates 
pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Disruption of this complex results in the
inhibition of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure in vivo. To establish a more 
effective therapy for heart failure, we have been analyzing a common nuclear
pathway within cardiomyocytes. We identified 73 GATA4 binding proteins by
tandem-affinity purification and mass spectrometric analysis. Noble GATA4 binding
partners, such as cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (Cdk9: the core factor of positive
transcription elongation factor b) and retinoblastoma-association protein 48/46
(RbAp48/46: the co-repressor complexes containing HDAC1/2), regulate the
p300/GATA4-mediated signaling pathway and hypertrophic responses. Further
analysis of p300/GATA4 complex is expected to identify target molecules for heart
failure therapy.

PMID: 26831785  [PubMed - in process]


10. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 24. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6997. [Epub ahead of print]

CDK9 inhibitors selectively target estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells
through combined inhibition of MYB and MCL-1 expression.

Mitra P(1), Yang RM(1), Sutton J(2), Ramsay RG(3,)(4), Gonda TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, CA, USA. (3)Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (4)Sir Peter MacCallum Dept. 
of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Our previous studies showed that MYB is required for proliferation of, and
confers protection against apoptosis on, estrogen receptor-positive (ER+ve)
breast cancer cells, which are almost invariably also MYB+ve. We have also shown 
that MYB expression in ER+ve breast cancer cells is regulated at the level of
transcriptional elongation and as such, is suppressed by CDK9i. Here we examined 
the effects of CDK9i on breast cancer cells and the involvement of MYB in these
effects. ER+ve breast cancer cell lines including MCF-7 were much more sensitive 
(> 10 times) to killing by CDK9i than ER-ve/MYB-ve cells. Moreover, surviving
cells showed a block at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Importantly, ectopic
MYB expression conferred resistance to apoptosis induction, cell killing and G2/M
accumulation. Expression of relevant MYB target genes including BCL2 and CCNB1
was suppressed by CDK9 inhibition, and this too was reversed by ectopic MYB
expression. Nevertheless, inhibition of BCL2 alone either by MYB knockdown or by 
ABT-199 treatment was insufficient for significant induction of apoptosis.
Further studies implied that suppression of MCL-1, a well-documented target of
CDK9 inhibition, was additionally required for apoptosis induction, while maximal
levels of apoptosis induced by CDK9i are likely to also involve inhibition of
BCL2L1 expression. Taken together these data suggest that MYB regulation of BCL2 
underlies the heightened sensitivity of ER+ve compared to ER-ve breast cancer
cells to CDK9 inhibition, and that these compounds represent a potential
therapeutic for ER+ve breast cancers and possibly other MYB-dependent cancers.

PMID: 26812885  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Cancer Lett. 2016 Apr 28;374(1):107-16. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.01.032. Epub
2016 Jan 22.

miR-206 functions as a novel cell cycle regulator and tumor suppressor in
clear-cell renal cell carcinoma.

Xiao H(1), Xiao W(2), Cao J(3), Li H(1), Guan W(1), Guo X(1), Chen K(1), Zheng
T(4), Ye Z(1), Wang J(5), Xu H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China; Institute of Urology, 
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. (2)Translational Medicine Center, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan 430030, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China. (4)Department of Urology, Puai Hospital, Wuhan, 430033, China.
(5)Department of Cell Death and Cancer Genetics, The Hormel Institute, University
of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA. Electronic address:
jiwang924@gmail.com. (6)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China;
Institute of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. Electronic address:
xuhua@mail.hust.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: In this study we tried to systematically investigate the tumor
suppressing microRNAs in ccRCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The MTS cell viability and colony formation assay were
used to systematically detect the tumor suppressing ability of down-regulated
miRNAs in ccRCC. Then miR-206 expression was detected by RT-qPCR and in situ
hybridization in ccRCC cell lines and clinical samples. Oligonucleotides were
used to overexpress or down-regulate miR-206. MTS cell viability, EdU cell
proliferation, colony formation assay, flow cytometry, Xenograft subcutaneously
and orthotopic implantations were done to examine tumor suppressing effects of
miR-206 in vitro and in vivo. Luciferase assay was performed to verify the
precise target of miR-206.
RESULTS: We reviewed and experimentally analyzed the currently available miRNA
expression profiles data of ccRCC and identified miR-206 as one of the most
critical tumor-suppressing microRNAs in ccRCC. In addition, miR-206 inhibited
ccRCC cell proliferation through inducing cell cycle arrest by directly targeting
cell cycle related gene CDK4, CDK9 and CCND1.
CONCLUSIONS: All these results suggested that miR-206 functioned as a novel cell 
cycle regulator and tumor suppressor in ccRCC and could be considered as a
potential target for ccRCC therapy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26808577  [PubMed - in process]


12. Mol Cell. 2016 Jan 21;61(2):305-14. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.003.

Heptad-Specific Phosphorylation of RNA Polymerase II CTD.

Schüller R(1), Forné I(2), Straub T(2), Schreieck A(3), Texier Y(1), Shah N(1),
Decker TM(1), Cramer P(4), Imhof A(2), Eick D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Epigenetics, Helmholtz Center Munich and Center for
Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Marchioninistrasse 25, 81377 Munich,
Germany. (2)Biomedical Center Munich, ZFP and Bioinformatic Unit, Großhaderner
Strasse 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany. (3)Gene Center, Center for
Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany. (4)Department of
Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Faßberg 11,
37077 Göttingen, Germany. (5)Department of Molecular Epigenetics, Helmholtz
Center Munich and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM),
Marchioninistrasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
eick@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) consists of
heptad repeats with the consensus motif Y1-S2-P3-T4-S5-P6-S7. Dynamic
phosphorylation of the CTD coordinates Pol II progression through the
transcription cycle. Here, we use genetic and mass spectrometric approaches to
directly detect and map phosphosites along the entire CTD. We confirm
phosphorylation of CTD residues Y1, S2, T4, S5, and S7 in mammalian and yeast
cells. Although specific phosphorylation signatures dominate, adjacent CTD
repeats can be differently phosphorylated, leading to a high variation of
coexisting phosphosites in mono- and di-heptad CTD repeats. Inhibition of CDK9
kinase specifically reduces S2 phosphorylation levels within the CTD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26799765  [PubMed - in process]


13. Oncol Lett. 2015 Dec;10(6):3712-3718. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Increased cyclin T1 expression as a favorable prognostic factor in treating
gastric adenocarcinoma.

Jin JS(1), Lin LF(2), Chen JC(3), Huang CC(4), Sheu JH(3), Chen W(3), Tsao TY(5),
Hsu CW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tungs' Taichung
Metro Harbor Hospital, Taichung 43503, Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbor
Hospital, Taichung 43503, Taiwan, R.O.C. (3)Department of Applied Chemistry,
National Chiayi University, Chia-Yi 60004, Taiwan, R.O.C. (4)Center of Nano
Bio-detection, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi 62102, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(5)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tungs' Taichung Metro
Harbor Hospital, Taichung 43503, Taiwan, R.O.C. (6)Department of Applied
Chemistry, National Chiayi University, Chia-Yi 60004, Taiwan, R.O.C.; Division of
General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbor Hospital,
Taichung 43503, Taiwan, R.O.C.

The expression of cyclin A, B1, D1 and E in gastric adenocarcinoma is known to be
associated with clinical outcome. However, few studies have investigated the role
of cyclin T1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) in gastric adenocarcinoma.
Therefore, this study assessed the clinical significance of cyclin T1 and CDK9
expression in gastric adenocarcinoma. A total of 39 gastric adenocarcinoma
patients received either radical total or distal gastrectomy in this study.
Surgical tissue slides were stained with CDK9 and cyclin T1 antibodies, and
immunohistochemistry scores and disease-free survival (DFS) rates were analyzed. 
Among the 19 patients with tumor-recurrent or distant metastasis, 16 were
recorded as exhibiting low expression of cyclin T1. The remaining three patients 
exhibited high expression of the antibody. The results of patients with a higher 
T stage, N stage and tumor grade were less favorable. For patients with
adenocarcinoma, the percentage of tissue slides stained with cyclin T1 was
significantly higher than for those with normal stomach epithelia. The DFS rates 
of patients with low expression of cyclin T1 were significantly associated with
poorer DFS rates. In conclusion, high expression of cyclin T1 is a favorable
prognostic factor in treating patients with stomach adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4665173
PMID: 26788195  [PubMed]


14. Cell Cycle. 2016 Feb 16;15(4):519-27. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1138186.

Overview of CDK9 as a target in cancer research.

Morales F(1), Giordano A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University ,
Philadelphia , PA , USA. (2)b Department of Medicine , Surgery and Neuroscience, 
University of Siena , Siena , Italy.

CDK9 is a protein in constant development in cancer therapy. Herein we present an
overview of the enzyme as a target for cancer therapy. We provide data on its
characteristics and mechanism of action. In recent years, CDK9 inhibitors that
have been designed with molecular modeling have demonstrated good antitumoral
activity in vitro. Clinical studies of the drugs flavopiridol, dinaciclib,
seliciclib, SNS-032 and RGB-286638 used as CDK9 inhibitors are also reviewed,
with their additional targets and their relative IC50 values. Unfortunately,
treatment with these drugs remains unsuccessful and involves many adverse
effects. We could conclude that there are many small molecules that bind to CDK9,
but their lack of selectivity against other CDKs do not allow them to get to the 
clinical use. However, drug designers currently have the tools needed to improve 
the selectivity of CDK9 inhibitors and to make successful treatment available to 
patients.

PMID: 26766294  [PubMed - in process]


15. Cell Rep. 2016 Jan 12;14(2):320-31. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.025. Epub 2015 
Dec 31.

Structural and Functional Analysis of the Cdk13/Cyclin K Complex.

Greifenberg AK(1), Hönig D(2), Pilarova K(3), Düster R(1), Bartholomeeusen K(3), 
Bösken CA(2), Anand K(4), Blazek D(3), Geyer M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Innate Immunity, Department of Structural Immunology, University 
of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany; Center of Advanced
European Studies and Research, Group Physical Biochemistry, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee
2, 53175 Bonn, Germany. (2)Center of Advanced European Studies and Research,
Group Physical Biochemistry, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175 Bonn, Germany; Max
Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Department of Physical Biochemistry,
Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. (3)Central European Institute of
Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic. (4)Institute
of Innate Immunity, Department of Structural Immunology, University of Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany. (5)Institute of Innate Immunity,
Department of Structural Immunology, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse
25, 53127 Bonn, Germany; Center of Advanced European Studies and Research, Group 
Physical Biochemistry, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175 Bonn, Germany; Max Planck
Institute of Molecular Physiology, Department of Physical Biochemistry,
Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. Electronic address:
geyer@uni-bonn.de.

Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate the cell cycle and transcription in higher
eukaryotes. We have determined the crystal structure of the transcription kinase 
Cdk13 and its Cyclin K subunit at 2.0 Å resolution. Cdk13 contains a C-terminal
extension helix composed of a polybasic cluster and a DCHEL motif that interacts 
with the bound ATP. Cdk13/CycK phosphorylates both Ser5 and Ser2 of the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) with a preference for Ser7
pre-phosphorylations at a C-terminal position. The peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1
does not change the phosphorylation specificities of Cdk9, Cdk12, and Cdk13 but
interacts with the phosphorylated CTD through its WW domain. Using recombinant
proteins, we find that flavopiridol inhibits Cdk7 more potently than it does
Cdk13. Gene expression changes after knockdown of Cdk13 or Cdk12 are markedly
different, with enrichment of growth signaling pathways for Cdk13-dependent
genes. Together, our results provide insights into the structure, function, and
activity of human Cdk13/CycK.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26748711  [PubMed - in process]


16. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 8;11(1):e0146648. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146648.
eCollection 2016.

The Establishment of a Hyperactive Structure Allows the Tumour Suppressor Protein
p53 to Function through P-TEFb during Limited CDK9 Kinase Inhibition.

Albert TK(1), Antrecht C(1), Kremmer E(2), Meisterernst M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Tumor Biology (IMTB), Faculty of Medicine, University
Muenster, 48149, Muenster, Germany. (2)Institute of Molecular Immunology (IMI),
Helmholtz Research Center for Environment and Health, 81377, Munich, Germany.

CDK9 is the catalytic subunit of positive elongation factor b (P-TEFb) that
controls the transition of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) into elongation. CDK9
inhibitors block mRNA synthesis and trigger activation of the stress-sensitive
p53 protein. This in turn induces transcription of CDKN1A (p21) and other cell
cycle control genes. It is presently unclear if and how p53 circumvents a general
P-TEFb-requirement when it activates its target genes. Our investigations using a
panel of specific inhibitors reason for a critical role of CDK9 also in the case 
of direct inhibition of the kinase. At the prototypic p21 gene, the activator p53
initially accumulates at the pre-bound upstream enhancer followed-with
significant delay-by de novo binding to a secondary enhancer site within the
first intron of p21. This is accompanied by recruitment of the RNAPII initiation 
machinery to both elements. ChIP and functional analyses reason for a prominent
role of CDK9 itself and elongation factor complexes PAF1c and SEC involved in
pause and elongation control. It appears that the strong activation potential of 
p53 facilitates gene activation in the situation of global repression of RNAPII
transcription. The data further underline the fundamental importance of CDK9 for 
class II gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC4706356
PMID: 26745862  [PubMed - in process]


17. Genes Dev. 2016 Jan 1;30(1):117-31. doi: 10.1101/gad.269589.115.

P-TEFb regulation of transcription termination factor Xrn2 revealed by a chemical
genetic screen for Cdk9 substrates.

Sansó M(1), Levin RS(2), Lipp JJ(2), Wang VY(3), Greifenberg AK(4), Quezada
EM(1), Ali A(5), Ghosh A(5), Larochelle S(1), Rana TM(6), Geyer M(7), Tong L(3), 
Shokat KM(2), Fisher RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York 10029, USA; (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Pharmacology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California 
at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA; (3)Department of
Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA;
(4)Department of Structural Immunology, Institute of Innate Immunity, University 
of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany; (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA; (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California at
San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. (7)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California at San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

The transcription cycle of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is regulated at discrete
transition points by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). Positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb), a complex of Cdk9 and cyclin T1, promotes release
of paused Pol II into elongation, but the precise mechanisms and targets of Cdk9 
action remain largely unknown. Here, by a chemical genetic strategy, we
identified ~100 putative substrates of human P-TEFb, which were enriched for
proteins implicated in transcription and RNA catabolism. Among the RNA processing
factors phosphorylated by Cdk9 was the 5'-to-3' "torpedo" exoribonuclease Xrn2,
required in transcription termination by Pol II, which we validated as a bona
fide P-TEFb substrate in vivo and in vitro. Phosphorylation by Cdk9 or
phosphomimetic substitution of its target residue, Thr439, enhanced enzymatic
activity of Xrn2 on synthetic substrates in vitro. Conversely, inhibition or
depletion of Cdk9 or mutation of Xrn2-Thr439 to a nonphosphorylatable Ala residue
caused phenotypes consistent with inefficient termination in human cells:
impaired Xrn2 chromatin localization and increased readthrough transcription of
endogenous genes. Therefore, in addition to its role in elongation, P-TEFb
regulates termination by promoting chromatin recruitment and activation of a
cotranscriptional RNA processing enzyme, Xrn2.

© 2016 Sansó et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4701974 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26728557  [PubMed - in process]


18. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2016 Feb;32(2):169-73. doi: 10.1089/AID.2015.0347.

Short Communication: The Broad-Spectrum Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Vorinostat
and Panobinostat Activate Latent HIV in CD4(+) T Cells In Part Through
Phosphorylation of the T-Loop of the CDK9 Subunit of P-TEFb.

Jamaluddin MS(1), Hu PW(1), Jan Y(1), Siwak EB(1), Rice AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine 
, Houston, Texas.

Cessation of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in HIV-infected
individual leads to a rebound of viral replication due to reactivation of a viral
reservoir composed largely of latently infected memory CD4(+) T cells. Efforts to
deplete this reservoir have focused on reactivation of transcriptionally silent
latent proviruses. HIV provirus transcription depends critically on the positive 
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), whose core components are
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T1. In resting CD4(+) cells, the
functional levels of P-TEFb are extremely low. Cellular activation upregulates
cyclin T1 protein levels and CDK9 T-loop (T186) phosphorylation. The
broad-spectrum histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) vorinostat and
panobinostat have been shown to reactivate latent virus in vivo in HAART-treated 
individuals. In this study, we have found that vorinostat and panobinostat
activate P-TEFb in resting primary CD4(+) T cells through induction of CDK9
T-loop phosphorylation. In contrast, tacedinaline and romidepsin, HDAC 1 and 2
inhibitors, were unable to activate CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation. We used a CCL19 
primary CD4(+) T-cell model HIV latency to assess the correlation between
induction of CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation and reactivation of latent HIV virus by 
HDACis. Vorinostat and panobinostat treatment of cells harboring latent HIV
increased CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation and reactivation of latent virus, whereas
tacedinaline and romidepsin failed to induce T-loop phosphorylation or reactivate
latent virus. We conclude that the ability of vorinostat and panobinostat to
induce latent HIV is, in part, likely due to the ability of the broad-spectrum
HDACis to upregulate P-TEFb through increased CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC4761808 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26727990  [PubMed - in process]


19. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2016 Jan 21;18(3):2034-46. doi: 10.1039/c5cp05622e. Epub
2015 Dec 21.

Molecular principle of the cyclin-dependent kinase selectivity of
4-(thiazol-5-yl)-2-(phenylamino) pyrimidine-5-carbonitrile derivatives revealed
by molecular modeling studies.

Kong X(1), Sun H, Pan P, Tian S, Li D, Li Y, Hou T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, 
Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. tingjunhou@zju.edu.cn tingjunhou@hotmail.com
yyli@suda.edu.cn.

Due to the high sequence identity of the binding pockets of cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs), designing highly selective inhibitors towards a specific CDK
member remains a big challenge. 4-(thiazol-5-yl)-2-(phenylamino) pyrimidine
derivatives are effective inhibitors of CDKs, among which the most promising
inhibitor 12u demonstrates high binding affinity to CDK9 and attenuated binding
affinity to other homologous kinases, such as CDK2. In this study, in order to
rationalize the principle of the binding preference towards CDK9 over CDK2 and to
explore crucial information that may aid the design of selective CDK9 inhibitors,
MM/GBSA calculations based on conventional molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
and enhanced sampling simulations (umbrella sampling and steered MD simulations) 
were carried out on two representative derivatives (12u and 4). The calculation
results show that the binding specificity of 12u to CDK9 is primarily controlled 
by conformational change of the G-loop and variation of the van der Waals
interactions. Furthermore, the enhanced sampling simulations revealed the
different reaction coordinates and transient interactions of inhibitors 12u and 4
as they dissociate from the binding pockets of CDK9 and CDK2. The physical
principles obtained from this study may facilitate the discovery and rational
design of novel and specific inhibitors of CDK9.

PMID: 26686753  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 16;10(12):e0145112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145112.
eCollection 2015.

GTPase Activating Protein (Sh3 Domain) Binding Protein 1 Regulates the Processing
of MicroRNA-1 during Cardiac Hypertrophy.

He M(1), Yang Z(1), Abdellatif M(1), Sayed D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miR) are small, posttranscriptional regulators, expressed 
as part of a longer primary transcript, following which they undergo nuclear and 
cytoplasmic processing by Drosha and Dicer, respectively, to form the functional 
mature ~20mer that gets incorporated into the silencing complex. Others and we
have shown that mature miR-1 levels decrease with pressure-induced cardiac
hypertrophy, however, there is little or no change in the primary transcript
encompassing miR-1 stem-loop, suggesting critical regulatory step in microRNA
processing. The objective of this study was to investigate the underlying
mechanisms regulating miR-1 expression in cardiomyocytes.
RESULTS: Here we report that GTPase-activating protein (SH3 domain) binding
protein 1 (G3bp1), an endoribonuclease regulates miR-1 processing in
cardiomyocytes. G3bp1 is upregulated during cardiac hypertrophy and restricts
miR-1 processing by binding to its consensus sequence in the pre-miR-1-2
stem-loop. In accordance, exogenous G3bp1 is sufficient to reduce miR-1 levels,
along with derepression of miR-1 targets; General transcription factor IIB
(Gtf2b), cyclin dependent factor 9 (Cdk9) and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E
(Eif4e). While Cdk9 and Gtf2b are essential for transcription, Eif4e is required 
for translation. Thus, downregulation of miR-1 is necessary for increase in these
molecules. Similar to miR-1 knockdown, G3bp1 overexpression is not sufficient for
development of cardiac hypertrophy. Conversely, knockdown of G3bp1 in
hypertrophying cardiomyocytes inhibited downregulation of miR-1 and upregulation 
of its targets along with restricted hypertrophy, suggesting that G3bp1 is
necessary for development of cardiac hypertrophy. These results indicate that
G3bp1-mediated inhibition of miR-1 processing with growth stimulation results in 
decrease in mature miR-1 and, thereby, an increase of its targets, which play
fundamental roles in the development of hypertrophy.
CONCLUSION: G3bp1 posttranscriptionally regulates miRNA-1 processing in the
heart, and G3bp1 mediated downregulation of mature miRNA-1 levels is required for
the derepression of its targets and increase in gene expression during cardiac
hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC4684496
PMID: 26675618  [PubMed - in process]


21. Science. 2015 Dec 11;350(6266):1383-6. doi: 10.1126/science.aad2338.

RNA polymerase II-associated factor 1 regulates the release and phosphorylation
of paused RNA polymerase II.

Yu M(1), Yang W(2), Ni T(3), Tang Z(1), Nakadai T(1), Zhu J(2), Roeder RG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic
Engineering and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, School
of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, P.R. China. (4)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. roeder@rockefeller.edu.

Release of promoter-proximal paused RNA polymerase II (Pol II) during early
elongation is a critical step in transcriptional regulation in metazoan cells.
Paused Pol II release is thought to require the kinase activity of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) for the phosphorylation of DRB
sensitivity-inducing factor, negative elongation factor, and C-terminal domain
(CTD) serine-2 of Pol II. We found that Pol II-associated factor 1 (PAF1) is a
critical regulator of paused Pol II release, that positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb) directly regulates the initial recruitment of PAF1
complex (PAF1C) to genes, and that the subsequent recruitment of CDK12 is
dependent on PAF1C. These findings reveal cooperativity among P-TEFb, PAF1C, and 
CDK12 in pausing release and Pol II CTD phosphorylation.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26659056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1854-62. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6443.

Serum cyclin-dependent kinase 9 is a potential biomarker of atherosclerotic
inflammation.

Han Y(1), Zhao S(2), Gong Y(2,)(3), Hou G(2), Li X(2,)(3), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Department of of
Cardiology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, China.
(2)Laboratory of Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, School of
Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, China. (3)Department of
Genetics, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012,
China.

Atherosclerotic coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the most prevalent
diseases worldwide. Atherosclerosis was considered to be the single most
important contributor to CAD. In this study, a distinct serum protein expression 
pattern in CAD patients was demonstrated by proteomic analysis with
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with mass spectrometry. In
particular, CDK9 was found to be highly elevated in serum, monocytes and artery
plaque samples of CAD patients. Furthermore, there was high infiltration of CD14+
monocytes/macrophages within artery plaques correlated with the expression of
CDK9. Moreover, Flavopiridol (CDK9 inhibitor) could inhibit THP-1 cell (monocytic
acute leukemia cell line) proliferation by targeting CDK9. Altogether, These
findings indicate that CDK9 represent an important role for inflammation in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. It may be a potential biomarker of
atherosclerotic inflammation and offer insights into the pathophysiology and
targeted therapy for atherosclerotic CAD.

PMID: 26636538  [PubMed - in process]


23. Genet Med. 2015 Dec 3. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.147. [Epub ahead of print]

Accelerating matchmaking of novel dysmorphology syndromes through clinical and
genomic characterization of a large cohort.

Shaheen R(1), Patel N(1), Shamseldin H(1), Alzahrani F(1), Al-Yamany R(1),
ALMoisheer A(1), Ewida N(1), Anazi S(1), Alnemer M(2), Elsheikh M(3), Alfaleh
K(3,)(4), Alshammari M(4), Alhashem A(5), Alangari AA(4), Salih MA(4), Kircher
M(6), Daza RM(6), Ibrahim N(1), Wakil SM(1), Alaqeel A(7), Altowaijri I(7),
Shendure J(6), Al-Habib A(7), Faqieh E(8), Alkuraya FS(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Suliman AlHabib Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (6)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (7)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (8)Department of Pediatrics, King Fahad
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (9)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: Dysmorphology syndromes are among the most common referrals to clinical 
genetics specialists. Inability to match the dysmorphology pattern to a known
syndrome can pose a major diagnostic challenge. With an aim to accelerate the
establishment of new syndromes and their genetic etiology, we describe our
experience with multiplex consanguineous families that appeared to represent
novel autosomal recessive dysmorphology syndromes at the time of evaluation.
METHODS: Combined autozygome/exome analysis of multiplex consanguineous families 
with apparently novel dysmorphology syndromes.
RESULTS: Consistent with the apparent novelty of the phenotypes, our analysis
revealed a strong candidate variant in genes that were novel at the time of the
analysis in the majority of cases, and 10 of these genes are published here for
the first time as novel candidates (CDK9, NEK9, ZNF668, TTC28, MBL2, CADPS,
CACNA1H, HYAL2, CTU2, and C3ORF17). A significant minority of the phenotypes
(6/31, 19%), however, were caused by genes known to cause Mendelian phenotypes,
thus expanding the phenotypic spectrum of the diseases linked to these genes. The
conspicuous inheritance pattern and the highly specific phenotypes appear to have
contributed to the high yield (90%) of plausible molecular diagnoses in our study
cohort.
CONCLUSION: Reporting detailed clinical and genomic analysis of a large series of
apparently novel dysmorphology syndromes will likely lead to a trend to
accelerate the establishment of novel syndromes and their underlying genes
through open exchange of data for the benefit of patients, their families,
health-care providers, and the research community.Genet Med advance online
publication 03 December 2015Genetics in Medicine (2015);
doi:10.1038/gim.2015.147.

PMID: 26633546  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 1;76(5):1158-69. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1070. Epub
2015 Dec 1.

The CDK9 Inhibitor Dinaciclib Exerts Potent Apoptotic and Antitumor Effects in
Preclinical Models of MLL-Rearranged Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Baker A(1), Gregory GP(2), Verbrugge I(3), Kats L(1), Hilton JJ(4), Vidacs E(4), 
Lee EM(5), Lock RB(5), Zuber J(6), Shortt J(7), Johnstone RW(8).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia. Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, 
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (2)Gene Regulation Laboratory,
Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia.
Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia. Monash Haematology, Monash Health, Clayton, Australia.
(3)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia. (5)Children's Cancer Institute
Australia, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. (6)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.
(7)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia. Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, 
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. Monash Haematology, Monash
Health, Clayton, Australia. School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health, Faculty
of Medicine, Nursing, & Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.
ricky.johnstone@petermac.org Jake.Shortt@monashhealth.org. (8)Gene Regulation
Laboratory, Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Melbourne, Australia. Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University 
of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. ricky.johnstone@petermac.org
Jake.Shortt@monashhealth.org.

Translocations of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene occur in 60% to 80% of
all infant acute leukemias and are markers of poor prognosis. MLL-AF9 and other
MLL fusion proteins aberrantly recruit epigenetic regulatory proteins, including 
histone deacetylases (HDAC), histone methyltransferases, bromodomain-containing
proteins, and transcription elongation factors to mediate chromatin remodeling
and regulate tumorigenic gene expression programs. We conducted a small-molecule 
inhibitor screen to test the ability of candidate pharmacologic agents targeting 
epigenetic and transcriptional regulatory proteins to induce apoptosis in
leukemic cells derived from genetically engineered mouse models of MLL-AF9-driven
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We found that the CDK inhibitor dinaciclib and HDAC
inhibitor panobinostat were the most potent inducers of apoptosis in short-term
in vitro assays. Treatment of MLL-rearranged leukemic cells with dinaciclib
resulted in rapidly decreased expression of the prosurvival protein Mcl-1, and
accordingly, overexpression of Mcl-1 protected AML cells from dinaciclib-induced 
apoptosis. Administration of dinaciclib to mice bearing MLL-AF9-driven human and 
mouse leukemias elicited potent antitumor responses and significantly prolonged
survival. Collectively, these studies highlight a new therapeutic approach to
potentially overcome the resistance of MLL-rearranged AML to conventional
chemotherapies and prompt further clinical evaluation of CDK inhibitors in AML
patients harboring MLL fusion proteins. Cancer Res; 76(5); 1158-69. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26627013  [PubMed - in process]


25. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jan;48(1):191-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3246. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

The impact of CDK9 on radiosensitivity, DNA damage repair and cell cycling of
HNSCC cancer cells.

Storch K(1), Cordes N(1).

Author information: 
(1)OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Medical Faculty 
Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden University of Technology, D-01307 Dresden, Germany.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), mainly involved in regulation of transcription,
has recently been shown to impact on cell cycling and DNA repair. Despite the
fact that CDK9 has been proposed as potential cancer target, it remains largely
elusive whether CDK9 targeting alters tumor cell radiosensitivity. Five human
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines (SAS, FaDu, HSC4, Cal33,
UTSCC5) as well as SAS cells stably transfected with CDK9-EGFP-N1 plasmid or
empty vector controls were used. Upon either CDK9 small interfering RNA knockdown
or treatment with a pan-CDK inhibitor (ZK304709), colony formation, DNA double
strand breaks (DSBs), apoptosis, cell cycling, and expression and phosphorylation
of major cell cycle and DNA damage repair proteins were examined. While CDK9
overexpression mediated radioprotection, CDK9 depletion clearly enhanced the
radiosensitivity of HNSCC cells without an induction of apoptosis. While the cell
cycle and cell cycle proteins were significantly modulated by CDK9 depletion, no 
further alterations in these parameters were observed after combined CDK9
knockdown with irradiation. ZK304709 showed concentration-dependent cytotoxicity 
but failed to radiosensitize HNSCC cells. Our findings suggest a potential role
of CDK9 in the radiation response of HNSCC cells. Additional studies are
warranted to clarify the usefulness to target CDK9 in the clinic.

PMID: 26573875  [PubMed - in process]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142655. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142655.
eCollection 2015.

A Chemical Screening Approach to Identify Novel Key Mediators of Erythroid
Enucleation.

Wölwer CB(1,)(2), Pase LB(1,)(2), Pearson HB(1,)(2), Gödde NJ(1,)(2), Lackovic
K(3,)(4), Huang DC(3,)(4), Russell SM(2,)(5,)(6), Humbert PO(1,)(2,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle and Cancer Genetics, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Australia. (2)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. (4)Department of Medical Biology,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (5)Immune Signaling Laboratory,
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia. (6)Centre for
Micro-Photonics, Faculty of Engineering and Industrial Sciences, Swinburne
University of Technology, Hawthorn, Australia. (7)Department of Pathology,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (8)Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Erythroid enucleation is critical for terminal differentiation of red blood
cells, and involves extrusion of the nucleus by orthochromatic erythroblasts to
produce reticulocytes. Due to the difficulty of synchronizing erythroblasts, the 
molecular mechanisms underlying the enucleation process remain poorly understood.
To elucidate the cellular program governing enucleation, we utilized a novel
chemical screening approach whereby orthochromatic cells primed for enucleation
were enriched ex vivo and subjected to a functional drug screen using a 324
compound library consisting of structurally diverse, medicinally active and cell 
permeable drugs. Using this approach, we have confirmed the role of HDACs,
proteasomal regulators and MAPK in erythroid enucleation and introduce a new role
for Cyclin-dependent kinases, in particular CDK9, in this process. Importantly,
we demonstrate that when coupled with imaging analysis, this approach provides a 
powerful means to identify and characterize rate limiting steps involved in the
erythroid enucleation process.

PMCID: PMC4646491
PMID: 26569102  [PubMed - in process]


27. Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Nov 11;18(5):571-81. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.10.010.

Microbiota-Dependent Priming of Antiviral Intestinal Immunity in Drosophila.

Sansone CL(1), Cohen J(1), Yasunaga A(1), Xu J(1), Osborn G(1), Subramanian H(1),
Gold B(1), Buchon N(2), Cherry S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of Entomology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address:
cherrys@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Nov 11;18(5):513-4.

Enteric pathogens must overcome intestinal defenses to establish infection. In
Drosophila, the ERK signaling pathway inhibits enteric virus infection. The
intestinal microflora also impacts immunity but its role in enteric viral
infection is unknown. Here we show that two signals are required to activate
antiviral ERK signaling in the intestinal epithelium. One signal depends on
recognition of peptidoglycan from the microbiota, particularly from the commensal
Acetobacter pomorum, which primes the NF-kB-dependent induction of a secreted
factor, Pvf2. However, the microbiota is not sufficient to induce this pathway; a
second virus-initiated signaling event involving release of transcriptional
paused genes mediated by the kinase Cdk9 is also required for Pvf2 production.
Pvf2 stimulates antiviral immunity by binding to the receptor tyrosine kinase
PVR, which is necessary and sufficient for intestinal ERK responses. These
findings demonstrate that sensing of specific commensals primes inflammatory
signaling required for epithelial responses that restrict enteric viral
infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648705 [Available on 2016-11-11]
PMID: 26567510  [PubMed - in process]


28. Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Nov 11;18(5):560-70. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.10.012.

CDK11 in TREX/THOC Regulates HIV mRNA 3' End Processing.

Pak V(1), Eifler TT(1), Jäger S(2), Krogan NJ(2), Fujinaga K(1), Peterlin BM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California at San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, 94143,
USA. (3)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address:
matija.peterlin@ucsf.edu.

Transcriptional cyclin-dependent kinases play important roles in eukaryotic gene 
expression. CDK7, CDK9 (P-TEFb), and CDK13 are also critical for HIV replication.
However, the function of CDK11 remained enigmatic. In this report, we determined 
that CDK11 regulates the cleavage and polyadenylation (CPA) of all viral
transcripts. CDK11 was found associated with the TREX/THOC, which recruited this 
kinase to DNA. Once at the viral genome, CDK11 phosphorylated serines at position
2 in the CTD of RNAPII, which increased levels of CPA factors at the HIV 3' end. 
In its absence, cleavage of viral transcripts was greatly attenuated. In
contrast, higher levels of CDK11 increased the length of HIV poly(A) tails and
the stability of mature viral transcripts. We conclude that CDK11 plays a
critical role for the cotranscriptional processing of all HIV mRNA species.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648707 [Available on 2016-11-11]
PMID: 26567509  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Gen Virol. 2016 Jan;97(1):144-51. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000337. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

New insight into the phosphorylation-regulated intranuclear localization of human
cytomegalovirus pUL69 mediated by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and viral CDK
orthologue pUL97.

Graf L(1), Feichtinger S(1), Naing Z(2), Hutterer C(1), Milbradt J(1), Webel
R(1), Wagner S(1), Scott GM(2), Hamilton ST(2), Rawlinson WD(2), Stamminger T(1),
Thomas M(1), Marschall M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B>Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, Friedrich-Alexander
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (2)2<U+200B>Virology Division, SEALS
Microbiology, Prince of Wales Hospital, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are multifaceted regulators involved in the
replication of human cytomegalovirus. Recently, we demonstrated an interaction of
CDK9-cyclin T1 as well as viral CDK orthologue pUL97 with the viral regulator
pUL69, thereby leading to pUL69-activating phosphorylation. Here, we demonstrate 
that colocalization and direct pUL69-cyclin T1 interaction is independent of
viral strains and host cell types. In vitro phosphorylation of pUL69 by CDK9 or
pUL97 did not occur in a single site-specific manner, but at multiple sites. The 
previously described fine-speckled nuclear aggregation of pUL69 was assigned to
the late phase of viral replication. CDK inhibitors, including a novel inhibitor 
of the CDK-activating kinase CDK7, massively intensified this fine-speckled
accumulation. Interestingly, we also observed spontaneous pUL69 accumulation in
the absence of inhibitors at a lower frequency. These findings provide new
insight into pUL69 kinase interregulation and emphasize the importance of pUL69
phosphorylation for correct intranuclear localization.

PMID: 26555090  [PubMed - in process]


30. DNA Cell Biol. 2016 Jan;35(1):13-23. doi: 10.1089/dna.2015.3049. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Identification and Characterization of the Cyclin-Dependent Kinases Gene Family
in Silkworm, Bombyx mori.

Li Y(1), Jiang F(1), Shi X(1), Liu X(1), Yang H(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute , Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, China .

Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) play key roles at different checkpoint
regulations of the eukaryotic cell cycle. However, only few studies of
lepidoptera CDK family proteins have been reported so far. In this study, we
performed the cDNA sequencing of 10 members of the CDK family in Bombyx mori.
Gene structure analysis suggested that CDK12 and CDC2L1 owned two and three
isoforms, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis showed that CDK genes in different 
species were highly conserved, implying that they evolved independently even
before the split between vertebrates and invertebrates. We found that the
expression levels of BmCDKs in 13 tissues of fifth-instar day 3 larvae were
different: CDK1, CDK7, and CDK9 had a high level of expression, whereas CDK4 was 
low-level expressed and was detected only in the testes and fat body cells.
Similar expression profiles of BmCDKs during embryo development were obtained.
Among the variants of CDK12, CDK12 transcript variant A had the highest
expression, and the expression of CDC2L1 transcript variant A was the highest
among the variants of CDC2L1. It was shown from the RNAi experiments that the
silencing of CDK1, CDK10, CDK12, and CDC2L1 could influence the cells from G0/G1 
to S phase transition.

PMID: 26544066  [PubMed - in process]


31. J Cell Sci. 2015 Dec 15;128(24):4560-71. doi: 10.1242/jcs.175018. Epub 2015 Nov
5.

CDK9 and its repressor LARP7 modulate cardiomyocyte proliferation and response to
injury in the zebrafish heart.

Matrone G(1), Wilson KS(2), Maqsood S(2), Mullins JJ(2), Tucker CS(2), Denvir
MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science, The Queen's
Medical Research Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK
Center for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Department of Cardiovascular Sciences,
Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)British Heart
Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science, The Queen's Medical Research
Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK. (3)British Heart 
Foundation Centre for Cardiovascular Science, The Queen's Medical Research
Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK
mdenvir@staffmail.ed.ac.uk.

Cyclin dependent kinase (Cdk)9 acts through the positive transcription elongation
factor-b (P-TEFb) complex to activate and expand transcription through RNA
polymerase II. It has also been shown to regulate cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, with
recent evidence linking it to cardiomyocyte proliferation. We hypothesised that
modification of CDK9 activity could both impair and enhance the cardiac response 
to injury by modifying cardiomyocyte proliferation. Cdk9 expression and activity 
were inhibited in the zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryo. We show that
dephosphorylation of residue Ser2 on the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II
is associated with impaired cardiac structure and function, and cardiomyocyte
proliferation and also results in impaired functional recovery following cardiac 
laser injury. In contrast, de-repression of Cdk9 activity, through knockdown of
La-related protein (Larp7) increases phosphorylation of Ser2 in RNA polymerase II
and increases cardiomyocyte proliferation. Larp7 knockdown rescued the structural
and functional phenotype associated with knockdown of Cdk9. The balance of Cdk9
and Larp7 plays a key role in cardiomyocyte proliferation and response to injury.
Larp7 represents a potentially novel therapeutic target to promote cardiomyocyte 
proliferation and recovery from injury.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4696495
PMID: 26542022  [PubMed - in process]


32. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 1;291(1):342-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.683722. Epub 2015
Oct 26.

Kinetically Defined Mechanisms and Positions of Action of Two New Modulators of
Glucocorticoid Receptor-regulated Gene Induction.

Pradhan MA(1), Blackford JA Jr(1), Devaiah BN(2), Thompson PS(2), Chow CC(3),
Singer DS(2), Simons SS Jr(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/Laboratory of Endocrinology and
Receptor Biology. (2)the Experimental Immunology Branch, NCI, and. (3)the
Mathematical Biology Section, NIDDK/Laboratory of Biological Modeling, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (4)From the Steroid Hormones
Section, NIDDK/Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology,
stoneys@helix.nih.gov.

Most of the steps in, and many of the factors contributing to, glucocorticoid
receptor (GR)-regulated gene induction are currently unknown. A competition
assay, based on a validated chemical kinetic model of steroid hormone action, is 
now used to identify two new factors (BRD4 and negative elongation factor
(NELF)-E) and to define their sites and mechanisms of action. BRD4 is a kinase
involved in numerous initial steps of gene induction. Consistent with its
complicated biochemistry, BRD4 is shown to alter both the maximal activity (Amax)
and the steroid concentration required for half-maximal induction (EC50) of
GR-mediated gene expression by acting at a minimum of three different kinetically
defined steps. The action at two of these steps is dependent on BRD4
concentration, whereas the third step requires the association of BRD4 with
P-TEFb. BRD4 is also found to bind to NELF-E, a component of the NELF complex.
Unexpectedly, NELF-E modifies GR induction in a manner that is independent of the
NELF complex. Several of the kinetically defined steps of BRD4 in this study are 
proposed to be related to its known biochemical actions. However, novel actions
of BRD4 and of NELF-E in GR-controlled gene induction have been uncovered. The
model-based competition assay is also unique in being able to order, for the
first time, the sites of action of the various reaction components: GR < Cdk9 <
BRD4 = induced gene < NELF-E. This ability to order factor actions will assist
efforts to reduce the side effects of steroid treatments.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4697169 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26504077  [PubMed - in process]


33. Mol Cell. 2015 Oct 15;60(2):328-37. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.09.001. Epub 2015 
Oct 1.

YAP Drives Growth by Controlling Transcriptional Pause Release from Dynamic
Enhancers.

Galli GG(1), Carrara M(2), Yuan WC(1), Valdes-Quezada C(3), Gurung B(4),
Pepe-Mooney B(5), Zhang T(6), Geeven G(3), Gray NS(6), de Laat W(3), Calogero
RA(2), Camargo FD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Molecular
Biotechnology Center, Department of Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University
of Torino, Torino 10126, Italy. (3)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical
Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, the Netherlands. (4)Stem Cell
Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (6)Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (7)Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: camargo@fas.harvard.edu.

The Hippo/YAP signaling pathway is a crucial regulator of tissue growth, stem
cell activity, and tumorigenesis. However, the mechanism by which YAP controls
transcription remains to be fully elucidated. Here, we utilize global chromatin
occupancy analyses to demonstrate that robust YAP binding is restricted to a
relatively small number of distal regulatory elements in the genome. YAP
occupancy defines a subset of enhancers and superenhancers with the highest
transcriptional outputs. YAP modulates transcription from these elements
predominantly by regulating promoter-proximal polymerase II (Pol II) pause
release. Mechanistically, YAP interacts and recruits the Mediator complex to
enhancers, allowing the recruitment of the CDK9 elongating kinase. Genetic and
chemical perturbation experiments demonstrate the requirement for Mediator and
CDK9 in YAP-driven phenotypes of overgrowth and tumorigenesis. Our results here
uncover the molecular mechanisms employed by YAP to exert its growth and
oncogenic functions, and suggest strategies for intervention.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4624327 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 26439301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Dec 5;242:107-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.09.020. Epub
2015 Sep 26.

Novel carbocyclic curcumin analog CUR3d modulates genes involved in multiple
apoptosis pathways in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Bhullar KS(1), Jha A(2), Rupasinghe HP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Dalhousie
University, Truro, Nova Scotia, B2N 5E3, Canada; Department of Pharmacology,
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 
2H7, Canada. (2)Department of Chemistry, Acadia University, Wolfville, Nova
Scotia, B4P 2R6, Canada. (3)Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of
Agriculture, Dalhousie University, Truro, Nova Scotia, B2N 5E3, Canada;
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address: vrupasinghe@dal.ca.

Anticancer activity of a novel curcumin analog
(E)-2-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzylidene)-5-((E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)acrylo
yl)cyclopentanone (CUR3d) was studied using a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell
line (HepG2). The results showed that CUR3d completely inhibits the tumor cell
proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent manner. CUR3d at 100 µmol/L activated
the pro-apoptotic caspase-3 along with downregulation of anti-apoptotic BIRC5 and
Bcl2. CUR3d treatment controlled the cancer cell growth by downregulating the
expression of PI3K/Akt (Akt1, Akt2) pathway along with NF-<U+03BA>B. CUR3d
down-regulated the members of epidermal growth receptor family (EGFR, ERBB3,
ERBB2) and insulin like growth receptors (IGF1, IGF-1R, IGF2). This correlated
with the downregulation of G-protein (RHOA, RHOB) and RAS (ATF2, HRAS, KRAS,
NRAS) pathway signaling. CUR3d also arrested cell cycle via inhibition of CDK2,
CDK4, CDK5, CDK9, MDM2, MDM4 and TERT genes. Cell cycle essential aurora kinases 
(AURKa, AURKß) and polo-like kinases (PLK1, PLK2, PLK3) were also modulated by
CUR3d. Topoisomerases (TOP2a, TOP2ß), important factors in cancer cell
immortality, as well as HIF-1a were downregulated following CUR3d treatment. The 
expression of protein kinase-C family (PRKC-A, PRKC-D, PRKC-E) was also
attenuated by CUR3d. The downregulation of histone deacetylases (Class I, II, IV)
and PARP I further strengthened the anticancer efficacy of CUR3d. Downregulation 
of carcinogenic cathepsins (CTSB, CTSD) and heat shock proteins exhibited CUR3d's
potency as a potential immunological adjuvant. Finally, the non-toxic
manifestation of CUR3d in healthy liver and lung cells along with downregulation 
of drug resistant gene ABCC1 further warrant need for advance investigations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26409325  [PubMed - in process]


35. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Dec 18;10(12):2680-6. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00368. Epub
2015 Oct 5.

Chemoproteomics Reveals Novel Protein and Lipid Kinase Targets of Clinical CDK4/6
Inhibitors in Lung Cancer.

Sumi NJ(1,)(2), Kuenzi BM(1,)(2), Knezevic CE(1), Remsing Rix LL(1), Rix U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
Institute , Tampa, Florida 33612-9497, United States. (2)Cancer Biology Ph.D.
Program, University of South Florida , Tampa, Florida 33620, United States.

Several selective CDK4/6 inhibitors are in clinical trials for non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Palbociclib (PD0332991) is included in the phase II/III
Lung-MAP trial for squamous cell lung carcinoma (LUSQ). We noted differential
cellular activity between palbociclib and the structurally related ribociclib
(LEE011) in LUSQ cells. Applying an unbiased mass spectrometry-based
chemoproteomics approach in H157 cells and primary tumor samples, we here report 
distinct proteome-wide target profiles of these two drug candidates in LUSQ,
which encompass novel protein and, for palbociclib only, lipid kinases. In
addition to CDK4 and 6, we observed CDK9 as a potent target of both drugs.
Palbociclib interacted with several kinases not targeted by ribociclib, such as
casein kinase 2 and PIK3R4, which regulate autophagy. Furthermore, palbociclib
engaged several lipid kinases, most notably, PIK3CD and PIP4K2A/B/C. Accordingly,
we observed modulation of autophagy and inhibition of AKT signaling by
palbociclib but not ribociclib.

PMCID: PMC4684772 [Available on 2016-12-18]
PMID: 26390342  [PubMed - in process]


36. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Oct 1;23(19):6280-96. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.08.035. Epub 
2015 Aug 28.

Discovery and SAR of novel pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines as inhibitors of CDK9.

Phillipson LJ(1), Segal DH(1), Nero TL(2), Parker MW(3), Wan SS(1), de Silva
M(1), Guthridge MA(4), Wei AH(5), Burns CJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Chemical Biology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, 1G Royal Parade, VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology,
The University of Melbourne, 1G Royal Parade, VIC 3052, Australia. (2)ACRF
Rational Drug Discovery Centre, St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, 41
Victoria Pde, Fitzroy, VIC 3065, Australia. (3)ACRF Rational Drug Discovery
Centre, St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, 41 Victoria Pde, Fitzroy,
VIC 3065, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21
Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, 30
Flemington Road, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia. (4)Division of Blood Cancers,
Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Alfred Medical Research 
and Education Precinct, 89 Commercial Rd, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
(5)Division of Blood Cancers, Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash
University, Alfred Medical Research and Education Precinct, 89 Commercial Rd,
Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia; Department of Clinical Haematology, The Alfred
Hospital, Commercial Rd, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia. (6)ACRF Chemical Biology
Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
VIC 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, 
1G Royal Parade, VIC 3052, Australia; School of Chemistry, Bio21 Molecular
Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, 30 Flemington
Rd, VIC 3010, Australia. Electronic address: burns@wehi.edu.au.

The serine-threonine kinase CDK9 is a target of emerging interest for the
development of anti-cancer drugs. There are multiple lines of evidence linking
CDK9 activity to cancer, including the essential role this kinase plays in
transcriptional regulation through phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD)
of RNA polymerase II. Indeed, inhibition of CDK9 has been shown to result in a
reduction of short-lived proteins such as the pro-survival protein Mcl-1 in
malignant cells leading to the induction of apoptosis. In this work we report our
initial studies towards the discovery of selective CDK9 inhibitors, starting from
the known multi-kinase inhibitor PIK-75 which possesses potent CDK9 activity. Our
series is based on a pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine nucleus and, importantly, the
resultant lead compound 18b is devoid of the structural liabilities present in
PIK-75 and possesses greater selectivity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26349627  [PubMed - in process]


37. Antiviral Res. 2015 Nov;123:1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.08.012. Epub 2015 
Aug 21.

Selective inhibition of HIV-1 replication by the CDK9 inhibitor FIT-039.

Okamoto M(1), Hidaka A(1), Toyama M(1), Hosoya T(2), Yamamoto M(3), Hagiwara
M(3), Baba M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Antiviral Chemotherapy, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima
890-8544, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Chemical Bioscience, Institute of Biomaterials 
and Bioengineering, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (4)Division of Antiviral Chemotherapy,
Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. Electronic address:
m-baba@m2.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

FIT-039 has recently been identified as a novel cyclin-dependent kinase 9
inhibitor with potent antiviral activity against a broad spectrum of DNA viruses,
such as herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and human cytomegaloviruses. In this 
study, FIT-039 was examined for its inhibitory effect on human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication in chronically infected cells. Its 50% effective
concentration was 1.4-2.1µM, irrespective of the cells used for antiviral assays,
while its 50% cytotoxic concentration was >20µM, indicating that FIT-039 is a
selective inhibitor of HIV-1 replication. FIT-039 also inhibited HIV-1 RNA
expression in a dose-dependent fashion. Since previous studies demonstrated that 
FIT-039 exhibited antiviral efficacy without noticeable adverse effects in
HSV-1-infected mice, the compound should be further investigated for its clinical
potential against HIV-1 infection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26304705  [PubMed - in process]


38. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2015 Sep;22(5):610-22. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2015.01.012. Epub
2015 Jan 20.

Identifying new targets in leukemogenesis using computational approaches.

Jayaraman A(1), Jamil K(2), Khan HA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Advanced Studies (JNIAS), Secunderabad, Telangana, 
India ; Center for Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University
(JNTUH), Kukatpally, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. (2)Centre for Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Advanced
Studies (JNIAS), Secunderabad, Telangana, India. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
College of Sciences, Bldg. 5, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2455, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.

There is a need to identify novel targets in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), 
a hematopoietic cancer affecting children, to improve our understanding of
disease biology and that can be used for developing new therapeutics. Hence, the 
aim of our study was to find new genes as targets using in silico studies; for
this we retrieved the top 10% overexpressed genes from Oncomine public domain
microarray expression database; 530 overexpressed genes were short-listed from
Oncomine database. Then, using prioritization tools such as ENDEAVOUR, DIR and
TOPPGene online tools, we found fifty-four genes common to the three
prioritization tools which formed our candidate leukemogenic genes for this
study. As per the protocol we selected thirty training genes from PubMed. The
prioritized and training genes were then used to construct STRING functional
association network, which was further analyzed using cytoHubba hub analysis tool
to investigate new genes which could form drug targets in leukemia. Analysis of
the STRING protein network built from these prioritized and training genes led to
identification of two hub genes, SMAD2 and CDK9, which were not implicated in
leukemogenesis earlier. Filtering out from several hundred genes in the network
we also found MEN1, HDAC1 and LCK genes, which re-emphasized the important role
of these genes in leukemogenesis. This is the first report on these five
additional signature genes in leukemogenesis. We propose these as new targets for
developing novel therapeutics and also as biomarkers in leukemogenesis, which
could be important for prognosis and diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4537869
PMID: 26288567  [PubMed]


39. RNA. 2015 Oct;21(10):1770-80. doi: 10.1261/rna.052555.115. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

RNA polymerase II CTD phospho-sites Ser5 and Ser7 govern phosphate homeostasis in
fission yeast.

Schwer B(1), Sanchez AM(1), Shuman S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, New York 10065, USA. (2)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering
Institute, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Phosphorylation of the tandem YSPTSPS repeats of the RNA polymerase II CTD
inscribes an informational code that orchestrates eukaryal mRNA synthesis. Here
we interrogate the role of the CTD in phosphate homeostasis in fission yeast.
Expression of Pho1 acid phosphatase, which is repressed during growth in
phosphate-rich medium and induced by phosphate starvation, is governed strongly
by CTD phosphorylation status, but not by CTD repeat length. Inability to place a
Ser7-PO4 mark (as in S7A) results in constitutive derepression of Pho1 expression
in phosphate-replete medium. In contrast, indelible installation of a Ser7-PO4
mimetic (as in S7E) hyper-represses Pho1 in phosphate-replete cells and inhibits 
Pho1 induction during starvation. Pho1 phosphatase is derepressed by ablation of 
the CTD Ser5-PO4 mark, achieved either by mutating Ser5 in all consensus heptads 
to alanine, or replacing all Pro6 residues with alanine. We find that Ser5 status
is a tunable determinant of Pho1 regulation, i.e., serial decrements in the
number of consensus Ser5 heptads from seven to two elicits a progressive increase
in Pho1 expression in phosphate-replete medium. Pho1 is also derepressed by
hypomorphic mutations of the CTD kinase Cdk9. Inactivation of the CTD phosphatase
Ssu72 attenuates Pho1 induction in wild-type cells and blocks Pho1 derepression
in S7A cells. These experiments implicate Ser5, Pro6, and Ser7 as component
letters of a CTD coding "word" that transduces a repressive transcriptional
signal via serine phosphorylation.

© 2015 Schwer et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
RNA Society.

PMCID: PMC4574753 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26264592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1336:179-209. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2926-9_15.

Models for the Study of the Cross Talk Between Inflammation and Cell Cycle.

Hoodless LJ(1), Robb CT, Felton JM, Tucker CS, Rossi AG.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Inflammation Research, The Queen's Medical Research Institute, 
The University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4TJ, UK.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) have been traditionally associated with the cell 
cycle. However, it is now known that CDK7 and CDK9 regulate transcriptional
activity via phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II and subsequent synthesis of,
for example, inflammatory mediators and factors that influence the apoptotic
process; including apoptosis of granulocytes such as neutrophils and eosinophils.
Successful resolution of inflammation and restoration of normal tissue
homeostasis requires apoptosis of these inflammatory cells and subsequent
clearance of apoptotic bodies by phagocytes such as macrophages. It is believed
that CDK7 and CDK9 influence resolution of inflammation since they are involved
in the transcription of anti-apoptotic proteins such as Mcl-1 which is especially
important in granulocyte survival.This chapter describes various in vitro and in 
vivo models used to investigate CDKs and their inhibitors in granulocytes and
particularly the role of CDKs in the apoptosis pathway. This can be performed in 
vitro by isolation and use of primary granulocytes and in vivo using animal
models of inflammatory disease in rodents and zebrafish. Some of the methods
described here to assess the role of CDKs in inflammation and apoptosis include
flow cytometry and western blotting, together with imaging and quantification of 
apoptosis in fixed tissue, as well as in vivo models of inflammation.

PMID: 26231717  [PubMed - in process]


41. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1336:13-28. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2926-9_3.

Expression and Purification of Recombinant CDKs: CDK7, CDK8, and CDK9.

Pinhero R(1), Yankulov K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, 50 Stone
Road East, Guelph, ON, Canada, N1G 2W1.

Cyclin-dependent kinases have established roles in the regulation of cell cycle, 
in gene expression and in cell differentiation. Many of these kinases have been
considered as drug targets and numerous efforts have been made to develop
specific and potent inhibitors against them. The first step in all of these
attempts and in many other biochemical analyses is the production of highly
purified and reliable kinase, most frequently in a recombinant form. In this
chapter we describe our experience in the cloning, expression, and purification
of CDKs using CDK7/CycH, CDK8/CycC, and CDK9/CycT1 as an example.

PMID: 26231705  [PubMed - in process]


42. Kidney Int. 2015 Dec;88(6):1323-1335. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.235. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

The Smad3/Smad4/CDK9 complex promotes renal fibrosis in mice with unilateral
ureteral obstruction.

Qu X(1), Jiang M(2), Sun YB(1), Jiang X(2), Fu P(3), Ren Y(4), Wang D(5), Dai
L(6), Caruana G(1), Bertram JF(1), Nikolic-Paterson DJ(7), Li J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
P.R. China. (3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, West
China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, P.R. China. (4)Florida State
University College of Medicine, Tallahassee, Florida, USA. (5)Centre for Cancer
Research, Hadson Institute of Medical Research, Monash Medical Centre, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (6)Department of Rheumatology, Sun
Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Monash Health and Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)/Smad signaling has a central role in the
pathogenesis of renal fibrosis. Smad3 and Smad4 are pro-fibrotic, while Smad2 is 
anti-fibrotic. However, these Smads form heterogeneous complexes, the functions
of which are poorly understood. Here we studied Smad complex function in renal
fibrosis using the mouse model of unilateral ureteric obstruction. Mice
heterozygous for Smad3/4 (Smad3/4(+/-)) exhibited substantial protection from
renal fibrosis through day 7 of obstruction, whereas Smad2/3(+/-) and
Smad2/4(+/-) mice showed only modest protection. Formation of Smad3/Smad4/CDK9
complexes was an early event following obstruction in wild-type mice, which
involved nuclear phosphorylation of the linker regions of Smad3. Significantly,
Smad3 or Smad4 deficiency decreased the formation of Smad4/CDK9 or Smad3/CDK9
complex, Smad3 linker phosphorylation, and fibrosis but at different degrees. In 
vitro, TGF-ß1 stimulation of collagen I promoter activity involved formation of
Smad3/Smad4/CDK9 complexes, and overexpression of each component gave additive
increases in collagen promoter activity. Co-administration of a CDK9 inhibitor
and Smad3-specific inhibition achieved better protection from TGF-ß1-induced
fibrotic response in vitro and renal interstitial fibrosis in vivo. Thus
formation of Smad3/Smad4/CDK9 complex drives renal fibrosis during ureteral
obstruction. Formation of this complex represents a novel target for antifibrotic
therapies.

PMID: 26221756  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Proteins. 2015 Oct;83(10):1849-58. doi: 10.1002/prot.24869. Epub 2015 Aug 24.

Structure of Ctk3, a subunit of the RNA polymerase II CTD kinase complex, reveals
a noncanonical CTD-interacting domain fold.

Mühlbacher W(1), Mayer A(2), Sun M(2), Remmert M(2), Cheung AC(2), Niesser J(1), 
Soeding J(1), Cramer P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular
Biology, Am Fassberg 11, Göttingen, 37077, Germany. (2)Gene Center Munich and
Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, Munich, 81377, Germany.

CTDK-I is a yeast kinase complex that phosphorylates the C-terminal repeat domain
(CTD) of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to promote transcription elongation. CTDK-I
contains the cyclin-dependent kinase Ctk1 (homologous to human CDK9/CDK12), the
cyclin Ctk2 (human cyclin K), and the yeast-specific subunit Ctk3, which is
required for CTDK-I stability and activity. Here we predict that Ctk3 consists of
a N-terminal CTD-interacting domain (CID) and a C-terminal three-helix bundle
domain. We determine the X-ray crystal structure of the N-terminal domain of the 
Ctk3 homologue Lsg1 from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe at 2.0 Å
resolution. The structure reveals eight helices arranged into a right-handed
superhelical fold that resembles the CID domain present in transcription
termination factors Pcf11, Nrd1, and Rtt103. Ctk3 however shows different surface
properties and no binding to CTD peptides. Together with the known structure of
Ctk1 and Ctk2 homologues, our results lead to a molecular framework for analyzing
the structure and function of the CTDK-I complex.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26219431  [PubMed - in process]


44. Oncogenesis. 2015 Jul 27;4:e161. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.20.

Combined transcriptome studies identify AFF3 as a mediator of the oncogenic
effects of ß-catenin in adrenocortical carcinoma.

Lefèvre L(1), Omeiri H(1), Drougat L(1), Hantel C(2), Giraud M(1), Val P(3),
Rodriguez S(1), Perlemoine K(1), Blugeon C(4), Beuschlein F(2), de Reyniès A(5), 
Rizk-Rabin M(1), Bertherat J(6), Ragazzon B(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France [2] Cnrs, UMR8104, Paris,
France [3] Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France. (2)Endocrine 
Research Unit, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universität
München, Munich, Germany. (3)1] Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal,
GReD, Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 1, France [2] CNRS, UMR 6293, GReD, Aubière Cedex,
France [3] Inserm, U1103, GReD, Aubière Cedex, France. (4)1] Ecole Normale
Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, Plateforme Génomique, Paris,
France [2] Inserm, U1024, Paris, France [3] CNRS, UMR 8197, Paris, France.
(5)Programme Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs, Ligue Nationale Contre Le Cancer,
Paris, France. (6)1] Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France [2] Cnrs,
UMR8104, Paris, France [3] Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
France [4] Department of Endocrinology, Referral Center for Rare Adrenal
Diseases, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Adrenocortical cancer (ACC) is a very aggressive tumor, and genomics studies
demonstrate that the most frequent alterations of driver genes in these cancers
activate the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. However, the adrenal-specific
targets of oncogenic ß-catenin-mediating tumorigenesis have not being
established. A combined transcriptomic analysis from two series of human tumors
and the human ACC cell line H295R harboring a spontaneous ß-catenin activating
mutation was done to identify the Wnt/ß-catenin targets. Seven genes were
consistently identified in the three studies. Among these genes, we found that
AFF3 mediates the oncogenic effects of ß-catenin in ACC. The Wnt response element
site located at nucleotide position -1408 of the AFF3 transcriptional start sites
(TSS) mediates the regulation by the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. AFF3
silencing decreases cell proliferation and increases apoptosis in the ACC cell
line H295R. AFF3 is located in nuclear speckles, which play an important role in 
RNA splicing. AFF3 overexpression in adrenocortical cells interferes with the
organization and/or biogenesis of these nuclear speckles and alters the
distribution of CDK9 and cyclin T1 such that they accumulate at the sites of
AFF3/speckles. We demonstrate that AFF3 is a new target of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway 
involved in ACC, acting on transcription and RNA splicing.

PMCID: PMC4521181
PMID: 26214578  [PubMed]


45. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Oct;14(10):2701-21. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.049221. Epub 
2015 Jul 24.

Systematic Determination of Human Cyclin Dependent Kinase (CDK)-9 Interactome
Identifies Novel Functions in RNA Splicing Mediated by the DEAD Box (DDX)-5/17
RNA Helicases.

Yang J(1), Zhao Y(1), Kalita M(2), Li X(3), Jamaluddin M(4), Tian B(1), Edeh
CB(5), Wiktorowicz JE(6), Kudlicki A(6), Brasier AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Internal Medicine; §Sealy Center for Molecular
Medicine; ¶Institute for Translational Sciences; (2)§Sealy Center for Molecular
Medicine; ¶Institute for Translational Sciences; (3)¶Institute for Translational 
Sciences; <U+2016>Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas. (4)From the Department of Internal Medicine;
¶Institute for Translational Sciences; (5)From the Department of Internal
Medicine; (6)§Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine; ¶Institute for Translational
Sciences; <U+2016>Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas. (7)From the Department of Internal Medicine;
§Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine; ¶Institute for Translational Sciences;
arbrasie@utmb.edu.

Inducible transcriptional elongation is a rapid, stereotypic mechanism for
activating immediate early immune defense genes by the epithelium in response to 
viral pathogens. Here, the recruitment of a multifunctional complex containing
the cyclin dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) triggers the process of transcriptional
elongation activating resting RNA polymerase engaged with innate immune response 
(IIR) genes. To identify additional functional activity of the CDK9 complex, we
conducted immunoprecipitation (IP) enrichment-stable isotope labeling LC-MS/MS of
the CDK9 complex in unstimulated cells and from cells activated by a synthetic
dsRNA, polyinosinic/polycytidylic acid [poly (I:C)]. 245 CDK9 interacting
proteins were identified with high confidence in the basal state and 20 proteins 
in four functional classes were validated by IP-SRM-MS. These data identified
that CDK9 interacts with DDX 5/17, a family of ATP-dependent RNA helicases,
important in alternative RNA splicing of NFAT5, and mH2A1 mRNA two proteins
controlling redox signaling. A direct comparison of the basal versus activated
state was performed using stable isotope labeling and validated by IP-SRM-MS.
Recruited into the CDK9 interactome in response to poly(I:C) stimulation are
HSPB1, DNA dependent kinases, and cytoskeletal myosin proteins that exchange with
60S ribosomal structural proteins. An integrated human CDK9 interactome map was
developed containing all known human CDK9- interacting proteins. These data were 
used to develop a probabilistic global map of CDK9-dependent target genes that
predicted two functional states controlling distinct cellular functions, one
important in immune and stress responses. The CDK9-DDX5/17 complex was shown to
be functionally important by shRNA-mediated knockdown, where differential
accumulation of alternatively spliced NFAT5 and mH2A1 transcripts and alterations
in downstream redox signaling were seen. The requirement of CDK9 for DDX5
recruitment to NFAT5 and mH2A1 chromatin target was further demonstrated using
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). These data indicate that CDK9 is a dynamic 
multifunctional enzyme complex mediating not only transcriptional elongation, but
also alternative RNA splicing and potentially translational control.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4597146 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26209609  [PubMed - in process]


46. Biochem J. 2015 Sep 15;470(3):293-302. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150700. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

The miRNA miR-34a enhances HIV-1 replication by targeting PNUTS/PPP1R10, which
negatively regulates HIV-1 transcriptional complex formation.

Kapoor R(1), Arora S(1), Ponia SS(1), Kumar B(1), Maddika S(2), Banerjea AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi,
India. (2)Laboratory of Cell Death & Cell Survival, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting
and Diagnostics (CDFD), Nampally, Hyderabad, India. (3)Laboratory of Virology,
National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi, India akhil@nii.res.in
akhil_banerjea@yahoo.com.

HIV-1 relies heavily on the host cellular machinery for its replication. During
infection, HIV-1 is known to modulate the host-cell miRNA profile. One of the
miRNAs, miR-34a, is up-regulated by HIV-1 in T-cells as suggested by miRNA
microarray studies. However, the functional consequences and the mechanism behind
this phenomenon were not explored. The present study shows that HIV-1 enhances
miR-34a in a time-dependent manner in T-cells. Our overexpression and
knockdown-based experimental results suggest that miR-34a promotes HIV-1
replication in T-cells. Hence, there is a positive feedback loop between miR-34a 
and HIV-1 replication. We show that the mechanism of action of miR-34a in HIV-1
replication involves a cellular protein, the phosphatase 1 nuclear-targeting
subunit (PNUTS). PNUTS expression levels decrease with the progression of HIV-1
infection in T-cells. Also, the overexpression of PNUTS potently inhibits HIV-1
replication in a dose-dependent manner. We report for the first time that PNUTS
negatively regulates HIV-1 transcription by inhibiting the assembly of core
components of the transcription elongation factor P-TEFb, i.e. cyclin T1 and
CDK9. Thus, HIV-1 increases miR-34a expression in cells to overcome the
inhibitory effect of PNUTS on HIV-1 transcription. So, the present study provides
new mechanistic details with regard to our understanding of a complex interplay
between miR-34a and the HIV-1 transcription machinery involving PNUTS.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 26188041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Elife. 2015 Jul 17;4:e09993. doi: 10.7554/eLife.09993.

Correction: Compensatory induction of MYC expression by sustained CDK9 inhibition
via a BRD4-dependent mechanism.

Lu H, Xue Y, Yu GK, Arias C, Lin J, Fong S, Faure M, Weisburd B, Ji X, Mercier A,
Sutton J, Luo K, Gao Z, Zhou Q.

Erratum for
    Elife. 2015;4:e06535. Xue, Yuahua [corrected to Xue, Yuhua].

PMCID: PMC4502752
PMID: 26186095  [PubMed]


48. Retrovirology. 2015 Jul 16;12:63. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0190-4.

Reactivation of latent HIV-1 provirus via targeting protein phosphatase-1.

Tyagi M(1), Iordanskiy S(2), Ammosova T(3,)(4,)(5), Kumari N(6), Smith K(7),
Breuer D(8), Ilatovskiy AV(9,)(10), Kont YS(11), Ivanov A(12), Üren A(13),
Kovalskyy D(14), Petukhov M(15,)(16), Kashanchi F(17), Nekhai S(18,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The George Washington University, Washington, DC,
2003, USA. tmudit@email.gwu.edu. (2)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious
Diseases, George Mason University, Manassas, VA, 20110, USA. siordans@gmu.edu.
(3)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, 1840 7th Street, N.W.
HURB1, Suite 202, Washington, DC, 20059, USA. tatiana.ammosova@howard.edu.
(4)Department of Medicine, Howard University, Washington, DC, 20059, USA.
tatiana.ammosova@howard.edu. (5)Yakut Science Center for Complex Medical
Problems, Yakutsk, 677019, Russia. tatiana.ammosova@howard.edu. (6)Center for
Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, 1840 7th Street, N.W. HURB1, Suite 202,
Washington, DC, 20059, USA. namita.kumari@howard.edu. (7)Center for Sickle Cell
Disease, Howard University, 1840 7th Street, N.W. HURB1, Suite 202, Washington,
DC, 20059, USA. KASmith8403@aol.com. (8)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard
University, 1840 7th Street, N.W. HURB1, Suite 202, Washington, DC, 20059, USA.
denitra.breuer@gmail.com. (9)Division of Molecular and Radiation Biophysics,
Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, Russia. andreyi@omrb.pnpi.spb.ru.
(10)Instiute of Nanobiotechnologies, St. Petersburg State Polytechnical
University, St. Petersburg, Russia. andreyi@omrb.pnpi.spb.ru. (11)Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, 20057, USA.
ys452@georgetown.edu. (12)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, 1840
7th Street, N.W. HURB1, Suite 202, Washington, DC, 20059, USA.
Andrei.ivanov@howard.edu. (13)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, 20057, USA. au26@georgetown.edu. (14)Department of
Biochemistry and Cancer Therapy and Research Center, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX, 78229,
USA. d.kovalskyy@gmail.com. (15)Division of Molecular and Radiation Biophysics,
Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina, Russia.
michael.petukhov@yandex.ru. (16)Instiute of Nanobiotechnologies, St. Petersburg
State Polytechnical University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
michael.petukhov@yandex.ru. (17)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious
Diseases, George Mason University, Manassas, VA, 20110, USA. fkashanc@gmu.edu.
(18)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, 1840 7th Street, N.W.
HURB1, Suite 202, Washington, DC, 20059, USA. snekhai@howard.edu. (19)Department 
of Medicine, Howard University, Washington, DC, 20059, USA. snekhai@howard.edu.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 escapes antiretroviral drugs by integrating into the host DNA
and forming a latent transcriptionally silent HIV-1 provirus. This provirus
presents the major hurdle in HIV-1 eradication and cure. Transcriptional
activation, which is prerequisite for reactivation and the eradication of latent 
proviruses, is impaired in latently infected T cells due to the lack of host
transcription factors, primarily NF-<U+03BA>B and P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T1). We and others
previously showed that protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) regulates HIV-1 transcription 
by modulating CDK9 phosphorylation. Recently we have developed a panel of small
molecular compounds targeting a non-catalytic site of PP1.
RESULTS: Here we generated a new class of sulfonamide-containing compounds that
activated HIV-1 in acute and latently infected cells. Among the tested molecules,
a small molecule activator of PP1 (SMAPP1) induced both HIV-1 replication and
reactivation of latent HIV-1 in chronically infected cultured and primary cells. 
In vitro, SMAPP1 interacted with PP1 and increased PP1 activity toward a
recombinant substrate. Treatment with SMAPP1 increased phosphorylation of CDK9's 
Ser90 and Thr186 residues, but not Ser175. Proteomic analysis showed upregulation
of P-TEFb and PP1 related proteins, including PP1 regulatory subunit Sds22 in
SMAPP1-treated T cells. Docking analysis identified a PP1 binding site for SMAPP1
located within the C-terminal binding pocket of PP1.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel class of PP1-targeting compounds that
reactivate latent HIV-1 provirus by targeting PP1, increasing CDK9
phosphorylation and enhancing HIV transcription. This compound represents a novel
candidate for anti-HIV-1 therapeutics aiming at eradication of latent HIV-1
reservoirs.

PMCID: PMC4504130
PMID: 26178009  [PubMed - in process]


49. Am J Blood Res. 2015 Jun 15;5(1):10-24. eCollection 2015.

AF4 and AF4N protein complexes: recruitment of P-TEFb kinase, their interactome
and potential functions.

Scholz B(1), Kowarz E(1), Rössler T(1), Ahmad K(2), Steinhilber D(2), Marschalek 
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, Goethe-University of Frankfurt Biocenter,
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany. (2)Institute of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University of Frankfurt Biocenter,
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

AF4/AFF1 and AF5/AFF4 are the molecular backbone to assemble "super-elongation
complexes" (SECs) that have two main functions: (1) control of transcriptional
elongation by recruiting the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb =
CyclinT1/CDK9) that is usually stored in inhibitory 7SK RNPs; (2) binding of
different histone methyltransferases, like DOT1L, NSD1 and CARM1. This way,
transcribed genes obtain specific histone signatures (e.g. H3K79me2/3, H3K36me2) 
to generate a transcriptional memory system. Here we addressed several questions:
how is P-TEFb recruited into SEC, how is the AF4 interactome composed, and what
is the function of the naturally occuring AF4N protein variant which exhibits
only the first 360 amino acids of the AF4 full-length protein. Noteworthy,
shorter protein variants are a specific feature of all AFF protein family
members. Here, we demonstrate that full-length AF4 and AF4N are both catalyzing
the transition of P-TEFb from 7SK RNP to their N-terminal domain. We have also
mapped the protein-protein interaction network within both complexes. In
addition, we have first evidence that the AF4N protein also recruits TFIIH and
the tumor suppressor MEN1. This indicate that AF4N may have additional functions 
in transcriptional initiation and in MEN1-dependend transcriptional processes.

PMCID: PMC4497493
PMID: 26171280  [PubMed]


50. Elife. 2015 Jun 17;4:e06535. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06535.

Compensatory induction of MYC expression by sustained CDK9 inhibition via a
BRD4-dependent mechanism.

Lu H(1), Xue Y, Yu GK(3), Arias C(3), Lin J(3), Fong S(3), Faure M(3), Weisburd
B(3), Ji X(1), Mercier A(3), Sutton J(3), Luo K(1), Gao Z(3), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, United States. (2)Innovation Center of Cell Signaling Network, School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. (3)Novartis
Institute for BioMedical Research, Emeryville, United States.

Erratum in
    Elife. 2015;4:e09993. Xue, Yuahua [corrected to Xue, Yuhua].

CDK9 is the kinase subunit of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb)
that enables RNA polymerase (Pol) II's transition from promoter-proximal pausing 
to productive elongation. Although considerable interest exists in CDK9 as a
therapeutic target, little progress has been made due to lack of highly selective
inhibitors. Here, we describe the development of i-CDK9 as such an inhibitor that
potently suppresses CDK9 phosphorylation of substrates and causes genome-wide Pol
II pausing. While most genes experience reduced expression, MYC and other primary
response genes increase expression upon sustained i-CDK9 treatment. Essential for
this increase, the bromodomain protein BRD4 captures P-TEFb from 7SK snRNP to
deliver to target genes and also enhances CDK9's activity and resistance to
inhibition. Because the i-CDK9-induced MYC expression and binding to P-TEFb
compensate for P-TEFb's loss of activity, only simultaneously inhibiting CDK9 and
MYC/BRD4 can efficiently induce growth arrest and apoptosis of cancer cells,
suggesting the potential of a combinatorial treatment strategy.

PMCID: PMC4490784
PMID: 26083714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. AIDS. 2015 Jun 19;29(10):1147-59. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000691.

A new model for post-integration latency in macroglial cells to study HIV-1
reservoirs of the brain.

Schneider M(1), Tigges B, Meggendorfer M, Helfer M, Ziegenhain C, Brack-Werner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Macroglial cells like astrocytes are key targets for the formation of 
HIV-1 reservoirs in the brain. The 'shock-and-kill' HIV-1 cure strategy proposes 
eradication of reservoirs by clinical treatment with latency reversing agents
(LRAs). However, virus activation may endanger the brain, due to limited cell
turnover, viral neurotoxicity and poor penetration of antiretroviral drugs. Since
the brain is not accessible to clinical sampling, we established an experimental 
model to investigate the LRA effects on HIV-1 latency in macroglial reservoirs.
DESIGN: Human neural stem cells (HNSC.100) were used to generate a system that
models HIV-1 transcriptional latency in proliferating progenitor, as well as
differentiated macroglial cell populations and latency-modulating effects of LRAs
and compounds targeting HIV-1 transcription were analysed.
METHODS: HNSCs were infected with pseudotyped Env-defective HIV-1 viruses. HIV-1 
DNA and RNA levels were quantified by qPCR. Expression of latent GFP-reporter
viruses was analysed by confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. NF-<U+03BA>B signalling 
was investigated by confocal microscopy and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Two of the eight well known LRAs (tumour necrosis factor-alpha,
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) reactivated HIV-1 in latently infected HNSCs.
Tumour necrosis factor-alpha reactivated HIV-1 in progenitor and differentiated
populations, whereas suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid was more potent in
progenitors. Pre-treatment with inhibitors of key HIV-1 transcription factors
(NF-<U+03BA>B, Cdk9) suppressed HIV-1 reactivation.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that latent HIV-1 in macroglial reservoirs can be
activated by selected LRAs. Identification of small molecules that suppress HIV-1
reactivation supports functional cure strategies. We propose using the HNSC model
to develop novel strategies to enforce provirus quiescence in the brain.

PMID: 26035317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2015 May 26;10(5):e0126654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126654.
eCollection 2015.

A Function for the hnRNP A1/A2 Proteins in Transcription Elongation.

Lemieux B(1), Blanchette M(2), Monette A(3), Mouland AJ(3), Wellinger RJ(1),
Chabot B(1).

Author information: 
(1)RNA group and Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada. (2)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United 
States of America. (3)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research-Sir Mortimer B.
Davis Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The hnRNP A1 and A2 proteins regulate processes such as alternative pre-mRNA
splicing and mRNA stability. Here, we report that a reduction in the levels of
hnRNP A1 and A2 by RNA interference or their cytoplasmic retention by osmotic
stress drastically increases the transcription of a reporter gene. Based on
previous work, we propose that this effect may be linked to a decrease in the
activity of the transcription elongation factor P-TEFb. Consistent with this
hypothesis, the transcription of the reporter gene was stimulated when the
catalytic component of P-TEFb, CDK9, was inhibited with DRB. While low levels of 
A1/A2 stimulated the association of RNA polymerase II with the reporter gene,
they also increased the association of CDK9 with the repressor 7SK RNA, and
compromised the recovery of promoter-distal transcription on the Kitlg gene after
the release of pausing. Transcriptome analysis revealed that more than 50% of the
genes whose expression was affected by the siRNA-mediated depletion of A1/A2 were
also affected by DRB. RNA polymerase II-chromatin immunoprecipitation assays on
DRB-treated and A1/A2-depleted cells identified a common set of repressed genes
displaying increased occupancy of polymerases at promoter-proximal locations,
consistent with pausing. Overall, our results suggest that lowering the levels of
hnRNP A1/A2 elicits defective transcription elongation on a fraction of
P-TEFb-dependent genes, hence favoring the transcription of P-TEFb-independent
genes.

PMCID: PMC4444011
PMID: 26011126  [PubMed - in process]


53. PLoS One. 2015 May 20;10(5):e0126535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126535.
eCollection 2015.

MiR-191 Regulates Primary Human Fibroblast Proliferation and Directly Targets
Multiple Oncogenes.

Polioudakis D(1), Abell NS(1), Iyer VR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, United States of America.

miRNAs play a central role in numerous pathologies including multiple cancer
types. miR-191 has predominantly been studied as an oncogene, but the role of
miR-191 in the proliferation of primary cells is not well characterized, and the 
miR-191 targetome has not been experimentally profiled. Here we utilized RNA
induced silencing complex immunoprecipitations as well as gene expression
profiling to construct a genome wide miR-191 target profile. We show that miR-191
represses proliferation in primary human fibroblasts, identify multiple
proto-oncogenes as novel miR-191 targets, including CDK9, NOTCH2, and RPS6KA3,
and present evidence that miR-191 extensively mediates target expression through 
coding sequence (CDS) pairing. Our results provide a comprehensive genome wide
miR-191 target profile, and demonstrate miR-191's regulation of primary human
fibroblast proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4439112
PMID: 25992613  [PubMed - in process]


54. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 20;6(17):14926-39.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor dinaciclib potently synergizes with cisplatin
in preclinical models of ovarian cancer.

Chen XX(1), Xie FF(1), Zhu XJ(1), Lin F(1), Pan SS(1), Gong LH(1), Qiu JG(2),
Zhang WJ(2), Jiang QW(2), Mei XL(2), Xue YQ(2), Qin WM(2), Shi Z(2), Yan XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Institute
of Biomedicine, National Engineering Research Center of Genetic Medicine,
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bioengineering Medicine, College of Life
Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal of woman cancers, and its clinical
therapeutic outcome currently is unsatisfied. Dinaciclib, a novel small molecule 
inhibitor of CDK1, CDK2, CDK5 and CDK9, is assessed in clinical trials for the
treatment of several types of cancers. In this study, we investigated the
anticancer effects and mechanisms of dinaciclib alone or combined with cisplatin 
in ovarian cancer. Dinaciclib alone actively induced cell growth inhibition, cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis with the increased intracellular ROS levels, which
were accompanied by obvious alterations of related proteins such as CDKs,
Cyclins, Mcl-1, XIAP and survivin. Pretreatment with N-acety-L-cysteine
significantly blocked ROS generation but only partially rescued apoptosis
triggered by dinaciclib. Moreover, the combination of dinaciclib with cisplatin
synergistically promoted cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, and inhibited the
subcutaneous xenograft growth of ovarian cancer in nude mice. Altogether,
dinaciclib potently synergizes with cisplatin in preclinical models of ovarian
cancer, indicating this beneficial combinational therapy may be a promising
strategy for treatment of ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4558126
PMID: 25962959  [PubMed - in process]


55. Kidney Int. 2015 Aug;88(2):286-98. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.121. Epub 2015 May 6.

Smad3 deficiency protects mice from obesity-induced podocyte injury that precedes
insulin resistance.

Sun YB(1), Qu X(1), Howard V(2), Dai L(3), Jiang X(4), Ren Y(5), Fu P(6), Puelles
VG(1), Nikolic-Paterson DJ(7), Caruana G(1), Bertram JF(1), Sleeman MW(2), Li
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC, Australia. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia [2] Department of Physiology, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (3)Department of Rheumatology, Sun Yat-Sen
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (5)Florida State University
College of Medicine, Tallahassee, Florida, USA. (6)Division of Nephrology,
Department of Internal Medicine, West China Hospital of Sichuan University,
Chengdu, People's Republic of China. (7)Department of Nephrology, Monash Health
and Monash University Department of Medicine, Clayton, VIC, Australia.

Signaling by TGF-ß/Smad3 plays a key role in renal fibrosis. As obesity is one of
the major risk factors of chronic and end-stage renal disease, we studied the
role of Smad3 signaling in the pathogenesis of obesity-related renal disease.
After switching to a high fat diet, the onset of Smad3 C-terminal
phosphorylation, increase in albuminuria, and the early stages of peripheral and 
renal insulin resistance occurred at 1 day, and 4 and 8 weeks, respectively, in
C57BL/6 mice. The loss of synaptopodin, a functional marker of podocytes, and
phosphorylation of the Smad3 linker region (T179 and S213) appeared after 4 weeks
of the high fat diet. This suggests a temporal pattern of Smad3 signaling
activation leading to kidney injury and subsequent insulin resistance in the
development of obesity-related renal disease. In vivo, Smad3 knockout attenuated 
the high fat diet-induced proteinuria, renal fibrosis, overall podocyte injury,
and mitochondrial dysfunction in podocytes. In vitro palmitate caused a rapid
activation of Smad3 in 30<U+2009>min, loss of synaptopodin in 2 days, and impaired
insulin signaling in 3 days in isolated mouse podocytes. Blockade of either Smad3
phosphorylation by SIS3 (a Smad3 inhibitor) or T179 phosphorylation by
flavopiridol (a CDK9 inhibitor) prevented the palmitate-induced loss of
synaptopodin and mitochondrial function in podocytes. Thus, Smad3 signaling plays
essential roles in obesity-related renal disease and may be a novel therapeutic
target.

PMID: 25945408  [PubMed - in process]


56. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Jul 1;96(1):52-64. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.04.019. Epub
2015 Apr 28.

JAK1/STAT3 activation directly inhibits IL-12 production in dendritic cells by
preventing CDK9/P-TEFb recruitment to the p35 promoter.

Wagner AH(1), Conzelmann M(2), Fitzer F(3), Giese T(4), Gülow K(5), Falk CS(6),
Krämer OH(7), Dietrich S(2), Hecker M(3), Luft T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Dept of Cardiovascular
Physiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 326, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany. Electronic address: a.wagner@physiologie.uni-heidelberg.de. (2)Dept of
Medicine V, University Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 672, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Dept of
Cardiovascular Physiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 326,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Institute of Immunology, University of Heidelberg, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 305, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)German Cancer Research
Centre (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Division of Immunogenetics (D030), Neuenheimer Feld
280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Institute for Transplantation Immunology,
IFB-Tx, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(7)Institute of Toxicology, Medical Center of the University Mainz,
Langenbeckstraße 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany.

Inhibition of Janus-activated kinase-1 (JAK1) is a promising clinical concept for
post-transplant immunosuppression and autoimmunity. However, it also raises
concerns regarding possible immunosuppressive side effects. Our study
investigates JAK1 signalling in the context of CD40L and bacterially activated
human MoDC using siRNA and biological inhibitors. We demonstrate that strong
stimuli (e.g. intact Escherichia coli or LPS in addition to IL-1ß) induce
IL-12p70 via a ROS/RELA/CDK9 pathway that is inhibited by simultaneous JAK1/STAT3
signalling. Transcription is effective if RELA recruits the positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) component CDK9 to a combined
RELA/STAT3 binding site -50 to -20bp upstream of the start site of the IL-12p35
promoter. STAT3 simultaneously attaches to this site and inhibits CDK9 binding.
In the presence of IFN<U+03B3>, JAK1/2 inhibitors block STAT1/IRF1/IRF8-dependent
activation and simultaneously enhance CDK9-dependent activation signals. This
inverse regulation of IFN<U+03B3>- vs. E. coli-induced cytokine production by JAK
inhibitors including Ruxolitinib was similarly observed for IL-6 and TNF-a
production, but not for IL-10 production. Thus, JAK1 inhibition enhances IL-12p70
production in this context by increased DNA binding of CDK9. In contrast, weak
RELA-activation signals (CD40L, LPS) depended on IFN-<U+03B3> induced STAT1/IRF1/IRF8
co-signalling, which was completely blocked by JAK inhibitors as reported before.
Our results suggest a novel molecular mechanism of how cytokine responses to
invading pathogens are separable from IFN<U+03B3>-dependent autoimmunity by targeting
JAK1/STAT3 activation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25931145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Medchemcomm. 2015 Mar 1;6(3):444-454.

Discovery of novel 5-fluoro-N (2),N (4)-diphenylpyrimidine-2,4-diamines as potent
inhibitors against CDK2 and CDK9.

Gao J(1), Fang C(1), Xiao Z(1), Huang L(2), Chen CH(2), Wang LT(3), Lee KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Active Substance Discovery and Druggability
Evaluation, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Department of Surgery,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. (3)Natural Products
Research Laboratories, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7568, USA. (4)Natural Products
Research Laboratories, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7568, USA ; Chinese Medicine Research
and Development Center, China Medical University and Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Based on a 3D-QSAR pharmacophore derived from a diverse set of known
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) inhibitors and a composite pharmacophore
extracted from the complex structure of flavopiridol (FVP)-CDK9, thirty novel
5-fluoro-N (2),N (4)-diphenylpyrimidine-2,4-diamine derivatives were designed and
synthesized. Initial tests against four tumor cell lines with the sulforhodamine 
B (SRB) assay identified a series of potent compounds with GI50 values at lower
micromolar or submicromolar level. Most of the highly cytotoxic compounds
exhibited potent inhibitory activities against both CDK2/cyclin E1 and
CDK9/cyclin T1. Notably, inhibitions against the two enzymes were generally
correlated well with the cytotoxicity of these compounds. Appreciable inhibition 
was also observed for selected compounds in the anti-HIV-1 assay. Docking studies
on compounds 6d and 9g provided conducive clues to further structural
optimization.

PMCID: PMC4406325
PMID: 25914804  [PubMed]


58. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 24;10(4):e0124673. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124673.
eCollection 2015.

Determining the Functions of HIV-1 Tat and a Second Magnesium Ion in the
CDK9/Cyclin T1 Complex: A Molecular Dynamics Simulation Study.

Jin HX(1), Go ML(2), Yin P(3), Qiu XT(1), Zhu P(1), Yan XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biotechnology Ministry of Education, School
of Marine Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Key Laboratory of
Chemical Biology and Traditional Chinese Medicine Research (Ministry of
Education), College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, China.

The current paradigm of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) regulation based on the
well-established CDK2 has been recently expanded. The determination of CDK9
crystal structures suggests the requirement of an additional regulatory protein, 
such as human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat, to exert its
physiological functions. In most kinases, the exact number and roles of the
cofactor metal ions remain unappreciated, and the repertoire has thus gained
increasing attention recently. Here, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were
implemented on CDK9 to explore the functional roles of HIV-1 Tat and the second
Mg2+ ion at site 1 (Mg12+). The simulations unveiled that binding of HIV-1 Tat to
CDK9 not only stabilized hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) between ATP and hinge residues 
Asp104 and Cys106, as well as between ATP and invariant Lys48, but also
facilitated the salt bridge network pertaining to the phosphorylated Thr186 at
the activation loop. By contrast, these H-bonds cannot be formed in CDK9 owing to
the absence of HIV-1 Tat. MD simulations further revealed that the Mg12+ ion,
coupled with the Mg22+ ion, anchored to the triphosphate moiety of ATP in its
catalytic competent conformation. This observation indicates the requirement of
the Mg12+ ion for CDK9 to realize its function. Overall, the introduction of
HIV-1 Tat and Mg12+ ion resulted in the active site architectural characteristics
of phosphorylated CDK9. These data highlighted the functional roles of HIV-1 Tat 
and Mg12+ ion in the regulation of CDK9 activity, which contributes an important 
complementary understanding of CDK molecular underpinnings.

PMCID: PMC4409394
PMID: 25909811  [PubMed - in process]


59. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Jun 1;25(11):2447-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.03.066.
Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Discovery of novel indirubin-3'-monoxime derivatives as potent inhibitors against
CDK2 and CDK9.

Yan L(1), Lai F(2), Chen X(2), Xiao Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Active Substance Discovery and Druggability
Evaluation, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Beijing Key Laboratory of
New Drug Mechanisms and Pharmacological Evaluation Study, Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100050, PR China. (3)Beijing Key Laboratory of Active Substance Discovery
and Druggability Evaluation, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China.
Electronic address: xiaoz@imm.ac.cn.

Indirubin-3'-monoxime (IM) is a potent cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor.
Twenty novel IM derivatives were prepared to investigate the structure-activity
relationships (SAR) of this compound class. Six compounds showed significant
inhibition against both CDK2/cyclin E1 and CDK9/cyclin T1. The most potent
compound 7t exhibited IC50 values at submicromolar level. Preliminary SAR trends 
were suggested and cytotoxicity of these compounds was investigated. Molecular
docking studies on compounds 7l and 7t provided conducive clues for further
structural optimization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25908517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proteomics. 2015 Jun;15(12):2078-86. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201500038. Epub 2015 May
15.

Phosphorylation of HEXIM1 at Tyr271 and Tyr274 Promotes Release of P-TEFb from
the 7SK snRNP Complex and Enhances Proviral HIV Gene Expression.

Mbonye UR(1), Wang B(2), Gokulrangan G(2), Chance MR(2), Karn J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. (2)Center for Proteomics and
Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA.

Efficient HIV transcription requires P-TEFb, an essential co-factor for Tat. In
actively replicating cells, P-TEFb is incorporated into the 7SK snRNP complex
together with the repressor protein HEXIM1. Using an affinity purification-tandem
mass spectrometry approach to identify modification sites on HEXIM1 that regulate
the sequestration of P-TEFb by 7SK snRNP, we found that HEXIM1 can be
phosphorylated on adjacent residues in a region immediately upstream of the
coiled-coil dimerization domain (Ser268, Thr270, Tyr271, and Tyr274).
Phosphomimetic mutations of Tyr271 and Tyr274 disrupted the assembly of P-TEFb
and HEXIM1 into the 7SK snRNP complex. Although Y271E/Y274E did not adversely
affect the nuclear localization pattern of HEXIM1, it induced the redistribution 
of the CDK9 subunit of P-TEFb into the cytoplasm. By contrast, the Y271F/Y274F
HEXIM1 mutant assembled normally with P-TEFb within the 7SK snRNP complex but
severely reduced proviral gene expression in T cells in response to activation
signals and caused a severe growth defect of Jurkat T cells. Thus, Y271F/Y274F,
which cannot be phosphorylated on these residues, appears to block the exchange
of active P-TEFb from the 7SK complex, thereby limiting the level of P-TEFb below
the threshold required to support transcription elongation of the HIV provirus
and cellular genes.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4487608 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25900325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 17;10(4):e0123624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123624.
eCollection 2015.

Evolutionary distance of amino acid sequence orthologs across macaque subspecies:
identifying candidate genes for SIV resistance in Chinese rhesus macaques.

Ross CT(1), Roodgar M(2), Smith DG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Davis. Davis, United
States of America; Molecular Anthropology Laboratory, University of California,
Davis. Davis, United States of America. (2)Molecular Anthropology Laboratory,
University of California, Davis. Davis, United States of America; California
National Primate Research Center, University of California, Davis. Davis, United 
States of America; Graduate Group of Comparative Pathology, University of
California, Davis. Davis, United States of America. (3)Department of
Anthropology, University of California, Davis. Davis, United States of America;
Molecular Anthropology Laboratory, University of California, Davis. Davis, United
States of America; California National Primate Research Center, University of
California, Davis. Davis, United States of America.

We use the Reciprocal Smallest Distance (RSD) algorithm to identify amino acid
sequence orthologs in the Chinese and Indian rhesus macaque draft sequences and
estimate the evolutionary distance between such orthologs. We then use GOanna to 
map gene function annotations and human gene identifiers to the rhesus macaque
amino acid sequences. We conclude methodologically by cross-tabulating a list of 
amino acid orthologs with large divergence scores with a list of genes known to
be involved in SIV or HIV pathogenesis. We find that many of the amino acid
sequences with large evolutionary divergence scores, as calculated by the RSD
algorithm, have been shown to be related to HIV pathogenesis in previous
laboratory studies. Four of the strongest candidate genes for SIVmac resistance
in Chinese rhesus macaques identified in this study are CDK9, CXCL12, TRIM21, and
TRIM32. Additionally, ANKRD30A, CTSZ, GORASP2, GTF2H1, IL13RA1, MUC16, NMDAR1,
Notch1, NT5M, PDCD5, RAD50, and TM9SF2 were identified as possible candidates,
among others. We failed to find many laboratory experiments contrasting the
effects of Indian and Chinese orthologs at these sites on SIVmac pathogenesis,
but future comparative studies might hold fertile ground for research into the
biological mechanisms underlying innate resistance to SIVmac in Chinese rhesus
macaques.

PMCID: PMC4401517
PMID: 25884674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Leukemia. 2015 Aug;29(8):1702-12. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.99. Epub 2015 Apr 17.

Synergistic induction of apoptosis in high-risk DLBCL by BCL2 inhibition with
ABT-199 combined with pharmacologic loss of MCL1.

Li L(1), Pongtornpipat P(1), Tiutan T(2), Kendrick SL(3), Park S(4), Persky
DO(4), Rimsza LM(3), Puvvada SD(4), Schatz JH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bio5 Institute, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(2)College of Medicine, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA. 
(5)1] Bio5 Institute, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA [2]
Department of Medicine, University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ, USA [3] 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Arizona Cancer Center,
Tucson, AZ, USA.

Better treatments are needed for patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) at high risk of failing standard therapy. Avoiding apoptosis is a
hallmark of cancer, and in DLBCL the redundantly functioning antiapoptotic
proteins BCL2 and MCL1 are frequently expressed. Here we explore drugs that cause
loss of MCL1, particularly the potent new cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
dinaciclib, which knocks down MCL1 by inhibiting CDK9. Dinaciclib induces
apoptosis in DLBCL cells but is completely overcome by increased activity of
BCL2. We find that clinical samples have frequent co-expression of MCL1 and BCL2,
suggesting that therapeutic strategies targeting only one will lead to treatment 
failures owing to activity of the other. The BH3 mimetic ABT-199 potently and
specifically targets BCL2. Single-agent ABT-199 had modest antitumor activity
against most DLBCL lines and resulted in compensatory upregulation of MCL1
expression. ABT-199 synergized strongly, however, when combined with dinaciclib
and with other drugs affecting MCL1, including standard DLBCL chemotherapy drugs.
We show potent antitumor activities of these combinations in xenografts and in a 
genetically accurate murine model of MYC-BCL2 double-hit lymphoma. In sum, we
reveal a rational treatment paradigm to strip DLBCL of its protection from
apoptosis and improve outcomes for high-risk patients.

PMCID: PMC4526343
PMID: 25882699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 May;22(5):396-403. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3000. Epub 2015
Apr 6.

CDK9 inhibitors define elongation checkpoints at both ends of RNA polymerase
II-transcribed genes.

Laitem C(1), Zaborowska J(1), Isa NF(2), Kufs J(3), Dienstbier M(4), Murphy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (2)1] 
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. [2]
Department of Biotechnology, International Islamic University Malaysia, Pahang,
Malaysia. (3)Faculty of Science, Brandenburg University of Technology
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Senftenberg, Germany. (4)Computational Genomics Analysis and
Training Programme, Medical Research Council Functional Genomics Unit, Department
of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 May;22(5):353-5.

Transcription through early-elongation checkpoints requires phosphorylation of
negative transcription elongation factors (NTEFs) by the cyclin-dependent kinase 
(CDK) 9. Using CDK9 inhibitors and global run-on sequencing (GRO-seq), we have
mapped CDK9 inhibitor-sensitive checkpoints genome wide in human cells. Our data 
indicate that early-elongation checkpoints are a general feature of RNA
polymerase (pol) II-transcribed human genes and occur independently of polymerase
stalling. Pol II that has negotiated the early-elongation checkpoint can elongate
in the presence of inhibitors but, remarkably, terminates transcription
prematurely close to the terminal polyadenylation (poly(A)) site. Our analysis
has revealed an unexpected poly(A)-associated elongation checkpoint, which has
major implications for the regulation of gene expression. Interestingly, the
pattern of modification of the C-terminal domain of pol II terminated at this new
checkpoint largely mirrors the pattern normally found downstream of the poly(A)
site, thus suggesting common mechanisms of termination.

PMCID: PMC4424039
PMID: 25849141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2015 Jul;15(7):392-7. doi:
10.1016/j.clml.2015.02.021. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

A phase II, single-arm, open-label, multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy
and safety of P276-00, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, in patients with
relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma.

Cassaday RD(1), Goy A(2), Advani S(3), Chawla P(4), Nachankar R(4), Gandhi M(4), 
Gopal AK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, and
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA. 
(2)John Theurer Cancer Center, Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, 
NJ. (3)Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre, Mumbai, India. (4)Piramal Enterprises
Limited, Mumbai, India. (5)Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, and Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA. Electronic address: agopal@uw.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of cyclin D1 is a hallmark feature of mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL). Many of the oncogenic effects of cyclin D1 are mediated through
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). P276-00 is a potent small molecule inhibitor of 
CDK4-D1, CDK1-B, and CDK9-T, with promising activity in preclinical models. In
phase I studies of P276-00 in patients with refractory solid neoplasms, it was
well-tolerated with a mild trend toward single-agent efficacy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A phase II study of P276-00 was conducted in patients with 
relapsed or refractory MCL at the recommended dose of 185 mg/m(2)/day from days 1
to 5 of a 21-day cycle. Thirteen patients were enrolled in the present study.
RESULTS: Of the 13 patients, 11 experienced disease progression, 1 patient was
withdrawn because of an adverse event (AE), and 1 patient died. Also, 11 patients
(84.6%) experienced a treatment-emergent AE deemed related to P276-00. Of the 13 
patients, 9 (69.2%) received = 2 cycles of treatment, which was the predefined
threshold to be evaluable for efficacy. Treatment was discontinued early in 2
patients because of AEs (1 of which was attributed to P276-00 administration) and
in 2 patients because of disease progression. Finally, 2 patients experienced
stable disease for an estimated median duration of 60.5 days (range, 58-63 days).
The estimated median time to progression for the predefined efficacy population
was 43 days (range, 38-58 days).
CONCLUSION: Given the results observed in the present study, if evaluation of CDK
inhibition in MCL continues, it should be considered earlier in the disease
course or as a part of combination strategies for relapsed or refractory disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4484300 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25816934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 13;11(2):e1004971. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004971.
eCollection 2015.

P-TEFb, the super elongation complex and mediator regulate a subset of non-paused
genes during early Drosophila embryo development.

Dahlberg O(1), Shilkova O(1), Tang M(2), Holmqvist PH(1), Mannervik M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Molecular Biosciences, the Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Dept. Molecular Biosciences, the Wenner-Gren Institute,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden; Dept. Biochemistry & Biology, South
China University, Hengyang, Hunan Province, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1005319.

Positive Transcription Elongation Factor b (P-TEFb) is a kinase consisting of
Cdk9 and Cyclin T that releases RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) into active
elongation. It can assemble into a larger Super Elongation Complex (SEC)
consisting of additional elongation factors. Here, we use a miRNA-based approach 
to knock down the maternal contribution of P-TEFb and SEC components in early
Drosophila embryos. P-TEFb or SEC depletion results in loss of cells from the
embryo posterior and in cellularization defects. Interestingly, the expression of
many patterning genes containing promoter-proximal paused Pol II is relatively
normal in P-TEFb embryos. Instead, P-TEFb and SEC are required for expression of 
some non-paused, rapidly transcribed genes in pre-cellular embryos, including the
cellularization gene Serendipity-a. We also demonstrate that another P-TEFb
regulated gene, terminus, has an essential function in embryo development.
Similar morphological and gene expression phenotypes were observed upon knock
down of Mediator subunits, providing in vivo evidence that P-TEFb, the SEC and
Mediator collaborate in transcription control. Surprisingly, P-TEFb depletion
does not affect the ratio of Pol II at the promoter versus the 3' end, despite
affecting global Pol II Ser2 phosphorylation levels. Instead, Pol II occupancy is
reduced at P-TEFb down-regulated genes. We conclude that a subset of non-paused, 
pre-cellular genes are among the most susceptible to reduced P-TEFb, SEC and
Mediator levels in Drosophila embryos.

PMCID: PMC4334199
PMID: 25679530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2015;15(3):196-204.

Dual Inhibition of Cdc7 and Cdk9 by PHA-767491 Suppresses Hepatocarcinoma
Synergistically with 5-Fluorouracil.

Li W, Zhao XL, Shang SQ, Shen HQ, Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)No. 57 Zhu Gan Xiang, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, China. chchenxi@zju.edu.cn.

Activation of checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) is essential in chemoresistance of
hepatocarcinoma (HCC) to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and other antimetabolite family of
drugs. In this study, we demonstrated that PHA-767491, a dual inhibitor of two
cell cycle checkpoint kinases, cell division cycle kinase 7 (Cdc7) and
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), has synergistic antitumor effect with 5-FU to
suppress human HCC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Compared with the sole use of
each agent, PHA-767491 in combination with 5-FU exhibited much stronger
cytotoxicity and induced significant apoptosis manifested by remarkably increased
caspase 3 activation and poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase fragmentation in HCC cells. 
PHA-767491 directly counteracted the 5-FU-induced phosphorylation of Chk1, a
substrate of Cdc7; and decreased the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein
myeloid leukemia cell 1, a downstream target of Cdk9. In tumor tissues sectioned 
from nude mice HCC xenografts, administration of PHA-767491 also decreased Chk1
phosphorylation and increased in situ cell apoptosis. Our study suggests that
PHA- 767491 could enhance the efficacy of 5-FU by inhibiting Chk1 phosphorylation
and down-regulating Mcl1 expression through inhibition of Cdc7 and Cdk9, thus
combinational administration of PHA-767491 with 5-FU could be potentially
beneficial to patients with advanced and resistant HCC.

PMID: 25643258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Vet Comp Oncol. 2015 Jan 26. doi: 10.1111/vco.12130. [Epub ahead of print]

Investigation of the cytotoxic effect of flavopiridol in canine lymphoma cell
lines.

Ema Y(1), Igase M, Takeda Y, Yanase T, Umeki S, Hiraoka H, Okuda M, Mizuno T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Joint Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan.

The cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor, flavopiridol, was tested as a
potential new cancer therapeutic agent to treat canine lymphoma by examining its 
effect on cell growth of canine lymphoma cell lines in vitro. Flavopiridol
induced profound cell death in all eight lymphoma cell lines at 400<U+2009>nM, and in
all cases cell death was due to apoptosis. Apoptosis was inhibited by caspase
inhibitor, despite the variable sensitivities between cell lines. Analysis of the
mechanism of flavopiridol-induced apoptosis showed that Rb phosphorylation was
inhibited, possibly due to CDK4 or CDK6 inhibition. There was also decreased
expression of Rb protein and anti-apoptotic proteins, Mcl-1 and XIAP, possibly
through transcriptional regulation by inhibition of CDK7 or CDK9 activation.
Canine lymphoma cell line-xenotransplanted mice were then treated with
flavopiridol and profound tumour shrinkage was observed. This study describes a
new therapeutic approach using flavopiridol for canine lymphoma treatment.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25623777  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


68. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):2667-79.

Up-regulation of CDK9 kinase activity and Mcl-1 stability contributes to the
acquired resistance to cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in leukemia.

Yeh YY(1), Chen R(2), Hessler J(1), Mahoney E(1), Lehman AM(3), Heerema NA(4),
Grever MR(1), Plunkett W(2), Byrd JC(1,)(5), Johnson AJ(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (2)Department of
Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. (3)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. (5)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Flavopiridol is a small molecule inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK)
known to impair global transcription via inactivation of positive transcription
elongation factor b. It has been demonstrated to have significant activity
predominantly in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia in phase
I/II clinical trials while other similar CDK inhibitors are vigorously being
pursued in pre-clinical and clinical studies. Although flavopiridol is a potent
therapeutic agent against blood diseases, some patients still have primary or
acquired resistance throughout their clinical course. Considering the limited
knowledge of resistance mechanisms of flavopiridol, we investigated the potential
mechanisms of resistance to flavopiridol in a cell line system, which gradually
acquired resistance to flavopiridol in vitro, and then confirmed the mechanism in
patient samples. Herein, we present that this resistant cell line developed
resistance through up-regulation of phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II
C-terminal domain, activation of CDK9 kinase activity, and prolonged Mcl-1
stability to counter flavopiridol's drug actions. Further analyses suggest
MAPK/ERK activation-mediated Mcl-1 stabilization contributes to the resistance
and knockdown of Mcl-1 in part restores sensitivity to flavopiridol-induced
cytotoxicity. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that CDK9 is the most
relevant target of flavopiridol and provide avenues to improve the therapeutic
strategies in blood malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4413609
PMID: 25596730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leukemia. 2015 Jun;29(6):1437-41. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.10. Epub 2014 Jan 12.

CDK9 inhibition by dinaciclib potently suppresses Mcl-1 to induce durable
apoptotic responses in aggressive MYC-driven B-cell lymphoma in vivo.

Gregory GP(1), Hogg SJ(2), Kats LM(2), Vidacs E(2), Baker AJ(2), Gilan O(3),
Lefebure M(2), Martin BP(2), Dawson MA(3), Johnstone RW(2), Shortt J(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Gene Regulation Laboratory, Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia [2] Sir Peter MacCallum Department of
Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia [3] Monash 
Haematology, Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (2)1] Gene Regulation
Laboratory, Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia [2] Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (3)1] Sir Peter
MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia [2] Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Research Division, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (4)1] Gene Regulation
Laboratory, Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia [2] Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia [3] Monash Haematology,
Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria, Australia [4] School of Clinical Sciences at
Monash Health, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

PMCID: PMC4498453
PMID: 25578475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 27;290(9):5267-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.575225. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Functional role of RNA polymerase II and P70 S6 kinase in KCl withdrawal-induced 
cerebellar granule neuron apoptosis.

Padmanabhan J(1), Brown KR(2), Padilla A(3), Shelanski ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida Health 
Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33613 and
jpadmana@health.usf.edu. (2)the Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Taub
Center for Alzheimer's Disease, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032. (3)From the Department of Molecular
Medicine, University of South Florida Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33613 and.

KCl withdrawal-induced apoptosis in cerebellar granule neurons is associated with
aberrant cell cycle activation, and treatment with cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) 
inhibitors protects cells from undergoing apoptosis. Because the Cdk inhibitor
flavopiridol is known to inhibit RNA polymerase II (Pol II)-dependent
transcription elongation by inhibiting the positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb, a complex of CDK9 and cyclin T), we examined whether inhibition
of RNA Pol II protects neurons from apoptosis. Treatment of neurons with 5,
6-dichloro-1-ß-D-ribobenzimidazole (DRB), an RNA Pol II-dependent transcription
elongation inhibitor, and flavopiridol inhibited phosphorylation and activation
of Pol II and protected neurons from undergoing apoptosis. In addition to Pol II,
neurons subjected to KCl withdrawal showed increased phosphorylation and
activation of p70 S6 kinase, which was inhibited by both DRB and flavopiridol.
Immunostaining analysis of the neurons deprived of KCl showed increased nuclear
levels of phospho-p70 S6 kinase, and neurons protected with DRB and flavopiridol 
showed accumulation of the kinase into large spliceosome assembly factor-positive
speckle domains within the nuclei. The formation of these foci corresponded with 
cell survival, and removal of the inhibitors resulted in dispersal of the
speckles into smaller foci with subsequent apoptosis induction. Because p70 S6
kinase is known to induce translation of mRNAs containing a 5'-terminal
oligopyrimidine tract, our data suggest that transcription and translation of
this subset of mRNAs may contribute to KCl withdrawal-induced apoptosis in
neurons.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4342447
PMID: 25568312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(6):928-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01426-14. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Characterization of human cyclin-dependent kinase 12 (CDK12) and CDK13 complexes 
in C-terminal domain phosphorylation, gene transcription, and RNA processing.

Liang K(1), Gao X(1), Gilmore JM(1), Florens L(1), Washburn MP(2), Smith E(3),
Shilatifard A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA. (2)Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, Kansas, USA. (3)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City,
Missouri, USA Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (4)Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois, USA ASH@northwestern.edu.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and CDK12 have each been demonstrated to
phosphorylate the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) at serine 2 of the
heptad repeat, both in vitro and in vivo. CDK9, as part of P-TEFb and the super
elongation complex (SEC), is by far the best characterized of CDK9, CDK12, and
CDK13. We employed both in vitro and in vivo assays to further investigate the
molecular properties of CDK12 and its paralog CDK13. We isolated Flag-tagged
CDK12 and CDK13 and found that they associate with numerous RNA processing
factors. Although knockdown of CDK12, CDK13, or their cyclin partner CCNK did not
affect the bulk CTD phosphorylation levels in HCT116 cells, transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis revealed that CDK12 and CDK13 losses in HCT116
cells preferentially affect expression of DNA damage response and snoRNA genes,
respectively. CDK12 and CDK13 depletion also leads to a loss of expression of RNA
processing factors and to defects in RNA processing. These findings suggest that 
in addition to implementing CTD phosphorylation, CDK12 and CDK13 may affect RNA
processing through direct physical interactions with RNA processing factors and
by regulating their expression.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4333096
PMID: 25561469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurochem. 2015 Feb;132(4):384-93. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13013. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Transcription factors Sox10 and Sox2 functionally interact with positive
transcription elongation factor b in Schwann cells.

Arter J(1), Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Sox proteins are mechanistically versatile regulators with established relevance 
to different developmental processes and crucial impact on chromatin structure,
DNA conformation, and transcriptional initiation. Here, we show that Sox2 and
Sox10, two Sox proteins important for Schwann cell development, also have the
capability to activate transcriptional elongation in a Schwann cell line by
recruiting the positive transcription elongation factor b. Recruitment is
mediated by physical interaction between the carboxyterminal transactivation
domains of the two Sox proteins and the Cyclin T1 subunit of positive
transcription elongation factor b, with interaction interfaces for the two Sox
proteins being mapped to adjacent regions of the central part of Cyclin T1.
Supporting the relevance of this interaction to Schwann cell development,
transcription of myelin genes appears regulated at the level of elongation. Our
results thus add a new facet to the activity of Sox proteins and expand the
functional repertoire of this important group of developmental regulators. Sox
transcription factors are important regulators of nervous system development.
While they are known to regulate transcription by recruiting and stabilizing the 
RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex directly or with help of the Mediator
complex, this study provides evidence that Sox10 and Sox2 additionally influence 
transcription in glial cells at the elongation stage by recruiting P-TEFb. Cdk9, 
cyclin-dependent kinase 9; P-TEFb, positive transcription elongation factor b;
Pol II, RNA polymerase II; Sox, Sox2 or Sox10 protein.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 25524031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Anticancer Res. 2014 Dec;34(12):6981-9.

Inhibition of P-TEFb by DRB suppresses SIRT1/CK2a pathway and enhances
radiosensitivity of human cancer cells.

Wang ZQ(1), Johnson CL(1), Kumar A(1), Molkentine DP(1), Molkentine JM(1), Rabin 
T(1), Mason KA(1), Milas L(1), Raju U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, U.S.A. (2)Department of Experimental
Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, U.S.A. uraju@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Positive transcription elongation factor-b (P-TEFb) is a complex
containing CDK9 and a cyclin (T1, T2 or K). The effect of inhibition of P-TEFb by
5,6-dichloro-l-ß-D-ribofuranosyl benzimidazole (DRB) on cell radiosensitivity and
the underlying mechanisms were investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six human cancer cell lines were subjected to (3)H-uridine
incorporation, cell viability and clonogenic cell survival assays; cell-cycle
redistribution and apoptosis assay; western blots and nuclear 53BP1 foci analysis
after exposing the cells to DRB with/without <U+03B3>-radiation.
RESULTS: DRB suppressed colony formation and enhanced radiosensitivity of all
cell lines. DRB caused a further increase in radiation-induced apoptosis and
cell-cycle redistribution depending on p53 status. DRB prolonged the presence of 
radiation-induced nuclear p53 binding protein-1 (53BP1) foci and suppressed the
expression of sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) and casein kinase 2-alpha (CK2a), suggesting an
inhibition of DNA repair processes.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that DRB has the potential to increase the
efficacy of radiotherapy and warrants further investigation using in vivo tumor
models.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25503124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Transcription. 2014;5(5):e988093. doi: 10.4161/21541264.2014.988093. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

Chromatin modification by the RNA Polymerase II elongation complex.

Tanny JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics ; McGill University ; Montreal ,
Canada.

Transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) involves the coordinated 
action of numerous regulatory factors. Among these are chromatin-modifying
enzymes, which generate a stereotypic and conserved pattern of histone
modifications along transcribed genes. This pattern implies a precise
coordination between regulators of histone modification and the RNAP II
elongation complex. Here I review the pathways and molecular events that regulate
co-transcriptional histone modifications. Insight into these events will
illuminate the assembly of functional RNAP II elongation complexes and how the
chromatin landscape influences their composition and function.

PMCID: PMC4581355
PMID: 25494544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 4;10(12):e1004827. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004827.
eCollection 2014.

The IKAROS interaction with a complex including chromatin remodeling and
transcription elongation activities is required for hematopoiesis.

Bottardi S(1), Mavoungou L(1), Pak H(1), Daou S(1), Bourgoin V(1), Lakehal YA(1),
Affar el B(1), Milot E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital
and Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

IKAROS is a critical regulator of hematopoietic cell fate and its dynamic
expression pattern is required for proper hematopoiesis. In collaboration with
the Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex, it promotes gene
repression and activation. It remains to be clarified how IKAROS can support
transcription activation while being associated with the HDAC-containing complex 
NuRD. IKAROS also binds to the Positive-Transcription Elongation Factor b
(P-TEFb) at gene promoters. Here, we demonstrate that NuRD and P-TEFb are
assembled in a complex that can be recruited to specific genes by IKAROS. The
expression level of IKAROS influences the recruitment of the NuRD-P-TEFb complex 
to gene regulatory regions and facilitates transcription elongation by
transferring the Protein Phosphatase 1a (PP1a), an IKAROS-binding protein and
P-TEFb activator, to CDK9. We show that an IKAROS mutant that is unable to bind
PP1a cannot sustain gene expression and impedes normal differentiation of
Ik(NULL) hematopoietic progenitors. Finally, the knock-down of the NuRD subunit
Mi2 reveals that the occupancy of the NuRD complex at transcribed regions of
genes favors the relief of POL II promoter-proximal pausing and thereby, promotes
transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC4256266
PMID: 25474253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1786-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.612226. Epub 2014 
Nov 26.

Expression, purification, and identification of associated proteins of the
full-length hCDK12/CyclinK complex.

Bartkowiak B(1), Greenleaf AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710. (2)From the Department of Biochemistry, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710 arno@duke.edu.

The coupling of transcription and associated processes has been shown to be
dependent on the RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) C-terminal repeat domain (CTD) and
the phosphorylation of the heptad repeats of which it is composed (consensus
sequence Y1S2P3T4S5P6S7). Two primary S2 position CTD kinases have been
identified in higher eukaryotes: P-TEFb and CDK12/CyclinK. The more recently
discovered CDK12 appears to act at the 3'-end of the transcription unit and has
been identified as a tumor suppressor for ovarian cancer; however much is still
unknown about the in vivo roles of CDK12/CyclinK. In an effort to further
characterize these roles we have purified to near homogeneity and characterized, 
full-length, active, human CDK12/CyclinK, and identified hCDK12-associated
proteins via mass spectrometry. We find that employing a "2A" peptide-linked
multicistronic construct containing CDK12 and CyclinK results in the efficient
production of active, recombinant enzyme in the baculovirus/Sf9 expression
system. Using GST-CTD fusion protein substrates we find that CDK12/CyclinK
prefers a substrate with unmodified repeats or one that mimics prephosphorylation
at the S7 position of the CTD; also the enzyme is sensitive to the inhibitor
flavopiridol at higher concentrations. Identification of CDK12-associating
proteins reveals a strong enrichment for RNA-processing factors suggesting that
CDK12 affects RNA processing events in two distinct ways: Indirectly through
generating factor-binding phospho-epitopes on the CTD of elongating RNAPII and
directly through binding to specific factors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4340420
PMID: 25429106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood. 2015 Jan 15;125(3):443-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-573741. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Dinaciclib, a novel CDK inhibitor, demonstrates encouraging single-agent activity
in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma.

Kumar SK(1), LaPlant B(2), Chng WJ(3), Zonder J(4), Callander N(5), Fonseca R(6),
Fruth B(2), Roy V(7), Erlichman C(8), Stewart AK(6); Mayo Phase 2 Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN; (3)Department of Haematology-Oncology, National University Cancer 
Institute of Singapore, National University Health System, Singapore; (4)Karmanos
Cancer Center, Detroit, MI; (5)Section of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplant, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI; (6)Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ; (7)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Mayo Clinic,
Jacksonville, FL; and. (8)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN.

Dysregulation of cyclin-dependent kinases is a hallmark of myeloma, and
specifically, cdk5 inhibition can enhance the activity of proteasome inhibitors
in vitro. Dinaciclib is a novel potent small molecule inhibitor of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK)1, CDK2, CDK5, and CDK9. Patients with relapsed
multiple myeloma and =5 prior lines of therapy, with measurable disease, were
enrolled. Dinaciclib was administered on day 1 of a 21-day cycle at doses of 30
to 50 mg/m(2). Overall, 27 evaluable patients were accrued; the median number of 
prior therapies was 4. The dose level of 50 mg/m(2) was determined to be the
maximally tolerated dose. The overall confirmed partial response rate (PR) was 3 
of 27 (11%), including 1 patient at the 30 mg/m(2) dose (1 very good PR [VGPR])
and 2 patients at the 40 mg/m(2) dose (1 VGPR and 1 PR). In addition, 2 patients 
at the 50 mg/mg(2) dose achieved a minimal response (clinical benefit rate, 19%).
Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, gastrointestinal symptoms, alopecia, and fatigue
were the most common adverse events. The current study demonstrates single agent 
activity of dinaciclib in relapsed myeloma, with 2 patients achieving a deep
response (VGPR) and 10 patients obtaining some degree of M protein stabilization 
or decrease. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT01096342.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4296007
PMID: 25395429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Biol Sci. 2014 Oct 9;10(10):1138-49. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.10366. eCollection
2014.

Interaction between HIV-1 Tat and DNA-PKcs modulates HIV transcription and class 
switch recombination.

Zhang SM(1), Zhang H(1), Yang TY(1), Ying TY(2), Yang PX(3), Liu XD(1), Tang
SJ(4), Zhou PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Radiation Toxicology and Oncology; Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, 100850, Beijing, China; (2)2. The State Key Laboratory of NBC
Protection for Civilian, 102205, Beijing, China; (3)3. Beijing Institute of
Health Administration and Medical Information, 100850, Beijing, China; (4)4.
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Plastic and Microscopic Repair Technology, 
Institute of Plastic Surgery, Weifang Medical University, 261053, Weifang,
Shandong Province, China.

HIV-1 tat targets a variety of host cell proteins to facilitate viral
transcription and disrupts host cellular immunity by inducing lymphocyte
apoptosis, but whether it influences humoral immunity remains unclear.
Previously, our group demonstrated that tat depresses expression of DNA-PKcs, a
critical component of the non-homologous end joining pathway (NHEJ) of DNA
double-strand breaks repair, immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR) and 
V(D)J recombination, and sensitizes cells to ionizing radiation. In this study,
we demonstrated that HIV-1 Tat down-regulates DNA-PKcs expression by directly
binding to the core promoter sequence. In addition, Tat interacts with and
activates the kinase activity of DNA-PKcs in a dose-dependent and DNA independent
manner. Furthermore, Tat inhibits class switch recombination (CSR) at low
concentrations (= 4 µg/ml) and stimulates CSR at high concentrations (= 8 µg/ml).
On the other hand, low protein level and high kinase activity of DNA-PKcs
promotes HIV-1 transcription, while high protein level and low kinase activity
inhibit HIV-1 transcription. Co-immunoprecipitation results revealed that
DNA-PKcs forms a large complex comprised of Cyclin T1, CDK9 and Tat via direct
interacting with CDK9 and Tat but not Cyclin T1. Taken together, our results
provide new clues that Tat regulates host humoral immunity via both
transcriptional depression and kinase activation of DNA-PKcs. We also raise the
possibility that inhibitors and interventions directed towards DNA-PKcs may
inhibit HIV-1 transcription in AIDS patients.

PMCID: PMC4202030
PMID: 25332688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Genes Dev. 2014 Oct 15;28(20):2261-75. doi: 10.1101/gad.250449.114.

A gene-specific role for the Ssu72 RNAPII CTD phosphatase in HIV-1 Tat
transactivation.

Chen Y(1), Zhang L(1), Estarás C(1), Choi SH(1), Moreno L Jr(1), Karn J(2),
Moresco JJ(3), Yates JR 3rd(3), Jones KA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA; (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Microbiology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA; (3)Department of Chemical Physiology and Cell Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. (4)Regulatory Biology
Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California
92037, USA; jones@salk.edu.

HIV-1 Tat stimulates transcription elongation by recruiting the P-TEFb (positive 
transcription elongation factor-b) (CycT1:CDK9) C-terminal domain (CTD) kinase to
the HIV-1 promoter. Here we show that Tat transactivation also requires the Ssu72
CTD Ser5P (S5P)-specific phosphatase, which mediates transcription termination
and intragenic looping at eukaryotic genes. Importantly, HIV-1 Tat interacts
directly with Ssu72 and strongly stimulates its CTD phosphatase activity. We
found that Ssu72 is essential for Tat:P-TEFb-mediated phosphorylation of the
S5P-CTD in vitro. Interestingly, Ssu72 also stimulates nascent HIV-1
transcription in a phosphatase-dependent manner in vivo. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments reveal that Ssu72, like P-TEFb and AFF4,
is recruited by Tat to the integrated HIV-1 proviral promoter in TNF-a signaling 
2D10 T cells and leaves the elongation complex prior to the termination site.
ChIP-seq (ChIP combined with deep sequencing) and GRO-seq (genome-wide nuclear
run-on [GRO] combined with deep sequencing) analysis further reveals that Ssu72
predominantly colocalizes with S5P-RNAPII (RNA polymerase II) at promoters in
human embryonic stem cells, with a minor peak in the terminator region. A few
genes, like NANOG, also have high Ssu72 at the terminator. Ssu72 is not required 
for transcription at most cellular genes but has a modest effect on
cotranscriptional termination. We conclude that Tat alters the cellular function 
of Ssu72 to stimulate viral gene expression and facilitate the early S5P-S2P
transition at the integrated HIV-1 promoter.

© 2014 Chen et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4201287
PMID: 25319827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Nov 6;15(5):574-88. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.09.018. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

Transcriptional pause release is a rate-limiting step for somatic cell
reprogramming.

Liu L(1), Xu Y(2), He M(3), Zhang M(4), Cui F(5), Lu L(6), Yao M(7), Tian W(5),
Benda C(1), Zhuang Q(1), Huang Z(5), Li W(1), Li X(3), Zhao P(1), Fan W(5), Luo
Z(1), Li Y(7), Wu Y(8), Hutchins AP(7), Wang D(9), Tse HF(10), Schambach A(11),
Frampton J(12), Qin B(13), Bao X(5), Yao H(7), Zhang B(14), Sun H(6), Pei D(13), 
Wang H(6), Wang J(3), Esteban MA(15).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin and Human Disease, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South 
China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; Key Laboratory of 
Regenerative Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100049, China. (2)Laboratory of Chromatin and Human Disease, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530,
China; Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South
China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. Electronic address:
xu_yan@gibh.ac.cn. (3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. (4)Laboratory of
Chromatin and Human Disease, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South China Institute
for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; Key Laboratory of Regenerative
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
Guangzhou 510530, China; School of Life Sciences, Anhui University, Hefei 230601,
China. (5)Laboratory of Chromatin and Human Disease, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; Key Laboratory of 
Regenerative Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Guangzhou 510530, China. (6)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences,
Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China. (7)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530,
China. (8)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (9)Laboratory of Chromatin
and Human Disease, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530,
China; Drug Discovery Pipeline Group, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Guangzhou 510530, China. (10)Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine,
Queen Mary Hospital, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China; Hong
Kong-Guangdong Joint Laboratory on Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, the
University of Hong Kong and Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
China; Shenzhen Institutes of Research and Innovation, the University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (11)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover D-30625, Germany. (12)Institute for Biomedical Research,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 
2TT, UK. (13)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; Hong
Kong-Guangdong Joint Laboratory on Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, the
University of Hong Kong and Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health,
China. (14)Laboratory of RNA Chemical Biology, State Key Laboratory of
Respiratory Diseases of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou Institutes of 
Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530, China. (15)Laboratory of Chromatin and 
Human Disease, Chinese Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Guangzhou 510530, China; Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Guangzhou 510530,
China; Hong Kong-Guangdong Joint Laboratory on Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, the University of Hong Kong and Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, China. Electronic address: miguel@gibh.ac.cn.

Reactivation of the pluripotency network during somatic cell reprogramming by
exogenous transcription factors involves chromatin remodeling and the recruitment
of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to target loci. Here, we report that Pol II is
engaged at pluripotency promoters in reprogramming but remains paused and
inefficiently released. We also show that bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4)
stimulates productive transcriptional elongation of pluripotency genes by
dissociating the pause release factor P-TEFb from an inactive complex containing 
HEXIM1. Consequently, BRD4 overexpression enhances reprogramming efficiency and
HEXIM1 suppresses it, whereas Brd4 and Hexim1 knockdown do the opposite. We
further demonstrate that the reprogramming factor KLF4 helps recruit P-TEFb to
pluripotency promoters. Our work thus provides a mechanism for explaining the
reactivation of pluripotency genes in reprogramming and unveils an unanticipated 
role for KLF4 in transcriptional pause release.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25312495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Arch Pharm Res. 2014 Oct 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Structure-based lead discovery for protein kinase C zeta inhibitor design by
exploiting kinase-inhibitor complex crystal structure data and potential
therapeutics for preterm labour.

Shao QC(1), Zhang CJ, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics Department, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University,
Weifang, 261031, China.

The protein kinase C (PKC) is a family of serine/threonine kinases with a broad
range of cellular targets. Members of the PKC family participate at the diverse
biological events involved in cellular proliferation, differentiation and
survival. The PKC isoform zeta (PKC<U+03B6>) is an atypical member that has recently
been found to play an essential role in promoting human uterine contractility and
thus been raised as a new target for treating preterm labour and other tocolytic 
diseases. In this study, an integrative protocol was described to graft hundreds 
of inhibitor ligands from their complex crystal structures with cognate kinases
into the active pocket of PKC<U+03B6> and, based on the modeled structures, to evaluate 
the binding strength of these inhibitors to the non-cognate PKC<U+03B6> receptor by
using a consensus scoring strategy. A total of 32 inhibitors with top score were 
compiled, and eight out of them were tested for inhibitory potency against PKC<U+03B6>. 
Consequently, five compounds, i.e. CDK6 inhibitor fisetin, PIM1 inhibitor
myricetin, CDK9 inhibitor flavopiridol and PknB inhibitor mitoxantrone as well as
the promiscuous kinase inhibitor staurosporine showed high or moderate inhibitory
activity on PKC<U+03B6>, with IC50 values of 58 ± 9, 1.7 ± 0.4, 108 ± 17, 280 ± 47 and
0.019 ± 0.004 µM, respectively, while other three compounds, including two
marketed drugs dasatinib and sunitinib as well as the Rho inhibitor fasudil, have
not been detected to possess observable activity. Next, based on the modeled
structure data we modified three flavonoid kinase inhibitors, i.e. fisetin,
myricetin and flavopiridol, to generate a number of more potential molecular
entities, two of which were found to have a moderately improved activity as
compared to their parent compounds.

PMID: 25311663  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


82. FEBS Lett. 2014 Dec 20;588(24):4527-35. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.035. Epub 
2014 Oct 2.

MicroRNA-874 inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in human breast
cancer by targeting CDK9.

Wang L(1), Gao W(2), Hu F(1), Xu Z(1), Wang F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Analytical & Testing Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210029, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)Analytical & Testing
Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. Electronic
address: wangfuqiang0802@163.com.

It has been demonstrated that miR-874 plays important roles in many types of
cancers. Nevertheless, its biological function in breast cancer remains largely
unknown. In this study, we found that the expression level of miR-874 is
down-regulated in breast cancer in comparison with the adjacent normal tissues.
The overexpression of miR-874 is able to inhibit cell proliferation and induce
cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Using a
bioinformatics method, we further show that CDK9 is a direct target of miR-874
and that its protein level is negatively regulated by miR-874. Therefore, the
data reported in this manuscript demonstrate that miR-874 is an important
regulator in breast cancer and imply that the miR-874/CDK9 axis has potential as 
a therapeutic target for breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25281924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biomed Rep. 2014 Nov;2(6):775-779. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 may as a novel target in downregulating the
atherosclerosis inflammation (Review).

Han Y(1), Zhan Y(2), Hou G(2), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese
Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Public Health, Qilu Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (2)Institute of
Experimental Nuclear Medicine, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P.R. China.

Inflammation is a key component of atherosclerosis. Genes coding for inflammatory
or anti-inflammatory molecules are considered good candidates for estimating the 
risk of developing atherosclerosis. Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), the kinase 
of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), is crucial in the cell
cycle and apoptosis. Previous studies have focused on its inhibition of immune
cells for the resolution of inflammation. Considering the effects of inflammation
in the pathogenicity of atherosclerosis, decreasing inflammation through the
inhibition of CDK9 may be useful for the prognosis of atherosclerosis. The aim of
this review was to examine whether inhibition of the CDK9 monocyte may affect the
process of inflammation by acting on the cytokine secretion and interacting with 
endothelial cells (ECs). Thus, CDK9 may be a novel target for the diagnosis and
therapy of atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC4179722
PMID: 25279144  [PubMed]


84. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7691-704.

Targeting RNA transcription and translation in ovarian cancer cells with
pharmacological inhibitor CDKI-73.

Lam F(1), Abbas AY(2), Shao H(2), Teo T(1), Adams J(1), Li P(1), Bradshaw TD(2), 
Fischer PM(2), Walsby E(3), Pepper C(3), Chen Y(4), Ding J(4), Wang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Drug Discovery and Development, Sansom Institute for Health
Research and School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South
Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (2)School of Pharmacy and Centre
for Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham,
United Kingdom. (3)Cardiff CLL Research Group, Institute of Cancer and Genetics, 
School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Health Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(4)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China. (5)Centre for Drug Discovery and Development, Sansom 
Institute for Health Research and School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences,
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. School of
Pharmacy and Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham,
University Park, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Dysregulation of cellular transcription and translation is a fundamental hallmark
of cancer. As CDK9 and Mnks play pivotal roles in the regulation of RNA
transcription and protein synthesis, respectively, they are important targets for
drug development. We herein report the cellular mechanism of a novel CDK9
inhibitor CDKI-73 in an ovarian cancer cell line (A2780). We also used
shRNA-mediated CDK9 knockdown to investigate the importance of CDK9 in the
maintenance of A2780 cells. This study revealed that CDKI-73 rapidly inhibited
cellular CDK9 kinase activity and down-regulated the RNAPII phosphorylation. This
subsequently caused a decrease in the eIF4E phosphorylation by blocking Mnk1
kinase activity. Consistently, CDK9 shRNA was also found to down-regulate the
Mnk1 expression. Both CDKI-73 and CDK9 shRNA decreased anti-apoptotic proteins
Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 and induced apoptosis. The study confirmed that CDK9 is required 
for cell survival and that ovarian cancer may be susceptible to CDK9 inhibition
strategy. The data also implied a role of CDK9 in eIF4E-mediated translational
control, suggesting that CDK9 may have important implication in the Mnk-eIF4E
axis, the key determinants of PI3K/Akt/mTOR- and Ras/Raf/MAPK-mediated
tumorigenic activity. As such, CDK9 inhibitor drug candidate CDKI-73 should have 
a major impact on these pathways in human cancers.

PMCID: PMC4202154
PMID: 25277198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Rep. 2014 Oct 9;9(1):234-47. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.055. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

Control of embryonic stem cell identity by BRD4-dependent transcriptional
elongation of super-enhancer-associated pluripotency genes.

Di Micco R(1), Fontanals-Cirera B(2), Low V(2), Ntziachristos P(3), Yuen SK(2),
Lovell CD(2), Dolgalev I(4), Yonekubo Y(2), Zhang G(5), Rusinova E(5),
Gerona-Navarro G(5), Cañamero M(6), Ohlmeyer M(5), Aifantis I(3), Zhou MM(5),
Tsirigos A(7), Hernando E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, and
Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel 
Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016,
USA. Electronic address: raffaella.dimicco@nyumc.org. (2)Department of Pathology,
New York University School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10016, USA; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, New 
York University School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, NY
10016, USA; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
and NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA. (4)Genome Technology Center, Office for Collaborative Science, NYU
Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. (5)Department of Structural and Chemical
Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(6)Histopathology Core Unit, Biotechnology Program, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain. (7)Department of
Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, 
New York, NY 10016, USA; Center for Health Informatics and Bioinformatics, NYU
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address:
aristotelis.tsirigos@nyumc.org. (8)Department of Pathology, New York University
School of Medicine, and Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York, NY 10016, USA; Helen 
L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU Langone Medical Center,
New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: eva.hernando-monge@nyumc.org.

Transcription factors and chromatin-remodeling complexes are key determinants of 
embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity. Here, we demonstrate that BRD4, a member of
the bromodomain and extraterminal domain (BET) family of epigenetic readers,
regulates the self-renewal ability and pluripotency of ESCs. BRD4 inhibition
resulted in induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and
commitment to the neuroectodermal lineage while reducing the ESC
multidifferentiation capacity in teratoma assays. BRD4 maintains transcription of
core stem cell genes such as OCT4 and PRDM14 by occupying their super-enhancers
(SEs), large clusters of regulatory elements, and recruiting to them Mediator and
CDK9, the catalytic subunit of the positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb), to allow Pol-II-dependent productive elongation. Our study describes a 
mechanism of regulation of ESC identity that could be applied to improve the
efficiency of ESC differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4317728
PMID: 25263550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Nov;35(11):2534-43. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu190. Epub 2014
Sep 18.

Upregulation of CYP1B1 expression by inflammatory cytokines is mediated by the
p38 MAP kinase signal transduction pathway.

Smerdová L(1), merdová J(2), Kabátková M(2), Kohoutek J(3), Blaek D(4), Machala
M(3), Vondrácek J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytokinetics, Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Brno 62165, Czech Republic. (2)Department of Cytokinetics,
Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Brno 62165,
Czech Republic, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Brno
61137, Czech Republic. (3)Department of Chemistry and Toxicology, Veterinary
Research Institute, Brno 62100, Czech Republic and. (4)Central European Institute
of Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno 62500, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Cytokinetics, Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Brno 62165, Czech Republic, vondracek@ibp.cz.

Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) is an enzyme that has a unique tumor-specific
pattern of expression and is capable of bioactivating a wide range of
carcinogenic compounds. We have reported previously that coordinated upregulation
of CYP1B1 by inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and 
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands, may increase bioactivation of promutagens,
such as benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) in epithelial cells. Here, we extend those studies
by describing a novel mechanism participating in the regulation of CYP1B1
expression, which involves activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(p38) and mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1). Using inhibitors
of p38 and MSKs, as well as mouse embryonic cells derived from p38a-deficient and
MSK1/2 double knockout mice, we show here that TNF-a potentiates CYP1B1
upregulation via the p38/MSK1 kinase cascade. Effects of this inflammatory
cytokine on CYP1B1 expression further involve the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb). The inhibition of the P-TEFb subunit,
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), which phosphorylates RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII), prevented the enhanced CYP1B1 induction by a combination of BaP and
inflammatory cytokine. Furthermore, using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
we found that cotreatment of epithelial cells with TNF-a and BaP resulted in
enhanced recruitment of both CDK9 and RNAPII to the Cyp1b1 gene promoter.
Overall, these results have implications concerning the contribution of
inflammatory factors to carcinogenesis, since enhanced CYP1B1 induction during
inflammation may alter metabolism of exogenous carcinogens, as well as endogenous
CYP1B1 substrates playing role in tumor development.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25233930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 18;9(9):e107654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107654.
eCollection 2014.

Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV-1) ICP22 protein directly interacts with
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)9 to inhibit RNA polymerase II transcription
elongation.

Zaborowska J(1), Baumli S(2), Laitem C(1), O'Reilly D(1), Thomas PH(3), O'Hare
P(4), Murphy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (2)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Oncology, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, United Kingdom. (4)Section of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College, St Mary's Medical School, London, United Kingdom.

The Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV-1)-encoded ICP22 protein plays an important role 
in viral infection and affects expression of host cell genes. ICP22 is known to
reduce the global level of serine (Ser)2 phosphorylation of the
Tyr1Ser2Pro3Thr4Ser5Pro6Ser7 heptapeptide repeats comprising the carboxy-terminal
domain (CTD) of the large subunit of RNA polymerase (pol) II. Accordingly, ICP22 
is thought to associate with and inhibit the activity of the
positive-transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) pol II CTD Ser2 kinase. We
show here that ICP22 causes loss of CTD Ser2 phosphorylation from pol II engaged 
in transcription of protein-coding genes following ectopic expression in HeLa
cells and that recombinant ICP22 interacts with the CDK9 subunit of recombinant
P-TEFb. ICP22 also interacts with pol II in vitro. Residues 193 to 256 of ICP22
are sufficient for interaction with CDK9 and inhibition of pol II CTD Ser2
phosphorylation but do not interact with pol II. These results indicate that
discrete regions of ICP22 interact with either CDK9 or pol II and that ICP22
interacts directly with CDK9 to inhibit expression of host cell genes.

PMCID: PMC4169428
PMID: 25233083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;74(5):1057-64. doi:
10.1007/s00280-014-2583-9. Epub 2014 Sep 13.

Clinical study of the novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor dinaciclib in
combination with rituximab in relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia
patients.

Fabre C(1), Gobbi M, Ezzili C, Zoubir M, Sablin MP, Small K, Im E, Shinwari N,
Zhang D, Zhou H, Le Tourneau C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Curie, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005, Paris,
France, fabre-claire@wanadoo.fr.

PURPOSE: Dinaciclib is a novel selective inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK)1, CDK2, CDK5, and CDK9. We conducted a phase I study to investigate the
effects of dinaciclib when administered with rituximab.
METHODS: In this phase I nonrandomized dose-escalation 3 + 3 trial, patients with
relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) were treated with
dinaciclib and rituximab. Dinaciclib was administered intravenously (IV) over 2 h
on days 1, 8 and 15 in cycles 2-13 (28-day cycles). Rituximab 375 mg/m(2) was
administered IV on days 1, 8, 15 and 22 in cycle 1 (28-day cycle) and on day 1
during cycle 3-13. Rituximab was not administered in cycle 2. Rituximab and
dinaciclib were given alone in cycles 1 and 2, respectively, and in combination
in cycles 3-13. Primary objectives included determination of the recommended
phase II dose of dinaciclib and evaluation of pharmacokinetics (PK) when
administered with rituximab.
RESULTS: Five patients completed the study due to early termination. All
presented with drug-related adverse events (AEs), but no dose-limiting toxicities
were observed. The most commonly observed toxicities included hematological,
digestive and metabolic AEs. However, no tumor lysis syndrome has been reported
in the study. Four patients achieved stable disease, and one patient achieved
complete response according to 2008 iwCLL criteria at cycle 3. PK samples were
collected from 5 patients, and no obvious interaction between dinaciclib and
rituximab was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Limited data from this study shows dinaciclib in combination with
rituximab was well tolerated and revealed encouraging clinical activity in
relapsed/refractory CLL patients.

PMID: 25217392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 16;111(37):E3890-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1410087111. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Nup98 promotes antiviral gene expression to restrict RNA viral infection in
Drosophila.

Panda D(1), Pascual-Garcia P(2), Dunagin M(3), Tudor M(2), Hopkins KC(1), Xu
J(1), Gold B(1), Raj A(4), Capelson M(2), Cherry S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, and. (4)Department of Bioengineering, and Penn
Genome Frontiers Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Penn Genome Frontiers Institute, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 cherrys@mail.med.upenn.edu.

In response to infection, the innate immune system rapidly activates an elaborate
and tightly orchestrated gene expression program to induce critical antimicrobial
genes. While many key players in this program have been identified in disparate
biological systems, it is clear that there are additional uncharacterized
mechanisms at play. Our previous studies revealed that a rapidly-induced
antiviral gene expression program is active against disparate human
arthropod-borne viruses in Drosophila. Moreover, one-half of this program is
regulated at the level of transcriptional pausing. Here we found that Nup98, a
virus-induced gene, was antiviral against a panel of viruses both in cells and
adult flies since its depletion significantly enhanced viral infection.
Mechanistically, we found that Nup98 promotes antiviral gene expression in
Drosophila at the level of transcription. Expression profiling revealed that the 
virus-induced activation of 36 genes was abrogated upon loss of Nup98; and we
found that a subset of these Nup98-dependent genes were antiviral. These
Nup98-dependent virus-induced genes are Cdk9-dependent and
translation-independent suggesting that these are rapidly induced primary
response genes. Biochemically, we demonstrate that Nup98 is directly bound to the
promoters of virus-induced genes, and that it promotes occupancy of the
initiating form of RNA polymerase II at these promoters, which are rapidly
induced on viral infection to restrict human arboviruses in insects.

PMCID: PMC4169978
PMID: 25197089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genome Biol. 2014;15(6):122.

Cyclin-dependent kinases.

Malumbres M.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are protein kinases characterized by needing a
separate subunit - a cyclin - that provides domains essential for enzymatic
activity. CDKs play important roles in the control of cell division and modulate 
transcription in response to several extra- and intracellular cues. The
evolutionary expansion of the CDK family in mammals led to the division of CDKs
into three cell-cycle-related subfamilies (Cdk1, Cdk4 and Cdk5) and five
transcriptional subfamilies (Cdk7, Cdk8, Cdk9, Cdk11 and Cdk20). Unlike the
prototypical Cdc28 kinase of budding yeast, most of these CDKs bind one or a few 
cyclins, consistent with functional specialization during evolution. This review 
summarizes how, although CDKs are traditionally separated into cell-cycle or
transcriptional CDKs, these activities are frequently combined in many family
members. Not surprisingly, deregulation of this family of proteins is a hallmark 
of several diseases, including cancer, and drug-targeted inhibition of specific
members has generated very encouraging results in clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4097832
PMID: 25180339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Nov;58(11):6558-71. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02918-14. 
Epub 2014 Aug 25.

Phenyl-1-Pyridin-2yl-ethanone-based iron chelators increase I<U+03BA>B-a expression,
modulate CDK2 and CDK9 activities, and inhibit HIV-1 transcription.

Kumari N(1), Iordanskiy S(2), Kovalskyy D(3), Breuer D(4), Niu X(1), Lin X(1), Xu
M(1), Gavrilenko K(3), Kashanchi F(2), Dhawan S(4), Nekhai S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University,
Washington, DC, USA. (2)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases,
School of Systems Biology, George Mason University, Manassas, Virginia, USA.
(3)ChemBio Center, National Taras Shevchenko University, Kiev, Ukraine. (4)Viral 
Immunology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Division of Emerging and
Transfusion Transmitted Diseases, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (5)Center for Sickle Cell 
Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA
snekhai@howard.edu.

HIV-1 transcription is activated by the Tat protein, which recruits CDK9/cyclin
T1 to the HIV-1 promoter. CDK9 is phosphorylated by CDK2, which facilitates
formation of the high-molecular-weight positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb) complex. We previously showed that chelation of intracellular iron
inhibits CDK2 and CDK9 activities and suppresses HIV-1 transcription, but the
mechanism of the inhibition was not understood. In the present study, we tested a
set of novel iron chelators for the ability to inhibit HIV-1 transcription and
elucidated their mechanism of action. Novel phenyl-1-pyridin-2yl-ethanone
(PPY)-based iron chelators were synthesized and examined for their effects on
cellular iron, HIV-1 inhibition, and cytotoxicity. Activities of CDK2 and CDK9,
expression of CDK9-dependent and CDK2-inhibitory mRNAs, NF-<U+03BA>B expression, and
HIV-1- and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent transcription were determined. PPY-based iron
chelators significantly inhibited HIV-1, with minimal cytotoxicity, in cultured
and primary cells chronically or acutely infected with HIV-1 subtype B, but they 
had less of an effect on HIV-1 subtype C. Iron chelators upregulated the
expression of I<U+03BA>B-a, with increased accumulation of cytoplasmic NF-<U+03BA>B. The iron
chelators inhibited CDK2 activity and reduced the amount of CDK9/cyclin T1 in the
large P-TEFb complex. Iron chelators reduced HIV-1 Gag and Env mRNA synthesis but
had no effect on HIV-1 reverse transcription. In addition, iron chelators
moderately inhibited basal HIV-1 transcription, equally affecting HIV-1 and Sp1- 
or NF-<U+03BA>B-driven transcription. By virtue of their involvement in targeting
several key steps in HIV-1 transcription, these novel iron chelators have the
potential for the development of new therapeutics for the treatment of HIV-1
infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4249367
PMID: 25155598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Immunity. 2014 Aug 21;41(2):325-38. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.002.

In vivo RNA interference screens identify regulators of antiviral CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cell differentiation.

Chen R(1), Bélanger S(2), Frederick MA(3), Li B(2), Johnston RJ(2), Xiao N(4),
Liu YC(4), Sharma S(4), Peters B(2), Rao A(5), Crotty S(6), Pipkin ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Signaling and Gene Expression, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and 
Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of
Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.
(2)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. (4)Division of Cell Biology, La Jolla
Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (5)Division of
Signaling and Gene Expression, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (6)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for
Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address:
shane@lji.org. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. Electronic address: mpipkin@scripps.edu.

Classical genetic approaches to examine the requirements of genes for T cell
differentiation during infection are time consuming. Here we developed a pooled
approach to screen 30-100+ genes individually in separate antigen-specific T
cells during infection using short hairpin RNAs in a microRNA context (shRNAmir).
Independent screens using T cell receptor (TCR)-transgenic CD4(+) and CD8(+) T
cells responding to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) identified multiple
genes that regulated development of follicular helper (Tfh) and T helper 1 (Th1) 
cells, and short-lived effector and memory precursor cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs). Both screens revealed roles for the positive transcription elongation
factor (P-TEFb) component Cyclin T1 (Ccnt1). Inhibiting expression of Cyclin T1, 
or its catalytic partner Cdk9, impaired development of Th1 cells and protective
short-lived effector CTL and enhanced Tfh cell and memory precursor CTL formation
in vivo. This pooled shRNA screening approach should have utility in numerous
immunological studies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4160313
PMID: 25148027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genes Dev. 2014 Aug 15;28(16):1800-14. doi: 10.1101/gad.244368.114.

CDK9-mediated transcription elongation is required for MYC addiction in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Huang CH(1), Lujambio A(2), Zuber J(3), Tschaharganeh DF(4), Doran MG(4), Evans
MJ(4), Kitzing T(2), Zhu N(4), de Stanchina E(4), Sawyers CL(5), Armstrong SA(4),
Lewis JS(4), Sherr CJ(6), Lowe SW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA; Cell
and Developmental Biology Program, Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Cornell University, New York, New York 10065, USA; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,
Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA; (2)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York 10065, USA; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, New York 11724, USA; (3)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, New York 11724, USA; Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna,
1030, Austria; (4)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
10065, USA; (5)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, 
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York 10065, USA; (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA; (7)Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA; Cell and
Developmental Biology Program, Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA; lowes@mskcc.org.

One-year survival rates for newly diagnosed hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are
<50%, and unresectable HCC carries a dismal prognosis owing to its aggressiveness
and the undruggable nature of its main genetic drivers. By screening a custom
library of shRNAs directed toward known drug targets in a genetically defined
Myc-driven HCC model, we identified cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) as required 
for disease maintenance. Pharmacological or shRNA-mediated CDK9 inhibition led to
robust anti-tumor effects that correlated with MYC expression levels and depended
on the role that both CDK9 and MYC exert in transcription elongation. Our results
establish CDK9 inhibition as a therapeutic strategy for MYC-overexpressing liver 
tumors and highlight the relevance of transcription elongation in the addiction
of cancer cells to MYC.

© 2014 Huang et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4197965
PMID: 25128497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;171(22):5059-75. doi: 10.1111/bph.12863.

1E7-03, a low MW compound targeting host protein phosphatase-1, inhibits HIV-1
transcription.

Ammosova T(1), Platonov M, Ivanov A, Kont YS, Kumari N, Kehn-Hall K, Jerebtsova
M, Kulkarni AA, Uren A, Kovalskyy D, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University,
Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: HIV-1 transcription is activated by the Tat protein which
recruits the cyclin-dependent kinase CDK9/cyclin T1 to TAR RNA. Tat binds to
protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) through the Q(35) VCF(38) sequence and translocates
PP1 to the nucleus. PP1 dephosphorylates CDK9 and activates HIV-1 transcription. 
We have synthesized a low MW compound 1H4, that targets PP1 and prevents HIV-1
Tat interaction with PP1 and inhibits HIV-1 gene transcription. Here, we report
our further work with the 1H4-derived compounds and analysis of their mechanism
of action.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Using the 1H4-PP1 complex as a model, we iteratively
designed and synthesized follow-up libraries that were analysed for the
inhibition of HIV-1 transcription and toxicity. We also confirmed the mechanism
of action of the PP1-targeting molecules by determining the affinity of binding
of these molecules to PP1, by analysing their effects on PP1 activity, disruption
of PP1 binding to Tat and shuttling of PP1 to the nucleus.
KEY RESULTS: We identified a tetrahydroquinoline derivative, compound 7, which
disrupted the interaction of Tat with PP1. We further optimized compound 7 and
obtained compound 7c, renamed 1E7-03, which inhibited HIV-1 with low IC50
(fivefold lower than the previously reported compound, 1H4), showed no
cytotoxicity and displayed a plasma half-life greater than 8 h in mice. 1E7-03
bound to PP1 in vitro and prevented shuttling of PP1 into the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our study shows that low MW compounds that
functionally mimic the PP1-binding RVxF peptide can inhibit HIV-1 transcription
by deregulating PP1.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4253456
PMID: 25073485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Aug;42(14):8954-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku611. Epub 2014
Jul 23.

Acute hypoxia affects P-TEFb through HDAC3 and HEXIM1-dependent mechanism to
promote gene-specific transcriptional repression.

Safronova OS(1), Nakahama K(2), Morita I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan Global
Center of Excellence Program, International Research Center for Molecular Science
in Tooth and Bone Diseases, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan. (2)Department of Cellular Physiological
Chemistry, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan. (3)Department of Cellular Physiological
Chemistry, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan Global Center of Excellence Program,
International Research Center for Molecular Science in Tooth and Bone Diseases,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, 
Japan morita.cell@tmd.ac.jp.

Hypoxia is associated with a variety of physiological and pathological conditions
and elicits specific transcriptional responses. The elongation competence of RNA 
Polymerase II is regulated by the positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb)-dependent phosphorylation of Ser2 residues on its C-terminal domain.
Here, we report that hypoxia inhibits transcription at the level of elongation.
The mechanism involves enhanced formation of inactive complex of P-TEFb with its 
inhibitor HEXIM1 in an HDAC3-dependent manner. Microarray transcriptome profiling
of hypoxia primary response genes identified ~79% of these genes being
HEXIM1-dependent. Hypoxic repression of P-TEFb was associated with reduced
acetylation of its Cdk9 and Cyclin T1 subunits. Hypoxia caused nuclear
translocation and co-localization of the Cdk9 and HDAC3/N-CoR repressor complex. 
We demonstrated that the described mechanism is involved in hypoxic repression of
the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) gene. Thus, HEXIM1 and
HDAC-dependent deacetylation of Cdk9 and Cyclin T1 in response to hypoxia
signalling alters the P-TEFb functional equilibrium, resulting in repression of
transcription.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4132729
PMID: 25056306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Virology. 2014 Aug;462-463:328-39. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.05.033. Epub 2014
Jul 9.

Reactivation of latent HIV-1 by new semi-synthetic ingenol esters.

Pandeló José D(1), Bartholomeeusen K(2), da Cunha RD(1), Abreu CM(1), Glinski
J(3), da Costa TB(4), Bacchi Rabay AF(4), Pianowski Filho LF(4), Dudycz LW(5),
Ranga U(6), Peterlin BM(2), Pianowski LF(4), Tanuri A(1), Aguiar RS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil. (2)Department of Medicine,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0703, United States. (3)PlantaAnalytica LLC, Danbury, CT
06810, United States. (4)Kyolab Laboratories, Valinhos, São Paulo 13273-105,
Brazil. (5)Lex Company Research Laboratories, Shirley 01464, MA, United States.
(6)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientific Research, Bengaluru 560064, India. (7)Departamento de Genética,
Instituto de Biologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro
21941-902, Brazil. Electronic address: santana@biologia.ufrj.br.

The ability of HIV to establish long-lived latent infection is mainly due to
transcriptional silencing of viral genome in resting memory T lymphocytes. Here, 
we show that new semi-synthetic ingenol esters reactivate latent HIV reservoirs. 
Amongst the tested compounds, 3-caproyl-ingenol (ING B) was more potent in
reactivating latent HIV than known activators such as SAHA, ingenol
3,20-dibenzoate, TNF-a, PMA and HMBA. ING B activated PKC isoforms followed by
NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation. As virus reactivation is dependent on intact NF-<U+03BA>B
binding sites in the LTR promoter region ING B, we have shown that. ING B was
able to reactivate virus transcription in primary HIV-infected resting cells up
to 12 fold and up to 25 fold in combination with SAHA. Additionally, ING B
promoted up-regulation of P-TEFb subunits CDK9/Cyclin T1. The role of ING B on
promoting both transcription initiation and elongation makes this compound a
strong candidate for an anti-HIV latency drug combined with suppressive HAART.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4383768
PMID: 25014309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 8;9(7):e101539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101539. eCollection
2014.

A distinct expression pattern of cyclin K in mammalian testes suggests a
functional role in spermatogenesis.

Xiang X(1), Deng L(1), Zhang J(2), Zhang X(1), Lei T(1), Luan G(1), Yang C(1),
Xiao ZX(1), Li Q(2), Li Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Growth, Metabolism, and Aging, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and
Eco-Environment, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, College of Life
Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. (2)363 Hospital, Aviation 
Industry Corporation of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Germ cell and embryonic stem cells are inextricably linked in many aspects.
Remarkably both can generate all somatic cell types in organisms. Yet the
molecular regulation accounting for these similarities is not fully understood.
Cyclin K was previously thought to associate with CDK9 to regulate gene
expression. However, we and others have recently shown that its cognate
interacting partners are CDK12 and CDK13 in mammalian cells. We further
demonstrated that cyclin K is essential for embryonic stem cell maintenance. In
this study, we examined the expression of cyclin K in various murine and human
tissues. We found that cyclin K is highly expressed in mammalian testes in a
developmentally regulated manner. During neonatal spermatogenesis, cyclin K is
highly expressed in gonocytes and spermatogonial stem cells. In adult testes,
cyclin K can be detected in spermatogonial stem cells but is absent in
differentiating spermatogonia, spermatids and spermatozoa. Interestingly, the
strongest expression of cyclin K is detected in primary spermatocytes. In
addition, we found that cyclin K is highly expressed in human testicular cancers.
Knockdown of cyclin K in a testicular cancer cell line markedly reduces cell
proliferation. Collectively, we suggest that cyclin K may be a novel molecular
link between germ cell development, cancer development and embryonic stem cell
maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4086901
PMID: 25004108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Clin Invest. 2014 Aug;124(8):3479-88. doi: 10.1172/JCI73805. Epub 2014 Jul 8.

CDK9 inhibitor FIT-039 prevents replication of multiple DNA viruses.

Yamamoto M, Onogi H, Kii I, Yoshida S, Iida K, Sakai H, Abe M, Tsubota T, Ito N, 
Hosoya T, Hagiwara M.

A wide range of antiviral drugs is currently available; however, drug-resistant
viruses have begun to emerge and represent a potential public health risk. Here, 
we explored the use of compounds that inhibit or interfere with the action of
essential host factors to prevent virus replication. In particular, we focused on
the cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) inhibitor, FIT-039, which suppressed
replication of a broad spectrum of DNA viruses through inhibition of mRNA
transcription. Specifically, FIT-039 inhibited replication of herpes simplex
virus 1 (HSV-1), HSV-2, human adenovirus, and human cytomegalovirus in cultured
cells, and topical application of FIT-039 ointment suppressed skin legion
formation in a murine HSV-1 infection model. FIT-039 did not affect cell cycle
progression or cellular proliferation in host cells. Compared with the general
CDK inhibitor flavopiridol, transcriptome analyses of FIT-039-treated cells
revealed that FIT-039 specifically inhibited CDK9. Given at concentrations above 
the inhibitory concentration, FIT-039 did not have a cytotoxic effect on
mammalian cells. Importantly, administration of FIT-039 ameliorated the severity 
of skin lesion formation in mice infected with an acyclovir-resistant HSV-1,
without noticeable adverse effects. Together, these data indicate that FIT-039
has potential as an antiviral agent for clinical therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4109542
PMID: 25003190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Sep 15;34(18):3435-49. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01383-13. Epub 2014
Jul 7.

Targeting SQSTM1/p62 induces cargo loading failure and converts autophagy to
apoptosis via NBK/Bik.

Chen S(1), Zhou L(1), Zhang Y(2), Leng Y(3), Pei XY(1), Lin H(1), Jones R(4),
Orlowski RZ(4), Dai Y(5), Grant S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University and Massey Cancer
Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University and Massey Cancer Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA National Engineering
Laboratory for Druggable Gene and Protein Screening, Northeast Normal University,
Changchun, Jilin, China. (3)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University and Massey Cancer Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA Department of
Hematology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital of Capital Medical University, Beijing,
China. (4)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Virginia
Commonwealth University and Massey Cancer Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA
ydai@vcu.edu stgrant@vcu.edu. (6)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University and Massey Cancer Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA Department of
Biochemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University and Massey Cancer Center and
Virginia Institute of Molecular Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, USA ydai@vcu.edu
stgrant@vcu.edu.

In selective autophagy, the adaptor protein SQSTM1/p62 plays a critical role in
recognizing/loading cargo (e.g., malfolded proteins) into autophagosomes for
lysosomal degradation. Here we report that whereas SQSTM1/p62 levels fluctuated
in a time-dependent manner during autophagy, inhibition or knockdown of
Cdk9/cyclin T1 transcriptionally downregulated SQSTM1/p62 but did not affect
autophagic flux. These interventions, or short hairpin RNA (shRNA) directly
targeting SQSTM1/p62, resulted in cargo loading failure and inefficient
autophagy, phenomena recently described for Huntington's disease neurons. These
events led to the accumulation of the BH3-only protein NBK/Bik on endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) membranes, most likely by blocking loading and autophagic
degradation of NBK/Bik, culminating in apoptosis. Whereas NBK/Bik upregulation
was further enhanced by disruption of distal autophagic events (e.g.,
autophagosome maturation) by chloroquine (CQ) or Lamp2 shRNA, it was
substantially diminished by inhibition of autophagy initiation (e.g., genetically
by shRNA targeting Ulk1, beclin-1, or Atg5 or pharmacologically by
3-methyladenine [3-MA] or spautin-1), arguing that NBK/Bik accumulation stems
from inefficient autophagy. Finally, NBK/Bik knockdown markedly attenuated
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Together, these findings identify novel cross
talk between autophagy and apoptosis, wherein targeting SQSTM1/p62 converts
cytoprotective autophagy to an inefficient form due to cargo loading failure,
leading to NBK/Bik accumulation, which triggers apoptosis.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135623
PMID: 25002530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Retrovirology. 2014 Jul 1;11:51. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-51.

A single point mutation in cyclin T1 eliminates binding to Hexim1, Cdk9 and RNA
but not to AFF4 and enforces repression of HIV transcription.

Kuzmina A, Verstraete N, Galker S, Maatook M, Bensaude O, Taube R(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics Faculty
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P,O, Box 653, Beer-Sheva 
84105, ISRAEL. rantaube@bgu.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) gene expression is primarily
regulated at the step of transcription elongation. The viral Tat protein recruits
the Positive Transcription Elongation Factor b (P-TEFb) and the Super Elongation 
Complex (SEC) to the HIV promoter and enhances transcription by host RNA
polymerase II.
RESULTS: To map residues in the cyclin box of cyclin T1 that mediate the binding 
of P-TEFb to its interacting host partners and support HIV transcription, a pool 
of N-terminal cyclin T1 mutants was generated. Binding and functional assays in
cells identified specific positions in cyclin T1 that are important for (i)
association of P-TEFb with Hexim1, Cdk9 and SEC/AFF4 (ii) supporting
Tat-transactivation in murine cells and (iii) inhibition of basal and
Tat-dependent HIV transcription in human cells. Significantly, a unique cyclin T1
mutant where a Valine residue at position 107 was mutated to Glutamate
(CycT1-V107E) was identified. CycT1-V107E did not bind to Hexim1 or Cdk9, and
also could not assemble on HIV TAR or 7SK-snRNA. However, it bound strongly to
AFF4 and its association with HIV Tat was slightly impaired. CycT1-V107E
efficiently inhibited HIV replication in human T cell lines and in CD4(+) primary
cells, and enforced HIV transcription repression in T cell lines that harbor a
transcriptionally silenced integrated provirus.
CONCLUSIONS: This study outlines the mechanism by which CycT1-V107E mutant
inhibits HIV transcription and enforces viral latency. It defines the importance 
of N-terminal residues of cyclin T1 in mediating contacts of P-TEFb with its
transcription partners, and signifies the requirement of a functional P-TEFb and 
SEC in mediating HIV transcription.

PMCID: PMC4226998
PMID: 24985467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(13):8416-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku529. Epub 2014
Jun 23.

ATM regulates NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent immediate-early genes via RelA Ser 276
phosphorylation coupled to CDK9 promoter recruitment.

Fang L(1), Choudhary S(2), Zhao Y(2), Edeh CB(3), Yang C(4), Boldogh I(5),
Brasier AR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB),
301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555 USA Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX 77555, USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), 301 University Blvd,
Galveston, TX 77555 USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, 301 University
Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555, USA Institute for Translational Sciences, UTMB, 301
University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX
77555 USA. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research
Institute, Weill Cornell University, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Sealy Center for 
Molecular Medicine, UTMB, 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555, USA
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UTMB, 301 University Blvd, Galveston, 
TX 77555, USA. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical
Branch (UTMB), 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555 USA Sealy Center for
Molecular Medicine, UTMB, 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555, USA Institute
for Translational Sciences, UTMB, 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555, USA
arbrasie@utmb.edu.

Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3
kinase-like kinase family, is a master regulator of the double strand DNA
break-repair pathway after genotoxic stress. Here, we found ATM serves as an
essential regulator of TNF-induced NF-kB pathway. We observed that TNF exposure
of cells rapidly induced DNA double strand breaks and activates ATM. TNF-induced 
ROS promote nuclear IKK<U+03B3> association with ubiquitin and its complex formation
with ATM for nuclear export. Activated cytoplasmic ATM is involved in the
selective recruitment of the E3-ubiquitin ligase ß-TrCP to phospho-I<U+03BA>Ba
proteosomal degradation. Importantly, ATM binds and activates the catalytic
subunit of protein kinase A (PKAc), ribosmal S6 kinase that controls RelA Ser 276
phosphorylation. In ATM knockdown cells, TNF-induced RelA Ser 276 phosphorylation
is significantly decreased. We further observed decreased binding and recruitment
of the transcriptional elongation complex containing cyclin dependent kinase-9
(CDK9; a kinase necessary for triggering transcriptional elongation) to promoters
of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent immediate-early cytokine genes, in ATM knockdown cells. We
conclude that ATM is a nuclear damage-response signal modulator of TNF-induced
NF-<U+03BA>B activation that plays a key scaffolding role in I<U+03BA>Ba degradation and RelA
Ser 276 phosphorylation. Our study provides a mechanistic explanation of
decreased innate immune response associated with A-T mutation.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4117761
PMID: 24957606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 25;289(30):21181-90.

Genetic analysis of the structure and function of 7SK small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) in cells.

Fujinaga K, Luo Z, Peterlin BM.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), comprised of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclins T1 (CycT1) or T2 (CycT2), activates 
eukaryotic transcription elongation. In growing cells, P-TEFb exists in active
and inactive forms. In the latter, it is incorporated into the 7SK small nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein, which contains hexamethylene bisacetamide-induced proteins
(HEXIM) 1 or 2, La-related protein 7 (LaRP7), methyl phosphate capping enzyme,
and 7SK small nuclear RNA (7SK). HEXIM1 inhibits the kinase activity of CDK9 via 
interactions between 7SK, HEXIM1, and CycT1. LaRP7 and methyl phosphate capping
enzyme interact with 7SK independently of HEXIM1 and P-TEFb. To analyze genetic
interactions between HEXIM1 and/or LaRP7 and 7SK using a cell-based system, we
established artificial heterologous RNA tethering assays in which reporter gene
expression depended on interactions between selected regions of 7SK and its
cognate binding partners fused to a strong activator. This system enabled us to
map the HEXIM1- and LaRP7- binding regions of 7SK. Assays with various mutant 7SK
plasmid targets revealed that the 5'U-Ubulge and central loop of stem-loop I or
RNA motif 3 of 7SK are required for transactivation, suggesting that HEXIM1 and
CycT1 form a combinatorial binding surface for 7SK. Moreover, a region in HEXIM1 
C-terminal to its previously mapped RNA-binding motif was also required for
interactions between HEXIM1 and 7SK. Finally, a tyrosine-to-alanine mutation in
HEXIM1, which is critical for its inhibitory effect on CDK9, changed HEXIM1 into 
an activator. These cell-based assays elucidate this important aspect of
transcription elongation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4110320
PMID: 24917669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 1;136(3):688-98. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29009. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Targeting CDK9 by wogonin and related natural flavones potentiates the
anti-cancer efficacy of the Bcl-2 family inhibitor ABT-263.

Polier G(1), Giaisi M, Köhler R, Müller WW, Lutz C, Buss EC, Krammer PH, Li-Weber
M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumorimmunology Program (D030), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Tumor initiation, progression and resistance to therapies are tightly associated 
with over-expression of anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2, Bcl-x(L), Bcl-w and Mcl-1.
ABT-263 (Navitoclax), an orally bio-available small-molecule mimetic of the Bcl-2
homology domain 3, inhibits Bcl-2, Bcl-x(L), and Bcl-w and has shown anti-cancer 
effects mainly on lymphomas and lymphocytic leukemia. Despite promising results
obtained from the clinical trials, the use of ABT-263 in patients is dose-limited
due to causing thrombocytopenia via inhibition of Bcl-x(L) in platelets. ABT-199 
specifically inhibits Bcl-2; however, its use is limited to tumors
over-expressing only Bcl-2. Besides, many tumors resist treatment due to high
levels of Mcl-1 expression or develop resistance via up-regulation of Mcl-1
during long-term exposure. These obstacles highlight the demand to improve the
ABT-263-based therapy. In this study, we show that anti-cancer flavones, e.g.,
wogonin, baicalein, apigenin, chrysin and luteolin enhance ABT-263-induced
apoptosis in different cancer cell lines and in primary AML and ALL cells by
down-regulation of Mcl-1 expression. Importantly, wogonin does not enhance the
toxicity of ABT-263 to proliferating normal T cells and thrombocytes. Wogonin
also potentiates the lethality of ABT-263 in cancer cells which have acquired
resistance to ABT-263. Furthermore, we show that combination of wogonin with
ABT-263 promotes in vivo tumor regression in a human T-cell leukemia xenograft
mouse model. Our study demonstrates that wogonin (and related flavones) reduce
the effective dose of ABT-263 thereby possibly decreasing the risk of adverse
side effects.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24895203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. BMC Res Notes. 2014 May 16;7:301. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-301.

CDK9 inhibition strategy defines distinct sets of target genes.

Garriga J, Graña X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, AHP bldg,, room 308,
3307 North Broad St,, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. xgrana@temple.edu.

BACKGROUND: CDK9 is the catalytic subunit of the Positive Transcription
Elongation Factor b (P-TEFb), which phosphorylates the CTD of RNAPII and negative
elongation factors enabling for productive elongation after initiation. CDK9
associates with T-type cyclins and cyclin K and its activity is tightly regulated
in cells at different levels. CDK9 is also the catalytic subunit of TAK (Tat
activating Kinase), essential for HIV1 replication. Because of CDK9's potential
as a therapeutic target in AIDS, cancer, inflammation, and cardiomyophathy it is 
important to understand the consequences of CDK9 inhibition. A previous gene
expression profiling study performed with human glioblastoma T98G cells in which 
CDK9 activity was inhibited either with a dominant negative mutant form of CDK9
(dnCDK9) or the pharmacological inhibitor Flavopiridol unveiled striking
differences in gene expression effects. In the present report we extended these
studies by (1) using both immortalized normal human fibroblasts and primary human
astrocytes, (2) eliminating potential experimental variability due to
transduction methodology and (3) also modulating CDK9 activity with siRNA.
FINDINGS: Striking differences in the effects on gene expression resulting from
the strategy used to inhibit CDK9 activity (dnCDK9 or FVP) remain even when
potential variability due to viral transduction is eliminated. siRNA mediated
CDK9 knockdown in human fibroblasts and astrocytes efficiently reduced CDK9
expression and led to potent changes in gene expression that exhibit little
correlation with the effects of dnCDK9 or FVP. Interestingly, HEXIM1 a validated 
CDK9 target gene, was found to be potently downregulated by dnCDK9, FVP and
siCDK9, but the cluster of genes with expression profiles similar to HEXIM1 was
small. Finally, cluster analysis of all treatments revealed higher correlation
between treatments than cell type origin.
CONCLUSION: The nature of the strategy used to inhibit CDK9 profoundly affects
the patterns of gene expression resulting from CDK9 inhibition. These results
suggest multiple variables that affect outcome, including kinetics of inhibition,
potency, off-target effects, and selectivity issues. This is particularly
important when considering CDK9 as a potential target for therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4045923
PMID: 24886624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nucleus. 2014 May-Jun;5(3):224-36. doi: 10.4161/nucl.29347. Epub 2014 May 30.

RNA polymerase II transcription elongation and Pol II CTD Ser2 phosphorylation: A
tail of two kinases.

Bowman EA(1), Kelly WG(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; Research Triangle Park,
NC USA. (2)Department of Biology; Emory University; Atlanta, GA USA.

The transition between initiation and productive elongation during RNA Polymerase
II (Pol II) transcription is a well-appreciated point of regulation across many
eukaryotes. Elongating Pol II is modified by phosphorylation of serine 2 (Ser2)
on its carboxy terminal domain (CTD) by two kinases, Bur1/Ctk1 in yeast and
Cdk9/Cdk12 in metazoans. Here, we discuss the roles and regulation of these
kinases and their relationship to Pol II elongation control, and focus on recent 
data from work in C. elegans that point out gaps in our current understand of
transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC4133218
PMID: 24879308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Oncol. 2014 Aug;45(2):804-12. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2467. Epub 2014 May 26.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor SNS-032 induces apoptosis in breast cancer 
cells via depletion of Mcl-1 and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein and
displays antitumor activity in vivo.

Xie G(1), Tang H(2), Wu S(1), Chen J(1), Liu J(3), Liao C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510623, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, Shenzhen Maternity and 
Child Healthcare Hospital Affiliated to Southern Medical University, Shenzhen
518028, P.R. China. (3)College of Light Industry and Food Science, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P.R. China.

Inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) have been reported to have
activities in many types of cancer cells by inhibiting Cdk7 and Cdk9, which
control transcription. SNS-032 is a potent and selective inhibitor of Cdk2, Cdk7 
and Cdk9 and has emerged in clinical trials. Here, we examined the viability of
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells in the presence of SNS-032 and observed 
a dose-dependent inhibition of cellular proliferation in both cell lines. SNS-032
had a direct apoptosis-inducing effect through both the extrinsic and intrinsic
apoptotic pathways in breast cancer cells as shown by a dose-dependent increase
in Annexin V-positive cells and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP nick?end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells, as well as activation of
caspase-8, -9 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). At the molecular level,
SNS-032 induced a marked dephosphorylation of serine 2 and 5 of RNA polymerase
(RNA Pol) II and blocked RNA synthesis. Consistent with the inherently rapid
turnover rates of their transcripts and proteins, the anti-apoptotic proteins
Mcl-1 and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) were rapidly reduced on 
exposure to SNS-032. Our results also indicated that SNS-032 suppressed the
growth of breast cancer xenografts in mice. These data demonstrate that the use
of SNS-032 may be a rational and novel therapeutic strategy for human breast
cancer and warrants further clinical investigation.

PMID: 24865236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):19-24. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.057. Epub 2014 May 22.

JUNB promotes the survival of Flavopiridol treated human breast cancer cells.

Hicks M(1), Hu Q(2), Macrae E(3), DeWille J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, 1925 Coffey
Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: hicks.270@osu.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, 1925 Coffey
Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Medical Oncology, 4th Floor, Starling Loving Hall, 320 West 10th Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: macrae.3@osu.edu. (4)Department of
Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, 1925 Coffey Road, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. Electronic address: dewille.1@osu.edu.

Chemotherapy resistance is a major obstacle to achieving durable
progression-free-survival in breast cancer patients. Identifying resistance
mechanisms is crucial to the development of effective breast cancer therapies.
Immediate early genes (IEGs) function in the initial cellular reprogramming
response to alterations in the extracellular environment and IEGs have been
implicated in cancer cell development and progression. The purpose of this study 
was to investigate the influence of kinase inhibitors on IEG expression in breast
cancer cells. The results demonstrated that Flavopiridol (FP), a CDK9 inhibitor, 
effectively reduced gene expression. FP treatment, however, consistently produced
a delayed induction of JUNB gene expression in multiple breast cancer cell lines.
Similar results were obtained with Sorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor and U0126,
a MEK1 inhibitor. Functional studies revealed that JUNB plays a pro-survival role
in kinase inhibitor treated breast cancer cells. These results demonstrate a
unique induction of JUNB in response to kinase inhibitor therapies that may be
among the earliest events in the progression to treatment resistance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2014 Oct;84(4):402-8. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12330. Epub 2014 May 
12.

Arylazopyrazole AAP1742 inhibits CDKs and induces apoptosis in multiple myeloma
cells via Mcl-1 downregulation.

Jorda R(1), Navrátilová J, Huková Z, Schütznerová E, Cankar P, Strnad M, Krytof
V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Centre of the Region Haná for
Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Institute of Experimental Botany ASCR
and Palacký University, lechtitelu 11, 783 71, Olomouc, Czech Republic; Regional
Centre for Applied Molecular Oncology, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, lutý
kopec 7, 656 53, Brno, Czech Republic.

Inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases 9 have been developed as potential
anticancer drugs for the treatment of multiple myeloma. We have previously
prepared a library of arylazo-3,5-diaminopyrazole inhibitors of CDKs. Here, we
describe a novel member, AAP1742 (CDK9 inhibition with IC(50) = 0.28 µm), that
reduces the viability of multiple myeloma cell lines in low micromolar
concentrations. Consistent with inhibition of CDK9, AAP1742 decreases the
phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II and inhibits mRNA synthesis of
anti-apoptotic proteins Mcl-1, Bcl-2, and XIAP, followed by apoptosis in the
RPMI-8226 cell line in a dose- and a time-dependent manner. These results are
consistent with the biochemical profile of AAP1742 and further suggest cellular
inhibition of CDK9 as a possible target for anticancer drugs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 24803299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Mol Graph Model. 2014 May;50:100-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2014.04.002. Epub 2014
Apr 13.

In silico design of small molecule inhibitors of CDK9/cyclin T1 interaction.

Randjelovic J(1), Eric S(2), Savic V(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Organic Chemistry, 
Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia; University of Belgrade, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221
Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: jelenar@pharmacy.bg.ac.rs. (2)University of
Belgrade, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Vojvode
Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia. (3)University of Belgrade, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Department of Organic Chemistry, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade,
Serbia. Electronic address: vladimir.savic@pharmacy.bg.ac.rs.

In order to design a small molecule which potentially may interfere with
CDK9/cyclin T1 complex formation and therefore influence its physiological role, 
a computational study of dynamics and druggability of CDK9 binding surface was
conducted. Druggability estimates and pocket opening analyses indicated binding
regions of cyclin T1 residues, Phe 146 and Lys 6, as starting points for the
design of small molecules with the potential to inhibit the CDK9/cyclin T1
association. A pharmacophore model was created, based on these two residues and
used to select potential inhibitor structures. Binding energies of the inhibitors
were estimated with MM-GBSA. A good correlation of MM-GBSA energies and FTMap
druggability predictions was observed. Amongst studied compounds a derivative of 
2-amino-8-hydroxyquinoline was identified as the best potential candidate to
inhibit CDK9/cyclin T1 interactions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biodiscovery. 2013 Mar 1;7(4):4.

Modelling c-Abl Signalling in Activated Neutrophils: the Anti-inflammatory Effect
of Seliciclib.

Jackson RC(1), Radivoyevitch T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacometrics Ltd., Cambridge, UK. (2)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

When mammalian tissues are infected by bacteria or fungi, inflammatory cytokines 
are released that cause circulating neutrophils to invade the infected tissue.
The cytosolic tyrosine kinase, c-Abl, in these tissue neutrophils is activated by
TNFa. c-Abl then phosphorylates STAT transcription factors, which results in
production of the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1. The normally short-lived tissue
neutrophils are then unable to enter apoptosis. c-Abl also causes release of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) from the mitochondria of the activated neutrophils.
These ROS, and ROS generated by NADPH oxidase, are bactericidal agents of the
innate immune system. In some inflammatory diseases, such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), the invading neutrophils become permanently activated, 
and the resulting ROS overproduction causes severe tissue damage. The
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, seliciclib, blocks transcription through
inhibition of cdk9. This results in a relatively rapid decline of antiapoptotic
Mcl-1 transcripts in activated neutrophils, an increase in neutrophil apoptosis, 
and less ROS leakage and oxidative damage. We present here a model of neutrophil 
kinetics that simulates the principal pathways of c-Abl signalling and use it to 
explore possible treatment options for inflammatory lung disease.

PMCID: PMC3994723
PMID: 24765523  [PubMed]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(13):2488-98. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00181-14. Epub 2014 Apr 
21.

Function and control of RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain phosphorylation in
vertebrate transcription and RNA processing.

Hsin JP(1), Xiang K(1), Manley JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York,
USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA jlm2@columbia.edu.

The C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase II largest subunit (the Rpb1 CTD) is 
composed of tandem heptad repeats of the consensus sequence
Y(1)S(2)P(3)T(4)S(5)P(6)S(7). We reported previously that Thr 4 is phosphorylated
and functions in histone mRNA 3'-end formation in chicken DT40 cells. Here, we
have extended our studies on Thr 4 and to other CTD mutations by using these
cells. We found that an Rpb1 derivative containing only the N-terminal half of
the CTD, as well as a similar derivative containing all-consensus repeats (26r), 
conferred full viability, while the C-terminal half, with more-divergent repeats,
did not, reflecting a strong and specific defect in snRNA 3'-end formation.
Mutation in 26r of all Ser 2 (S2A) or Ser 5 (S5A) residues resulted in lethality,
while Ser 7 (S7A) mutants were fully viable. While S2A and S5A cells displayed
defects in transcription and RNA processing, S7A cells behaved identically to 26r
cells in all respects. Finally, we found that Thr 4 was phosphorylated by
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 in cells and dephosphorylated both in vitro and in vivo
by the phosphatase Fcp1.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054314
PMID: 24752900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Retrovirology. 2014 Apr 17;11:30. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-30.

HIV-1 Tat second exon limits the extent of Tat-mediated modulation of
interferon-stimulated genes in antigen presenting cells.

Kukkonen S, Martinez-Viedma Mdel P, Kim N, Manrique M, Aldovini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Department of Medicine,
Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
anna.aldovini@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: We have shown that HIV-1 Tat interaction with MAP2K3, MAP2K6, and
IRF7 promoters is key to IFN-stimulated genes (ISG) activation in immature
dendritic cells and macrophages.
RESULTS: We evaluated how Tat alleles and mutants differ in cellular gene
modulation of immature dendritic cells and monocyte-derived macrophages and what 
similarities this modulation has with that induced by interferons. The tested
alleles and mutants modulated to different degrees ISG, without concomitant
induction of interferons. The first exon TatSF21-72 and the minimal
transactivator TatSF21-58, all modulated genes to a significantly greater extent 
than full-length wild type, two-exon Tat, indicating that Tat second exon is
critical in reducing the innate response triggered by HIV-1 in these cells.
Mutants with reduced LTR transactivation had a substantially reduced effect on
host gene expression modulation than wild type TatSF2. However, the more potent
LTR transactivator TatSF2A58T modulated ISG expression to a lower degree compared
to TatSF2. A cellular gene modulation similar to that induced by Tat and Tat
mutants in immature dendritic cells could be observed in monocyte-derived
macrophages, with the most significant pathways affected by Tat being the same in
both cell types. Tat expression in cells deleted of the type I IFN locus or
receptor resulted in a gene modulation pattern similar to that induced in primary
immature dendritic cells and monocyte-derived macrophages, excluding the
involvement of type I IFNs in Tat-mediated gene modulation. ISG activation
depends on Tat interaction with MAP2K3, MAP2K6, and IRF7 promoters and a single
exon Tat protein more strongly modulated the luciferase activity mediated by
MAP2K3, MAP2K6, and IRF7 promoter sequences located 5' of the RNA start site than
the wild type two-exon Tat, while a cysteine and lysine Tat mutants, reduced in
LTR transactivation, had negligible effects on these promoters. Chemical
inhibition of CDK9 or Sp1 decreased Tat activation of MAP2K3-, MAP2K6-, and
IRF7-mediated luciferase transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data indicate that the second exon of Tat is
critical to the containment of the innate response stimulated by Tat in antigen
presenting cells and support a role for Tat in stimulating cellular transcription
via its interaction with transcription factors present at promoters.

PMCID: PMC4036831
PMID: 24742347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Med Chem. 2014 May 22;57(10):3939-65. doi: 10.1021/jm401742r. Epub 2014 May 2.

Synthesis and evaluation of phosphorus containing, specific CDK9/CycT1
inhibitors.

Németh G(1), Greff Z, Sipos A, Varga Z, Székely R, Sebestyén M, Jászay Z, Béni S,
Nemes Z, Pirat JL, Volle JN, Virieux D, Gyuris Á, Kelemenics K, Ay E, Minarovits 
J, Szathmary S, Kéri G, Orfi L.

Author information: 
(1)Vichem Chemie Ltd. , Budapest 1022, Hungary.

Although there is a significant effort in the design of a selective CDK9/CycT1
inhibitor, no compound has been proven to be a specific inhibitor of this kinase 
so far. The aim of this research was to develop novel and selective phosphorus
containing CDK9/CycT1 inhibitors. Molecules bearing phosphonamidate, phosphonate,
and phosphinate moieties were synthesized. Prepared compounds were evaluated in
an enzymatic CDK9/CycT1 assay. The most potent molecules were tested in
cell-based toxicity and HIV proliferation assays. Selectivity of shortlisted
compounds against CDKs and other kinases was tested. The best compound was shown 
to be a highly specific, ATP-competitive inhibitor of CDK9/CycT1 with antiviral
activity.

PMID: 24742150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(11):1788-97. doi: 10.4161/cc.28756. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Crystal structure of HIV-1 Tat complexed with human P-TEFb and AFF4.

Gu J(1), Babayeva ND(1), Suwa Y(1), Baranovskiy AG(1), Price DH(2), Tahirov
TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases; University of
Nebraska Medical Center; Omaha, NE USA. (2)Biochemistry Department; University of
Iowa; Iowa City, IA USA.

Developing anti-viral therapies targeting HIV-1 transcription has been hampered
by the limited structural knowledge of the proteins involved. HIV-1 hijacks the
cellular machinery that controls RNA polymerase II elongation through an
interaction of HIV-1 Tat with the positive transcription elongation factor
P-TEFb, which interacts with an AF4 family member (AFF1/2/3/4) in the super
elongation complex (SEC). Because inclusion of TatP-TEFb into the SEC is
critical for HIV transcription, we have determined the crystal structure of the
TatAFF4P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat (residues 1-48), human Cyclin T1
(1-266), human Cdk9 (7-332), and human AFF4 (27-69). Tat binding to AFF4P-TEFb
causes concerted structural changes in AFF4 via a shift of helix H5' of Cyclin T1
and the a-3 10 helix of AFF4. The interaction between Tat and AFF4 provides
structural constraints that explain tolerated Tat mutations. Analysis of the
Tat-binding surface of AFF4 coupled with modeling of all other AF4 family members
suggests that AFF1 and AFF4 would be preferred over AFF2 or AFF3 for interaction 
with TatP-TEFb. The structure establishes that the Tat-TAR recognition motif
(TRM) in Cyclin T1 interacts with both Tat and AFF4, leading to the exposure of
arginine side chains for binding to TAR RNA. Furthermore, modeling of Tat Lys28
acetylation suggests that the acetyl group would be in a favorable position for
H-bond formation with Asn257 of TRM, thereby stabilizing the TRM in Cyclin T1,
and provides a structural basis for the modulation of TAR RNA binding by
acetylation of Tat Lys28.

PMCID: PMC4111725
PMID: 24727379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jun;13(6):1442-56. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0849. Epub
2014 Mar 31.

A novel CDK9 inhibitor shows potent antitumor efficacy in preclinical hematologic
tumor models.

Yin T(1), Lallena MJ(1), Kreklau EL(1), Fales KR(1), Carballares S(1), Torrres
R(1), Wishart GN(1), Ajamie RT(1), Cronier DM(1), Iversen PW(1), Meier TI(1),
Foreman RT(1), Zeckner D(1), Sissons SE(1), Halstead BW(1), Lin AB(1), Donoho
GP(1), Qian Y(1), Li S(1), Wu S(1), Aggarwal A(1), Ye XS(1), Starling JJ(1),
Gaynor RB(1), de Dios A(2), Du J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly Corporate Center,
Indianapolis, Indiana; Eli Lilly and Company, Alcobendas, Madrid, Spain; and Eli 
Lilly and Company, Windlesham, United Kingdom. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Eli
Lilly and Company, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; Eli Lilly and
Company, Alcobendas, Madrid, Spain; and Eli Lilly and Company, Windlesham, United
Kingdom du_jian@lilly.com de_dios_alfonso@lilly.com.

DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) largest subunit RPB1 C-terminal domain 
(CTD) kinases, including CDK9, are serine/threonine kinases known to regulate
transcriptional initiation and elongation by phosphorylating Ser 2, 5, and 7
residues on CTD. Given the reported dysregulation of these kinases in some
cancers, we asked whether inhibiting CDK9 may induce stress response and
preferentially kill tumor cells. Herein, we describe a potent CDK9 inhibitor,
LY2857785, that significantly reduces RNAP II CTD phosphorylation and
dramatically decreases MCL1 protein levels to result in apoptosis in a variety of
leukemia and solid tumor cell lines. This molecule inhibits the growth of a broad
panel of cancer cell lines, and is particularly efficacious in leukemia cells,
including orthotopic leukemia preclinical models as well as in ex vivo acute
myeloid leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia patient tumor samples. Thus,
inhibition of CDK9 may represent an interesting approach as a cancer therapeutic 
target, especially in hematologic malignancies.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24688048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 24;5:3505. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4505.

The structure and substrate specificity of human Cdk12/Cyclin K.

Bösken CA(1), Farnung L(2), Hintermair C(3), Merzel Schachter M(4),
Vogel-Bachmayr K(2), Blazek D(5), Anand K(6), Fisher RP(4), Eick D(3), Geyer
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Group Physical Biochemistry, Center of Advanced European Studies and
Research, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, Bonn 53175, Germany [2] Department of Physical
Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11,
Dortmund 44227, Germany. (2)Department of Physical Biochemistry, Max Planck
Institute of Molecular Physiology, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, Dortmund 44227, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Epigenetics, Helmholtz Center Munich, Center for
Integrated Protein Science (CIPSM), Marchioninistrasse 25, München 81377,
Germany. (4)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA. (5)Central European
Institute of Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno 62500, Czech Republic.
(6)Group Physical Biochemistry, Center of Advanced European Studies and Research,
Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, Bonn 53175, Germany.

Phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) by
cyclin-dependent kinases is important for productive transcription. Here we
determine the crystal structure of Cdk12/CycK and analyse its requirements for
substrate recognition. Active Cdk12/CycK is arranged in an open conformation
similar to that of Cdk9/CycT but different from those of cell cycle kinases.
Cdk12 contains a C-terminal extension that folds onto the N- and C-terminal lobes
thereby contacting the ATP ribose. The interaction is mediated by an HE motif
followed by a polybasic cluster that is conserved in transcriptional CDKs.
Cdk12/CycK showed the highest activity on a CTD substrate prephosphorylated at
position Ser7, whereas the common Lys7 substitution was not recognized.
Flavopiridol is most potent towards Cdk12 but was still 10-fold more potent
towards Cdk9. T-loop phosphorylation of Cdk12 required coexpression with a
Cdk-activating kinase. These results suggest the regulation of Pol II elongation 
by a relay of transcriptionally active CTD kinases.

PMCID: PMC3973122
PMID: 24662513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncotarget. 2014 May 30;5(10):3023-8.

Linking off-target kinase pharmacology to the differential cellular effects
observed among PARP inhibitors.

Antolín AA(1), Mestres J.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Pharmacology, Research Program on Biomedical Informatics, IMIM
Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Doctor 
Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

PARP inhibitors hold promise as a novel class of targeted anticancer drugs.
However, their true mechanism of action is still not well understood following
recent reports that show marked differences in cellular effects. Here, we
demonstrate that three PARP drug candidates, namely, rucaparib, veliparib, and
olaparib, have a clearly different in vitro affinity profile across a panel of
diverse kinases selected using a computational approach that relates proteins by 
ligand similarity. In this respect, rucaparib inhibits nine kinases with
micromolar affinity, including PIM1, PIM2, PRKD2, DYRK1A, CDK1, CDK9, HIPK2, CK2,
and ALK. In contrast, olaparib does not inhibit any of the sixteen kinases
tested. In between, veliparib inhibits only two, namely, PIM1 and CDK9. The
differential kinase pharmacology observed among PARP inhibitors provides a
plausible explanation to their different cellular effects and offers unexplored
opportunities for this drug class, but alerts also on the risk associated to
transferring directly both preclinical and clinical outcomes from one PARP drug
candidate to another.

PMCID: PMC4102788
PMID: 24632590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 13;9(3):e91200. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091200. eCollection
2014.

Nonproteolytic roles of 19S ATPases in transcription of CIITApIV genes.

Maganti N(1), Moody TD(1), Truax AD(1), Thakkar M(1), Spring AM(2), Germann
MW(2), Greer SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell Biology and Immunology, Department of Biology,
Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America.

Accumulating evidence shows the 26S proteasome is involved in the regulation of
gene expression. We and others have demonstrated that proteasome components bind 
to sites of gene transcription, regulate covalent modifications to histones, and 
are involved in the assembly of activator complexes in mammalian cells. The
mechanisms by which the proteasome influences transcription remain unclear,
although prior observations suggest both proteolytic and non-proteolytic
activities. Here, we define novel, non-proteolytic, roles for each of the three
19S heterodimers, represented by the 19S ATPases Sug1, S7, and S6a, in mammalian 
gene expression using the inflammatory gene CIITApIV. These 19S ATPases are
recruited to induced CIITApIV promoters and also associate with CIITA coding
regions. Additionally, these ATPases interact with elongation factor PTEFb
complex members CDK9 and Hexim-1 and with Ser5 phosphorylated RNA Pol II. Both
the generation of transcripts from CIITApIV and efficient recruitment of RNA Pol 
II to CIITApIV are negatively impacted by siRNA mediated knockdown of these 19S
ATPases. Together, these results define novel roles for 19S ATPases in mammalian 
gene expression and indicate roles for these ATPases in promoting transcription
processes.

PMCID: PMC3953376
PMID: 24625964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 May;1839(5):355-63. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.02.018.
Epub 2014 Mar 6.

RNAi screen in Drosophila larvae identifies histone deacetylase 3 as a positive
regulator of the hsp70 heat shock gene expression during heat shock.

Achary BG(1), Campbell KM(1), Co IS(1), Gilmour DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.
Electronic address: dsg11@psu.edu.

The transcription regulation of the Drosophila hsp70 gene is a complex process
that involves the regulation of multiple steps, including the establishment of
paused Pol II and release of Pol II into elongation upon heat shock activation.
While the major players involved in the regulation of gene expression have been
studied in detail, additional factors involved in this process continue to be
discovered. To identify factors involved in hsp70 expression, we developed a
screen that capitalizes on a visual assessment of heat shock activation using a
hsp70-beta galactosidase reporter and publicly available RNAi fly lines to
deplete candidate proteins. We validated the screen by showing that the depletion
of HSF, CycT, Cdk9, Nurf 301, or ELL prevented the full induction of hsp70 by
heat shock. Our screen also identified the histone deacetylase HDAC3 and its
associated protein SMRTER as positive regulators of hsp70 activation.
Additionally, we show that HDAC3 and SMRTER contribute to hsp70 gene expression
at a step subsequent to HSF-mediated activation and release of the paused Pol II 
that resides at the promoter prior to heat shock induction.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4013238
PMID: 24607507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 21;9(2):e89228. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089228. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of post-transcriptional RNA processing by CDK inhibitors and its
implication in anti-viral therapy.

Holcakova J(1), Muller P(1), Tomasec P(2), Hrstka R(1), Nekulova M(1), Krystof
V(3), Strnad M(3), Wilkinson GW(2), Vojtesek B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Regional Centre for Applied Molecular Oncology, Masaryk Memorial Cancer
Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. (2)School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom. (3)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Faculty of Science, 
Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic ; Institute of Experimental Botany AS
CR, Olomouc, Czech Republic.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are key regulators of the cell cycle and RNA
polymerase II mediated transcription. Several pharmacological CDK inhibitors are 
currently in clinical trials as potential cancer therapeutics and some of them
also exhibit antiviral effects. Olomoucine II and roscovitine, purine-based
inhibitors of CDKs, were described as effective antiviral agents that inhibit
replication of a broad range of wild type human viruses. Olomoucine II and
roscovitine show high selectivity for CDK7 and CDK9, with important functions in 
the regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription. RNA polymerase II is necessary
for viral transcription and following replication in cells. We analyzed the
effect of inhibition of CDKs by olomoucine II on gene expression from viral
promoters and compared its effect to widely-used roscovitine. We found that both 
roscovitine and olomoucine II blocked the phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II
C-terminal domain. However the repression of genes regulated by viral promoters
was strongly dependent on gene localization. Both roscovitine and olomoucine II
inhibited expression only when the viral promoter was not integrated into
chromosomal DNA. In contrast, treatment of cells with genome-integrated viral
promoters increased their expression even though there was decreased
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. To define the
mechanism responsible for decreased gene expression after pharmacological CDK
inhibitor treatment, the level of mRNA transcription from extrachromosomal DNA
was determined. Interestingly, our results showed that inhibition of RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain phosphorylation increased the number of
transcribed mRNAs. However, some of these mRNAs were truncated and lacked
polyadenylation, which resulted in decreased translation. These results suggest
that phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain is critical for
linking transcription and posttrancriptional processing of mRNA expressed from
extrachromosomal DNA.

PMCID: PMC3931720
PMID: 24586613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochemistry. 2014 Mar 25;53(11):1753-67. doi: 10.1021/bi5000178. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

A kinase-independent activity of Cdk9 modulates glucocorticoid receptor-mediated 
gene induction.

Zhu R(1), Lu X, Pradhan M, Armstrong SP, Storchan GB, Chow CC, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases/Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, and Laboratory
of Biological Modeling, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United
States.

A gene induction competition assay has recently uncovered new inhibitory
activities of two transcriptional cofactors, NELF-A and NELF-B, in
glucocorticoid-regulated transactivation. NELF-A and -B are also components of
the NELF complex, which participates in RNA polymerase II pausing shortly after
the initiation of gene transcription. We therefore asked if cofactors (Cdk9 and
ELL) best known to affect paused polymerase could reverse the effects of NELF-A
and -B. Unexpectedly, Cdk9 and ELL augmented, rather than prevented, the effects 
of NELF-A and -B. Furthermore, Cdk9 actions are not blocked either by Ckd9
inhibitors (DRB or flavopiridol) or by two Cdk9 mutants defective in kinase
activity. The mode and site of action of NELF-A and -B mutants with an altered
NELF domain are similarly affected by wild-type and kinase-dead Cdk9. We conclude
that Cdk9 is a new modulator of GR action, that Ckd9 and ELL have novel
activities in GR-regulated gene expression, that NELF-A and -B can act separately
from the NELF complex, and that Cdk9 possesses activities that are independent of
Cdk9 kinase activity. Finally, the competition assay has succeeded in ordering
the site of action of several cofactors of GR transactivation. Extension of this 
methodology should be helpful in determining the site and mode of action of
numerous additional cofactors and in reducing unwanted side effects.

PMCID: PMC3985961
PMID: 24559102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2015 Jan;31(1):137-41. doi: 10.1089/AID.2013.0288.

Short communication: SAHA (vorinostat) induces CDK9 Thr-186 (T-loop)
phosphorylation in resting CD4+ T cells: implications for reactivation of latent 
HIV.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Liu H, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine 
, Houston, Texas.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) suberoylanilide hydroxyamic acid
(SAHA), also known as vorinostat, has recently been reported to activate latent
HIV-1 in patients undergoing antiretroviral therapy. It is possible that SAHA
reactivation of latent viruses may involve effects on cellular transcription
factors such as positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), a protein
kinase whose core is composed of CDK9 and Cyclin T1. P-TEFb is recruited by the
HIV-1 Tat protein to activate productive RNA polymerase II elongation of the
integrated provirus. We found that SAHA treatment of isolated resting CD4(+) T
cells induced CDK9 Thr-186 (T-loop) phosphorylation in six of eight healthy
donors and increased Cyclin T1 expression in one donor; Thr-186 phosphorylation
is required for P-TEFb function. Disulfiram, another small molecule currently
under evaluation in clinical trials for reactivation of latent HIV-1, was also
found capable of inducing CDK9 Thr-186 phosphorylation and Cyclin T1 levels in
resting CD4(+) T cells from healthy donors. In a Jurkat CD4(+) T cells HIV-1
latency system, disulfiram reactivated the latent provirus and induced CDK9
Thr-186 phosphorylation. Our findings suggest that small molecules capable of
reactivating latent HIV-1 in resting CD4(+) T cells may function in part by
increasing CDK9 Thr-186 phosphorylation and perhaps Cyclin T1 expression, thereby
up-regulating P-TEFb function.

PMCID: PMC4287136
PMID: 24528253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:964964. doi: 10.1155/2014/964964. Epub 2014 Jan 12.

Regulation of CDK9 activity by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation.

Nekhai S(1), Petukhov M(2), Breuer D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University, 520
W Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20059, USA. (2)Division of Molecular and Radiation 
Biophysics, Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina 188350, Russia ;
Department of Biophysics, St. Petersburg State Polytechnical University,
Polytechnicheskaya Street 29, St. Petersburg 195251, Russia.

HIV-1 transcription is regulated by CDK9/cyclin T1, which, unlike a typical cell 
cycle-dependent kinase, is regulated by associating with 7SK small nuclear
ribonuclear protein complex (snRNP). While the protein components of this complex
are well studied, the mechanism of the complex formation is still not fully
understood. The association of CDK9/cyclin T1 with 7SK snRNP is, in part,
regulated by a reversible CDK9 phosphorylation. Here, we present a comprehensive 
review of the kinases and phosphatases involved in CDK9 phosphorylation and
discuss their role in regulation of HIV-1 replication and potential for being
targeted for drug development. We propose a novel pathway of HIV-1 transcription 
regulation via CDK9 Ser-90 phosphorylation by CDK2 and CDK9 Ser-175
dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase-1.

PMCID: PMC3913462
PMID: 24524087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Br J Cancer. 2014 Mar 4;110(5):1189-98. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.54. Epub 2014 Feb
11.

Comparative drug screening in NUT midline carcinoma.

Beesley AH(1), Stirnweiss A(1), Ferrari E(1), Endersby R(1), Howlett M(1), Failes
TW(2), Arndt GM(2), Charles AK(3), Cole CH(4), Kees UR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia.
(2)ACRF Drug Discovery Centre for Childhood Cancer, Children's Cancer Institute
Australia for Medical Research, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW, Sydney,
Australia. (3)1] Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital for
Children, Perth, Western Australia [2] School of Paediatrics and Child Health,
University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia. (4)School of
Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
Australia.

BACKGROUND: The NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) is a rare but fatal cancer for which 
systematic testing of therapy options has never been performed.
METHODS: On the basis of disease biology, we compared the efficacy of the CDK9
inhibitor flavopiridol (FP) with a panel of anticancer agents in NMC cell lines
and mouse xenografts.
RESULTS: In vitro anthracyclines, topoisomerase inhibitors, and microtubule
poisons were among the most cytotoxic drug classes for NMC cells, while efficacy 
of the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 varied considerably between lines carrying
different BRD4 (bromodomain-containing protein 4)-NUT (nuclear protein in testis)
translocations. Efficacy of FP was comparable to vincristine and doxorubicin,
drugs that have been previously used in NMC patients. All three compounds showed 
significantly better activity than etoposide and vorinostat, agents that have
also been used in NMC patients. Statins and antimetabolites demonstrated
intermediate single-agent efficacy. In vivo, vincristine significantly inhibited 
tumour growth in two different NMC xenografts. Flavopiridol in vivo was
significantly effective in one of the two NMC xenograft lines, demonstrating the 
biological heterogeneity of this disease.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that FP may be of benefit to a subset of
patients with NMC, and warrant a continued emphasis on microtubule inhibitors,
anthracyclines, and topoisomerase inhibitors as effective drug classes in this
disease.

PMCID: PMC3950881
PMID: 24518598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):9918-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.539015. Epub 2014 
Feb 10.

Release of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) from 7SK small
nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) activates hexamethylene bisacetamide-inducible 
protein (HEXIM1) transcription.

Liu P(1), Xiang Y, Fujinaga K, Bartholomeeusen K, Nilson KA, Price DH, Peterlin
BM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Immunology, Rosalind
Russell Medical Research Center, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0703, and.

By phosphorylating negative elongation factors and the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II (RNAPII), positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb),
which is composed of CycT1 or CycT2 and CDK9, activates eukaryotic transcription 
elongation. In growing cells, it is found in active and inactive forms. In the
former, free P-TEFb is a potent transcriptional coactivator. In the latter, it is
inhibited by HEXIM1 or HEXIM2 in the 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP),
which contains, additionally, 7SK snRNA, methyl phosphate-capping enzyme (MePCE),
and La-related protein 7 (LARP7). This P-TEFb equilibrium determines the state of
growth and proliferation of the cell. In this study, the release of P-TEFb from
the 7SK snRNP led to increased synthesis of HEXIM1 but not HEXIM2 in HeLa cells, 
and this occurred only from an unannotated, proximal promoter. ChIP with
sequencing revealed P-TEFb-sensitive poised RNA polymerase II at this proximal
but not the previously annotated distal HEXIM1 promoter. Its immediate upstream
sequences were fused to luciferase reporters and were found to be responsive to
many P-TEFb-releasing compounds. The superelongation complex subunits AF4/FMR2
family member 4 (AFF4) and elongation factor RNA polymerase II 2 (ELL2) were
recruited to this proximal promoter after P-TEFb release and were required for
its transcriptional effects. Thus, P-TEFb regulates its own equilibrium in cells,
most likely to maintain optimal cellular homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3975036
PMID: 24515107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):375-85.

A novel Cdk9 inhibitor preferentially targets tumor cells and synergizes with
fludarabine.

Walsby E(1), Pratt G, Shao H, Abbas AY, Fischer PM, Bradshaw TD, Brennan P, Fegan
C, Wang S, Pepper C.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff CLL Research Group, Institute of Cancer and Genetics, School of
Medicine, Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff, UK.

Cdk9 is a key elongation factor for RNA transcription and functions by
phosphorylating the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. Here we present
direct evidence that cdk9 is important for cancer cell survival and describe the 
characterization of the potent cdk9 inhibitor CDKI-73 in primary human leukemia
cells. CDKI-73 induced caspase-dependent apoptosis that was preceded by
dephosphorylation of cdk9 and serine 2 of RNA polymerase II. CDKI-73 was more
potent than the pan-cdk inhibitor flavopiridol and showed >200-fold selectivity
against primary leukemia cells when compared with normal CD34+ cells.
Furthermore, CDKI-73 was equipotent in poor prognostic sub-groups of leukemia
patients and showed cytotoxic synergy with the nucleoside analog fludarabine. The
Mechanism of synergy was associated with CDKI-73-mediated transcriptional
inhibition of MCL1 and XIAP that was maintained when used in combination with
fludarabine. Our data present a strong rationale for the development of cdk9
inhibitors such as CDKI-73 as anticancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3964214
PMID: 24495868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Jun;66(6):1537-46. doi: 10.1002/art.38378.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 inhibition protects cartilage from the catabolic
effects of proinflammatory cytokines.

Yik JH(1), Hu Z, Kumari R, Christiansen BA, Haudenschild DR.

Author information: 
(1)University of California Davis, Sacramento, California.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Dec;66(12):3525-6.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Dec;66(12):3526.

OBJECTIVE: Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK-9) controls the activation of primary
inflammatory response genes. The purpose of this study was to determine whether
CDK-9 inhibition protects cartilage from the catabolic effects of proinflammatory
cytokines.
METHODS: Human chondrocytes were challenged with different proinflammatory
stimuli (interleukin-1ß [IL-1ß], lipopolysaccharides, and tumor necrosis factor
a) in the presence or absence of either the CDK-9 inhibitor flavopiridol or small
interfering RNA (siRNA). The expression of messenger RNA (mRNA) for inflammatory 
mediator genes, catabolic genes, and anabolic genes were determined by real-time 
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis. 
Cartilage explants were incubated for 6 days with IL-1ß in the presence or
absence of flavopiridol. Cartilage matrix degradation was assessed by the release
of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) and cleaved type II collagen (COL2A) peptides.
RESULTS: CDK-9 inhibition by flavopiridol or knockdown by siRNA effectively
suppressed the induction of mRNA for inducible nitric oxide synthase by all 3
proinflammatory stimuli. Results from NF-<U+03BA>B-targeted PCR array analysis showed
that flavopiridol suppressed IL-1ß induction of a broad range of inflammatory
mediator genes (59 of 67 tested). CDK-9 inhibition also suppressed the induction 
of catabolic genes (matrix metalloproteinase 1 [MMP-1], MMP-3, MMP-9, MMP-13,
ADAMTS-4, and ADAMTS-5), but did not affect the basal expression of anabolic
genes (COL2A, aggrecan, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein) and housekeeping
genes. Flavopiridol had no apparent short-term cytotoxicity, as assessed by G6PDH
activity. Finally, in IL-1ß-treated cartilage explants, flavopiridol reduced the 
release of the matrix degradation product GAG and cleaved COL2A peptides, but did
not affect long-term chondrocyte viability.
CONCLUSION: CDK-9 activity is required for the primary inflammatory response in
chondrocytes. Flavopiridol suppresses the induction of inflammatory mediator
genes and catabolic genes to protect cartilage from the deleterious effects of
proinflammatory cytokines, without affecting cell viability and functions.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4127300
PMID: 24470357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Transl Oncol. 2013 Dec 1;6(6):685-96. eCollection 2013.

Testing of SNS-032 in a Panel of Human Neuroblastoma Cell Lines with Acquired
Resistance to a Broad Range of Drugs.

Löschmann N(1), Michaelis M(2), Rothweiler F(1), Zehner R(3), Cinatl J(1), Voges 
Y(1), Sharifi M(4), Riecken K(5), Meyer J(6), von Deimling A(6), Fichtner I(7),
Ghafourian T(4), Westermann F(8), Cinatl J Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Virologie, Klinikum der Goethe-Universität,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (2)Centre for Molecular Processing and School of
Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom. (3)Institut für
Rechtsmedizin, Klinikum der Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Medway School of Pharmacy, Universities of Kent and Greenwich, Kent, United
Kingdom. (5)Forschungsabteilung Zell- und Gentherapie, Interdisziplinäre Klinik
und Poliklinik für Stammzelltransplantation, Universitätsklinikum
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Department of Neuropathology,
Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg and Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany. (8)Division of Tumor Genetics (B030), German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Novel treatment options are needed for the successful therapy of patients with
high-risk neuroblastoma. Here, we investigated the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 
inhibitor SNS-032 in a panel of 109 neuroblastoma cell lines consisting of 19
parental cell lines and 90 sublines with acquired resistance to 14 different
anticancer drugs. Seventy-three percent of the investigated neuroblastoma cell
lines and all four investigated primary tumor samples displayed concentrations
that reduce cell viability by 50% in the range of the therapeutic plasma levels
reported for SNS-032 (<754 nM). Sixty-two percent of the cell lines and two of
the primary samples displayed concentrations that reduce cell viability by 90% in
this concentration range. SNS-032 also impaired the growth of the
multidrug-resistant cisplatin-adapted UKF-NB-3 subline UKF-NB-3(r)CDDP(1000) in
mice. ABCB1 expression (but not ABCG2 expression) conferred resistance to
SNS-032. The antineuroblastoma effects of SNS-032 did not depend on functional
p53. The antineuroblastoma mechanism of SNS-032 included CDK7 and CDK9
inhibition-mediated suppression of RNA synthesis and subsequent depletion of
antiapoptotic proteins with a fast turnover rate including X-linked inhibitor of 
apoptosis (XIAP), myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1 (Mcl-1), baculoviral IAP
repeat containing 2 (BIRC2; cIAP-1), and survivin. In conclusion, CDK7 and CDK9
represent promising drug targets and SNS-032 represents a potential treatment
option for neuroblastoma including therapy-refractory cases.

PMCID: PMC3890703
PMID: 24466371  [PubMed]


129. Leukemia. 2014 Jul;28(7):1427-35. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.40. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Efficacy of cyclin-dependent-kinase 9 inhibitors in a murine model of
mixed-lineage leukemia.

Garcia-Cuellar MP(1), Füller E(1), Mäthner E(1), Breitinger C(1), Hetzner K(1),
Zeitlmann L(2), Borkhardt A(3), Slany RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (2)Ingenium
Pharmaceuticals AG, Munich, Germany. (3)Clinic of Paediatric Oncology,
Haematology and Clinical Immunology, Centre for Child and Adolescent Health,
Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Mixed-lineage leukemia fusion proteins activate their target genes predominantly 
by stimulating transcriptional elongation. A core component necessary for this
activity is cyclin-dependent kinase 9. Here we explored the effectiveness of
small molecules targeting this enzyme as potential therapeutics. A screen of
seven compounds with anti-CDK9 activity applied to a panel of leukemia cell lines
identified flavopiridol and the experimental inhibitor PC585 as superior in
efficacy with inhibitory concentrations in the submicromolar range. Both
substances induced rapid dephosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain, accompanied by downregulation of CDK9-dependent transcripts for MYC and
HOXA9. Global gene expression analysis indicated the induction of a general
stress response program, culminating in widespread apoptosis. Importantly,
colony-forming activity in leukemia lines and primary patient samples could be
completely inhibited under conditions that did not affect native precursors from 
bone marrow. In vivo application in a mouse transplant model significantly
delayed disease with PC585 showing also oral activity. These results suggest CDK9
inhibition as novel treatment option for mixed-lineage leukemia.

PMID: 24445865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1491-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323535111. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

An RNAi screen for Aire cofactors reveals a role for Hnrnpl in polymerase release
and Aire-activated ectopic transcription.

Giraud M(1), Jmari N, Du L, Carallis F, Nieland TJ, Perez-Campo FM, Bensaude O,
Root DE, Hacohen N, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Aire induces the expression of a large set of autoantigen genes in the thymus,
driving immunological tolerance in maturing T cells. To determine the full
spectrum of molecular mechanisms underlying the Aire transactivation function, we
screened an AIRE-dependent gene-expression system with a genome-scale lentiviral 
shRNA library, targeting factors associated with chromatin architecture/function,
transcription, and mRNA processing. Fifty-one functional allies were identified, 
with a preponderance of factors that impact transcriptional elongation compared
with initiation, in particular members of the positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) involved in the release of "paused" RNA polymerases (CCNT2 and 
HEXIM1); mRNA processing and polyadenylation factors were also highlighted
(HNRNPL/F, SFRS1, SFRS3, and CLP1). Aire's functional allies were validated on
transfected and endogenous target genes, including the generation of lentigenic
knockdown (KD) mice. We uncovered the effect of the splicing factor Hnrnpl on
Aire-induced transcription. Transcripts sensitive to the P-TEFb inhibitor
flavopiridol were reduced by Hnrnpl knockdown in thymic epithelial cells,
independently of their dependence on Aire, therefore indicating a general effect 
of Hnrnpl on RNA elongation. This conclusion was substantiated by demonstration
of HNRNPL interactions with P-TEFb components (CDK9, CCNT2, HEXIM1, and the small
7SK RNA). Aire-containing complexes include 7SK RNA, the latter interaction
disrupted by HNRNPL knockdown, suggesting that HNRNPL may partake in delivering
inactive P-TEFb to Aire. Thus, these results indicate that mRNA processing
factors cooperate with Aire to release stalled polymerases and to activate
ectopic expression of autoantigen genes in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3910647
PMID: 24434558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. BMC Evol Biol. 2014 Jan 17;14:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-14-10.

Phylogenetic analysis of CDK and cyclin proteins in premetazoan lineages.

Cao L(1), Chen F, Yang X, Xu W, Xie J, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, PR China.
lihuancao@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The molecular history of animal evolution from single-celled
ancestors remains a major question in biology, and little is known regarding the 
evolution of cell cycle regulation during animal emergence. In this study, we
conducted a comprehensive evolutionary analysis of CDK and cyclin proteins in
metazoans and their unicellular relatives.
RESULTS: Our analysis divided the CDK family into eight subfamilies. Seven
subfamilies (CDK1/2/3, CDK5, CDK7, CDK 20, CDK8/19, CDK9, and CDK10/11) are
conserved in metazoans and fungi, with the remaining subfamily, CDK4/6, found
only in eumetazoans. With respect to cyclins, cyclin C, H, L, Y subfamilies, and 
cyclin K and T as a whole subfamily, are generally conserved in animal, fungi,
and amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. In contrast, cyclin subfamilies B, A, E, and
D, which are cell cycle-related, have distinct evolutionary histories. The cyclin
B subfamily is generally conserved in D. discoideum, fungi, and animals, whereas 
cyclin A and E subfamilies are both present in animals and their unicellular
relatives such as choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and filasterean
Capsaspora owczarzaki, but are absent in fungi and D. discoideum. Although absent
in fungi and D. discoideum, cyclin D subfamily orthologs can be found in the
early-emerging, non-opisthokont apusozoan Thecamonas trahens. Within
opisthokonta, the cyclin D subfamily is conserved only in eumetazoans, and is
absent in fungi, choanoflagellates, and the basal metazoan Amphimedon
queenslandica.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that the CDK4/6 subfamily and eumetazoans emerged 
simultaneously, with the evolutionary conservation of the cyclin D subfamily also
tightly linked with eumetazoan appearance. Establishment of the CDK4/6-cyclin D
complex may have been the key step in the evolution of cell cycle control during 
eumetazoan emergence.

PMCID: PMC3923393
PMID: 24433236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1004029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004029. Epub 2013 Dec
26.

The PAF complex and Prf1/Rtf1 delineate distinct Cdk9-dependent pathways
regulating transcription elongation in fission yeast.

Mbogning J(1), Nagy S(1), Pagé V(1), Schwer B(2), Shuman S(3), Fisher RP(4),
Tanny JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, United States of America. (3)Molecular Biology
Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United
States of America. (4)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) promotes elongation by RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII), mRNA processing, and co-transcriptional histone modification. Cdk9
phosphorylates multiple targets, including the conserved RNAPII elongation factor
Spt5 and RNAPII itself, but how these different modifications mediate Cdk9
functions is not known. Here we describe two Cdk9-dependent pathways in the
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe that involve distinct targets and elicit 
distinct biological outcomes. Phosphorylation of Spt5 by Cdk9 creates a direct
binding site for Prf1/Rtf1, a transcription regulator with functional and
physical links to the Polymerase Associated Factor (PAF) complex. PAF association
with chromatin is also dependent on Cdk9 but involves alternate phosphoacceptor
targets. Prf1 and PAF are biochemically separate in cell extracts, and genetic
analyses show that Prf1 and PAF are functionally distinct and exert opposing
effects on the RNAPII elongation complex. We propose that this opposition
constitutes a Cdk9 auto-regulatory mechanism, such that a positive effect on
elongation, driven by the PAF pathway, is kept in check by a negative effect of
Prf1/Rtf1 and downstream mono-ubiquitylation of histone H2B. Thus, optimal RNAPII
elongation may require balanced action of functionally distinct Cdk9 pathways.

PMCID: PMC3873232
PMID: 24385927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Dev Cell. 2013 Dec 23;27(6):607-20. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.11.013.

Calpain 2 activation of P-TEFb drives megakaryocyte morphogenesis and is
disrupted by leukemogenic GATA1 mutation.

Elagib KE(1), Rubinstein JD(1), Delehanty LL(1), Ngoh VS(1), Greer PA(2), Li
S(3), Lee JK(3), Li Z(4), Orkin SH(4), Mihaylov IS(1), Goldfarb AN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Molecular
Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (3)Department of
Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's
Hospital Boston, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. Electronic address: ang3x@virginia.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(12):1827-8.

Megakaryocyte morphogenesis employs a "hypertrophy-like" developmental program
that is dependent on P-TEFb kinase activation and cytoskeletal remodeling. P-TEFb
activation classically occurs by a feedback-regulated process of signal-induced, 
reversible release of active Cdk9-cyclin T modules from large, inactive 7SK small
nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle (snRNP) complexes. Here, we have identified an
alternative pathway of irreversible P-TEFb activation in megakaryopoiesis that is
mediated by dissolution of the 7SK snRNP complex. In this pathway, calpain 2
cleavage of the core 7SK snRNP component MePCE promoted P-TEFb release and
consequent upregulation of a cohort of cytoskeleton remodeling factors, including
a-actinin-1. In a subset of human megakaryocytic leukemias, the transcription
factor GATA1 undergoes truncating mutation (GATA1s). Here, we linked the GATA1s
mutation to defects in megakaryocytic upregulation of calpain 2 and of
P-TEFb-dependent cytoskeletal remodeling factors. Restoring calpain 2 expression 
in GATA1s mutant megakaryocytes rescued normal development, implicating this
morphogenetic pathway as a target in human leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3892434
PMID: 24369834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):E15-24. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1318503111.
Epub 2013 Dec 23.

AFF1 is a ubiquitous P-TEFb partner to enable Tat extraction of P-TEFb from 7SK
snRNP and formation of SECs for HIV transactivation.

Lu H(1), Li Z, Xue Y, Schulze-Gahmen U, Johnson JR, Krogan NJ, Alber T, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) stimulates RNA polymerase
elongation by inducing the transition of promoter proximally paused polymerase II
into a productively elongating state. P-TEFb itself is regulated by reversible
association with various transcription factors/cofactors to form several
multisubunit complexes [e.g., the 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle
(7SK snRNP), the super elongation complexes (SECs), and the bromodomain protein 4
(Brd4)-P-TEFb complex] that constitute a P-TEFb network controlling cellular and 
HIV transcription. These complexes have been thought to share no components other
than the core P-TEFb subunits cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T
(CycT, T1, T2a, and T2b). Here we show that the AF4/FMR2 family member 1 (AFF1)
is bound to CDK9-CycT and is present in all major P-TEFb complexes and that the
tripartite CDK9-CycT-AFF1 complex is transferred as a single unit within the
P-TEFb network. By increasing the affinity of the HIV-encoded transactivating
(Tat) protein for CycT1, AFF1 facilitates Tat's extraction of P-TEFb from 7SK
snRNP and the formation of Tat-SECs for HIV transcription. Our data identify AFF1
as a ubiquitous P-TEFb partner and demonstrate that full Tat transactivation
requires the complete SEC.

PMCID: PMC3890890
PMID: 24367103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Mar;13(3):662-74. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0714. Epub 
2013 Dec 20.

Dinaciclib (SCH727965) inhibits the unfolded protein response through a CDK1- and
5-dependent mechanism.

Nguyen TK(1), Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Steven Grant, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Room 234, 401 College Street, P.O. Box 980035, Richmond,
VA 23298-0035. stgrant@vcu.edu.

Evidence implicating dysregulation of the IRE1/XBP-1s arm of the unfolded protein
response (UPR) in cancer pathogenesis (e.g., multiple myeloma) has prompted the
development of IRE1 RNase inhibitors. Here, effects of cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK) inhibitor SCH727965 (dinaciclib) on the IRE1 arm of the UPR were examined
in human leukemia and myeloma cells. Exposure of cells to extremely low (e.g.,
nmol/L) concentrations of SCH727965, a potent inhibitor of CDKs 1/2/5/9,
diminished XBP-1s and Grp78 induction by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-inducers thapsigargin and tunicamycin, while sharply inducing cell death. 
SCH727965, in contrast to IRE1 RNase inhibitors, inhibited the UPR in association
with attenuation of XBP-1s nuclear localization and accumulation rather than
transcription, translation, or XBP-1 splicing. Notably, in human leukemia cells, 
CDK1 and 5 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown diminished Grp78 and XBP-1s
upregulation while increasing thapsigargin lethality, arguing for a functional
role for CDK1/5 in activation of the cytoprotective IRE1/XBP-1s arm of the UPR.
In contrast, CDK9 or 2 inhibitors or shRNA knockdown failed to downregulate
XBP-1s or Grp78. Furthermore, IRE1, XBP-1, or Grp78 knockdown significantly
increased thapsigargin lethality, as observed with CDK1/5 inhibition/knockdown.
Finally, SCH727965 diminished myeloma cell growth in vivo in association with
XBP-1s downregulation. Together, these findings demonstrate that SCH727965 acts
at extremely low concentrations to attenuate XBP-1s nuclear accumulation and
Grp78 upregulation in response to ER stress inducers. They also highlight a link 
between specific components of the cell-cycle regulatory apparatus (e.g., CDK1/5)
and the cytoprotective IRE1/XBP-1s/Grp78 arm of the UPR that may be exploited
therapeutically in UPR-driven malignancies.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3970263
PMID: 24362465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Mar;21(3):491-502. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.179. Epub 2013
Dec 20.

Selective CDK9 inhibition overcomes TRAIL resistance by concomitant suppression
of cFlip and Mcl-1.

Lemke J(1), von Karstedt S(2), Abd El Hay M(2), Conti A(3), Arce F(4), Montinaro 
A(2), Papenfuss K(2), El-Bahrawy MA(5), Walczak H(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Cell Death, Cancer and Inflammation, UCL Cancer Institute,
University College London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK [2] Clinic of
General and Visceral Surgery, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 23, 89081 
Ulm, Germany. (2)Centre for Cell Death, Cancer and Inflammation, UCL Cancer
Institute, University College London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK.
(3)1] Centre for Cell Death, Cancer and Inflammation, UCL Cancer Institute,
University College London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK [2] Department 
of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, 20133 Milan, Italy. (4)Cancer Immunology Unit, University
College London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK. (5)Department of
Histopathology, Imperial College London, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) can induce
apoptosis in many cancer cells without causing toxicity in vivo. However, to
date, TRAIL-receptor agonists have only shown limited therapeutic benefit in
clinical trials. This can, most likely, be attributed to the fact that 50% of all
cancer cell lines and most primary human cancers are TRAIL resistant.
Consequently, future TRAIL-based therapies will require the addition of
sensitizing agents that remove crucial blocks in the TRAIL apoptosis pathway.
Here, we identify PIK-75, a small molecule inhibitor of the p110a isoform of
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K), as an exceptionally potent TRAIL apoptosis
sensitizer. Surprisingly, PI3K inhibition was not responsible for this activity. 
A kinome-wide in vitro screen revealed that PIK-75 strongly inhibits a panel of
27 kinases in addition to p110a. Within this panel, we identified
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) as responsible for TRAIL resistance of cancer
cells. Combination of CDK9 inhibition with TRAIL effectively induced apoptosis
even in highly TRAIL-resistant cancer cells. Mechanistically, CDK9 inhibition
resulted in downregulation of cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (cFlip) and 
Mcl-1 at both the mRNA and protein levels. Concomitant cFlip and Mcl-1
downregulation was required and sufficient for TRAIL sensitization by CDK9
inhibition. When evaluating cancer selectivity of TRAIL combined with SNS-032,
the most selective and clinically used inhibitor of CDK9, we found that a panel
of mostly TRAIL-resistant non-small cell lung cancer cell lines was readily
killed, even at low concentrations of TRAIL. Primary human hepatocytes did not
succumb to the same treatment regime, defining a therapeutic window. Importantly,
TRAIL in combination with SNS-032 eradicated established, orthotopic lung cancer 
xenografts in vivo. Based on the high potency of CDK9 inhibition as a cancer
cell-selective TRAIL-sensitizing strategy, we envisage the development of new,
highly effective cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3921597
PMID: 24362439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Viruses. 2013 Dec 18;5(12):3213-30. doi: 10.3390/v5123213.

The cyclin-dependent kinase ortholog pUL97 of human cytomegalovirus interacts
with cyclins.

Graf L, Webel R, Wagner S, Hamilton ST, Rawlinson WD, Sticht H, Marschall M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
manfred.marschall@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-encoded protein kinase, pUL97, is considered a
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) ortholog, due to shared structural and functional
characteristics. The primary mechanism of CDK activation is binding to
corresponding cyclins, including cyclin T1, which is the usual regulatory
cofactor of CDK9. This study provides evidence of direct interaction between
pUL97 and cyclin T1 using yeast two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation analyses.
Confocal immunofluorescence revealed partial colocalization of pUL97 with cyclin 
T1 in subnuclear compartments, most pronounced in viral replication centres. The 
distribution patterns of pUL97 and cyclin T1 were independent of HCMV strain and 
host cell type. The sequence domain of pUL97 responsible for the interaction with
cyclin T1 was between amino acids 231-280. Additional co-immunoprecipitation
analyses showed cyclin B1 and cyclin A as further pUL97 interaction partners.
Investigation of the pUL97-cyclin T1 interaction in an ATP consumption assay
strongly suggested phosphorylation of pUL97 by the CDK9/cyclin T1 complex in a
substrate concentration-dependent manner. This is the first demonstration of
interaction between a herpesviral CDK ortholog and cellular cyclins.

PMCID: PMC3967168
PMID: 24351800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Blood. 2014 Jan 30;123(5):697-705. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-478420. Epub 2013
Dec 13.

Potent antimyeloma activity of the novel bromodomain inhibitors I-BET151 and
I-BET762.

Chaidos A(1), Caputo V, Gouvedenou K, Liu B, Marigo I, Chaudhry MS, Rotolo A,
Tough DF, Smithers NN, Bassil AK, Chapman TD, Harker NR, Barbash O, Tummino P,
Al-Mahdi N, Haynes AC, Cutler L, Le B, Rahemtulla A, Roberts I, Kleijnen M,
Witherington JJ, Parr NJ, Prinjha RK, Karadimitris A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Department of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom;

The bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) protein BRD2-4 inhibitors hold
therapeutic promise in preclinical models of hematologic malignancies. However,
translation of these data to molecules suitable for clinical development has yet 
to be accomplished. Herein we expand the mechanistic understanding of BET
inhibitors in multiple myeloma by using the chemical probe molecule I-BET151.
I-BET151 induces apoptosis and exerts strong antiproliferative effect in vitro
and in vivo. This is associated with contrasting effects on oncogenic MYC and
HEXIM1, an inhibitor of the transcriptional activator P-TEFb. I-BET151 causes
transcriptional repression of MYC and MYC-dependent programs by abrogating
recruitment to the chromatin of the P-TEFb component CDK9 in a BRD2-4-dependent
manner. In contrast, transcriptional upregulation of HEXIM1 is BRD2-4
independent. Finally, preclinical studies show that I-BET762 has a favorable
pharmacologic profile as an oral agent and that it inhibits myeloma cell
proliferation, resulting in survival advantage in a systemic myeloma xenograft
model. These data provide a strong rationale for extending the clinical testing
of the novel antimyeloma agent I-BET762 and reveal insights into biologic
pathways required for myeloma cell proliferation.

PMID: 24335499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncogene. 2014 Dec 11;33(50):5675-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.513. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

CDK/CK1 inhibitors roscovitine and CR8 downregulate amplified MYCN in
neuroblastoma cells.

Delehouzé C(1), Godl K(2), Loaëc N(3), Bruyère C(1), Desban N(4), Oumata N(1),
Galons H(5), Roumeliotis TI(6), Giannopoulou EG(7), Grenet J(8), Twitchell D(8), 
Lahti J(8), Mouchet N(9), Galibert MD(9), Garbis SD(6), Meijer L(3).

Author information: 
(1)ManRos Therapeutics, Hôtel de Recherche, Centre de Perharidy, Roscoff, France.
(2)Evotec (München) GmbH, Am Klopferspitz 19a, Martinsried, Germany. (3)1] ManRos
Therapeutics, Hôtel de Recherche, Centre de Perharidy, Roscoff, France [2]
C.N.R.S., 'Protein Phosphorylation & Human Disease' Group, Station Biologique,
B.P. 74, Roscoff cedex, Bretagne, France. (4)C.N.R.S., 'Protein Phosphorylation &
Human Disease' Group, Station Biologique, B.P. 74, Roscoff cedex, Bretagne,
France. (5)Laboratoire de Chimie Organique 2, INSERM U 648, Université
Paris-Descartes, 4 avenue de l'Observatoire, Paris cedex, France. (6)Cancer
Sciences & Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Southampton,
Institute for Life Sciences, Center for Proteomics & Metabolomics Research,
Highfield Campus, Southampton, UK. (7)Institute for Computational Biomedicine,
Weil Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. (8)Department of Tumor Cell
Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale, Memphis, TN,
USA. (9)CNRS UMR 6290-Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Equipe
Expression des Gènes et Oncogenèse, Université de Rennes1, SFR Biosit, Faculté de
Médecine, 2 avenue du Pr. Léon Bernard, Rennes cedex, France.

To understand the mechanisms of action of (R)-roscovitine and (S)-CR8, two
related pharmacological inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), we applied
a variety of '-omics' techniques to the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y and IMR32
cell lines: (1) kinase interaction assays, (2) affinity competition on
immobilized broad-spectrum kinase inhibitors, (3) affinity chromatography on
immobilized (R)-roscovitine and (S)-CR8, (4) whole genome transcriptomics
analysis and specific quantitative PCR studies, (5) global quantitative
proteomics approach and western blot analysis of selected proteins. Altogether,
the results show that the major direct targets of these two molecules belong to
the CDKs (1,2,5,7,9,12), DYRKs, CLKs and CK1s families. By inhibiting CDK7, CDK9 
and CDK12, these inhibitors transiently reduce RNA polymerase 2 activity, which
results in downregulation of a large set of genes. Global transcriptomics and
proteomics analysis converge to a central role of MYC transcription factors
downregulation. Indeed, CDK inhibitors trigger rapid and massive downregulation
of MYCN expression in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells as well as in nude mice 
xenografted IMR32 cells. Inhibition of casein kinase 1 may also contribute to the
antitumoral activity of (R)-roscovitine and (S)-CR8. This dual mechanism of
action may be crucial in the use of these kinase inhibitors for the treatment of 
MYC-dependent cancers, in particular neuroblastoma where MYCN amplification is a 
strong predictor factor for high-risk disease.

PMCID: PMC4087096
PMID: 24317512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jan;143(1):113-24. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2789-2. 
Epub 2013 Dec 6.

Cyclin dependent kinase-9 mediated transcriptional de-regulation of cMYC as a
critical determinant of endocrine-therapy resistance in breast cancers.

Sengupta S(1), Biarnes MC, Jordan VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, 3970 Reservoir Rd NW, Washington, DC, 20057, USA,
ss972@georgetown.edu.

Endocrine therapy resistance in estrogen receptor alpha positive (ERa+) breast
cancers remains a major obstacle for maintaining efficacy of targeted therapies. 
We investigated the significance and the mechanisms involved in cMYC
over-expression in a MCF7 derived panel of ERa+ breast cancer cells which can
proliferate in the absence of estrogen with different sensitivities to
anti-hormone therapies. We show that all the resistant cell lines tested
over-express cMYC as compared to parental MCF7 cells and its inhibition lead to
the differential blocking of estrogen-independent proliferation in resistant
cells. Further investigation of the resistant cell line, MCF7:5C, suggested
transcriptional de-regulation of cMYC gene was responsible for its
over-expression. Chromatin immuno-precipitation assay revealed markedly higher
recruitment of phosphorylated serine-2 carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA
polymerase-II at the proximal promoter of cMYC gene, which is responsible for
transcriptional elongation of the cMYC RNA. The level of CDK9, a factor
responsible for the phosphorylation of serine-2 of RNA polymerase II CTD, was
found to be elevated in all the resistant cell lines. Pharmacological inhibition 
of CDK9 not only reduced the transcripts and the protein levels of cMYC in
MCF7:5C cells but also selectively inhibited the estrogen-independent growth of
all the resistant cell lines. This study describes the up-stream molecular events
involved in the transcriptional over-expression of cMYC gene in breast cancer
cells proliferating estrogen-independently and identifies CDK9 as a potential
novel drug target for therapeutic intervention in endocrine-resistant breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC3908445
PMID: 24309997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Nov 25;14:121. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-121.

Copy number variations in endoglin locus: mapping of large deletions in Spanish
families with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 1.

Fontalba A(1), Fernández-Luna JL, Zarrabeitia R, Recio-Poveda L, Albiñana V,
Ojeda-Fernández ML, Bernabéu C, Alcaraz LA, Botella LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC), and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. cibluisa@cib.csic.es.

BACKGROUND: The hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia syndrome (HHT), also known 
as the Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome is a multiorganic vascular disorder inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait. Diagnostic clinical criteria include: epistaxis, 
telangiectases in mucocutaneous and gastrointestinal sites, arteriovenous
malformations (AVMs) most commonly found in pulmonary, hepatic and cerebral
circulations, and familial inheritance. HHT is transmitted in 90% of the cases as
an autosomal dominant condition due to mutations in either endoglin (ENG), or
activin receptor-like kinase 1 (ACVRL1/ALK1) genes (HHT type 1 and 2,
respectively).
METHODS: We have carried out a genetic analysis of four independent Spanish
families with HHT clinical criteria, which has permitted the identification of
new large deletions in ENG. These mutations were first detected using the MLPA
technique and subsequently, the deletion breakpoints were mapped using a
customized copy number variation (CNV) microarray. The array was designed to
cover the ENG gene and surrounding areas.
RESULTS: All tested families carried large deletions ranging from 3-kb to 100-kb,
involving the ENG gene promoter, several ENG exons, and the two downstream genes 
FGSH and CDK9. Interestingly, common breakpoints coincident with Alu repetitive
sequences were found among these families.
CONCLUSIONS: The systematic hybridization of DNA from HHT families, with
deletions or duplications, to custom designed microarrays, could allow the
mapping of breakpoints, coincident with repetitive Alu sequences that might act
as "hot spots" in the development of chromosomal anomalies.

PMCID: PMC4222255
PMID: 24267784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 18;8(10):e79007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079007.
eCollection 2013.

Inhibition of cdk9 during herpes simplex virus 1 infection impedes viral
transcription.

Ou M(1), Sandri-Goldin RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

During herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection there is a loss of the serine-2
phosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) found in elongation complexes.
This occurs in part because RNAP II undergoes ubiquitination and proteasomal
degradation during times of highly active viral transcription, which may result
from stalled elongating complexes. In addition, a viral protein, ICP22, was
reported to trigger a loss of serine-2 RNAP II. These findings have led to some
speculation that the serine-2 phosphorylated form of RNAP II may not be required 
for HSV-1 transcription, although this form is required for cellular
transcription elongation and RNA processing. Cellular kinase cdk9 phosphorylates 
serine-2 in the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNAP II. To determine if serine-2
phosphorylated RNAP II is required for HSV-1 transcription, we inhibited cdk9
during HSV-1 infection and measured viral gene expression. Inhibition was
achieved by adding cdk9 inhibitors 5,6-dichlorobenzimidazone-1-ß-D-ribofuranoside
(DRB) or flavopiridol (FVP) or by expression of a dominant-negative cdk9 or
HEXIM1, which in conjunction with 7SK snRNA inhibits cdk9 in complex with cyclin 
1. Here we report that inhibition of cdk9 resulted in decreased viral yields and 
levels of late proteins, poor formation of viral transcription-replication
compartments, reduced levels of poly(A)+ mRNA and decreased RNA synthesis as
measured by uptake of 5-bromouridine into nascent RNA. Importantly, a global
reduction in viral mRNAs was seen as determined by microarray analysis. We
conclude that serine-2 phosphorylation of the CTD of RNAP II is required for
HSV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC3799718
PMID: 24205359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cancers (Basel). 2013 Jul 24;5(3):901-18. doi: 10.3390/cancers5030901.

Characterization of a Dual CDC7/CDK9 Inhibitor in Multiple Myeloma Cellular
Models.

Natoni A(1), Coyne MR, Jacobsen A, Rainey MD, O'Brien G, Healy S, Montagnoli A,
Moll J, O'Dwyer M, Santocanale C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Chromosome Biology, School of Natural Sciences National University 
of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland. michael.odwyer@nuigalway.ie.

Two key features of myeloma cells are the deregulation of the cell cycle and the 
dependency on the expression of the BCL2 family of anti-apoptotic proteins. The
cell division cycle 7 (CDC7) is an essential S-phase kinase and emerging CDC7
inhibitors are effective in a variety of preclinical cancer models. These
compounds also inhibit CDK9 which is relevant for MCL-1 expression. The activity 
and mechanism of action of the dual CDC7/CDK9 inhibitor PHA-767491 was assessed
in a panel of multiple myeloma cell lines, in primary samples from patients, in
the presence of stromal cells and in combination with drugs used in current
chemotherapeutic regimens. We report that in all conditions myeloma cells undergo
cell death upon PHA-767491 treatment and we report an overall additive effect
with melphalan, bortezomib and doxorubicin, thus supporting further assessment of
targeting CDC7 and CDK9 in multiple myeloma.

PMCID: PMC3795371
PMID: 24202326  [PubMed]


144. Eur J Med Chem. 2013;70:447-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.08.052. Epub 2013 Sep 
15.

Synthesis, structure-activity relationship and biological evaluation of
2,4,5-trisubstituted pyrimidine CDK inhibitors as potential anti-tumour agents.

Shao H(1), Shi S, Foley DW, Lam F, Abbas AY, Liu X, Huang S, Jiang X, Baharin N, 
Fischer PM, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

A series of 2,4,5-trisubstituted pyrimidines have been synthesised and
characterised, which exhibited potent CDK inhibition and anti-proliferative
activities. The structure-activity relationship is analysed and a rational for
CDK9 selectivity is discussed. Compound 9s, possessing appreciable selectivity
for CDK9 over other CDKs, is capable of activating caspase 3, reducing the level 
of Mcl-1 anti-apoptotic protein, and inducing cancer cell apoptosis.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24185375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. ChemMedChem. 2013 Dec;8(12):1941-53. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300287. Epub 2013 Oct
21.

Computer-aided design, synthesis and validation of 2-phenylquinazolinone
fragments as CDK9 inhibitors with anti-HIV-1 Tat-mediated transcription activity.

Sancineto L(1), Iraci N, Massari S, Attanasio V, Corazza G, Barreca ML, Sabatini 
S, Manfroni G, Avanzi NR, Cecchetti V, Pannecouque C, Marcello A, Tabarrini O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Technology of Drugs, University of Perugia, 06123 
Perugia (Italy).

The activity of the cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) is critical for HIV-1
Tat-mediated transcription and represents a promising target for antiviral
therapy. Here we present computational studies that, along with preliminary
synthetic efforts, allowed us to identify and characterize a new class of
nontoxic anti-CDK9 chemotypes based on the 2-phenylquinazolinone scaffold.
Inhibition of CDK9 translated into the ability to interfere selectively with
Tat-mediated transactivation of the viral promoter and in the inhibition of HIV-1
reactivation from latently infected cells, with the most potent derivative 37
(2-(4-aminophenyl)-7-chloroquinazolin-4(3H)-one) showing an IC50 value of 4.0 µM.
Because the herein reported 2-phenylquinazolinones are merely fragments, they are
largely optimizable, paving the way to derivatives with improved potency.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24150998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochimie. 2014 Feb;97:22-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.10.004. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

The two faces of Cdk8, a positive/negative regulator of transcription.

Nemet J(1), Jelicic B(1), Rubelj I(1), Sopta M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Ruder Bokovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, 10000
Zagreb, Croatia. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, Ruder Bokovic Institute,
Bijenicka 54, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address: msopta@irb.hr.

Three cyclin dependent kinases, Cdk7, Cdk8 and Cdk9 are intimately connected with
the processes of RNA polymerase II dependent transcription initiation and
elongation in eukaryotic cells. Each of these kinases is part of a larger
multisubunit complex, TFIIH, Mediator and p-TEFb respectively. Of the three
kinases, Cdk8 is the most complex given that it has been associated with both
positive and negative effects on transcription via mechanisms that include
regulation of transcription factor turnover, regulation of CTD phosphorylation
and regulation of activator or repressor function. Furthermore, Cdk8 has emerged 
as a key regulator of multiple transcriptional programs linked to nutrient/growth
factor sensing and differentiation control. As such Cdk8 represents a potentially
interesting therapeutic drug target. In this review we summarize the current
state of knowledge on Cdk8 function both in yeast and higher eukaryotes as well
as discussing the effects of Cdk8 null mutations at the organismal level.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24139904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;171(1):55-68. doi: 10.1111/bph.12408.

Characterization of molecular and cellular functions of the cyclin-dependent
kinase CDK9 using a novel specific inhibitor.

Albert TK(1), Rigault C, Eickhoff J, Baumgart K, Antrecht C, Klebl B, Mittler G, 
Meisterernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Tumor Biology (IMTB), Faculty of Medicine, Westfalian
Wilhelms University Muenster (WWU), Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The cyclin-dependent kinase CDK9 is an important
therapeutic target but currently available inhibitors exhibit low specificity
and/or narrow therapeutic windows. Here we have used a new highly specific CDK9
inhibitor, LDC000067 to interrogate gene control mechanisms mediated by CDK9.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The selectivity of LDC000067 was established in functional
kinase assays. Functions of CDK9 in gene expression were assessed with in vitro
transcription experiments, single gene analyses and genome-wide expression
profiling. Cultures of mouse embryonic stem cells, HeLa cells, several cancer
cell lines, along with cells from patients with acute myelogenous leukaemia were 
also used to investigate cellular responses to LDC000067.
KEY RESULTS: The selectivity of LDC000067 for CDK9 over other CDKs exceeded that 
of the known inhibitors flavopiridol and DRB. LDC000067 inhibited in vitro
transcription in an ATP-competitive and dose-dependent manner. Gene expression
profiling of cells treated with LDC000067 demonstrated a selective reduction of
short-lived mRNAs, including important regulators of proliferation and apoptosis.
Analysis of de novo RNA synthesis suggested a wide ranging positive role of CDK9.
At the molecular and cellular level, LDC000067 reproduced effects characteristic 
of CDK9 inhibition such as enhanced pausing of RNA polymerase II on genes and,
most importantly, induction of apoptosis in cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our study provides a framework for the mechanistic 
understanding of cellular responses to CDK9 inhibition. LDC000067 represents a
promising lead for the development of clinically useful, highly specific CDK9
inhibitors.

© 2013 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3874696
PMID: 24102143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 22;110(43):17290-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1314754110. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Structural basis for Spt5-mediated recruitment of the Paf1 complex to chromatin.

Wier AD(1), Mayekar MK, Héroux A, Arndt KM, VanDemark AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15260.

Polymerase associated factor 1 complex (Paf1C) broadly influences gene expression
by regulating chromatin structure and the recruitment of RNA-processing factors
during transcription elongation. The Plus3 domain of the Rtf1 subunit mediates
Paf1C recruitment to genes by binding a repeating domain within the elongation
factor Spt5 (suppressor of Ty). Here we provide a molecular description of this
interaction by reporting the structure of human Rtf1 Plus3 in complex with a
phosphorylated Spt5 repeat. We find that Spt5 binding is mediated by an extended 
surface containing phosphothreonine recognition and hydrophobic interfaces that
interact with residues outside the Spt5 motif. Changes within these interfaces
diminish binding of Spt5 in vitro and chromatin localization of Rtf1 in vivo. The
structure reveals the basis for recognition of the repeat motif of Spt5, a key
player in the recruitment of gene regulatory factors to RNA polymerase II.

PMCID: PMC3808610
PMID: 24101474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Br J Cancer. 2013 Oct 29;109(9):2356-67. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.584. Epub 2013 Sep
26.

Development of a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor devoid of ABC
transporter-dependent drug resistance.

Kaliszczak M(1), Patel H, Kroll SH, Carroll L, Smith G, Delaney S, Heathcote DA, 
Bondke A, Fuchter MJ, Coombes RC, Barrett AG, Ali S, Aboagye EO.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College
London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) control cell cycle progression, RNA
transcription and apoptosis, making them attractive targets for anticancer drug
development. Unfortunately, CDK inhibitors developed to date have demonstrated
variable efficacy.
METHODS: We generated drug-resistant cells by continuous low-dose exposure to a
model pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine CDK inhibitor and investigated potential
structural alterations for optimal efficacy.
RESULTS: We identified induction of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, 
ABCB1 and ABCG2, in resistant cells. Assessment of features involved in the ABC
transporter substrate specificity from a compound library revealed high polar
surface area (>100<U+2009>Å(2)) as a key determinant of transporter interaction. We
developed ICEC-0782 that preferentially inhibited CDK2, CDK7 and CDK9 in the
nanomolar range. The compound inhibited phosphorylation of CDK substrates and
downregulated the short-lived proteins, Mcl-1 and cyclin D1. ICEC-0782 induced
G2/M arrest and apoptosis. The permeability and cytotoxicity of ICEC-0782 were
unaffected by ABC transporter expression. Following daily oral dosing, the
compound inhibited growth of human colon HCT-116 and human breast MCF7 tumour
xenografts in vivo by 84% and 94%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We identified a promising pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine compound devoid
of ABC transporter interaction, highly suitable for further preclinical and
clinical evaluation for the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3817326
PMID: 24071597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 20;8(8):e72823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072823. eCollection
2013.

HEXIM1 induces differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells.

Ding V(1), Lew QJ, Chu KL, Natarajan S, Rajasegaran V, Gurumurthy M, Choo AB,
Chao SH.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore.

Hexamethylene bisacetamide inducible protein 1 (HEXIM1) is best known as the
inhibitor of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which is
composed of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9)/cyclin T1. P-TEFb is an essential
regulator for the transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II. A genome-wide 
study using human embryonic stem cells shows that most mRNA synthesis is
regulated at the stage of transcription elongation, suggesting a possible role
for P-TEFb/HEXIM1 in the gene regulation of stem cells. In this report, we
detected a marked increase in HEXIM1 protein levels in the differentiated human
pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) induced by LY294002 treatment. Since no changes in
CDK9 and cyclin T1 were observed in the LY294002-treated cells, increased levels 
of HEXIM1 might lead to inhibition of P-TEFb activity. However, treatment with a 
potent P-TEFb inhibiting compound, flavopiridol, failed to induce hPSC
differentiation, ruling out the possible requirement for P-TEFb kinase activity
in hPSC differentiation. Conversely, differentiation was observed when hPSCs were
incubated with hexamethylene bisacetamide, a HEXIM1 inducing reagent. The
involvement of HEXIM1 in the regulation of hPSCs was further supported when
overexpression of HEXIM1 concomitantly induced hPSC differentiation.
Collectively, our study demonstrates a novel role of HEXIM1 in regulating hPSC
fate through a P-TEFb-independent pathway.

PMCID: PMC3748041
PMID: 23977357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 16;8(8):e72289. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072289. eCollection
2013.

Polo-like kinase 1 inhibits the activity of positive transcription elongation
factor of RNA Pol II b (P-TEFb).

Jiang L(1), Huang Y, Deng M, Liu T, Lai W, Ye X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Immunology, CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology
and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
PR China.

Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is a highly conserved Ser/Thr kinase in eukaryotes and 
plays a critical role in various aspects of the cell cycle. Plk1 exerts its
multiple functions by phosphorylating its substrates. In this study, we found
that Plk1 can interact with cyclin T1/Cdk9 complex-the main form of the positive 
transcription elongation complex b (P-TEFb), and its C-terminal polo-box domain
is responsible for the binding. Further analysis indicated that Plk1 could
phosphorylate cyclin T1 at Ser564 and inhibit the kinase activity of cyclin
T1/Cdk9 complex on phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA
polymerase II. By taking the approach of luciferase assay, we demonstrated that
over-expression of both wild type Plk1 and constitutively active form of Plk1
inhibits the P-TEFb dependent HIV-1 LTR transcription, while knockdown of Plk1
increases the HIV-1 LTR transcription. Consistently, the data from the HIV-1
pseudovirus reporter assay indicated that Plk1 blocks the gene expression of
HIV-1 pseudovirus. Taken together, our results revealed that Plk1 negatively
regulates the RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription through inhibiting the
activity of cyclin T1/Cdk9 complex.

PMCID: PMC3745420
PMID: 23977272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Oct;12(10):1947-57. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0263.
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Novel inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases combat hepatocellular carcinoma
without inducing chemoresistance.

Haider C(1), Grubinger M, Reznícková E, Weiss TS, Rotheneder H, Miklos W, Berger 
W, Jorda R, Zatloukal M, Gucky T, Strnad M, Krytof V, Mikulits W.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Wolfgang Mikulits, Medical University Vienna,
Borschkegasse 8a, Vienna 1090, Austria. wolfgang.mikulits@meduniwien.ac.at.

Treatment options for hepatocellular carcinoma using chemotherapeutics at
intermediate and advanced stages of disease are limited as patients most rapidly 
escape from therapy and succumb to disease progression. Mechanisms of the hepatic
xenobiotic metabolism are mostly involved in providing chemoresistance to
therapeutic compounds. Given the fact that the aberrant activation of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) is frequently observed in hepatocellular
carcinomas, we focused on the efficacy of the novel compounds BA-12 and BP-14
that antagonize CDK1/2/5/7 and CDK9. Inhibition of those CDKs in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines reduced the clonogenicity by arresting cells 
in S-G2 and G2-M phase of the cell cycle and inducing apoptosis. In contrast,
primary human hepatocytes failed to show cytotoxicity and apoptosis. No loss of
chemosensitivity was observed in hepatocellular carcinoma cells after long-term
exposure to inhibitors. In vivo, treatment of xenografted human hepatocellular
carcinomas with BA-12 or BP-14 effectively repressed tumor formation. Moreover,
BA-12 or BP-14 significantly diminished diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced hepatoma
development in mice. These data show that BA-12 or BP-14 exhibit strong
antitumorigenic effects in the absence of chemoresistance, resulting in a
superior efficacy compared with currently used chemotherapeutics in
hepatocellular carcinomas.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23939380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 13;110(33):13546-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301463110. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

SIRT2 directs the replication stress response through CDK9 deacetylation.

Zhang H(1), Park SH, Pantazides BG, Karpiuk O, Warren MD, Hardy CW, Duong DM,
Park SJ, Kim HS, Vassilopoulos A, Seyfried NT, Johnsen SA, Gius D, Yu DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Sirtuin 2 (SIRT2) is a sirtuin family deacetylase that directs acetylome
signaling, protects genome integrity, and is a murine tumor suppressor. We show
that SIRT2 directs replication stress responses by regulating the activity of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), a protein required for recovery from
replication arrest. SIRT2 deficiency results in replication stress sensitivity,
impairment in recovery from replication arrest, spontaneous accumulation of
replication protein A to foci and chromatin, and a G2/M checkpoint deficit. SIRT2
interacts with and deacetylates CDK9 at lysine 48 in response to replication
stress in a manner that is partially dependent on ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 
related (ATR) but not cyclin T or K, thereby stimulating CDK9 kinase activity and
promoting recovery from replication arrest. Moreover, wild-type, but not
acetylated CDK9, alleviates the replication stress response impairment of SIRT2
deficiency. Collectively, our results define a function for SIRT2 in regulating
checkpoint pathways that respond to replication stress through deacetylation of
CDK9, providing insight into how SIRT2 maintains genome integrity and a unique
mechanism by which SIRT2 may function, at least in part, as a tumor suppressor
protein.

PMCID: PMC3746840
PMID: 23898190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 30;110(31):12655-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220136110. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

CTIP2 is a negative regulator of P-TEFb.

Cherrier T(1), Le Douce V, Eilebrecht S, Riclet R, Marban C, Dequiedt F, Goumon
Y, Paillart JC, Mericskay M, Parlakian A, Bausero P, Abbas W, Herbein G,
Kurdistani SK, Grana X, Van Driessche B, Schwartz C, Candolfi E, Benecke AG, Van 
Lint C, Rohr O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Parasitologie et de Pathologie Tropicale, Fédération de Médecine
Translationnelle, University of Strasbourg, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is involved in
physiological and pathological events including inflammation, cancer, AIDS, and
cardiac hypertrophy. The balance between its active and inactive form is tightly 
controlled to ensure cellular integrity. We report that the transcriptional
repressor CTIP2 is a major modulator of P-TEFb activity. CTIP2 copurifies and
interacts with an inactive P-TEFb complex containing the 7SK snRNA and HEXIM1.
CTIP2 associates directly with HEXIM1 and, via the loop 2 of the 7SK snRNA, with 
P-TEFb. In this nucleoprotein complex, CTIP2 significantly represses the Cdk9
kinase activity of P-TEFb. Accordingly, we show that CTIP2 inhibits large sets of
P-TEFb- and 7SK snRNA-sensitive genes. In hearts of hypertrophic cardiomyopathic 
mice, CTIP2 controls P-TEFb-sensitive pathways involved in the establishment of
this pathology. Overexpression of the ß-myosin heavy chain protein contributes to
the pathological cardiac wall thickening. The inactive P-TEFb complex associates 
with CTIP2 at the MYH7 gene promoter to repress its activity. Taken together, our
results strongly suggest that CTIP2 controls P-TEFb function in physiological and
pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC3732990
PMID: 23852730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. ISRN Oncol. 2013 Jun 6;2013:305371. doi: 10.1155/2013/305371. Print 2013.

Deregulations in the cyclin-dependent kinase-9-related pathway in cancer:
implications for drug discovery and development.

Romano G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science and Technology, Department of Biology, Temple University,
Bio Life Science Building, Suite 456, 1900 North 12th Street, Philadelphia, PA
19122, USA.

The CDK9-related pathway is an important regulator of mammalian cell biology and 
is also involved in the replication cycle of several viruses, including the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1. CDK9 is present in two isoforms termed CDK9-42 and
CDK9-55 that bind noncovalently type T cyclins and cyclin K. This association
forms a heterodimer, where CDK9 carries the enzymatic site and the cyclin partner
functions as a regulatory subunit. This heterodimer is the main component of the 
positive transcription elongation factor b, which stabilizes RNA elongation via
phosphorylation of the RNA pol II carboxyl terminal domain. Abnormal activities
in the CDK9-related pathway were observed in human malignancies and cardiac
hypertrophies. Thus, the elucidation of the CDK9 pathway deregulations may
provide useful insights into the pathogenesis and progression of human
malignancies, cardiac hypertrophy, AIDS and other viral-related maladies. These
studies may lead to the improvement of kinase inhibitors for the treatment of the
previously mentioned pathological conditions. This review describes the
CDK9-related pathway deregulations in malignancies and the development of kinase 
inhibitors in cancer therapy, which can be classified into three categories:
antagonists that block the ATP binding site of the catalytic domain, allosteric
inhibitors, and small molecules that disrupt protein-protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC3690251
PMID: 23840966  [PubMed]


156. Blood. 2013 Aug 1;122(5):738-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-447441. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Targeting acute myeloid leukemia by dual inhibition of PI3K signaling and
Cdk9-mediated Mcl-1 transcription.

Thomas D(1), Powell JA, Vergez F, Segal DH, Nguyen NY, Baker A, Teh TC, Barry EF,
Sarry JE, Lee EM, Nero TL, Jabbour AM, Pomilio G, Green BD, Manenti S, Glaser SP,
Parker MW, Lopez AF, Ekert PG, Lock RB, Huang DC, Nilsson SK, Récher C, Wei AH,
Guthridge MA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Growth and Differentiation Laboratory, Division of Human Immunology, SA
Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia.

Resistance to cell death is a hallmark of cancer and renders transformed cells
resistant to multiple apoptotic triggers. The Bcl-2 family member, Mcl-1, is a
key driver of cell survival in diverse cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML). A screen for compounds that downregulate Mcl-1 identified the kinase
inhibitor, PIK-75, which demonstrates marked proapoptotic activity against a
panel of cytogenetically diverse primary human AML patient samples. We show that 
PIK-75 transiently blocks Cdk7/9, leading to transcriptional suppression of
MCL-1, rapid loss of Mcl-1 protein, and alleviation of its inhibition of
proapoptotic Bak. PIK-75 also targets the p110a isoform of PI3K, which leads to a
loss of association between Bcl-xL and Bak. The simultaneous loss of Mcl-1 and
Bcl-xL association with Bak leads to rapid apoptosis of AML cells. Concordantly, 
low Bak expression in AML confers resistance to PIK-75-mediated killing. On the
other hand, the induction of apoptosis by PIK-75 did not require the expression
of the BH3 proteins Bim, Bid, Bad, Noxa, or Puma. PIK-75 significantly reduced
leukemia burden and increased the survival of mice engrafted with human AML
without inducing overt toxicity. Future efforts to cotarget PI3K and Cdk9 with
drugs such as PIK-75 in AML are warranted.

PMID: 23775716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Genes Dev. 2013 Jun 1;27(11):1299-312. doi: 10.1101/gad.217240.113.

The methyltransferase SMYD3 mediates the recruitment of transcriptional cofactors
at the myostatin and c-Met genes and regulates skeletal muscle atrophy.

Proserpio V(1), Fittipaldi R, Ryall JG, Sartorelli V, Caretti G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, 20133 Milan, Italy.

Elucidating the epigenetic mechanisms underlying muscle mass determination and
skeletal muscle wasting holds the potential of identifying molecular pathways
that constitute possible drug targets. Here, we report that the methyltransferase
SMYD3 modulates myostatin and c-Met transcription in primary skeletal muscle
cells and C2C12 myogenic cells. SMYD3 targets the myostatin and c-Met genes and
participates in the recruitment of the bromodomain protein BRD4 to their
regulatory regions through protein-protein interaction. By recruiting BRD4, SMYD3
favors chromatin engagement of the pause-release factor p-TEFb (positive
transcription elongation factor) and elongation of Ser2-phosphorylated RNA
polymerase II (PolIISer2P). Reducing SMYD3 decreases myostatin and c-Met
transcription, thus protecting from glucocorticoid-induced myotube atrophy.
Supporting functional relevance of the SMYD3/BRD4 interaction, BRD4
pharmacological blockade by the small molecule JQ1 prevents dexamethasone-induced
myostatin and atrogene up-regulation and spares myotube atrophy. Importantly, in 
a mouse model of dexamethasone-induced skeletal muscle atrophy, SMYD3 depletion
prevents muscle loss and fiber size decrease. These findings reveal a mechanistic
link between SMYD3/BRD4-dependent transcriptional regulation, muscle mass
determination, and skeletal muscle atrophy and further encourage testing of small
molecules targeting specific epigenetic regulators in animal models of muscle
wasting.

PMCID: PMC3690402
PMID: 23752591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1327-39. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.048.

HIF1A employs CDK8-mediator to stimulate RNAPII elongation in response to
hypoxia.

Galbraith MD(1), Allen MA, Bensard CL, Wang X, Schwinn MK, Qin B, Long HW,
Daniels DL, Hahn WC, Dowell RD, Espinosa JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder,
CO 80309, USA.

The transcription factor HIF1A is a key mediator of the cellular response to
hypoxia. Despite the importance of HIF1A in homeostasis and various pathologies, 
little is known about how it regulates RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). We report here
that HIF1A employs a specific variant of the Mediator complex to stimulate RNAPII
elongation. The Mediator-associated kinase CDK8, but not the paralog CDK19, is
required for induction of many HIF1A target genes. HIF1A induces binding of
CDK8-Mediator and the super elongation complex (SEC), containing AFF4 and CDK9,
to alleviate RNAPII pausing. CDK8 is dispensable for HIF1A chromatin binding and 
histone acetylation, but it is essential for binding of SEC and RNAPII
elongation. Global analysis of active RNAPII reveals that hypoxia-inducible genes
are paused and active prior to their induction. Our results provide a mechanistic
link between HIF1A and CDK8, two potent oncogenes, in the cellular response to
hypoxia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3681429
PMID: 23746844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 19;288(29):21173-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.483719. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 links RNA polymerase II transcription to processing of 
ribosomal RNA.

Burger K(1), Mühl B, Rohrmoser M, Coordes B, Heidemann M, Kellner M, Gruber-Eber 
A, Heissmeyer V, Strässer K, Eick D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Epigenetics, Helmholtz Center Munich, Center for
Integrated Protein Science Munich, Marchioninistrasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Ribosome biogenesis is a process required for cellular growth and proliferation. 
Processing of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is highly sensitive to flavopiridol, a
specific inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9). Cdk9 has been
characterized as the catalytic subunit of the positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). Here we studied the connection
between RNAPII transcription and rRNA processing. We show that inhibition of
RNAPII activity by a-amanitin specifically blocks processing of rRNA. The block
is characterized by accumulation of 3' extended unprocessed 47 S rRNAs and the
entire inhibition of other 47 S rRNA-specific processing steps. The transcription
rate of rRNA is moderately reduced after inhibition of Cdk9, suggesting that
defective 3' processing of rRNA negatively feeds back on RNAPI transcription.
Knockdown of Cdk9 caused a strong reduction of the levels of RNAPII-transcribed
U8 small nucleolar RNA, which is essential for 3' rRNA processing in mammalian
cells. Our data demonstrate a pivotal role of Cdk9 activity for coupling of
RNAPII transcription with small nucleolar RNA production and rRNA processing.

PMCID: PMC3774383
PMID: 23744076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3064-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00296-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
3.

Direct protein interactions are responsible for Ikaros-GATA and Ikaros-Cdk9
cooperativeness in hematopoietic cells.

Bottardi S(1), Mavoungou L, Bourgoin V, Mashtalir N, Affar el B, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 
and Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Ikaros (Ik) is a critical regulator of hematopoietic gene expression. Here, we
established that the Ik interactions with GATA transcription factors and
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), a component of the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb), are required for transcriptional activation of Ik
target genes. A detailed dissection of Ik-GATA and Ik-Cdk9 protein interactions
indicated that the C-terminal zinc finger domain of Ik interacts directly with
the C-terminal zinc fingers of GATA1, GATA2, and GATA3, whereas the N-terminal
zinc finger domain of Ik is required for interaction with the kinase and T-loop
domains of Cdk9. The relevance of these interactions was demonstrated in vivo in 
COS-7 and primary hematopoietic cells, in which Ik facilitated Cdk9 and GATA
protein recruitment to gene promoters and transcriptional activation. Moreover,
the oncogenic isoform Ik6 did not efficiently interact with Cdk9 or GATA proteins
in vivo and perturbed Cdk9/P-TEFb recruitment to Ik target genes, thereby
affecting transcription elongation. Finally, characterization of a novel nuclear 
Ik isoform revealed that Ik exon 6 is dispensable for interactions with Mi2 and
GATA proteins but is essential for the Cdk9 interaction. Thus, Ik is central to
the Ik-GATA-Cdk9 regulatory network, which is broadly utilized for gene
regulation in hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC3753914
PMID: 23732910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Aug 15;375(1-2):35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.05.003. 
Epub 2013 May 22.

Expression profiling of cell cycle genes in human pancreatic islets with and
without type 2 diabetes.

Taneera J(1), Fadista J, Ahlqvist E, Zhang M, Wierup N, Renström E, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University Diabetes Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes &
Endocrinology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden.
Jalal.Taneera@med.lu.se

Microarray gene expression data were used to analyze the expression pattern of
cyclin, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDKs) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
(CDKIs) genes from human pancreatic islets with and without type 2 diabetes
(T2D). Of the cyclin genes, CCNI was the most expressed. Data obtained from
microarray and qRT-PCR showed higher expression of CCND1 in diabetic islets.
Among the CDKs, CDK4, CDK8 and CDK9 were highly expressed, while CDK1 was
expressed at low level. High expression of CDK18 was observed in diabetic islets.
Of the CDKIs, CDKN1A expression was higher in diabetic islets in both microarray 
and qRT-PCR. Expression of CDKN1A, CDKN2A, CCNI2, CDK3 and CDK16 was correlated
with age. Finally, eight SNPs in these genes were associated with T2D in the
DIAGRAM database. Our data provide a comprehensive expression pattern of cell
cycle genes in human islets. More human studies are required to confirm and
reproduce animal studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Future Virol. 2013 Mar;8(3):301-311.

Role of cellular iron and oxygen in the regulation of HIV-1 infection.

Nekhai S(1), Kumari N, Dhawan S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University, 520
W Street, NW, Washington DC 20059, USA.

Despite efficient antiretroviral therapy, eradication of HIV-1 infection is
challenging and requires novel biological insights and therapeutic strategies.
Among other physiological and environmental factors, intracellular iron greatly
affects HIV-1 replication. Higher iron stores were shown to be associated with
faster progression of HIV-1 infection and to inversely correlate with the
survival of HIV-1 infected patients. Iron is required for several steps in the
HIV-1 life cycle, including reverse transcription, HIV-1 gene expression and
capsid assembly. Here, the authors present a comprehensive review of the
molecular mechanisms involved in iron- and oxygen-mediated regulation of HIV-1
replication. We also propose key intracellular pathways that may be involved in
regulating HIV-1 replication, via protein kinase complexes, CDK9/cyclin T1 and
CDK 2/cyclin E, protein phosphatase-1 and other host factors.

PMCID: PMC3652425
PMID: 23678366  [PubMed]


163. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 5;288(27):20014-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438895. Epub 2013
May 9.

Exosomes derived from HIV-1-infected cells contain trans-activation response
element RNA.

Narayanan A(1), Iordanskiy S, Das R, Van Duyne R, Santos S, Jaworski E, Guendel
I, Sampey G, Dalby E, Iglesias-Ussel M, Popratiloff A, Hakami R, Kehn-Hall K,
Young M, Subra C, Gilbert C, Bailey C, Romerio F, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, Virginia 20110, USA.

Exosomes are nano-sized vesicles produced by healthy and virus-infected cells.
Exosomes derived from infected cells have been shown to contain viral microRNAs
(miRNAs). HIV-1 encodes its own miRNAs that regulate viral and host gene
expression. The most abundant HIV-1-derived miRNA, first reported by us and later
by others using deep sequencing, is the trans-activation response element (TAR)
miRNA. In this study, we demonstrate the presence of TAR RNA in exosomes from
cell culture supernatants of HIV-1-infected cells and patient sera. TAR miRNA was
not in Ago2 complexes outside the exosomes but enclosed within the exosomes. We
detected the host miRNA machinery proteins Dicer and Drosha in exosomes from
infected cells. We report that transport of TAR RNA from the nucleus into
exosomes is a CRM1 (chromosome region maintenance 1)-dependent active process.
Prior exposure of naive cells to exosomes from infected cells increased
susceptibility of the recipient cells to HIV-1 infection. Exosomal TAR RNA
down-regulated apoptosis by lowering Bim and Cdk9 proteins in recipient cells. We
found 10(4)-10(6) copies/ml TAR RNA in exosomes derived from infected culture
supernatants and 10(3) copies/ml TAR RNA in the serum exosomes of highly active
antiretroviral therapy-treated patients or long term nonprogressors. Taken
together, our experiments demonstrated that HIV-1-infected cells produced
exosomes that are uniquely characterized by their proteomic and RNA profiles that
may contribute to disease pathology in AIDS.

PMCID: PMC3707700
PMID: 23661700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(5):e1003338. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003338. Epub 2013 May
2.

Phosphorylation of CDK9 at Ser175 enhances HIV transcription and is a marker of
activated P-TEFb in CD4(+) T lymphocytes.

Mbonye UR(1), Gokulrangan G, Datt M, Dobrowolski C, Cooper M, Chance MR, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The HIV transactivator protein, Tat, enhances HIV transcription by recruiting
P-TEFb from the inactive 7SK snRNP complex and directing it to proviral
elongation complexes. To test the hypothesis that T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling
induces critical post-translational modifications leading to enhanced
interactions between P-TEFb and Tat, we employed affinity purification-tandem
mass spectrometry to analyze P-TEFb. TCR or phorbal ester (PMA) signaling
strongly induced phosphorylation of the CDK9 kinase at Ser175. Molecular modeling
studies based on the Tat/P-TEFb X-ray structure suggested that pSer175
strengthens the intermolecular interactions between CDK9 and Tat. Mutations in
Ser175 confirm that this residue could mediate critical interactions with Tat and
with the bromodomain protein BRD4. The S175A mutation reduced CDK9 interactions
with Tat by an average of 1.7-fold, but also completely blocked CDK9 association 
with BRD4. The phosphomimetic S175D mutation modestly enhanced Tat association
with CDK9 while causing a 2-fold disruption in BRD4 association with CDK9. Since 
BRD4 is unable to compete for binding to CDK9 carrying S175A, expression of CDK9 
carrying the S175A mutation in latently infected cells resulted in a robust
Tat-dependent reactivation of the provirus. Similarly, the stable knockdown of
BRD4 led to a strong enhancement of proviral expression. Immunoprecipitation
experiments show that CDK9 phosphorylated at Ser175 is excluded from the 7SK RNP 
complex. Immunofluorescence and flow cytometry studies carried out using a
phospho-Ser175-specific antibody demonstrated that Ser175 phosphorylation occurs 
during TCR activation of primary resting memory CD4+ T cells together with
upregulation of the Cyclin T1 regulatory subunit of P-TEFb, and Thr186
phosphorylation of CDK9. We conclude that the phosphorylation of CDK9 at Ser175
plays a critical role in altering the competitive binding of Tat and BRD4 to
P-TEFb and provides an informative molecular marker for the identification of the
transcriptionally active form of P-TEFb.

PMCID: PMC3642088
PMID: 23658523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2013 Jun;22(6):723-38. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2013.789859. Epub 2013 May 6.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor therapy for hematologic malignancies.

Bose P(1), Simmons GL, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University, Internal Medicine, 1101 E Marshall St,
Sanger Hall, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) regulate cell cycle progression.
Certain CDKs (e.g., CDK7, CDK9) also control cellular transcription.
Consequently, CDKs represent attractive targets for anticancer drug development, 
as their aberrant expression is common in diverse malignancies, and CDK
inhibition can trigger apoptosis. CDK inhibition may be particularly successful
in hematologic malignancies, which are more sensitive to inhibition of cell
cycling and apoptosis induction.
AREAS COVERED: A number of CDK inhibitors, ranging from pan-CDK inhibitors such
as flavopiridol (alvocidib) to highly selective inhibitors of specific CDKs
(e.g., CDK4/6), such as PD0332991, that are currently in various phases of
development, are profiled in this review. Flavopiridol induces cell cycle arrest,
and globally represses transcription via CDK9 inhibition. The latter may
represent its major mechanism of action via down-regulation of multiple
short-lived proteins. In early phase trials, flavopiridol has shown encouraging
efficacy across a wide spectrum of hematologic malignancies. Early results with
dinaciclib and PD0332991 also appear promising.
EXPERT OPINION: In general, the antitumor efficacy of CDK inhibitor monotherapy
is modest, and rational combinations are being explored, including those
involving other targeted agents. While selective CDK4/6 inhibition might be
effective against certain malignancies, broad-spectrum CDK inhibition will likely
be required for most cancers.

PMCID: PMC4039040
PMID: 23647051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Genome Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1210-23. doi: 10.1101/gr.152306.112. Epub 2013 May 1.

Enhancer transcripts mark active estrogen receptor binding sites.

Hah N(1), Murakami S, Nagari A, Danko CG, Kraus WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853, USA.

We have integrated and analyzed a large number of data sets from a variety of
genomic assays using a novel computational pipeline to provide a global view of
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; a.k.a. ERa) enhancers in MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells. Using this approach, we have defined a class of primary transcripts
(eRNAs) that are transcribed uni- or bidirectionally from estrogen receptor
binding sites (ERBSs) with an average transcription unit length of ~3-5 kb. The
majority are up-regulated by short treatments with estradiol (i.e., 10, 25, or 40
min) with kinetics that precede or match the induction of the target genes. The
production of eRNAs at ERBSs is strongly correlated with the enrichment of a
number of genomic features that are associated with enhancers (e.g., H3K4me1,
H3K27ac, EP300/CREBBP, RNA polymerase II, open chromatin architecture), as well
as enhancer looping to target gene promoters. In the absence of eRNA production, 
strong enrichment of these features is not observed, even though ESR1 binding is 
evident. We find that flavopiridol, a CDK9 inhibitor that blocks transcription
elongation, inhibits eRNA production but does not affect other molecular
indicators of enhancer activity, suggesting that eRNA production occurs after the
assembly of active enhancers. Finally, we show that an enhancer transcription
"signature" based on GRO-seq data can be used for de novo enhancer prediction
across cell types. Together, our studies shed new light on the activity of ESR1
at its enhancer sites and provide new insights about enhancer function.

PMCID: PMC3730096
PMID: 23636943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Genes Cancer. 2012 Nov;3(11-12):731-8. doi: 10.1177/1947601912473308.

The CDK Network: Linking Cycles of Cell Division and Gene Expression.

Fisher RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play essential roles in cell proliferation and
gene expression. Although distinct sets of CDKs work in cell division and
transcription by RNA polymerase II (Pol II), they share a CDK-activating kinase
(CAK), which is itself a CDK-Cdk7-in metazoans. Thus a unitary CDK network
controls and may coordinate cycles of cell division and gene expression. Recent
work reveals decisive roles for Cdk7 in both pathways. The CAK function of Cdk7
helps determine timing of activation and cyclin-binding preferences of different 
CDKs during the cell cycle. In the transcription cycle, Cdk7 is both an effector 
kinase, which phosphorylates Pol II and other proteins and helps establish
promoter-proximal pausing; and a CAK for Cdk9 (P-TEFb), which releases Pol II
from the pause. By governing the transition from initiation to elongation, Cdk7, 
Cdk9 and their substrates influence expression of genes important for
developmental and cell-cycle decisions, and ensure co-transcriptional maturation 
of Pol II transcripts. Cdk7 engaged in transcription also appears to be regulated
by phosphorylation within its own activation (T) loop. Here I review recent
studies of CDK regulation in cell division and gene expression, and propose a
model whereby mitogenic signals trigger a cascade of CDK T-loop phosphorylation
that drives cells past the restriction (R) point, when continued cell-cycle
progression becomes growth factor-independent. Because R-point control is
frequently deregulated in cancer, the CAK-CDK pathway is an attractive target for
chemical inhibition aimed at impeding the inappropriate commitment to cell
division.

PMCID: PMC3636752
PMID: 23634260  [PubMed]


168. Cell Cycle. 2013 May 15;12(10):1569-77. doi: 10.4161/cc.24733. Epub 2013 Apr 19.

Cdk9 phosphorylates Pirh2 protein and prevents degradation of p53 protein.

Bagashev A(1), Fan S, Mukerjee R, Claudio PP, Chabrashvili T, Leng RP, Benchimol 
S, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Studies of Neurodegenerative Diseases Lab, The Fels Institute for
Cancer Research & Molecular Biology, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Several reports have pointed to the negative involvement of p53 in
transcriptional regulation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
long-terminal repeat (HIV-1 LTR). We recently demonstrated that through their
physical interaction, cdk9 phosphorylates p53 on Ser-392, leading to p53
stability and accumulation. As a result, p53 stalled transcriptional elongation
of the HIV-1 LTR and significantly reduced HIV-1 replication in primary microglia
and astrocytes. Therefore, we sought to identify the mechanisms used by cdk9 to
allow this p53 function. Using western blot analysis, we found that cdk9 promotes
inhibition and phosphorylation of Mdm2 on Ser-395, thus preventing degradation of
p53, a protein that is directly involved in promoting p53 ubiquitination. On the 
other hand, we showed that cdk9 phosphorylates Pirh2 on Ser-211 and Thr-217
residues through their physical interaction. Phosphorylation of Pirh2 renders it 
inactive and may contribute to p53-inhibition of transcriptional elongation of
the HIV-1 LTR. Hence, we suggest that phosphorylation of Pirh2 may be a novel
target for the inhibition of HIV-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3680536
PMID: 23603988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Med Chem. 2013 May 23;56(10):3768-82. doi: 10.1021/jm301234k. Epub 2013 May 6.

Development of highly potent and selective diaminothiazole inhibitors of
cyclin-dependent kinases.

Schonbrunn E(1), Betzi S, Alam R, Martin MP, Becker A, Han H, Francis R,
Chakrasali R, Jakkaraj S, Kazi A, Sebti SM, Cubitt CL, Gebhard AW, Hazlehurst LA,
Tash JS, Georg GI.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Department, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.
ernst.schonbrunn@moffitt.org

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are serine/threonine protein kinases that act as 
key regulatory elements in cell cycle progression. We describe the development of
highly potent diaminothiazole inhibitors of CDK2 (IC50 = 0.0009-0.0015 µM) from a
single hit compound with weak inhibitory activity (IC50 = 15 µM), discovered by
high-throughput screening. Structure-based design was performed using 35
cocrystal structures of CDK2 liganded with distinct analogues of the parent
compound. The profiling of compound 51 against a panel of 339 kinases revealed
high selectivity for CDKs, with preference for CDK2 and CDK5 over CDK9, CDK1,
CDK4, and CDK6. Compound 51 inhibited the proliferation of 13 out of 15 cancer
cell lines with IC50 values between 0.27 and 6.9 µM, which correlated with the
complete suppression of retinoblastoma phosphorylation and the onset of
apoptosis. Combined, the results demonstrate the potential of this new inhibitors
series for further development into CDK-specific chemical probes or therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3714109
PMID: 23600925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):7075-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03399-12. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

CDK9-dependent transcriptional elongation in the innate interferon-stimulated
gene response to respiratory syncytial virus infection in airway epithelial
cells.

Tian B(1), Zhao Y, Kalita M, Edeh CB, Paessler S, Casola A, Teng MN, Garofalo RP,
Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus
responsible for lower respiratory tract infections. During infection, the
presence of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) activates the interferon (IFN) regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) transcription factor, an event triggering expression of immediate
early, IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). We examine the role of transcriptional
elongation in control of IRF3-dependent ISG expression. RSV infection induces
ISG54, ISG56, and CIG5 gene expression in an IRF3-dependent manner demonstrated
by IRF3 small interfering RNA (siRNA) silencing in both A549 epithelial cells and
IRF3(-/-) MEFs. ISG expression was mediated by the recruitment of IRF3, CDK9,
polymerase II (Pol II), and phospho-Ser(2) carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) Pol II
to the IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) binding sites of the IRF3-dependent
ISG promoters in native chromatin. We find that RSV infection enhances the
activated fraction of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) by promoting its
association with bromodomain 4 (BRD4) and disrupting its association with the
inhibitory 7SK small nuclear RNA. The requirement of CDK9 activity for ISG
expression was shown by siRNA-mediated silencing of CDK9 and by a selective CDK9 
inhibitor in A549 cells. In contrast, RSV-induced beta interferon (IFN-ß)
expression is not influenced by CDK9 inhibition. Using transcript-selective
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (Q-RT-PCR) assays for the ISG54 
gene, we observed that RSV induces transition from short to fully spliced mRNA
transcripts and that this transition is blocked by CDK9 inhibition in both A549
and primary human small airway epithelial cells. These data indicate that
transcription elongation plays a major role in RSV-induced ISG expression and is 
mediated by IRF3-dependent recruitment of activated CDK9. CDK9 activity may be a 
target for immunomodulation in RSV-induced lung disease.

PMCID: PMC3676079
PMID: 23596302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 11;8(4):e61055. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061055. Print 2013.

CTR9, a component of PAF complex, controls elongation block at the c-Fos locus
via signal-dependent regulation of chromatin-bound NELF dissociation.

Yoo HS(1), Seo JH, Yoo JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, Department of Life Sciences, Pohang
University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea.

PAF complex (PAFc) is an RNA polymerase II associated factor that controls
diverse steps of transcription. Although it is generally associated with actively
transcribed genes, a repressive PAFc has also been suggested. Here, we report
that PAFc regulates the transition from transcription initiation to transcription
elongation. PAFc repressed IL-6-induced, but not TNF-a-induced, immediate early
gene expression. PAFc constitutively associated with the 5'-coding region of the 
c-Fos locus, then transiently dissociated upon IL-6 stimulation. When CTR9, a
component of PAFc, was depleted, higher levels of serine 5-phosphorylated or
serine 2-phosphorylated forms of RNA Polymerase II were associated with the
unstimulated c-Fos locus. We also observed an increased association of CDK9, a
kinase component of the pTEF-b elongation factor, with the c-Fos locus in the
CTR9-depleted condition. Furthermore, association of negative elongation factor, 
NELF, which is required to proceed to the elongation phase, was significantly
reduced by CTR9 depletion, whereas elongation factor SPT5 recruitment was
enhanced by CTR9 depletion. Finally, the chromatin association of CTR9 was
specifically controlled by IL-6-induced kinase activity, because a JAK2 kinase
inhibitor, AG-490, blocked its association. In conclusion, our data suggest that 
PAFc controls the recruitment of NELF and SPT5 to target loci in a signal- and
locus-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC3623864
PMID: 23593388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 1;27(7):767-77. doi: 10.1101/gad.216200.113.

In vivo live imaging of RNA polymerase II transcription factories in primary
cells.

Ghamari A(1), van de Corput MP, Thongjuea S, van Cappellen WA, van Ijcken W, van 
Haren J, Soler E, Eick D, Lenhard B, Grosveld FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015GE Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2013 Jun 15;27(12):1434.
    Genes Dev. 2013 May 15;27(10):1216.

Transcription steps are marked by different modifications of the C-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). Phosphorylation of Ser5 and Ser7 by
cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) as part of TFIIH marks initiation, whereas
phosphorylation of Ser2 by CDK9 marks elongation. These processes are thought to 
take place in localized transcription foci in the nucleus, known as
"transcription factories," but it has been argued that the observed clusters/foci
are mere fixation or labeling artifacts. We show that transcription factories
exist in living cells as distinct foci by live-imaging fluorescently labeled
CDK9, a kinase known to associate with active RNAPII. These foci were observed in
different cell types derived from CDK9-mCherry knock-in mice. We show that these 
foci are very stable while highly dynamic in exchanging CDK9. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) data show that
the genome-wide binding sites of CDK9 and initiating RNAPII overlap on
transcribed genes. Immunostaining shows that CDK9-mCherry foci colocalize with
RNAPII-Ser5P, much less with RNAPII-Ser2P, and not with CDK12 (a kinase reported 
to be involved in the Ser2 phosphorylation) or with splicing factor SC35. In
conclusion, transcription factories exist in living cells, and initiation and
elongation of transcripts takes place in different nuclear compartments.

PMCID: PMC3639417
PMID: 23592796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(12):2497-507. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01180-12. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

BRD4 coordinates recruitment of pause release factor P-TEFb and the pausing
complex NELF/DSIF to regulate transcription elongation of interferon-stimulated
genes.

Patel MC(1), Debrosse M, Smith M, Dey A, Huynh W, Sarai N, Heightman TD, Tamura
T, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and the pausing complex, NELF and DSIF, are detected
near the transcription start site (TSS) of many active and silent genes. Active
transcription starts when the pause release factor P-TEFb is recruited to
initiate productive elongation. However, the mechanism of P-TEFb recruitment and 
regulation of NELF/DSIF during transcription is not fully understood. We
investigated this question in interferon (IFN)-stimulated transcription, focusing
on BRD4, a BET family protein that interacts with P-TEFb. Besides P-TEFb, BRD4
binds to acetylated histones through the bromodomain. We found that BRD4 and
P-TEFb, although not present prior to IFN treatment, were robustly recruited to
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) after stimulation. Likewise, NELF and DSIF prior to
stimulation were hardly detectable on ISGs, which were strongly recruited after
IFN treatment. A shRNA-based knockdown assay of NELF revealed that it negatively 
regulates the passage of Pol II and DSIF across the ISGs during elongation,
reducing total ISG transcript output. Analyses with a BRD4 small-molecule
inhibitor showed that IFN-induced recruitment of P-TEFb and NELF/DSIF was under
the control of BRD4. We suggest a model where BRD4 coordinates both positive and 
negative regulation of ISG elongation.

PMCID: PMC3700095
PMID: 23589332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 17;288(20):14297-309. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438465. Epub
2013 Apr 8.

Inhibition of HIV-1 transcription and replication by a newly identified cyclin T1
splice variant.

Gao G(1), Wu X, Zhou J, He M, He JJ, Guo D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, Wuhan
University College of Life Sciences, 430072 Wuhan, China.

A variety of cellular factors participates in the HIV-1 life cycle. Among them is
the well characterized cyclin T1 (CYCT1). CycT1 binds to cyclin-dependent kinase 
9 (CDK9) and forms the positive transcription elongation factor-b (P-TEFb).
P-TEFb is then recruited by HIV-1 TAT to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
promoter and subsequently leads to phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II (pol II), enhanced processivity of pol II, and transcription of
a full-length HIV-1 RNA. In this study, we report the identification of a new
CYCT1 splice variant, designated as CYCT1b, and accordingly we renamed CYCT1 as
CYCT1a. CYCT1b was detected in several cell lines, including primary human CD4 T 
cells, and its expression was subject to cell cycle regulation. Similar to
CYCT1a, CYCT1b was primarily localized in the nucleus. CYCT1b expression was
found to be inversely correlated with HIV-1 gene expression and replication. This
inverse correlation appeared to involve TAT transactivation, CDK9 binding, and
subsequent recruitment of P-TEFb to the HIV-1 LTR promoter and pol II C-terminal 
domain phosphorylation. In agreement with these findings, CYCT1b expression led
to direct inhibition of TAT-transactivated transcription of the HIV-1 LTR
promoter. Taken together, these results show that the newly identified CYCT1b
splice variant inhibits HIV-1 transcription and may provide new clues for the
development of anti-HIV strategies.

PMCID: PMC3656286
PMID: 23569210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 May 15;19(10):2677-87. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2118. 
Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Potent antimyeloma activity of a novel ERK5/CDK inhibitor.

Álvarez-Fernández S(1), Ortiz-Ruiz MJ, Parrott T, Zaknoen S, Ocio EM, San Miguel 
J, Burrows FJ, Esparís-Ogando A, Pandiella A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, CSIC-IBSAL-Universidad
de Salamanca, Spain.

PURPOSE: To analyze the antimyeloma potential of TG02, an ERK5/CDK inhibitory
drug.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Utilizing different multiple myeloma cell lines we
determined the effect of TG02 over viability by MTT assays. The apoptotic effect 
over multiple myeloma patient samples was studied ex vivo by cytometry. The
mechanism of action of TG02 was analyzed in the cell line MM1S, studying its
effect on the cell cycle, the induction of apoptosis, and the loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential by cytometry and Western blot. Two models of
multiple myeloma xenograft were utilized to study the in vivo action of TG02.
RESULTS: TG02 potently inhibited proliferation and survival of multiple myeloma
cell lines, even under protective bone marrow niche conditions, and selectively
induced apoptosis of primary patient-derived malignant plasma cells. TG02
displayed significant single-agent activity in two multiple myeloma xenograft
models, and enhanced the in vivo activity of bortezomib and lenalidomide.
Signaling analyses revealed that the drug simultaneously blocked the activity of 
CDKs 1, 2, and 9 as well as the MAP kinase ERK5 in MM1S cells, leading to
cell-cycle arrest and rapid commitment to apoptosis. TG02 induced robust
activation of both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of apoptosis, and
depletion of XIAP and the key multiple myeloma survival protein Mcl-1.
CONCLUSIONS: TG02 is a promising new antimyeloma agent that is currently in phase
I clinical trials in leukemia and multiple myeloma patients.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 23532886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Viruses. 2013 Mar 21;5(3):902-27. doi: 10.3390/v5030902.

Lost in transcription: molecular mechanisms that control HIV latency.

Taube R(1), Peterlin M.

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology Immunology and Genetics, Faculty
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva 
84105, Israel. rantaube@bgu.ac.il

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has limited the replication and
spread of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). However, despite treatment, HIV
infection persists in latently infected reservoirs, and once therapy is
interrupted, viral replication rebounds quickly. Extensive efforts are being
directed at eliminating these cell reservoirs. This feat can be achieved by
reactivating latent HIV while administering drugs that prevent new rounds of
infection and allow the immune system to clear the virus. However, current
approaches to HIV eradication have not been effective. Moreover, as HIV latency
is multifactorial, the significance of each of its molecular mechanisms is still 
under debate. Among these, transcriptional repression as a result of reduced
levels and activity of the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb:
CDK9/cyclin T) plays a significant role. Therefore, increasing levels of P-TEFb
expression and activity is an excellent strategy to stimulate viral gene
expression. This review summarizes the multiple steps that cause HIV to enter
into latency. It positions the interplay between transcriptionally active and
inactive host transcriptional activators and their viral partner Tat as valid
targets for the development of new strategies to reactivate latent viral gene
expression and eradicate HIV.

PMCID: PMC3705304
PMID: 23518577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 5;433(2):243-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.091. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Development of temperature-sensitive mutants of the Drosophila melanogaster
P-TEFb (Cyclin T/CDK9) heterodimer using yeast two-hybrid screening.

Kim S(1), Min IM, Ren S, Spector A, Jin MM, Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA. skim@dongguk.edu

P-TEFb complex, a heterodimer of the kinase CDK9 and Cyclin T, is a critical
factor that stimulates the process of transcription elongation. Here, we explored
a fast and large-scale screening method to induce a temperature-dependent
conditional disruption of the CDK9/Cyclin T interaction and developed an assay to
validate their mutant phenotypes in a biological context. First, we used the
yeast two-hybrid system to screen Drosophila melanogaster Cyclin T mutants at a
large scale for temperature or cold sensitive (TS or CS) CDK9 interaction
phenotypes. The isolated P-TEFb TS mutants were then expressed in Drosophila
cells and were investigated for their effects on Drosophila hsp70 transcriptional
activity. Our results showed that these P-TEFb TS mutants had a reduced level of 
hsp70 transcription at restrictive temperatures. A model structure of the Cyclin 
T and CDK9 complex suggested that the key TS mutations were found within the a2- 
and a3-helices at the interface of the complex, which may disrupt the binding of 
Cyclin T to CDK9 directly or indirectly by affecting the conformation of Cyclin
T. The yeast two-hybrid-based screening strategy described here for isolating TS 
or CS interaction phenotypes can be directly applicable to other complexes in
higher organisms. The use of TS or CS mutants will enable a 'real-time and
reversible perturbation' restricted to specific protein-protein interactions,
providing a mechanistic insight into the biological process mediated by a target 
complex.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4014677
PMID: 23500466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Elife. 2013 Mar 5;2:e00327. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00327.

The AFF4 scaffold binds human P-TEFb adjacent to HIV Tat.

Schulze-Gahmen U(1), Upton H, Birnberg A, Bao K, Chou S, Krogan NJ, Zhou Q, Alber
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California, Berkeley 
, Berkeley , United States.

Human positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) phosphorylates RNA
polymerase II and regulatory proteins to trigger elongation of many gene
transcripts. The HIV-1 Tat protein selectively recruits P-TEFb as part of a super
elongation complex (SEC) organized on a flexible AFF1 or AFF4 scaffold. To
understand this specificity and determine if scaffold binding alters P-TEFb
conformation, we determined the structure of a tripartite complex containing the 
recognition regions of P-TEFb and AFF4. AFF4 meanders over the surface of the
P-TEFb cyclin T1 (CycT1) subunit but makes no stable contacts with the CDK9
kinase subunit. Interface mutations reduced CycT1 binding and AFF4-dependent
transcription. AFF4 is positioned to make unexpected direct contacts with HIV
Tat, and Tat enhances P-TEFb affinity for AFF4. These studies define the
mechanism of scaffold recognition by P-TEFb and reveal an unanticipated
intersubunit pocket on the AFF4 SEC that potentially represents a target for
therapeutic intervention against HIV/AIDS.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00327.001.

PMCID: PMC3589825
PMID: 23471103  [PubMed - in process]


179. Front Oncol. 2013 Jan 24;3:4. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00004. eCollection 2013.

Re-thinking cell cycle regulators: the cross-talk with metabolism.

Fajas L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Université de Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland.

Analysis of genetically engineered mice deficient in cell cycle regulators,
including E2F1, cdk4, and pRB, showed that the major phenotypes are metabolic
perturbations. These key cell cycle regulators contribute to lipid synthesis,
glucose production, insulin secretion, and glycolytic metabolism. It has been
shown that deregulation of these pathways can lead to metabolic perturbations and
related metabolic diseases, such as obesity and type II diabetes. The
cyclin-cdk-Rb-E2F1 pathway regulates adipogenesis in addition to its
well-described roles in cell cycle regulation and cancer. It was also shown that 
E2F1 directly participates in the regulation of pancreatic growth and function.
Similarly, cyclin D3, cdk4, and cdk9 are also adipogenic factors with strong
effects on whole organism metabolism. These examples support the emerging notion 
that cell cycle regulatory proteins also modulate metabolic processes. These cell
cycle regulators are activated by insulin and glucose, even in non-proliferating 
cells. Most importantly, these cell cycle regulators trigger the adaptive
metabolic switch that normal and cancer cells require in order to proliferate.
These changes include increased lipid synthesis, decreased oxidative metabolism, 
and increased glycolytic metabolism. In summary, these factors are essential
regulators of anabolic biosynthetic processes, blocking at the same time
oxidative and catabolic pathways, which is reminiscent of cancer cell metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3555080
PMID: 23355973  [PubMed]


180. Transcription. 2013 Jan-Feb;4(1):39-51. doi: 10.4161/trns.22874.

Mediator MED23 regulates basal transcription in vivo via an interaction with
P-TEFb.

Wang W(1), Yao X, Huang Y, Hu X, Liu R, Hou D, Chen R, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The Mediator is a multi-subunit complex that transduces regulatory information
from transcription regulators to the RNA polymerase II apparatus. Growing
evidence suggests that Mediator plays roles in multiple stages of eukaryotic
transcription, including elongation. However, the detailed mechanism by which
Mediator regulates elongation remains elusive. In this study, we demonstrate that
Mediator MED23 subunit controls a basal level of transcription by recruiting
elongation factor P-TEFb, via an interaction with its CDK9 subunit. The mRNA
level of Egr1, a MED23-controlled model gene, is reduced 4-5 fold in Med23 (-/-) 
ES cells under an unstimulated condition, but Med23-deficiency does not alter the
occupancies of RNAP II, GTFs, Mediator complex, or activator ELK1 at the Egr1
promoter. Instead, Med23 depletion results in a significant decrease in P-TEFb
and RNAP II (Ser2P) binding at the coding region, but no changes for several
other elongation regulators, such as DSIF and NELF. ChIP-seq revealed that
Med23-deficiency partially reduced the P-TEFb occupancy at a set of
MED23-regulated gene promoters. Further, we demonstrate that MED23 interacts with
CDK9 in vivo and in vitro. Collectively, these results provide the mechanistic
insight into how Mediator promotes RNAP II into transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC3644042
PMID: 23340209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054607. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Trisubstituted pyrazolopyrimidines as novel angiogenesis inhibitors.

Weitensteiner SB(1), Liebl J, Krystof V, Havlícek L, Gucký T, Strnad M, Fürst R, 
Vollmar AM, Zahler S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

Current inhibitors of angiogenesis comprise either therapeutic antibodies (e.g.
bevacicumab binding to VEGF-A) or small molecular inhibitors of receptor tyrosin 
kinases like e.g. sunitinib, which inhibits PDGFR and VEGFR. We have recently
identified cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) as novel alternative and
pharmacologically accessible target in the context of angiogenesis. In the
present work we demonstrate that trisubstituted pyrazolo[4,3-d]pyrimidines
constitute a novel class of compounds which potently inhibit angiogenesis. All
seven tested compounds inhibited endothelial cell proliferation with IC(50)
values between 1 and 18 µM. Interestingly, this seems not to be due to
cytotoxicity, since none of them showed acute cytotoxic effects on endothelial
cells at a concentration of 10 µM,. The three most potent compounds (LGR1404,
LGR1406 and LGR1407) also inhibited cell migration (by 27, 51 and 31%, resp.),
chemotaxis (by 50, 70 and 60% in accumulative distance, resp.), and tube
formation (by 25, 60 and 30% of total tube length, resp.) at the non-toxic
concentration of 10 µM. Furthermore, angiogenesis was reduced in vivo in the CAM 
assay by these three compounds. A kinase selectivity profiling revealed that the 
compounds prevalently inhibit Cdk2, Cdk5 and Cdk9. The phenotype of the migrating
cells (reduced formation of lamellipodia, loss of Rac-1 translocation to the
membrane) resembles the previously described effects of silencing of Cdk5 in
endothelial cells. We conclude that especially LGR1406 and LGR1407 are highly
attractive anti-angiogenic compounds, whose effects seem to largely depend on
their Cdk5 inhibiting properties.

PMCID: PMC3545992
PMID: 23336010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 1;12(3):392-3. doi: 10.4161/cc.23556. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

P-TEFb as a target to reactivate latent HIV: two Brds are now in hand.

Rice AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. arice@bcm.edu

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 1;12(3):452-62.

Comment on: Boehm D, et al. Cell Cycle 2013; 12(3): In this issue.

PMCID: PMC3587438
PMID: 23324342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2013 Mar;87(6):3425-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03046-12. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Adenovirus L-E1A activates transcription through mediator complex-dependent
recruitment of the super elongation complex.

Vijayalingam S(1), Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

The adenovirus large E1A (L-E1A) protein is a prototypical transcriptional
activator, and it functions through the action of a conserved transcriptional
activation domain, CR3. CR3 interacts with a mediator subunit, MED23, that has
been linked to the transcriptional activity of CR3. Our unbiased proteomic
analysis revealed that human adenovirus 5 (HAdv5) L-E1A was associated with many 
mediator subunits. In MED23-depleted cells and in Med23 knockout (KO) cells,
L-E1A was deficient in association with other mediator subunits, suggesting that 
MED23 links CR3 with the mediator complex. Short interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated
depletion of several mediator subunits suggested differential effects of various 
subunits on transcriptional activation of HAdv5 early genes. In addition to
MED23, mediator subunits such as MED14 and MED26 were also essential for the
transcription of HAdv5 early genes. The L-E1A proteome contained MED26-associated
super elongation complex. The catalytic component of the elongation complex,
CDK9, was important for the transcriptional activity of L-E1A and HAdv5
replication. Our results suggest that L-E1A-mediated transcriptional activation
involves a transcriptional elongation step, like HIV Tat, and constitutes a
therapeutic target for inhibition of HAdv replication.

PMCID: PMC3592126
PMID: 23302885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Med Chem. 2013 Feb 14;56(3):640-59. doi: 10.1021/jm301475f. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

Substituted 4-(thiazol-5-yl)-2-(phenylamino)pyrimidines are highly active CDK9
inhibitors: synthesis, X-ray crystal structures, structure-activity relationship,
and anticancer activities.

Shao H(1), Shi S, Huang S, Hole AJ, Abbas AY, Baumli S, Liu X, Lam F, Foley DW,
Fischer PM, Noble M, Endicott JA, Pepper C, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

Cancer cells often have a high demand for antiapoptotic proteins in order to
resist programmed cell death. CDK9 inhibition selectively targets survival
proteins and reinstates apoptosis in cancer cells. We designed a series of
4-thiazol-2-anilinopyrimidine derivatives with functional groups attached to the 
C5-position of the pyrimidine or to the C4-thiazol moiety and investigated their 
effects on CDK9 potency and selectivity. One of the most selective compounds, 12u
inhibits CDK9 with IC(50) = 7 nM and shows over 80-fold selectivity for CDK9
versus CDK2. X-ray crystal structures of 12u bound to CDK9 and CDK2 provide
insights into the binding modes. This work, together with crystal structures of
selected inhibitors in complex with both enzymes described in a companion paper, 
(34) provides a rationale for the observed SAR. 12u demonstrates potent
anticancer activity against primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells with a
therapeutic window 31- and 107-fold over those of normal B- and T-cells.

PMCID: PMC3579313
PMID: 23301767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Mol Model. 2013 Apr;19(4):1711-25. doi: 10.1007/s00894-012-1735-2. Epub 2013
Jan 8.

Computational study and peptide inhibitors design for the CDK9 - cyclin T1
complex.

Randjelovic J(1), Eric S, Savic V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Belgrade - Faculty of Pharmacy,
Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia.

Cyclin dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) is a protein that belongs to the
cyclin-dependent kinases family, and its main role is in the regulation of the
cell transcription processes. Since the increased activity of CDK9 is connected
with the development of pathological processes such as tumor growth and survival 
and HIV-1 replication, inhibition of the CDK9 could be of particular interest for
treating such diseases. The activation of CDK9 is initiated by the formation of
CDK9/cyclin T1 complex, therefore disruption of its formation could be a
promising strategy for the design of CDK9 inhibitors. In order to assist in the
design of potential inhibitors of CDK9/cyclin T1 complex formation, a
computational study of the CDK9/cyclin T1 interface was conducted. Ten peptides
were designed using the information from the analysis of the complex, hot spot
residues and fragment based design. The designed peptides were docked to CDK9
structures obtained by molecular dynamics simulations of CDK9/cyclin T1 complex
and the CDK9 alone and their binding affinities were evaluated using molecular
mechanics Poisson Boltzman surface area (MM-PBSA) method and steered molecular
dynamics (SMD). Designed peptide sequences LQTLGF and ESIILQ, both derived from
the surface of cyclin T1, as well as the peptide sequence PRWPE, derived from
fragment based design, showed the most favorable binding properties and were
selected for our further studies.

PMID: 23296566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Med Chem. 2013 Feb 14;56(3):660-70. doi: 10.1021/jm301495v. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Comparative structural and functional studies of
4-(thiazol-5-yl)-2-(phenylamino)pyrimidine-5-carbonitrile CDK9 inhibitors suggest
the basis for isotype selectivity.

Hole AJ(1), Baumli S, Shao H, Shi S, Huang S, Pepper C, Fischer PM, Wang S,
Endicott JA, Noble ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1
3QU, UK.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9/cyclin T, the protein kinase heterodimer that
constitutes positive transcription elongation factor b, is a well-validated
target for treatment of several diseases, including cancer and cardiac
hypertrophy. In order to aid inhibitor design and rationalize the basis for CDK9 
selectivity, we have studied the CDK-binding properties of six different members 
of a 4-(thiazol-5-yl)-2-(phenylamino)pyrimidine-5-carbonitrile series that bind
to both CDK9/cyclin T and CDK2/cyclin A. We find that for a given CDK, the
melting temperature of a CDK/cyclin/inhibitor complex correlates well with
inhibitor potency, suggesting that differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) is a
useful orthogonal measure of inhibitory activity for this series. We have used
DSF to demonstrate that the binding of these compounds is independent of the
presence or absence of the C-terminal tail region of CDK9, unlike the binding of 
the CDK9-selective inhibitor 5,6-dichlorobenzimidazone-1-ß-d-ribofuranoside
(DRB). Finally, on the basis of 11 cocrystal structures bound to CDK9/cyclin T or
CDK2/cyclin A, we conclude that selective inhibition of CDK9/cyclin T by members 
of the 4-(thiazol-5-yl)-2-(phenylamino)pyrimidine-5-carbonitrile series results
from the relative malleability of the CDK9 active site rather than from the
formation of specific polar contacts.

PMCID: PMC3579457
PMID: 23252711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Mol Biol. 2013 Feb 22;425(4):812-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.12.005. Epub 2012 
Dec 13.

Effect of mimetic CDK9 inhibitors on HIV-1-activated transcription.

Van Duyne R(1), Guendel I, Jaworski E, Sampey G, Klase Z, Chen H, Zeng C,
Kovalskyy D, El Kouni MH, Lepene B, Patanarut A, Nekhai S, Price DH, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

Potent anti-retroviral therapy has transformed HIV-1 infection into a chronic
manageable disease; however, drug resistance remains a common problem that limits
the effectiveness and clinical benefits of this type of treatment. The discovery 
of viral reservoirs in the body, in which HIV-1 may persist, has helped to
explain why therapeutic eradication of HIV-1 has proved so difficult. In the
current study, we utilized a combination of structure-based analysis of
cyclin/CDK complexes with our previously published Tat peptide derivatives. We
modeled the Tat peptide inhibitors with CDKs and found a particular pocket that
showed the most stable binding site (Cavity 1) using in silico analysis.
Furthermore, we were able to find peptide mimetics that bound to similar regions 
using in silico searches of a chemical library, followed by cell-based biological
assays. Using these methods, we obtained the first-generation mimetic drugs and
tested these compounds on HIV-1 long terminal repeat-activated transcription.
Using biological assays followed by similar in silico analysis to find
second-generation drugs resembling the original mimetic, we found the new targets
of Cavity 1 and Cavity 2 regions on CDK9. We examined the second-generation
mimetic against various viral isolates and observed a generalized suppression of 
most HIV-1 isolates. Finally, the drug inhibited viral replication in humanized
mouse models of Rag2(-/-)<U+03B3>c(-/-) with no toxicity to the animals at tested
concentrations. Our results suggest that it may be possible to model peptide
inhibitors into available crystal structures and further find drug mimetics using
in silico analysis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3595178
PMID: 23247501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Feb;24(3):351-60. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-07-0561. Epub 2012 Dec
14.

RNA polymerase II progression through H3K27me3-enriched gene bodies requires
JMJD3 histone demethylase.

Estarás C(1), Fueyo R, Akizu N, Beltrán S, Martínez-Balbás MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genomics, Instituto de Biología Molecular de
Barcelona, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 08028 Barcelona,
Spain.

JMJD3 H3K27me3 demethylase plays an important role in the transcriptional
response to different signaling pathways; however, the mechanism by which it
facilitates transcription has been unclear. Here we show that JMJD3 regulates
transcription of transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)-responsive genes by
promoting RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) progression along the gene bodies. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing experiments, we show that,
upon TGFß treatment, JMJD3 and elongating RNAPII colocalize extensively along the
intragenic regions of TGFß target genes. According to these data, genome-wide
analysis shows that JMJD3-dependent TGFß target genes are enriched in H3K27me3
before TGFß signaling pathway activation. Further molecular analyses demonstrate 
that JMJD3 demethylates H3K27me3 along the gene bodies, paving the way for the
RNAPII progression. Overall these findings uncover the mechanism by which JMJD3
facilitates transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC3564542
PMID: 23243002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Proteome Res. 2013 Jan 4;12(1):272-81. doi: 10.1021/pr300778b. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Discovery of cell compartment specific protein-protein interactions using
affinity purification combined with tandem mass spectrometry.

Lavallée-Adam M(1), Rousseau J, Domecq C, Bouchard A, Forget D, Faubert D,
Blanchette M, Coulombe B.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Centre for Bioinformatics and School of Computer Science, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Affinity purification combined with tandem mass spectrometry (AP-MS/MS) is a
well-established method used to discover interaction partners for a given protein
of interest. Because most AP-MS/MS approaches are performed using the soluble
fraction of whole cell extracts (WCE), information about the cellular
compartments where the interactions occur is lost. More importantly, classical
AP-MS/MS often fails to identify interactions that take place in the nonsoluble
fraction of the cell, for example, on the chromatin or membranes; consequently,
protein complexes that are less soluble are underrepresented. In this paper, we
introduce a method called multiple cell compartment AP-MS/MS (MCC-AP-MS/MS),
which identifies the interactions of a protein independently in three fractions
of the cell: the cytoplasm, the nucleoplasm, and the chromatin. We show that this
fractionation improves the sensitivity of the method when compared to the
classical affinity purification procedure using soluble WCE while keeping a very 
high specificity. Using three proteins known to localize in various cell
compartments as baits, the CDK9 subunit of transcription elongation factor
P-TEFb, the RNA polymerase II (RNAP II)-associated protein 4 (RPAP4), and the
largest subunit of RNAP II, POLR2A, we show that MCC-AP-MS/MS reproducibly yields
fraction-specific interactions. Finally, we demonstrate that this improvement in 
sensitivity leads to the discovery of novel interactions of RNAP II
carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) interacting domain (CID) proteins with POLR2A.

PMCID: PMC4494838
PMID: 23157168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(2):1211-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02413-12. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Cyclin T1 and CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation are downregulated during establishment 
of HIV-1 latency in primary resting memory CD4+ T cells.

Budhiraja S(1), Famiglietti M, Bosque A, Planelles V, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Virology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

P-TEFb, a cellular kinase composed of Cyclin T1 and CDK9, is essential for
processive HIV-1 transcription. P-TEFb activity is dependent on phosphorylation
of Thr186 in the CDK9 T loop. In resting CD4(+) T cells which are nonpermissive
for HIV-1 replication, the levels of Cyclin T1 and T-loop-phosphorylated CDK9 are
very low but increase significantly upon cellular activation. Little is known
about how P-TEFb activity and expression are regulated in resting central memory 
CD4(+) T cells, one of the main reservoirs of latent HIV-1. We used an in vitro
primary cell model of HIV-1 latency to show that P-TEFb availability in resting
memory CD4(+) T cells is governed by the differential expression and
phosphorylation of its subunits. This is in contrast to previous observations in 
dividing cells, where P-TEFb can be regulated by its sequestration in the 7SK RNP
complex. We find that resting CD4(+) T cells, whether naïve or memory and
independent of their infection status, have low levels of Cyclin T1 and
T-loop-phosphorylated CDK9, which increase upon activation. We also show that the
decrease in Cyclin T1 protein upon the acquisition of a memory phenotype is in
part due to proteasome-mediated proteolysis and likely also to
posttranscriptional downregulation by miR-150. We also found that HEXIM1 levels
are very low in ex vivo- and in vitro-generated resting memory CD4(+) T cells,
thus limiting the sequestration of P-TEFb in the 7SK RNP complex, indicating that
this mechanism is unlikely to be a driver of viral latency in this cell type.

PMCID: PMC3554045
PMID: 23152527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Retrovirology. 2012 Nov 9;9:94. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-94.

CDK2 regulates HIV-1 transcription by phosphorylation of CDK9 on serine 90.

Breuer D(1), Kotelkin A, Ammosova T, Kumari N, Ivanov A, Ilatovskiy AV, Beullens 
M, Roane PR, Bollen M, Petukhov MG, Kashanchi F, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University,
1840 7th Street, N.W. HURB1, Suite 202, Washington, DC 20001, USA.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 transcription is activated by the viral Tat protein that
recruits host positive transcription elongation factor-b (P-TEFb) containing
CDK9/cyclin T1 to the HIV-1 promoter. P-TEFb in the cells exists as a lower
molecular weight CDK9/cyclin T1 dimer and a high molecular weight complex of 7SK 
RNA, CDK9/cyclin T1, HEXIM1 dimer and several additional proteins. Our previous
studies implicated CDK2 in HIV-1 transcription regulation. We also found that
inhibition of CDK2 by iron chelators leads to the inhibition of CDK9 activity,
suggesting a functional link between CDK2 and CDK9. Here, we investigate whether 
CDK2 phosphorylates CDK9 and regulates its activity.
RESULTS: The siRNA-mediated knockdown of CDK2 inhibited CDK9 kinase activity and 
reduced CDK9 phosphorylation. Stable shRNA-mediated CDK2 knockdown inhibited
HIV-1 transcription, but also increased the overall level of 7SK RNA. CDK9
contains a motif (90SPYNR94) that is consensus CDK2 phosphorylation site. CDK9
was phosphorylated on Ser90 by CDK2 in vitro. In cultured cells, CDK9
phosphorylation was reduced when Ser90 was mutated to an Ala. Phosphorylation of 
CDK9 on Ser90 was also detected with phospho-specific antibodies and it was
reduced after the knockdown of CDK2. CDK9 expression decreased in the large
complex for the CDK9-S90A mutant and was correlated with a reduced activity and
an inhibition of HIV-1 transcription. In contrast, the CDK9-S90D mutant showed a 
slight decrease in CDK9 expression in both the large and small complexes but
induced Tat-dependent HIV-1 transcription. Molecular modeling showed that Ser 90 
of CDK9 is located on a flexible loop exposed to solvent, suggesting its
availability for phosphorylation.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that CDK2 phosphorylates CDK9 on Ser 90 and thereby
contributes to HIV-1 transcription. The phosphorylation of Ser90 by CDK2
represents a novel mechanism of HIV-1 regulated transcription and provides a new 
strategy for activation of latent HIV-1 provirus.

PMCID: PMC3515335
PMID: 23140174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Retrovirology. 2012 Oct 30;9:90. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-90.

Identification of novel CDK9 and Cyclin T1-associated protein complexes (CCAPs)
whose siRNA depletion enhances HIV-1 Tat function.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Liu H, Donahue H, Malovannaya A, Qin J, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Tat activates RNA Polymerase II (RNAP II) elongation of the
integrated provirus by recruiting a protein kinase known as P-TEFb to TAR RNA at 
the 5' end of nascent viral transcripts. The catalytic core of P-TEFb contains
CDK9 and Cyclin T1 (CCNT1). A human endogenous complexome has recently been
described - the set of multi-protein complexes in HeLa cell nuclei. We mined this
complexome data set and identified 12 distinct multi-protein complexes that
contain both CDK9 and CCNT1. We have termed these complexes CCAPs for
CDK9/CCNT1-associated protein complexes. Nine CCAPs are novel, while three were
previously identified as Core P-TEFb, the 7SK snRNP, and the Super-Elongation
Complex. We have investigated the role of five newly identified CCAPs in Tat
function and viral gene expression.
RESULTS: We examined five CCAPs that contain: 1) PPP1R10/TOX3/WDR82; 2) TTF2; 3) 
TPR; 4) WRNIP1; 5) FBXO11/CUL1/SKP1. SiRNA depletions of protein subunits of the 
five CCAPs enhanced Tat activation of an integrated HIV-1 LTR-Luciferase reporter
in TZM-bl cells. Using plasmid transfection assays in HeLa cells, we also found
that siRNA depletions of TTF2, FBXO11, PPP1R10, WDR82, and TOX3 enhanced Tat
activation of an HIV-1 LTR-luciferase reporter, but the depletions did not
enhance expression of an NF-<U+03BA>B reporter plasmid with the exception of PPP1R10. We
found no evidence that depletion of CCAPs perturbed the level of CDK9/CCNT1 in
the 7SK snRNP. We also found that the combination of siRNA depletions of both
TTF2 and FBXO11 sensitized a latent provirus in Jurkat cells to reactivation by
sub-optimal amounts of aCD3/CD28 antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identified five novel CDK9/CCNT1 complexes that are
capable of negative regulation of HIV-1 Tat function and viral gene expression.
Because siRNA depletions of CCAPs enhance Tat function, it is possible that these
complexes reduce the level of CDK9 and CCNT1 available for Tat, similar to the
negative regulation of Tat by the 7SK snRNP. Our results highlight the complexity
in the biological functions of CDK9 and CCNT1.

PMCID: PMC3494656
PMID: 23110726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 Jan;12(1):23-36. doi: 10.1128/EC.00181-12. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Evidence that two Pcl-like cyclins control Cdk9 activity during cell
differentiation in Aspergillus nidulans asexual development.

Kempf C(1), Bathe F, Fischer R.

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute for Applied Biosciences,
Department of Microbiology, Karlsruhe, Germany.

Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) are usually involved in cell cycle
regulation. However, Cdk9 is an exception and promotes RNA synthesis through
phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of
RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). The CTD is comprised of repeating heptapeptides, in
which serine residues at positions 2, 5, and 7 are of crucial importance. Ser5
phosphorylation causes transcription initiation and promoter escape. However,
RNAPII pauses 20 to 50 bp downstream from the transcription start site, until
Cdk9 phosphorylates Ser2. This event relieves the checkpoint and promotes the
processivity of elongation. Here we present evidence that in the filamentous
fungus Aspergillus nidulans, a Cdk9 homologue, PtkA, serves specific functions in
conidiophore development. It was previously shown that PtkA interacts with two
cyclins, PclA and the T cyclin PchA. Using yeast two-hybrid screens, we
identified a third cyclin, PclB, and a kinase, PipA(Bud32). Both proteins were
expressed in hyphae and in conidiophores, but interaction between each protein
and PtkA was restricted to the conidiophores. Deletion of pchA caused a severe
growth defect, and deletion of pipA was lethal, suggesting basic functions in
PtkA-dependent gene transcription. In contrast, deletion of pclB in combination
with deletion of pclA essentially caused a block in spore formation. We present
evidence that the phosphorylation status of the CTD of RNA polymerase II in the
conidiophore changes upon deletion of pclA or pclB. Our results suggest that
tissue-specific modulation of Cdk9 activity by PclA and PclB is required for
proper differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3535853
PMID: 23104571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur J Med Chem. 2012 Nov;57:311-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2012.09.034. Epub 2012 
Oct 3.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine and
4-heteroaryl-pyrimidine derivatives as anti-cancer agents.

Lukasik PM(1), Elabar S, Lam F, Shao H, Liu X, Abbas AY, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

A series of N-phenyl-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-2-amines,
4-indazolyl-N-phenylpyrimidin-2-amines and
N-phenyl-4-pyrazolo[3,4-b]pyridin-pyrimidin-2-amines have been synthesized. Their
anti-proliferative activities were tested in HCT-116 human colon carcinoma and
MCF-7 breast carcinoma cell lines. Many exhibited potent anti-proliferative and
CDK9 inhibitory activities. A lead compound 18b demonstrated the ability to
reduce the level of Mcl-1 anti-apoptotic protein, to activate caspase 3/7 and
induce cancer cell apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cancer. 2012 Oct 18;11:77. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-11-77.

P276-00, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, modulates cell cycle and induces
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo in mantle cell lymphoma cell lines.

Shirsath NP(1), Manohar SM, Joshi KS.

Author information: 
(1)Target Identification Group, Piramal Healthcare Limited, 1-Nirlon Complex,
Goregaon (E), Mumbai, India.

BACKGROUND: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a well-defined aggressive lymphoid
neoplasm characterized by proliferation of mature B-lymphocytes that have a
remarkable tendency to disseminate. This tumor is considered as one of the most
aggressive lymphoid neoplasms with poor responses to conventional chemotherapy
and relatively short survival. Since cyclin D1 and cell cycle control appears as 
a natural target, small-molecule inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks)
and cyclins may play important role in the therapy of this disorder. We explored 
P276-00, a novel selective potent Cdk4-D1, Cdk1-B and Cdk9-T1 inhibitor
discovered by us against MCL and elucidated its potential mechanism of action.
METHODS: The cytotoxic effect of P276-00 in three human MCL cell lines was
evaluated in vitro. The effect of P276-00 on the regulation of cell cycle,
apoptosis and transcription was assessed, which are implied in the pathogenesis
of MCL. Flow cytometry, western blot, immunoflourescence and siRNA studies were
performed. The in vivo efficacy and effect on survival of P276-00 was evaluated
in a Jeko-1 xenograft model developed in SCID mice. PK/PD analysis of tumors were
performed using LC-MS and western blot analysis.
RESULTS: P276-00 showed a potent cytotoxic effect against MCL cell lines.
Mechanistic studies confirmed down regulation of cell cycle regulatory proteins
with apoptosis. P276-00 causes time and dose dependent increase in the sub G1
population as early as from 24 h. Reverse transcription PCR studies provide
evidence that P276-00 treatment down regulated transcription of antiapoptotic
protein Mcl-1 which is a potential pathogenic protein for MCL. Most importantly, 
in vivo studies have revealed significant efficacy as a single agent with
increased survival period compared to vehicle treated. Further, preliminary
combination studies of P276-00 with doxorubicin and bortezomib showed in vitro
synergism.
CONCLUSION: Our studies thus provide evidence and rational that P276-00 alone or 
in combination is a potential therapeutic molecule to improve patients' outcome
in mantle cell lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3558400
PMID: 23075291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;19(11):1108-15. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2399. Epub 2012
Oct 14.

Cyclin-dependent kinase control of the initiation-to-elongation switch of RNA
polymerase II.

Larochelle S(1), Amat R, Glover-Cutter K, Sansó M, Zhang C, Allen JJ, Shokat KM, 
Bentley DL, Fisher RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA.

Promoter-proximal pausing by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) ensures gene-specific
regulation and RNA quality control. Structural considerations suggested a
requirement for initiation-factor eviction in elongation-factor engagement and
pausing of transcription complexes. Here we show that selective inhibition of
Cdk7--part of TFIIH--increases TFIIE retention, prevents DRB sensitivity-inducing
factor (DSIF) recruitment and attenuates pausing in human cells. Pause release
depends on Cdk9-cyclin T1 (P-TEFb); Cdk7 is also required for Cdk9-activating
phosphorylation and Cdk9-dependent downstream events--Pol II C-terminal domain
Ser2 phosphorylation and histone H2B ubiquitylation--in vivo. Cdk7 inhibition,
moreover, impairs Pol II transcript 3'-end formation. Cdk7 thus acts through
TFIIE and DSIF to establish, and through P-TEFb to relieve, barriers to
elongation: incoherent feedforward that might create a window to recruit
RNA-processing machinery. Therefore, cyclin-dependent kinases govern Pol II
handoff from initiation to elongation factors and cotranscriptional RNA
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3746743
PMID: 23064645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Mar;114(3):728-34. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24414.

Activation and function of murine Cyclin T2A and Cyclin T2B during skeletal
muscle differentiation.

Marchesi I(1), Nieddu V, Caracciolo V, Maioli M, Gaspa L, Giordano A, Bagella L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Biochemistry and National
Institute of Biostructures and Biosystems, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) is a serine-threonine kinase, involved in many
cellular processes. The regulatory units of Cdk9 are the T family Cyclins (T1,
T2) and Cyclin K. Cyclin T2 has two forms termed Cyclin T2a and Cyclin T2b that
arise by an alternative splicing of the primary transcript. Upon induction of
muscle differentiation, MyoD recruits Cdk9/Cyclin T2 on muscle-specific gene
promoter sequences. This complex is able to phosphorylate the C-terminal domain
of RNA polymerase II, enhancing MyoD function and promoting myogenic
differentiation. This work focuses on the characterization of two murine Cyclin
T2 isoforms and the evaluation of the role of Cdk9/Cyclin T2 complexes during the
skeletal muscle differentiation. This study demonstrated a predominant expression
of isoform b in all stages of differentiation. Moreover, both isoforms of Cyclin 
T2 are able to activate the myogenic program but Cyclin T2b has a predominant
role, in particular during the latest stages.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23060074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;70(6):891-8. doi: 10.1007/s00280-012-1967-y.
Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Effect of aprepitant on the pharmacokinetics of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor dinaciclib in patients with advanced malignancies.

Zhang D(1), Mita M, Shapiro GI, Poon J, Small K, Tzontcheva A, Kantesaria B, Zhu 
Y, Bannerji R, Statkevich P.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA.

PURPOSE: Dinaciclib, a selective inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 1,
CDK2, CDK5, and CDK9, is metabolized via CYP3A4. Aprepitant, a neurokinin-1
receptor antagonist for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting, is an inhibitor and inducer of CYP3A4. We conducted a randomized,
crossover study to investigate the effects of single oral doses of aprepitant
when coadministered with dinaciclib.
METHODS: As part of a phase 1 dose-escalation trial, subjects with advanced
malignancies were randomized into a 2-period, multi-cycle, crossover study to
investigate the effect of single doses of oral aprepitant on the pharmacokinetics
of 29.6 mg/m(2) dinaciclib administered by 2-h intravenous infusion. During cycle
1 and cycle 2, subjects received dinaciclib with aprepitant in one cycle and
dinaciclib without aprepitant in the other cycle; aprepitant was administered at 
a dose of 125 mg orally on day 1 and 80 mg orally on days 2 and 3, along with
standard dosing regimens of ondansetron and dexamethasone.
RESULTS: Twelve patients completed the study; T (max) occurred approximately 2 h 
after the initiation of the infusion. The percent geometric mean ratio
(dinaciclib + aprepitant vs. dinaciclib alone) was 106 % (90 % confidence
interval [CI] 89-126 %) and 111 % (90 % CI 93-132 %) for dinaciclib C(max) and
AUC([I]), respectively. The half-life and clearance of dinaciclib were similar,
with or without aprepitant.
CONCLUSIONS: Coadministration of dinaciclib with aprepitant resulted in no
clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics and did not alter the
safety profile of dinaciclib in patients with advanced malignancies.

PMID: 23053255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biochem J. 2013 Jan 1;449(1):231-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121286.

Ribavirin-induced intracellular GTP depletion activates transcription elongation 
in coagulation factor VII gene expression.

Suzuki A(1), Miyawaki Y, Okuyama E, Murata M, Ando Y, Kato I, Takagi Y, Takagi A,
Murate T, Saito H, Kojima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiological Laboratory Sciences, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 461-8673, Japan.

Coagulation FVII (Factor VII) is a vitamin K-dependent glycoprotein synthesized
in hepatocytes. It was reported previously that FVII gene (F7) expression was
up-regulated by ribavirin treatment in hepatitis C virus-infected haemophilia
patients; however, its precise mechanism is still unknown. In the present study, 
we investigated the molecular mechanism of ribavirin-induced up-regulation of F7 
expression in HepG2 (human hepatoma cell line). We found that intracellular GTP
depletion by ribavirin as well as other IMPDH (inosine-5'-monophosphate
dehydrogenase) inhibitors, such as mycophenolic acid and 6-mercaptopurine,
up-regulated F7 expression. FVII mRNA transcription was mainly enhanced by
accelerated transcription elongation, which was mediated by the P-TEFb
(positive-transcription elongation factor b) complex, rather than by promoter
activation. Ribavirin unregulated ELL (eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukaemia) 3
mRNA expression before F7 up-regulation. We observed that ribavirin enhanced ELL3
recruitment to F7, whereas knockdown of ELL3 diminished ribavirin-induced FVII
mRNA up-regulation. Ribavirin also enhanced recruitment of CDK9 (cyclin-dependent
kinase 9) and AFF4 to F7. These data suggest that ribavirin-induced intracellular
GTP depletion recruits a super elongation complex containing P-TEFb, AFF4 and
ELL3, to F7, and modulates FVII mRNA transcription elongation. Collectively, we
have elucidated a basal mechanism for ribavirin-induced FVII mRNA up-regulation
by acceleration of transcription elongation, which may be crucial in
understanding its pleiotropic functions in vivo.

PMID: 23050902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):38755-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.412015. Epub 2012
Oct 1.

Cross-talk among RNA polymerase II kinases modulates C-terminal domain
phosphorylation.

Devaiah BN(1), Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

The RNA polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD) serves as a docking site
for numerous proteins, bridging various nuclear processes to transcription. The
recruitment of these proteins is mediated by CTD phospho-epitopes generated
during transcription. The mechanisms regulating the kinases that establish these 
phosphorylation patterns on the CTD are not known. We report that three CTD
kinases, CDK7, CDK9, and BRD4, engage in cross-talk, modulating their subsequent 
CTD phosphorylation. BRD4 phosphorylates PTEFb/CDK9 at either Thr-29 or Thr-186, 
depending on its relative abundance, which represses or activates CDK9 CTD kinase
activity, respectively. Conversely, CDK9 phosphorylates BRD4 enhancing its CTD
kinase activity. The CTD Ser-5 kinase CDK7 also interacts with and phosphorylates
BRD4, potently inhibiting BRD4 kinase activity. Additionally, the three kinases
regulate each other indirectly through the general transcription factor TAF7. An 
inhibitor of CDK9 and CDK7 CTD kinase activities, TAF7 also binds to BRD4 and
inhibits its kinase activity. Each of these kinases phosphorylates TAF7,
affecting its subsequent ability to inhibit the other two. Thus, a complex
regulatory network governs Pol II CTD kinases.

PMCID: PMC3493918
PMID: 23027873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4691-704. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06267-11. Epub 2012 Sep
17.

Interaction of cyclin-dependent kinase 12/CrkRS with cyclin K1 is required for
the phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II.

Cheng SW(1), Kuzyk MA, Moradian A, Ichu TA, Chang VC, Tien JF, Vollett SE,
Griffith M, Marra MA, Morin GB.

Author information: 
(1)Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

CrkRS (Cdc2-related kinase, Arg/Ser), or cyclin-dependent kinase 12 (CKD12), is a
serine/threonine kinase believed to coordinate transcription and RNA splicing.
While CDK12/CrkRS complexes were known to phosphorylate the C-terminal domain
(CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II), the cyclin regulating this activity was 
not known. Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we identified a
65-kDa isoform of cyclin K (cyclin K1) in endogenous CDK12/CrkRS protein
complexes. We show that cyclin K1 complexes isolated from mammalian cells contain
CDK12/CrkRS but do not contain CDK9, a presumed partner of cyclin K. Analysis of 
extensive RNA-Seq data shows that the 65-kDa cyclin K1 isoform is the
predominantly expressed form across numerous tissue types. We also demonstrate
that CDK12/CrkRS is dependent on cyclin K1 for its kinase activity and that small
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of CDK12/CrkRS or cyclin K1 has similar effects
on the expression of a luciferase reporter gene. Our data suggest that cyclin K1 
is the primary cyclin partner for CDK12/CrkRS and that cyclin K1 is required to
activate CDK12/CrkRS to phosphorylate the CTD of RNA Pol II. These properties are
consistent with a role of CDK12/CrkRS in regulating gene expression through
phosphorylation of RNA Pol II.

PMCID: PMC3486194
PMID: 22988298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Nov;11(11):2321-30. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0578.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Sangivamycin-like molecule 6 exhibits potent anti-multiple myeloma activity
through inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase-9.

Dolloff NG(1), Allen JE, Dicker DT, Aqui N, Vogl D, Malysz J, Talamo G, El-Deiry 
WS.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and Cancer Institute, 500
University Drive CH046, Office T4419, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. dolloffn@gmail.com

Despite significant treatment advances over the past decade, multiple myeloma
(MM) remains largely incurable. In this study we found that MM cells were
remarkably sensitive to the death-inducing effects of a new class of
sangivamycin-like molecules (SLM). A panel of structurally related SLMs
selectively induced apoptosis in MM cells but not other tumor or nonmalignant
cell lines at submicromolar concentrations. SLM6 was the most active compound in 
vivo, where it was well tolerated and significantly inhibited growth and induced 
apoptosis of MM tumors. We determined that the anti-MM activity of SLM6 was
mediated by direct inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), which resulted
in transcriptional repression of oncogenes that are known to drive MM progression
(MAF, CCND1, MYC, and others). Furthermore, SLM6 showed superior in vivo anti-MM 
activity more than the CDK inhibitor flavopiridol, which is currently in clinical
trials for MM. These findings show that SLM6 is a novel CDK9 inhibitor with
promising preclinical activity as an anti-MM agent.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3502072
PMID: 22964485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Structure. 2012 Oct 10;20(10):1788-95. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.08.011. Epub 2012 
Sep 6.

The CDK9 tail determines the reaction pathway of positive transcription
elongation factor b.

Baumli S(1), Hole AJ, Wang LZ, Noble ME, Endicott JA.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. sbaumli@gmx.ch

CDK9, the kinase of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb),
stimulates transcription elongation by phosphorylating RNA polymerase II and
transcription elongation factors. Using kinetic analysis of a human P-TEFb
complex consisting of CDK9 and cyclin T, we show that the CDK9 C-terminal tail
sequence is important for the catalytic mechanism and imposes an ordered binding 
of substrates and release of products. Crystallographic analysis of a CDK9/cyclin
T complex in which the C-terminal tail partially blocks the ATP binding site
reveals a possible reaction intermediate. Biochemical characterization of CDK9
mutants supports a model in which the CDK9 tail cycles through different
conformational states. We propose that this mechanism is critical for the pattern
of CTD Ser2 phosphorylation on actively transcribed genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3469819
PMID: 22959624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Analyst. 2012 Nov 7;137(21):4921-33. doi: 10.1039/c2an35368g. Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Assessing the responses of cellular proteins induced by hyaluronic acid-modified 
surfaces utilizing a mass spectrometry-based profiling system: over-expression of
CD36, CD44, CDK9, and PP2A.

Yang MH(1), Jong SB, Lu CY, Lin YF, Chiang PW, Tyan YC, Chung TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, National Yunlin University
of Science and Technology, 123 University Road, Section 3, Douliou, Yunlin, 64002
Taiwan, ROC.

The cell responses to biopolymer surface at the early adhesion stages can be
critical for cell survival. The purpose of this research was to assess formation 
of hyaluronic acid (HA) biopolymer surface, the fibroblasts were used as an
experimental model to evaluate the responses of cellular proteins induced by
biopolymer materials using a mass spectrometry-based profiling system. Surfaces
were covered by multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNT), chitosan (CS), and HA to
increase the surface area, enhance the adhesion of biopolymer and promote the
rate of cell proliferation. The amount of adhered fibroblasts on CNT/CS/HA
electrodes of quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) were greatly exceeded those on
other surfaces that were consistent with cell-count technique. Moreover,
analyzing differential protein expressions of adhered fibroblasts on those
biopolymer surfaces by proteomic approaches identified CD36, CD44, PP2A, and CDK9
as key proteins. To validate the influences of those four proteins on adhesions
of fibroblasts on biopolymers, the cells were blocked by antibodies of the
proteins and the adhesions of cells on the tested biopolymer surfaces were
examined using a QCM technique, flow cytometric analysis and morphological
observations. The results of significantly decreasing the weights and densities
of the blocked fibroblasts adhering to CNT/CS/HA surfaces were obtained, and
validate those proteins found by proteomic approaches. Utilizing mass
spectrometry-based proteomics to evaluate cell adhesions on biopolymers is
proposed.

PMID: 22910856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Dec;40(22):e173. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks765. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

Antisense morpholino targeting just upstream from a poly(A) tail junction of
maternal mRNA removes the tail and inhibits translation.

Wada T(1), Hara M, Taneda T, Qingfu C, Takata R, Moro K, Takeda K, Kishimoto T,
Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Supramolecular
Biology, Graduate School of Nanobioscience, Yokohama City University, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. tawada@tsurumi.yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Gene downregulation by antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) is achieved by
either hybridization around the translation initiation codon or by targeting the 
splice donor site. In the present study, an antisense MO method is introduced
that uses a 25-mer MO against a region at least 40-nt upstream from a poly(A)
tail junction in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of maternal mRNA. The MO
removed the poly(A) tail and blocked zebrafish cdk9 (zcdk9) mRNA translation,
showing functional mimicry between miRNA and MO. A PCR-based assay revealed
MO-mediated specific poly(A) tail removal of zebrafish mRNAs, including those for
cyclin B1, cyclin B2 and tbp. The MO activity targeting cyclins A and B mRNAs was
validated in unfertilized starfish oocytes and eggs. The MO removed the elongated
poly(A) tail from maternal matured mRNA. This antisense method introduces a new
application for the targeted downregulation of maternal mRNAs in animal oocytes, 
eggs and early embryos.

PMCID: PMC3526265
PMID: 22904086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002860. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

CDK9 and H2B monoubiquitination: a well-choreographed dance.

Johnsen SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany. sjohnsen@alumni.mayo.edu

Comment on
    PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002822.

PMCID: PMC3410825
PMID: 22876198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002822. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

A positive feedback loop links opposing functions of P-TEFb/Cdk9 and histone H2B 
ubiquitylation to regulate transcript elongation in fission yeast.

Sansó M(1), Lee KM, Viladevall L, Jacques PÉ, Pagé V, Nagy S, Racine A, St Amour 
CV, Zhang C, Shokat KM, Schwer B, Robert F, Fisher RP, Tanny JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002860.

Transcript elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is accompanied by conserved
patterns of histone modification. Whereas histone modifications have established 
roles in transcription initiation, their functions during elongation are not
understood. Mono-ubiquitylation of histone H2B (H2Bub1) plays a key role in
coordinating co-transcriptional histone modification by promoting site-specific
methylation of histone H3. H2Bub1 also regulates gene expression through an
unidentified, methylation-independent mechanism. Here we reveal bidirectional
communication between H2Bub1 and Cdk9, the ortholog of metazoan positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), in the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Chemical and classical genetic analyses indicate that 
lowering Cdk9 activity or preventing phosphorylation of its substrate, the
transcription processivity factor Spt5, reduces H2Bub1 in vivo. Conversely,
mutations in the H2Bub1 pathway impair Cdk9 recruitment to chromatin and decrease
Spt5 phosphorylation. Moreover, an Spt5 phosphorylation-site mutation, combined
with deletion of the histone H3 Lys4 methyltransferase Set1, phenocopies
morphologic and growth defects due to H2Bub1 loss, suggesting independent,
partially redundant roles for Cdk9 and Set1 downstream of H2Bub1. Surprisingly,
mutation of the histone H2B ubiquitin-acceptor residue relaxes the Cdk9 activity 
requirement in vivo, and cdk9 mutations suppress cell-morphology defects in
H2Bub1-deficient strains. Genome-wide analyses by chromatin immunoprecipitation
also demonstrate opposing effects of Cdk9 and H2Bub1 on distribution of
transcribing RNAPII. Therefore, whereas mutual dependence of H2Bub1 and Spt5
phosphorylation indicates positive feedback, mutual suppression by cdk9 and
H2Bub1-pathway mutations suggests antagonistic functions that must be kept in
balance to regulate elongation. Loss of H2Bub1 disrupts that balance and leads to
deranged gene expression and aberrant cell morphologies, revealing a novel
function of a conserved, co-transcriptional histone modification.

PMCID: PMC3410854
PMID: 22876190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Oct;11(10):2265-73. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0286.
Epub 2012 Jul 19.

BAY 1000394, a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, with potent antitumor
activity in mono- and in combination treatment upon oral application.

Siemeister G(1), Lücking U, Wengner AM, Lienau P, Steinke W, Schatz C, Mumberg D,
Ziegelbauer K.

Author information: 
(1)Bayer Pharma AG, Global Drug Discovery/TRG-ONC/GT, Mullerstrasse 178, D-13342 
Berlin, Germany. gerhard.siemeister@bayer.com

Deregulated activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) results in loss of
cell-cycle checkpoint function and increased expression of antiapoptotic
proteins, which has been directly linked to the molecular pathology of cancer.
BAY 1000394 inhibits the activity of cell-cycle CDKs CDK1, CDK2, CDK3, CDK4, and 
of transcriptional CDKs CDK7 and CDK9 with IC(50) values in the range between 5
and 25 nmol/L. Cell proliferation was inhibited at low nanomolar concentration in
a broad spectrum of human cancer cell lines. In cell-based assays, the inhibition
of phosphorylation of the CDK substrates retinoblastoma protein, nucleophosmin,
and RNA polymerase II was shown. Cell-cycle profiles were consistent with
inhibition of CDK 1, 2, and 4 as shown in cell-cycle block and release
experiments. The physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties of BAY 1000394
facilitate rapid absorption and moderate oral bioavailability. The compound
potently inhibits growth of various human tumor xenografts on athymic mice
including models of chemotherapy resistance upon oral dosing. Furthermore, BAY
1000394 shows more than additive efficacy when combined with cisplatin and
etoposide. These results suggest that BAY 1000394 is a potent pan-CDK inhibitor
and a novel oral cytotoxic agent currently in phase I clinical trials.

PMID: 22821149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Virology. 2012 Oct 10;432(1):219-31. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.06.007. Epub 2012 
Jul 6.

Use of ATP analogs to inhibit HIV-1 transcription.

Narayanan A(1), Sampey G, Van Duyne R, Guendel I, Kehn-Hall K, Roman J, Currer R,
Galons H, Oumata N, Joseph B, Meijer L, Caputi M, Nekhai S, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is the etiological agent of AIDS.
Chronic persistent infection is an important reason for the presence of "latent
cell populations" even after Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART). We have analyzed the 
effect of ATP analogs in inhibiting cdk9/T1 complex in infected cells. A third
generation drug named CR8#13 is an effective inhibitor of Tat activated
transcription. Following drug treatment, we observed a decreased loading of cdk9 
onto the HIV-1 DNA. We found multiple novel cdk9/T1 complexes present in infected
and uninfected cells with one complex being unique to infected cells. This
complex is sensitive to CR8#13 in kinase assays. Treatment of PBMC with CR8#13
does not kill infected cells as compared to Flavopiridol. Interestingly, there is
a difference in sensitivity of various clades to these analogs. Collectively,
these results point to targeting novel complexes for inhibition of cellular
proteins that are unique to infected cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3431923
PMID: 22771113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039481. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Small molecules targeted to a non-catalytic "RVxF" binding site of protein
phosphatase-1 inhibit HIV-1.

Ammosova T(1), Platonov M, Yedavalli VR, Obukhov Y, Gordeuk VR, Jeang KT,
Kovalskyy D, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, Washington, DC, United
States of America.

HIV-1 Tat protein recruits host cell factors including CDK9/cyclin T1 to HIV-1
TAR RNA and thereby induces HIV-1 transcription. An interaction with host Ser/Thr
protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) is critical for this function of Tat. PP1 binds to a 
Tat sequence, Q(35)VCF(38), which resembles the PP1-binding "RVxF" motif present 
on PP1-binding regulatory subunits. We showed that expression of PP1 binding
peptide, a central domain of Nuclear Inhibitor of PP1, disrupted the interaction 
of HIV-1 Tat with PP1 and inhibited HIV-1 transcription and replication. Here, we
report small molecule compounds that target the "RVxF"-binding cavity of PP1 to
disrupt the interaction of PP1 with Tat and inhibit HIV-1 replication. Using the 
crystal structure of PP1, we virtually screened 300,000 compounds and identified 
262 small molecules that were predicted to bind the "RVxF"-accommodating cavity
of PP1. These compounds were then assayed for inhibition of HIV-1 transcription
in CEM T cells. One of the compounds, 1H4, inhibited HIV-1 transcription and
replication at non-cytotoxic concentrations. 1H4 prevented PP1-mediated
dephosphorylation of a substrate peptide containing an RVxF sequence in vitro.
1H4 also disrupted the association of PP1 with Tat in cultured cells without
having an effect on the interaction of PP1 with the cellular regulators, NIPP1
and PNUTS, or on the cellular proteome. Finally, 1H4 prevented the translocation 
of PP1 to the nucleus. Taken together, our study shows that HIV- inhibition can
be achieved through using small molecules to target a non-catalytic site of PP1. 
This proof-of-principle study can serve as a starting point for the development
of novel antiviral drugs that target the interface of HIV-1 viral proteins with
their host partners.

PMCID: PMC3387161
PMID: 22768081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Retrovirology. 2012 Jun 22;9:52. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-52.

Phosphatase PPM1A negatively regulates P-TEFb function in resting CD4(+) T cells 
and inhibits HIV-1 gene expression.

Budhiraja S(1), Ramakrishnan R, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Processive elongation of the integrated HIV-1 provirus is dependent
on recruitment of P-TEFb by the viral Tat protein to the viral TAR RNA element.
P-TEFb kinase activity requires phosphorylation of Thr186 in the T-loop of the
CDK9 subunit. In resting CD4+T cells, low levels of T-loop phosphorylated CDK9
are found, which increase significantly upon activation. This suggests that the
phosphorylation status of the T-loop is actively regulated through the concerted 
actions of cellular proteins such as Ser/Thr phosphatases. We investigated the
role of phosphatase PPM1A in regulating CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation and its
effect on HIV-1 proviral transcription.
RESULTS: We found that overexpression of PPM1A inhibits HIV-1 gene expression
during viral infection and this required PPM1A catalytic function. Using an
artificial CDK tethering system, we further found that PPM1A inhibits CDK9, but
not CDK8 mediated activation of the HIV-1 LTR. SiRNA depletion of PPM1A in
resting CD4+T cells increased the level of CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation and
enhanced HIV-1 gene expression. We also observed that PPM1A protein levels are
relatively high in resting CD4+T cells and are not up-regulated upon T cell
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results establish a functional link between HIV-1 replication
and modulation of CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation by PPM1A. PPM1A represses HIV-1
gene expression by inhibiting CDK9 T-loop phosphorylation, thus reducing the
amount of active P-TEFb available for recruitment to the viral LTR. We also infer
that PPM1A enzymatic activity in resting and activated CD4+ T cells are likely
regulated by as yet undefined factors.

PMCID: PMC3406988
PMID: 22727189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 1;11(13):2418. doi: 10.4161/cc.21068. Epub 2012 Jul 1.

One stone, two birds: CDK9-directed activation of UBE2A regulates
monoubiquitination of both H2B and PCNA.

Zhang H(1), Yu DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 1;11(11):2122-7.

PMCID: PMC3404870
PMID: 22722497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Gene. 2012 Aug 15;505(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.006. Epub 2012 Jun 9.

Regulation of cyclin T1 expression and function by an alternative splice variant 
that skips exon 7 and contains a premature termination codon.

Urano E(1), Miyauchi K, Ichikawa R, Futahashi Y, Komano J.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 1-23-1
Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan.

Cyclin T1 (CCNT1), a gene containing nine exons, forms the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complex and regulates a wide variety of biological
processes including transcription. We discovered a novel splice variant of CCNT1 
that lacks exon 7 (dE7). RT-PCR analysis revealed that the dE7 transcript was
detected in almost all tissues examined. The dE7/FL transcript ratio was high in 
quiescent peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and in tissues poor in cell
division; however, it was low in activated PBMC and in tissues with high cell
proliferative potential. These results suggest that exon 7 skipping is linked to 
cell cycle progression. Increasing the dE7/FL transcript ratio resulted in the
reduction of CCNT1 protein levels, indicating that the expression of CCNT1
protein is controlled by exon skipping. Exon 7 skipping yields a +1 frameshift at
exon 8, which generates a premature termination codon (PTC). The dE7 transcript
levels increased when cells were treated with the protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide (CHX) or a kinase inhibitor wortmannin (WORT), whilst the FL
transcript levels were unchanged, suggesting that the dE7 transcript is a target 
of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). Importantly, reduction of dE7 transcript by
WORT correlated well with the decrement of CCNT1 protein expression. The dE7
transcript would produce an approximately 23kDa protein that covers approximately
70% of the cyclin box. The ectopically expressed dE7 protein physically
interacted with CDK9 and competed with FL CCNT1 for CDK9, thus should act
dominant-negatively on FL CCNT1. The replication of human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 (HIV-1), heavily dependent on the CCNT1 function, was inhibited by dE7
protein through the attenuation of Tat/long terminal repeat (LTR)-driven
transcription. Taken together, these results suggest that dE7 is a novel splice
variant that regulates the expression and function of CCNT1.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22692005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell. 2012 Jun 8;46(5):705-13. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.022.

The histone H2B monoubiquitination regulatory pathway is required for
differentiation of multipotent stem cells.

Karpiuk O(1), Najafova Z, Kramer F, Hennion M, Galonska C, König A, Snaidero N,
Vogel T, Shchebet A, Begus-Nahrmann Y, Kassem M, Simons M, Shcherbata H,
Beissbarth T, Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, 
University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen 37077, Germany.

Extensive changes in posttranslational histone modifications accompany the
rewiring of the transcriptional program during stem cell differentiation.
However, the mechanisms controlling the changes in specific chromatin
modifications and their function during differentiation remain only poorly
understood. We show that histone H2B monoubiquitination (H2Bub1) significantly
increases during differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and
various lineage-committed precursor cells and in diverse organisms. Furthermore, 
the H2B ubiquitin ligase RNF40 is required for the induction of differentiation
markers and transcriptional reprogramming of hMSCs. This function is dependent
upon CDK9 and the WAC adaptor protein, which are required for H2B
monoubiquitination. Finally, we show that RNF40 is required for the resolution of
the H3K4me3/H3K27me3 bivalent poised state on lineage-specific genes during the
transition from an inactive to an active chromatin conformation. Thus, these data
indicate that H2Bub1 is required for maintaining multipotency of hMSCs and plays 
a central role in controlling stem cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22681891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 15;11(12):2229-30. doi: 10.4161/cc.20963. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

A role for CDK9 in UV damage response.

Morawska ME.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 1;11(11):2122-7.

PMCID: PMC3383583
PMID: 22672903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1819(8):885-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.05.001.
Epub 2012 May 18.

Ldb1 regulates carbonic anhydrase 1 during erythroid differentiation.

Song SH(1), Kim A, Dale R, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. song1030@snu.ac.kr

Carbonic anhydrase 1 (Car1), an early specific marker of the erythroid
differentiation, has been used to distinguish fetal and adult erythroid cells
since its production closely follows the <U+03B3>- to ß-globin transition, but the
molecular mechanism underlying transcriptional regulation of Car1 is unclear.
Here, we show that Car1 mRNA decreases significantly when erythroid
differentiation is induced in MEL cells. The Ldb1 protein complex including
GATA1/SCL/LMO2 binds to the Car1 promoter in uninduced cells and reduced
enrichment of the complex during differentiation correlates with loss of Car1
expression. Knockdown of Ldb1 results in a reduction of Ser2 phosphorylated RNA
Pol II and Cdk9 at the Car1 promoter region, suggesting that Ldb1 is required for
recruitment of Pol II as well as the transcription regulator P-TEFb to enhance
elongation of Car1 transcripts. Taken together, these data show that Ldb1 forms a
regulatory complex to maintain Car1 expression in erythroid cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3720789
PMID: 22609543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 1;11(11):2122-7. doi: 10.4161/cc.20548. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinase-9 controls ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme-2A function.

Shchebet A(1), Karpiuk O, Kremmer E, Eick D, Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Universit of Göttingen Medical Center,
Göttingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 15;11(12):2229-30.
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 1;11(13):2418.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) plays a central role in transcriptional
elongation and controls multiple cotranscriptional histone modifications,
including histone H2B monoubiquitination (H2Bub1). Like other CDK9-dependent
histone modifications, the role of CDK9 in maintaining H2Bub1 was shown to be
partially dependent upon the phosphorylation status of Ser2 of the RNA polymerase
II (RNAPII) C-terminal domain (CTD). Since mutation of Ser2 within the RNAPII CTD
resulted in a milder effect on H2Bub1 compared with CDK9 knockdown, we explored
whether another CDK9 target may also influence H2Bub1. Based on its homology to
yeast Bur1, we hypothesized that CDK9 may directly phosphorylate and activate the
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme utilized for H2B monoubiquitination. Indeed, we
demonstrate that UBE2A specifically interacts with CDK9, but not CDK2.
Furthermore, UBE2A is phosphorylated by CDK9 in vitro and increases UBE2A
activity. Interestingly, CDK9 knockdown not only decreases UBE2A phosphorylation 
and H2Bub1, but also significantly impairs the induction of UBE2A-dependent
monoubiquitination of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Thus, we provide
the first evidence that CDK9 is required for the activity of UBE2A in humans, and
that its activity is not only required for maintaining H2Bub1, but also for the
monoubiquitination of PCNA. The common involvement of these two ubiquitinations
in distinct DNA repair pathways may provide a mechanistic rationale for further
exploring CDK9 as a combinatorial target for increasing the efficacy of existing 
cancer therapies based on the induction of DNA damage and are repaired by
mechanisms which require H2Bub1 and/or PCNA ubiquitination.

PMID: 22592529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nat Commun. 2012 May 15;3:842. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1846.

Serine-7 but not serine-5 phosphorylation primes RNA polymerase II CTD for P-TEFb
recognition.

Czudnochowski N(1), Bösken CA, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Physiologie, Abt. Physikalische Biochemie, 
Otto-Hahn-Straße 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) in
hepta-repeats YSPTSPS regulates eukaryotic transcription. Whereas Ser5 is
phosphorylated in the initiation phase, Ser2 phosphorylation marks the elongation
state. Here we show that the positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb is a
Ser5 CTD kinase that is unable to create Ser2/Ser5 double phosphorylations, while
it exhibits fourfold higher activity on a CTD substrate pre-phosphorylated at
Ser7 compared with the consensus hepta-repeat or the YSPTSPK variant. Mass
spectrometry reveals an equal number of phosphorylations to the number of
hepta-repeats provided, yet the mechanism of phosphorylation is distributive
despite the repetitive nature of the substrate. Inhibition of P-TEFb activity is 
mediated by two regions in Hexim1 that act synergistically on Cdk9 and Cyclin T1.
HIV-1 Tat/TAR abrogates Hexim1 inhibition to stimulate transcription of viral
genes but does not change the substrate specificity. Together, these results
provide insight into the multifaceted pattern of CTD phosphorylation.

PMID: 22588304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(20):2883-90.

Perspective of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) as a drug target.

Krystof V(1), Baumli S, Fürst R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Palacký University, lechtitelu 11, 78371,
Olomouc, Czech Republic. vladimir.krystof@upol.cz

Deregulation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) has been associated with many
cancer types and has evoked an interest in chemical inhibitors with possible
therapeutic benefit. While most known inhibitors display broad selectivity
towards multiple CDKs, recent work highlights CDK9 as the critical target
responsible for the anticancer activity of clinically evaluated drugs. In this
review, we discuss recent findings provided by structural biologists that may
allow further development of highly specific inhibitors of CDK9 towards
applications in cancer therapy. We also highlight the role of CDK9 in
inflammatory processes and diseases.

PMCID: PMC3382371
PMID: 22571657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. AIDS. 2012 Aug 24;26(13):1599-605. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283554f7d.

Preventing the formation of positive transcription elongation factor b by human
cyclin T1-binding RNA aptamer for anti-HIV transcription.

Um HJ(1), Kim M, Lee SH, Kim YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Republic
of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Development of an innovative antitranscriptional technique for HIV.
DESIGN: Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX)
technique that can characterize target-specific aptamer was employed to
synthesize an aptamer that binds human cyclin T1 (CycT1). When CycT1-binding
aptamer interferes the binding of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) to CycT1, HIV 
transcription is likely to be discouraged.
METHODS: Throughout SELEX steps, RNA aptamers having high specific affinity
toward CycT1 were characterized. The binding interaction between selected
aptamers and CycT1 was analyzed via various techniques.
RESULTS: Both qualitative and quantitative analyses revealed Apt4 aptamer, among 
four candidates, has the highest specific affinity to CycT1. In the presence of
Apt4, Cdk9 protein was unable to make interaction with CycT1.
CONCLUSION: A specific RNA aptamer that identifies and binds to CycT1 with high
affinity was successfully characterized. As CycT1 plays an important role in HIV 
transcription, this novel method that interferes and inhibits the transcription
of HIV has the potential of being exploited in extended research fields, such as 
clinical therapy.

© 2012 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMID: 22569018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jun 4;586(11):1592-601. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.002. Epub 
2012 Apr 13.

The enigmatic role of H2Bub1 in cancer.

Johnsen SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. sjohnsen@alumni.mayo.edu

The post-translational modification of histone proteins plays an important role
in controlling cell fate by directing essentially all DNA-associated nuclear
processes. Misregulation and mutation of histone modifying enzymes is a hallmark 
of tumorigenesis. However, how these different epigenetic modifications lead to
tumor initiation and/or progression remains poorly understood. Recent studies
have uncovered a potential tumor suppressor role for histone H2B
monoubiquitination (H2Bub1). Like many other histone modifications, H2Bub1 has
diverse functions and plays roles both in transcriptional activation and
repression as well as in controlling mRNA processing and directing DNA repair
processes. Notably, H2Bub1 has been linked to transcriptional elongation and is
preferentially found in the transcribed region of active genes. Its activity is
intimately connected to active transcription and the transcriptional elongation
regulatory protein cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) and the facilitates chromatin
transcription (FACT) complex. This review provides an overview of the current
understanding of H2Bub1 function in mammalian systems with a particular emphasis 
on its role in cancer and potential options for exploiting this knowledge for the
treatment of cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22564770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 20;287(30):25344-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.321760. Epub
2012 Apr 30.

Cyclin K-containing kinase complexes maintain self-renewal in murine embryonic
stem cells.

Dai Q(1), Lei T, Zhao C, Zhong J, Tang YZ, Chen B, Yang J, Li C, Wang S, Song X, 
Li L, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, West China Center of Medical Sciences, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610064, Sichuan, China.

Protein phosphorylation plays an important role in the regulation of self-renewal
and differentiation of embryonic stem cells. However, the responsible
intracellular kinases are not well characterized. Here, we discovered that cyclin
K protein was highly expressed in pluripotent embryonic stem cells but low in
their differentiated derivatives or tissue-specific stem cells. Upon cell
differentiation, the level of cyclin K protein was decreased. Furthermore,
knockdown of cyclin K led to cell differentiation, which could be rescued by an
expression construct resistant to RNA interference. Surprisingly, cyclin K did
not interact with CDK9 protein in cells as thought previously. Instead, it
associated with CrkRS (also known as CDK12) and CDC2L5 (also known as CDK13).
Similar to cyclin K, both CDK12 and CDK13 proteins were highly expressed in
murine embryonic stem cells and were decreased upon cell differentiation.
Importantly, knockdown of either kinase resulted in differentiation. Thus, our
studies have uncovered two novel protein kinase complexes that maintain
self-renewal in embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3408147
PMID: 22547058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell Div. 2012 Apr 18;7:12. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-7-12.

Cyclin K goes with Cdk12 and Cdk13.

Kohoutek J(1), Blazek D.

Author information: 
(1)Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, 62500
Brno, Czech Republic. dblazek@med.muni.cz.

The cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) regulate many cellular processes, including
the cell cycle, neuronal development, transcription, and posttranscriptional
processing. To perform their functions, Cdks bind to specific cyclin subunits to 
form a functional and active cyclin/Cdk complex. This review is focused on Cyclin
K, which was originally considered an alternative subunit of Cdk9, and on its
newly identified partners, Cdk12 and Cdk13. We briefly summarize research devoted
to each of these proteins. We also discuss the proteins' functions in the
regulation of gene expression via the phosphorylation of serine 2 in the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, contributions to the maintenance of
genome stability, and roles in the onset of human disease and embryo development.

PMCID: PMC3348076
PMID: 22512864  [PubMed]


224. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(13):2372-83. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06657-11. Epub 2012 Apr 
16.

Separate domains of fission yeast Cdk9 (P-TEFb) are required for capping enzyme
recruitment and primed (Ser7-phosphorylated) Rpb1 carboxyl-terminal domain
substrate recognition.

St Amour CV(1), Sansó M, Bösken CA, Lee KM, Larochelle S, Zhang C, Shokat KM,
Geyer M, Fisher RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA.

In fission yeast, discrete steps in mRNA maturation and synthesis depend on a
complex containing the 5'-cap methyltransferase Pcm1 and Cdk9, which
phosphorylates the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) and 
the processivity factor Spt5 to promote transcript elongation. Here we show that 
a Cdk9 carboxyl-terminal extension, distinct from the catalytic domain, mediates 
binding to both Pcm1 and the Pol II CTD. Removal of this segment diminishes
Cdk9/Pcm1 chromatin recruitment and Spt5 phosphorylation in vivo and leads to
slow growth and hypersensitivity to cold temperature, nutrient limitation, and
the IMP dehydrogenase inhibitor mycophenolic acid (MPA). These phenotypes, and
the Spt5 phosphorylation defect, are suppressed by Pcm1 overproduction,
suggesting that normal transcript elongation and gene expression depend on
physical linkage between Cdk9 and Pcm1. The extension is dispensable, however,
for recognition of CTD substrates "primed" by Mcs6 (Cdk7). On defined peptide
substrates in vitro, Cdk9 prefers CTD repeats phosphorylated at Ser7 over
unmodified repeats. In vivo, Ser7 phosphorylation depends on Mcs6 activity,
suggesting a conserved mechanism, independent of chromatin recruitment, to order 
transcriptional CDK functions. Therefore, fission yeast Cdk9 comprises a
catalytic domain sufficient for primed substrate recognition and a multivalent
recruitment module that couples transcription with capping.

PMCID: PMC3434489
PMID: 22508988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(13):5988-6000. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks286. Epub 2012 
Apr 5.

Estrogen receptor-a recruits P-TEFb to overcome transcriptional pausing in intron
1 of the MYB gene.

Mitra P(1), Pereira LA, Drabsch Y, Ramsay RG, Gonda TJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Queensland 4102,
Australia.

The MYB proto-oncogene is expressed in most estrogen receptor-positive (ERa(+))
breast tumors and cell lines. Expression of MYB is controlled, in breast cancer
and other cell types, by a transcriptional pausing mechanism involving an
attenuation site located ~1.7<U+2009>kb downstream from the transcription start site. In
breast cancer cells, ligand-bound ERa binds close to, and drives transcription
beyond this attenuation site, allowing synthesis of complete transcripts.
However, little is known, in general, about the factors involved in relieving
transcriptional attenuation, or specifically how ERa coordinates such factors to 
promote transcriptional elongation. Using cyclin dependent kinase 9 (CDK9)
inhibitors, reporter gene assays and measurements of total and intronic MYB
transcription, we show that functionally active CDK9 is required for
estrogen-dependent transcriptional elongation. We further show by ChIP and
co-immunoprecipitation studies that the P-TEFb complex (CDK9/CyclinT1) is
recruited to the attenuation region by ligand-bound ERa, resulting in increased
RNA polymerase II Ser-2 phosphorylation. These data provide new insights into MYB
regulation, and given the critical roles of MYB in tumorigenesis, suggest
targeting MYB elongation as potential therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3401469
PMID: 22492511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Div. 2012 Mar 29;7:11. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-7-11.

Complex effects of flavopiridol on the expression of primary response genes.

Keskin H(1), Garriga J, Georlette D, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, AHP bldg,, room 308, 3307 North Broad St, Philadelphia, PA
19140, USA. xavier@temple.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Positive Transcription Elongation Factor b (P-TEFb) is a complex 
of Cyclin Dependent Kinase 9 (CDK9) with either cyclins T1, T2 or K. The complex 
phosphorylates the C-Terminal Domain of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and negative
elongation factors, stimulating productive elongation by RNAPII, which is paused 
after initiation. P-TEFb is recruited downstream of the promoters of many genes, 
including primary response genes, upon certain stimuli. Flavopiridol (FVP) is a
potent pharmacological inhibitor of CDK9 and has been used extensively in cells
as a means to inhibit CDK9 activity. Inhibition of P-TEFb complexes has potential
therapeutic applications.
RESULTS: It has been shown that Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulates the
recruitment of P-TEFb to Primary Response Genes (PRGs) and proposed that P-TEFb
activity is required for their expression, as the CDK9 inhibitor DRB prevents
localization of RNAPII in the body of these genes. We have previously determined 
the effects of FVP in global gene expression in a variety of cells and
surprisingly observed that FVP results in potent upregulation of a number of PRGs
in treatments lasting 4-24 h. Because inhibition of CDK9 activity is being
evaluated in pre-clinical and clinical studies for the treatment of several
pathologies, it is important to fully understand the short and long term effects 
of its inhibition. To this end, we determined the immediate and long-term effect 
of FVP in the expression of several PRGs. In exponentially growing normal human
fibroblasts, the expression of several PRGs including FOS, JUNB, EGR1 and
GADD45B, was rapidly and potently downregulated before they were upregulated
following FVP treatment. In serum starved cells re-stimulated with serum, FVP
also inhibited the expression of these genes, but subsequently, JUNB, GADD45B and
EGR1 were upregulated in the presence of FVP. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation of
RNAPII revealed that EGR1 and GADD45B are transcribed at the FVP-treatment time
points where their corresponding mRNAs accumulate. These results suggest a
possible stress response triggered by CDK9 inhibition than ensues transcription
of certain PRGs.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that certain PRGs are transcribed in the presence of
FVP in a manner that might be independent of CDK9, suggesting a possible
alternative mechanism for their transcription when P-TEFb kinase activity is
pharmacologically inhibited. These results also show that the sensitivity to FVP 
is quite variable, even among PRGs.

PMCID: PMC3339560
PMID: 22458775  [PubMed]


227. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;18(7):1966-78. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1971.
Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 7/9 inhibitor SNS-032 abrogates FIP1-like-1
platelet-derived growth factor receptor a and bcr-abl oncogene addiction in
malignant hematologic cells.

Wu Y(1), Chen C, Sun X, Shi X, Jin B, Ding K, Yeung SC, Pan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, 74 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510089, PR China.

PURPOSE: The "gate-keeper" mutations T674I platelet-derived growth factor
receptor a (PDGFRa) in hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) and T315I Bcr-Abl in
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) are resistant to imatinib and the
second-generation small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). However, to
combat acquired resistance to imatinib, an alternative approach is to decrease
the expression of the addicted gene to efficiently kill resistant malignant
hematologic cells. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the strategy of
shutting down the transcription and expression of FIP1-like-1 (FIP1L1)-PDGFRa and
Bcr-Abl with SNS-032, an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) and CDK9
in phase I clinical trials.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects of SNS-032 on PDGFRa and Bcr-Abl signaling
pathways, apoptosis, and cell cycling were analyzed in TKI-resistant cells of HES
and CML. The in vivo antitumor activity of SNS-032 was assessed with xenografted 
BaF3-T674I FIP1L1-PDGFRa and KBM5-T315I Bcr-Abl cells in nude mouse models.
RESULTS: SNS-032 inhibited the phosphorylation on Ser5 and Ser2 of RNA polymerase
II. SNS-032 decreased both the mRNA and protein levels of FIP1L1-PDGFRa and
Bcr-Abl and inhibited the proliferation of malignant cells expressing
FIP1L1-PDGFRa or Bcr-Abl. It also decreased the phosphorylation of downstream
molecules. It induced apoptosis by triggering both the mitochondrial pathway and 
the death receptor pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: This CDK7/9 inhibitor potently inhibits FIP1L1-PDGFRa-positive HES
cells and Bcr-Abl-positive CML cells regardless of their sensitivity to imatinib.
SNS-032 may have potential in treating hematologic malignancy by abrogating
oncogene addiction.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22447844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 4;287(19):15193-204. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.350496. Epub
2012 Mar 5.

Functional interactions between erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF/KLF1) and
protein phosphatase PPM1B/PP2Cß.

Yien YY(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, The Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF; KLF1) is an erythroid-specific transcription
factor required for the transcription of genes that regulate erythropoiesis. In
this paper, we describe the identification of a novel EKLF interactor, Ppm1b, a
serine-threonine protein phosphatase that has been implicated in the attenuation 
of NF<U+03BA>B signaling and the regulation of Cdk9 phosphorylation status. We show that
Ppm1b interacts with EKLF via its PEST1 sequence. However, its genetic regulatory
role is complex. Using a promoter-reporter assay in an erythroid cell line, we
show that Ppm1b superactivates EKLF at the ß-globin and BKLF promoters, dependent
on intact Ppm1b phosphatase activity. Conversely, depletion of Ppm1b in CD34(+)
cells leads to a higher level of endogenous ß-globin gene activation after
differentiation. We also observe that Ppm1b likely has an indirect role in
regulating EKLF turnover via its zinc finger domain. Together, these studies show
that Ppm1b plays a multilayered role in regulating the availability and optimal
activity of the EKLF protein in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3346094
PMID: 22393050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Oncogene. 2013 Jan 24;32(4):444-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.71. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

UVB-induced COX-2 expression requires histone H3 phosphorylation at Ser10 and
Ser28.

Keum YS(1), Kim HG, Bode AM, Surh YJ, Dong Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN 55912, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is an inducible enzyme that contributes to the
generation of chronic inflammation in response to chemical carcinogens and
environmental stresses, including ultraviolet B (UVB) irradiation. Although
post-translational histone modifications are believed to have an important role
in modulating transcriptional regulation of UVB-induced COX-2, the underlying
biochemical mechanisms are completely unknown. Here, we show that UVB activates
the p38 MAPK/MSK1 kinase cascade to phosphorylate histone H3 at Ser10 and Ser28, 
contributing to UVB-induced COX-2 expression. UVB has no effect on the global
tri-methylation level of histone H3 (H3K4me3, H3K9me3, and H3K27me3). We observed
that selected mammalian 14-3-3 proteins bind to UVB-induced phosphorylated
histone H3 (Ser10 and Ser28). In particular, 14-3-3<U+025B> is critical for recruiting
MSK1 and Cdk9 to the chromatin and subsequently phosphorylating the C-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase II in the cox-2 promoter. We propose that histone H3
phosphorylation at Ser10 and Ser28 serve as critical switches to promote cox-2
gene expression by facilitating the recruitment of MSK1 and Cdk9 to the cox-2
promoter, thereby promoting RNA polymerase II phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC3504182
PMID: 22391560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Cycle. 2012 Mar 15;11(6):1202-16. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.6.19663. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Flavopiridol induces phosphorylation of AKT in a human glioblastoma cell line, in
contrast to siRNA-mediated silencing of Cdk9: Implications for drug design and
development.

Caracciolo V(1), Laurenti G, Romano G, Carnevale V, Cimini AM, Crozier-Fitzgerald
C, Gentile Warschauer E, Russo G, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Cdk9 and Cdk7 are cdc2-like serine/threonine kinases that stabilize RNA
transcript elongation through RNA polII carboxyl terminal domain (CTD)
phosphorylation and are considered suitable targets for cancer therapy. The
effects of flavopiridol and of siRNA-mediated inhibition of Cdk9 and/or Cdk7 were
analyzed in human glioblastoma and human prostate cancer cell lines. One finding 
revealed that Cdk9 and Cdk7 could substitute each other in RNA polII CTD
phosphorylation in contrast to the in vitro system. Thus, a simultaneous
inhibition of Cdk9 and Cdk7 might be required both for targeting malignant cells 
and developing a platform for microarray analysis. However, these two pathways
are not redundant, as indicated by differential effects observed in cell cycle
regulation following siRNA-mediated inhibition of Cdk9 and/or Cdk7 in human PC3
prostate cancer cell line. Specifically, siRNA-mediated inhibition of Cdk9 caused
a shift from G 0/G 1 to G 2/M phase in human PC3 prostate cancer cell line.
Another finding showed that flavopiridol treatment induced a substantial
AKT-Ser473 phosphorylation in human glioblastoma T98G cell line in contrast to
siRNA-mediated inhibition of Cdk9 and Cdk9 combined with Cdk7, whereas
siRNA-mediated silencing of Cdk7 caused a minor increase in AKT-Ser473
phosphorylation. AKT-Ser473 is a hallmark of AKT pathway activation and may
protect cells from apoptosis. This finding also shows that Cdk9 and Cdk7 pathways
are not redundant and may have important implications in drug development and for
studying the mechanism of chemoresistance in malignant cells.

PMID: 22391209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Front Microbiol. 2012 Feb 22;3:60. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00060. eCollection
2012.

Ser-634 and Ser-636 of Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus RTA are Involved
in Transactivation and are Potential Cdk9 Phosphorylation Sites.

Tsai WH(1), Wang PW, Lin SY, Wu IL, Ko YC, Chen YL, Li M, Lin SF.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes
Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, Taiwan.

The replication and transcription activator (RTA) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated 
herpesvirus (KSHV), K-RTA, is a lytic switch protein that moderates the
reactivation process of KSHV latency. By mass spectrometric analysis of affinity 
purified K-RTA, we showed that Thr-513 or Thr-514 was the primary in vivo
phosphorylation site. Thr-513 and Thr-514 are proximal to the nuclear
localization signal ((527)KKRK(530)) and were previously hypothesized to be
target sites of Ser/Thr kinase hKFC. However, substitutions of Thr with Ala at
513 and 514 had no effect on K-RTA subcellular localization or transactivation
activity. By contrast, replacement of Ser with Ala at Ser-634 and Ser-636 located
in a Ser/Pro-rich region of K-RTA, designated as S634A/S636A, produced a
polypeptide with ~10<U+2009>kDa shorter in molecular weight and reduced transactivation 
in a luciferase reporter assay relative to the wild type. In contrast to
prediction, the decrease in molecular weight was not due to lack of
phosphorylation because the overall Ser and Thr phosphorylation state in K-RTA
and S634A/S636A were similar, excluding that Ser-634 or Ser-636 motif served as
docking sites for consecutive phosphorylation. Interestingly, S634A/S636A lost
~30% immuno-reactivity to MPM2, an antibody specific to pSer/pThr-Pro motif,
indicating that (634)SPSP(637) motif was in vivo phosphorylated. By in vitro
kinase assay, we showed that K-RTA is a substrate of CDK9, a Pro-directed Ser/Thr
kinase central to transcriptional regulation. Importantly, the capability of
K-RTA in associating with endogenous CDK9 was reduced in S634A/S636A, which
suggested that Ser-634 and Ser-636 may be involved in CDK9 recruitment. In
agreement, S634A/S636A mutant exhibited ~25% reduction in KSHV lytic cycle
reactivation relative to that by the wild type K-RTA. Taken together, our data
propose that Ser-634 and Ser-636 of K-RTA are phosphorylated by host
transcriptional kinase CDK9 and such a process contributes to a full
transcriptional potency of K-RTA.

PMCID: PMC3283893
PMID: 22371709  [PubMed]


232. Virology. 2012 May 10;426(2):152-61. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.01.033. Epub 2012 
Feb 18.

Functional characterization of a human cyclin T1 mutant reveals a different
binding surface for Tat and HEXIM1.

Kuzmina A(1), Hadad U, Fujinaga K, Taube R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Developmental Genetics Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel.

HIV transcription is regulated at the step of elongation by the viral Tat protein
and the cellular positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb; Cdk9/cyclin 
T1). Herein, a human cyclin T1 mutant, cyclin T1-U7, which contains four
substitutions and one deletion in the N-terminal cyclin box, was stably expressed
in HeLa cells. HIV transcription was efficiently inhibited in HeLa-HA-CycT1-U7
stable cells. Cyclin T1-U7 bound Tat but did not modulate its expression levels, 
which remained high. Importantly cyclin T1-U7 failed to interact with Cdk9 or
HEXIM1 and did not interfere with endogenous P-TEFb activity to stimulate MEF2C
or NFkB mediated transcription. In a T cell line and primary CD4+ cells, cyclin
T1-U7 also inhibited HIV transcription. We conclude that cyclin T1-U7 sequesters 
Tat from P-TEFb and inhibits HIV transcription. Importantly, N-terminal residues 
in cyclin T1 are specifically involved in the binding of cyclin T1 to HEXIM1 but 
not to Tat.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22342181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 Dec 15;59(7):1266-74. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24073. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

Initial testing (stage 1) of the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor SCH 727965
(dinaciclib) by the pediatric preclinical testing program.

Gorlick R(1), Kolb EA, Houghton PJ, Morton CL, Neale G, Keir ST, Carol H, Lock R,
Phelps D, Kang MH, Reynolds CP, Maris JM, Billups C, Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY 10467, USA.
rgorlick@montefiore.org

BACKGROUND: SCH 727965 is a novel drug in clinical development that potently and 
selectively inhibits CDK1, CDK2, CDK5, and CDK9. The activity of SCH 727965 was
evaluated against the PPTP's in vitro and in vivo panels.
PROCEDURES: SCH 727965 was tested against the PPTP in vitro panel using 96<U+2009>hours 
exposure at concentrations ranging from 0.1<U+2009>nM to 1.0<U+2009>µM. It was tested against
the PPTP in vivo panels at a dose of 40<U+2009>mg/kg administered intraperitoneally
twice weekly for 2 weeks and repeated at Day 21 with a total observation period
of 6 weeks.
RESULTS: The median IC(50) value for the cell lines was 7.5<U+2009>nM, with less than
fourfold range between the minimum (3.4<U+2009>nM) and maximum (11.2<U+2009>nM) IC(50) values. 
SCH 727965 demonstrated an activity pattern consistent with cytotoxicity for most
of the cell lines. Forty-three xenograft models were studied and SCH 727965
induced significant delays in event free survival distribution compared to
control in 23 of 36 (64%) evaluable solid tumor xenografts and in 3 of 7 ALL
xenografts. SCH 727965 did not induce objective responses in the solid tumor
panels and the best response observed was stable disease for one osteosarcoma
xenograft. In the leukemia panel, there were two objective responses with a
complete response observed in a single xenograft.
CONCLUSIONS: SCH 727965 shows an interesting pattern of activity suggesting its
potential applicability against selected childhood cancers, particularly
leukemias.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3349821
PMID: 22315240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 13;287(16):13084-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.288944. Epub
2012 Feb 3.

Cardiac lineage protein-1 (CLP-1) regulates cardiac remodeling via
transcriptional modulation of diverse hypertrophic and fibrotic responses and
angiotensin II-transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß1) signaling axis.

Mascareno E(1), Galatioto J, Rozenberg I, Salciccioli L, Kamran H, Lazar JM, Liu 
F, Pedrazzini T, Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle Research,
State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York 11203, 
USA.

It is well known that the renin-angiotensin system contributes to left
ventricular hypertrophy and fibrosis, a major determinant of myocardial
stiffness. TGF-ß1 and renin-angiotensin system signaling alters the fibroblast
phenotype by promoting its differentiation into morphologically distinct
pathological myofibroblasts, which potentiates collagen synthesis and fibrosis
and causes enhanced extracellular matrix deposition. However, the atrial
natriuretic peptide, which is induced during left ventricular hypertrophy, plays 
an anti-fibrogenic and anti-hypertrophic role by blocking, among others, the
TGF-ß-induced nuclear localization of Smads. It is not clear how the hypertrophic
and fibrotic responses are transcriptionally regulated. CLP-1, the mouse homolog 
of human hexamethylene bis-acetamide inducible-1 (HEXIM-1), regulates the pTEFb
activity via direct association with pTEFb causing inhibition of the
Cdk9-mediated serine 2 phosphorylation in the carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II. It was recently reported that the serine kinase activity of Cdk9
not only targets RNA polymerase II but also the conserved serine residues of the 
polylinker region in Smad3, suggesting that CLP-1-mediated changes in pTEFb
activity may trigger Cdk9-dependent Smad3 signaling that can modulate collagen
expression and fibrosis. In this study, we evaluated the role of CLP-1 in vivo in
induction of left ventricular hypertrophy in angiotensinogen-overexpressing
transgenic mice harboring CLP-1 heterozygosity. We observed that introduction of 
CLP-1 haplodeficiency in the transgenic a-myosin heavy chain-angiotensinogen mice
causes prominent changes in hypertrophic and fibrotic responses accompanied by
augmentation of Smad3/Stat3 signaling. Together, our findings underscore the
critical role of CLP-1 in remodeling of the genetic response during hypertrophy
and fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3339995
PMID: 22308025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Front Genet. 2011 Dec 28;2:95. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2011.00095. eCollection 2011.

A Network of Regulations by Small Non-Coding RNAs: The P-TEFb Kinase in
Development and Pathology.

Ghanbarian H(1), Grandjean V, Cuzin F, Rassoulzadegan M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U636 Nice, France.

Part of the heterodimeric P-TEF-b element of the Pol II transcription machinery, 
the cyclin-dependent kinase 9 plays a critical role in gene expression.
Phosphorylation of several residues in the polymerase is required for elongation 
of transcript. It determines the rates of transcription and thus, plays a
critical role in several differentiation pathways, best documented in heart
development. The synthesis and activity of the protein are tightly regulated in a
coordinated manner by at least three non-coding RNAs. First, its kinase activity 
is reversibly inhibited by formation of a complex with the 334<U+2009>nt 7SK RNA, from
which it is released under conditions of stress. Then, heart development requires
a maximal rate of synthesis during cardiomyocyte differentiation, followed by a
decrease in the differentiated state. The latter is insured by microRNA-mediated 
translational inhibition. In a third mode of RNA control, increased levels of
transcription are induced by small non-coding RNA molecules with sequences
homologous to the transcript. Designated paramutation, this epigenetic variation,
stable during development, and hereditarily transmitted in a non-Mendelian manner
over several generations, is thought to be a response to the inactivation of one 
of the two alleles by an abnormal recombination event such as insertion of a
transposon.

PMCID: PMC3268644
PMID: 22303389  [PubMed]


236. ACS Chem Biol. 2012 May 18;7(5):811-6. doi: 10.1021/cb2004516. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

The CDK9 C-helix exhibits conformational plasticity that may explain the
selectivity of CAN508.

Baumli S(1), Hole AJ, Noble ME, Endicott JA.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Framlington
Place, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, U.K. sonja.baumli@ncl.ac.uk

CDK9 is the kinase of positive transcription elongation factor b and facilitates 
the transition of paused RNA polymerase II to processive transcription
elongation. CDK9 is a validated target for the treatment of cancer, cardiac
hypertrophy, and human immunodeficiency virus. Here we analyze different
CDK9/cyclin T variants to identify a form of the complex amenable to use in
inhibitor design. To demonstrate the utility of this system, we have determined
the crystal structures of CDK9/cyclin T and CDK2/cyclin A bound to the
CDK9-specific inhibitor CAN508. Comparison of the structures reveals
CDK9-specific conformational changes and identifies a CDK9-specific hydrophobic
pocket, adjacent to the aC-helix. By comparison with a previously published
structure of CDK9/cyclin T/human immunodeficiency virus TAT we find that the CDK9
aC-helix has a degree of conformational variability that has the potential to be 
exploited for inhibitor design.

PMCID: PMC3355656
PMID: 22292676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030128. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 activity regulates neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis.

Wang K(1), Hampson P, Hazeldine J, Krystof V, Strnad M, Pechan P, M J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute of Biomedical Research, Birmingham
University Medical School, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Neutrophils are the most abundant leukocyte and play a central role in the immune
defense against rapidly dividing bacteria. However, they are also the shortest
lived cell in the blood with a lifespan in the circulation of 5.4 days. The
mechanisms underlying their short lifespan and spontaneous entry into apoptosis
are poorly understood. Recently, the broad range cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor R-roscovitine was shown to increase neutrophil apoptosis, implicating
CDKs in the regulation of neutrophil lifespan. To determine which CDKs were
involved in regulating neutrophil lifespan we first examined CDK expression in
human neutrophils and found that only three CDKs: CDK5, CDK7 and CDK9 were
expressed in these cells. The use of CDK inhibitors with differing selectivity
towards the various CDKs suggested that CDK9 activity regulates neutrophil
lifespan. Furthermore CDK9 activity and the expression of its activating partner 
cyclin T1 both declined as neutrophils aged and entered apoptosis spontaneously. 
CDK9 is a component of the P-TEFb complex involved in transcriptional regulation 
and its inhibition will preferentially affect proteins with short half-lives.
Treatment of neutrophils with flavopiridol, a potent CDK9 inhibitor, increased
apoptosis and caused a rapid decline in the level of the anti-apoptotic protein
Mcl-1, whilst Bcl2A was unaffected. We propose that CDK9 activity is a key
regulator of neutrophil lifespan, preventing apoptosis by maintaining levels of
short lived anti-apoptotic proteins such as Mcl-1. Furthermore, as inappropriate 
inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis contributes to chronic inflammatory diseases
such as Rheumatoid Arthritis, CDK9 represents a novel therapeutic target in such 
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3261871
PMID: 22276149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 9;287(11):8571-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.325290. Epub 2012 
Jan 24.

Androgen receptor serine 81 phosphorylation mediates chromatin binding and
transcriptional activation.

Chen S(1), Gulla S, Cai C, Balk SP.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
schen@bidmc.harvard.edu

Our previous findings indicated that androgen receptor (AR) phosphorylation at
serine 81 is stimulated by the mitotic cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1). In this 
report, we extended our previous study and confirmed that Ser-81 phosphorylation 
increases during mitosis, coincident with CDK1 activation. We further showed
blocking cell cycle at G(1) or S phase did not disrupt androgen-induced Ser-81
phosphorylation and AR-dependent transcription, consistent with a recent report
that AR was phosphorylated at Ser-81 and activated by the transcriptional CDK9.
To assess the function of Ser-81 phosphorylation in prostate cancer (PCa) cells
expressing endogenous AR, we developed a ligand switch strategy using a
ligand-binding domain mutation (W741C) that renders AR responsive to the
antagonist bicalutamide. An S81A/W741C double mutant AR stably expressed in PCa
cells failed to transactivate the endogenous AR-regulated PSA or TMPRSS2 genes.
ChIP showed that the S81A mutation prevented ligand-induced AR recruitment to
these genes, and cellular fractionation revealed that the S81A mutation globally 
abrogated chromatin binding. Conversely, the AR fraction rapidly recruited to
chromatin after androgen stimulation was highly enriched for Ser-81
phosphorylation. Finally, inhibition of CDK1 and CDK9 decreased AR Ser-81
phosphorylation, chromatin binding, and transcriptional activity. These findings 
indicate that Ser-81 phosphorylation by CDK9 stabilizes AR chromatin binding for 
transcription and suggest that CDK1-mediated Ser-81 phosphorylation during
mitosis provides a pool of Ser-81 phosphorylation AR that can be readily
recruited to chromatin for gene reactivation and may enhance AR activity in PCa.

PMCID: PMC3318700
PMID: 22275373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28950. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028950. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Protein kinase A regulates molecular chaperone transcription and protein
aggregation.

Zhang Y(1), Murshid A, Prince T, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) regulates one of the major pathways of protein quality
control and is essential for deterrence of protein-folding disorders,
particularly in neuronal cells. However, HSF1 activity declines with age, a
change that may open the door to progression of neurodegenerative disorders such 
as Huntington's disease. We have investigated mechanisms of HSF1 regulation that 
may become compromised with age. HSF1 binds stably to the catalytic domain of
protein kinase A (PKAca) and becomes phosphorylated on at least one regulatory
serine residue (S320). We show here that PKA is essential for effective
transcription of HSP genes by HSF1. PKA triggers a cascade involving HSF1 binding
to the histone acetylase p300 and positive translation elongation factor 1
(p-TEFb) and phosphorylation of the c-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, a key
mechanism in the downstream steps of HSF1-mediated transcription. This cascade
appears to play a key role in protein quality control in neuronal cells
expressing aggregation-prone proteins with long poly-glutamine (poly-Q) tracts.
Such proteins formed inclusion bodies that could be resolved by HSF1 activation
during heat shock. Resolution of the inclusions was inhibited by knockdown of
HSF1, PKAca, or the pTEFb component CDK9, indicating a key role for the HSF1-PKA 
cascade in protein quality control.

© 2011 Zhang et al.

PMCID: PMC3245242
PMID: 22216146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biology (Basel). 2012 Jun 15;1(1):94-115. doi: 10.3390/biology1010094.

Making a Short Story Long: Regulation of P-TEFb and HIV-1 Transcriptional
Elongation in CD4+ T Lymphocytes and Macrophages.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Chiang K(2), Liu H(3), Budhiraja S(4), Donahue H(5), Rice
AP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. ramakris@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Molecular Virology &
Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. chiang@bcm.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. hliu@bcm.edu. (4)Department of Molecular Virology &
Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
budhiraj@bcm.edu. (5)Department of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. hartdonahue@gmail.com. (6)Department
of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA. arice@bcm.edu.

Productive transcription of the integrated HIV-1 provirus is restricted by
cellular factors that inhibit RNA polymerase II elongation. The viral Tat protein
overcomes this by recruiting a general elongation factor, P-TEFb, to the TAR RNA 
element that forms at the 5' end of nascent viral transcripts. P-TEFb exists in
multiple complexes in cells, and its core consists of a kinase, Cdk9, and a
regulatory subunit, either Cyclin T1 or Cyclin T2. Tat binds directly to Cyclin
T1 and thereby targets the Cyclin T1/P-TEFb complex that phosphorylates the CTD
of RNA polymerase II and the negative factors that inhibit elongation, resulting 
in efficient transcriptional elongation. P-TEFb is tightly regulated in cells
infected by HIV-1-CD4+ T lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages. A number of
mechanisms have been identified that inhibit P-TEFb in resting CD4+ T lymphocytes
and monocytes, including miRNAs that repress Cyclin T1 protein expression and
dephosphorylation of residue Thr186 in the Cdk9 T-loop. These repressive
mechanisms are overcome upon T cell activation and macrophage differentiation
when the permissivity for HIV-1 replication is greatly increased. This review
will summarize what is currently known about mechanisms that regulate P-TEFb and 
how this regulation impacts HIV-1 replication and latency.

PMCID: PMC4011037
PMID: 24832049  [PubMed]


241. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;809:105-20. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-376-9_7.

Two-step cross-linking for analysis of protein-chromatin interactions.

Tian B(1), Yang J, Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA.

Eukaryotic gene regulation is controlled, in part, by inducible transcription
factor-binding regulatory sequences in a tissue-specific and hormone-responsive
manner. The development of methods for the analysis of transcription factor
interaction within native chromatin has been a significant advance for the
systematic analyses of the timing of gene regulation and studies on the effects
of chromatin modifying enzymes on promoter accessibility. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is a specific method involving formaldehyde mediated
protein-chromatin fixation to preserve the interaction for subsequent target
identification. However, the conventional single-step cross-linking technique
does not preserve all protein-DNA interactions, especially for transcription
factors in hyper-dynamic equilibrium with chromatin or for coactivator
interactions. Here, we describe a versatile, efficient "two-step" XChIP method
that involves sequential protein-protein fixation followed by protein-DNA
fixation. This method has been used successfully for analysis of chromatin
binding for transcription factors (NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT3), polymerases (RNA Pol II),
coactivators (CBP/p300, CDK9), and chromatin structural proteins (modified
histones). Modifications of DNA extraction and sonication suitable for downstream
target identification by quantitative genomic PCR and next generation sequencing 
are described.

PMCID: PMC4148016
PMID: 22113271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Mar 10;318(5):489-99. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.004. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

The human HECA interacts with cyclins and CDKs to antagonize Wnt-mediated
proliferation and chemoresistance of head and neck cancer cells.

Dowejko A(1), Bauer R, Bauer K, Müller-Richter UD, Reichert TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, 
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
Albert.Dowejko@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

There is a growing evidence that the human homologue of the Drosophila headcase
(HECA) plays an important role in human carcinogenesis. So far specific protein
interaction partners and affected signaling pathways of HECA are still elusive.
In a recent study we showed that HECA overexpression in oral squamous-cell
carcinoma (OSCC) keratinocytes has tumor suppressive effects resulting in a
recuperation of cell cycle control concerning the entry and progression of
S-phase, G2- and M-phase. Currently, quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical 
analysis of primary tumor tissue from OSCC patients demonstrate that HECA
expression is markedly decreased compared to normal control patients with
abundant HECA expression. Additionally, there is nearly no HECA expression in
OSCC metastases. Here, we show that HECA expression is negatively controlled by
the Wnt-pathway and TCF4, a Wnt related transcription factor, binds to the HECA
promoter. Furthermore, immunocytochemistry reveals colocalization of HECA with
the cyclin dependent kinase CDK9. Immunoprecipitation experiments and proximity
ligation assays further reveal an interaction of HECA with CDK2, CDK9, Cyclin A
and Cyclin K, a direct transcriptional target of the p53 tumor suppressor.
Silencing HECA in OSCC cell lines leads to a significant increase of cell
division and a markedly increased resistance against the chemotherapeutic
cisplatin. On the contrary, HECA overexpressing OSCC cell lines show decreased
resistance of OSCC cells against cisplatin. Therefore, HECA could be considered
as future therapeutic agent against Wnt-dependent tumor progression.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Prostate. 2012 Jun 15;72(9):1035-44. doi: 10.1002/pros.21510. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Hexim-1 modulates androgen receptor and the TGF-ß signaling during the
progression of prostate cancer.

Mascareno EJ(1), Belashov I, Siddiqui MA, Liu F, Dhar-Mascareno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical
School, Brooklyn, New York 11203, USA. emascareno@downstate.edu

BACKGROUND: Androgen and TGF-ß signaling are important components during the
progression of prostate cancer. However, whether common molecular events
participate in the activation of these signaling pathways are less understood.
METHOD: Hexim 1 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry of human tissue
microarrays and TRAMP mouse models. The in vivo significance of Hexim-1 was
established by crossing the TRAMP mouse model of prostate cancer with Hexim-1
heterozygous mice. TRAMP C2 cell line was also modified to delete one copy of
Hexim-1 gene to generate TRAMP-C2-Hexim-1+/- cell lines.
RESULTS: In this report, we observed that Hexim-1 protein expression is absent in
normal prostate but highly expressed in adenocarcinoma of the prostate and a
characteristic sub-cellular distribution among normal, benign hyperplasia, and
adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Heterozygosity of the Hexim-1 gene in the
prostate cancer mice model and the TRAMP-C2 cell line, leads to increased
Cdk9-dependent serine phosphorylation on protein targets such as the androgen
receptor (AR) and the TGF-ß-dependent downstream transcription factors, such as
the SMAD proteins.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that changes in the Hexim-1 protein expression
and cellular distribution significantly influences the AR activation and the
TGF-ß signaling. Thus, Hexim-1 is likely to play a significant role in prostate
cancer progression.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22095517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):1090-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.282855. Epub 2011
Nov 14.

Two-pronged binding with bromodomain-containing protein 4 liberates positive
transcription elongation factor b from inactive ribonucleoprotein complexes.

Schröder S(1), Cho S, Zeng L, Zhang Q, Kaehlcke K, Mak L, Lau J, Bisgrove D,
Schnölzer M, Verdin E, Zhou MM, Ott M.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, California 94158, USA.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) exists in two forms in
cells as follows: an inactive form where the core components cyclin T1 and CDK9
are incorporated in the 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex containing
the inhibitory molecule HEXIM1, and an active form, part of which associates with
the bromodomain-containing protein BRD4. Here, we define a novel interaction
between P-TEFb and BRD4 involving tri-acetylated cyclin T1 (acK380, acK386, and
acK309) and the second bromodomain in BRD4. This interaction is observed with the
short splice variant of BRD4 (amino acids 1-722) lacking a previously defined
C-terminal P-TEFb-interacting domain (PID). Notably, P-TEFb complexes associated 
with short BRD4 contain HEXIM1 and 7SK snRNA, implicating the PID in the
liberation of P-TEFb from the 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex (7SK
snPNP). Overexpression of the PID alone in cells dissociates HEXIM1 and 7SK snRNA
from P-TEFb, but it is not sufficient to activate P-TEFb-dependent transcription 
of the HIV LTR. Our data support a model where two BRD4 domains, the second
bromodomain and the PID, bind P-TEFb and are required for full transcriptional
activation of P-TEFb response genes.

PMCID: PMC3256921
PMID: 22084242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Science. 2011 Nov 4;334(6056):683-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1206034.

RNAP II CTD phosphorylated on threonine-4 is required for histone mRNA 3' end
processing.

Hsin JP(1), Sheth A, Manley JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

The RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) largest subunit contains a C-terminal domain
(CTD) with up to 52 Tyr(1)-Ser(2)-Pro(3)-Thr(4)-Ser(5)-Pro(6)-Ser(7) consensus
repeats. Serines 2, 5, and 7 are known to be phosphorylated, and these
modifications help to orchestrate the interplay between transcription and
processing of messenger RNA (mRNA) precursors. Here, we provide evidence that
phosphorylation of CTD Thr(4) residues is required specifically for histone mRNA 
3' end processing, functioning to facilitate recruitment of 3' processing factors
to histone genes. Like Ser(2), Thr(4) phosphorylation requires the CTD kinase
CDK9 and is evolutionarily conserved from yeast to human. Our data thus
illustrate how a CTD modification can play a highly specific role in facilitating
efficient gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3678764
PMID: 22053051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002334. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002334. Epub
2011 Oct 27.

RNA polymerase II stalling promotes nucleosome occlusion and pTEFb recruitment to
drive immortalization by Epstein-Barr virus.

Palermo RD(1), Webb HM, West MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, United
Kingdom.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) immortalizes resting B-cells and is a key etiologic
agent in the development of numerous cancers. The essential EBV-encoded protein
EBNA 2 activates the viral C promoter (Cp) producing a message of ~120 kb that is
differentially spliced to encode all EBNAs required for immortalization. We have 
previously shown that EBNA 2-activated transcription is dependent on the activity
of the RNA polymerase II (pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD) kinase pTEFb
(CDK9/cyclin T1). We now demonstrate that Cp, in contrast to two shorter EBNA
2-activated viral genes (LMP 1 and 2A), displays high levels of
promoter-proximally stalled pol II despite being constitutively active.
Consistent with pol II stalling, we detect considerable pausing complex
(NELF/DSIF) association with Cp. Significantly, we observe substantial
Cp-specific pTEFb recruitment that stimulates high-level pol II CTD serine 2
phosphorylation at distal regions (up to +75 kb), promoting elongation. We reveal
that Cp-specific pol II accumulation is directed by DNA sequences unfavourable
for nucleosome assembly that increase TBP access and pol II recruitment. Stalled 
pol II then maintains Cp nucleosome depletion. Our data indicate that pTEFb is
recruited to Cp by the bromodomain protein Brd4, with polymerase stalling
facilitating stable association of pTEFb. The Brd4 inhibitor JQ1 and the pTEFb
inhibitors DRB and Flavopiridol significantly reduce Cp, but not LMP1 transcript 
production indicating that Brd4 and pTEFb are required for Cp transcription.
Taken together our data indicate that pol II stalling at Cp promotes
transcription of essential immortalizing genes during EBV infection by (i)
preventing promoter-proximal nucleosome assembly and ii) necessitating the
recruitment of pTEFb thereby maintaining serine 2 CTD phosphorylation at distal
regions.

PMCID: PMC3203192
PMID: 22046134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Mol Biol. 2011 Dec 16;414(5):639-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.10.022. Epub 2011 
Oct 18.

Structure and dynamics of a stabilized coiled-coil domain in the P-TEFb regulator
Hexim1.

Bigalke JM(1), Dames SA, Blankenfeldt W, Grzesiek S, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Physiologie, Abteilung Physikalische
Biochemie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

The positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb mediates the transition from 
transcription initiation to productive elongation by phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. P-TEFb is negatively regulated by the
cellular protein Hexim1 (hexamethylene bisacetamide-inducible protein 1), which
is highly conserved in higher eukaryotes. The C-terminal coiled-coil domain of
Hexim1 recognizes the Cyclin T subunit of P-TEFb, whereas a central PYNT motif is
required to inhibit the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9 by a yet unknown mechanism. 
Here, the crystal structure of the Cyclin T-binding domain (TBD) of human Hexim1 
was determined at 2.1 Å resolution using a deletion mutant of three residues in
its central stammer motif. The structure showed a continuous parallel coiled-coil
domain of nine hepta-repeats with a preceding helix encompassing up to 15
residues. Two uncommon residues at heptad a positions in the N-terminal part of
the coiled-coil structure, Lys284 and Tyr291, stabilize the preceding helix by a 
tight intermolecular hydrogen bond network with residues of the opposing chain.
These interactions delineate a characteristic turn between both helices that is
supposed to mediate binding to Cyclin T1. Stabilization of the coiled-coil domain
by deletion of the stammer region was confirmed by NMR spectroscopic and backbone
dynamic analyses analyzing wild-type TBD and three mutant variants. This study
thus provides structural insights into the recognition of the regulator protein
Hexim1 by P-TEFb and the modulation of coiled-coil dynamics by specific
discontinuities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22033481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2011 Dec;20(12):1611-28. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2011.628985. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

The impact of multi-targeted cyclin-dependent kinase inhibition in breast cancer 
cells: clinical implications.

Wesierska-Gadek J(1), Kramer MP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of Vienna, Department of Medicine I, Institute of Cancer
Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cell Cycle Regulation Group, Borschkegasse
8a, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Jozefa.Gadek-Wesierski@meduniwien.ac.at

INTRODUCTION: The progression of the mammalian cell cycle is driven by the
transient activation of complexes consisting of cyclins and cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs). Loss of control over the cell cycle results in accelerated cell
division and malignant transformation and can be caused by the upregulation of
cyclins, the aberrant activation of CDKs or the inactivation of cellular CDK
inhibitors. For these reasons, cell cycle regulators are regarded as very
promising therapeutic targets for the treatment of human malignancies.
AREAS COVERED: This review covers the structures and anti-breast cancer activity 
of selected pharmacological pan-specific CDK inhibitors. Multi-targeted CDK
inhibitors affect CDKs involved in the regulation of both cell cycle progression 
and transcriptional control. The inhibition of CDK7/CDK9 has a serious impact on 
the activity of RNA polymerase II; when its carboxy-terminal domain is
unphosphorylated, it is unable to recruit the cofactors required for
transcriptional elongation, resulting in a global transcriptional block.
Multi-targeted inhibition of CDKs represses anti-apoptotic proteins and thus
promotes the induction of apoptosis. Moreover, the inhibition of CDK7 in estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cells prevents activating phosphorylation of
ER-a.
EXPERT OPINION: These diverse modes of action make multi-targeted CDK inhibitors 
promising drugs for the treatment of breast cancers.

PMID: 22017180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Nov 15;19(22):6949-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.08.051. Epub
2011 Aug 31.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of 6-pyridylmethylaminopurines as CDK
inhibitors.

Wilson SC(1), Atrash B, Barlow C, Eccles S, Fischer PM, Hayes A, Kelland L,
Jackson W, Jarman M, Mirza A, Moreno J, Nutley BP, Raynaud FI, Sheldrake P,
Walton M, Westwood R, Whittaker S, Workman P, McDonald E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Division of Cancer Therapeutics, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

The cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor seliciclib (1, CYC202) is in phase II
clinical development for the treatment of cancer. Here we describe the synthesis 
of novel purines with greater solubility, lower metabolic clearance, and enhanced
potency versus CDKs. These compounds exhibit novel selectivity profiles versus
CDK isoforms. Compound aSßR-21 inhibits CDK2/cyclin E with IC(50)=30 nM,
CDK7-cyclin H with IC(50)=1.3 µM, and CDK9-cyclinT with IC(50)=0.11 µM; it
(CCT68127) inhibits growth of HCT116 colon cancer cells in vitro with GI(50)=0.7 
µM; and shows antitumour activity when dosed p.o. at 50mg/kg to mice bearing
HCT116 solid human tumour xenografts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21982796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. RNA Biol. 2011 Nov-Dec;8(6):1084-93. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.6.17015. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

7SK snRNA-mediated, gene-specific cooperativity of HMGA1 and P-TEFb.

Eilebrecht S(1), Benecke BJ, Benecke A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques & Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Bures sur Yvette, France.

7SK small-nuclear RNA has been shown to negatively regulate P-TEFb transcription 
elongation on the one hand and control HMGA1 transcription initiation and
chromatin remodeling on the other. The non-coding 7SK RNA thereby directly
interacts with both factors through different regions. While the loop 2 of the
RNA specifically binds to the first HMGA1 A/T hook, thereby competing with DNA
binding to the same domain, loops 1, 3 and 4 are involved in P-TEFb interaction. 
This raises the question of whether HMGA1 and P-TEFb cooperate during gene
transcription. Using transcriptome profiling, we have identifed genes that are
oppositely regulated by 7SK RNA over-expression versus shRNA mediated knock-down.
Inhibition of P-TEFb by competitive expression of a dominant-negative Cdk9
protein leads to highly similar changes in global gene expression as the
over-expression of 7SK RNA, confirming the importance of P-TEFb inhibition by 7SK
RNA. Furthermore, we have similarly assembled genes affected concomitantly by
HMGA1 over-expression. HMGA1 and P-TEFb, in the case of select target genes, show
strong cooperation in transcriptional activation. Finally, we provide evidence
for 7SK RNA complexes containing simultaneously HMGA1 and P-TEFb. 7SK RNA thus
establishes gene-dependent plasticity between HMGA1 chromatin remodeling and
transcription initiation and P-TEFb transcription elongation.

PMID: 21957495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Transcription. 2011 May;2(3):103-108.

Inhibiting eukaryotic transcription: Which compound to choose? How to evaluate
its activity?

Bensaude O(1).

Author information: 
(1)IBENS; UMR CNRS 8197; UA INSERM 1024; Paris, France.

This review first discusses ways in which we can evaluate transcription
inhibition, describe changes in nuclear structure due to transcription
inhibition, and report on genes that are paradoxically stimulated by
transcription inhibition. Next, it summarizes the characteristics and mechanisms 
of commonly used inhibitors: a-amanitin is highly selective for RNAP II and RNAP 
III but its action is slow, actinomycin D is fast but its selectivity is poor,
CDK9 inhibitors such as DRB and flavopiridol are fast and reversible but many
genes escape transcription inhibition. New compounds, such as triptolide, are
fast and selective and able to completely arrest transcription by triggering
rapid degradation of RNAP II.

PMCID: PMC3173647
PMID: 21922053  [PubMed]


252. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(22):11752-69. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05360-11. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

RelA Ser276 phosphorylation-coupled Lys310 acetylation controls transcriptional
elongation of inflammatory cytokines in respiratory syncytial virus infection.

Brasier AR(1), Tian B, Jamaluddin M, Kalita MK, Garofalo RP, Lu M.

Author information: 
(1)MRB 8.126, University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Blvd.,
Galveston, TX 77555-1060, USA. arbrasie@utmb.edu

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus
responsible for lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) in humans. In
experimental models of RSV LRTI, the actions of the nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)
transcription factor mediate inflammation and pathology. We have shown that RSV
replication induces a mitogen-and-stress-related kinase 1 (MSK-1) pathway that
activates NF-<U+03BA>B RelA transcriptional activity by a process involving serine
phosphorylation at serine (Ser) residue 276. In this study, we examined the
mechanism by which phospho-Ser276 RelA mediates expression of the NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
gene network. RelA-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) complemented with
the RelA Ser276Ala mutant are deficient in CXCL2/Groß, KC, and interleukin-6
(IL-6) expression, but NFKBIA/I<U+03BA>Ba is preserved. We show that RSV-induced RelA
Ser276 phosphorylation is required for acetylation at Lys310, an event required
for transcriptional activity and stable association of RelA with the activated
positive transcriptional elongation factor (PTEF-b) complex proteins, bromodomain
4 (Brd4), and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9). In contrast to gene loading
pattern of PTEF-b proteins produced by tumor necrosis factor (TNF) stimulation,
RSV induces their initial clearance followed by partial reaccumulation coincident
with RelA recruitment. The RSV-induced binding patterns of the CDK9 substrate,
phospho-Ser2 RNA polymerase (Pol) II, follows a similar pattern of clearance and 
downstream gene reaccumulation. The functional role of CDK9 was examined using
CDK9 small interfering RNA (siRNA) and CDK inhibitors, where RSV-induced
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene expression was significantly inhibited. Finally, although
RSV induces a transition from short transcripts to fully spliced mRNA in
wild-type RelA (RelA WT)-expressing cells, this transition is not seen in cells
expressing RelA Ser276Ala. We conclude that RelA Ser276 phosphorylation mediates 
RelA acetylation, Brd4/CDK9 association, and activation of downstream
inflammatory genes by transcriptional elongation in RSV infection.

PMCID: PMC3209292
PMID: 21900162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Jul 26;4:260. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-260.

Limited redundancy in genes regulated by Cyclin T2 and Cyclin T1.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Yu W, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. arice@bcm.edu.

BACKGROUND: The elongation phase, like other steps of transcription by RNA
Polymerase II, is subject to regulation. The positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) complex allows for the transition of mRNA synthesis to the
productive elongation phase. P-TEFb contains Cdk9 (Cyclin-dependent kinase 9) as 
its catalytic subunit and is regulated by its Cyclin partners, Cyclin T1 and
Cyclin T2. The HIV-1 Tat transactivator protein enhances viral gene expression by
exclusively recruiting the Cdk9-Cyclin T1 P-TEFb complex to a RNA element in
nascent viral transcripts called TAR. The expression patterns of Cyclin T1 and
Cyclin T2 in primary monocytes and CD4+ T cells suggests that Cyclin T2 may be
generally involved in expression of constitutively expressed genes in quiescent
cells, while Cyclin T1 may be involved in expression of genes up-regulated during
macrophage differentiation, T cell activation, and conditions of increased
metabolic activity To investigate this issue, we wished to identify the sets of
genes whose levels are regulated by either Cyclin T2 or Cyclin T1.
FINDINGS: We used shRNA lentiviral vectors to stably deplete either Cyclin T2 or 
Cyclin T1 in HeLa cells. Total RNA extracted from these cells was subjected to
cDNA microarray analysis. We found that 292 genes were down- regulated by
depletion of Cyclin T2 and 631 genes were down-regulated by depletion of Cyclin
T1 compared to cells transduced with a control lentivirus. Expression of 100
genes was commonly reduced in either knockdown. Additionally, 111 and 287 genes
were up-regulated when either Cyclin T2 or Cyclin T1 was depleted, respectively, 
with 45 genes in common.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that there is limited redundancy in genes
regulated by Cyclin T1 or Cyclin T2.

PMCID: PMC3160394
PMID: 21791050  [PubMed]


254. Curr Biol. 2011 Aug 9;21(15):1308-13. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.06.050. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

A maternal factor unique to ascidians silences the germline via binding to P-TEFb
and RNAP II regulation.

Kumano G(1), Takatori N, Negishi T, Takada T, Nishida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.
kumano@bio.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp

Suppression of zygotic transcription in early embryonic germline cells is tightly
linked to their separation from the somatic lineage. Many invertebrate embryos
utilize localized maternal factors that are successively inherited by the
germline cells for silencing the germline. Germline quiescence has also been
associated with the underphosphorylation of Ser2 of the C-terminal domain
(CTD-Ser2) of RNA polymerase II [1-3]. Here, using the ascidian Halocynthia
roretzi, we identified a first deuterostome example of a maternally localized
factor, posterior end mark (PEM), which globally represses germline
transcription. PEM knockdown resulted in ectopic transcription and ectopic
phosphorylation of CTD-Ser2 in the germline. Overexpression of PEM abolished all 
transcription and led to the underphosphorylation of CTD-Ser2 in the somatic
cells. PEM protein was reiteratively detected in the nucleus of the germline
cells and coimmunoprecipitated with CDK9, a component of posterior transcription 
elongation factor b (P-TEFb). These results suggest that nonhomologous proteins, 
PEM and Pgc of Drosophila [3-5] and PIE-1 of C. elegans [1, 6, 7], repress
germline gene expression through analogous functions: by keeping CTD-Ser2
underphosphorylated through binding to the P-TEFb complex. The present study is
an interesting example of evolutionary constraint on how a mechanism of germline 
silencing can evolve in diverse animals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21782435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Jul 21;2:e182. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.66.

Wogonin and related natural flavones are inhibitors of CDK9 that induce apoptosis
in cancer cells by transcriptional suppression of Mcl-1.

Polier G(1), Ding J, Konkimalla BV, Eick D, Ribeiro N, Köhler R, Giaisi M,
Efferth T, Desaubry L, Krammer PH, Li-Weber M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunology Program (D030), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

The wogonin-containing herb Scutellaria baicalensis has successfully been used
for curing various diseases in traditional Chinese medicine. Wogonin has been
shown to induce apoptosis in different cancer cells and to suppress growth of
human cancer xenografts in vivo. However, its direct targets remain unknown. In
this study, we demonstrate for the first time that wogonin and structurally
related natural flavones, for example, apigenin, chrysin and luteolin, are
inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and block phosphorylation of the
carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II at Ser(2). This effect leads to
reduced RNA synthesis and subsequently rapid downregulation of the short-lived
anti-apoptotic protein myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1) resulting in apoptosis
induction in cancer cells. We show that genetic inhibition of Mcl-1 or CDK9
expression by siRNA is sufficient to mimic flavone-induced apoptosis. Pull-down
and in silico docking studies demonstrate that wogonin directly binds to CDK9,
presumably to the ATP-binding pocket. In contrast, wogonin does not inhibit CDK2,
CDK4 and CDK6 at doses that inhibit CDK9 activity. Furthermore, we show that
wogonin preferentially inhibits CDK9 in malignant compared with normal
lymphocytes. Thus, our study reveals a new mechanism of anti-cancer action of
natural flavones and supports CDK9 as a therapeutic target in oncology.

PMCID: PMC3199715
PMID: 21776020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Oct 1;12(7):598-609. Epub 2011 Oct 1.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Dinaciclib (SCH727965) inhibits pancreatic
cancer growth and progression in murine xenograft models.

Feldmann G(1), Mishra A, Bisht S, Karikari C, Garrido-Laguna I, Rasheed Z,
Ottenhof NA, Dadon T, Alvarez H, Fendrich V, Rajeshkumar NV, Matsui W, Brossart
P, Hidalgo M, Bannerji R, Maitra A, Nelkin BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal of human malignancies, and potent
therapeutic options are lacking. Inhibition of cell cycle progression through
pharmacological blockade of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) has been suggested as 
a potential treatment option for human cancers with deregulated cell cycle
control. Dinaciclib (SCH727965) is a novel small molecule multi-CDK inhibitor
with low nanomolar potency against CDK1, CDK2, CDK5 and CDK9 that has shown
favorable toxicity and efficacy in preliminary mouse experiments, and has been
well tolerated in Phase I clinical trials. In the current study, the therapeutic 
efficacy of SCH727965 on human pancreatic cancer cells was tested using in vitro 
and in vivo model systems. Treatment with SCH727965 significantly reduced in
vitro cell growth, motility and colony formation in soft agar of MIAPaCa-2 and
Pa20C cells. These phenotypic changes were accompanied by marked reduction of
phosphorylation of Retinoblastoma (Rb) and reduced activation of RalA. Single
agent therapy with SCH727965 (40 mg/kg i.p. twice weekly) for 4 weeks
significantly reduced subcutaneous tumor growth in 10/10 (100%) of tested
low-passage human pancreatic cancer xenografts. Treatment of low passage
pancreatic cancer xenografts with a combination of SCH727965 and gemcitabine was 
significantly more effective than either agent alone. Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis identified overrepresentation of the Notch and Transforming Growth
Factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathways in the xenografts least responsive to
SCH727965 treatment. Treatment with the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
SCH727965 alone or in combination is a highly promising novel experimental
therapeutic strategy against pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3218385
PMID: 21768779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Sep;10(9):1624-34. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-1119. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

Mechanisms of action of a dual Cdc7/Cdk9 kinase inhibitor against quiescent and
proliferating CLL cells.

Natoni A(1), Murillo LS, Kliszczak AE, Catherwood MA, Montagnoli A, Samali A,
O'Dwyer M, Santocanale C.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre of Biomedical Engineering and Science and Centre for
Chromosome Biology, National University of Ireland Galway, University Road,
Galway, Ireland.

In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) the proliferation rate and resistance to
drug-induced apoptosis are recognized as important factors in the outcome of
treatment. In this study, we assess the activity and the mechanism of action of
the prototype cell division cycle kinase 7 (Cdc7) inhibitor, PHA-767491, which
inhibits the initiation of DNA replication but also has cyclin-dependent kinase 9
(Cdk9) inhibitory activity. We have studied the effects of this dual Cdc7/Cdk9
inhibitor in both quiescent CLL cells and CLL cells that have been induced to
proliferate using a cellular coculture system that mimics the lymph node
microenvironment. We find that this compound, originally developed as a DNA
replication inhibitor, is particularly active in promoting mitochondrial
dependent apoptosis in quiescent CLL cells purified from peripheral blood of
patients regardless of recognized risk factors. In this setting, apoptosis is
preceded by a decrease in the levels of Mcl-1 protein and transcript possibly due
to inhibition of Cdk9. Following stimulation by CD154 and interleukin-4, CLL
cells become highly chemoresistant, reenter into the cell cycle, reexpress Cdc7
kinase, a key molecular switch for the initiation of DNA replication, replicate
their DNA, and undergo cell division. In this context, treatment with PHA-767491 
abolished DNA synthesis by inhibiting Cdc7 but is less effective in triggering
cell death, although Mcl-1 protein is no longer detectable. Thus, dual Cdc7/Cdk9 
inhibition has the potential to target both the quiescent and actively
proliferating CLL populations through two distinct mechanisms and may be a new
therapeutic strategy in CLL.

PMID: 21768328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jul 29;410(5):944-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.04.005.

Reciprocal regulation of human immunodeficiency virus-1 gene expression and
replication by heat shock proteins 40 and 70.

Kumar M(1), Rawat P, Khan SZ, Dhamija N, Chaudhary P, Ravi DS, Mitra D.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411007, India.

Cellular heat shock proteins (Hsps) are induced upon heat shock, UV irradiation
and microbial or viral infection. They are also known to be involved in apoptosis
and immune response in addition to their chaperone function. Although some
literature exists regarding the role of Hsps in human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-1 infection, a clear understanding of their role remains elusive.
Previously, we have shown that Hsp40, a co-chaperone of Hsp70, interacts with
HIV-1 negative regulatory factor (Nef) and is required for Nef-mediated increase 
in viral gene expression and replication. We now show that Hsp70 is also present 
in the Nef-Hsp40 complex reported earlier. Furthermore, Hsp70 inhibits viral gene
expression and replication; however, Hsp40 can rescue this down regulation of
viral gene expression induced by Hsp70. We also show that HIV-1 viral protein R
is required for this inhibitory effect of Hsp70 on viral replication. Our data
further show that Hsp40 is consistently up regulated in HIV-1 infection, whereas 
Hsp70 is down regulated after initial up regulation favoring viral replication.
Finally, Hsp70 expression inhibits the phosphorylation of cyclin-dependent kinase
9 required for high-affinity binding of HIV-1 transactivator of
transcription-positive transcription elongation factor b complex to
transactivation response RNA, whereas Hsp40 seems to induce it. Thus, Hsp40 and
Hsp70, both closely associated in their chaperone function, seem to act contrary 
to each other in regulating viral gene expression. It seems that Hsp70 favors the
host by inhibiting viral replication, whereas Hsp40 works in favor of the virus
by inducing its replication. Thus, differential expression of Hsp40 and Hsp70
reciprocally regulates viral gene expression and replication in HIV-1 infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jul 29;410(5):917-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.03.060.

HIV-1 replication and latency are regulated by translational control of cyclin
T1.

Hoque M(1), Shamanna RA, Guan D, Pe'ery T, Mathews MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, PO Box 1709, Newark, NJ 07101-1709, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) exploits cellular proteins during its
replicative cycle and latent infection. The positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) is a key cellular transcription factor critical for these viral
processes and is a drug target. During viral replication, P-TEFb is recruited via
interactions of its cyclin T1 subunit with the HIV Tat (transactivator of
transcription) protein and TAR (transactivation response) element. Through RNA
silencing and over-expression experiments, we discovered that nuclear factor 90
(NF90), a cellular RNA binding protein, regulates P-TEFb expression. NF90
depletion reduced cyclin T1 protein levels by inhibiting translation initiation. 
Regulation was mediated by the 3' untranslated region of cyclin T1 mRNA
independently of microRNAs. Cyclin T1 induction is involved in the escape of
HIV-1 from latency. We show that the activation of viral replication by phorbol
ester in latently infected monocytic cells requires the posttranscriptional
induction of NF90 and cyclin T1, implicating NF90 in protein kinase C signaling
pathways. This investigation reveals a novel mechanism of cyclin T1 regulation
and establishes NF90 as a regulator of HIV-1 replication during both productive
infection and induction from latency.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164259
PMID: 21763496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jul 29;410(5):896-916. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.03.054.

T-cell receptor signaling enhances transcriptional elongation from latent HIV
proviruses by activating P-TEFb through an ERK-dependent pathway.

Kim YK(1), Mbonye U, Hokello J, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Room W200, Cleveland, OH
44106-4960, USA.

Latent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) proviruses are thought to be primarily 
reactivated in vivo through stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR). Activation 
of the TCR induces multiple signal transduction pathways, leading to the ordered 
nuclear migration of the HIV transcription initiation factors NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B) and NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T-cells), as well as potential
effects on HIV transcriptional elongation. We have monitored the kinetics of
proviral reactivation using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to measure
changes in the distribution of RNA polymerase II in the HIV provirus.
Surprisingly, in contrast to TNF-a (tumor necrosis factor a) activation, where
early transcription elongation is highly restricted due to rate-limiting
concentrations of Tat, efficient and sustained HIV elongation and positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) recruitment are detected immediately
after the activation of latent proviruses through the TCR. Inhibition of NFAT
activation by cyclosporine had no effect on either HIV transcription initiation
or elongation. However, examination of P-TEFb complexes by gel-filtration
chromatography showed that TCR signaling led to the rapid dissociation of the
large inactive P-TEFb:7SK RNP (small nuclear RNA 7SK ribonucleoprotein) complex
and the release of active low-molecular-weight P-TEFb complexes. Both P-TEFb
recruitment to the HIV long terminal repeat and enhanced HIV processivity were
blocked by the ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) inhibitor U0126, but
not by AKT (serine/threonine protein kinase Akt) and PI3K (phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase) inhibitors. In contrast to treatment with HMBA (hexamethylene
bisacetamide) and DRB (5,6-dichlorobenzimidazole 1-ß-ribofuranoside), which
disrupt the large 7SK RNP complex but do not stimulate early HIV elongation, TCR 
signaling provides the first example of a physiological pathway that can shift
the balance between the inactive P-TEFb pool and the active P-TEFb pool and
thereby stimulate proviral reactivation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3139146
PMID: 21763495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Oct;39(18):7908-19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr527. Epub 2011
Jun 30.

Patient mutation in AIRE disrupts P-TEFb binding and target gene transcription.

umer K(1), Plemenita A, Saksela K, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Vrazov trg 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. kristina.zumer@helsinki.fi

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcription factor that induces the expression
of a large subset of otherwise strictly tissue restricted antigens in medullary
thymic epithelial cells, thereby enabling their presentation to developing T
cells for negative selection. Mutations in AIRE lead to
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), a rare
monogenetic disease. Although it has been reported that AIRE interacts with
proteins involved in nuclear transport, DNA-damage response, chromatin
remodeling, transcription and pre-mRNA-splicing, the precise mechanism of
AIRE-induced tissue restricted antigen expression has remained elusive. In this
study, we investigated an APECED patient mutation that causes the loss of the
extreme C-terminus of AIRE and found that this mutant protein is transcriptionaly
inactive. When tethered heterologously to DNA, this domain could stimulate
transcription and splicing by itself. Moreover, the loss of this C-terminus
disrupted interactions with the positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb). Via P-TEFb, AIRE increased levels of RNA polymerase II on and enhanced 
pre-mRNA splicing of heterologous and endogenous target genes. Indeed, the
inhibition of CDK9, the kinase subunit of P-TEFb, inhibited AIRE-induced pre-mRNA
splicing of these genes. Thus, AIRE requires P-TEFb to activate transcription
elongation and co-transcriptional processing of target genes.

PMCID: PMC3185428
PMID: 21724609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Viruses. 2010 Oct 1;2(10):2226-2234.

HIV-1 Tat: Its Dependence on Host Factors is Crystal Clear.

D'Orso I(1), Frankel AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, 600 16
Street, San Francisco, CA 94158-2280.

HIV-1 transcription is regulated at the level of elongation by the viral Tat
protein together with the cellular elongation factor P-TEFb, which is composed of
cyclin T1 and Cdk9 subunits. The crystal structure of a Tat:P-TEFb complex
(Tahirov, T.H.; Babayeva, N.D.; Varzavand, K.; Cooper, J.J.; Sedore, S.C.; and
Price, D.H. Crystal structure of HIV-1 Tat complexed with human P-TEFb.
Nature2010, 465, 747-751) reveals molecular details of Tat and its interactions
that have eluded investigators for more than two decades and provides provocative
insights into the mechanism of Tat activation.

PMCID: PMC3120229
PMID: 21709748  [PubMed]


263. J Mol Biol. 2011 Aug 19;411(3):581-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.06.001. Epub 2011 
Jun 15.

Varying modulation of HIV-1 LTR activity by Baf complexes.

Van Duyne R(1), Guendel I, Narayanan A, Gregg E, Shafagati N, Tyagi M, Easley R, 
Klase Z, Nekhai S, Kehn-Hall K, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Microbiology, National Center for Biodefense and
Infectious Diseases, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat is present
on both ends of the integrated viral genome and contains regulatory elements
needed for transcriptional initiation and elongation. Post-integration, a highly 
ordered chromatin structure consisting of at least five nucleosomes, is found at 
the 5' long terminal repeat, the location and modification state of which control
the state of active viral replication as well as silencing of the latent HIV-1
provirus. In this context, the chromatin remodeling field rapidly emerges as
having a critical role in the control of viral gene expression. In the current
study, we focused on unique Baf subunits that are common to the most highly
recognized of chromatin remodeling proteins, the SWI/SNF
(switching-defective-sucrose non-fermenting) complexes. We find that at least two
Baf proteins, Baf53 and Baf170, are highly regulated in HIV-1-infected cells.
Previously, studies have shown that the depletion of Baf53 in uninfected cells
leads to the expansion of chromosomal territories and the decompaction of the
chromatin. Baf53, in the presence of HIV-1 infection, co-elutes off of a
chromatographic column as a different-sized complex when compared to uninfected
cells and appears to be predominantly phosphorylated. The innate function of
Baf53-containing complexes appears to be transcriptionally suppressive, in that
knocking down Baf53 increases viral gene expression from cells both transiently
and chronically infected with HIV-1. Additionally, cdk9/cyclin T in the presence 
of Tat is able to phosphorylate Baf53 in vitro, implying that this
posttranslationally modified form relieves the suppressive effect and allows for 
viral transcription to proceed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3146592
PMID: 21699904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Jun 3;11:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-33.

The CDK9/cyclin T1 subunits of P-TEFb in mouse oocytes and preimplantation
embryos: a possible role in embryonic genome activation.

Oqani RK(1), Kim HR, Diao YF, Park CS, Jin DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science & Biotechnology, Research Center for Transgenic
Cloned Pigs, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Two stages of genome activation have been identified in the mouse
embryo. Specifically, minor transcriptional activation is evident at the one-cell
stage and a second major episode of activation occurs at the two-cell stage.
Nuclear translocation of RNA polymerase II and phosphorylation of the C-terminal 
domain (CTD) of the largest enzyme subunit are major determinants of embryonic
genome activation. P-TEFb, the Pol II CTD kinase, regulates transcriptional
elongation via phosphorylation of the serine 2 residues of the CTD.
RESULTS: Here, we show that the CDK9 and cyclin T1 subunits of P-TEFb are present
in mouse oocytes and preimplantation embryos. Both proteins translocate to
pronuclei at the late one-cell stage and are predominantly localized in nuclei at
the two-cell stage. We additionally examine the effects of the CDK9-specific
inhibitor, flavopiridol, on mouse preimplantation development. Our data show that
treatment with the drug results in mislocalization of CDK9, cyclin T1, and
phosphorylated Pol II, as well as developmental arrest at the two-cell stage.
CONCLUSIONS: A change in CDK9 localization from the cytoplasm to the pronucleus
occurs at the time of minor embryonic genome activation, and CDK9 accumulation at
the two-cell stage is evident, concomitant with major transcriptional activation 
of the embryonic genome. Moreover, CDK9 inhibition triggers a developmental block
at the two-cell stage. Our findings clearly indicate that CDK9 is essential for
embryonic genome activation in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC3127986
PMID: 21639898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochem J. 2011 Aug 15;438(1):121-31. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101633.

Protein network study of human AF4 reveals its central role in RNA Pol
II-mediated transcription and in phosphorylation-dependent regulatory mechanisms.

Esposito G(1), Cevenini A, Cuomo A, de Falco F, Sabbatino D, Pane F, Ruoppolo M, 
Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, s.c.a r.l., Via G. Salvatore 486, 80145 Naples,
Italy.

AF4 belongs to a family of proteins implicated in childhood lymphoblastic
leukaemia, FRAXE (Fragile X E site) mental retardation and ataxia. AF4 is a
transcriptional activator that is involved in transcriptional elongation.
Although AF4 has been implicated in MLL (mixed-lineage leukaemia)-related
leukaemogenesis, AF4-dependent physiological mechanisms have not been clearly
defined. Proteins that interact with AF4 may also play important roles in
mediating oncogenesis, and are potential targets for novel therapies. Using a
functional proteomic approach involving tandem MS and bioinformatics, we
identified 51 AF4-interacting proteins of various Gene Ontology categories.
Approximately 60% participate in transcription regulatory mechanisms, including
the Mediator complex in eukaryotic cells. In the present paper we report one of
the first extensive proteomic studies aimed at elucidating AF4 protein
cross-talk. Moreover, we found that the AF4 residues Thr(220) and Ser(212) are
phosphorylated, which suggests that AF4 function depends on phosphorylation
mechanisms. We also mapped the AF4-interaction site with CDK9 (cyclin-dependent
kinase 9), which is a direct interactor crucial for the function and regulation
of the protein. The findings of the present study significantly expand the number
of putative members of the multiprotein complex formed by AF4, which is
instrumental in promoting the transcription/elongation of specific genes in human
cells.

© 2011 The Author(s)

PMCID: PMC3174057
PMID: 21574958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):22943-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201194. Epub 2011
May 9.

Cyclin K inhibits HIV-1 gene expression and replication by interfering with
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9)-cyclin T1 interaction in Nef-dependent manner.

Khan SZ(1), Mitra D.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) exploits a number of host cellular factors
for successful survival and propagation. The viral protein Nef plays an important
role in HIV-1 pathogenesis by interacting with various cellular proteins. In the 
present work, we identified Cyclin K (CycK) as a novel Nef-interacting protein,
and for the first time, we showed that CycK inhibits HIV-1 gene expression and
replication in a Nef-dependent manner. The positive elongation factor b complex
comprising cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and Cyclin T1 is a critical cellular 
complex required for viral gene expression and replication. Enhanced expression
of CycK in the presence of Nef induced CycK-CDK9 binding, which prevented
CDK9-Cyclin T1 complex formation and nuclear translocation of CDK9, resulting in 
inhibition of HIV-1 long terminal repeat-driven gene expression. Furthermore,
this effect of CycK was not observed with Nef-deleted virus, indicating the
importance of Nef in this phenomenon. Finally, silencing of CycK in
HIV-1-infected cells resulted in increased translocation of CDK9 into the
nucleus, leading to increased viral gene expression and replication. These data
also suggest that endogenous CycK might act as an inhibitory factor for HIV-1
gene expression and replication in T-cells. Thus, our results clearly demonstrate
that CycK utilizes HIV-1 Nef protein to displace CycT1 from the positive
elongation factor b complex, resulting in inhibition of HIV-1 gene expression and
replication.

PMCID: PMC3123062
PMID: 21555514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 21;6(4):e18985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018985.

Protein phosphatase-1 activates CDK9 by dephosphorylating Ser175.

Ammosova T(1), Obukhov Y, Kotelkin A, Breuer D, Beullens M, Gordeuk VR, Bollen M,
Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, Washington, DC, United
States of America.

The cyclin-dependent kinase CDK9/cyclin T1 induces HIV-1 transcription by
phosphorylating the carboxyterminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII).
CDK9 activity is regulated by protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) which was previously
shown to dephosphorylate CDK9 Thr186. Here, we analyzed the effect of PP1 on
RNAPII phosphorylation and CDK9 activity. The selective inhibition of PP1 by
okadaic acid and by NIPP1 inhibited phosphorylation of RNAPII CTD in vitro and in
vivo. Expression of the central domain of NIPP1 in cultured cells inhibited the
enzymatic activity of CDK9 suggesting its activation by PP1. Comparison of
dephosphorylation of CDK9 phosphorylated by ((32)P) in vivo and dephosphorylation
of CDK9's Thr186 analyzed by Thr186 phospho-specific antibodies, indicated that a
residue other than Thr186 might be dephosphorylated by PP1. Analysis of
dephosphorylation of phosphorylated peptides derived from CDK9's T-loop suggested
that PP1 dephosphorylates CDK9 Ser175. In cultured cells, CDK9 was found to be
phosphorylated on Ser175 as determined by combination of Hunter 2D peptide
mapping and LC-MS analysis. CDK9 S175A mutant was active and S175D--inactive, and
dephosphorylation of CDK9's Ser175 upregulated HIV-1 transcription in
PP1-dependent manner. Collectively, our results point to CDK9 Ser175 as novel
PP1-regulatory site which dephosphorylation upregulates CDK9 activity and
contribute to the activation of HIV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC3080879
PMID: 21533037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Apoptosis. 2011 Jul;16(7):660-70. doi: 10.1007/s10495-011-0603-3.

Transcriptional modulation of apoptosis regulators by roscovitine and related
compounds.

Garrofé-Ochoa X(1), Cosialls AM, Ribas J, Gil J, Boix J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Group, Departament de Medicina Experimental,
IRBLLEIDA-Universitat de Lleida, C/Montserrat Roig 2, 25008, Lleida, Catalunya,
Spain.

Chemical inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), like roscovitine, are
promising drugs in the context of new cancer therapies. Roscovitine and related
compounds, like seliciclib and olomoucine, are effective inducers of apoptosis in
many proliferating cells in culture. These compounds are known to activate the
intrinsic or mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. In order to better characterize 
this intrinsic pathway, a transcriptional analysis was performed using the
reverse transcriptase-multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification procedure 
(RT-MLPA). In five cell lines, we detected an early and marked reduction of most 
transcripts, which is consistent with the disruption of transcription that
results from the inhibition of CDK7 and CDK9. However, the mRNA of
p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) gene escaped from this
transcription inhibition in neuroblastoma cells with a functional p53 protein.
The increase of PUMA mRNA was not found in roscovitine-treated cell lines
defective in p53, which underwent apoptosis like their p53 proficient
counterparts. In addition, in SH-SY5Y cells, sublethal and lethal concentrations 
of roscovitine produced equivalent increases of PUMA mRNA and protein. In
conclusion, the increased expression of PUMA was not associated with apoptosis
induction. On the contrary, mRNA and protein depletion of MCL-1 gene correlated
the best with cell demise. Moreover, NOXA protein suffered a far minor decrease
than MCL-1. Because of the selective neutralization of NOXA by MCL-1, we
hypothesize that the disruption of this balance is a critical event in apoptosis 
induction by roscovitine and related compounds.

PMID: 21505869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jan;227(1):383-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22797.

Phosphorylation of histone H1 by P-TEFb is a necessary step in skeletal muscle
differentiation.

O'Brien SK(1), Knight KL, Rana TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School Worcester, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), the complex of Cyclin T1 and
CDK9, activates the transcription of many viral and eukaryotic genes at the point
of mRNA elongation. The activity of P-TEFb has been implicated in the
differentiation of a number of cell types, including skeletal muscle. In order to
promote transcription, P-TEFb hyperphosphorylates RNA Pol II, thereby increasing 
its processivity. Our previous work identified histone H1 as a P-TEFb substrate
during HIV-1 and immediate-early transcription. Here, we examine the role of
P-TEFb phosphorylation of histone H1 during differentiation, using the myoblast
cell line C2C12 as a model for skeletal muscle differentiation. We found that H1 
phosphorylation is elevated in differentiating C2C12, and this phosphorylation is
sensitive to P-TEFb inhibition. H1 phosphorylation was also necessary for the
induction of three muscle marker genes that require P-TEFb for expression.
Additionally, ChIP experiments demonstrate that H1 dissociates from muscle
differentiation marker genes in C2C12 cells under active P-TEFb conditions. We
determine that both P-TEFb activity and H1 phosphorylation are necessary for the 
full differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts into myotubes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3562545
PMID: 21503884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Angiogenesis. 2011 Sep;14(3):281-91. doi: 10.1007/s10456-011-9212-6. Epub 2011
Apr 13.

Anti-angiogenic effects of purine inhibitors of cyclin dependent kinases.

Liebl J(1), Krystof V, Vereb G, Takács L, Strnad M, Pechan P, Havlicek L,
Zatloukal M, Fürst R, Vollmar AM, Zahler S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Center for Drug Research, Ludwig Maximilians
University, Munich, Germany.

Small molecular inhibitors of Cyclin dependent kinases (Cdks) are currently being
developed as anticancer therapeutics due to their antiproliferative properties.
The purine Cdk specific inhibitor (R)-roscovitine (seliciclib, CYC202) represents
one of the most promising of these compounds. It is currently evaluated in
clinical trials concerning cancer therapy. Recently, we have shown that
roscovitine exerts potent antiangiogenic effects and elucidated Cdk5 as a new
player in angiogenesis. These findings introduce Cdk5 as novel target for
antiangiogenic therapy, and Cdk5 inhibitors as an attractive therapeutic
approach. Here, we present the antiangiogenic profile of 15 derivatives of
roscovitine in vitro and in vivo and provide structure activity relationships of 
the roscovitine analogs. The (S)-isomer LGR561 and the respective (R)- and
(S)-isomers LGR848 and LGR849 strongly inhibited proliferation and cell cycle
progression, induced cell death, and reduced migration of endothelial cells in
vitro. In comparison to roscovitine, these compounds showed an increased potency 
to inhibit Cdk2, Cdk5, Cdk7, and Cdk9. By analyzing the effects of LGR561,
LGR848, and LGR849 on endothelial cell tube formation, mouse aortic ring
sprouting, angiogenesis in the chick chorioallantoic membrane, and neovessel
formation in the mouse cornea, we elucidate the two (S)-isomers LGR561 and LGR849
as highly potent inhibitors of angiogenesis. This study provides first
information on how to modify roscovitine to develop Cdk inhibitors with increased
antiangiogenic activity and suggests the application of existing and the
development of new Cdk inhibitors to inhibit both, cancer cell proliferation and 
angiogenesis.

PMID: 21487803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Int J Cancer. 2012 Mar 1;130(5):1216-26. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26127. Epub 2011 Jun
21.

CDKI-71, a novel CDK9 inhibitor, is preferentially cytotoxic to cancer cells
compared to flavopiridol.

Liu X(1), Shi S, Lam F, Pepper C, Fischer PM, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Cancer cells appear to depend heavily on antiapoptotic proteins for survival and 
so targeted inhibition of these proteins has therapeutic potential. One
innovative strategy is to inhibit the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) responsible
for the regulation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). In our study, we investigated
the detailed cellular mechanism of a novel small-molecule CDK inhibitor (CDKI-71)
in cancer cell lines, primary leukemia cells, normal B - & T- cells, and
embryonic lung fibroblasts and compared the cellular and molecular responses to
the clinical CDK inhibitor, flavopiridol. Like flavopiridol, CDKI-71 displayed
potent cytotoxicity and caspase-dependent apoptosis induction that were closely
associated with the inhibition of RNAPII phosphorylation at serine-2. This was
caused by effective targeting of cyclinT-CDK9 and resulted in the downstream
inhibition of Mcl-1. No correlation between apoptosis and inhibition of
cell-cycle CDKs 1 and 2 was observed. CDKI-71 showed a 10-fold increase in
potency in tumor cell lines when compared to MRC-5 human fibroblast cells.
Significantly, CDKI-71 also demonstrated potent anti-chronic lymphocytic leukemia
activity with minimal toxicity in normal B- and T-cells. In contrast,
flavopiridol showed little selectivity between cancer and normal cells. Here, we 
provide the first cell-based evidence that flavopiridol induces DNA double-strand
breaks: a fact which may explain why flavopiridol has such a narrow therapeutic
window in preclinical and clinical settings. Taken together, our data provide a
rationale for the development of selective CDK inhibitors as therapeutic agents
and CDKI-71 represents a promising lead in this context.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21484792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19662-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.209551. Epub 2011
Apr 8.

Ibulocydine is a novel prodrug Cdk inhibitor that effectively induces apoptosis
in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Cho SJ(1), Kim YJ, Surh YJ, Kim BM, Lee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, College of Pharmacy, The Research
Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is frequently associated with abnormalities in
cell cycle regulation, leading to increased activity of cyclin-dependent kinases 
(Cdks) due to the loss, or low expression of, Cdk inhibitors. In this study, we
showed that ibulocydine (an isobutyrate prodrug of the specific Cdk inhibitor,
BMK-Y101) is a candidate anti-cancer drug for HCC. Ibulocydine has high activity 
against Cdk7/cyclin H/Mat1 and Cdk9/cyclin T. Ibulocydine inhibited the growth of
HCC cells more effectively than other Cdk inhibitors, including olomoucine and
roscovitine, whereas ibulocydine as well as the other Cdk inhibitors and BMK-Y101
minimally influenced the growth of normal hepatocyte cells. Ibulocydine induced
apoptosis in HCC cells, most likely by inhibiting Cdk7 and Cdk9. In vitro
treatment of HCC cells with ibulocydine rapidly blocked phosphorylation of the
carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II, a
process mediated by Cdk7/9. Anti-apoptotic gene products such as Mcl-1, survivin,
and X-linked IAP (XIAP) are crucial for the survival of many cell types,
including HCC. Following the inhibition of RNA polymerase II phosphorylation,
ibulocydine caused rapid down-regulation of Mcl-1, survivin, and XIAP, thus
inducing apoptosis. Furthermore, ibulocydine effectively induced apoptosis in HCC
xenografts with no toxic side effects. These results suggest that ibulocydine is 
a strong candidate anti-cancer drug for the treatment of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3103345
PMID: 21478145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2012 Feb;28(2):182-7. doi: 10.1089/AID.2010.0211. Epub
2011 May 6.

Activation of P-TEFb at sites of dual HIV/TB infection, and inhibition of
MTB-induced HIV transcriptional activation by the inhibitor of CDK9,
Indirubin-3'-monoxime.

Toossi Z(1), Wu M, Hirsch CS, Mayanja-Kizza H, Baseke J, Aung H, Canaday DH,
Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4984, USA.
zahra.toossi@case.edu

At sites of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) infection, HIV-1 replication is
increased during tuberculosis (TB). Here we investigated the role of positive
transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb), comprised of CycT1 and CDK9, as the
cellular cofactor of HIV-1 Tat protein in transcriptional activation of HIV-1 in 
mononuclear cells from HIV-1-infected patients with pleural TB. Expression of
CycT1 in response to MTB was assessed in mononuclear cells from pleural fluid
(PFMC) and blood (PBMC) from HIV/TB patients with pleural TB, and in blood
monocytes (MN) from singly infected HIV-1-seropositive subjects. We then examined
whether the CDK9 inhibitor, Indirubin 3'-monoxime (IM), was effective in
inhibition of MTB-induced HIV-1 mRNA expression. We found higher expression of
CycT1 mRNA in PFMCs as compared to PBMCs from HIV/TB-coinfected subjects. MTB
induced the expression of CycT1 and HIV-1 gag/pol mRNA in both PFMCs from HIV/TB 
subjects and MN from HIV-1-infected subjects. CycT1 protein was also induced by
MTB stimulation in PFMCs from HIV/TB patients, and both MN and in vitro-derived
macrophages. Inhibition of CDK9 by IM in both PFMCs from HIV/TB and MN from
HIV-1-infected subjects in response to MTB led to inhibition of HIV-1 mRNA
expression. These data imply that IM may be useful as an adjunctive therapy in
control of HIV-1 replication in HIV/TB dually infected subjects.

PMCID: PMC3275925
PMID: 21453127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Gen Virol. 2011 Jul;92(Pt 7):1519-31. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.030494-0. Epub 2011
Mar 30.

Recruitment of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 to nuclear compartments during
cytomegalovirus late replication: importance of an interaction between viral
pUL69 and cyclin T1.

Feichtinger S(1), Stamminger T, Müller R, Graf L, Klebl B, Eickhoff J, Marschall 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Molecular Virology, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) are important regulators of cellular
processes and are functionally integrated into the replication of human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Recently, a regulatory impact of CDK activity on the
viral mRNA export factor pUL69 was shown. Here, specific aspects of the mode of
interaction between CDK9/cyclin T1 and pUL69 are described. Intracellular
localization was studied in the presence of a novel selective CDK9 inhibitor,
R22, which exerts anti-cytomegaloviral activity in vitro. A pronounced
R22-induced formation of nuclear speckled aggregation of pUL69 was demonstrated. 
Multi-labelling confocal laser-scanning microscopy revealed that CDK9 and cyclin 
T1 co-localized perfectly with pUL69 in individual speckles. The effects were
similar to those described recently for the broad CDK inhibitor roscovitine.
Co-immunoprecipitation and yeast two-hybrid analyses showed that cyclin T1
interacted with both CDK9 and pUL69. The interaction region of pUL69 for cyclin
T1 could be attributed to aa 269-487. Moreover, another component of CDK
inhibitor-induced speckled aggregates was identified with RNA polymerase II,
supporting earlier reports that strongly suggested an association of pUL69 with
transcription complexes. Interestingly, when using a UL69-deleted recombinant
HCMV, no speckled aggregates were formed by CDK inhibitor treatment. This
indicated that pUL69 is the defining component of aggregates and generally may
represent a crucial viral interactor of cyclin T1. In conclusion, these data
emphasize that HCMV inter-regulation with CDK9/cyclin T1 is at least partly based
on a pUL69-cylin T1 interaction, thus contributing to the importance of CDK9 for 
HCMV replication.

PMID: 21450947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Feb;227(2):609-17. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22760.

Cdk9 T-loop phosphorylation is regulated by the calcium signaling pathway.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Eukaryotic RNA polymerase II transcriptional elongation is a tightly regulated
process and is dependent upon positive transcription elongation factor-b
(P-TEFb). The core P-TEFb complex is composed of Cdk9 and Cyclin T and is
essential for the expression of most protein coding genes. Cdk9 kinase function
is dependent upon phosphorylation of Thr186 in its T-loop. In this study, we
examined kinases and signaling pathways that influence Cdk9 T-loop
phosphorylation. Using an RNAi screen in HeLa cells, we found that Cdk9 T-loop
phosphorylation is regulated by Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase 1D (CaMK1D).
Using small molecules inhibitors in HeLa cells and primary CD4(+) T lymphocytes, 
we found that the Ca(2+) signaling pathway is required for Cdk9 T-loop
phosphorylation. Inhibition of Ca(2+) signaling led to dephosphorylation of
Thr186 on Cdk9. In reporter plasmid assays, inhibition of the Ca(2+) signaling
pathway repressed the PCNA promoter and HIV-1 Tat transactivation of the HIV-1
LTR, but not HTLV-1 Tax transactivation of the HTLV-1 LTR, suggesting that
perturbation of the Ca(2+) pathway and reduction of Cdk9 T-loop phosphorylation
inhibits transcription units that have a rigorous requirement for P-TEFb
function.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3146566
PMID: 21448926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Clin Invest. 2011 Apr;121(4):1549-60. doi: 10.1172/JCI44539. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

CD4+ T cells from elite controllers resist HIV-1 infection by selective
upregulation of p21.

Chen H(1), Li C, Huang J, Cung T, Seiss K, Beamon J, Carrington MF, Porter LC,
Burke PS, Yang Y, Ryan BJ, Liu R, Weiss RH, Pereyra F, Cress WD, Brass AL,
Rosenberg ES, Walker BD, Yu XG, Lichterfeld M.

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Elite controllers represent a unique group of HIV-1-infected persons with
undetectable HIV-1 replication in the absence of antiretroviral therapy. However,
the mechanisms contributing to effective viral immune defense in these patients
remain unclear. Here, we show that compared with HIV-1 progressors and
HIV-1-negative persons, CD4+ T cells from elite controllers are less susceptible 
to HIV-1 infection. This partial resistance to HIV-1 infection involved less
effective reverse transcription and mRNA transcription from proviral DNA and was 
associated with strong and selective upregulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor p21 (also known as cip-1 and waf-1). Experimental blockade of p21 in
CD4+ T cells from elite controllers resulted in a marked increase of viral
reverse transcripts and mRNA production and led to higher enzymatic activities of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), which serves as a transcriptional coactivator
of HIV-1 gene expression. This suggests that p21 acts as a barrier against HIV-1 
infection in CD4+ T cells from elite controllers by inhibiting a cyclin-dependent
kinase required for effective HIV-1 replication. These data demonstrate a
mechanism of host resistance to HIV-1 in elite controllers and may open novel
perspectives for clinical strategies to prevent or treat HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC3069774
PMID: 21403397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Br J Pharmacol. 2011 Jul;163(5):1086-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01309.x.

Roscovitine blocks leukocyte extravasation by inhibition of cyclin-dependent
kinases 5 and 9.

Berberich N(1), Uhl B, Joore J, Schmerwitz UK, Mayer BA, Reichel CA, Krombach F, 
Zahler S, Vollmar AM, Fürst R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Biology, University of Munich, Munich, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Roscovitine, a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
that induces tumour cell death, is under evaluation as an anti-cancer drug. By
triggering leukocyte apoptosis, roscovitine can also enhance the resolution of
inflammation. Beyond death-inducing properties, we tested whether roscovitine
affects leukocyte-endothelial cell interaction, a vital step in the onset of
inflammation.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions were evaluated in 
venules of mouse cremaster muscle, using intravital microscopy. In primary human 
endothelial cells, we studied the influence of roscovitine on adhesion molecules 
and on the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathway. A cellular kinome array, in vitro
CDK profiling and RNAi methods were used to identify targets of roscovitine.
KEY RESULTS: In vivo, roscovitine attenuated the tumour necrosis factor-a
(TNF-a)-induced leukocyte adherence to and transmigration through, the
endothelium. In vitro, roscovitine strongly inhibited TNF-a-evoked expression of 
endothelial adhesion molecules (E-selectin, intercellular cell adhesion molecule,
vascular cell adhesion molecule). Roscovitine blocked NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene
transcription, but not the NF-<U+03BA>B activation cascade [inhibitor of <U+03BA>B (I<U+03BA>B) kinase
activity, I<U+03BA>B-a degradation, p65 translocation]. Using a cellular kinome array
and an in vitro CDK panel, we found that roscovitine inhibited protein kinase A, 
ribosomal S6 kinase and CDKs 2, 5, 7 and 9. Experiments using kinase inhibitors
and siRNA showed that the decreased endothelial activation was due solely to
blockade of CDK5 and CDK9 by roscovitine.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our study highlights a novel mode of action for
roscovitine, preventing endothelial activation and leukocyte-endothelial cell
interaction by inhibition of CDK5 and 9. This might expand its usage as a
promising anti-inflammatory compound.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3130954
PMID: 21391976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 May 15;17(10):3443-54. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1071. 
Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Molecular karyotypes of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells at disease onset reveal 
distinct copy number alterations in chemosensitive versus refractory Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Slovak ML(1), Bedell V, Hsu YH, Estrine DB, Nowak NJ, Delioukina ML, Weiss LM,
Smith DD, Forman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Hematology/Stem Cell Transplantation,
City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the recurring DNA copy number alterations (CNA) in
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) by microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) using laser capture microdissected CD30(+) Hodgkin and
Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Archived tissues from 27 CD30(+) HL plus control samples
were analyzed by DNA microarrays. The HL molecular karyotypes were compared with 
the genomic profiles of germinal center B cells and treatment outcome
(chemotherapy responsive vs. primary refractory disease).
RESULTS: Gains and losses observed in more than 35% of HL samples were localized 
to 22 and 12 chromosomal regions, respectively. Frequent gains (>65%) were
associated with growth and proliferation, NF-<U+03BA>B activation, cell-cycle control,
apoptosis, and immune and lymphoid development. Frequent losses (>40%) observed
encompassed tumor suppressor genes (SPRY1, NELL1, and ID4, inhibitor of DNA
binding 4), transcriptional repressors (TXNIP, thioredoxin interacting protein), 
SKP2 (S-phase kinase-associated protein 2; ubiquitin ligase component), and an
antagonist of NF-<U+03BA>B activation (PPARGC1A). In comparison to the germinal center
profiles, the most frequent imbalances in HL were losses in 5p13 (AMACR, GDNF,
and SKP2), and gains in 7q36 (SHH, sonic hedgehog homolog) and 9q34 (ABL1, CDK9, 
LCN2, and PTGES). Gains (>35%) in the HL chemoresponsive patients housed genes
known to regulate T-cell trafficking or NF-<U+03BA>B activation (CCL22, CX3CL1, CCL17,
DOK4, and IL10), whereas the refractory samples showed frequent loss of 4q27
(interleukin; IL21/IL2) and 17p12, and gain of 19q13.3 (BCL3/RELB).
CONCLUSION: We identified nonrandom CNAs in the molecular karyotypes of classical
HL. Several recurring genetic lesions correlated with disease outcome. These
findings may be useful prognostic markers in the counseling and management of
patients and for the development of novel therapeutic approaches in primary
refractory HL.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3096736
PMID: 21385932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 29;286(17):15171-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.184374. Epub
2011 Mar 4.

G-actin participates in RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription elongation by
recruiting positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb).

Qi T(1), Tang W, Wang L, Zhai L, Guo L, Zeng X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of MOE and the Institute of Genetics
and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, Jilin 130024, China.

Actin is a key regulator of RNA polymerase (Pol) II-dependent transcription.
Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), a Cdk9/cyclin T1
heterodimer, has been reported to play a critical role in transcription
elongation. However, the relationship between actin and P-TEFb is still not
clear. In this study, actin was found to interact with Cdk9, a catalytic subunit 
of P-TEFb, in elongation complexes. Using immunofluorescence and
immunoprecipitation assays, Cdk9 was found to bind to G-actin through the
conserved Thr-186 in the T-loop. Overexpression and in vitro kinase assays showed
that G-actin promotes P-TEFb-dependent phosphorylation of the Pol II C-terminal
domain. An in vitro transcription experiment revealed that the interaction
between G-actin and Cdk9 stimulated Pol II transcription elongation. ChIP and
immobilized template assays indicated that actin recruited Cdk9 to a
transcriptional template in vivo and in vitro. Using cytokine IL-6-inducible p21 
gene expression system, we revealed that actin recruited Cdk9 to endogenous gene.
Moreover, overexpression of actin and Cdk9 increased histone H3 acetylation and
acetylized histone H3 binding to a transcriptional template through the
interaction with histone acetyltransferase, p300. Taken together, our results
suggested that actin participates in transcription elongation by recruiting Cdk9 
for phosphorylation of the Pol II C-terminal domain, and the actin-Cdk9
interaction promotes chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3083233
PMID: 21378166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cell Cycle. 2011 Mar 15;10(6):977-88. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Expression analysis and molecular targeting of cyclin-dependent kinases in
advanced melanoma.

Abdullah C(1), Wang X, Becker D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 May 1;10(9):1349.

A major focus of melanoma research continues to be the search for genes/proteins 
that may be suitable targets for molecular therapy of primary and metastatic
melanoma. In line with this effort, the objective of the study presented herein
was to determine whether interfering with cell cycle progression and in
particular, the expression and function of select cyclin-dependent kinases, would
impair the biological features of advanced melanoma. We provide data, which
document that unlike nevi and melanoma in situ, primary and metastatic melanomas 
express high levels of CDK2, CDK1, and CDK5. Furthermore, we present the results 
of in vitro and preclinical in vivo studies, which demonstrate that treatment
with a small-molecule cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor that selectively blocks
the function of CDK2, CDK5, CDK1, and CDK9, leads not only to inhibition of
melanoma cell proliferation and apoptosis of melanoma cells, but also impairs the
growth of human melanoma xenografts.

PMCID: PMC3100877
PMID: 21358262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Mol Graph Model. 2011 Apr;29(6):800-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2011.01.003. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

Generation and validation of the first predictive pharmacophore model for
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 inhibitors.

Fang C(1), Xiao Z, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resources Utilization of Chinese
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education & Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

A three-dimensional (3D) pharmacophore modelling approach was applied to a
diverse data set of known cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) inhibitors. Diversity 
sampling and principal components analysis (PCA) were employed to ensure the
rational selection of representative training sets. Twelve statistically robust
pharmacophore models were generated using the HypoGen algorithm. The resulting
models showed high homology and indicated great convergence in ascertaining
pharmacophoric features essential for CDK9 inhibitory activity. One of the best
models (Hypo 6) was assessed further by external predictive capability,
randomization test, as well as its performance in virtual screening. The
capability of the resulting models to reliably predict the inhibitory activity of
external data sets and discriminate active structures from general databases
would assist the identification and optimization of novel CDK9 inhibitors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21333571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Jun;30(3):889-97. doi: 10.1007/s10637-011-9641-5. Epub
2011 Feb 18.

In vitro antitumor mechanism of a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
CDKI-83.

Liu X(1), Lam F, Shi S, Fischer PM, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK.

Cancer is regarded as a proliferative disorder. Inhibition of cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs), which are the key regulators of the cell-cycle and RNA
transcription, represents an attractive strategy for cancer therapy. In this
study, we report the cellular mechanistic investigation of CDKI-83, a K
(i)-nanomolar CDK9 inhibitor. The compound shows effective anti-proliferative
activity in human tumour cell lines with GI(50) <1 µM, and is capable of inducing
apoptosis in A2780 human ovarian cancer cells as determined by the activated
caspase-3, Annexin V/PI double staining and accumulated cells at the sub-G1 phase
of cell-cycle. While A2780 cells were arrested in G(2)/M phase with CDKI-83
treatment, phosphorylation at Thr(320) of PP1a was significantly reduced,
indicating CDK1 inhibition. Importantly, this compound reduced phosphorylation at
Ser-2 of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) by inhibiting cellular CDK9 activity, and
down-regulated Mcl-1 and Bcl-2. These results suggest that combined inhibition of
CDK9 and CDK1 may result in the effective induction of apoptosis and CDKI-83 has 
the potential to be developed as an anti-cancer agent.

PMID: 21331744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cell Cycle. 2010 Dec 15;9(24):4786. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.24.14166.

Research highlights on a notable retrovirus and a popular guardian gene.

Vogiatzi P, Mason PJ.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4569-78.

PMCID: PMC3233483
PMID: 21248483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3505-19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1271. Epub 2011
Jan 17.

Ikaros interacts with P-TEFb and cooperates with GATA-1 to enhance transcription 
elongation.

Bottardi S(1), Zmiri FA, Bourgoin V, Ross J, Mavoungou L, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital
and Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, 5415 boulevard l'Assomption,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H1T 2M4.

Ikaros is associated with both gene transcriptional activation and repression in 
lymphocytes. Ikaros acts also as repressor of human <U+03B3>-globin (hu<U+03B3>-) gene
transcription in fetal and adult erythroid cells. Whether and eventually, how
Ikaros can function as a transcriptional activator in erythroid cells remains
poorly understood. Results presented herein demonstrate that Ikaros is a
developmental-specific activator of hu<U+03B3>-gene expression in yolk sac erythroid
cells. Molecular analysis in primary cells revealed that Ikaros interacts with
Gata-1 and favors Brg1 recruitment to the human ß-globin Locus Control Region and
the hu<U+03B3>-promoters, supporting long-range chromatin interactions between these
regions. Additionally, we demonstrate that Ikaros contributes to transcription
initiation and elongation of the hu<U+03B3>-genes, since it is not only required for TBP
and RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) assembly at the hu<U+03B3>-promoters but also for
conversion of Pol II into the elongation-competent phosphorylated form. In
agreement with the latter, we show that Ikaros interacts with Cyclin-dependent
kinase 9 (Cdk9), which contributes to efficient transcription elongation by
phosphorylating the C-terminal domain of the large subunit of Pol II on Serine 2,
and favours Cdk9 recruitment to hu<U+03B3>-promoters. Our results show that Ikaros
exerts dual functionality during gene activation, by promoting efficient
transcription initiation and elongation.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089448
PMID: 21245044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Br J Haematol. 2011 Feb;152(4):420-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08427.x.
Epub 2011 Jan 11.

Molecular and cellular effects of multi-targeted cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibition in myeloma: biological and clinical implications.

McMillin DW(1), Delmore J, Negri J, Buon L, Jacobs HM, Laubach J, Jakubikova J,
Ooi M, Hayden P, Schlossman R, Munshi NC, Lengauer C, Richardson PG, Anderson KC,
Mitsiades CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02115, USA.

Cell cycle regulators, such as cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), are appealing
targets for multiple myeloma (MM) therapy given the increased proliferative rates
of tumour cells in advanced versus early stages of MM. We hypothesized that a
multi-targeted CDK inhibitor with a different spectrum of activity compared to
existing CDK inhibitors could trigger distinct molecular sequelae with
therapeutic implications for MM. We therefore studied the small molecule
heterocyclic compound NVP-LCQ195/AT9311 (LCQ195), which inhibits CDK1, CDK2 and
CDK5, as well as CDK3 and CDK9. LCQ195 induced cell cycle arrest and eventual
apoptotic cell death of MM cells, even at sub-µmol/l concentrations, spared
non-malignant cells, and overcame the protection conferred to MM cells by stroma 
or cytokines of the bone marrow milieu. In MM cells, LCQ195 triggered decreased
amplitude of transcriptional signatures associated with oncogenesis, drug
resistance and stem cell renewal, including signatures of activation of key
transcription factors for MM cells e.g. myc, HIF-1a, IRF4. Bortezomib-treated MM 
patients whose tumours had high baseline expression of genes suppressed by LCQ195
had significantly shorter progression-free and overall survival than those with
low levels of these transcripts in their MM cells. These observations provide
insight into the biological relevance of multi-targeted CDK inhibition in MM.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4042406
PMID: 21223249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Leuk Res. 2011 Jun;35(6):821-30. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.12.010. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, P276-00 induces apoptosis in multiple myeloma 
cells by inhibition of Cdk9-T1 and RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription.

Manohar SM(1), Rathos MJ, Sonawane V, Rao SV, Joshi KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Piramal Life Sciences Limited, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.

P276-00 is a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor especially potent for
Cdk9-T1, Cdk4-D1 and Cdk1-B. Multiple myeloma (MM) is a B-cell malignancy
characterized by the accumulation of malignant plasma cells. Treatment of MM cell
lines with P276-00 resulted in apoptosis that correlated with transcription
inhibition and a significant decline in Mcl-1 protein levels with the appearance 
of cleaved PARP in these cells. In vivo studies of P276-00 confirmed antitumor
activity in RPMI-8226 xenograft. These results suggest that P276-00 causes
multiple myeloma cell death by disrupting the balance between cell survival and
apoptosis through inhibition of transcription and downregulation of Mcl-1.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21216463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. BMC Biochem. 2011 Jan 8;12:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-2.

Strand-specific PCR of UV radiation-damaged genomic DNA revealed an essential
role of DNA-PKcs in the transcription-coupled repair.

An J(1), Yang T, Huang Y, Liu F, Sun J, Wang Y, Xu Q, Wu D, Zhou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Toxicology and Oncology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, P R China.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic cells, there are two sub-pathways of nucleotide
excision repair (NER), the global genome (gg) NER and the transcription-coupled
repair (TCR). TCR can preferentially remove the bulky DNA lesions located at the 
transcribed strand of a transcriptional active gene more rapidly than those at
the untranscribed strand or overall genomic DNA. This strand-specific repair in a
suitable restriction fragment is usually determined by alkaline gel
electrophoresis followed by Southern blotting transfer and hybridization with an 
indirect end-labeled single-stranded probe. Here we describe a new method of TCR 
assay based on strand-specific-PCR (SS-PCR). Using this method, we have
investigated the role of DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit
(DNA-PKcs), a member of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related protein kinases
(PIKK) family, in the TCR pathway of UV-induced DNA damage.
RESULTS: Although depletion of DNA-PKcs sensitized HeLa cells to UV radiation, it
did not affect the ggNER efficiency of UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
(CPD) damage. We postulated that DNA-PKcs may involve in the TCR process. To test
this hypothesis, we have firstly developed a novel method of TCR assay based on
the strand-specific PCR technology with a set of smart primers, which allows the 
strand-specific amplification of a restricted gene fragment of UV
radiation-damaged genomic DNA in mammalian cells. Using this new method, we
confirmed that siRNA-mediated downregulation of Cockayne syndrome B resulted in a
deficiency of TCR of the UV-damaged dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene. In
addition, DMSO-induced silencing of the c-myc gene led to a decreased TCR
efficiency of UV radiation-damaged c-myc gene in HL60 cells. On the basis of the 
above methodology verification, we found that the depletion of DNA-PKcs mediated 
by siRNA significantly decreased the TCR capacity of repairing the UV-induced
CPDs damage in DHFR gene in HeLa cells, indicating that DNA-PKcs may also be
involved in the TCR pathway of DNA damage repair. By means of immunoprecipitation
and MALDI-TOF-Mass spectrometric analysis, we have revealed the interaction of
DNA-PKcs and cyclin T2, which is a subunit of the human transcription elongation 
factor (P-TEFb). While the P-TEFb complex can phosphorylate the serine 2 of the
carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II and promote transcription
elongation.
CONCLUSION: A new method of TCR assay was developed based the strand-specific-PCR
(SS-PCR). Our data suggest that DNA-PKcs plays a role in the TCR pathway of
UV-damaged DNA. One possible mechanistic hypothesis is that DNA-PKcs may function
through associating with CyclinT2/CDK9 (P-TEFb) to modulate the activity of RNA
Pol II, which has already been identified as a key molecule recognizing and
initializing TCR.

PMCID: PMC3022811
PMID: 21214942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Leukemia. 2011 Mar;25(3):411-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.290. Epub 2011 Jan 7.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor SNS-032 has single agent activity in AML
cells and is highly synergistic with cytarabine.

Walsby E(1), Lazenby M, Pepper C, Burnett AK.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre, Department of Haematology, School
of Medicine, Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff, UK. walsbyej@cf.ac.uk

SNS-032 (BMS-387032) is a selective cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor. In
this study, we evaluated its effects on primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
samples (n=87). In vitro exposure to SNS-032 for 48<U+2009>h resulted in a mean LD(50)
of 139±203<U+2009>nM; Cytarabine (Ara-C) was more than 35 times less potent in the same 
cohort. SNS-032-induced a dose-dependent increase in annexin V staining and
caspase-3 activation. At the molecular level, SNS-032 induced a marked
dephosphorylation of serine 2 and 5 of RNA polymerase (RNA Pol) II and inhibited 
the expression of CDK2 and CDK9 and dephosphorylated CDK7. Furthermore, the
combination of SNS-032 and Ara-C showed remarkable synergy that was associated
with reduced mRNA levels of the antiapoptotic genes XIAP, BCL2 and MCL1. In
conclusion, SNS-032 is effective as a single agent and in combination with Ara-C 
in primary AML blasts. Treatment with Ara-C alone significantly induced the
transcription of the antiapoptotic genes BCL2 and XIAP. In contrast, the
combination of SNS-032 and Ara-C suppressed the transcription of BCL2, XIAP and
MCL1. Therefore, the combination of SNS-032 and Ara-C may increase the
sensitivity of AML cells to the cytotoxic effects of Ara-C by inhibiting the
transcription of antiapoptotic genes.

PMID: 21212792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 1;10(1):28-32. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

A role for CDK9-cyclin K in maintaining genome integrity.

Yu DS(1), Cortez D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA. dsyu@emory.edu

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), with its cyclin T regulatory subunit, is a
component of the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complex,
which stimulates transcription elongation and also functions in
co-transcriptional histone modification, mRNA processing, and mRNA export. CDK9
also binds to cyclin K but the function of this CDK9-cyclin K complex is less
clear. We and others have recently shown that CDK9 functions directly in
maintaining genome integrity. This activity is restricted to CDK9-cyclin K.
Depletion of CDK9 or its cyclin K but not cyclin T regulatory subunit impairs
cell cycle recovery in response to replication stress and induces spontaneous DNA
damage in replicating cells. CDK9-cyclin K also interacts with ATR and other DNA 
damage response and DNA repair proteins. CDK9 accumulates on chromatin and limits
the amount of single-stranded DNA in response to replication stress.
Collectively, these data are consistent with a model in which CDK9 responds to
replication stress by localizing to chromatin to reduce the breakdown of stalled 
replication forks and promote recovery from replication arrest. The direct role
of CDK9-cyclin K in pathways that maintain genome integrity in response to
replication stress appear to be evolutionarily conserved.

PMCID: PMC3048070
PMID: 21200140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Blood. 2011 Jan 27;117(4):1260-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-289215. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

HIV-1 Vif promotes the G1- to S-phase cell-cycle transition.

Wang J(1), Reuschel EL, Shackelford JM, Jeang L, Shivers DK, Diehl JA, Yu XF,
Finkel TH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3615 Civic 
Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

HIV-1 depends on host-cell resources for replication, access to which may be
limited to a particular phase of the cell cycle. The HIV-encoded proteins Vpr
(viral protein R) and Vif (viral infectivity factor) arrest cells in the G2
phase; however, alteration of other cell-cycle phases has not been reported. We
show that Vif drives cells out of G1 and into the S phase. The effect of Vif on
the G1- to-S transition is distinct from its effect on G2, because G2 arrest is
Cullin5-dependent, whereas the G1- to-S progression is Cullin5-independent. Using
mass spectrometry, we identified 2 novel cellular partners of Vif, Brd4 and Cdk9,
both of which are known to regulate cell-cycle progression. We confirmed the
interaction of Vif and Cdk9 by immunoprecipitation and Western blot, and showed
that small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) specific for Cdk9 inhibit the Vif-mediated
G1- to-S transition. These data suggest that Vif regulates early cell-cycle
progression, with implications for infection and latency.

PMCID: PMC3320848
PMID: 21149631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Curr Med Chem. 2011;18(3):342-58.

Novel, selective CDK9 inhibitors for the treatment of HIV infection.

Németh G(1), Varga Z, Greff Z, Bencze G, Sipos A, Szántai-Kis C, Baska F, Gyuris 
A, Kelemenics K, Szathmáry Z, Minárovits J, Kéri G, Orfi L.

Author information: 
(1)Vichem Chemie Research Ltd., Budapest, Hungary.

Cyclin Dependent Kinases (CDKs) are important regulators of cell cycle and gene
expression. Since an up-to-date review about the pharmacological inhibitors of
CDK family (CDK1-10) is not available; therefore in the present paper we briefly 
summarize the most relevant inhibitors and point out the low number of selective 
inhibitors. Among CDKs, CDK9 is a validated pathological target in HIV infection,
inflammation and cardiac hypertrophy; however selective CDK9 inhibitors are still
not available. We present a selective inhibitor family of CDK9 based on the
4-phenylamino-6- phenylpyrimidine nucleus. We show a convenient synthetic method 
to prepare a useful intermediate and its derivatisation resulting in novel
compounds. The CDK9 inhibitory activity of the derivatives was measured in
specific kinase assay and the CDK inhibitory profile of the best ones (IC(50) <
100 nM) was determined. The most selective compounds had high selectivity over
CDK1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and showed at least one order of magnitude higher inhibitory 
activity over CDK4 inhibition. The most selective molecules were examined in
cytotoxicity assays and their ability to inhibit HIV-1 replication was determined
in cellular assays.

PMID: 21143121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5012-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.176628. Epub 2010 
Dec 2.

Transcription factor IIS cooperates with the E3 ligase UBR5 to ubiquitinate the
CDK9 subunit of the positive transcription elongation factor B.

Cojocaru M(1), Bouchard A, Cloutier P, Cooper JJ, Varzavand K, Price DH, Coulombe
B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7,
Canada.

Elongation of transcription by mammalian RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is regulated 
by specific factors, including transcription factor IIS (TFIIS) and positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). We show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
UBR5 associates with the CDK9 subunit of positive transcription elongation factor
b to mediate its polyubiquitination in human cells. TFIIS also binds UBR5 to
stimulate CDK9 polyubiquitination. Co-localization of UBR5, CDK9, and TFIIS along
specific regions of the <U+03B3> fibrinogen (<U+03B3>FBG) gene indicates that a ternary complex
involving these factors participates in the transcriptional regulation of this
gene. In support of this notion, overexpression of TFIIS not only modifies the
ubiquitination pattern of CDK9 in vivo but also increases the association of CDK9
with various regions of the <U+03B3>FBG gene. Notably, the TFIIS-mediated increase in
CDK9 loading is obtained during both basal and activated transcription of the
<U+03B3>FBG gene. This increased CDK9 binding is paralleled by an increase in the
recruitment of RNAPII along the <U+03B3>FBG gene and the phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain of the RNAPII largest subunit RPB1 on Ser-2, a known target of 
CDK9. Together, these results identify UBR5 as a novel E3 ligase that regulates
transcription and define an additional function of TFIIS in the regulation of
CDK9.

PMCID: PMC3037613
PMID: 21127351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 4;286(5):3798-804. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.196493. Epub 2010 
Nov 22.

Expression of a protein phosphatase 1 inhibitor, cdNIPP1, increases CDK9
threonine 186 phosphorylation and inhibits HIV-1 transcription.

Ammosova T(1), Yedavalli VR, Niu X, Jerebtsova M, Van Eynde A, Beullens M, Bollen
M, Jeang KT, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, Washington, DC 20001, USA.

CDK9/cyclin T1, a key enzyme in HIV-1 transcription, is negatively regulated by
7SK RNA and the HEXIM1 protein. Dephosphorylation of CDK9 on Thr(186) by protein 
phosphatase 1 (PP1) in stress-induced cells or by protein phosphatase M1A in
normally growing cells activates CDK9. Our previous studies showed that HIV-1 Tat
protein binds to PP1 through the Tat Q(35)VCF(38) sequence, which is similar to
the PP1-binding RVXF motif and that this interaction facilitates HIV-1
transcription. In the present study, we analyzed the effect of expression of the 
central domain of nuclear inhibitor of PP1 (cdNIPP1) in an engineered cell line
and also when cdNIPP1 was expressed as part of HIV-1 pNL4-3 in place of nef.
Stable expression of cdNIPP1 increased CDK9 phosphorylation on Thr(186) and the
association of CDK9 with 7SK RNA. The stable expression of cdNIPP1 disrupted the 
interaction of Tat and PP1 and inhibited HIV-1 transcription. Expression of
cdNIPP1 as a part of the HIV-1 genome inhibited HIV-1 replication. Our study
provides a proof-of-concept for the future development of PP1-targeting compounds
as inhibitors of HIV-1 replication.

PMCID: PMC3030381
PMID: 21098020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Feb;31(2):280-8. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.213934. Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Flavopiridol protects against inflammation by attenuating leukocyte-endothelial
interaction via inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase 9.

Schmerwitz UK(1), Sass G, Khandoga AG, Joore J, Mayer BA, Berberich N, Totzke F, 
Krombach F, Tiegs G, Zahler S, Vollmar AM, Fürst R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Biology, University of Munich,
Butenandtstrasse 5-13, Munich, Germany. robert.fuerst@cup.uni-muenchen.de.

OBJECTIVE: The cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor flavopiridol is currently 
being tested in clinical trials as anticancer drug. Beyond its cell
death-inducing action, we hypothesized that flavopiridol affects inflammatory
processes. Therefore, we elucidated the action of flavopiridol on
leukocyte-endothelial cell interaction and endothelial activation in vivo and in 
vitro and studied the underlying molecular mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Flavopiridol suppressed concanavalin A-induced hepatitis and
neutrophil infiltration into liver tissue. Flavopiridol also inhibited tumor
necrosis factor-a-induced leukocyte-endothelial cell interaction in the mouse
cremaster muscle. Endothelial cells were found to be the major target of
flavopiridol, which blocked the expression of endothelial cell adhesion molecules
(intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, and
E-selectin), as well as NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent transcription. Flavopiridol did not
affect inhibitor of <U+03BA>B (I<U+03BA>B) kinase, the degradation and phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>Ba,
nuclear translocation of p65, or nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) DNA-binding activity. 
By performing a cellular kinome array and a kinase activity panel, we found LIM
domain kinase-1 (LIMK1), casein kinase 2, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), protein 
kinase C (PKC), CDK4, CDK6, CDK8, and CDK9 to be influenced by flavopiridol.
Using specific inhibitors, as well as RNA interference (RNAi), we revealed that
only CDK9 is responsible for the action of flavopiridol.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights flavopiridol as a promising antiinflammatory
compound and inhibition of CDK9 as a novel approach for the treatment of
inflammation-associated diseases.

PMID: 21088252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Med Chem. 2010 Dec 23;53(24):8508-22. doi: 10.1021/jm100732t. Epub 2010 Nov 16.

A novel pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine is a potent inhibitor of cyclin-dependent
protein kinases 1, 2, and 9, which demonstrates antitumor effects in human tumor 
xenografts following oral administration.

Heathcote DA(1), Patel H, Kroll SH, Hazel P, Periyasamy M, Alikian M, Kanneganti 
SK, Jogalekar AS, Scheiper B, Barbazanges M, Blum A, Brackow J, Siwicka A, Pace
RD, Fuchter MJ, Snyder JP, Liotta DC, Freemont PS, Aboagye EO, Coombes RC,
Barrett AG, Ali S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Oncology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London
W12 0NN, England.

Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) are central to the appropriate regulation
of cell proliferation, apoptosis, and gene expression. Abnormalities in CDK
activity and regulation are common features of cancer, making CDK family members 
attractive targets for the development of anticancer drugs. Here, we report the
identification of a pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine derived compound, 4k (BS-194), as a
selective and potent CDK inhibitor, which inhibits CDK2, CDK1, CDK5, CDK7, and
CDK9 (IC50= 3, 30, 30, 250, and 90 nmol/L, respectively). Cell-based studies
showed inhibition of the phosphorylation of CDK substrates, Rb and the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain, down-regulation of cyclins A, E, and D1, and
cell cycle block in the S and G2/M phases. Consistent with these findings, 4k
demonstrated potent antiproliferative activity in 60 cancer cell lines tested
(mean GI50= 280 nmol/L). Pharmacokinetic studies showed that 4k is orally
bioavailable, with an elimination half-life of 178 min following oral dosing in
mice. When administered at a concentration of 25 mg/kg orally, 4k inhibited human
tumor xenografts and suppressed CDK substrate phosphorylation. These findings
identify 4k as a novel, potent CDK selective inhibitor with potential for oral
delivery in cancer patients.

PMID: 21080703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell. 2010 Nov 12;40(3):410-22. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.012.

Crosstalk between mRNA 3' end processing and transcription initiation.

Mapendano CK(1), Lykke-Andersen S, Kjems J, Bertrand E, Jensen TH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for mRNP Biogenesis and Metabolism, Department of Molecular Biology,
Aarhus University, C.F. Møllers Allé 3, Building 1130, DK-8000 Aarhus, Denmark.

Transcription and mRNA maturation are interdependent events. Although stimulatory
connections between these processes within the same round of transcription are
well described, functional coupling between separate transcription cycles remains
elusive. Comparing time-resolved transcription profiles of single-copy integrated
ß-globin gene variants, we demonstrate that a polyadenylation site mutation
decreases transcription initiation of the same gene. Upon depletion of the 3' end
processing and transcription termination factor PCF11, endogenous genes exhibit a
similar phenotype. Readthrough RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) engaged on
polyadenylation site-mutated transcription units sequester the transcription
initiation/elongation factors TBP, TFIIB and CDK9, leading to their depletion at 
the promoter. Additionally, high levels of TBP and TFIIB appear inside the gene
body, and Ser2-phosphorylated RNAPII accumulates at the promoter. Our data
demonstrate that 3' end formation stimulates transcription initiation and suggest
that coordinated recycling of factors from a gene terminator back to the promoter
is essential for sustaining continued transcription.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Chem Biol. 2010 Oct 29;17(10):1111-21. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.07.016.

Discovery and characterization of 2-anilino-4- (thiazol-5-yl)pyrimidine
transcriptional CDK inhibitors as anticancer agents.

Wang S(1), Griffiths G, Midgley CA, Barnett AL, Cooper M, Grabarek J, Ingram L,
Jackson W, Kontopidis G, McClue SJ, McInnes C, McLachlan J, Meades C, Mezna M,
Stuart I, Thomas MP, Zheleva DI, Lane DP, Jackson RC, Glover DM, Blake DG,
Fischer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cyclacel Limited, Dundee DD15JJ, Scotland, UK.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2010 Oct 29;17(10):1047-8.

The main difficulty in the development of ATP antagonist kinase inhibitors is
target specificity, since the ATP-binding motif is present in many proteins. We
introduce a strategy that has allowed us to identify compounds from a kinase
inhibitor library that block the cyclin-dependent kinases responsible for
regulating transcription, i.e., CDK7 and especially CDK9. The screening cascade
employs cellular phenotypic assays based on mitotic index and nuclear p53 protein
accumulation. This permitted us to classify compounds into transcriptional, cell 
cycle, and mitotic inhibitor groups. We describe the characterization of the
transcriptional inhibitor class in terms of kinase inhibition profile, cellular
mode of action, and selectivity for transformed cells. A structural selectivity
rationale was used to optimize potency and biopharmaceutical properties and led
to the development of a transcriptional inhibitor,
3,4-dimethyl-5-[2-(4-piperazin-1-yl-phenylamino)-pyrimidin-4-yl]-3H-thiazol-2-one
, with anticancer activity in animal models.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21035734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Chem Biol. 2010 Oct 29;17(10):1047-8. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.10.003.

CDK9 inhibitors push cancer cells over the edge.

Nowicki MW(1), Walkinshaw MD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Translational and Chemical Biology, University of Edinburgh, King's
Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH93JR, Scotland, UK.

Comment on
    Chem Biol. 2010 Oct 29;17(10):1111-21.

The trouble with CDK active-site inhibitors is their tendency to have off-target 
effects. This is not surprising, as the ATP binding sites of most protein kinases
are very similar. Wang et al. (2010) have used some clever screening approaches
to identify selective CDK9 inhibitors that drive cancer cells into apoptosis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21035725  [PubMed]


299. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Dec;24(12):2267-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0238. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

CDK9 regulates AR promoter selectivity and cell growth through serine 81
phosphorylation.

Gordon V(1), Bhadel S, Wunderlich W, Zhang J, Ficarro SB, Mollah SA, Shabanowitz 
J, Hunt DF, Xenarios I, Hahn WC, Conaway M, Carey MF, Gioeli D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, Department of Microbiology, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22908, USA.

Previously we determined that S81 is the highest stoichiometric phosphorylation
on the androgen receptor (AR) in response to hormone. To explore the role of this
phosphorylation on growth, we stably expressed wild-type and S81A mutant AR in
LHS and LAPC4 cells. The cells with increased wild-type AR expression grow faster
compared with parental cells and S81A mutant-expressing cells, indicating that
loss of S81 phosphorylation limits cell growth. To explore how S81 regulates cell
growth, we tested whether S81 phosphorylation regulates AR transcriptional
activity. LHS cells stably expressing wild-type and S81A mutant AR showed
differences in the regulation of endogenous AR target genes, suggesting that S81 
phosphorylation regulates promoter selectivity. We next sought to identify the
S81 kinase using ion trap mass spectrometry to analyze AR-associated proteins in 
immunoprecipitates from cells. We observed cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)9
association with the AR. CDK9 phosphorylates the AR on S81 in vitro.
Phosphorylation is specific to S81 because CDK9 did not phosphorylate the AR on
other serine phosphorylation sites. Overexpression of CDK9 with its cognate
cyclin, Cyclin T, increased S81 phosphorylation levels in cells. Small
interfering RNA knockdown of CDK9 protein levels decreased hormone-induced S81
phosphorylation. Additionally, treatment of LNCaP cells with the CDK9 inhibitors,
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole and Flavopiridol, reduced S81
phosphorylation further, suggesting that CDK9 regulates S81 phosphorylation.
Pharmacological inhibition of CDK9 also resulted in decreased AR transcription in
LNCaP cells. Collectively these results suggest that CDK9 phosphorylation of AR
S81 is an important step in regulating AR transcriptional activity and prostate
cancer cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2999477
PMID: 20980437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Virol Sin. 2010 Feb;25(1):1-7. doi: 10.1007/s12250-010-3080-x. Epub 2010 Feb 12.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 infected cell protein 22.

Lin FS(1), Ding Q, Guo H, Zheng AC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China.

As one of the immediate-early (IE) proteins of herpes simplex virus type 1
(HSV-1), ICP22 is a multifunctional viral regulator that localizes in the nucleus
of infected cells. It is required in experimental animal systems and some
nonhuman cell lines, but not in Vero or HEp-2 cells. ICP22 is extensively
phosphorylated by viral and cellular kinases and nucleotidylylated by casein
kinase II. It has been shown to be required for efficient expression of early (E)
genes and a subset of late (L) genes. ICP22, in conjunction with the UL13 kinase,
mediates the phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II. Both ICP22 and UL13 are
required for the activation of cdc2, the degradation of cyclins A and B and the
acquisition of a new cdc2 partner, the UL42 DNA polymerase processivity factor.
The cdc2-UL42 complex mediates postranscriptional modification of topoisomerase
IIa in an ICP22-dependent manner to promote L gene expression. In addition, ICP22
interacts with cdk9 in a Us3 kinase dependent fashion to phosphorylate RNA
polymerase II.

PMID: 20960278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Jan;79(1):185-96. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.069062. Epub 2010 Oct 
18.

Iron chelators of the di-2-pyridylketone thiosemicarbazone and 2-benzoylpyridine 
thiosemicarbazone series inhibit HIV-1 transcription: identification of novel
cellular targets--iron, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 2, and CDK9.

Debebe Z(1), Ammosova T, Breuer D, Lovejoy DB, Kalinowski DS, Kumar K, Jerebtsova
M, Ray P, Kashanchi F, Gordeuk VR, Richardson DR, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Medicine, Howard University,
Washington DC 20001, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Dec;80(6):1190. Karla, Pradeep K [removed].

HIV-1 transcription is activated by HIV-1 Tat protein, which recruits
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9)/cyclin T1 and other host transcriptional
coactivators to the HIV-1 promoter. Tat itself is phosphorylated by CDK2, and
inhibition of CDK2 by small interfering RNA, the iron chelator
2-hydroxy-1-naphthylaldehyde isonicotinoyl hydrazone (311), and the iron chelator
deferasirox (ICL670) inhibits HIV-1 transcription. Here we have analyzed a group 
of novel di-2-pyridylketone thiosemicarbazone- and 2-benzoylpyridine
thiosemicarbazone-based iron chelators that exhibit marked anticancer activity in
vitro and in vivo (Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:7670-7675, 2006; J Med Chem
50:3716-3729, 2007). Several of these iron chelators, in particular
2-benzoylpyridine 4-allyl-3-thiosemicarbazone (Bp4aT) and 2-benzoylpyridine
4-ethyl-3-thiosemicarbazone (Bp4eT), inhibited HIV-1 transcription and
replication at much lower concentrations than did 311 and ICL670. Neither Bp4aT
nor Bp4eT were toxic after a 24-h incubation. However, longer incubations for 48 
h or 72 h resulted in cytotoxicity. Analysis of the molecular mechanism of HIV-1 
inhibition showed that the novel iron chelators inhibited basal HIV-1
transcription, but not the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-dependent transcription or
transcription from an HIV-1 promoter with inactivated SP1 sites. The chelators
inhibited the activities of CDK2 and CDK9/cyclin T1, suggesting that inhibition
of CDK9 may contribute to the inhibition of HIV-1 transcription. Our study
suggests the potential usefulness of Bp4aT or Bp4eT in antiretroviral regimens,
particularly where resistance to standard treatment occurs.

PMCID: PMC3014282
PMID: 20956357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Eukaryot Cell. 2010 Dec;9(12):1901-12. doi: 10.1128/EC.00384-09. Epub 2010 Oct
15.

Functional characterization of a new member of the Cdk9 family in Aspergillus
nidulans.

Bathe F(1), Kempf C, Osmani SA, Osmani AH, Hettinger S, Wohlmann E, Fischer R.

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Applied Life Sciences,
Microbiology, Hertzstr. 16, 76187 Karlsruhe, Germany.
friederike.bathe@mbio.uka.de

Cdk9-like kinases in complex with T-type cyclins are essential components of the 
eukaryotic transcription elongation machinery. The full spectrum of Cdk9/cyclin T
targets, as well as the specific consequences of phosphorylations, is still
largely undefined. We identify and characterize here a Cdk9 kinase (PtkA) in the 
filamentous ascomycete Aspergillus nidulans. Deletion of ptkA had a lethal effect
in later stages of vegetative growth and completely impeded asexual development. 
Overexpression of ptkA affected directionality of polarized growth and the
initiation of new branching sites. A green fluorescent protein-tagged PtkA
version localized inside the nucleus during interphase, supporting a role of PtkA
in transcription elongation, as observed in other organisms. We also identified a
putative cyclin T homolog, PchA, in the A. nidulans genome and confirmed its
interaction with PtkA in vivo. Surprisingly, the Pcl-like cyclin PclA, previously
described to be involved in asexual development, was also found to interact with 
PtkA, indicating a possible role of PtkA in linking transcriptional activity with
development and/or morphogenesis in A. nidulans. This is the first report of a
Cdk9 kinase interacting with a Pcl-like cyclin, revealing interesting new aspects
about the involvement of this Cdk-subfamily in differential gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3008270
PMID: 20952582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genes Dev. 2010 Oct 15;24(20):2303-16. doi: 10.1101/gad.1968210.

CDK12 is a transcription elongation-associated CTD kinase, the metazoan ortholog 
of yeast Ctk1.

Bartkowiak B(1), Liu P, Phatnani HP, Fuda NJ, Cooper JJ, Price DH, Adelman K, Lis
JT, Greenleaf AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke Center for RNA Biology, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Drosophila contains one (dCDK12) and humans contain two (hCDK12 and hCDK13)
proteins that are the closest evolutionary relatives of yeast Ctk1, the catalytic
subunit of the major elongation-phase C-terminal repeat domain (CTD) kinase in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, CTDK-I. However, until now, neither CDK12 nor CDK13 has
been demonstrated to be a bona fide CTD kinase. Using Drosophila, we demonstrate 
that dCDK12 (CG7597) is a transcription-associated CTD kinase, the ortholog of
yCtk1. Fluorescence microscopy reveals that the distribution of dCDK12 on
formaldehyde-fixed polytene chromosomes is virtually identical to that of
hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), but is distinct from that of
P-TEFb (dCDK9 + dCyclin T). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments
confirm that dCDK12 is present on the transcribed regions of active Drosophila
genes. Compared with P-TEFb, dCDK12 amounts are lower at the 5' end and higher in
the middle and at the 3' end of genes (both normalized to RNAPII). Appropriately,
Drosophila dCDK12 purified from nuclear extracts manifests CTD kinase activity in
vitro. Intriguingly, we find that cyclin K is associated with purified dCDK12,
implicating it as the cyclin subunit of this CTD kinase. Most importantly, we
demonstrate that RNAi knockdown of dCDK12 in S2 cells alters the phosphorylation 
state of the CTD, reducing its Ser2 phosphorylation levels. Similarly, in human
HeLa cells, we show that hCDK13 purified from nuclear extracts displays CTD
kinase activity in vitro, as anticipated. Also, we find that chimeric
(yeast/human) versions of Ctk1 containing the kinase homology domains of
hCDK12/13 (or hCDK9) are functional in yeast cells (and also in vitro); using
this system, we show that a bur1(ts) mutant is rescued more efficiently by a
hCDK9 chimera than by a hCDK13 chimera, suggesting the following orthology
relationships: Bur1 <U+2194> CDK9 and Ctk1 <U+2194> CDK12/13. Finally, we show that siRNA
knockdown of hCDK12 in HeLa cells results in alterations in the CTD
phosphorylation state. Our findings demonstrate that metazoan CDK12 and CDK13 are
CTD kinases, and that CDK12 is orthologous to yeast Ctk1.

PMCID: PMC2956209
PMID: 20952539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Leukemia. 2011 Jan;25(1):89-100. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.233. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Chemoproteomics-based kinome profiling and target deconvolution of clinical
multi-kinase inhibitors in primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells.

Kruse U(1), Pallasch CP, Bantscheff M, Eberhard D, Frenzel L, Ghidelli S, Maier
SK, Werner T, Wendtner CM, Drewes G.

Author information: 
(1)Cellzome AG, Heidelberg, Germany.

The pharmacological induction of apoptosis in neoplastic B cells presents a
promising therapeutic avenue for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). We profiled a panel of clinical multi-kinase inhibitors for their ability 
to induce apoptosis in primary CLL cells. Whereas inhibitors targeting a large
number of receptor and intracellular tyrosine kinases including c-KIT, FLT3, BTK 
and SYK were comparatively inactive, the CDK inhibitors BMS-387032 and
flavopiridol showed marked efficacy similar to staurosporine. Using the kinobeads
proteomics method, kinase expression profiles and binding profiles of the
inhibitors to target protein complexes were quantitatively monitored in CLL
cells. The targets most potently affected were CDK9, cyclin T1, AFF3/4 and MLLT1,
which may represent four subunits of a deregulated positive transcriptional
elongation factor (p-TEFb) complex. Albeit with lower potency, both drugs also
bound the basal transcription factor BTF2/TFIIH containing CDK7. Staurosporine
and geldanamycin do not affect these targets and thus seem to exhibit a different
mechanism of action. The data support a critical role of p-TEFb inhibitors in CLL
that supports their future clinical development.

PMID: 20944678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Virol. 2010 Dec;84(24):12619-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01696-10. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

Cyclin T1/CDK9 interacts with influenza A virus polymerase and facilitates its
association with cellular RNA polymerase II.

Zhang J(1), Li G, Ye X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Immunology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, CAS, 1 Beichen
West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, People's Republic of China.

Influenza virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase scavenges the 5' cap from host
pre-mRNA to prime viral transcription initiation. It is also well established
that viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (vRNP) associates with cellular RNA
polymerase II (Pol II), on which viral replication depends. Here we report that
cyclin T1/CDK9 can interact with influenza virus polymerase and facilitate its
association with cellular Pol II. The immunodepletion of cyclin T1/CDK9 totally
abolished the association of vRNP with the C-terminal domain (CTD)
Ser-2-phosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II. Further studies showed that
overexpression of cyclin T1/CDK9 increased the transcription activity of vRNP,
while knockdown of cyclin T1/CDK9 impaired viral replication. Our results suggest
that cyclin T1/CDK9 serves as an adapter to mediate the interaction of vRNP and
RNA Pol II and promote viral transcription.

PMCID: PMC3004352
PMID: 20943989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. EMBO Rep. 2010 Nov;11(11):876-82. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.153. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9-cyclin K functions in the replication stress response.

Yu DS(1), Zhao R, Hsu EL, Cayer J, Ye F, Guo Y, Shyr Y, Cortez D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) is a well-characterized subunit of the positive 
transcription elongation factor b complex in which it regulates transcription
elongation in cooperation with cyclin T. However, CDK9 also forms a complex with 
cyclin K, the function of which is less clear. Using a synthetic lethal RNA
interference screen in human cells, we identified CDK9 as a component of the
replication stress response. Loss of CDK9 activity causes an increase in
spontaneous levels of DNA damage signalling in replicating cells and a decreased 
ability to recover from a transient replication arrest. This activity is
restricted to CDK9-cyclin K complexes and is independent of CDK9-cyclin T
complex. CDK9 accumulates on chromatin in response to replication stress and
limits the amount of single-stranded DNA in cells under stress. Furthermore, we
show that CDK9 and cyclin K interact with ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related 
protein and other checkpoint signalling proteins. These results reveal an
unexpectedly direct role for CDK9-cyclin K in checkpoint pathways that maintain
genome integrity in response to replication stress.

PMCID: PMC2966956
PMID: 20930849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Dec 15;649(1-3):390-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.030.
Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Berberine regulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and positive
transcription elongation factor b expression in diabetic adipocytes.

Zhou J(1), Zhou S.

Author information: 
(1)Base for Drug Clinical Trial, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400037, PR China.

Berberine has hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects on diabetic rats. This study
investigated the relationship between hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects of
berberine and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) (including cyclin-dependent kinase 9
(CDK9) and cyclin T1) in white adipose tissue of diabetic rats and RNA
interference-treated 3T3-L1 cells. Berberine promoted differentiation and
inhibited lipid accumulation of 3T3-L1 cells, further decreased PPARa/d/<U+03B3>, CDK9
and cyclin T1 mRNA and protein expression and decreased tumor necrosis factor a
content in supernatants of both control and RNA interference-treated 3T3-L1
cells. After a 16-week induction with 35 mg/kg streptozotocin (i.p.) and
high-carbohydrate/high-fat diet, diabetic rats were treated with 75, 150 and 300 
mg/kg berberine and 100 mg/kg fenofibrate or 4 mg/kg rosiglitazone for another 16
weeks. Berberine decreased white adipose tissue to body weight ratio and
adipocyte size and increased adipocyte number. Berberine upregulated PPARa/d/<U+03B3>,
CDK9 and cyclin T1 mRNA and protein expression in adipose tissue, decreased tumor
necrosis factor a and free fatty acid content and increased lipoprotein lipase
activity in serum and adipose tissue. Berberine modulated metabolic related PPARs
expression and differentiation related P-TEFb expression in adipocytes, which are
associated with its hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20868663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Exp Hematol. 2011 Jan;39(1):77-86.e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.09.003. Epub
2010 Sep 18.

MLL-AF9 and MLL-ENL alter the dynamic association of transcriptional regulators
with genes critical for leukemia.

Monroe SC(1), Jo SY, Sanders DS, Basrur V, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Slany RK, Hess
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to better understand how mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins deregulate the expression of genes critical for
leukemia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The transforming domain of one of the most common MLL
fusion partners, AF9, was immunopurified after expression in myeloblastic M1
cells, and associating proteins were identified by mass spectrometric analysis.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
was used to determine how binding of associating proteins compare across Hoxa9
and Meis1 in cell lines with and without MLL fusion proteins and how binding is
altered during gene down-regulation and differentiation.
RESULTS: Consistent with earlier purifications of ENL and AF4 from 293 cells, the
90 amino acid C-terminal domain of AF9 associates with many other MLL
translocation partners including Enl, Af4, Laf4, Af5q31, Ell, and Af10. This
complex, termed elongation assisting proteins (EAPs), also contains the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain kinase Cdk9/Cyclin T1/T2 (pTEFb) and the histone 
H3 lysine 79 methyltransferase Dot1L. Myeloid cells transformed by MLL fusions
show higher levels and a broader distribution of EAP components at genes critical
for leukemia. Inhibition of EAP components pTEFb and Dot1l show that both
contribute significantly to activation of Hoxa9 and Meis1 expression. EAP is
dynamically associated with the Hoxa9 and Meis1 loci in hematopoietic cells and
rapidly dissociates during induction of differentiation. In the presence of MLL
fusion proteins, its dissociation is prevented.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that MLL fusion proteins deregulate genes
critical for leukemia by excessive recruitment and impaired dissociation of EAP
from target loci.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3038424
PMID: 20854876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Chem Biol. 2010 Sep 24;17(9):931-6. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.07.012.

Halogen bonds form the basis for selective P-TEFb inhibition by DRB.

Baumli S(1), Endicott JA, Johnson LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, University of
Oxford, UK. Sonja.baumli@bioch.ox.ac.uk

Cdk9, the kinase of the positive transcription elongation factor b, is required
for processive transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II. Cdk9 inhibition
contributes to the anticancer activity of many Cdk inhibitors under clinical
investigation and hence there is interest in selective Cdk9 inhibitors. DRB
(5,6-dichlorobenzimidazone-1-ß-D-ribofuranoside) is a commonly used reagent for
Cdk9 inhibition in cell biology studies. The crystal structures of Cdk9 and Cdk2 
in complex with DRB reported here describe the molecular basis for the DRB
selectivity toward Cdk9. The DRB chlorine atoms form halogen bonds that are
specific for the Cdk9 kinase hinge region. Kinetic and thermodynamic experiments 
validate the structural findings and implicate the C-terminal residues of Cdk9 in
contributing to the affinity for DRB. These results open the possibility to
exploit halogen atoms in inhibitor design to specifically target Cdk9.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20851342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Exp Med. 2010 Sep 27;207(10):2081-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100414. Epub 2010 Aug
30.

IL-10 inhibits transcription elongation of the human TNF gene in primary
macrophages.

Smallie T(1), Ricchetti G, Horwood NJ, Feldmann M, Clark AR, Williams LM.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology Division, Imperial College London, London W6
8LH, UK.

IL-10 plays a central nonredundant role in limiting inflammation in vivo.
However, the mechanisms involved remain to be resolved. Using primary human
macrophages, we found that IL-10 inhibits selected inflammatory genes, primarily 
at a level of transcription. At the TNF gene, this occurs not through an
inhibition of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment and transcription initiation
but through a mechanism targeting the stimulation of transcription elongation by 
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 9. We demonstrated an unanticipated requirement for
a region downstream of the TNF 3' untranslated region (UTR) that contains the
nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) binding motif (<U+03BA>B4) both for induction of transcription
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and its inhibition by IL-10. IL-10 not only inhibits 
the recruitment of RelA to regions containing <U+03BA>B sites at the TNF gene but also
to those found at other LPS-induced genes. We show that although IL-10 elicits a 
general block in RelA recruitment to its genomic targets, the gene-specific
nature of IL-10's actions are defined through the differential recruitment of
CDK9 and the control of transcription elongation. At TNF, but not NFKBIA, the
consequence of RelA recruitment inhibition is a loss of CDK9 recruitment,
preventing the stimulation of transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC2947066
PMID: 20805562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 1;9(15):3119-26. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.15.12526.

Cyclin T1 overexpression induces malignant transformation and tumor growth.

Moiola C(1), De Luca P, Gardner K, Vazquez E, De Siervi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Sciences, University of Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 1;9(15):2933-4.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 1;9(15):2935.

Human PTE Fb is a protein kinase composed by CDK9 and Cyclin T that controls the 
elongation phase of RNA Pol II. This complex also affects the activation and
differentiation program of lymphoid cells. In this study we found that several
head and neck tumor cell lines overexpress PTE Fb. We also established that
Cyclin T1 is able to induce transformation in vitro, as we determined by foci and
colony formation assays. Nu/nu mice s.c. injected with stable transfected Cyclin 
T1 cells (NIH 3T3 Cyclin T1) developed tumors faster than animals injected with
control cells (NIH 3T3 beta-gal). In vitro, NIH 3T3 Cyclin T1 cells show
increased proliferation and CDK4-Rb phosphorylation. Even more, silencing E2F1
expression (shRNA E2F1) in NIH 3T3 cells resulted in a dramatic inhibition of
Cyclin T1-induced foci. All these data demonstrate for the first time the Cyclin 
T1 oncogenic function and suggest a role for this protein in controlling cell
cycle probably via Rb/E2F1 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3040930
PMID: 20714219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 1;9(15):2933-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.15.12698. Epub 2010 Aug 1.

Transcription elongation takes central stage: the P-TEFb connection.

Peterlin BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. matija.peterlin@ucsf.edu

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 1;9(15):3119-26.

PMID: 20703074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Jan;226(1):248-54. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22336.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 forms a complex with GATA4 and is involved in the
differentiation of mouse ES cells into cardiomyocytes.

Kaichi S(1), Takaya T, Morimoto T, Sunagawa Y, Kawamura T, Ono K, Shimatsu A,
Baba S, Heike T, Nakahata T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

The treatment of ES cells with trichostatin A (TSA), an HDAC inhibitor, induces
the acetylation of GATA4 as well as histones, and facilitates their
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. Recently, we demonstrated that
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), a core component of positive elongation
factor-b, is a novel GATA4-binding partner. The present study examined whether
Cdk9 forms a complex with GATA4 in mouse ES cells and is involved in their
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. Mouse ES cells and Nkx2.5/GFP ES cells, in
which green fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed under the control of the
cardiac-specific Nkx2.5 promoter, were induced to differentiate on feeder-free
gelatin-coated plates. Immunoprecipitation/Western blotting in nuclear extracts
from mouse ES cells demonstrated that Cdk9 as well as cyclin T1 interact with
GATA4 during myocardial differentiation. TSA treatment increased
Nkx2.5/GFP-positive cells and endogenous mRNA levels of Nkx2.5 and atrial
natriuretic factor. To determine the role of Cdk9 in myocardial cell
differentiation, we examined the effects of a dominant-negative form of Cdk9
(DN-Cdk9), which loses its kinase activity, and a Cdk9 kinase inhibitor,
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-ribofuranosyl-benzimidazole (DRB) on TSA-induced myocardial cell
differentiation. The introduction of the DN-Cdk9 inhibited TSA-induced increase
in GFP expression in Nkx2.5/GFP ES cells. The administration of DRB into ES cells
significantly inhibited TSA-induced increase of endogenous Nkx2.5 mRNA levels in 
ES cells as well as GFP expression in Nkx2.5/GFP ES cells. These findings
demonstrate that Cdk9 is involved in the differentiation of mouse ES cells into
cardiomyocytes by interacting with GATA4.

PMID: 20665673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Aug;9(8):2344-53. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0324. Epub 
2010 Jul 27.

Dinaciclib (SCH 727965), a novel and potent cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor.

Parry D(1), Guzi T, Shanahan F, Davis N, Prabhavalkar D, Wiswell D, Seghezzi W,
Paruch K, Dwyer MP, Doll R, Nomeir A, Windsor W, Fischmann T, Wang Y, Oft M, Chen
T, Kirschmeier P, Lees EM.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratory-Palo Alto, 901 California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA
94304-1104, USA. david.parry@merck.com

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) are key positive regulators of cell cycle
progression and attractive targets in oncology. SCH 727965 inhibits CDK2, CDK5,
CDK1, and CDK9 activity in vitro with IC(50) values of 1, 1, 3, and 4 nmol/L,
respectively. SCH 727965 was selected as a clinical candidate using a functional 
screen in vivo that integrated both efficacy and safety parameters. Compared with
flavopiridol, SCH 727965 exhibits superior activity with an improved therapeutic 
index. In cell-based assays, SCH 727965 completely suppressed retinoblastoma
phosphorylation, which correlated with apoptosis onset and total inhibition of
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation in >100 tumor cell lines of diverse origin and
background. Moreover, short exposures to SCH 727965 were sufficient for
long-lasting cellular effects. SCH 727965 induced regression of established solid
tumors in a range of mouse models following intermittent scheduling of doses
below the maximally tolerated level. This was associated with modulation of
pharmacodynamic biomarkers in skin punch biopsies and rapidly reversible,
mechanism-based effects on hematologic parameters. These results suggest that SCH
727965 is a potent and selective CDK inhibitor and a novel cytotoxic agent.

(c) 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20663931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 15;70(16):6587-97. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3578. Epub 
2010 Jul 27.

Responses in mantle cell lymphoma cells to SNS-032 depend on the biological
context of each cell line.

Chen R(1), Chubb S, Cheng T, Hawtin RE, Gandhi V, Plunkett W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas
Houston Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

SNS-032 is a potent inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdk) 2, 7, and 9 that 
regulate the cell cycle and transcription. Our studies in indolent primary
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells showed that SNS-032 inhibited transcription,
diminished the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1, and induced apoptosis. The present
study focuses on evaluating this compound in four proliferating mantle cell
lymphoma lines (Jeko-1, Granta 519, Mino, and SP-53). Consistent with its action 
against Cdk9 and Cdk7, SNS-032 inhibited the phosphorylation of RNA pol II in all
four lines and blocked RNA synthesis. The transcripts and protein levels of
short-lived proteins decreased, including cyclin D1 and Mcl-1. Cell growth was
inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner in all lines. Apoptosis was induced
in JeKo-1, Mino, and SP-53 cells without disrupting cell cycle distribution.
However, apoptosis was limited in Granta cells; rather, there was a significant
reduction of clonogenic survival. Small interfering RNA was used to specifically 
knock down Mcl-1 and cyclin D1 in JeKo-1 and Granta cells. Knocking down Mcl-1
induced significant apoptosis in Jeko-1 cells but not Granta cells. Reducing
cyclin D1, rather than Mcl-1, was associated with loss of clonogenic survival in 
Granta cells. Thus, these results indicated that mantle cell lymphoma cell lines 
have distinct mechanisms sustaining their survival, and the mechanism of action
of SNS-032 is dependent on the biological context of an individual line.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2929954
PMID: 20663900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Stem Cells. 2010 Sep;28(9):1571-80. doi: 10.1002/stem.476.

Adult stem cells exhibit global suppression of RNA polymerase II serine-2
phosphorylation.

Freter R(1), Osawa M, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. rasmus.freter@ludwig.ox.ac.uk

Adult stem cells, which are characterized by their capacity for self-renewal and 
differentiation, participate in tissue homeostasis and response to injury. They
are thought to enter a state of relative quiescence, known as reversible cell
cycle arrest, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly
characterized. Previous data from our laboratory has shown that housekeeping gene
expression is downregulated in melanocyte stem cells (MelSCs), suggesting a
global suppression of mRNA transcription. We now show, using antibodies against
specific phosphorylated forms of RNA polymerase II (RNApII), that adult MelSCs do
not undergo productive mRNA transcription elongation, while RNApII is activated
and initialized, ready to synthesize mRNA upon stimulation, and that the RNApII
kinase CDK9 is absent in adult MelSCs. Interestingly, other adult stem cells
also, including keratinocyte, muscle, spermatogonia, and hematopoietic stem
cells, showed a similar absence of RNApII phosphorylation. Although it is
difficult to show the functional significance of this observation in vivo, CDK9
inhibition resulted in enhanced survival of cells that are deprived from survival
factors. We conclude that the absence of productive mRNA transcription is an
early, specific, and conserved characteristic of adult stem cells. Downregulation
of mRNA transcription may lead to decreased rates of metabolism, and protection
from cellular and genetic damage. Screening heterogeneous tissues, including
tumors, for transcriptionally quiescent cells may result in the identification of
cells with stem cell-like phenotypes.

PMID: 20641035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Aug 15;20(16):4940-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.06.024.
Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Concise synthesis and CDK/GSK inhibitory activity of the missing 9-azapaullones.

Power DP(1), Lozach O, Meijer L, Grayson DH, Connon SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Synthesis and Chemical Biology, School of Chemistry, University of 
Dublin, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland.

A remarkably concise, chromatography-free route to the parent compound of the
paullone family of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors is reported. A
similar strategy allowed the synthesis of the hitherto missing 9-azapaullone and 
its protonated, N-oxidised and N-alkylated derivatives. Screening studies
identified an active and strongly selective inhibitor of CDK9/cyclin T.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20621478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1589-603. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01493.x.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) contributes to dengue
virus-stimulated induction of interleukin-8 (IL-8).

Li LL(1), Hu ST, Wang SH, Lee HH, Wang YT, Ping YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Dengue virus (DENV) is one of the most common infectious pathogens worldwide. One
major clinical and pathogenic feature of DENV infection is the elevation of
interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression; however, little is known about the molecular
mechanism of DENV-induced chemokine production. The positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb) composed of CDK9 and cyclin T1 stimulates gene
expression by enhancing RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II) processivity. This study
examined the possibility that P-TEFb mediates DENV-induced IL-8 expression. The
treatment of either a pharmacological inhibitor of P-TEFb,
5,6-dichloro-1-ß-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) or cyclin T1 siRNA prior to
DENV infection abolished the elevation of IL-8, indicating that P-TEFb is
essential for IL-8 induction. Moreover, DENV core protein participated in the
activation of IL-8 promoter in a P-TEFb-dependent manner. Immunostaining and
co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated the association between P-TEFb and
DENV core protein. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) results
indicated that P-TEFb and DENV core protein were recruited to the
transcriptionally active IL-8 gene promoter. Taken together, this study showed
that P-TEFb and DENV core protein work in concert to enhance IL-8 gene expression
by DENV infection. This is the first demonstration of P-TEFb being directly
involved in virus-induced host gene expression by interacting with a viral
structural protein.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20618343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Dec;1806(2):240-50. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2010.06.003. 
Epub 2010 Jun 27.

Dissecting the transcriptional functions of human DNA topoisomerase I by
selective inhibitors: implications for physiological and therapeutic modulation
of enzyme activity.

Capranico G(1), Marinello J, Baranello L.

Author information: 
(1)"G. Moruzzi" Department of Biochemistry, University of Bologna, Bologna,
Italy. giovanni.capranico@unibo.it

Camptothecin is a selective inhibitor of DNA topoisomerase I, and has effective
antitumor activity. Recently, camptothecin has been shown to activate the
transcription of low-abundance antisense RNAs at the HIF-1a gene locus in human
cancer cells in a Topoisomerase I-dependent manner. The activation of antisense
transcription is likely due to sustained drug interference with transcription
regulation mechanisms leading to a more open chromatin conformation and
de-repression/activation of antisense transcription. Camptothecin readily
inhibits Topoisomerase I in cells, and the enzyme inhibition activates
transcriptional Cdk (Cdk9 and/or Cdk7) activity leading to the
hyperphosphorylation of the CTD of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (RNAP
II). This results in an alteration of RNAP II regulation with specific effects at
transcription levels. Thus, the findings have documented that camptothecin can
interfere with specific transcription regulatory steps, impairing the balance of 
cellular antisense and sense transcripts at the HIF-1a gene locus. That may have 
a considerable impact on cancer therapy development particularly for
non-responsive human tumors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20600630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Proteome Res. 2010 Sep 3;9(9):4464-75. doi: 10.1021/pr100217d.

Differential proteomics based on 18O labeling to determine the cyclin dependent
kinase 9 interactome.

Bezstarosti K(1), Ghamari A, Grosveld FG, Demmers JA.

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Center and Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Although enzyme catalyzed 18O labeling has been used as a tool in quantitative
proteomics, this type of labeling has not yielded the same impact yet as
alternative techniques for quantitation like SILAC or labeling with chemical mass
tags. The practical difficulties involved in 18O labeling, most importantly the
occurrence of incomplete labeling and, as a result, the difficulties in data
analysis and interpretation have hampered its implementation in high-throughput
comparative proteomics protocols. In this paper, we have optimized the 18O
labeling procedure to such an extent that complete labeling can be achieved in a 
routine manner. We have implemented this approach into a protein-protein
interaction analysis pipeline to differentiate between bona fide interaction
partners of the low-level expressing cell cycle regulator cyclin-dependent kinase
9 (Cdk9) and nonspecifically binding or background proteins. Previously known as 
well as novel interaction partners of Cdk9 were found, among which most notably
the Mediator complex and several other proteins involved in transcriptional
regulation. We show here that a differential proteomics approach based on 18O
labeling provides a valuable method for high-confidence determination of protein 
interaction partners and is easily implemented in protein network analysis
workflows.

PMID: 20593818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Oligonucleotides. 2010 Aug;20(4):199-206. doi: 10.1089/oli.2010.0239.

Longer 19-base pair short interfering RNA duplexes rather than shorter duplexes
trigger RNA interference.

Sierant M(1), Kazmierczak-Baranska J, Paduszynska A, Sobczak M, Pietkiewicz A,
Nawrot B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Centre of Molecular and Macromolecular
Studies, Polish Academy of Sciences, Lodz, Poland.

Short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are valuable reagents for sequence-specific
inhibition of gene expression via the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. Recently, 
it was suggested that 16-bp siRNAs are effective RNAi triggers and superior to
"classical" 19-bp siRNAs. This contradiction with generally accepted knowledge
prompted us to reinvestigate this issue. Here, in a series of experiments
performed with siRNA duplexes of various lengths (from 19 to 15 bp) designed to
silence either overexpressed enhanced green fluorescent protein or endogenously
expressed CDK9, we demonstrate that 19-bp siRNAs are more active silencers than
shorter corresponding duplexes. The discrepancy between our results and those
questioned appears to be due to different modes of shortening the duplex (either 
at the 3'-end or at the 5'-end, with respect to polarity of the guide strand).
Importantly, duplexes with intact 5'-ends but shortened at their 3'-ends retain
target site specificity, whereas those shortened at the 5'-end are complementary 
to different target sites located upstream.

PMID: 20575617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):29713-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.125997. Epub
2010 Jun 15.

P-TEFb kinase complex phosphorylates histone H1 to regulate expression of
cellular and HIV-1 genes.

O'Brien SK(1), Cao H, Nathans R, Ali A, Rana TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Transcription of HIV-1 genes depends on the RNA polymerase II kinase and
elongation factor positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), the
complex of cyclin T1 and CDK9. Recent evidence suggests that regulation of
transcription by P-TEFb involves chromatin binding and modifying factors. To
determine how P-TEFb may connect chromatin remodeling to transcription, we
investigated the relationship between P-TEFb and histone H1. We identify histone 
H1 as a substrate for P-TEFb involved in cellular and HIV-1 transcription. We
show that P-TEFb interacts with H1 and that P-TEFb inhibition by RNAi,
flavopiridol, or dominant negative CDK9 expression correlates with loss of
phosphorylation and mobility of H1 in vivo. Importantly, P-TEFb directs H1
phosphorylation in response to wild-type HIV-1 infection, but not Tat-mutant
HIV-1 infection. Our results show that P-TEFb phosphorylates histone H1 at a
specific C-terminal phosphorylation site. Expression of a mutant H1.1 that cannot
be phosphorylated by P-TEFb also disrupts Tat transactivation in an HIV reporter 
cell line as well as transcription of the c-fos and hsp70 genes in HeLa cells. We
identify histone H1 as a novel P-TEFb substrate, and our results suggest new
roles for P-TEFb in both cellular and HIV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2943301
PMID: 20551309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nature. 2010 Jun 10;465(7299):747-51. doi: 10.1038/nature09131.

Crystal structure of HIV-1 Tat complexed with human P-TEFb.

Tahirov TH(1), Babayeva ND, Varzavand K, Cooper JJ, Sedore SC, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-7696, USA. ttahirov@unmc.edu

Regulation of the expression of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genome is 
accomplished in large part by controlling transcription elongation. The viral
protein Tat hijacks the host cell's RNA polymerase II elongation control
machinery through interaction with the positive transcription elongation factor, 
P-TEFb, and directs the factor to promote productive elongation of HIV mRNA. Here
we describe the crystal structure of the Tat.P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat,
human Cdk9 (also known as CDK9), and human cyclin T1 (also known as CCNT1). Tat
adopts a structure complementary to the surface of P-TEFb and makes extensive
contacts, mainly with the cyclin T1 subunit of P-TEFb, but also with the T-loop
of the Cdk9 subunit. The structure provides a plausible explanation for the
tolerance of Tat to sequence variations at certain sites. Importantly, Tat
induces significant conformational changes in P-TEFb. This finding lays a
foundation for the design of compounds that would specifically inhibit the
Tat.P-TEFb complex and block HIV replication.

PMCID: PMC2885016
PMID: 20535204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Invest New Drugs. 2011 Oct;29(5):921-31. doi: 10.1007/s10637-010-9448-9. Epub
2010 Jun 4.

Cell death induction in resting lymphocytes by pan-Cdk inhibitor, but not by
Cdk4/6 selective inhibitor.

Kobayashi M(1), Takahashi-Suzuki I, Shimomura T, Iwasawa Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Merck Research Laboratories, Banyu Tsukuba Research
Institute, 3 Okubo, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan.

Immunosuppression is one of the common side effects of many anti-tumor agents
targeting proliferating cells. We previously reported the development of a new
class of pan-cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor compounds that induce
immunosuppression in rodents. Here, we demonstrated that a pan-Cdk inhibitor,
Compound 1 very rapidly reduced white blood cells in mice, only 8 h after
administration. Compound 1 induced death of peripheral blood cells or purified
resting (non-stimulated) lymphocytes ex vivo. Cell death was induced very
rapidly, after 4 h of incubation, suggesting that acute immunosuppression
observed in rodents might be, at least in part, due to direct cytotoxic effects
of Compound 1 on resting lymphocytes. While cell cycle-related Cdks were not
activated, the carboxyl terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA
polymerase II was phosphorylated, indicating activation of Cdk7 or Cdk9, which
phosphorylates this domain, in resting lymphocytes. Indeed, the pan-Cdk inhibitor
suppressed CTD phosphorylation in resting cells at the dose required for cell
death induction. Inhibition of Cdk7 or Cdk9 by Compound 1 was also confirmed by
suppression of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-dependent transcription activity in
the human cancer cell line U2OS. Interestingly, a Cdk4/6 inhibitor with
selectivity against Cdk7 and Cdk9 did not induce cell death in resting
lymphocytes. These results suggest that CTD phosphorylation possibly by Cdk7 or
Cdk9 might be important for survival of resting lymphocytes and that Cdk
inhibitors without inhibitory activity on these kinases might be an attractive
agent for cancer chemotherapy.

PMID: 20524038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 25;397(2):245-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.092. Epub 2010 May 20.

55K isoform of CDK9 associates with Ku70 and is involved in DNA repair.

Liu H(1), Herrmann CH, Chiang K, Sung TL, Moon SH, Donehower LA, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Positive elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is a cellular protein kinase that is
required for RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) transcriptional elongation of protein
coding genes. P-TEFb is a set of different molecular complexes, each containing
CDK9 as the catalytic subunit. There are two isoforms of the CDK9 protein - the
major 42KDa CDK9 isoform and the minor 55KDa isoform that is translated from an
in-frame mRNA that arises from an upstream transcriptional start site. We found
that shRNA depletion of the 55K CDK9 protein in HeLa cells induces apoptosis and 
double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs). The levels of apoptosis and DSBs induced by the 
depletion were reduced by expression of a 55K CDK9 protein variant resistant to
the shRNA, indicating that these phenotypes are the consequence of depletion of
the 55K protein and not off-target effects. We also found that the 55K CDK9
protein, but not the 42K CDK9 protein, specifically associates with Ku70, a
protein involved in DSB repair. Our findings suggest that the 55K CDK9 protein
may function in repair of DNA through an association with Ku70.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2900499
PMID: 20493174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun 20;28(18):3015-22. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.26.1347. Epub
2010 May 17.

Phase I and pharmacologic study of SNS-032, a potent and selective Cdk2, 7, and 9
inhibitor, in patients with advanced chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple
myeloma.

Tong WG(1), Chen R, Plunkett W, Siegel D, Sinha R, Harvey RD, Badros AZ,
Popplewell L, Coutre S, Fox JA, Mahadocon K, Chen T, Kegley P, Hoch U, Wierda WG.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: SNS-032 is a highly selective and potent inhibitor of cyclin-dependent
kinases (Cdks) 2, 7, and 9, with in vitro growth inhibitory effects and ability
to induce apoptosis in malignant B cells. A phase I dose-escalation study of
SNS-032 was conducted to evaluate safety, pharmacokinetics, biomarkers of
mechanism-based pharmacodynamic (PD) activity, and clinical efficacy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Parallel cohorts of previously treated patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and multiple myeloma (MM) received SNS-032 as 
a loading dose followed by 6-hour infusion weekly for 3 weeks of each 4-week
course.
RESULTS: There were 19 patients with CLL and 18 with MM treated. Tumor lysis
syndrome was the dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) for CLL, the maximum-tolerated dose
(MTD) was 75 mg/m(2), and the most frequent grade 3 to 4 toxicity was
myelosuppression. One patient with CLL had more than 50% reduction in measurable 
disease without improvement in hematologic parameters. Another patient with low
tumor burden had stable disease for four courses. For patients with MM, no DLT
was observed and MTD was not identified at up to 75 mg/m(2), owing to early study
closure. Two patients with MM had stable disease and one had normalization of
spleen size with treatment. Biomarker analyses demonstrated mechanism-based PD
activity with inhibition of Cdk7 and Cdk9, decreases in Mcl-1 and XIAP expression
level, and associated CLL cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: SNS-032 demonstrated mechanism-based target modulation and limited
clinical activity in heavily pretreated patients with CLL and MM. Further
single-agent, PD-based, dose and schedule modification is warranted to maximize
clinical efficacy.

PMID: 20479412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Cell. 2010 May 14;38(3):439-51. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.04.012.

HIV-1 Tat assembles a multifunctional transcription elongation complex and stably
associates with the 7SK snRNP.

Sobhian B(1), Laguette N, Yatim A, Nakamura M, Levy Y, Kiernan R, Benkirane M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Institut de Génétique Humaine,
CNRS-UPR1142, Montpellier, France. bijan.sobhian@igh.cnrs.fr

HIV-1 transactivator Tat has greatly contributed to our understanding of
transcription elongation by RNAPII. We purified HIV-1 Tat-associated factors from
HeLa nuclear extract and show that Tat forms two distinct and stable complexes.
Tatcom1 consists of the core active P-TEFb, MLL-fusion partners involved in
leukemia (AF9, AFF4, AFF1, ENL, and ELL), and PAF1 complex. Importantly, Tatcom1 
formation relies on P-TEFb while optimal CDK9 CTD-kinase activity is AF9
dependent. MLL-fusion partners and PAF1 are required for Tat transactivation.
Tatcom2 is composed of CDK9, CycT1, and 7SK snRNP lacking HEXIM. Tat remodels 7SK
snRNP by interacting directly with 7SK RNA, leading to the formation of a
stress-resistant 7SK snRNP particle. Besides the identification of factors
required for Tat transactivation and important for P-TEFb function, our data show
a coordinated control of RNAPII elongation by different classes of transcription 
elongation factors associated in a single complex and acting at the same
promoter.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3595998
PMID: 20471949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell. 2010 May 14;38(3):428-38. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.04.013.

HIV-1 Tat and host AFF4 recruit two transcription elongation factors into a
bifunctional complex for coordinated activation of HIV-1 transcription.

He N(1), Liu M, Hsu J, Xue Y, Chou S, Burlingame A, Krogan NJ, Alber T, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Recruitment of the P-TEFb kinase by HIV-1 Tat to the viral promoter triggers the 
phosphorylation and escape of RNA polymerase II from promoter-proximal pausing.
It is unclear, however, if Tat recruits additional host factors that further
stimulate HIV-1 transcription. Using a sequential affinity-purification scheme,
we have identified human transcription factors/coactivators AFF4, ENL, AF9, and
elongation factor ELL2 as components of the Tat-P-TEFb complex. Through the
bridging functions of Tat and AFF4, P-TEFb and ELL2 combine to form a
bifunctional elongation complex that greatly activates HIV-1 transcription.
Without Tat, AFF4 can mediate the ELL2-P-TEFb interaction, albeit inefficiently. 
Tat overcomes this limitation by bringing more ELL2 to P-TEFb and stabilizing
ELL2 in a process that requires active P-TEFb. The ability of Tat to enable two
different classes of elongation factors to cooperate and coordinate their actions
on the same polymerase enzyme explains why Tat is such a powerful activator of
HIV-1 transcription.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3085314
PMID: 20471948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cell Cycle. 2010 May;9(9):1697-705. Epub 2010 May 29.

CYCLINg through transcription: posttranslational modifications of P-TEFb regulate
transcription elongation.

Cho S(1), Schroeder S, Ott M.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

The cyclin T/CDK9 complex, also called positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb) phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of the large fragment of the RNA
polymerase II. This action is a hallmark of the transition from transcription
initiation to elongation. P-TEFb is itself modified by phosphorylation and
ubiquitination. Recently, the core components of P-TEFb, cyclin T1 and CDK9, were
identified as novel substrates of histone acetyltransferases. Here, we review how
posttranslational modifications regulate the activity of the P-TEFb complex and
discuss how acetylation of the complex optimizes transcription elongation in the 
context of other posttranslational modifications.

PMCID: PMC2956491
PMID: 20436276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;16(10):2792-802. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3112.
Epub 2010 Apr 20.

New molecular and biological mechanism of antitumor activities of KW-2478, a
novel nonansamycin heat shock protein 90 inhibitor, in multiple myeloma cells.

Nakashima T(1), Ishii T, Tagaya H, Seike T, Nakagawa H, Kanda Y, Akinaga S, Soga 
S, Shiotsu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Shizuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: The heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) plays an important role in chaperoning
oncogenic client proteins in multiple myeloma (MM) cells, and several Hsp90
inhibitors have shown antitumor activities both in vitro and in vivo. However the
precise mechanism of action of Hsp90 inhibitor in MM has not been fully
elucidated.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We evaluated the antitumor activities of KW-2478, a
nonansamycin Hsp90 inhibitor, in MM cells with various chromosomal translocations
of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) loci both in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Our studies revealed that exposure of KW-2478 to MM cells resulted in
growth inhibition and apoptosis, which were associated with degradation of
well-known client proteins as well as a decrease in IgH translocation products
(FGFR3, c-Maf, and cyclin D1), and FGFR3 was shown to be a new client protein of 
Hsp90 chaperon complex. In addition, KW-2478 depleted the Hsp90 client Cdk9, a
transcriptional kinase, and the phosphorylated 4E-BP1, a translational inhibitor.
Both inhibitory effects of KW-2478 on such transcriptional and translational
pathways were shown to reduce c-Maf and cyclin D1 expression. In NCI-H929 s.c.
inoculated model, KW-2478 showed a significant suppression of tumor growth and
induced the degradation of client proteins in tumors. Furthermore, in a novel
orthotopic MM model of i.v. inoculated OPM-2/green fluorescent protein, KW-2478
showed a significant reduction of both serum M protein and MM tumor burden in the
bone marrow.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that targeting such diverse pathways by
KW-2478 could be a promising strategy for the treatment of MM with various
cytogenetic abnormalities.

Copyright (c) 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20406843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Methods. 2011 Jan;53(1):78-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.04.001. Epub 2010 Apr
10.

Formation of Tat-TAR containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for biochemical and
structural analyses.

Bigalke JM(1), Czudnochowski N, Vollmuth F, Vogel-Bachmayr K, Anand K, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Physiologie, Abteilung Physikalische
Biochemie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Viruses manipulate multiple processes of the host cell machinery in order to
replicate successfully in the infected cell. Among these, stimulation of
transcription of the viral genes is crucial for lentiviruses such as HIV for
increased protein expression levels and generation of escape mutants. The
transactivation response (TAR) element at the 5'-end of HIV, SIV, BIV, EIAV or
JDV retroviruses forms a unique RNA based promoter element that together with the
transcription activator protein Tat stimulates viral gene expression at the level
of transcription elongation. TAR is a double stranded non-coding RNA of typically
24-40 nucleotides length. Together with Tat it interacts with the Cyclin T
subunit of the positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb to recruit Cyclin 
T and its corresponding Cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9 to the RNA polymerase II. In
vitro formations of these Tat-TAR containing ribonucleoprotein complexes are a
key requisite for biochemical characterizations and interaction studies that
eventually will allow structural analyses. Here, we describe purification methods
of the different factors employed and chromatography techniques that yield highly
specific complex assemblies suitable for crystallization.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20385237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Neurovirol. 2010 Mar;16(2):150-67. doi: 10.3109/13550281003735691.

Induction of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) gene expression by
human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat in human astrocytes is CDK9 dependent.

Khiati A(1), Chaloin O, Muller S, Tardieu M, Horellou P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U802 and Université Paris-Sud 11, Faculté de médecine Paris-Sud, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) invades the brain early in infection and
may cause HIV-associated dementia (HAD), which is characterized by reactive
astrocytes, and macrophage and T-cell infiltrates. HIV-1 Tat protein is thought
to contribute to HAD by transactivating host genes, such as that encoding
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2), although its mechanisms of
action are not fully understood. We investigated the molecular pathways involved 
in Tat-induced MCP-1/CCL2 gene expression in human astrocytes. We found that Tat 
induced MCP-1/CCL2 synthesis in human astrocytes infected with a lentivirus
carrying the gene encoding Tat or treated with a biologically active synthetic
Tat protein. The induction of MCP-1/CCL2 was independent of the nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB) classical pathway, but was significantly inhibited by specific
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (cdk9) inhibitors, such as a dominant-negative mutant
or siRNA. By contrast, broader-spectrum cdk inhibitors, such as roscovitine,
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), and flavopiridol,
inhibited MCP-1/CCL2 induction by Tat. We also analyzed the effects of
roscovitine, DRB, and flavopiridol on Tat-induced HIV-1 long terminal repeat
(LTR) expression following the infection of astrocytes and HeLa cells. Astrocytes
showed no inhibition by roscovitine, 59% inhibition by DRB, and 80% inhibition by
flavopiridol. In control HeLa cells, high levels of inhibition were observed with
roscovitine, DRB, and flavopiridol. We have ascertained the direct implication of
cdk9 in Tat-induced MCP-1 expression by performing ChIP assay. These results
demonstrate that cdk9 is involved in Tat-induced HIV-1 LTR, MCP-1/CCL2 gene
expression.

PMID: 20370601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Genes Cancer. 2010 Apr;1(4):369-80. doi: 10.1177/1947601910369817.

CDK Inhibitors Roscovitine and CR8 Trigger Mcl-1 Down-Regulation and Apoptotic
Cell Death in Neuroblastoma Cells.

Bettayeb K(1), Baunbæk D, Delehouze C, Loaëc N, Hole AJ, Baumli S, Endicott JA,
Douc-Rasy S, Bénard J, Oumata N, Galons H, Meijer L.

Author information: 
(1)C.N.R.S. USR3151, 'Protein Phosphorylation & Human Disease' Group, Station
Biologique, Bretagne, France.

Neuroblastoma (NB), the most frequent extracranial solid tumor of children
accounting for nearly 15% of all childhood cancer mortality, displays
overexpression of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 in aggressive forms of the
disease. The clinical phase 2 drug roscovitine (CYC202, seliciclib), a relatively
selective inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and CR8, a recently
developed and more potent analog, induce concentration-dependent apoptotic cell
death of NB cells (average IC(50) values: 24.2 µM and 0.4 µM for roscovitine and 
CR8, respectively). Both roscovitine and CR8 trigger rapid down-regulation of the
short-lived survival factor Mcl-1 in the 9 investigated human NB cell lines. This
effect was further analyzed in the human SH-SY5Y NB cell line. Down-regulation of
Mcl-1 appears to depend on inhibition of CDKs rather than on interaction of
roscovitine and CR8 with their secondary targets. CR8 is an adenosine
triphosphate-competitive inhibitor of CDK9, and the structure of a CDK9/cyclin
T/CR8 complex is described. Mcl-1 down-regulation occurs both at the mRNA and
protein levels. This effect can be accounted for by a reduction in Mcl-1 protein 
synthesis, under stable Mcl-1 degradation conditions. Mcl-1 down-regulation is
accompanied by a transient increase in free Noxa, a proapoptotic factor. Mcl-1
down-regulation occurs independently of the presence or up-regulation of p53 and 
of the MYCN status. Taken together, these results suggest that the clinical drug 
roscovitine and its novel analog CR8 induce apoptotic tumor cell death by
down-regulating Mcl-1, a key survival factor expressed in all NB cell lines. CDK 
inhibition may thus constitute a new approach to treat refractory high-risk NB.

PMCID: PMC3092200
PMID: 21779453  [PubMed]


334. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(10):2353-64. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00116-10. Epub 2010 Mar 
15.

Separable functions of the fission yeast Spt5 carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) in
capping enzyme binding and transcription elongation overlap with those of the RNA
polymerase II CTD.

Schneider S(1), Pei Y, Shuman S, Schwer B.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, New York 10065, USA.

An interaction network connecting mRNA capping enzymes, the RNA polymerase II
(Pol II) carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD), elongation factor Spt5, and the Cdk7 and
Cdk9 protein kinases is thought to comprise a transcription elongation
checkpoint. A crux of this network is Spt5, which regulates early transcription
elongation and has an imputed role in pre-mRNA processing via its physical
association with capping enzymes. Schizosaccharomyces pombe Spt5 has a
distinctive CTD composed of tandem nonapeptide repeats of the consensus sequence 
(1)TPAWNSGSK(9). The Spt5 CTD binds the capping enzymes and is a substrate for
threonine phosphorylation by the Cdk9 kinase. Here we report that deletion of the
S. pombe Spt5 CTD results in slow growth and aberrant cell morphology. The
severity of the spt5-DeltaCTD phenotype is exacerbated by truncation of the Pol
II CTD and ameliorated by overexpression of the capping enzymes RNA
triphosphatase and RNA guanylyltransferase. These results suggest that the Spt5
and Pol II CTDs play functionally overlapping roles in capping enzyme
recruitment. We probed structure-activity relations of the Spt5 CTD by alanine
scanning of the consensus nonapeptide. The T1A change abolished CTD
phosphorylation by Cdk9 but did not affect CTD binding to the capping enzymes.
The T1A and P2A mutations elicited cold-sensitive (cs) and temperature-sensitive 
(ts) growth defects and conferred sensitivity to growth inhibition by 6-azauracil
that was exacerbated by partial truncations of the Pol II CTD. The T1A phenotypes
were rescued by a phosphomimetic T1E change but not by capping enzyme
overexpression. These results imply a positive role for Spt5 CTD phosphorylation 
in Pol Il transcription elongation in fission yeast, distinct from its capping
enzyme interactions. Viability of yeast cells bearing both Spt5 CTD T1A and Pol
II CTD S2A mutations heralds that the Cdk9 kinase has an essential target other
than Spt5 and Pol II CTD-Ser2.

PMCID: PMC2863715
PMID: 20231361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(10):2437-48. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01541-09. Epub 2010 Mar 
15.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 8 positively cooperates with Mediator to promote thyroid 
hormone receptor-dependent transcriptional activation.

Belakavadi M(1), Fondell JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
UMDNJ, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Mediator is a multisubunit assemblage of proteins originally identified in humans
as a coactivator bound to thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) and essential for
thyroid hormone (T3)-dependent transcription. Cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8),
cyclin C, MED12, and MED13 form a variably associated Mediator subcomplex (termed
the CDK8 module) whose functional role in TR-dependent transcription remains
unclear. Using in vitro and cellular approaches, we show here that Mediator
complexes containing the CDK8 module are specifically recruited into
preinitiation complexes at the TR target gene type I deiodinase (DioI) together
with RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in a TR- and T3-dependent manner. We found that
CDK8 is essential for robust T3-dependent Dio1 transcription and that CDK8
knockdown via RNA interference decreased Pol II occupancy, and also the
recruitment of the Pol II kinase CDK9, at the DioI promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed CDK8 occupancy at the DioI promoter concurrent with 
active transcription, thus suggesting CDK8 involvement in transcriptional
reinitiation. Mutagenesis assays showed that CDK8 kinase activity is necessary
for full T3-dependent DioI activation, whereas in vitro kinase studies indicated 
that CDK8 may contribute to Pol II phosphorylation. Collectively, our data
suggest CDK8 plays an important coactivator role in TR-dependent transcription by
promoting Pol II recruitment and activation at TR target gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC2863696
PMID: 20231357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Curr Drug Targets. 2010 Mar;11(3):291-302.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors as anticancer drugs.

Krystof V(1), Uldrijan S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Palacký University & Institute of
Experimental Botany AS CR, 78371 Olomouc, Czech Republic.
vladimir.krystof@upol.cz

Poor therapeutic outcomes and serious side effects, together with acquired
resistance to multiple drugs, are common problems of current cancer therapies.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for new cancer-targeted drugs, which has led
(inter alia) to the development of molecules that can specifically inhibit
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). In addition to their cell cycle regulatory
functions, CDKs, especially CDK7 and CDK9, play important roles in the regulation
of RNA polymerase II-mediated transcription. Here, we report on progress in the
preclinical development of CDK inhibitors and their anticancer activities.
Special attention is paid to the action mechanisms of the pan-specific CDK
inhibitors flavopiridol and roscovitine, which have already entered phase II
clinical trials as treatments for various tumours. The links between their
ability to inhibit transcription and sensitisation of some types of cancer to
apoptosis, mechanisms leading to p53 activation, and their synergistic
cooperation with common DNA damaging drugs are also discussed. It has been
demonstrated that drug-resistant cancer cells can arise during therapeutic
application of small molecule protein kinase inhibitors. Clinical resistance to
CDK inhibitors has not yet been described, but by comparing CDKs to other
kinases, and CDK inhibitors to other clinically used protein kinase inhibitors,
we also discuss possible mechanisms that could lead to resistance to CDK
inhibitors.

PMID: 20210754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;224(1):84-93. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22096.

T-loop phosphorylated Cdk9 localizes to nuclear speckle domains which may serve
as sites of active P-TEFb function and exchange between the Brd4 and 7SK/HEXIM1
regulatory complexes.

Dow EC(1), Liu H, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

P-TEFb functions to induce the elongation step of RNA polymerase II transcription
by phosphorylating the carboxyl-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA
polymerase II. Core P-TEFb is comprised of Cdk9 and a cyclin regulatory subunit, 
with Cyclin T1 being the predominant Cdk9-associated cyclin. The kinase activity 
of P-TEFb is dependent on phosphorylation of the Thr186 residue located within
the T-loop domain of the Cdk9 subunit. Here, we used immunofluorescence
deconvolution microscopy to examine the subcellular distribution of
phospho-Thr186 Cdk9/Cyclin T1 P-TEFb heterodimers. We found that phospho-Thr186
Cdk9 displays a punctate distribution throughout the non-nucleolar nucleoplasm
and it co-localizes with Cyclin T1 almost exclusively within nuclear speckle
domains. Phospho-Thr186 Cdk9 predominantly co-localized with the
hyperphosphorylated forms of RNA polymerase II. Transient expression of
kinase-defective Cdk9 mutants revealed that neither is Thr186 phosphorylation or 
kinase activity required for Cdk9 speckle localization. Lastly, both the Brd4 and
HEXIM1 proteins interact with P-TEFb at or very near speckle domains and
treatment of cells with the Cdk9 inhibitor flavopiridol alters this distribution.
These results indicate that the active form of P-TEFb resides in nuclear speckles
and raises the possibility that speckles are sites of P-TEFb function and
exchange between negative and positive P-TEFb regulatory complexes.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2888102
PMID: 20201073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Oncogene. 2010 May 13;29(19):2853-63. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.42. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Induced G1 cell-cycle arrest controls replication-dependent histone mRNA 3' end
processing through p21, NPAT and CDK9.

Pirngruber J(1), Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, 
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Proper cell cycle-dependent expression of replication-dependent histones is
essential for packaging of DNA into chromatin during replication. We previously
showed that cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) controls histone H2B
monoubiquitination (H2Bub1) to direct the recruitment of specific mRNA 3' end
processing proteins to replication-dependent histone genes and promote proper
pre-mRNA 3' end processing. We now show that p53 decreases the expression of the 
histone-specific transcriptional regulator Nuclear Protein, Ataxia-Telangiectasia
Locus (NPAT) by inducing a G1 cell-cycle arrest, thereby affecting E2F-dependent 
transcription of the NPAT gene. Furthermore, NPAT is essential for histone mRNA
3' end processing and recruits CDK9 to replication-dependent histone genes.
Reduced NPAT expression following p53 activation or small interfering RNA
knockdown decreases CDK9 recruitment and replication-dependent histone gene
transcription but increases the polyadenylation of remaining histone mRNAs. Thus,
we present evidence that the induction of a G1 cell-cycle arrest (for example,
following p53 accumulation) alters histone mRNA 3' end processing and uncover the
first mechanism of a regulated switch in the mode of pre-mRNA 3' end processing
during a normal cellular process, which may be altered during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 20190802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Virology. 2010 Apr 25;400(1):32-43. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.01.018. Epub 2010
Feb 6.

Differential expression and interaction of host factors augment HIV-1 gene
expression in neonatal mononuclear cells.

Sundaravaradan V(1), Mehta R, Harris DT, Zack JA, Ahmad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

We have previously shown a higher level of HIV-1 replication and gene expression 
in neonatal (cord) blood mononuclear cells (CBMC) compared with adult blood cells
(PBMC), which could be due to differential expression of host factors. We
performed the gene expression profile of CBMC and PBMC and found that 8013 genes 
were expressed at higher levels in CBMC than PBMC and 8028 genes in PBMC than
CBMC, including 1181 and 1414 genes upregulated after HIV-1 infection in CBMC and
PBMC, respectively. Several transcription factors (NF-kappaB, E2F, HAT-1, TFIIE, 
Cdk9, Cyclin T1), signal transducers (STAT3, STAT5A) and cytokines (IL-1beta,
IL-6, IL-10) were upregulated in CBMC than PBMC, which are known to influence
HIV-1 replication. In addition, a repressor of HIV-1 transcription, YY1, was down
regulated in CBMC than PBMC and several matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-7, -12,
-14) were significantly upregulated in HIV-1 infected CBMC than PBMC.
Furthermore, we show that CBMC nuclear extracts interacted with a higher extent
to HIV-1 LTR cis-acting sequences, including NF-kappaB, NFAT, AP1 and NF-IL6
compared with PBMC nuclear extracts and retroviral based short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) for STAT3 and IL-6 down regulated their own and HIV-1 gene expression,
signifying that these factors influenced differential HIV-1 gene expression in
CBMC than PBMC.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20138641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9813-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.091496. Epub 2010
Jan 27.

CDKN1C negatively regulates RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain phosphorylation
in an E2F1-dependent manner.

Ma Y(1), Chen L, Wright GM, Pillai SR, Chellappan SP, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

CDKN1C is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor and is a candidate tumor suppressor
gene. We previously found that the CDKN1C protein represses E2F1-driven
transcription in an apparent negative feedback loop. Herein, we explore the
mechanism by which CDKN1C represses transcription. We find that
adenoviral-mediated overexpression of CDKN1C leads to a dramatic reduction in
phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II (pol II) C-terminal domain (CTD). RNA
interference studies demonstrate that this activity is not an artifact of CDKN1C 
overexpression, because endogenous CDKN1C mediates an inhibition of RNA pol II
CTD phosphorylation in HeLa cells upon treatment with dexamethasone.
Surprisingly, we find that CDKN1C-mediated repression of RNA pol II
phosphorylation is E2F1-dependent, suggesting that E2F1 may direct CDKN1C to
chromatin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that CDKN1C is
associated with E2F1-regulated promoters in vivo and that this association can
dramatically reduce the level of RNA pol II CTD phosphorylation at both Ser-2 and
Ser-5 of the C-terminal domain repeat. In addition, we show that CDKN1C interacts
with both CDK7 and CDK9 (putative RNA pol II CTD kinases) and that CDKN1C blocks 
their ability to phosphorylate a glutathione S-transferase-CTD fusion protein in 
vitro. E2F1 and CDKN1C are found to form stable complexes both in vivo and in
vitro. Molecular studies demonstrate that the E2F1-CDKN1C interaction is mediated
by two E2F domains. A central E2F1 domain interacts directly with CDKN1C, whereas
a C-terminal E2F1 domain interacts with CDKN1C via interaction with Rb. The
results presented in this report highlight a novel mechanism of tumor suppression
by CDKN1C.

PMCID: PMC2843230
PMID: 20106982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 22;29(16):2325-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.510. Epub 2010 Jan
25.

AT7519, A novel small molecule multi-cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, induces
apoptosis in multiple myeloma via GSK-3beta activation and RNA polymerase II
inhibition.

Santo L(1), Vallet S, Hideshima T, Cirstea D, Ikeda H, Pozzi S, Patel K, Okawa Y,
Gorgun G, Perrone G, Calabrese E, Yule M, Squires M, Ladetto M, Boccadoro M,
Richardson PG, Munshi NC, Anderson KC, Raje N.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Disease Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. loredana_santo@dfci.harvard.edu

Dysregulated cell cycling is a universal hallmark of cancer and is often mediated
by abnormal activation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and their cyclin
partners. Overexpression of individual complexes are reported in multiple myeloma
(MM), making them attractive therapeutic targets. In this study, we investigate
the preclinical activity of a novel small-molecule multi-CDK inhibitor, AT7519,
in MM. We show the anti-MM activity of AT7519 displaying potent cytotoxicity and 
apoptosis; associated with in vivo tumor growth inhibition and prolonged
survival. At the molecular level, AT7519 inhibited RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II)
phosphorylation, a CDK9, 7 substrate, associated with decreased RNA synthesis
confirmed by [(3)H] Uridine incorporation. In addition, AT7519 inhibited glycogen
synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta) phosphorylation; conversely pretreatment with a
selective GSK-3 inhibitor and shRNA GSK-3beta knockdown restored MM survival,
suggesting the involvement of GSK-3beta in AT7519-induced apoptosis. GSK-3beta
activation was independent of RNA pol II dephosphorylation confirmed by
alpha-amanitin, a specific RNA pol II inihibitor, showing potent inhibition of
RNA pol II phosphorylation without corresponding effects on GSK-3beta
phosphorylation. These results offer new insights into the crucial, yet
controversial role of GSK-3beta in MM and show significant anti-MM activity of
AT7519, providing the rationale for its clinical evaluation in MM.

PMCID: PMC3183744
PMID: 20101221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 19;392(4):588-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.079. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

IMP dehydrogenase is recruited to the transcription complex through serine 2
phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II.

Park JH(1), Ahn SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy,
Sungkyunkwan University, 300 Cheoncheon-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do
440-746, Republic of Korea.

IMP dehydrogenase (IMPDH) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the de novo
synthesis of guanine, namely the oxidation of IMP to XMP with a concomitant
reduction of NAD+. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a family of four closely-related 
genes, IMD1, IMD2 (also known as PUR5), IMD3, and IMD4, encodes the putative
IMPDH. Although IMPDH synthesizes guanine in the cytoplasm, it has also been
found in the nucleus, where it associates with nucleic acids in human cells.
Here, we further show that IMPDH is recruited to actively transcribed region of
genes. A synthetic lethal screen using a deletion strain of Ctk1 kinase, a yeast 
homolog of mammalian Cdk9/P-TEFb that phosphorylates serine 2 within the RNA
polymerase II (RNApII) C-terminal domain (CTD), identified that Imd2 genetically 
interacts with Ctk1. Consistent with this association, IMPDHs were recruited to
elongating RNApII only when serine 2 of the CTD was phosphorylated by Ctk1. Loss 
of Imd2 had little effect on the association of most elongation factors with
RNApII. However, in cells lacking Imd2 or all the essential IMPDHs in the
presence of minimal guanine, a defect in the association of Ctk1 with the
promoter region was seen. Taken together, our results show that IMPDH is
recruited to transcription complex through serine 2 phosphorylation of RNApII CTD
and suggest that it may play a role in initiating transcriptional regulation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20097157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9556-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.070458. Epub 2010
Jan 17.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 is a component of the p300/GATA4 complex required for
phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes.

Sunagawa Y(1), Morimoto T, Takaya T, Kaichi S, Wada H, Kawamura T, Fujita M,
Shimatsu A, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

A zinc finger protein GATA4 is one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription
factors and forms a complex with an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase, p300.
Disruption of this complex results in the inhibition of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy
and heart failure in vivo. By tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometric
analyses, we identified cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (Cdk9) as a novel GATA4-binding
partner. Cdk9 also formed a complex with p300 as well as GATA4 and cyclin T1. We 
showed that p300 was required for the interaction of GATA4 with Cdk9 and for the 
kinase activity of Cdk9. Conversely, Cdk9 kinase activity was required for the
p300-induced transcriptional activities, DNA binding, and acetylation of GATA4.
Furthermore, the kinase activity of Cdk9 was required for the phosphorylation of 
p300 as well as for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. These findings demonstrate that
Cdk9 forms a functional complex with the p300/GATA4 and is required for
p300/GATA4- transcriptional pathway during cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC2843206
PMID: 20081228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 15;11:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-4.

Halogenated imidazole derivatives block RNA polymerase II elongation along
mitogen inducible genes.

Mikula M(1), Hanusek K, Paziewska A, Dzwonek A, Rubel T, Bomsztyk K, Ostrowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center 
and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of protein kinases is one of the essential
oncogenic driving forces inherent to the process of tumorigenesis. The protein
kinase CK2 plays an important role in diverse biological processes, including
cell growth and proliferation as well as in the governing and transduction of
prosurvival signals. Increased expression of CK2 is a hallmark of some cancers,
hence its antiapoptotic properties may be relevant to cancer onset. Thus, the
designing and synthesis of the CK2 inhibitors has become an important pursuit in 
the search for cancer therapies.
RESULTS: Using a high-throughput microarray approach, we demonstrate that two
potent inhibitors of CK2, 4,5,6,7-tetrabromo-benzimidazole (TBBz) and
2-Dimethyloamino-4,5,6,7-tetrabromo-1H-benzimidazole (DMAT), blocked mitogen
induced mRNA expression of immediate early genes. Given the impact of these
inhibitors on the process of transcription, we investigated their effects on RNA 
Polymerase II (RNAPII) elongation along the mitogen inducible gene, EGR1 (early
growth response 1), using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. ChIP
analysis demonstrated that both drugs arrest RNAPII elongation. Finally, we show 
that CDK9 kinase activity, essential for the triggering of RNAPII elongation, was
blocked by TBBz and to lesser degree by DMAT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our approach revealed that small molecules derived from halogenated 
imidazole compounds may decrease cell proliferation, in part, by inhibiting
pathways that regulate transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC2824761
PMID: 20078881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Apr;223(1):224-33. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22031.

Progranulin (granulin/epithelin precursor) and its constituent granulin repeats
repress transcription from cellular promoters.

Hoque M(1), Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, New Jersey, USA.

Progranulin (also known as granulin/epithelin precursor, GEP) is composed of
seven granulin/epithelin repeats (granulins) and functions both as a full-length 
protein and as individual granulins. It is a secretory protein but a substantial 
amount of GEP is found inside cells, some in complexes with positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). GEP and certain granulins interact
with the cyclin T1 subunit of P-TEFb, and with its HIV-1 Tat co-factor, leading
to repression of transcription from the HIV promoter. We show that GEP lacking
the signal peptide (GEPspm) remains inside cells and, like wild-type GEP,
interacts with cyclin T1 and Tat. GEPspm represses transcription from the HIV-1
promoter at the RNA level. Granulins that bind cyclin T1 are phosphorylated by
P-TEFb in vivo and in vitro on serine residues. GEPspm and those granulins that
interact with cyclin T1 also inhibit transcription from cellular cad and c-myc
promoters, which are highly dependent on P-TEFb, but not from the PCNA promoter. 
In addition, GEPspm and granulins repress transcriptional activation by VP16 or
c-Myc, proteins that bind and recruit P-TEFb to responsive promoters. These data 
suggest that intracellular GEP is a promoter-specific transcriptional repressor
that modulates the function of cellular and viral transcription factors.

J. Cell. Physiol. 223: 224-233, 2010. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2904068
PMID: 20054825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jan;9(1):236-45. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0767. Epub
2010 Jan 6.

8-Amino-adenosine inhibits multiple mechanisms of transcription.

Frey JA(1), Gandhi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Roscovitine and flavopiridol suppress cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) and CDK9
activity resulting in transcription inhibition, thus providing an alternative
mechanism to traditional genotoxic chemotherapy. These agents have been effective
in slow or nonreplicative cell types. 8-Amino-adenosine is a transcription
inhibitor that has proved very effective in multiple myeloma cell lines and
primary indolent leukemia cells. The objective of the current work was to define 
mechanisms of action that lead to transcription inhibition by 8-amino-adenosine. 
8-Amino-adenosine is metabolized into the active triphosphate (8-amino-ATP) in
cells. This accumulation resulted in a simultaneous decrease of intracellular ATP
and RNA synthesis. When the effects of established ATP synthesis inhibitors and
transcription inhibitors on intracellular ATP concentrations and RNA synthesis
were studied, there was a strong correlation between ATP decline and RNA
synthesis. This correlation substantiated the hypothesis that the loss of ATP in 
8-amino-adenosine-treated cells contributes to the decrease in transcription due 
to the lack of substrate needed for mRNA body and polyadenylation tail synthesis.
RNA polymerase II COOH terminal domain phosphorylation declined sharply in
8-amino-adenosine-treated cells, which may have been due to the lack of an ATP
phosphate donor or competitive inhibition with 8-amino-ATP at CDK7 and CDK9.
Furthermore, 8-amino-ATP was incorporated into nascent RNA in a dose-dependent
manner at the 3'-end resulting in transcription termination. Finally, in vitro
transcription assays showed that 8-amino-ATP competes with ATP for incorporation 
into mRNA. Collectively, we have concluded that 8-amino-adenosine elicits effects
on multiple mechanisms of transcription, providing a new class of transcription
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2806509
PMID: 20053765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2009 Dec;44(12):1343-7.

[Action of protein phosphatase-1 on Tat-dependent HIV-1 transcription and its
related inhibitors].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Liu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University,
Jinan 250012, China.

Host cell protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) is an important regulator of human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) transcription. PP1 is involved in the regulation
of HIV-1 transcription, and dephosphorylates RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain 
(RNAPII CTD) or CycT1-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) to increase Tat-dependent HIV-1
transcription. In this review, we discuss the action of PP1 in Tat-induced HIV-1 
transcription and related to PP1 inhibitors.

PMID: 21351466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2009 Dec;18(12):1957-65. doi:
10.1517/13543780903418445.

Seliciclib in malignancies.

Aldoss IT(1), Tashi T, Ganti AK.

Author information: 
(1)Creighton University Medical Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Omaha,
NE, USA.

Cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) form a key part of the regulatory
proteins that govern the cell cycle. Aberrancy in their function can lead to
uncontrolled growth and proliferation of the cells which forms the basis of many 
human diseases, especially cancers. Seliciclib (CYC202, R-roscovitine) is a
second-generation CDK inhibitor that competes for ATP binding sites on these
kinases, reducing tumor growth and inducing cell death. It is a direct inhibitor 
of cyclin E/CDK2 and also has inhibitory effects on cyclin H/CDK7 and cyclin
T/CDK9. Seliciclib leads to growth arrest and apoptosis of cell lines through
activation of the p53 gene, inhibition of RNA processing and blockage of the RNA 
polymerase II-dependent transcription, and reduction of anti-apoptotic proteins. 
Seliciclib has good oral bioavailability, although its absorption is slowed by
food. It is distributed rapidly to the body tissues and metabolized rapidly to a 
carboxylated derivative that is excreted by the kidneys. The major adverse
effects of seliciclib are electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia, hyponatremia),
gastrointestinal side effects (nausea, emesis, anorexia), fatigue, transient
hyperglycemia, elevation of liver enzymes and reversible elevation of serum
creatinine. At present, it is in Phase II trials for non-small cell lung cancer
and nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

PMID: 19938906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cell. 2009 Nov 13;139(4):757-69. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.035.

Nuclear CDKs drive Smad transcriptional activation and turnover in BMP and
TGF-beta pathways.

Alarcón C(1), Zaromytidou AI, Xi Q, Gao S, Yu J, Fujisawa S, Barlas A, Miller AN,
Manova-Todorova K, Macias MJ, Sapkota G, Pan D, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 Nov 13;139(4):658-60.

TGF-beta and BMP receptor kinases activate Smad transcription factors by
C-terminal phosphorylation. We have identified a subsequent agonist-induced
phosphorylation that plays a central dual role in Smad transcriptional activation
and turnover. As receptor-activated Smads form transcriptional complexes, they
are phosphorylated at an interdomain linker region by CDK8 and CDK9, which are
components of transcriptional mediator and elongation complexes. These
phosphorylations promote Smad transcriptional action, which in the case of Smad1 
is mediated by the recruitment of YAP to the phosphorylated linker sites. An
effector of the highly conserved Hippo organ size control pathway, YAP supports
Smad1-dependent transcription and is required for BMP suppression of neural
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. The phosphorylated linker is
ultimately recognized by specific ubiquitin ligases, leading to
proteasome-mediated turnover of activated Smad proteins. Thus, nuclear CDK8/9
drive a cycle of Smad utilization and disposal that is an integral part of
canonical BMP and TGF-beta pathways.

PMCID: PMC2818353
PMID: 19914168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 8;395(1):28-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.10.055. Epub 2009
Oct 31.

Specificity of Hexim1 and Hexim2 complex formation with cyclin T1/T2, importin
alpha and 7SK snRNA.

Czudnochowski N(1), Vollmuth F, Baumann S, Vogel-Bachmayr K, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Physikalische Biochemie, Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, D-44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) stimulates the transition
from transcription initiation to productive elongation by phosphorylation of the 
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. P-TEFb consists of the cyclin-dependent
kinase Cdk9 and a T-type cyclin and is regulated by the small nuclear RNA 7SK and
the coupling protein Hexim1 or Hexim2. In this study, we analyzed the tripartite 
protein-RNA complex formation between Hexim, Cyclin T and 7SK snRNA. Using
isothermal titration calorimetry, we observed higher affinities for Cyclin
T1-Hexim1 and Cyclin T2-Hexim2 complex formations compared with the interactions 
in reverse. Importin alpha, which is part of the Ran-mediated nuclear import
pathway, bound Hexim1 and Hexim2 with dissociation constants of 2.0 and 0.5 muM, 
respectively. Furthermore, tripartite complex formations between Cyclin T, Hexim 
and Importin alpha showed the suitability of a collaborative nuclear import
pathway for Cyclin T. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using radioactively
labelled full-length 7SK snRNA revealed a tight association of the RNA to Cyclin 
T1-Hexim1 with dissociation constants lower than 0.3 muM. Similar binding
affinities were recorded for both Hexim orthologues to a 66-mer double-stranded
5' hairpin loop encompassing nucleotides 23-88 of 7SK, while a 39-mer fragment,
resulting from different RNA folding predictions, did not bind as tightly. These 
results provide the molecular basis for the generation of a core complex for the 
inhibition of P-TEFb.

PMID: 19883659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cell Cycle. 2009 Nov 15;8(22):3636-42. Epub 2009 Nov 24.

Insights into the function of the human P-TEFb component CDK9 in the regulation
of chromatin modifications and co-transcriptional mRNA processing.

Pirngruber J(1), Shchebet A, Johnsen SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences, 
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) was originally characterized as a transcription 
elongation factor which regulates RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) activity following
transcriptional initiation. However, recent evidence from a number of studies
have shown that CDK9 plays an important role in regulating not only RNAPII
activity but also co-transcriptional histone modification and mRNA processing
events such as splicing and 3' end processing. Importantly, our previous work and
the work presented here demonstrate that CDK9 functions to guide a complex
network of chromatin modifications including histone H2B monoubiquitination
(H2Bub1), H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and H3K36me3. This function
appears to be dependent upon not only the phosphorylation of the RNA Polymerase
II C-terminal domain but also upon other CDK9 targets such as the Suppressor of
Ty Homolog-5 (SUPT5H), Negative Elongation Factor-E (NELF-E) and probably the
human Rad6 homolog UBE2A. We provide a working model by which CDK9 may control
co-transcriptional replication-dependent histone mRNA 3' end processing in an
H2Bub1 and H3K4me3-dependent manner and uncover new and important differences
between the functions of human CDK9 and its yeast counterparts Ctk1 and Bur1.

PMID: 19844166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36547-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.033712. Epub
2009 Oct 13.

Structures of the dual bromodomains of the P-TEFb-activating protein Brd4 at
atomic resolution.

Vollmuth F(1), Blankenfeldt W, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Physikalische Biochemie, Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, D-44227 Dortmund, Germany.

Brd4 is a member of the bromodomains and extra terminal domain (BET) family of
proteins that recognize acetylated chromatin structures through their
bromodomains and act as transcriptional activators. Brd4 functions as an
associated factor and positive regulator of P-TEFb, a Cdk9-cyclin T heterodimer
that stimulates transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II. Here, the
crystal structures of the two bromodomains of Brd4 (BD1 and BD2) were determined 
at 1.5 and 1.2 A resolution, respectively. Complex formation of BD1 with a
histone H3 tail polypeptide encompassing residues 12-19 showed binding of the
Nzeta-acetylated lysine 14 to the conserved asparagine 140 of Brd4. In contrast, 
in BD2 the N-terminal linker sequence was found to interact with the binding site
for acetylated lysines of the adjacent molecule to form continuous strings in the
crystal lattice. This assembly shows for the first time a different binding
ligand than acetylated lysine indicating that also other sequence compositions
may be able to form similar interaction networks. Isothermal titration
calorimetry revealed best binding of BD1 to H3 and of BD2 to H4 acetylated lysine
sequences, suggesting alternating histone recognition specificities.
Intriguingly, an acetylated lysine motif from cyclin T1 bound similarly well to
BD2. Whereas the structure of Brd2 BD1 suggested its dimer formation, both Brd4
bromodomains appeared monomeric in solution as shown by size exclusion
chromatography and mutational analyses.

PMCID: PMC2794770
PMID: 19828451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar;1804(3):511-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2009.10.002. 
Epub 2009 Oct 12.

Recent developments in cyclin-dependent kinase biochemical and structural
studies.

Echalier A(1), Endicott JA, Noble ME.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK. aude.echalier-glazer@cbs.cnrs.fr

The cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) have been intensely studied because of their 
involvement in regulating essential cellular activities that include
proliferation and transcription. A series of CDK2-containing structures have
informed a general model for the molecular details of CDK activation and
regulation. Recent structural studies of other members of the CDK family have
lead to a re-appraisal of this model. In this review, we describe alternative
CDK-cyclin assemblies taking the recently characterised CDK/cyclin complexes,
CDK9/cyclinT1 and CDK4/cyclinD as examples. The differential effects of CDK
phosphorylation on CDK activation state and substrate specificity are examined in
the light of recent data on CDK2/cyclinA, CDK9/cyclinT, CDK4/cyclinD and
Pho85/Pho80. We also present an overview of factors that affect CDK substrate
specificity, and, in particular, the contributions that are made by the cyclin
subunit. Finally, we review recent results that have helped to unravel the
molecular mechanisms underlying the conflicting roles of the Cip/Kip CDK
inhibitor family in CDK regulation.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19822225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cell. 2009 Oct 9;36(1):75-87. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.08.015.

SKIP interacts with c-Myc and Menin to promote HIV-1 Tat transactivation.

Brès V(1), Yoshida T, Pickle L, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037-1099, USA.

The Ski-interacting protein SKIP/SNW1 associates with the P-TEFb/CDK9 elongation 
factor and coactivates inducible genes, including HIV-1. We show here that SKIP
also associates with c-Myc and Menin, a subunit of the MLL1 histone
methyltransferase (H3K4me3) complex and that HIV-1 Tat transactivation requires
c-Myc and Menin, but not MLL1 or H3K4me3. RNAi-ChIP experiments reveal that SKIP 
acts downstream of Tat:P-TEFb to recruit c-Myc and its partner TRRAP, a scaffold 
for histone acetyltransferases, to the HIV-1 promoter. By contrast, SKIP is
recruited by the RNF20 H2B ubiquitin ligase to the basal HIV-1 promoter in a step
that is bypassed by Tat and downregulated by c-Myc. Of interest, we find that
SKIP and P-TEFb are dispensable for UV stress-induced HIV-1 transcription, which 
is strongly upregulated by treating cells with the CDK9 inhibitor flavopiridol.
Thus, SKIP acts with c-Myc and Menin to promote HIV-1 Tat:P-TEFb transcription at
an elongation step that is bypassed under stress.

PMCID: PMC2766281
PMID: 19818711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jan;222(1):200-8. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21938.

Selective control of gene expression by CDK9 in human cells.

Garriga J(1), Xie H, Obradovic Z, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

CDK9 associates with T-type cyclins and positively regulates transcriptional
elongation by phosphorylating RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and negative elongation 
factors. However, it is unclear whether CDK9 is required for transcription of
most genes by RNAPII or alternatively plays a role regulating the expression of
restricted subsets of genes. We have investigated the direct effects of
inhibiting cellular CDK9 activity in global gene expression in human cells by
using a dominant-negative form of CDK9 (dnCDK9). We have also compared direct
inhibition of cellular CDK9 activity to pharmacological inhibition with
flavopiridol (FVP), a CDK inhibitor that potently inhibits CDK9 and cellular
transcription. Because of its presumed selectivity for CDK9, FVP has been
previously used as a tool to infer the role of CDK9 on global gene expression.
DNA microarray analyses described here show that inhibition of gene expression by
FVP is consistent with global inhibition of transcription. However, specific
inhibition of CDK9 activity with dnCDK9 leads to a distinctive pattern of changes
in gene expression, with more genes being specifically upregulated (122) than
downregulated (84). Indeed, the expression of many short-lived transcripts
downregulated by FVP is not modulated by dnCDK9. Nevertheless, consistently with 
FVP inhibiting CDK9 activity, a significant number of the genes
downregulated/upregulated by dnCDK9 are modulated with a similar trend by FVP.
Our data suggests that the potent effects of FVP on transcription are likely to
involve inhibition of CTD kinases in addition to CDK9. Our data also suggest
complex and gene-specific modulation of gene expression by CDK9.

PMCID: PMC2783197
PMID: 19780058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Med Res Rev. 2010 Jul;30(4):646-66. doi: 10.1002/med.20172.

Pharmacological targeting of CDK9 in cardiac hypertrophy.

Krystof V(1), Chamrád I, Jorda R, Kohoutek J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Palacký University &
Institute of Experimental Botany AS CR, Slechtitelu 11, Olomouc 783 71, Czech
Republic. vladimir.krystof@upol.cz

Cardiac hypertrophy allows the heart to adapt to workload, but persistent or
unphysiological stimulus can result in pump failure. Cardiac hypertrophy is
characterized by an increase in the size of differentiated cardiac myocytes. At
the molecular level, growth of cells is linked to intensive transcription and
translation. Several cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) have been identified as
principal regulators of transcription, and among these CDK9 is directly
associated with cardiac hypertrophy. CDK9 phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II and thus stimulates the elongation phase of transcription.
Chronic activation of CDK9 causes not only cardiac myocyte enlargement but also
confers predisposition to heart failure. Due to the long interest of molecular
oncologists and medicinal chemists in CDKs as potential targets of anticancer
drugs, a portfolio of small-molecule inhibitors of CDK9 is available. Recent
determination of CDK9's crystal structure now allows the development of selective
inhibitors and their further optimization in terms of biochemical potency and
selectivity. CDK9 may therefore constitute a novel target for drugs against
cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 19757441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Dec;86(6):1345-50. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0509309. Epub 2009 Sep
10.

Characterization of Cdk9 T-loop phosphorylation in resting and activated CD4(+) T
lymphocytes.

Ramakrishnan R(1), Dow EC, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The cellular kinase complex P-TEFb is composed of Cdk9 and cyclin T, and it is
required for expression of most protein-coding genes by RNAP II. Cdk9 has been
shown recently to be activated in cis by autophosphorylation of Thr186 in its
T-loop. Using a phosphospecific Cdk9 antibody, we examined the level of Cdk9
T-loop phosphorylation in resting and activated CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Cdk9 T-loop
phosphorylation was found to be low-to-undetectable in resting CD4(+) T
lymphocytes, and upon activation by distinct stimuli, there is a rapid (<1 h)
increase in pCdk9 that does not require protein synthesis. The low level of Cdk9 
T-loop phosphorylation was not to be a result of the absence of an associated
regulatory cyclin partner. These observations suggest that autophosphorylation of
the Cdk9 T-loop is repressed in resting CD4(+) T lymphocytes. The low level of
T-loop phosphorylation in resting cells is also reflected in a low level of
phosphorylation of Ser2 in the carboxyl terminal domain of RNAP II, suggesting
that lack of Cdk9 T-loop autophosphorylation may limit RNAP II elongation in
quiescent CD4(+) T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2780919
PMID: 19741158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Feb;19(2):181-94. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0065.

Cdk2 inhibition prolongs G1 phase progression in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Koledova Z(1), Kafkova LR, Calabkova L, Krystof V, Dolezel P, Divoky V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech
Republic.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) proliferate rapidly and have a unique cell-cycle
structure with a very short G1 phase. Previous reports suggested that the rapid
G1 phase progression of ESCs might be underpinned by high and precocious Cdk2
activity and that Cdk2 activity might be crucial for both cell-cycle regulation
and cell-fate decisions in human ESCs. However, the actual role of Cdk2 in
cell-cycle progression of mouse ESCs (mESCs) has not been elucidated. In this
study, we investigated the effects of down-regulation of Cdk2 activity by
olomoucine II in 2 mESC lines. Olomoucine II treatment significantly increased
the G1 phase cell numbers, decreased the S phase cell numbers, and inhibited DNA 
replication in mESCs. In nocodazole-synchronized mESCs, we show that specific
down-regulation of Cdk2 activity prolongs G1 phase progression. In addition,
down-regulation of Cdk2 activity in mESCs established a somatic cell-like cell
cycle and induced expression of differentiation markers. Our results suggest that
high Cdk2 activity is essential for rapid G1 phase progression and establishment 
of ESC-specific cell-cycle structure in mESCs and support the hypothesis of a
link between cell-cycle regulation and pluripotency maintenance in ESCs. This
study reveals olomoucine II to be an effective tool for manipulation of the cell 
cycle and pluripotency in ESCs and very likely also for the manipulation of other
stem cell types, including cancer stem cells.

PMID: 19737069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2009 Nov;9(11):1369-82. doi: 10.1517/14712590903257781.

Novel HIV-1 therapeutics through targeting altered host cell pathways.

Coley W(1), Kehn-Hall K, Van Duyne R, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)George Washington University, School of Medicine, Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Tropical Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The emergence of drug-resistant HIV-1 strains presents a challenge for the design
of new drugs. Anti-HIV compounds currently in use are the subject of advanced
clinical trials using either HIV-1 reverse transcriptase, viral protease or
integrase inhibitors. Recent studies show an increase in the number of HIV-1
variants resistant to anti-retroviral agents in newly infected individuals.
Targeting host cell factors involved in the regulation of HIV-1 replication might
be one way to combat HIV-1 resistance to the currently available anti-viral
agents. A specific inhibition of HIV-1 gene expression could be expected from the
development of compounds targeting host cell factors that participate in the
activation of the HIV-1 LTR promoter. Here we discuss how targeting the host can 
be accomplished either by using small molecules to alter the function of the
host's proteins such as p53 or cdk9, or by utilizing new advances in siRNA
therapies to knock down essential host factors such as CCR5 and CXCR4. Finally,
we will discuss how the viral protein interactomes should be used to better
design therapeutics against HIV-1.

PMCID: PMC2785118
PMID: 19732026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009 Sep;2(9):800-6. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0053. Epub 2009 Sep 1.

Chemoprevention of mouse intestinal tumorigenesis by the cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor SNS-032.

Boquoi A(1), Chen T, Enders GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Epigenetics and Progenitor Cell Program, Fox Chase
Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Despite advances in screening and treatment, colorectal cancer remains the second
leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States. Cyclin-dependent
kinases (Cdk) are deregulated in colorectal cancer by silencing of the Cdk
inhibitor p16(Ink4a) and other mechanisms. We tested whether the small molecule
Cdk inhibitor SNS-032 (formerly BMS-387032), which targets Cdk2, Cdk7, and Cdk9, 
can prevent intestinal tumorigenesis in mouse models. We generated mice with high
intestinal tumor loads by combining the multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min)
mutation with Ink4a/Arf mutations and inducing colitis with dextran sulfate
sodium. p16-null Min mice (n = 17) began dextran sulfate sodium treatment at week
5 and i.p. injection of carrier or SNS-032 at week 6. Mice were sacrificed at
week 12. SNS-032 was well tolerated and reduced colon tumor burden to 36% of that
in carrier-treated mice (P < 0.001). We then extended the study to Ink4/Arf-null 
Min mice (n = 14) and increased the drug dose frequency. SNS-032 treatment
reduced the intestinal tumor number to 25% and intestinal tumor burden to 16% of 
carrier-treated mice (P < 0.0001). DNA synthesis in non-neoplastic and tumor
epithelial cells, detected by bromodeoxyuridine incorporation, was modestly
reduced by acute SNS-032 treatment. The mitotic index, detected by histone H3
phosphorylation, was distinctly decreased (P < 0.03), and apoptosis, detected by 
caspase 3 activation, was increased (P < 0.005). These results show the
chemoprevention of intestinal tumorigenesis by SNS-032. Our findings support
further study of Cdk inhibitors for chemoprevention and therapy of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2819381
PMID: 19723896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2201-12. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01557-07. Epub 2008 Feb
4.

Acetylation of conserved lysines in the catalytic core of cyclin-dependent kinase
9 inhibits kinase activity and regulates transcription.

Sabò A(1), Lusic M, Cereseto A, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)ICGEB Trieste, Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Padriciano, 99, 34012 Trieste,
Italy.

Promoter clearance and transcriptional processivity in eukaryotic cells are
fundamentally regulated by the phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain of 
RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). One of the kinases that essentially performs this
function is P-TEFb (positive transcription elongation factor b), which is
composed of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) associated with members of the
cyclin T family. Here we show that cellular GCN5 and P/CAF, members of the
GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase family of histone acetyltransferases, regulate
CDK9 function by specifically acetylating the catalytic core of the enzyme and,
in particular, a lysine that is essential for ATP coordination and the
phosphotransfer reaction. Acetylation markedly reduces both the kinase function
and transcriptional activity of P-TEFb. In contrast to unmodified CDK9, the
acetylated fraction of the enzyme is specifically found in the insoluble nuclear 
matrix compartment. Acetylated CDK9 associates with the transcriptionally silent 
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 provirus; upon transcriptional activation, it
is replaced by the unmodified form, which is involved in the elongating phase of 
transcription marked by Ser2-phosphorylated RNAPII. Given the conservation of the
CDK9 acetylated residues in the catalytic task of virtually all CDK proteins, we 
anticipate that this mechanism of regulation might play a broader role in
controlling the function of other members of this kinase family.

PMCID: PMC2268415
PMID: 18250157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Med Chem. 2008 Feb 28;51(4):737-51. doi: 10.1021/jm700940h. Epub 2008 Jan 31.

Meriolins (3-(pyrimidin-4-yl)-7-azaindoles): synthesis, kinase inhibitory
activity, cellular effects, and structure of a CDK2/cyclin A/meriolin complex.

Echalier A(1), Bettayeb K, Ferandin Y, Lozach O, Clément M, Valette A, Liger F,
Marquet B, Morris JC, Endicott JA, Joseph B, Meijer L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Department of Biochemistry, The Rex
Richards Building, University of Oxford, UK.

We report the synthesis and biological characterization of
3-(pyrimidin-4-yl)-7-azaindoles (meriolins), a chemical hybrid between the
natural products meridianins and variolins, derived from marine organisms.
Meriolins display potent inhibitory activities toward cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs) and, to a lesser extent, other kinases (GSK-3, DYRK1A). The crystal
structures of 1e (meriolin 5) and variolin B (Bettayeb, K.; Tirado, O. M.;
Marionneau-Lambert, S.; Ferandin, Y.; Lozach, O.; Morris, J.; Mateo-Lozano, S.;
Drückes, P.; Schächtele, C.; Kubbutat, M.; Liger, F.; Marquet, B.; Joseph, B.;
Echalier, A.; Endicott, J.; Notario, V.; Meijer, L. Cancer Res. 2007, 67,
8325-8334) in complex with CDK2/cyclin A reveal that the two inhibitors are
orientated in very different ways inside the ATP-binding pocket of the kinase. A 
structure-activity relationship provides further insight into the molecular
mechanism of action of this family of kinase inhibitors. Meriolins are also
potent antiproliferative and proapoptotic agents in cells cultured either as
monolayers or in spheroids. Proapoptotic efficacy of meriolins correlates best
with their CDK2 and CDK9 inhibitory activity. Meriolins thus constitute a
promising class of pharmacological agents to be further evaluated against the
numerous human diseases that imply abnormal regulation of CDKs including cancers,
neurodegenerative disorders, and polycystic kidney disease.

PMID: 18232649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 30;3(1):e1492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001492.

The CDK-activating kinase (CAK) Csk1 is required for normal levels of homologous 
recombination and resistance to DNA damage in fission yeast.

Gerber HB(1), Pikman Y, Fisher RP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) perform essential roles in cell
division and gene expression in all eukaryotes. The requirement for an upstream
CDK-activating kinase (CAK) is also universally conserved, but the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe appears to be unique in having two CAKs with both
overlapping and specialized functions that can be dissected genetically. The Mcs6
complex--orthologous to metazoan Cdk7/cyclin H/Mat1--activates the cell-cycle
CDK, Cdk1, but its non-redundant essential function appears to be in regulation
of gene expression, as part of transcription factor TFIIH. The other CAK is Csk1,
an ortholog of budding yeast Cak1, which activates all three essential CDKs in S.
pombe--Cdk1, Mcs6 and Cdk9, the catalytic subunit of positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb)--but is not itself essential.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Cells lacking csk1(+) are viable but
hypersensitive to agents that damage DNA or block replication. Csk1 is required
for normal levels of homologous recombination (HR), and interacts genetically
with components of the HR pathway. Tests of damage sensitivity in csk1, mcs6 and 
cdk9 mutants indicate that Csk1 acts pleiotropically, through Cdk9 and at least
one other target (but not through Mcs6) to preserve genomic integrity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The two CAKs in fission yeast, which differ with
respect to their substrate range and preferences for monomeric CDKs versus
CDK/cyclin complexes as substrates, also support different functions of the CDK
network in vivo. Csk1 plays a non-redundant role in safeguarding genomic
integrity. We propose that specialized activation pathways dependent on different
CAKs might insulate CDK functions important in DNA damage responses from those
capable of triggering mitosis.

PMCID: PMC2200797
PMID: 18231579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9040-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707603200. Epub 2008
Jan 27.

The bromodomain protein Brd4 stimulates G1 gene transcription and promotes
progression to S phase.

Mochizuki K(1), Nishiyama A, Jang MK, Dey A, Ghosh A, Tamura T, Natsume H, Yao H,
Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

Brd4 is a bromodomain protein that binds to acetylated chromatin. It regulates
cell growth, although the underlying mechanism has remained elusive. Brd4 has
also been shown to control transcription of viral genes, whereas its role in
transcription of cellular genes has not been fully elucidated. Here we addressed 
the role of Brd4 in cell growth and transcription using a small hairpin (sh) RNA 
approach. The Brd4 shRNA vector stably knocked down Brd4 protein expression by
approximately 90% in NIH3T3 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Brd4 knockdown
cells were growth impaired and grew more slowly than control cells. When
synchronized by serum starvation and released, Brd4 knockdown cells were arrested
at G(1), whereas control cells progressed to S phase. In microarray analysis,
although numerous genes were up-regulated during G(1) in control cells, many of
these G(1) genes were not up-regulated in Brd4 knockdown cells. Reintroduction of
Brd4 rescued expression of these G(1) genes in Brd4 knockdown cells, allowing
cells to progress toward S phase. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed
that Brd4 was recruited to the promoters of these G(1) genes during G(0)-G(1)
progression. Furthermore, Brd4 recruitment coincided with increased binding of
Cdk9, a component of P-TEFb and RNA polymerase II to these genes. Brd4
recruitment was low to absent at genes not affected by Brd4 shRNA. The results
indicate that Brd4 stimulates G(1) gene expression by binding to multiple G(1)
gene promoters in a cell cycle-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC2431025
PMID: 18223296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 21;283(12):7368-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706243200. Epub 2008 
Jan 24.

Promoter influences transcription elongation: TATA-box element mediates the
assembly of processive transcription complexes responsive to cyclin-dependent
kinase 9.

Montanuy I(1), Torremocha R, Hernández-Munain C, Suñé C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Instituto de Parasitología y
Biomedicina López Neyra, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 18100
Granada, Spain.

Pausing of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) during transcript elongation is an
important mechanism for regulating gene expression at many genes. In this study
we investigated the mechanism of regulated elongation of c-myc and human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) using an in vitro elongation assay that
reproduces the conditional block to elongation. We found that HIV-1 Tat can
activate the RNAPII transcription complexes paused on c-myc by enhancing their
elongation efficiency. We determined that cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), the
kinase subunit of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complex,
regulates transcriptional elongation of c-myc and is present in transcription
pre-initiation complexes formed on the c-myc promoter, which emphasizes a common 
mechanism of elongation control between HIV-1 and c-myc genes. We also
investigated the roles of upstream elements of the HIV-1 and c-myc promoters in
CDK9-activated transcriptional elongation. We found that the TATA-box element
mediates the assembly of processive transcription complexes responsive to CDK9
and that specific combinations of upstream activation binding sites contribute to
the recruitment of these complexes. We propose a common mechanism for elongation 
control at the c-myc and HIV-1 genes with an essential role for the TATA-box and 
specific modulatory contribution of upstream regulatory sequences, derived from
the unique structure of the promoters, to form a composite surface for efficient 
recruitment of elongation-competent transcription complexes.

PMID: 18218627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Plant J. 2008 Apr;54(2):220-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03414.x. Epub 2008 
Jan 16.

A cyclin-dependent protein kinase, CDKC2, colocalizes with and modulates the
distribution of spliceosomal components in Arabidopsis.

Kitsios G(1), Alexiou KG, Bush M, Shaw P, Doonan JH.

Author information: 
(1)John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play key regulatory roles in diverse cellular
functions, including cell-cycle progression, transcription and translation. In
plants, CDKs have been classified into several groups, named A through to G, but 
the functions of most are poorly characterized. CDKCs are known to phosphorylate 
the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II), and therefore the
CDKC-cyclinT (CycT) complex may have a role similar to the animal CDK9-CycT
complex of the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). However, we
found that the predicted structure of the Arabidopsis CDKC2 protein is more
similar to the mammalian cdc2-related kinase, CRK7, than to CDK9. CRK7 is
proposed to link transcription with splicing, and CDKC2 contains all the
structural features of CRK7 that make the latter distinct from CDK9. Consistent
with this, we show that GFP-CDKC2 fusion proteins co-localize with spliceosomal
components, that the expression of CDKC2 modifies the location of these
components, and that co-localization was dependent on the transcriptional status 
of the cells and on CDKC2-kinase activity. We propose, therefore, that the
Arabidopsis CDKC2 combines the functions of both CRK7 and CDK9, and could also
couple splicing with transcription.

PMID: 18208522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Apr;215(1):276-82. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21311.

Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex: a key player during the activation/differentiation
process of normal lymphoid B cells.

De Falco G(1), Leucci E, Onnis A, Bellan C, Tigli C, Wirths S, Cerino G, Cocco M,
Crupi D, De Luca A, Lanzavecchia A, Tosi P, Leoncini L, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex is very important in controlling specific differentiative 
pathways of several cell types. Limited data are available regarding the
expression of Cdk9/Cyclin T1 in hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. Cdk9/Cyclin
T1 expression seems to be related to particular stages of lymphoid
differentiation/activation. In this study, we observed that the expression level 
of Cdk9/Cyclin T1 in vivo increases in memory B cells compared to naïve B cells, 
and in activated B cells, compared to non-activated ones. The expression level of
the Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex does not increase in cells induced to differentiate in
vitro. In addition, we showed that Cdk9 interacts with E12 and E47, specifically 
activated during Germinal Center (GC) reaction. Taken together this data suggests
an active role for the Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex during lymphoid differentiation
through germinal center reaction.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18205180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Gen Virol. 2008 Jan;89(Pt 1):87-96.

Human herpesvirus 6B induces phosphorylation of p53 in its regulatory domain by a
CK2- and p38-independent pathway.

Oster B(1), Bundgaard B, Hupp TR, Höllsberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Aarhus,
Aarhus, Denmark.

Here, we demonstrate that human herpesvirus 6B (HHV-6B) infection upregulates the
tumour suppressor p53 and induces phosphorylation of p53 at Ser392.
Interestingly, phosphorylation at the equivalent site has previously been shown
to correlate with p53 tumour suppression in murine models. Although the
signalling pathways leading to Ser392 phosphorylation are poorly understood, they
seem to include casein kinase 2 (CK2), double-stranded RNA-activated protein
kinase (PKR), p38 or cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9). By using column
chromatography and in vitro kinase assays, CK2 and p38, but not PKR or Cdk9,
eluted in column fractions that phosphorylated p53 at Ser392. However, treatment 
of cells with neither the CK2 and Cdk9 inhibitor
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) nor p38 kinase inhibitors 
reduced HHV-6B-induced Ser392 phosphorylation significantly. Knockdown of the
CK2beta subunit or p38alpha by small interfering RNA had no effect on
HHV-6B-induced phosphorylation of p53 at Ser392. Thus, HHV-6B induces p53 Ser392 
phosphorylation by an atypical pathway independent of CK2 and p38 kinases,
whereas mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signalling pathways are involved
in viral replication.

PMID: 18089732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1630-43. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Up-regulation of P-TEFb by the MEK1-extracellular signal-regulated kinase
signaling pathway contributes to stimulated transcription elongation of immediate
early genes in neuroendocrine cells.

Fujita T(1), Ryser S, Piuz I, Schlegel W.

Author information: 
(1)Fondation pour Recherches Médicales, 64 av. de la Roseraie, University of
Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

The positive elongation factor P-TEFb appears to function as a crucial
C-terminal-domain (CTD) kinase for RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcribing
immediate early genes (IEGs) in neuroendocrine GH4C1 cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation indicated that in resting cells Pol II occupied the
promoter-proximal regions of the c-fos and junB genes, together with the negative
elongation factors DSIF and NELF. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)-induced
recruitment of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) abolished the 
pausing of Pol II and enhanced phosphorylation of CTD serine 2, resulting in
transcription elongation. In addition, P-TEFb was essential for splicing and
3'-end processing of IEG transcripts. Importantly, the MEK1-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway activated by TRH up-regulated
nuclear CDK9 and CDK9/cyclinT1 dimers (i.e., P-TEFb), facilitating the
recruitment of P-TEFb to c-fos and other IEGs. Thus, in addition to established
gene transcription control via promoter response elements, the MEK1-ERK signaling
pathway controls transcription elongation by Pol II via the up-regulation of
nuclear CDK9 integrated into P-TEFb.

PMCID: PMC2258797
PMID: 18086894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;28(3):967-76. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Brd4 recruits P-TEFb to chromosomes at late mitosis to promote G1 gene expression
and cell cycle progression.

Yang Z(1), He N, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 622 Barker
Hall, Room 3202, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Brd4, a bromodomain protein capable of interacting with acetylated histones, is
implicated in transmitting epigenetic memory through mitosis. It also functions
as an associated factor and positive regulator of P-TEFb, a Cdk9-cyclin T1
heterodimer that stimulates transcriptional elongation by phosphorylating RNA
polymerase II. In the present study, experiments were performed to determine
whether these two functions of Brd4 are interrelated and, if so, how they may
impact cell cycle progression. Our data demonstrate that while the P-TEFb level
remains constant, the Brd4-P-TEFb interaction increases dramatically in cells
progressing from late mitosis to early G(1). Concurrently, P-TEFb is recruited to
chromosomes, beginning around mid- to late anaphase and before nuclear
envelope/lamina formation and nuclear import of other general transcription
factors. Importantly, the recruitment of P-TEFb depends on Brd4. Abrogation of
this process through Brd4 knockdown reduces the binding of P-TEFb to and
expression of key G(1) and growth-associated genes, leading to G(1) cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Because P-TEFb is synonymous with productive elongation,
its recruitment by Brd4 to chromosomes at late mitosis may indicate those genes
whose active transcription status must be preserved across cell division.

PMCID: PMC2223388
PMID: 18039861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(2):687-704. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

Parvin-beta inhibits breast cancer tumorigenicity and promotes CDK9-mediated
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 1 phosphorylation.

Johnstone CN(1), Mongroo PS, Rich AS, Schupp M, Bowser MJ, Delemos AS, Tobias JW,
Liu Y, Hannigan GE, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania,
600 Clinical Research Building, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Parvin-beta is a focal adhesion protein downregulated in human breast cancer
cells. Loss of Parvin-beta contributes to increased integrin-linked kinase
activity, cell-matrix adhesion, and invasion through the extracellular matrix in 
vitro. The effect of ectopic Parvin-beta expression on the transcriptional
profile of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which normally do not express
Parvin-beta, was evaluated. Particular emphasis was placed upon propagating
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in three-dimensional culture matrices.
Interestingly, Parvin-beta reexpression in MDA-MB-231 cells increased the mRNA
expression, serine 82 phosphorylation (mediated by CDK9), and activity of the
nuclear hormone receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma), and there was a concomitant increase in lipogenic gene expression as
a downstream effector of PPARgamma. Importantly, Parvin-beta suppressed breast
cancer growth in vivo, with associated decreased proliferation. These data
suggest that Parvin-beta might influence breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2223422
PMID: 17998334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 21;282(51):37091-102. Epub 2007 Oct 23.

The functional role of an interleukin 6-inducible CDK9.STAT3 complex in human
gamma-fibrinogen gene expression.

Hou T(1), Ray S, Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-1060, USA.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is an
IL-6-inducible transcription factor that mediates the hepatic acute phase
response (APR). Using gamma-fibrinogen (FBG) as a model of the APR, we
investigated the requirement of an IL-6-inducible complex of STAT3 with
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) on gamma-FBG expression in HepG2 hepatocarcinoma
cells. IL-6 induces rapid nuclear translocation of Tyr-phosphorylated STAT3 that 
forms a nuclear complex with CDK9 in nondenaturing co-immunoprecipitation and
confocal colocalization assays. To further understand this interaction, we found 
that CDK9-STAT3 binding is mediated via both STAT NH2-terminal modulatory and
COOH-terminal transactivation domains. Both IL-6-inducible gamma-FBG reporter
gene and endogenous mRNA expression are significantly decreased after CDK9
inhibition using the potent CDK inhibitor, flavopiridol (FP), or specific CDK9
siRNA. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments revealed an
IL-6-inducible STAT3 and CDK9 binding to the proximal gamma-FBG promoter as well 
as increased loading of RNA Pol II and phospho-Ser2 CTD Pol II on the TATA box
and coding regions. Finally, FP specifically and efficiently inhibits association
of phospho-Ser2 CTD RNA Pol II on the gamma-FBG promoter, indicating that CDK9
kinase activity mediates IL-6-inducible CTD phosphorylation. Our data indicate
that IL-6 induces a STAT3.CDK9 complex mediated by bivalent STAT3 domains and
CDK9 kinase activity is necessary for licensing Pol II to enter a transcriptional
elongation mode. Therefore, disruption of IL-6 signaling by CDK9 inhibitors could
be a potential therapeutic strategy for inflammatory disease.

PMID: 17956865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Gene. 2007 Dec 15;405(1-2):65-78. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Direct inhibition of CDK9 blocks HIV-1 replication without preventing T-cell
activation in primary human peripheral blood lymphocytes.

Salerno D(1), Hasham MG, Marshall R, Garriga J, Tsygankov AY, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, 3307 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

HIV-1 transcription is essential for the virus replication cycle. HIV-1 Tat is a 
viral transactivator that strongly stimulates the processivity of RNA polymerase 
II (RNAPII) via recruitment of the cyclin T1/CDK9 positive transcription
elongation factor, which phosphorylates the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNAPII.
Consistently, HIV-1 replication in transformed cells is very sensitive to direct 
CDK9 inhibition. Thus, CDK9 could be a potential target for anti-HIV-1 therapy. A
clearer understanding of the requirements for CDK9 activity in primary human T
cells is needed to assess whether the CDK9-dependent step in HIV-1 transcription 
can be targeted clinically. We have investigated the effects of limiting CDK9
activity with recombinant lentiviruses expressing a dominant-negative form of
CDK9 (HA-dnCDK9) in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and other cells. Our
results show that direct inhibition of CDK9 potently inhibits HIV-1 replication
in single-round infection assays with little to undetectable effects on RNAPII
transcription, RNA synthesis, proliferation and viability. In PBLs purified from 
multiple donors, direct inhibition of CDK9 activity blocks HIV-1
replication/transcription but does not prevent T-cell activation, as determined
via measurement of cell surface and cell cycle entry and progression markers, and
DNA synthesis. We have also compared the effects of HA-dnCDK9 to flavopiridol
(FVP), a general CDK inhibitor that potently inhibits CDK9. In contrast to
HA-dnCDK9, FVP interferes with key cellular processes at concentrations that
inhibit HIV-1 replication with potency similar to HA-dnCDK9. In particular, FVP
inhibits several T-cell activation markers and DNA synthesis in primary PBLs at
the minimal concentrations required to inhibit HIV-1 replication. Our results
imply that small pharmacological compounds targeting CDK9 with enhanced
selectivity could be developed into effective anti-HIV-1 therapeutic drugs.

PMCID: PMC2222555
PMID: 17949927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Virol. 2008 Jan;82(1):278-90. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus K-cyclin interacts with Cdk9 and
stimulates Cdk9-mediated phosphorylation of p53 tumor suppressor.

Chang PC(1), Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Health Research, University of Kentucky College of Dentistry, 
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

K-cyclin, encoded by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus, has previously been
demonstrated to activate cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (Cdk6) to induce the
phosphorylation of various cell cycle regulators. In this study, we identified
Cdk9 as a new K-cyclin-associated Cdk and showed that K-cyclin interacted with
Cdk9 through its basic domain. We hypothesized that K-cyclin served as a
regulatory subunit for the activity of Cdk9. Recent reports show that Cdk9
phosphorylates tumor suppressor p53, and we found that the K-cyclin/Cdk9
interaction greatly enhanced the kinase activity of Cdk9 toward p53. The
phosphorylation site(s) of K-cyclin/Cdk9 kinase complexes was mapped in the
transactivation domain of p53. We showed that the ectopic expression of K-cyclin 
led to a sustained increase of p53 phosphorylation on Ser(33) in vivo, and the
phosphorylation could be inhibited by a dominant negative Cdk9 mutant, dn-Cdk9.
Using p53-positive U2OS and p53-null SaOS2 cells, we demonstrated that
K-cyclin-induced growth arrest was associated with the presence of p53. In
addition, K-cyclin-induced p53-dependent growth arrest was rescued by the
dn-Cdk9- or Cdk9-specific short hairpin RNA in SaOS2 cells. Together, our
findings for the first time demonstrated the interaction of K-cyclin and Cdk9 and
revealed a new molecular link between K-cyclin and p53.

PMCID: PMC2224387
PMID: 17942552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Virol. 2008 Jan;82(1):394-407. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Inhibition of the cyclin-dependent kinases at the beginning of human
cytomegalovirus infection specifically alters the levels and localization of the 
RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain kinases cdk9 and cdk7 at the viral
transcriptosome.

Kapasi AJ(1), Spector DH.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Room 3254, Mail Code
0712, 9500 Gilman Drive, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0712, USA.

We previously reported that defined components of the host transcription
machinery are recruited to human cytomegalovirus immediate-early (IE)
transcription sites, including cdk9 and cdk7 (S. Tamrakar, A. J. Kapasi, and D.
H. Spector, J. Virol. 79:15477-15493, 2005). In this report, we further document 
the complexity of this site, referred to as the transcriptosome, through
identification of additional resident proteins, including viral UL69 and cellular
cyclin T1, Brd4, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and HDAC2. To examine the role of
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) in the establishment of this site, we used
roscovitine, a specific inhibitor of cdk1, cdk2, cdk7, and cdk9, that alters
processing of viral IE transcripts and inhibits expression of viral early genes. 
In the presence of roscovitine, IE2, cyclin T1, Brd4, HDAC1, and HDAC2 accumulate
at the transcriptosome. However, accumulation of cdk9 and cdk7 was specifically
inhibited. Roscovitine treatment also resulted in decreased levels of cdk9 and
cdk7 RNA. There was a corresponding reduction in cdk9 protein but only a modest
decrease in cdk7 protein. However, overexpression of cdk9 does not compensate for
the effects of roscovitine on cdk9 localization or viral gene expression.
Delaying the addition of roscovitine until 8 h postinfection prevented all of the
observed effects of the cdk inhibitor. These data suggest that IE2 and multiple
cellular factors needed for viral RNA synthesis accumulate within the first 8 h
at the viral transcriptosome and that functional cdk activity is required for the
specific recruitment of cdk7 and cdk9 during this time interval.

PMCID: PMC2224385
PMID: 17942543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2007;18(4):201-11.

Potent and selective inhibition of Tat-dependent HIV-1 replication in chronically
infected cells by a novel naphthalene derivative JTK-101.

Wang X(1), Yamataka K, Okamoto M, Ikeda S, Baba M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Antiviral Chemotherapy, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, 
Japan.

In search for effective human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcription
inhibitors, we have evaluated more than 100,000 compounds for their inhibitory
effects on HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)-driven reporter gene expression, and 
identified a novel naphthalene derivative, JTK-101. This compound could suppress 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced HIV-1 production in latently infected 
OM-10.1 cells at nanomolar concentrations. JTK-101 could also potently inhibit
constitutive HIV-1 production in MOTL-4/IIIB. However, the antiviral activity of 
JTK-101 was found to be much weaker in acutely infected cells and the chronically
infected cells U937/IIIB cells than in OM-10.1 and MOLT-4/IIIB cells. JTK-101
selectively suppressed TNF-alpha-induced HIV-1 mRNA synthesis in OM-10.1 cells in
a dose-dependent fashion. JTK-101 modestly inhibited TNF-alpha-induced HIV-1
LTR-driven reporter gene expression, but potently inhibited Tat-induced gene
expression. Immunoblot analysis revealed that low-level expression of the Tat
cofactors CDK9 and cyclin T1 might contribute to the diminished antiviral
activity in U937/IIIB cells. Furthermore, JTK-101 could not inhibit HIV-1
replication in chronically infected monocytes/macrophages, in which CDK9 and
cyclin T1 were undetectable. These results suggest that JTK-101 exerts its
anti-HIV-1 activity through the inhibition of known or unknown Tat cofactors,
presumably CDK9/cyclin T1.

PMID: 17907378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;67(17):8325-34.

Meriolins, a new class of cell death inducing kinase inhibitors with enhanced
selectivity for cyclin-dependent kinases.

Bettayeb K(1), Tirado OM, Marionneau-Lambot S, Ferandin Y, Lozach O, Morris JC,
Mateo-Lozano S, Drueckes P, Schächtele C, Kubbutat MH, Liger F, Marquet B, Joseph
B, Echalier A, Endicott JA, Notario V, Meijer L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Cell Cycle Group & UPS2682,
Station Biologique, Roscoff, Bretagne, France.

Protein kinases represent promising anticancer drug targets. We describe here the
meriolins, a new family of inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK).
Meriolins represent a chemical structural hybrid between meridianins and
variolins, two families of kinase inhibitors extracted from various marine
invertebrates. Variolin B is currently in preclinical evaluation as an antitumor 
agent. A selectivity study done on 32 kinases showed that, compared with variolin
B, meriolins display enhanced specificity toward CDKs, with marked potency on
CDK2 and CDK9. The structures of pCDK2/cyclin A/variolin B and pCDK2/cyclin
A/meriolin 3 complexes reveal that the two inhibitors bind within the ATP binding
site of the kinase, but in different orientations. Meriolins display better
antiproliferative and proapoptotic properties in human tumor cell cultures than
their parent molecules, meridianins and variolins. Phosphorylation at CDK1, CDK4,
and CDK9 sites on, respectively, protein phosphatase 1alpha, retinoblastoma
protein, and RNA polymerase II is inhibited in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells
exposed to meriolins. Apoptosis triggered by meriolins is accompanied by rapid
Mcl-1 down-regulation, cytochrome c release, and activation of caspases. Meriolin
3 potently inhibits tumor growth in two mouse xenograft cancer models, namely,
Ewing's sarcoma and LS174T colorectal carcinoma. Meriolins thus constitute a new 
CDK inhibitory scaffold, with promising antitumor activity, derived from
molecules initially isolated from marine organisms.

PMID: 17804748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 4;104(36):14312-7. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Structure of the Cyclin T binding domain of Hexim1 and molecular basis for its
recognition of P-TEFb.

Dames SA(1), Schönichen A, Schulte A, Barboric M, Peterlin BM, Grzesiek S, Geyer 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Biozentrum Basel, University of Basel, 4003 
Basel, Switzerland. sonja.dames@unibas.ch

Hexim1 is a cellular protein that associates with the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb) to regulate RNA polymerase II elongation of nascent 
mRNA transcripts. It directly binds to Cyclin T1 of P-TEFb and inhibits the
kinase activity of Cdk9, leading to an arrest of transcription elongation. Here, 
we report the solution structure of the Cyclin T binding domain (TBD) of Hexim1
that forms a parallel coiled-coil homodimer composed of two segments and a
preceding alpha helix that folds back onto the first coiled-coil unit. NMR
titration, fluorescence, and immunoprecipitation experiments revealed the binding
interface to Cyclin T1, which covers a large surface on the first coiled-coil
segment. Electrostatic interactions between an acidic patch on Hexim1 and
positively charged residues of Cyclin T1 drive the complex formation that is
confirmed by mutagenesis data on Hexim1 mediated transcription regulation in
cells. Thus, our studies provide structural insights how Hexim1 recognizes the
Cyclin T1 subunit of P-TEFb, which is a key step toward the regulation of
transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC1955226
PMID: 17724342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Cell. 2007 Aug 17;27(4):517-9.

Transcriptional networking cap-tures the 7SK RNA 5'-gamma-methyltransferase.

Shuman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021, USA.
s-shuman@ski.mskcc.org

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2007 Jul 20;27(2):262-74.

In a recent issue of Molecular Cell, Jeronimo et al. (2007) identify BCDIN3, a
Cdk9-associated protein, as the enzyme that forms the distinctive
gamma-methylphosphate cap structure of 7SK, a noncoding RNA that regulates Cdk9
activity.

PMID: 17707222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cell Cycle. 2007 Aug 15;6(16):2031-7. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

P-TEFb is a crucial co-factor for Myc transactivation.

Gargano B(1), Amente S, Majello B, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy.

Myc forms an heterodimer with Max and operates as a transcription factor upon
binding to specific DNA sites in cellular chromatin. In addition to recruit
histone acetylation activity, Myc binds to the positive transcription elongation 
factor b (P-TEFb) which consists of the cyclin-dependent kinase CKD9 and its
regulatory subunit cyclin T. P-TEFb phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal-domain
(CTD) of the larger subunit of RNA polymerase II as well as negative elongation
factors allowing efficient transcription elongation. Here, we report that Myc
binds, as heterodimer with Max, exclusively the core active P-TEFb complex, and
it recruits P-TEFb at Myc targets in vivo. Pharmacological inhibition of P-TEFb
by 5.6-di-chloro-1-b-D-ribofuranosyl-bensimidazole (DRB) specifically inhibits
expression of Myc-responsive CAD and NUC genes, and impairs the Myc-induced
S-phase and apoptosis of quiescent cells grown in low serum. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP) demonstrated co-occupancy of Myc and P-TEFb to 
CAD and NUC E-boxes, and DRB treatment diminished the density of Pol II
phosphorylated on Ser-2 of its CTD. These results indicate that P-TEFb is
recruited in vivo to Myc-target promoters and CDK9 activity is an important step 
for Myc-dependent stimulation of responsive genes.

PMID: 17700062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(20):11179-86. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Modulation of the Brd4/P-TEFb interaction by the human T-lymphotropic virus type 
1 tax protein.

Cho WK(1), Zhou M, Jang MK, Huang K, Jeong SJ, Ozato K, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 41
Medlars Dr., Bldg. 41, Rm. B201, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb), which is composed of CDK9 and 
cyclin T1, plays an important role in cellular and viral gene expression. Our lab
has recently demonstrated that P-TEFb is required for Tax transactivation of the 
viral long terminal repeat (LTR). P-TEFb is found in two major complexes: the
inactive form, which is associated with inhibitory subunits 7SK snRNA and HEXIM1,
and the active form, which is associated with, at least in part, Brd4. In this
study, we analyzed the effect of Brd4 on human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
(HTLV-1) transcription. Overexpression of Brd4 repressed Tax transactivation of
the HTLV-1 LTR in a dose-dependent manner. In vitro binding studies suggest that 
Tax and Brd4 compete for binding to P-TEFb through direct interaction with cyclin
T1. Tax interacts with cyclin T1 amino acids 426 to 533, which overlaps the
region responsible for Brd4 binding. In vivo, overexpression of Tax decreased the
amount of 7SK snRNA associated with P-TEFb and stimulates serine 2
phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain, suggesting
that Tax regulates the functionality of P-TEFb. Our results suggest the
possibility that Tax may compete and functionally substitute for Brd4 in P-TEFb
regulation.

PMCID: PMC2045532
PMID: 17686863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Future Microbiol. 2006 Dec;1(4):417-26.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of HIV-1 gene expression:
role of cellular factors for Tat and Rev.

Nekhai S(1), Jeang KT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease & Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biolology, Howard University, NW Washington, DC 20059, USA. snekhai@howard.edu

The emergence of drug-resistant HIV-1 strains presents a challenge for the design
of new therapy. Targeting host cell factors that regulate HIV-1 replication might
be one way to overcome the propensity for HIV-1 to mutate in order to develop
resistance to antivirals. This article reviews the interplay between viral
proteins Tat and Rev and their cellular cofactors in the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation of HIV-1 gene expression. HIV-1 Tat regulates
viral transcription by recruiting cellular factors to the HIV promoter. Tat
interacts with protein kinase complexes Cdk9/cyclin T1 and Cdk2/cyclin E;
acetyltransferases p300/CBP, p300/CBP-associated factor and hGCN5; protein
phosphatases and other factors. HIV-1 Rev regulates post-transcriptional
processing of viral mRNAs. Rev primarily functions to export unspliced and
partially spliced viral RNAs from the nucleus into the cytoplasm. For this
activity, Rev cooperates with cellular transport protein CRM1 and RNA helicases
DDX1 and DDX3, amongst others.

PMID: 17661632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Virology. 2007 Oct 25;367(2):324-33. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Iron chelators ICL670 and 311 inhibit HIV-1 transcription.

Debebe Z(1), Ammosova T, Jerebtsova M, Kurantsin-Mills J, Niu X, Charles S,
Richardson DR, Ray PE, Gordeuk VR, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University College of Medicine,
Washington, DC 20060, USA.

HIV-1 replication is induced by an excess of iron and iron chelation by
desferrioxamine (DFO) inhibits viral replication by reducing proliferation of
infected cells. Treatment of cells with DFO and 2-hydroxy-1-naphthylaldehyde
isonicotinoyl hydrazone (311) inhibit expression of proteins that regulate
cell-cycle progression, including cycle-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2). Our recent
studies showed that CDK2 participates in HIV-1 transcription and viral
replication suggesting that inhibition of CDK2 by iron chelators might also
affect HIV-1 transcription. Here we evaluated the effect of a clinically approved
orally effective iron chelator,
4-[3,5-bis-(hydroxyphenyl)-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl]-benzoic acid (ICL670) and 311 on
HIV-1 transcription. Both ICL670 and 311 inhibited Tat-induced HIV-1
transcription in CEM-T cells, 293T and HeLa cells. Neither ICL670 nor 311 induced
cytotoxicity at concentrations that inhibited HIV-1 transcription. The chelators 
decreased cellular activity of CDK2 and reduced HIV-1 Tat phosphorylation by
CDK2. Neither ICL670A or 311 decreased CDK9 protein level but significantly
reduced association of CDK9 with cyclin T1 and reduced phosphorylation of Ser-2
residues of RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain. In conclusion, our findings add 
to the evidence that iron chelators can inhibit HIV-1 transcription by
deregulating CDK2 and CDK9. Further consideration should be given to the
development of iron chelators for future anti-retroviral therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC2077891
PMID: 17631934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Retrovirology. 2007 Jul 11;4:47.

Inhibition of HIV-1 replication by P-TEFb inhibitors DRB, seliciclib and
flavopiridol correlates with release of free P-TEFb from the large, inactive form
of the complex.

Biglione S(1), Byers SA, Price JP, Nguyen VT, Bensaude O, Price DH, Maury W.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, USA. biglione@cbrinstitute.org

BACKGROUND: The positive transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, comprised of
cyclin dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) and cyclin T1, T2 or K regulates the productive 
elongation phase of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) dependent transcription of
cellular and integrated viral genes. P-TEFb containing cyclin T1 is recruited to 
the HIV long terminal repeat (LTR) by binding to HIV Tat which in turn binds to
the nascent HIV transcript. Within the cell, P-TEFb exists as a kinase-active,
free form and a larger, kinase-inactive form that is believed to serve as a
reservoir for the smaller form.
RESULTS: We developed a method to rapidly quantitate the relative amounts of the 
two forms based on differential nuclear extraction. Using this technique, we
found that titration of the P-TEFb inhibitors flavopiridol, DRB and seliciclib
onto HeLa cells that support HIV replication led to a dose dependent loss of the 
large form of P-TEFb. Importantly, the reduction in the large form correlated
with a reduction in HIV-1 replication such that when 50% of the large form was
gone, HIV-1 replication was reduced by 50%. Some of the compounds were able to
effectively block HIV replication without having a significant impact on cell
viability. The most effective P-TEFb inhibitor flavopiridol was evaluated against
HIV-1 in the physiologically relevant cell types, peripheral blood lymphocytes
(PBLs) and monocyte derived macrophages (MDMs). Flavopiridol was found to have a 
smaller therapeutic index (LD50/IC50) in long term HIV-1 infectivity studies in
primary cells due to greater cytotoxicity and reduced efficacy at blocking HIV-1 
replication.
CONCLUSION: Initial short term studies with P-TEFb inhibitors demonstrated a dose
dependent loss of the large form of P-TEFb within the cell and a concomitant
reduction in HIV-1 infectivity without significant cytotoxicity. These findings
suggested that inhibitors of P-TEFb may serve as effective anti-HIV-1 therapies. 
However, longer term HIV-1 replication studies indicated that these inhibitors
were more cytotoxic and less efficacious against HIV-1 in the primary cell
cultures.

PMCID: PMC1948018
PMID: 17625008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Genes Dev. 2007 Jun 1;21(11):1409-21.

The RNA polymerase II CTD kinase Ctk1 functions in translation elongation.

Röther S(1), Strässer K.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Center and Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2007 Jun 1;21(11):1288-91.

Translation is a highly complex process that is regulated by a multitude of
factors. Here, we show that the conserved kinase Ctk1 functions in translation by
enhancing decoding fidelity. Ctk1 associates with translating ribosomes in vivo
and is needed for efficient translation. Ctk1 phosphorylates Rps2, a protein of
the small ribosomal subunit, on Ser 238. Importantly, Ctk1-depleted as well as
rps2-S238A mutant cells show a defect in translation elongation through an
increase in the frequency of miscoding. The role of Ctk1 in translation may be
conserved as the mammalian homolog of Ctk1, CDK9, also associates with polysomes.
Since Ctk1 interacts with the TREX (transcription and mRNA export) complex, which
couples transcription to mRNA export, Ctk1/CDK9 might bind to correctly processed
mRNPs during transcription and accompany the mRNP to the ribosomes in the
cytoplasm, where Ctk1 enhances efficient and accurate translation of the mRNA.

PMCID: PMC1877752
PMID: 17545469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jul 27;370(5):826-36. Epub 2007 May 10.

Cyclin box structure of the P-TEFb subunit cyclin T1 derived from a fusion
complex with EIAV tat.

Anand K(1), Schulte A, Fujinaga K, Scheffzek K, Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Heidelberg, Structural and Computational Biology & Developmental Biology 
Unit, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is an essential regulator
of viral gene expression during the life cycle of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1). Its cyclin T1 subunit forms a ternary complex with the viral
transcriptional transactivator (Tat) protein and the transactivation response
(TAR) RNA element thereby activating cyclin dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), which
stimulates transcription at the level of chain elongation. We report the
structure of the cyclin box domain of human cyclin T1 at a resolution of 2.67 A. 
The structure was obtained by crystallographic analysis of a fusion protein
composed of cyclin T1 linked to the transactivator protein Tat from equine
infectious anemia virus (EIAV), which is functionally and structurally related to
HIV-1 Tat. The conserved cyclin box domain of cyclin T1 exhibits structural
features for interaction with physiological binding partners such as Cdk9. A
recognition site for Cdk/Cyclin substrates is partly covered by a cyclin
T-specific insert, suggesting specific interactions with regulatory factors. The 
previously identified Tat/TAR recognition motif (TRM) forms a C-terminal helix
that is partly occluded in the cyclin box repeat interface, while cysteine 261 is
accessible to form an intermolecular zinc finger with Tat. Residues of the TRM
contribute to a positively charged groove that may directly attract RNA
molecules. The EIAV Tat protein instead appeared undefined from the electron
density map suggesting that it is highly disordered. Functional experiments
confirmed the TAR binding properties of the fusion protein and suggested residues
on the second cyclin box repeat to contribute to Tat stimulated transcription.

PMCID: PMC1987359
PMID: 17540406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Retrovirology. 2007 May 30;4:36.

A real-time view of the TAR:Tat:P-TEFb complex at HIV-1 transcription sites.

Molle D(1), Maiuri P, Boireau S, Bertrand E, Knezevich A, Marcello A, Basyuk E.

Author information: 
(1)IGMM-CNRS UMR 5535, Montpellier, France. dorothee.molle@igmm.cnrs.fr

HIV-1 transcription is tightly regulated: silent in long-term latency and highly 
active in acutely-infected cells. Transcription is activated by the viral protein
Tat, which recruits the elongation factor P-TEFb by binding the TAR sequence
present in nascent HIV-1 RNAs. In this study, we analyzed the dynamic of the
TAR:Tat:P-TEFb complex in living cells, by performing FRAP experiments at HIV-1
transcription sites. Our results indicate that a large fraction of Tat present at
these sites is recruited by Cyclin T1. We found that in the presence of Tat, Cdk9
remained bound to nascent HIV-1 RNAs for 71s. In contrast, when transcription was
activated by PMA/ionomycin, in the absence of Tat, Cdk9 turned-over rapidly and
resided on the HIV-1 promoter for only 11s. Thus, the mechanism of
trans-activation determines the residency time of P-TEFb at the HIV-1 gene,
possibly explaining why Tat is such a potent transcriptional activator. In
addition, we observed that Tat occupied HIV-1 transcription sites for 55s,
suggesting that the TAR:Tat:P-TEFb complex dissociates from the polymerase
following transcription initiation, and undergoes subsequent cycles of
association/dissociation.

PMCID: PMC1904240
PMID: 17537237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 20;282(29):20887-96. Epub 2007 May 29.

Regulation of transcript elongation through cooperative and ordered recruitment
of cofactors.

Sharma M(1), George AA, Singh BN, Sahoo NC, Rao KV.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

We studied the regulation of murine CD80, a gene whose basal transcriptional
status was characterized by the presence of a stalled RNA polymerase II complex
on the promoter-proximal region. Stimulus-induced activation of productive
elongation involved a complex interplay of regulated events that included a
synergy between ordered cofactor recruitment. This cascade of recruitments was
initiated through the engagement of transcription factor NF-kappaB, leading to
the temporal association of histone acetyltransferases and the consequent
selective acetylation of a transcription start site downstream nucleosome. This
in turn culminated into the nucleosomal association of Brd4-associated P-TEFb, a 
protein complex containing kinase specific for serine 2 of Rbp 1, the largest
subunit of the carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. The consequent
phosphorylation of serine 2 residues in CTD by CDK9 in the P-TEFb complex then
facilitated escape of polymerase II into the productive elongation phase. Thus,
the cooperative mechanisms that integrate between independent pathways
characterize regulation of the elongation step of transcription, thereby
providing another level at which specificity of gene regulation can be achieved.

PMID: 17535807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Plant Cell. 2007 Apr;19(4):1388-402. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Roles of Arabidopsis cyclin-dependent kinase C complexes in cauliflower mosaic
virus infection, plant growth, and development.

Cui X(1), Fan B, Scholz J, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907-2054, USA.

The C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II is phosphorylated during the
transcription cycle by three cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs): CDK7, CDK8, and
CDK9. CDK9 and its interacting cyclin T partners belong to the positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complexes, which phosphorylate the CTD
to promote transcription elongation. We report that Arabidopsis thaliana
CDK9-like proteins, CDKC;1 and CDKC;2, and their interacting cyclin T partners,
CYCT1;4 and CYCT1;5, play important roles in infection with Cauliflower mosaic
virus (CaMV). cdkc;2 and cyct1;5 knockout mutants are highly resistant and cdkc;2
cyct1;5 double mutants are extremely resistant to CaMV. The mutants respond
normally to other types of plant viruses that do not replicate by reverse
transcription. Expression of a reporter gene driven by the CaMV 35S promoter is
markedly reduced in the cdkc;2 and cyct1;5 mutants, indicating that the kinase
complexes are important for transcription from the viral promoter. Loss of
function of CDKC;1/CDKC;2 or CYCT1;4/CYCT1;5 results in complete resistance to
CaMV as well as altered leaf and flower growth, trichome development, and delayed
flowering. These results establish Arabidopsis CDKC kinase complexes as important
host targets of CaMV for transcriptional activation of viral genes and critical
regulators of plant growth and development.

PMCID: PMC1913762
PMID: 17468259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cardiovasc Res. 2007 Jul 1;75(1):129-38. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Pivotal role of cardiac lineage protein-1 (CLP-1) in transcriptional elongation
factor P-TEFb complex formation in cardiac hypertrophy.

Espinoza-Derout J(1), Wagner M, Shahmiri K, Mascareno E, Chaqour B, Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle Research and Department of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn,
New York, 11203, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to determine if the expression pattern of CLP-1 in
developing heart is consistent with its role in controlling RNA transcript
elongation by transcriptional elongation factor b (P-TEFb) and if the inhibitory 
control exerted over P-TEFb by CLP-1 is released under hypertrophic conditions.
METHODS: We performed immunoblot and immunofluorescence analysis of CLP-1 and the
P-TEFb components cdk9 and cyclin T in fetal mouse heart and 2 day post-natal
mouse cardiomyocytes to determine if they are co-localized. We induced
hypertrophy in rat cardiomyocytes either by mechanical stretch or treatment with 
hypertrophic agents such as endothelin-1 and phenylephrine to determine if CLP-1 
is released from P-TEFb in response to hypertrophic stimuli. The involvement of
the Jak/STAT signal transduction pathway in this process was studied by blocking 
this pathway with the Jak2 kinase inhibitor, AG490, and assessing the association
of CLP-1 with P-TEFb complexes.
RESULTS: We found that CLP-1 is expressed along with P-TEFb components in
developing heart during the period in which knockout mice lacking the CLP-1 gene 
develop cardiac hypertrophy and die. Under conditions of hypertrophy induced by
mechanical stretch or agonist treatment, CLP-1 dissociates from the P-TEFb
complex, a finding consistent with the de-repression of P-TEFb kinase activity
seen in hypertrophic cardiomyocytes. Blockage of Jak/STAT signaling by AG490
prevented release of CLP-1 from P-TEFb despite the ongoing presence of
hypertrophic stimulation by mechanical stretch.
CONCLUSIONS: CLP-1 expression in developing heart and isolated post-natal
cardiomyocytes colocalizes with P-TEFb expression and therefore has the potential
to regulate RNA transcript elongation by controlling P-TEFb cdk9 kinase activity 
in heart. We further conclude that the dissociation of CLP-1 from P-TEFb is
responsive to hypertrophic stimuli transduced by cellular signal transduction
pathways. This process may be part of the genomic stress response resulting in
increased RNA transcript synthesis in hypertrophic cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC2778048
PMID: 17459355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4641-51. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Regulation of P-TEFb elongation complex activity by CDK9 acetylation.

Fu J(1), Yoon HG, Qin J, Wong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

P-TEFb, comprised of CDK9 and a cyclin T subunit, is a global transcriptional
elongation factor important for most RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcription.
P-TEFb facilitates transcription elongation in part by phosphorylating Ser2 of
the heptapeptide repeat of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest
subunit of pol II. Previous studies have shown that P-TEFb is subjected to
negative regulation by forming an inactive complex with 7SK small RNA and HEXIM1.
In an effort to investigate the molecular mechanism by which corepressor N-CoR
mediates transcription repression, we identified HEXIM1 as an N-CoR-interacting
protein. This finding led us to test whether the P-TEFb complex is regulated by
acetylation. We demonstrate that CDK9 is an acetylated protein in cells and can
be acetylated by p300 in vitro. Through both in vitro and in vivo assays, we
identified lysine 44 of CDK9 as a major acetylation site. We present evidence
that CDK9 is regulated by N-CoR and its associated HDAC3 and that acetylation of 
CDK9 affects its ability to phosphorylate the CTD of pol II. These results
suggest that acetylation of CDK9 is an important posttranslational modification
that is involved in regulating P-TEFb transcriptional elongation function.

PMCID: PMC1951478
PMID: 17452463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2006;71:301-11.

Regulation of two key nuclear enzymatic activities by the 7SK small nuclear RNA.

He WJ(1), Chen R, Yang Z, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720, USA.

7SK is a highly conserved small nuclear RNA (snRNA) in vertebrates. Since its
discovery in 1968, little had been known about its function until recently, when 
7SK was found to associate with the general transcription elongation factor
P-TEFb. Together with the HEXIM1 protein, 7SK sequesters P-TEFb into a
kinase-inactive complex, where it mediates HEXIM1's inhibition of P-TEFb. This
helps maintain P-TEFb in a functional equilibrium to control transcription, cell 
growth, and differentiation. Although highly abundant, only a small fraction of
7SK is P-TEFb-bound. Using affinity purification, we have identified APOBEC3C as 
another 7SK-associated protein. As a member of the APOBEC family that functions
in diverse processes through deaminating cytosine in DNA, it is unclear how
APOBEC3C's activity is controlled to prevent its mutations of genomic DNA. We
show that most of APOBEC3C interact with about half of nuclear 7SK, which
suppresses APOBEC3C's deaminase activity and sequesters APOBEC3C in the nucleolus
where it could be at a safe distance from most genomic sequences. Because the DNA
substrate-binding site in APOBEC3C differs from the region for 7SK binding, 7SK
does not act as a substrate competitor in inhibiting APOBEC3C. The demonstration 
of 7SK's suppression of yet another enzyme besides P-TEFb suggests a general role
for this RNA in regulating key nuclear functions.

PMID: 17381310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):6043-56. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Sustained induction of NF-kappa B is required for efficient expression of latent 
human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Williams SA(1), Kwon H, Chen LF, Greene WC.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, University of California San
Francisco, 1650 Owens Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Cells harboring infectious, but transcriptionally latent, human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-1) proviruses currently pose an insurmountable barrier to viral
eradication in infected patients. To better understand the molecular basis for
HIV-1 latency, we used the J-Lat model of postintegration HIV-1 latency to assess
the kinetic relationship between the induction of NF-kappaB and the activation of
latent HIV-1 gene expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses revealed an 
oscillating pattern of RelA recruitment to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
during continuous tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) stimulation. RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment to the HIV-1 LTR closely mirrored RelA
binding. Transient stimulation of cells with TNF-alpha for 15 min induced only a 
single round of RelA and RNA Pol II binding and failed to induce robust
expression of latent HIV-1. Efficient formation of elongated HIV-1 transcripts
required sustained induction by NF-kappaB, which promoted de novo synthesis of
Tat. Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and serine-2-phosphorylated RNA Pol II were
rapidly recruited to the HIV-1 LTR after NF-kappaB induction; however, these
elongating polymerase complexes were progressively dephosphorylated in the
absence of Tat. Okadaic acid promoted sustained serine-2 phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain of RNA Pol II and stimulated efficient transcriptional
elongation and HIV-1 expression in the absence of Tat. These findings underscore 
important differences between NF-kappaB and Tat stimulation of RNA Pol II
elongation. While NF-kappaB binding to the HIV-1 LTR induces serial waves of
efficient RNA Pol II initiation, elongation is impaired by the action of an
okadaic acid-sensitive phosphatase that dephosphorylates the C-terminal domain of
RNA Pol II. Conversely, the action of this phosphatase is overcome in the
presence of Tat, promoting very efficient RNA Pol II elongation.

PMCID: PMC1900291
PMID: 17376917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Mar;6(3):918-25.

In vitro antitumor properties of a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor,
P276-00.

Joshi KS(1), Rathos MJ, Joshi RD, Sivakumar M, Mascarenhas M, Kamble S, Lal B,
Sharma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Nicholas Piramal Research Center, Nicholas Piramal
India Limited, 1-Nirlon Complex, Goregaon (E), Mumbai 400 063, India.
kjoshi@nicholaspiramal.co.in

Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdk) and their associated pathways represent some of
the most attractive targets for the development of anticancer therapeutics. Based
on antitumor activity in animal models, a variety of Cdk inhibitors are
undergoing clinical evaluation either as a single agent or in combination with
other approved drugs. In our anticancer drug discovery program, a novel series of
flavones have been synthesized for evaluation against the activity of Cdk4-D1.
This enzyme catalyzes the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein, thus
inhibiting its function. We have identified a series of potent Cdk4-D1 inhibitors
with IC(50) below 250 nmol/L. In this report, we have described the properties of
one of the best compound, P276-00 of the flavone's series. P276-00 shows 40-fold 
selectivity toward Cdk4-D1, compared with Cdk2-E. The specificity toward 14 other
related and unrelated kinases was also determined. P276-00 was found to be more
selective with IC(50)s <100 nmol/L for Cdk4-D1, Cdk1-B, and Cdk9-T1, as compared 
with other Cdks, and less selective for non-Cdk kinases. It showed potent
antiproliferative effects against various human cancer cell lines, with an IC(50)
ranging from 300 to 800 nmol/L and was further compared for its antiproliferative
activity against cancer and normal fibroblast cell lines. P276-00 was found to be
highly selective for cancer cells as compared with normal fibroblast cells. To
delineate its mechanism of action, the effect of P276-00 on cell cycle proteins
was studied in human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7) and human non-small cell
lung carcinoma (H-460). A significant down-regulation of cyclin D1 and Cdk4 and a
decrease in Cdk4-specific pRb Ser(780) phosphorylation was observed. P276-00
produced potent inhibition of Cdk4-D1 activity that was found to be competitive
with ATP and not with retinoblastoma protein. The compound also induced apoptosis
in human promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) cells, as evidenced by the induction of
caspase-3 and DNA ladder studies. These data suggest that P276-00 has the
potential to be developed as an anti-Cdk chemotherapeutic agent.

PMID: 17363486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Aug;212(2):411-5.

The role of the Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex in T cell differentiation.

Leucci E(1), De Falco G, Onnis A, Cerino G, Cocco M, Luzzi A, Crupi D, Tigli C,
Bellan C, Tosi P, Leoncini L, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

The Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex is very important in controlling specific
differentiative pathways of several cell types, including muscle cells and
neurons. We recently demonstrated the involvement of this complex in B cell
activation/differentiation. To check whether the Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex is also
involved in the T cell activation/differentiation process, we isolated different 
T cell populations by magnetic separation, based on their surface antigens. We
observed that the expression level of Cdk9/Cyclin T1 increases in effector T
cells (CD27(+)), as well as in activated T cells (CD25(+)) and memory T cells
(CD45RA(-)), thus suggesting a specific upregulation of the Cdk9/Cyclin T1
complex following antigen encounter. We have previously demonstrated that in B
cells, Cdk9 interacts in vivo with the E2A gene products E12/E47 (members of the 
basic helix-loop-helix family) which are involved in differentiation. In this
article, we show that this interaction also occurs in T cells. This suggests an
active role for the Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex during lymphoid differentiation,
through physical binding with E12 and E47. These preliminary results suggest that
the Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex may be important in the activation and differentiation
program of lymphoid cells and that its upregulation, which is due to still
unknown mechanisms, may contribute to malignant transformation.

PMID: 17352406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(6):2003-12. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Tat competes with HEXIM1 to increase the active pool of P-TEFb for HIV-1
transcription.

Barboric M(1), Yik JH, Czudnochowski N, Yang Z, Chen R, Contreras X, Geyer M,
Matija Peterlin B, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, University
of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0703, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcriptional transactivator (Tat) 
recruits the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) to the viral
promoter. Consisting of cyclin dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) and cyclin T1, P-TEFb
phosphorylates RNA polymerase II and the negative transcription elongation factor
to stimulate the elongation of HIV-1 genes. A major fraction of nuclear P-TEFb is
sequestered into a transcriptionally inactive 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
(snRNP) by the coordinated actions of the 7SK small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and
hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) induced protein 1 (HEXIM1). In this study, we
demonstrate that Tat prevents the formation of and also releases P-TEFb from the 
7SK snRNP in vitro and in vivo. This ability of Tat depends on the integrity of
its N-terminal activation domain and stems from the high affinity interaction
between Tat and cyclin T1, which allows Tat to directly displace HEXIM1 from
cyclin T1. Furthermore, we find that in contrast to the Tat-independent
activation of the HIV-1 promoter, Tat-dependent HIV-1 transcription is largely
insensitive to the inhibition by HEXIM1. Finally, primary blood lymphocytes
display a reduced amount of the endogenous 7SK snRNP upon HIV-1 infection. All
these data are consistent with the model that Tat not only recruits but also
increases the active pool of P-TEFb for efficient HIV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC1874611
PMID: 17341462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. EMBO J. 2007 Mar 21;26(6):1552-9. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Recruitment of P-TEFb (Cdk9-Pch1) to chromatin by the cap-methyl transferase Pcm1
in fission yeast.

Guiguen A(1), Soutourina J, Dewez M, Tafforeau L, Dieu M, Raes M, Vandenhaute J, 
Werner M, Hermand D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire (GEMO), Facultés Universitaires
Notre-Dame de la Paix, Namur, Belgium.

Capping of nascent pre-mRNAs is thought to be a prerequisite for productive
elongation and associated serine 2 phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD)
of RNA polymerase II (PolII). The mechanism mediating this link is unknown, but
is likely to include the capping machinery and P-TEPb. We report that the fission
yeast P-TEFb (Cdk9-Pch1) forms a complex with the cap-methyltransferase Pcm1 and 
these proteins colocalise on chromatin. Ablation of Cdk9 function through
chemical genetics causes growth arrest and abolishes serine 2 phosphorylation on 
the PolII CTD. Strikingly, depletion of Pcm1 also leads to a dramatic decrease of
phospho-serine 2. Chromatin immunoprecipitations show a severe decrease of
chromatin-bound Cdk9-Pch1 when Pcm1 is depleted. On the contrary, Cdk9 is not
required for association of Pcm1 with chromatin. Furthermore, compromising Cdk9
activity leads to a promoter-proximal PolII stalling and sensitivity to
6-azauracil, reflecting elongation defects. The in vivo data presented here
strongly support the existence of a molecular mechanism where the
cap-methyltransferase recruits P-TEFb to chromatin, thereby ensuring that only
properly capped transcripts are elongated.

PMCID: PMC1829387
PMID: 17332744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007 Jan;48(1):158-67.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor seliciclib shows in vitro activity in diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas.

Lacrima K(1), Rinaldi A, Vignati S, Martin V, Tibiletti MG, Gaidano G, Catapano
CV, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland (IOSI), Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Despite recent improvements in treatment, a significant fraction of patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) still fail therapy. Therefore, new
therapeutic modalities are needed to advance the cure rate. Seliciclib (CYC202,
R-roscovitine) is a purine analog developed as an inhibitor of CDK2/cyclin E
CDK7/cyclin H and CDK9/cyclin T. Seliciclib has been shown to be active in B-cell
neoplasms, such as mantle cell lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and in
multiple myeloma in vitro. The aim of this study was to assess the in vitro
activity of seliciclib in DLBCL. The anti-proliferative activity of seliciclib
was tested in nine human DLBCL cell lines and six DLBCL primary cell cultures.
The effects of seliciclib on the cell cycle and on apoptosis, as well as on
transcription-related proteins were assessed. The cell viability of all DLBCL
cell lines and primary cells was reduced by seliciclib treatment. The IC50 for
the cell lines ranged from 13 - 36 microm. The effect of seliciclib was
independent of the genetic aberrations characterizing the cell lines. After
seliciclib exposure cells accumulated in G2/M or in G1 phase, with most of the
cells showing signs of apoptosis. Despite the clear cytotoxic effect and
induction of apoptosis, this study could not identify a unique mechanism of
action. The in vitro data suggest that seliciclib is an active agent in DLBCL.
Its efficacy is apparently independent of the underlying chromosomal
translocations characteristic of DLBCL. The drug might represent a new
therapeutic agent in this lymphoma sub-type.

PMID: 17325859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. AIDS. 2007 Mar 12;21(5):575-82.

Inhibiting lentiviral replication by HEXIM1, a cellular negative regulator of the
CDK9/cyclin T complex.

Shimizu S(1), Urano E, Futahashi Y, Miyauchi K, Isogai M, Matsuda Z, Nohtomi K,
Onogi T, Takebe Y, Yamamoto N, Komano J.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Research Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Tat-dependent transcriptional elongation is crucial for the
replication of HIV-1 and depends on positive transcription elongation factor b
complex (P-TEFb), composed of cyclin dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T.
Hexamethylene bisacetamide-induced protein 1 (HEXIM1) inhibits P-TEFb in
cooperation with 7SK RNA, but direct evidence that this inhibition limits the
replication of HIV-1 has been lacking. In the present study we examined whether
the expression of FLAG-tagged HEXIM1 (HEXIM1-f) affected lentiviral replication
in human T cell lines.
METHODS: HEXIM1-f was introduced to five human T cell lines, relevant host for
HIV-1, by murine leukemia virus vector and cells expressing HEXIM1-f were
collected by fluorescence activated cell sorter. The lentiviral replication
kinetics in HEXIM1-f-expressing cells was compared with that in green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-expressing cells.
RESULTS: HIV-1 and simian immunodeficiency virus replicated less efficiently in
HEXIM1-f-expressing cells than in GFP-expressing cells of the five T cell lines
tested. The viral revertants were not immediately selected in culture. In
contrast, the replication of vaccinia virus, adenovirus, and herpes simplex virus
type 1 was not limited. The quantitative PCR analyses revealed that the early
phase of viral life cycle was not blocked by HEXIM1. On the other hand,
Tat-dependent transcription in HEXIM1-f-expressing cells was substantially
repressed as compared with that in GFP-expressing cells.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that HEXIM1 is a host factor that negatively
regulates lentiviral replication specifically. Elucidating the regulatory
mechanism of HEXIM1 might lead to ways to control lentiviral replication.

PMID: 17314519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Mol Biol. 2007 Mar 30;367(3):630-46. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Developmental regulators containing the I-mfa domain interact with T cyclins and 
Tat and modulate transcription.

Wang Q(1), Young TM, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103-2714, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complexes, composed of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T1 or T2, are engaged by many
cellular transcription regulators that activate or inhibit transcription from
specific promoters. The related I-mfa (inhibitor of MyoD family a) and HIC (human
I-mfa-domain-containing) proteins function in myogenic differentiation and
embryonic development by participating in the Wnt signaling pathway. We report
that I-mfa is a novel regulator of P-TEFb. Both HIC and I-mfa interact through
their homologous I-mfa domains with cyclin T1 and T2 at two binding sites. One
site is the regulatory histidine-rich domain that interacts with CDK9 substrates 
including RNA polymerase II. The second site contains a lysine and arginine-rich 
motif that is highly conserved between the two T cyclins. This site overlaps and 
includes the previously identified Tat/TAR recognition motif of cyclin T1
required for activation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
transcription. HIC and I-mfa can serve as substrates for P-TEFb. Their I-mfa
domains also bind the activation domain of HIV-1 Tat and inhibit Tat- and
P-TEFb-dependent transcription from the HIV-1 promoter. This transcriptional
repression is cell-type specific and can operate via Tat and cyclin T1. Genomic
and sequence comparisons indicate that the I-mf and HIC genes, as well as
flanking genes, diverged from a duplicated chromosomal region. Our findings link 
I-mfa and HIC to viral replication, and suggest that P-TEFb is modulated in the
Wnt signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC1868487
PMID: 17289077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Curr HIV Res. 2007 Jan;5(1):3-9.

Regulation of HIV-1 transcription by protein phosphatase 1.

Nekhai S(1), Jerebtsova M, Jackson A, Southerland W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA. 
snekhai@howard.edu

The emergence of drug-resistant HIV-1 strains presents a challenge for the design
of new drugs. Targeting host cell factors involved in the regulation of HIV-1
replication might be one way to overcome the resistance of HIV-1 to anti-viral
agents. Our recent studies identified protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) as an important
regulator of HIV-1 transcription. Transcription of HIV-1 genes is activated by
HIV-1 Tat protein that induces phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase-II by CDK9/cyclin T1. We have shown that HIV-1 Tat binds PP1 in vitro;
targets PP1 to the nucleus; and that Tat interaction with PP1 is important for
HIV-1 transcription. In this review, we discuss two potential targets of PP1 in
Tat-induced HIV-1 transcription: the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase-II and
CDK9. We also present a computer model of Tat-PP1 complex that might be useful
for future drug design in anti-HIV-1 therapeutics.

PMID: 17266553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Gen Virol. 2007 Feb;88(Pt 2):631-40.

C/EBPbeta regulates human immunodeficiency virus 1 gene expression through its
association with cdk9.

Mameli G(1), Deshmane SL, Ghafouri M, Cui J, Simbiri K, Khalili K, Mukerjee R,
Dolei A, Amini S, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Center for Neurovirology, Temple University School
of Medicine, 1900 N 12th Street 015-96, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is 
a complex event that requires the cooperative action of both viral (e.g. Tat) and
cellular (e.g. C/EBPbeta, NF-kappaB) factors. The HIV-1 Tat protein recruits the 
human positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb, consisting of cdk9 and
cyclin T1, to the HIV-1 transactivation response (TAR) region. In the absence of 
TAR, Tat activates the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) through its association
with several cellular factors including C/EBPbeta. C/EBPbeta is a member of the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family of transcription factors and has been shown
to be a critical transcriptional regulator of HIV-1 LTR. We examined whether
Tat-C/EBPbeta association requires the presence of the P-TEFb complex. Using
immunoprecipitation followed by Western blot, we demonstrated that
C/EBPbeta-cyclin T1 association requires the presence of cdk9. Further, due to
its instability, cdk9 was unable to physically interact with C/EBPbeta in the
absence of cyclin T1 or Tat. Using kinase assays, we demonstrated that cdk9, but 
not a cdk9 dominant-negative mutant (cdk9-dn), phosphorylates C/EBPbeta. Our
functional data show that co-transfection of C/EBPbeta and cdk9 leads to an
increase in HIV-1 gene expression when compared to C/EBPbeta alone. Addition of
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) inhibits C/EBPbeta transcriptional activity in
the presence and absence of cdk9 and causes a delay in HIV-1 replication in
T-cells. Together, our data suggest that Tat-C/EBPbeta association is mediated
through cdk9, and that phosphorylated C/EBPbeta may influence AIDS progression by
increasing expression of HIV-1 genes.

PMID: 17251582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(6):2059-73. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

The Myc transactivation domain promotes global phosphorylation of the RNA
polymerase II carboxy-terminal domain independently of direct DNA binding.

Cowling VH(1), Cole MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

Myc is a transcription factor which is dependent on its DNA binding domain for
transcriptional regulation of target genes. Here, we report the surprising
finding that Myc mutants devoid of direct DNA binding activity and Myc target
gene regulation can rescue a substantial fraction of the growth defect in
myc(-/-) fibroblasts. Expression of the Myc transactivation domain alone induces 
a transcription-independent elevation of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II)
C-terminal domain (CTD) kinases cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) and CDK9 and a
global increase in CTD phosphorylation. The Myc transactivation domain binds to
the transcription initiation sites of these promoters and stimulates TFIIH
binding in an MBII-dependent manner. Expression of the Myc transactivation domain
increases CDK mRNA cap methylation, polysome loading, and the rate of
translation. We find that some traditional Myc transcriptional target genes are
also regulated by this Myc-driven translation mechanism. We propose that Myc
transactivation domain-driven RNA Pol II CTD phosphorylation has broad effects on
both transcription and mRNA metabolism.

PMCID: PMC1820498
PMID: 17242204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Circ Res. 2007 Feb 16;100(3):416-24. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

MicroRNAs play an essential role in the development of cardiac hypertrophy.

Sayed D(1), Hong C, Chen IY, Lypowy J, Abdellatif M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103,
USA.

MicroRNAs are naturally existing, small, noncoding RNA molecules that
downregulate posttranscriptional gene expression. Their expression pattern and
function in the heart remain unknown. Here we report an array of microRNAs that
are differentially and temporally regulated during cardiac hypertrophy.
Significantly, the muscle-specific microRNA-1 (miR-1) was singularly
downregulated as early as day 1 (0.56+/-0.036), persisting through day 7
(0.29+/-0.14), after aortic constriction-induced hypertrophy in a mouse model.
Overexpression experiments showed that miR-1 inhibited its in silico-predicted,
growth-related targets, including Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP),
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), fibronectin, and Ras homolog enriched in brain 
(Rheb), in addition to protein synthesis and cell size. Thus, we propose that
microRNAs play an essential regulatory role in the development of cardiac
hypertrophy, wherein downregulation of miR-1 is necessary for the relief of
growth-related target genes from its repressive influence and induction of
hypertrophy.

PMID: 17234972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Jan;3(1):e6.

Viral and cell cycle-regulated kinases in cytomegalovirus-induced pseudomitosis
and replication.

Hertel L(1), Chou S, Mocarski ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario, Canada.

A process of pseudomitosis occurs during human cytomegalovirus infection that
appears similar to cellular mitosis but involves the formation of multiple
spindle poles, abnormal condensation, and mislocalization of chromosomal DNA. The
relationship of this process to viral replication and cell cycle regulation
during infection has been poorly understood. Pseudomitosis consistently peaks at 
late times of infection in all viral strains examined but at overall highest
frequencies (30% to 35% of cells) using one common laboratory strain variant
(AD169varATCC). Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) plays a crucial role in
pseudomitosis, mirroring its role in conventional mitosis. Dominant negative Cdk1
inhibits and wild-type Cdk1 stimulates this process; however, viral yields remain
the same regardless of pseudomitosis levels. Broad inhibition of cell
cycle-regulated kinases (Cdk1/Cdk2/Cdk5/Cdk9) with indirubin-3'-monoxime
substantially decreases viral yields and synergizes with the viral UL97 kinase
inhibitor, maribavir. Thus, Cdk1 is necessary and sufficient to drive
pseudomitosis, whereas a combination of viral and cell cycle-regulated kinases is
important during viral replication.

PMCID: PMC1764433
PMID: 17206862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Mol Biol. 2007 Feb 16;366(2):563-73. Epub 2006 Nov 18.

Crystal structure of human cyclin K, a positive regulator of cyclin-dependent
kinase 9.

Baek K(1), Brown RS, Birrane G, Ladias JA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory and Macromolecular Crystallography Unit,
Division of Experimental Medicine, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cyclin K and the closely related cyclins T1, T2a, and T2b interact with
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) forming multiple nuclear complexes, referred to 
collectively as positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Through
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase II largest
subunit, distinct P-TEFb species regulate the transcriptional elongation of
specific genes that play central roles in human physiology and disease
development, including cardiac hypertrophy and human immunodeficiency virus-1
pathogenesis. We have determined the crystal structure of human cyclin K
(residues 11-267) at 1.5 A resolution, which represents the first atomic
structure of a P-TEFb subunit. The cyclin K fold comprises two typical cyclin
boxes with two short helices preceding the N-terminal box. A prominent feature of
cyclin K is an additional helix (H4a) in the first cyclin box that obstructs the 
binding pocket for the cell-cycle inhibitor p27(Kip1). Modeling of CDK9 bound to 
cyclin K provides insights into the structural determinants underlying the
formation and regulation of this complex. A homology model of human cyclin T1
generated using the cyclin K structure as a template reveals that the two
proteins have similar structures, as expected from their high level of sequence
identity. Nevertheless, their CDK9-interacting surfaces display significant
structural differences, which could potentially be exploited for the design of
cyclin-targeted inhibitors of the CDK9-cyclin K and CDK9-cyclin T1 complexes.

PMCID: PMC1852425
PMID: 17169370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10720-8.

Improved tumor control through circadian clock induction by Seliciclib, a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor.

Iurisci I(1), Filipski E, Reinhardt J, Bach S, Gianella-Borradori A, Iacobelli S,
Meijer L, Lévi F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U776 "Rythmes
Biologiques et Cancers," Hôpital Paul Brousse, Villejuif Cedex, France.

The circadian timing system and the cell division cycle are frequently
deregulated in cancer. The therapeutic relevance of the reciprocal interactions
between both biological rhythms was investigated using Seliciclib, a
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor (CDKI). Mice bearing Glasgow osteosarcoma
received Seliciclib (300 mg/kg/d orally) or vehicle for 5 days at Zeitgeber time 
(ZT) 3, 11, or 19. On day 6, tumor mRNA 24-hour expression patterns were
determined for clock genes (Per2, Rev-erbalpha, and Bmal1) and clock-controlled
cell cycle genes (c-Myc, Wee1, cyclin B1, and CDK1) with quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR. Affinity chromatography on immobilized Seliciclib identified
CDK1/CDK2 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/ERK2, CDK7/CDK9, and 
casein kinase CK1epsilon as Seliciclib targets, which respectively regulate cell 
cycle, transcription, and circadian clock in Glasgow osteosarcoma. Seliciclib
reduced tumor growth by 55% following dosing at ZT3 or ZT11 and by 35% at ZT19
compared with controls (P < 0.001). Tolerability was also best at ZT3. Mean
transcriptional activity of Rev-erbalpha, Per2, and Bmal1 was arrhythmic in the
tumors of untreated mice. Seliciclib induced rhythmic clock gene expression
patterns with physiologic phase relations only after ZT3 dosing. c-Myc and Wee1
mRNAs displayed synchronous circadian rhythms in the tumors of control mice
receiving vehicle only but not in those of mice given the drug. Seliciclib
further enhanced Wee1 expression irrespective of dosing time, an effect that
reinforced G(2)-M gating. Seliciclib also inhibited CK1epsilon, which determines 
circadian period length. The coordination of clock gene expression patterns in
tumor cells was associated with best antitumor activity of Seliciclib. The
circadian clock and its upstream regulators represent relevant targets for CDKIs.

PMID: 17108108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4913-23. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Novel binding partners of Ldb1 are required for haematopoietic development.

Meier N(1), Krpic S, Rodriguez P, Strouboulis J, Monti M, Krijgsveld J, Gering M,
Patient R, Hostert A, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Ldb1, a ubiquitously expressed LIM domain binding protein, is essential in a
number of tissues during development. It interacts with Gata1, Tal1, E2A and Lmo2
to form a transcription factor complex regulating late erythroid genes. We
identify a number of novel Ldb1 interacting proteins in erythroleukaemic cells,
in particular the repressor protein Eto-2 (and its family member Mtgr1), the
cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9, and the bridging factor Lmo4. MO-mediated
knockdowns in zebrafish show these factors to be essential for definitive
haematopoiesis. In accordance with the zebrafish results these factors are
coexpressed in prehaematopoietic cells of the early mouse embryo, although we
originally identified the complex in late erythroid cells. Based on the change in
subcellullar localisation of Eto-2 we postulate that it plays a central role in
the transition from the migration and expansion phase of the prehaematopoietic
cells to the establishment of definitive haematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 17108004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Gynecol Oncol. 2007 Feb;104(2):352-61. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Coexpression of Notch1 and NF-kappaB signaling pathway components in human
cervical cancer progression.

Ramdass B(1), Maliekal TT, Lakshmi S, Rehman M, Rema P, Nair P, Mukherjee G,
Reddy BK, Krishna S, Radhakrishna Pillai M.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre For Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, UAS-GKVK Campus, Bangalore-560 065, India.

Erratum in
    Gynecol Oncol. 2007 Jul;106(1):277.

OBJECTIVES: Features of deregulated Notch1 signaling and NF-kappaB activation
have independently been reported in cervical cancers. Here, we have extended
these observations and examined both these pathways simultaneously in human
cervical cancer tissue. Further, we have investigated the potential cross-talk
between these pathways in a human cervical cancer derived cell line CaSki, which 
mirrors features of Notch activation as in the majority of human cervical
cancers.
METHODS: Cervical tissue samples were analyzed for the expression of Notch1,
Jagged 1, Hes1, pAKT, NF-kappaB p50, NF-kappaB p65, IkappaB-alpha, Bcl-2,
CyclinD1, Cdk9, c-Fos, and p53 by immunohistochemistry. A total of 352 samples
were analyzed which included 69 normal cervical tissue, 132 preinvasive lesions
and 151 squamous cell carcinomas of the uterine cervix. Dual immunofluorescent
analysis was performed to evaluate the coexpression of Notch1 and NF-kappaB.
Transcriptional reporter assays and xenografts were undertaken with CaSki cells.
RESULTS: Features of Notch1 activation as measured by intracellular Notch1, high 
levels of Jagged1, Hes1 and Cdk9 were paralleled by nuclear translocation of both
NF-kappaB p50 and p65 with target gene expression (IkappaB-alpha, Bcl-2, and
CyclinD1) in human cervical cancer sections. Reporter assays in CaSki cells are
consistent with Notch being an upstream regulator of NF-kappaB. Further, the
xenografts recreate key aspects of human cancer tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from this study suggest that there is a co-activation of
Notch1 and NF-kappaB signaling pathways at the cellular level in the majority of 
human cervical cancers, with Notch as an upstream regulator.

PMID: 17098279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Retrovirology. 2006 Nov 3;3:78.

Phosphorylation of HIV-1 Tat by CDK2 in HIV-1 transcription.

Ammosova T(1), Berro R, Jerebtsova M, Jackson A, Charles S, Klase Z, Southerland 
W, Gordeuk VR, Kashanchi F, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University College of Medicine,
Washington, DC 20059, USA. tammosova@mail.ru

BACKGROUND: Transcription of HIV-1 genes is activated by HIV-1 Tat protein, which
induces phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) C-terminal domain (CTD) by 
CDK9/cyclin T1. Earlier we showed that CDK2/cyclin E phosphorylates HIV-1 Tat in 
vitro. We also showed that CDK2 induces HIV-1 transcription in vitro and that
inhibition of CDK2 expression by RNA interference inhibits HIV-1 transcription
and viral replication in cultured cells. In the present study, we analyzed
whether Tat is phosphorylated in cultured cells by CDK2 and whether Tat
phosphorylation has a regulatory effect on HIV-1 transcription.
RESULTS: We analyzed HIV-1 Tat phosphorylation by CDK2 in vitro and identified
Ser16 and Ser46 residues of Tat as potential phosphorylation sites. Tat was
phosphorylated in HeLa cells infected with Tat-expressing adenovirus and
metabolically labeled with 32P. CDK2-specific siRNA reduced the amount and the
activity of cellular CDK2 and significantly decreased phosphorylation of Tat. Tat
co-migrated with CDK2 on glycerol gradient and co-immunoprecipitated with CDK2
from the cellular extracts. Tat was phosphorylated on serine residues in vivo,
and mutations of Ser16 and Ser46 residues of Tat reduced Tat phosphorylation in
vivo. Mutation of Ser16 and Ser46 residues of Tat reduced HIV-1 transcription in 
transiently transfected cells. The mutations of Tat also inhibited HIV-1 viral
replication and Tat phosphorylation in the context of the integrated HIV-1
provirus. Analysis of physiological importance of the S16QP(K/R)19 and S46YGR49
sequences of Tat showed that Ser16 and Ser46 and R49 residues are highly
conserved whereas mutation of the (K/R)19 residue correlated with non-progression
of HIV-1 disease.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate for the first time that Tat is phosphorylated in
vivo; Tat phosphorylation is likely to be mediated by CDK2; and phosphorylation
of Tat is important for HIV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC1636661
PMID: 17083724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Med Chem. 2006 Nov 2;49(22):6500-9.

4-arylazo-3,5-diamino-1H-pyrazole CDK inhibitors: SAR study, crystal structure in
complex with CDK2, selectivity, and cellular effects.

Krystof V(1), Cankar P, Frysová I, Slouka J, Kontopidis G, Dzubák P, Hajdúch M,
Srovnal J, de Azevedo WF Jr, Orság M, Paprskárová M, Rolcík J, Látr A, Fischer
PM, Strnad M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Faculty of Science, Palacký University and
Institute of Experimental Botany, Slechtitelu 11, 783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic.

In a routine screening of our small-molecule compound collection we recently
identified 4-arylazo-3,5-diamino-1H-pyrazoles as a novel group of ATP antagonists
with moderate potency against CDK2-cyclin E. A preliminary SAR study based on 35 
analogues suggests ways in which the pharmacophore could be further optimized,
for example, via substitutions in the 4-aryl ring. Enzyme kinetics studies with
the lead compound and X-ray crystallography of an inhibitor-CDK2 complex
demonstrated that its mode of inhibition is competitive. Functional kinase assays
confirmed the selectivity toward CDKs, with a preference for CDK9-cyclin T1. The 
most potent inhibitor, 4-[(3,5-diamino-1H-pyrazol-4-yl)diazenyl]phenol 31b
(CAN508), reduced the frequency of S-phase cells of the cancer cell line HT-29 in
antiproliferation assays. Further observed cellular effects included decreased
phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein and the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II, inhibition of mRNA synthesis, and induction of the tumor
suppressor protein p53, all of which are consistent with inhibition of CDK9.

PMID: 17064068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Retrovirology. 2006 Oct 2;3:66.

Effects of prostratin on Cyclin T1/P-TEFb function and the gene expression
profile in primary resting CD4+ T cells.

Sung TL(1), Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. ts144315@bcm.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: The latent reservoir of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
in resting CD4+ T cells is a major obstacle to the clearance of infection by
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Recent studies have focused on
searches for adjuvant therapies to activate this reservoir under conditions of
HAART. Prostratin, a non tumor-promoting phorbol ester, is a candidate for such a
strategy. Prostratin has been shown to reactivate latent HIV-1 and Tat-mediated
transactivation may play an important role in this process. We examined resting
CD4+ T cells from healthy donors to determine if prostratin induces Cyclin
T1/P-TEFb, a cellular kinase composed of Cyclin T1 and Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 
(CDK9) that mediates Tat function. We also examined effects of prostratin on
Cyclin T2a, an alternative regulatory subunit for CDK9, and 7SK snRNA and the
HEXIM1 protein, two factors that associate with P-TEFb and repress its kinase
activity.
RESULTS: Prostratin up-regulated Cyclin T1 protein expression, modestly induced
CDK9 protein expression, and did not affect Cyclin T2a protein expression.
Although the kinase activity of CDK9 in vitro was up-regulated by prostratin, we 
observed a large increase in the association of 7SK snRNA and the HEXIM1 protein 
with CDK9. Using HIV-1 reporter viruses with and without a functional Tat
protein, we found that prostratin stimulation of HIV-1 gene expression appears to
require a functional Tat protein. Microarray analyses were performed and several 
genes related to HIV biology, including APOBEC3B, DEFA1, and S100 calcium-binding
protein genes, were found to be regulated by prostratin.
CONCLUSION: Prostratin induces Cyclin T1 expression and P-TEFb function and this 
is likely to be involved in prostratin reactivation of latent HIV-1 proviruses.
The large increase in association of 7SK and HEXIM1 with P-TEFb following
prostratin treatment may reflect a requirement in CD4+ T cells for a precise
balance between active and catalytically inactive P-TEFb. Additionally, genes
regulated by prostratin were identified that have the potential to regulate HIV-1
replication both positively and negatively.

PMCID: PMC1599745
PMID: 17014716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Genet Genomics. 2007 Feb;277(2):101-14. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Cdk9 is an essential kinase in Drosophila that is required for heat shock gene
expression, histone methylation and elongation factor recruitment.

Eissenberg JC(1), Shilatifard A, Dorokhov N, Michener DE.

Author information: 
(1)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis 
University School of Medicine, 1402 South Grand Blvd, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.
eissenjc@slu.edu

Phosphorylation of the large RNA Polymerase II subunit C-terminal domain (CTD) is
believed to be important in promoter clearance and for recruiting protein factors
that function in messenger RNA synthesis and processing. P-TEFb is a protein
kinase that targets the (CTD). The goal of this study was to identify chromatin
modifications and associations that require P-TEFb activity in vivo. We knocked
down the catalytic subunit of P-TEFb, Cdk9, in Drosophila melanogaster using RNA 
interference. Cdk9 knockdown flies die during metamorphosis. Phosphorylation at
serine 2 and serine 5 of the CTD heptad repeat were both dramatically reduced in 
knockdown larvae. Hsp 70 mRNA induction by heat shock was attenuated in Cdk9
knockdown larvae. Both mono- and trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 were
dramatically reduced, suggesting a link between CTD phosphorylation and histone
methylation in transcribed chromatin in vivo. Levels of the chromo helicase
protein CHD1 were reduced in Cdk9 knockdown chromosomes, suggesting that CHD1 is 
targeted to chromosomes through P-TEFb-dependent histone methylation.
Dimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 36 was significantly reduced in knockdown
larvae, implicating CTD phosphorylation in the regulation of this chromatin
modification. Binding of the RNA Polymerase II elongation factor ELL was reduced 
in knockdown chromosomes, suggesting that ELL is recruited to active polymerase
via CTD phosphorylation.

PMID: 17001490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;66(18):9270-80.

Combined depletion of cell cycle and transcriptional cyclin-dependent kinase
activities induces apoptosis in cancer cells.

Cai D(1), Latham VM Jr, Zhang X, Shapiro GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Selective cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) 2 inhibition is readily compensated.
However, reduced cdk2 activity may have antiproliferative effects in concert with
other family members. Here, inducible RNA interference was used to codeplete cdk2
and cdk1 from NCI-H1299 non-small cell lung cancer and U2OS osteosarcoma cells,
and effects were compared with those mediated by depletion of either cdk alone.
Depletion of cdk2 slowed G1 progression of NCI-H1299 cells and depletion of cdk1 
slowed G2-M progression in both cell lines, with associated endoreduplication in 
U2OS cells. However, compared with the incomplete cell cycle blocks produced by
individual depletion, combined depletion had substantial consequences, with G2-M 
arrest predominating in NCI-H1299 cells and apoptosis the primary outcome in U2OS
cells. In U2OS cells, combined depletion affected RNA polymerase II expression
and phosphorylation, causing decreased expression of the antiapoptotic proteins
Mcl-1 and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP), effects usually mediated by
inhibition of the transcriptional cdk9. These events do not occur after
individual depletion of cdk2 and cdk1, suggesting that reduction of cdk2, cdk1,
and RNA polymerase II activities all contribute to apoptosis in U2OS cells. The
limited cell death induced by combined depletion in NCI-H1299 cells was
significantly increased by codepletion of cdk9 or XIAP or by simultaneous
treatment with the cdk9 inhibitor flavopiridol. These results show the potency of
concomitant compromise of cell cycle and transcriptional cdk activities and may
guide the selection of clinical drug candidates.

PMID: 16982772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cell Cycle. 2006 Sep;5(18):2153-9. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Replication-dependent DNA damage response triggered by roscovitine induces an
uncoupling of DNA replication proteins.

Savio M(1), Cerri M, Cazzalini O, Perucca P, Stivala LA, Pichierri P, Franchitto 
A, Meijer L, Prosperi E.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Patologia Generale, Università di
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

The cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor roscovitine is under evaluation in
clinical trials for its antiproliferative properties. Roscovitine arrests cell
cycle progression in G(1) and in G(2) phase by inhibiting CDK2 and CDK1, and
possibly CDK7 and CDK9. However, the effects of CDK2 inhibition in S-phase cells 
have been not fully investigated. Here, we show that a short-term treatment with 
roscovitine is sufficient to inhibit DNA synthesis, and to activate a DNA damage 
checkpoint response, as indicated by phosphorylation of p53-Ser15, replication
protein A, and histone H2AX. Analysis of DNA replication proteins loaded onto DNA
during S phase showed that the amount of proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA), a cofactor of DNA replication enzymes, was significantly reduced by
roscovitine. In contrast, chromatin-bound levels of DNA polymerase delta, DNA
ligase I and CDK2, were stabilized. Checkpoint inhibition with caffeine could
rescue PCNA disassembly only partially, pointing to additional effects due to
CDK2 inhibition and the presence of replication stress. These results suggest
that in S-phase cells, roscovitine induces checkpoint-dependent and -independent 
effects, leading to stabilization of replication forks and an uncoupling between 
PCNA and PCNA-interacting proteins.

PMID: 16969115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Retrovirology. 2006 Aug 7;3:48.

Effect of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex on HIV-1 Tat activated
transcription.

Agbottah E(1), Deng L, Dannenberg LO, Pumfery A, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington University Medical Center, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Washington, DC 20037, USA. etagbottah@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is the etiologic agent of
acquired immunodeficiency virus (AIDS). Following entry into the host cell, the
viral RNA is reverse transcribed into DNA and subsequently integrated into the
host genome as a chromatin template. The integrated proviral DNA, along with the 
specific chromatinized environment in which integration takes place allows for
the coordinated regulation of viral transcription and replication. While the
specific roles of and interplay between viral and host proteins have not been
fully elucidated, numerous reports indicate that HIV-1 retains the ability for
self-regulation via the pleiotropic effects of its viral proteins. Though viral
transcription is fully dependent upon host cellular factors and the state of host
activation, recent findings indicate a complex interplay between viral proteins
and host transcription regulatory machineries including histone deacetylases
(HDACs), histone acetyltransferases (HATs), cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs), and 
histone methyltransferases (HMTs).
RESULTS: Here, we describe the effect of Tat activated transcription at the G1/S 
border of the cell cycle and analyze the interaction of modified Tat with the
chromatin remodeling complex, SWI/SNF. HIV-1 LTR DNA reconstituted into
nucleosomes can be activated in vitro using various Tat expressing extracts.
Optimally activated transcription was observed at the G1/S border of the cell
cycle both in vitro and in vivo, where chromatin remodeling complex, SWI/SNF, was
present on the immobilized LTR DNA. Using a number of in vitro binding as well as
in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, we detected the presence of 
both BRG1 and acetylated Tat in the same complex. Finally, we demonstrate that
activated transcription resulted in partial or complete removal of the nucleosome
from the start site of the LTR as evidenced by a restriction enzyme accessibility
assay.
CONCLUSION: We propose a model where unmodified Tat is involved in binding to the
CBP/p300 and cdk9/cyclin T1 complexes facilitating transcription initiation.
Acetylated Tat dissociates from the TAR RNA structure and recruits
bromodomain-binding chromatin modifying complexes such as p/CAF and SWI/SNF to
possibly facilitate transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC1570494
PMID: 16893449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jan;14(1):192-5. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Abrogation of signal-dependent activation of the cdk9/cyclin T2a complex in human
RD rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Simone C, Giordano A.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jan;14(1):196.

PMID: 16841087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Med Res Rev. 2006 Sep;26(5):595-625.

The regulation of HIV-1 transcription: molecular targets for chemotherapeutic
intervention.

Stevens M(1), De Clercq E, Balzarini J.

Author information: 
(1)Rega Institute for Medical Research, Minderbroedersstraat 10, B-3000 Leuven,
Belgium.

The regulation of transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a
complex event that requires the cooperative action of both viral and cellular
components. In latently infected resting CD4(+) T cells HIV-1 transcription seems
to be repressed by deacetylation events mediated by histone deacetylases (HDACs).
Upon reactivation of HIV-1 from latency, HDACs are displaced in response to the
recruitment of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) by NF-kappaB or the viral
transcriptional activator Tat and result in multiple acetylation events.
Following chromatin remodeling of the viral promoter region, transcription is
initiated and leads to the formation of the TAR element. The complex of Tat with 
p-TEFb then binds the loop structures of TAR RNA thereby positioning CDK9 to
phosphorylate the cellular RNA polymerase II. The Tat-TAR-dependent
phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II plays an important role in transcriptional
elongation as well as in other post-transcriptional events. As such, targeting of
Tat protein (and/or cellular cofactors) provide an interesting perspective for
therapeutic intervention in the HIV replicative cycle and may afford lifetime
control of the HIV infection.

(c) 2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc

PMID: 16838299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Retrovirology. 2006 Jun 9;3:32.

Induction of the HIV-1 Tat co-factor cyclin T1 during monocyte differentiation is
required for the regulated expression of a large portion of cellular mRNAs.

Yu W(1), Wang Y, Shaw CA, Qin XF, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. wy132177@bcm.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: P-TEFb, a general RNA polymerase II elongation factor, is composed of
CDK9 (cyclin-dependent kinase 9) as a catalytic unit and either cyclin T1, T2 or 
K as a regulatory subunit. The cyclin T1/P-TEFb complex is targeted by HIV to
mediate Tat transactivation. Cyclin T1 protein expression is induced during early
macrophage differentiation, suggesting a role in regulation of mRNA expression
during the differentiation process. To study the functional significance of
cyclin T1 induction during differentiation, we utilized the human Mono Mac 6
(MM6) monocytic cell line.
RESULTS: We found that cyclin T1 protein expression is induced by a
post-transcriptional mechanism following PMA treatment of MM6 cells, similar to
its induction in primary monocytes and macrophages. Also in agreement with
findings in primary cells, cyclin T2a is present at relatively high levels in MM6
cells and is not induced by PMA. Although the knock-down of cyclin T1 in MM6
cells by shRNA inhibited HIV-1 Tat transactivation, MM6 cell growth was not
affected by the depletion of cyclin T1. Using DNA microarray technology, we found
that more than 20% of genes induced by PMA require cyclin T1 for their normal
level of induction, and approximately 15% of genes repressed by PMA require
cyclin T1 for their normal level of repression. Gene ontology analysis indicates 
that many of these cyclin T1-dependent genes are related to immune response and
signal transduction.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that cyclin T1 serves a critical role in the
program of macrophage differentiation, and this raises questions about the
feasibility of cyclin T1 serving as an antiviral therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC1557533
PMID: 16764723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Sep;208(3):602-12.

Cdk9 phosphorylates p53 on serine 392 independently of CKII.

Claudio PP(1), Cui J, Ghafouri M, Mariano C, White MK, Safak M, Sheffield JB,
Giordano A, Khalili K, Amini S, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, College of Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19122, USA. claudio@temple.edu

The tumor suppressor p53 is an important cellular protein, which controls cell
cycle progression. Phosphorylation is one of the mechanisms by which p53 is
regulated. Here we report the interaction of p53 with another key regulator,
cdk9, which together with cyclin T1 forms the positive transcription elongation
complex, p-TEFb. This complex cooperates with the HIV-1 Tat protein to cause the 
phosphorylation of the carboxyl terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II and
this facilitates the elongation of HIV-1 transcription. We demonstrate that cdk9 
phosphorylates p53 on serine 392 through their direct physical interaction.
Results from protein-protein interaction assays revealed that cdk9 interacts with
the C-terminal domain (aa 361-393) of p53, while p53 interacts with the
N-terminal domain of cdk9. Transfection and protein binding assays (EMSA and
ChIP) demonstrated the ability of p53 to bind and activate the cdk9 promoter.
Interestingly, cdk9 phosphorylates serine 392 of p53, which could be also
phosphorylated by casein kinase II. Kinase assays demonstrated that cdk9
phosphorylates p53 independently of CKII. These studies demonstrate the existence
of a feedback-loop between p53 and cdk9, pinpointing a novel mechanism by which
p53 regulates the basal transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 16741955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 21;281(29):20338-48. Epub 2006 May 24.

Distinct roles of the steroid receptor coactivator 1 and of MED1 in
retinoid-induced transcription and cellular differentiation.

Flajollet S(1), Lefebvre B, Rachez C, Lefebvre P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U459, FacultédeMédecine Henri Warembourg, Lille F-59045, France.

Retinoic acid receptors (RARs) are the molecular relays of retinoid action on
transcription, cellular differentiation and apoptosis. Transcriptional activation
of retinoid-regulated promoters requires the dismissal of corepressors and the
recruitment of coactivators to promoter-bound RAR. RARs recruit in vitro a
plethora of coactivators whose actual contribution to retinoid-induced
transcription is poorly characterized in vivo. Embryonal carcinoma P19 cells,
which are highly sensitive to retinoids, were depleted from archetypical
coactivators by RNAi. SRC1-deficient P19 cells showed severely compromised
retinoid-induced responses, in agreement with the supposed role of SRC1 as a RAR 
coactivator. Unexpectedly, Med1/TRAP220/DRIP205-depleted cells exhibited an
exacerbated response to retinoids, both in terms transcriptional responses and of
cellular differentiation. Med1 depletion affected TFIIH and cdk9 detection at the
prototypical retinoid-regulated RARbeta2 promoter, and favored a higher RNA
polymerase II detection in transcribed regions of the RARbeta2 gene. Furthermore,
the nature of the ligand impacted strongly on the ability of RARs to interact
with a given coactivator and to activate transcription in intact cells. Thus RAR 
accomplishes transcriptional activation as a function of the ligand structure, by
recruiting regulatory complexes which control distinct molecular events at
retinoid-regulated promoters.

PMID: 16723356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Front Biosci. 2006 Sep 1;11:2598-613.

Mechanisms controlling CDK9 activity.

Marshall RM(1), Grana X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

This review primarily focuses on the mechanisms that modulate CDK9 activity and
its recruitment to cellular genes, where it phosphorylates the C-terminal domain 
of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) as well as negative elongation factors. CDK9
associates with each of four cyclins (T1, T2a, T2b and K), forming distinct
positive transcription elongation factors (P-TEFb). Research done during the past
decade has demonstrated a role for P-TEFb in stimulating elongation of otherwise 
paused RNAPII transcripts. Recent work suggests that P-TEFb also positively
modulates other steps during transcription. In addition, "abnormal" CDK9 function
is associated with certain diseases. Specifically, the activity of the cyclin
T1/CDK9 complex is essential for HIV-1 replication and CDK9 upregulation is
associated with cardiac hypertrophy. Thus, the role of CDK9 in these processes,
and the possibility of therapeutically targeting CDK9, will also be briefly
discussed.

PMID: 16720337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Virol. 2006 May;80(10):4781-91.

Tax interacts with P-TEFb in a novel manner to stimulate human T-lymphotropic
virus type 1 transcription.

Zhou M(1), Lu H, Park H, Wilson-Chiru J, Linton R, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for
Cancer Research, NCI/NIH, , Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) encodes a transcriptional activator,
Tax, whose function is essential for viral transcription and replication. Tax
transactivates the viral long-terminal repeat through a series of protein-protein
interactions which facilitate CREB and CBP/p300 binding. In addition, Tax
dissociates transcription repressor histone deacetylase 1 interaction with the
CREB response element. The subsequent events through which Tax interacts and
communicates with RNA polymerase II and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are not
clearly understood. Here we present evidence that Tax recruits positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) (CDK9/cyclin T1) to the viral
promoter. This recruitment likely involves protein-protein interactions since Tax
associates with P-TEFb in vitro as demonstrated by glutathione S-transferase
fusion protein pull-down assays and in vivo as shown by co-immunoprecipitation
assays. Functionally, small interfering RNA directed toward CDK9 inhibited Tax
transactivation in transient assays. Consistent with these findings, the
depletion of CDK9 from nuclear extracts inhibited Tax transactivation in vitro.
Reconstitution of the reaction with wild-type P-TEFb, but not a kinase-dead
mutant, recovered HTLV-1 transcription. Moreover, the addition of the CDK9
inhibitor flavopiridol blocked Tax transactivation in vitro and in vivo.
Interestingly, we found that Tax regulates CDK9 kinase activity through a novel
autophosphorylation pathway.

PMCID: PMC1472077
PMID: 16641271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2006 Apr;22(4):350-6.

Estradiol negatively regulates HIV-LTR promoter activity in glial cells.

Wilson ME(1), Allred KF, Bisotti AJ, Bruce-Keller A, Chuahan A, Nath A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA. mewils2@uky.edu

HIV-associated dementia results from neuronal loss and an alteration of neuronal 
function due to a loss of synapses. While HIV infection in astrocytes is limited,
astrocytes exhibit a chronic nonproductive infection that can lead to the release
of neurotoxic proteins. Additionally, infection can disrupt the normal
neurotrophic role of astrocytes that results in neuronal death. Gonadal steroid
hormones are known to act as trophic and protective factors in the brain under a 
variety of normal and pathological conditions. In the present study, to determine
if estrogen plays a role in the ability of Tat to function as a transcriptional
activator within astrocytes, we examined the effect of estrogen on regulation of 
viral transcription. We utilized an immortalized human astrocyte cell line (SVGA)
stably transfected with a reporter plasmid containing the HIV-1IIIB LTR driving
the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene. The amount of transcriptional
activity was measured by quantifying the amount of CAT produced. We determined
that 17beta-estradiol treatment (1 nM) had no effect on basal LTR activity.
Following transfection with a Tat-expressing plasmid, there was a 100-fold
increase in CAT production. This induction was reduced by 40% in cells pretreated
with 17beta-estradiol. 17beta- Estradiol only suppressed transcription stimulated
by Tat. Furthermore, we determined that this effect was specific to
17beta-estradiol and estrogen receptor agonists. This activity was limited to
astrocytes as no effect was observed in a monocytic cell line. Finally, the
mechanism of action did not involve an alteration in levels of Cdk9 or Cyclin T1 
proteins necessary for Tat activation of the HIV-1 LTR. This study demonstrates a
novel activity of 17beta-estradiol in glial cells that could play a role in the
maintenance of neuronal health during HIV infection of the central nervous
system.

PMID: 16623639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2006 May 15;449(1-2):27-33. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

HIV-1 Tat interaction with cyclin T1 represses mannose receptor and the bone
morphogenetic protein receptor-2 transcription.

Caldwell RL(1), Lane KB, Shepherd VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Macrophage transcription is significantly altered by HIV-1 infection. HIV Tat, an
immediate-early product of the viral lifecycle, interacts with host transcription
factors to alter host gene expression. We have previously shown that Tat
represses transcription from the mannose receptor (MR) and the bone morphogenetic
protein receptor-2 (BMPR2) promoters. The current study shows that
transcriptional repression of these receptors involves Tat interaction with
cyclin T1. Assays using U937 human monocytic cells transiently expressing MR or
BMPR2 promoter-luciferase constructs demonstrated equal repression by one- and
two-exon Tat gene products. A mutant Tat expression vector encoding Tat protein
lacking the cyclin T1 binding domain failed to inhibit MR and BMPR2 promoter
activities. Over-expression of cyclin T1 in the presence of wild-type Tat
resulted in recovered activity from both promoters. Finally, two inhibitors of
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (a dominant negative CDK9 and flavopiridol) repressed
activity from the MR and BMPR2 promoters.

PMID: 16615932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Apr 10;24(11):1770-83.

Cyclin-dependent kinase pathways as targets for cancer treatment.

Shapiro GI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. geoffrey_shapiro@dfci.harvard.edu

Cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) are critical regulators of cell cycle progression
and RNA transcription. A variety of genetic and epigenetic events cause universal
overactivity of the cell cycle cdks in human cancer, and their inhibition can
lead to both cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. However, built-in redundancy may
limit the effects of highly selective cdk inhibition. Cdk4/6 inhibition has been 
shown to induce potent G1 arrest in vitro and tumor regression in vivo; cdk2/1
inhibition has the most potent effects during the S and G2 phases and induces E2F
transcription factor-dependent cell death. Modulation of cdk2 and cdk1 activities
also affects survival checkpoint responses after exposure to DNA-damaging and
microtubule-stabilizing agents. The transcriptional cdks phosphorylate the
carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, facilitating efficient
transcriptional initiation and elongation. Inhibition of these cdks primarily
affects the accumulation of transcripts with short half-lives, including those
encoding antiapoptosis family members, cell cycle regulators, as well as p53 and 
nuclear factor-kappa B-responsive gene targets. These effects may account for
apoptosis induced by cdk9 inhibitors, especially in malignant hematopoietic
cells, and may also potentiate cytotoxicity mediated by disruption of a variety
of pathways in many transformed cell types. Current work is focusing on
overcoming pharmacokinetic barriers that hindered development of flavopiridol, a 
pan-cdk inhibitor, as well as assessing novel classes of compounds potently
targeting groups of cell cycle cdks (cdk4/6 or cdk2/1) with variable effects on
the transcriptional cdks 7 and 9. These efforts will establish whether the
strategy of cdk inhibition is able to produce therapeutic benefit in the majority
of human tumors.

PMID: 16603719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Eur J Histochem. 2006 Jan-Mar;50(1):19-23.

Involvement of cdks and cyclins in muscle differentiation.

De Falco M(1), De Luca A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Section of Evolutionary and Comparative
Biology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Myocyte differentiation is due to transcription of genes that characterize the
phenotypic and biochemical identity of differentiated muscle cells. These are the
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) MyoD, Myf5, myogenin and MRF4. Overexpression 
of cdk/cyclins has been reported to inhibit the activity of MyoD and prevent
myogenic differentiation by different modalities. Unlike other cdk/cyclin
complexes, overexpression of cdk9/cyclin T2a, enhances MyoD function and promotes
myogenic differentiation. In addition, cyclin T2a interacting with a novel
partner, PKN alpha, is able to strongly enhance the expression of myogenic
differentiation markers, such as myogenin and Myosin Heavy Chain. So, cyclin T2a 
could stimulate myogenic differentiation interacting with different kinase
partners Cdk9 or PKN alpha in a synergistic or antagonistic way.

PMID: 16584981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Protein Expr Purif. 2006 Jun;47(2):614-20. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Expression, purification, and circular dichroism analysis of human CDK9.

Leopoldino AM(1), Canduri F, Cabral H, Junqueira M, de Marqui AB, Apponi LH, da
Fonseca IO, Domont GB, Santos DS, Valentini S, Bonilla-Rodriguez GO, Fossey MA,
de Azevedo WF Jr, Tajara EH.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.

The human cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) protein was expressed in E. coli BL21 
using the pET23a vector at 30 degrees C. Several milligrams of protein were
purified from soluble fraction using ionic exchange and ATP-affinity
chromatography. The structural quality of recombinant CDK9 and the estimation of 
its secondary structure were obtained by circular dichroism. Structural models of
CDK9 presented 26% of helices in agreement with the spectra by circular dichroism
analysis. This is the first report on human CDK9 expression in Escherichia coli
and structure analysis and provides the first step for the development of CDK9
inhibitors.

PMID: 16580843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cell Cycle. 2006 Mar;5(5):519-21. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

CDK9 phosphorylates p53 on serine residues 33, 315 and 392.

Radhakrishnan SK(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA.

Tumor suppressor p53 is often activated in response to DNA damage or other forms 
of stress, leading to either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Stress-induced
kinases phosphorylate p53 thereby enhancing its stability, leading to an increase
in transactivation of its target genes. Several different protein kinases
phosphorylate p53 on multiple amino acid residues. Here, we report for the first 
time that Cyclin dependent kinase 9, whose well-known substrate is RNA polymerase
II, can also phosphorylate p53. Specifically, Ser33 on the N-terminus and, Ser315
and Ser392 on the C-terminus of p53 were found to be phosphorylated. The precise 
biological role of this phosphorylation remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 16552184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(7):3567-81.

ICP27 interacts with the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II and facilitates
its recruitment to herpes simplex virus 1 transcription sites, where it undergoes
proteasomal degradation during infection.

Dai-Ju JQ(1), Li L, Johnson LA, Sandri-Goldin RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4025, USA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) ICP27 has been shown to interact with RNA
polymerase II (RNAP II) holoenzyme. Here, we show that ICP27 interacts with the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNAP II and that ICP27 mutants that cannot interact
fail to relocalize RNAP II to viral transcription sites, suggesting a role for
ICP27 in RNAP II recruitment. Using monoclonal antibodies specific for different 
phosphorylated forms of the RNAP II CTD, we found that the serine-2
phosphorylated form, which is found predominantly in elongating complexes, was
not recruited to viral transcription sites. Further, there was an overall
reduction in phosphoserine-2 staining. Western blot analysis revealed that there 
was a pronounced decrease in the phosphoserine-2 form and in overall RNAP II
levels in lysates from cells infected with wild-type HSV-1. There was no
appreciable difference in cdk9 levels, suggesting that protein degradation rather
than dephosphorylation was occurring. Treatment of infected cells with proteasome
inhibitors MG-132 and lactacystin prevented the decrease in the phosphoserine-2
form and in overall RNAP II levels; however, there was a concomitant decrease in 
the levels of several HSV-1 late proteins and in virus yield. Proteasomal
degradation has been shown to resolve stalled RNAP II complexes at sites of DNA
damage to allow 3' processing of transcripts. Thus, we propose that at later
times of infection when robust transcription and DNA replication are occurring,
elongating complexes may collide and proteasomal degradation may be required for 
resolution.

PMCID: PMC1440381
PMID: 16537625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jul;20(7):1494-505. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma recruits the positive
transcription elongation factor b complex to activate transcription and promote
adipogenesis.

Iankova I(1), Petersen RK, Annicotte JS, Chavey C, Hansen JB, Kratchmarova I,
Sarruf D, Benkirane M, Kristiansen K, Fajas L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Equipe Avenir,
Unité 540, 60 rue de Navacelles, Montpellier, France.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) phosphorylates the C-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase II, facilitating transcriptional elongation. In addition
to its participation in general transcription, P-TEFb is recruited to specific
promoters by some transcription factors such as c-Myc or MyoD. The P-TEFb complex
is composed of a cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk9) subunit and a regulatory partner 
(cyclin T1, cyclin T2, or cyclin K). Because cdk9 has been shown to participate
in differentiation processes, such as muscle cell differentiation, we studied a
possible role of cdk9 in adipogenesis. In this study we show that the expression 
of the cdk9 p55 isoform is highly regulated during 3T3-L1 adipocyte
differentiation at RNA and protein levels. Furthermore, cdk9, as well as cyclin
T1 and cyclin T2, shows differences in nuclear localization at distinct stages of
adipogenesis. Overexpression of cdk9 increases the adipogenic potential of 3T3-L1
cells, whereas inhibition of cdk9 by specific cdk inhibitors, and
dominant-negative cdk9 mutant impairs adipogenesis. We show that the positive
effects of cdk9 on the differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells are mediated by a direct
interaction with and phosphorylation of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARgamma), which is the master regulator of this process, on the
promoter of PPARgamma target genes. PPARgamma-cdk9 interaction results in
increased transcriptional activity of PPARgamma and therefore increased
adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2259259
PMID: 16484339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(3):777-88.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) of fission yeast is activated by the
CDK-activating kinase Csk1, overlaps functionally with the TFIIH-associated
kinase Mcs6, and associates with the mRNA cap methyltransferase Pcm1 in vivo.

Pei Y(1), Du H, Singer J, Stamour C, Granitto S, Shuman S, Fisher RP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY. r-fisher@ski.mskcc.org.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) of fission yeast is an essential ortholog of
metazoan positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which is proposed
to coordinate capping and elongation of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcripts.
Here we show that Cdk9 is activated to phosphorylate Pol II and the elongation
factor Spt5 by Csk1, one of two fission yeast CDK-activating kinases (CAKs).
Activation depends on Cdk9 T-loop residue Thr-212. The other CAK-Mcs6, the kinase
component of transcription factor IIH (TFIIH)-cannot activate Cdk9. Consistent
with the specificities of the two CAKs in vitro, the kinase activity of Cdk9 is
reduced approximately 10-fold by csk1 deletion, and Cdk9 complexes from csk1Delta
but not csk1+ cells can be activated by Csk1 in vitro. A cdk9(T212A) mutant is
viable but phenocopies conditional growth defects of csk1Delta strains,
indicating a role for Csk1-dependent activation of Cdk9 in vivo. A cdk9(T212A)
mcs6(S165A) strain, in which neither Cdk9 nor Mcs6 can be activated by CAK, has a
synthetic growth defect, implying functional overlap between the two CDKs, which 
have distinct but overlapping substrate specificities. Cdk9 forms complexes in
vivo with the essential cyclin Pch1 and with Pcm1, the mRNA cap
methyltransferase. The carboxyl-terminal region of Cdk9, through which it
interacts with another capping enzyme, the RNA triphosphatase Pct1, is essential.
Together, the data support a proposed model whereby Cdk9/Pch1-the third essential
CDK-cyclin complex described in fission yeast-helps to target the capping
apparatus to the transcriptional elongation complex.

PMCID: PMC1347026
PMID: 16428435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 1;66(1):435-44.

AZ703, an imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases 1 and 2,
induces E2F-1-dependent apoptosis enhanced by depletion of cyclin-dependent
kinase 9.

Cai D(1), Byth KF, Shapiro GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Preclinical studies were performed of a novel selective imidazopyridine
cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor, AZ703. In vitro kinase assays showed
that IC50 values for AZ703 against purified cyclin E/cdk2 and cyclin B/cdk1 were 
34 and 29 nmol/L, respectively. In contrast, the IC50 against cdk4 was 10
micromol/L. AZ703 also inhibited cdk7 and cdk9 with IC50 values of 2.1 micromol/L
and 521 nmol/L, respectively. Treatment of U2OS, NCI-H1299, and A549 cells for 24
hours resulted in growth arrest involving multiple cell cycle phases. At low drug
concentrations (< 2 micromol/L), G2 arrest predominated, whereas at higher
concentrations (> or = 2 micromol/L), S-G2 arrest was observed. When cells were
synchronized in G1 by starvation and released into AZ703, a block in G1 occurred 
that was not evident in exponentially growing cells. Cell cycle arrest was
associated with reduced phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein and
p27(Kip1) at cdk2 phospho-sites. Following longer exposures, apoptosis was
evident. Cells were further sensitized to AZ703 following recruitment to S phase 
by synchronization. Consistent with the inhibition of cdks during S and G2 that
modulate the activity and stability of E2F-1, AZ703 treatment induced E2F-1
expression. In U2OS and NCI-H1299 cells engineered to inducibly express the
dominant-negative mutant E2F-1 (1-374), expression of the mutant decreased
AZ703-mediated apoptosis, indicating dependence on E2F-1 transcriptional targets.
AZ703-induced apoptosis in NCI-H1299 cells was enhanced by small interfering
RNA-mediated depletion of cdk9, which caused reduced levels of Mcl-1 and XIAP,
suggesting that cdk2, cdk1, and cdk9 represent a rational subset of family
members for drug targeting.

PMID: 16397259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(2):630-42.

Regulation of polymerase II transcription by 7SK snRNA: two distinct RNA elements
direct P-TEFb and HEXIM1 binding.

Egloff S(1), Van Herreweghe E, Kiss T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote du CNRS, UMR5099 and Université 
Paul Sabatier, IFR109, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 4, France.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), a complex of Cdk9 and
cyclin T1/T2, stimulates transcription by phosphorylating RNA polymerase II. The 
7SK small nuclear RNA, in cooperation with HEXIM1 protein, functions as a general
polymerase II transcription regulator by sequestering P-TEFb into a large
kinase-inactive 7SK/HEXIM1/P-TEFb complex. Here, determination and
characterization of the functionally essential elements of human 7SK snRNA
directing HEXIM1 and P-TEFb binding led to a new model for the assembly of the
7SK/HEXIM1/P-TEFb regulatory complex. We demonstrate that two structurally and
functionally distinct protein binding elements located in the 5'- and 3'-terminal
hairpins of 7SK support the in vivo recruitment of HEXIM1 and P-TEFb.
Consistently, a minimal regulatory RNA composed of the 5' and 3' hairpins of 7SK 
can modulate polymerase II transcription in HeLa cells. HEXIM1 binds
independently and specifically to the G24-C48/G60-C87 distal segment of the 5'
hairpin of 7SK. Binding of HEXIM1 is a prerequisite for association of P-TEFb
with the G302-C324 apical region of the 3' hairpin of 7SK that is highly
reminiscent of the human immunodeficiency virus transactivation-responsive RNA.

PMCID: PMC1346915
PMID: 16382153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1054:55-67.

Isolation and characterization of hematopoietic transcription factor complexes by
in vivo biotinylation tagging and mass spectrometry.

Grosveld F(1), Rodriguez P, Meier N, Krpic S, Pourfarzad F, Papadopoulos P,
Kolodziej K, Patrinos GP, Hostert A, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, 50 Dr.
Molewaterplein, 3015 GE Rotterdam, the Netherlands. f.grosveld@erasmusmc.nl

We have described the application of a simple biotinylation tagging approach for 
the direct purification of tagged transcription factor complexes, based on the
use of artificial short peptide tags that are specifically and efficiently
biotinylated by the bacterial BirA biotin ligase, which is co-expressed in cells 
with the tagged factor. We used this approach to initially characterize complexes
formed by the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 in erythroid cells.
GATA-1 is essential for the erythroid differentiation, its functions encompassing
upregulation of erythroid genes, repression of alternative transcription
programs, and suppression of cell proliferation. However, it was not clear how
all of these GATA-1 functions are mediated. Our work describes, for the first
time, distinct GATA-1 interactions with the essential hematopoietic factor
Gfi-1b, the repressive MeCP1 complex, and the chromatin remodeling ACF/WCRF
complex, in addition to the known GATA-1/FOG-1 and GATA-1/TAL-1 complexes. We
also provide evidence that distinct GATA-1 complexes are associated with specific
GATA-1 functions in erythroid differentiation, for example, GATA-1/Gfi-1b with
the suppression of cell proliferation and GATA-1/FOG-1/MeCP1 with the repression 
of other hematopoietic transcription programs. We next applied the biotinylation 
tag to Ldb-1, a known partner of GATA-1, and characterized a number of novel
interaction partners that are essential in erythroid development, in particular, 
Eto-2, Lmo4, and CdK9. Last, we are in the process of applying the same
technology to characterize the factors that are bound to the suppressed
gamma-globin promoter in vivo.

PMID: 16339652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;207(1):232-7.

Pkn is a novel partner of cyclin T2a in muscle differentiation.

Cottone G(1), Baldi A, Palescandolo E, Manente L, Penta R, Paggi MG, De Luca A.

Author information: 
(1)Department for the Development of Therapeutic Programs, Center for
Experimental Research, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

With the aim to find novel partners of human Cyclin T2a, we performed a
two-hybrid screening in yeast using the full-length cDNA of this cyclin as bait, 
and a human heart cDNA library as preys source. Upon several interesting genes
selected, our attention has been focused on the cDNA coding for PKNalpha, a fatty
acid- and Rho-activated serine/threonine protein kinase, having a catalytic
domain homologous to protein kinase C family. Co-immunoprecipitation and in vitro
pull-down assays independently confirmed the interaction between the two
proteins. Luciferase assays, performed on NIH3T3 cell extracts after transfection
with a MyoD-responsive promoter, pointed out that PKNalpha was able to enhance
MyoD-dependent transcription, and that this effect was further increased when
cyclin T2a was co-overexpressed. Finally, overexpression of both Cyclin T2a and
PKNalpha in C2C12 cells strongly enhanced the expression of myogenic
differentiation markers, such as Myogenin and Myosin Heavy Chain, during
starvation-induced differentiation. Taken together, our data strengthen the
hypothesis that Cyclin T2a plays a role in muscle differentiation, and propose
PKNalpha as a novel partner of Cyclin T2a in this process.

PMID: 16331689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 16;25(12):1775-85.

EBV EBNA 2 stimulates CDK9-dependent transcription and RNA polymerase II
phosphorylation on serine 5.

Bark-Jones SJ(1), Webb HM, West MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QG, UK.

EBNA 2 is one of only five viral genes essential for the infection and
immortalization of human B cells by the cancer-associated virus Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV). EBNA 2 activates cellular and viral transcription and associates
with components of the basal transcription apparatus and a number of
coactivators. We provide the first evidence to show that the mechanism of
transcriptional activation by EBNA 2 also involves phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (pol II). We found that
transcriptional activation by EBNA 2 was inhibited by a dominant-negative mutant 
of the pol II CTD kinase, CDK9, and by low concentrations of the CDK9 inhibitor
5, 6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole. Moreover, using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays we demonstrated that EBNA 2 stimulates both pol II
recruitment and pol II phosphorylation on serine 5 of the CTD in vivo. These
results identify a new step in the transcription cycle that is subject to
regulation by a key EBV-encoded transcription factor and highlight CDK9
inhibitors as potential anti-EBV agents.

PMID: 16314842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10675-83.

Runx1 binds positive transcription elongation factor b and represses
transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II: possible mechanism of CD4
silencing.

Jiang H(1), Zhang F, Kurosu T, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Russell Medical 
Research Center, University of California at San Francisco, 94143-0703, USA.

Runx1 binds the silencer and represses CD4 transcription in immature thymocytes. 
In this study, we found that Runx1 inhibits P-TEFb, which contains CycT1, CycT2, 
or CycK and Cdk9 and stimulates transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) in eukaryotic cells. Indeed, its inhibitory domain, spanning positions
371 to 411, not only bound CycT1 but was required for silencing CD4 transcription
in vivo. Our chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Runx1 inhibits
the elongation but not initiation of transcription and that RNAPII is engaged at 
the CD4 promoter but is unable to elongate in CD4(-) CD8(+) thymoma cells. These 
results suggest that active repression by Runx1 occurs by blocking the elongation
by RNAPII, which may contribute to CD4 silencing during T-cell development.

PMCID: PMC1316947
PMID: 16314494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Nat Genet. 2005 Dec;37(12):1323-32. Epub 2005 Nov 20.

A genome-wide RNA interference screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells for new
components of the Hh signaling pathway.

Nybakken K(1), Vokes SA, Lin TY, McMahon AP, Perrimon N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. knybakke@receptor.med.harvard.edu

Members of the Hedgehog (Hh) family of signaling proteins are powerful regulators
of developmental processes in many organisms and have been implicated in many
human disease states. Here we report the results of a genome-wide RNA
interference screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells for new components of the Hh
signaling pathway. The screen identified hundreds of potential new regulators of 
Hh signaling, including many large protein complexes with pleiotropic effects,
such as the coat protein complex I (COPI) complex, the ribosome and the
proteasome. We identified the multimeric protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and two
new kinases, the D. melanogaster orthologs of the vertebrate PITSLRE and
cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) kinases, as Hh regulators. We also identified a 
large group of constitutive and alternative splicing factors, two nucleoporins
involved in mRNA export and several RNA-regulatory proteins as potent regulators 
of Hh signal transduction, indicating that splicing regulation and mRNA transport
have a previously unrecognized role in Hh signaling. Finally, we showed that
several of these genes have conserved roles in mammalian Hh signaling.

PMID: 16311596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. EMBO J. 2005 Dec 7;24(23):4154-65. Epub 2005 Nov 24.

P-TEFb is not an essential elongation factor for the intronless human U2 snRNA
and histone H2b genes.

Medlin J(1), Scurry A, Taylor A, Zhang F, Peterlin BM, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford, UK.

Phosphorylation of Ser2 of the heptapeptide repeat of the CTD of mammalian pol II
by P-TEFb is associated with productive elongation of transcription of
protein-coding genes. Here, we show that the CTD of pol II transcribing the human
U2 snRNA genes is phosphorylated on Ser2 in vivo and that both the CDK9 kinase
and cyclin T components of P-TEFb are required for cotranscriptional recognition 
of the 3' box RNA 3' end processing signal. However, inhibitors of CDK9 do not
affect transcription of the U2 genes, indicating that P-TEFb functions
exclusively as an RNA processing factor in expression of these relatively short, 
intronless genes. We also show that inhibition of CDK9 does not adversely affect 
either transcription of an intron-less, replication-activated histone H2b gene or
recognition of the histone gene-specific U7-dependent RNA 3' end formation
signal. These results emphasize that the role of P-TEFb as an activator of
transcription elongation can be separated from its role in RNA processing and
that neither function is universally required for expression of mammalian pol
II-dependent genes.

PMCID: PMC1356315
PMID: 16308568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Virol. 2005 Dec;79(24):15477-93.

Human cytomegalovirus infection induces specific hyperphosphorylation of the
carboxyl-terminal domain of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II that is
associated with changes in the abundance, activity, and localization of cdk9 and 
cdk7.

Tamrakar S(1), Kapasi AJ, Spector DH.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Medicine East, Room 2059, Mail Code 0712, 9500 Gilman
Drive, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0712, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus infection in the presence of the cyclin-dependent kinase
(cdk) inhibitor roscovitine leads to changes in differential splicing and the
polyadenylation of immediate early IE1/IE2 and UL37 transcripts (V. Sanchez, A.
K. McElroy, J. Yen, S. Tamrakar, C. L. Clark, R. A. Schwartz, and D. H. Spector, 
J. Virol. 78:11219-11232, 2004). To determine if this was associated with
specific phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the RNA polymerase II 
(RNAP II) large subunit by cdk7/cyclin H and cdk9/cyclin T1, we examined the
expression and localization of these kinases and the various phosphorylated forms
of RNAP II. Infection resulted in increased RNAP II CTD phosphorylated on serines
2 and 5 and increased levels of activity of cdk7 and cdk9. At early times, cdk9
localizes with input viral DNA, and aggregates of cdk9 and cdk7 and a subset of
Ser2-phosphorylated RNAP II colocalize with IE1/IE2 proteins adjacent to
promyelocytic leukemia protein oncogenic domains. Later, cdk9 and
Ser2-phosphorylated RNAP II form a nuclear punctate pattern; cdk7 resides in
replication centers, and Ser5-phosphorylated RNAP II clusters at the peripheries 
of replication centers. Roscovitine treatment leads to decreased levels of
hyperphosphorylated RNAP II (RNAP IIo) in infected cells and of
hypophosphorylated RNAP II in mock-infected and infected cells. The RNAP IIo
decrease does not occur if roscovitine is added 8 h postinfection, as was
previously observed for processing of IE transcripts. These results suggest that 
accurate IE gene expression requires specific phosphorylation of the RNAP II CTD 
early in infection.

PMCID: PMC1316045
PMID: 16306619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. AIDS. 2005 Dec 2;19(18):2087-95.

Indirubin-3'-monoxime, a derivative of a Chinese antileukemia medicine, inhibits 
P-TEFb function and HIV-1 replication.

Heredia A(1), Davis C, Bamba D, Le N, Gwarzo MY, Sadowska M, Gallo RC, Redfield
RR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of the cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
Indirubin-3'-monoxime (IM) on Tat-mediated transactivation function, a step of
the HIV-1 cycle that is not currently targeted in antiviral therapy.
METHODS: The effects of IM on CDK implicated in HIV-1 Tat transactivation
function were evaluated by kinase assays, transfection experiments, RNase
protection assay and RT-PCR analysis of viral transcripts. The antiviral effect
of IM was investigated in cells from HIV-1 infected individuals as well as in
cell lines, primary lymphocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages. The antiviral
activity of IM was also tested against drug-resistant HIV-1.
RESULTS: IM inhibits the kinase activity of CDK9 [50% inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of 0.05 microM], the catalytic subunit of Positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Inhibition of CDK9 activity by IM results in
abrogation of Tat-induced expression of HIV-1 RNA in cell lines. In addition, IM 
inhibits the replication of HIV-1 in both peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(IC50 of 1 microM) and macrophages (IC50 of 0.5 microM). IM is effective against 
primary and drug-resistant strains of HIV-1. Importantly, the antiviral effects
of the drug were seen at concentrations that did not affect cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-toxic concentrations of IM inhibit HIV-1 by blocking viral gene 
expression mediated by the cellular factor P-TEFb. The drug is effective against 
wild-type and drug-resistant strains of HIV-1. IM may help control replication of
HIV-1 in patients by disrupting a step of the HIV-1 cycle that is not being
targeted in current antiretroviral treatments.

PMID: 16284457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Retrovirology. 2005 Nov 9;2:69.

Tat gets the "green" light on transcription initiation.

Brady J(1), Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. bradyj@dce41.nci.nih.gov

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat transactivation is an essential
step in the viral life cycle. Over the past several years, it has become widely
accepted that Tat exerts its transcriptional effect by binding the
transactivation-responsive region (TAR) and enhancing transcriptional elongation.
Consistent with this hypothesis, it has been shown that Tat promotes the binding 
of P-TEFb, a transcription elongation factor composed of cyclin T1 and cdk9, and 
the interaction of Tat with P-TEFb and TAR leads to hyperphosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA Pol II and increased processivity of RNA Pol II. A
recent report, however, has generated renewed interest that Tat may also play a
critical role in transcription complex (TC) assembly at the preinitiation step.
Using in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, the authors reported that the
HIV TC contains TBP but not TBP-associated factors. The stimulatory effect
involved the direct interaction of Tat and P-TEFb and was evident at the earliest
step of TC assembly, the TBP-TATA box interaction. In this article, we will
review this data in context of earlier data which also support Tat's involvement 
in transcriptional complex assembly. Specifically, we will discuss experiments
which demonstrated that Tat interacted with TBP and increased transcription
initiation complex stability in cell free assays. We will also discuss studies
which demonstrated that over expression of TBP alone was sufficient to obtain Tat
activated transcription in vitro and in vivo. Finally, studies using
self-cleaving ribozymes which suggested that Tat transactivation was not
compatible with pausing of the RNA Pol II at the TAR site will be discussed.

PMCID: PMC1308864
PMID: 16280076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 15;175(10):6402-11.

Cyclin T1 expression is regulated by multiple signaling pathways and mechanisms
during activation of human peripheral blood lymphocytes.

Marshall RM(1), Salerno D, Garriga J, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology and Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Stimulation of primary human T lymphocytes results in up-regulation of cyclin T1 
expression, which correlates with phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase II (RNAP II). Up-regulation of cyclin T1 and concomitant stabilization
of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) may facilitate productive replication of HIV 
in activated T cells. We report that treatment of PBLs with two mitogens, PHA and
PMA, results in accumulation of cyclin T1 via distinct mechanisms. PHA induces
accumulation of cyclin T1 mRNA and protein, which results from cyclin T1 mRNA
stabilization, without significant change in cyclin T1 promoter activity. Cyclin 
T1 mRNA stabilization requires the activation of both calcineurin and JNK because
inhibition of either precludes cyclin T1 accumulation. In contrast, PMA induces
cyclin T1 protein up-regulation by stabilizing cyclin T1 protein, apparently
independently of the proteasome and without accumulation of cyclin T1 mRNA. This 
process is dependent on Ca2+-independent protein kinase C activity but does not
require ERK1/2 activation. We also found that PHA and anti-CD3 Abs induce the
expression of both the cyclin/CDK complexes involved in RNAP II C-terminal domain
phosphorylation and the G1-S cyclins controlling cell cycle progression. In
contrast, PMA alone is a poor inducer of the expression of G1-S cyclins but often
as potent as PHA in inducing RNAP II cyclin/CDK complexes. These findings suggest
coordination in the expression and activation of RNAP II kinases by pathways that
independently stimulate gene expression but are insufficient to induce S phase
entry in primary T cells.

PMID: 16272292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):807-13.

MyoD recruits the cdk9/cyclin T2 complex on myogenic-genes regulatory regions.

Giacinti C(1), Bagella L, Puri PL, Giordano A, Simone C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, College of Science and Technology Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

During skeletal myogenesis, muscle-regulatory factors bHLH and MEF2 promote the
expression of muscle-specific genes by recruiting several chromatin-modifying
complexes on specific DNA regulatory sequences. A number of MyoD-interacting
proteins have been reported, but whether they are recruited to the chromatin of
myogenic loci, and the relationship with other chromatin bound proteins is
unknown. We show that MyoD recruits cdk9/cyclin T2, together with the histone
acetyltransferases p300 and PCAF, and the chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF,
on promoters and enhancers of muscle-specific genes, and that this event
correlates with the acetylation of histone tails, remodeling of chromatin, and
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the RNA polymerase II at these 
elements.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16245309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):603-10.

Increased HEXIM1 expression during erythroleukemia and neuroblastoma cell
differentiation.

Turano M(1), Napolitano G, Dulac C, Majello B, Bensaude O, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy.

The HEXIM1 protein, in association with 7SK snRNA, binds and inhibits the kinase 
activity of P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T). P-TEFb activity is crucial for efficient
transcription elongation of viral and cellular genes. HEXIM1 was originally
isolated as a protein up-regulated by hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA), a
prototypical inducer of differentiation. To determine the causative role of
HEXIM1 during cell differentiation we analyzed the biochemical and functional
consequences of HEXIM1 protein levels in several in vitro differentiation
systems. We found that HEXIM1 mRNA and protein levels are up-regulated during
differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells upon treatment with HMBA or DMSO.
Stimulation of HEXIM1 is not restricted to hematopoietic cells, as induction of
phenotypic differentiation of neuroblastoma cells by retinoic acid results in
up-regulation of HEXIM1. Moreover, ectopic expression of HEXIM1 causes growth
inhibition and promotes neuronal differentiation. These findings highlight a
crucial role of HEXIM1 protein during cell differentiation.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16222702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Dec;205(3):463-70.

siRNA depletion of 7SK snRNA induces apoptosis but does not affect expression of 
the HIV-1 LTR or P-TEFb-dependent cellular genes.

Haaland RE(1), Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

P-TEFb is a general transcriptional elongation factor composed of Cdk9 and either
cyclin T1, T2, or K. A substantial portion of P-TEFb is associated with the 7SK
small nuclear RNA (7SK) and the HEXIM1 or HEXIM2 proteins; this complex has
reduced kinase activity in vitro relative to free P-TEFb. Here we report that 7SK
and HEXIM1 levels are induced in activated lymphocytes concomitantly with
increased P-TEFb activity and global transcription. We used siRNA-mediated
depletion to probe the function of 7SK in HeLa cells. Depletion of 7SK caused a
large reduction in the association of HEXIM1 with Cdk9 and cyclin T1, and greatly
reduced the amount of the cyclin T1 present in the 7SK/HEXIM1/P-TEFb complex.
Similar to previous studies, siRNA-mediated depletion of 7SK resulted in
increased expression of several reporter plasmids tested, including a plasmid
lacking promoter elements. However, in contrast to previous studies, which did
not examine the effects of 7SK depletion on endogenous gene expression, depletion
of 7SK did not appear to affect the expression of the corresponding endogenous
genes. Moreover, 7SK depletion had no effect on expression from the integrated
HIV-1 provirus or the c-myc and MCL-1 genes, three transcription units known to
be highly dependent upon P-TEFb. Importantly, depletion of 7SK was found to cause
apoptosis by 72 h post-transfection in HeLa cells. These results suggest that 7SK
may provide an essential cellular function whose relation to P-TEFb function is
unclear.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16152622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36364-71. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

Nuclear targeting of protein phosphatase-1 by HIV-1 Tat protein.

Ammosova T(1), Jerebtsova M, Beullens M, Lesage B, Jackson A, Kashanchi F,
Southerland W, Gordeuk VR, Bollen M, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA.

Transcription of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 genes is activated by HIV-1
Tat protein, which induces phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase-II by CDK9/cyclin T1. We previously showed that Tat-induced HIV-1
transcription is regulated by protein phosphatase-1 (PP1). In the present study
we demonstrate that Tat interacts with PP1 and that disruption of this
interaction prevents induction of HIV-1 transcription. We show that PP1 interacts
with Tat in part through the binding of Val36 and Phe38 of Tat to PP1 and that
Tat is involved in the nuclear and subnuclear targeting of PP1. The PP1 binding
mutant Tat-V36A/F38A displayed a decreased affinity for PP1 and was a poor
activator of HIV-1 transcription. Surprisingly, Tat-Q35R mutant that had a higher
affinity for PP1 was also a poor activator of HIV-1 transcription, because strong
PP1 binding competed out binding of Tat to CDK9/cyclin T1. Our results suggest
that Tat might function as a nuclear regulator of PP1 and that interaction of Tat
with PP1 is critical for activation of HIV-1 transcription by Tat.

PMID: 16131488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell. 2005 Aug 19;19(4):535-45.

Recruitment of P-TEFb for stimulation of transcriptional elongation by the
bromodomain protein Brd4.

Yang Z(1), Yik JH, Chen R, He N, Jang MK, Ozato K, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

The cyclinT1/Cdk9 heterodimer that constitutes core P-TEFb is generally presumed 
to be the transcriptionally active form for stimulating RNA polymerase II
elongation. About half of cellular P-TEFb also exists in an inactive complex with
the 7SK snRNA and the HEXIM1 protein. Here, we show that the remaining half
associates with the bromodomain protein Brd4. In stress-induced cells, the
7SK/HEXIM1-bound P-TEFb is quantitatively converted into the Brd4-associated
form. The association with Brd4 is necessary to form the transcriptionally active
P-TEFb, recruits P-TEFb to a promoter, and enables P-TEFb to contact the Mediator
complex, a potential target for the Brd4-mediated recruitment. Although generally
required for transcription, the P-TEFb-recruitment function of Brd4 can be
substituted by that of HIV-1 Tat, which recruits P-TEFb directly for activated
HIV-1 transcription. Brd4, HEXIM1, and 7SK are all implicated in regulating cell 
growth, which may result from their dynamic control of the general transcription 
factor P-TEFb.

PMID: 16109377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell. 2005 Aug 19;19(4):523-34.

The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P-TEFb and
stimulates RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription.

Jang MK(1), Mochizuki K, Zhou M, Jeong HS, Brady JN, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Brd4 is a mammalian bromodomain protein that binds to acetylated chromatin.
Proteomic analysis revealed that Brd4 interacts with cyclinT1 and Cdk9 that
constitutes core positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Brd4
interacted with P-TEFb in the living nucleus through its bromodomain. About half 
of P-TEFb was bound to the inhibitory subunit and functionally inactive. Brd4
interacted with P-TEFb that was free of the inhibitory subunit. An increase in
Brd4 expression led to increased P-TEFb-dependent phosphorylation of RNA
polymerase II (RNAPII) CTD and stimulation of transcription from promoters in
vivo. Conversely, a reduction in Brd4 expression by siRNA reduced CTD
phosphorylation and transcription, revealing that Brd4 is a positive regulatory
component of P-TEFb. In chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, the
recruitment of P-TEFb to a promoter was dependent on Brd4 and was enhanced by an 
increase in chromatin acetylation. Together, P-TEFb alternately interacts with
Brd4 and the inhibitory subunit to maintain functional equilibrium in the cell.

PMID: 16109376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(17):11135-41.

Ubiquitylation of Cdk9 by Skp2 facilitates optimal Tat transactivation.

Barboric M(1), Zhang F, Besenicar M, Plemenitas A, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, Department of Medicine, University
of California, San Francisco, 94143, USA.

By recruiting the positive transcriptional elongation factor b (P-TEFb) to paused
RNA polymerase II, the transactivator Tat stimulates transcriptional elongation
of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome. We found that
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), the catalytic subunit of P-TEFb, is
ubiquitylated in vivo. This ubiquitylation depended on the Skp1/Cul1/F-box
protein E3 ubiquitin ligase Skp2. Likewise, Tat required Skp2 since its
transactivation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat decreased in primary mouse
embryonic fibroblasts, which lacked Skp2. The ubiquitylation of Cdk9 by Skp2
facilitated the formation of the ternary complex between P-TEFb, Tat, and
transactivation response element. Thus, our findings underscore the requirement
of ubiquitylation for the coactivator function in regulating HIV-1
transcriptional elongation.

PMCID: PMC1193628
PMID: 16103164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Retrovirology. 2005 Jul 27;2:47.

Dephosphorylation of CDK9 by protein phosphatase 2A and protein phosphatase-1 in 
Tat-activated HIV-1 transcription.

Ammosova T(1), Washington K, Debebe Z, Brady J, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Howard University, 2121 Georgia Ave., N.W.
Washington, DC 20059, USA. tammosova@mail.ru

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Tat protein recruits human positive transcription elongation
factor P-TEFb, consisting of CDK9 and cyclin T1, to HIV-1 transactivation
response (TAR) RNA. CDK9 is maintained in dephosphorylated state by TFIIH and
undergo phosphorylation upon the dissociation of TFIIH. Thus, dephosphorylation
of CDK9 prior to its association with HIV-1 preinitiation complex might be
important for HIV-1 transcription. Others and we previously showed that protein
phosphatase-2A and protein phosphatase-1 regulates HIV-1 transcription. In the
present study we analyze relative contribution of PP2A and PP1 to
dephosphorylation of CDK9 and to HIV-1 transcription in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: In vitro, PP2A but not PP1 dephosphorylated autophosphorylated CDK9 and 
reduced complex formation between P-TEFb, Tat and TAR RNA. Inhibition of PP2A by 
okadaic acid inhibited basal as well as Tat-induced HIV-1 transcription whereas
inhibition of PP1 by recombinant nuclear inhibitor of PP1 (NIPP1) inhibited only 
Tat-induced transcription in vitro. In cultured cells, low concentration of
okadaic acid, inhibitory for PP2A, only mildly inhibited Tat-induced HIV-1
transcription. In contrast Tat-mediated HIV-1 transcription was strongly
inhibited by expression of NIPP1. Okadaic acid induced phosphorylation of
endogenous as well transiently expressed CDK9, but this induction was not seen in
the cells expressing NIPP1. Also the okadaic acid did not induce phosphorylation 
of CDK9 with mutation of Thr 186 or with mutations in Ser-329, Thr-330, Thr-333, 
Ser-334, Ser-347, Thr-350, Ser-353, and Thr-354 residues involved in
autophosphorylation of CDK9.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that although PP2A dephosphorylates
autophosphorylated CDK9 in vitro, in cultured cells PP1 is likely to
dephosphorylate CDK9 and contribute to the regulation of activated HIV-1
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1187922
PMID: 16048649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Aug;62(15):1763-71.

Antiproliferative activity of olomoucine II, a novel 2,6,9-trisubstituted purine 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor.

Krystof V(1), McNae IW, Walkinshaw MD, Fischer PM, Müller P, Vojtesek B, Orság M,
Havlícek L, Strnad M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Faculty of Science, Palacký University &
Institute of Experimental Botany AS CR, Slechtitelu 11, 783 71, Olomouc, The
Czech Republic.

The study describes the protein kinase selectivity profile, as well as the
binding mode of olomoucine II in the catalytic cleft of CDK2, as determined from 
cocrystal analysis. Apart from the main cell cycle-regulating kinase CDK2,
olomoucine II exerts specificity for CDK7 and CDK9, with important functions in
the regulation of RNA transcription. In vitro anticancer activity of the
inhibitor in a panel of tumor cell lines shows a wide potency range with a slight
preference for cells harboring a wild-type p53 gene. Cell-based assays confirmed 
activation of p53 protein levels and events leading to accumulation of p21(WAF1).
Additionally, in olomoucine II-treated cells, Mdm2 was found to form a complex
with the ribosomal protein L11, which inhibits Mdm2 ubiquitin ligase function. We
conclude that perturbations in RNA synthesis may lead to activation of p53 and
that this contributes to the antiproliferative potency of cyclindependent kinase 
inhibitors.

PMID: 16003486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 26;280(34):30619-29. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Transcription-dependent association of multiple positive transcription elongation
factor units to a HEXIM multimer.

Dulac C(1), Michels AA, Fraldi A, Bonnet F, Nguyen VT, Napolitano G, Lania L,
Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Unite Mixte de Recherche 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Laboratoire de
Régulation de l'Expression Génétique, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The positive transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb) comprises a kinase, CDK9,
and a Cyclin T1 or T2. Its activity is inhibited by association with the HEXIM1
or HEXIM2 protein bound to 7SK small nuclear RNA. HEXIM1 and HEXIM2 were found to
form stable homo- and hetero-oligomers. Using yeast two-hybrid and transfection
assays, we have now shown that the C-terminal domains of HEXIM proteins directly 
interact with each other. Hydrodynamic parameters measured by glycerol gradient
ultracentrifugation and gel-permeation chromatography demonstrate that both
purified recombinant and cellular HEXIM1 proteins form highly anisotropic
particles. Chemical cross-links suggest that HEXIM1 proteins form dimers. The
multimeric nature of HEXIM1 is maintained in P-TEFb.HEXIM1.7SK RNA complexes.
Multiple P-TEFb modules are found in the inactive P-TEFb.HEXIM1.7SK complexes. It
is proposed that 7SK RNA binding to a HEXIM1 multimer promotes the simultaneous
recruitment and hence inactivation of multiple P-TEFb units.

PMID: 15994294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Retrovirology. 2005 Jul 2;2:42.

Inhibition of Tat activity by the HEXIM1 protein.

Fraldi A(1), Varrone F, Napolitano G, Michels AA, Majello B, Bensaude O, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, University of Naples Federico
II, Naples, Italy. fraldi@tigem.it

BACKGROUND: The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) composed by
CDK9/CyclinT1 subunits is a dedicated co-factor of HIV transcriptional
transactivator Tat protein. Transcription driven by the long terminal repeat
(LTR) of HIV involves formation of a quaternary complex between P-TEFb, Tat and
the TAR element. This recruitment is necessary to enhance the processivity of RNA
Pol II from the HIV-1 5' LTR promoter. The activity of P-TEFb is regulated in
vivo and in vitro by the HEXIM1/7SK snRNA ribonucleic-protein complex.
RESULTS: Here we report that Tat transactivation is effectively inhibited by
co-expression of HEXIM1 or its paralog HEXIM2. HEXIM1 expression specifically
represses transcription mediated by the direct activation of P-TEFb through
artificial recruitment of GAL4-CycT1. Using appropriate HEXIM1 mutants we
determined that effective Tat-inhibition entails the 7SK snRNA basic recognition 
motif as well as the C-terminus region required for interaction with cyclin T1.
Enhanced expression of HEXIM1 protein modestly affects P-TEFb activity,
suggesting that HEXIM1-mediated repression of Tat activity is not due to a global
inhibition of cellular transcription.
CONCLUSION: These results point to a pivotal role of P-TEFb for Tat's optimal
transcription activity and suggest that cellular proteins that regulate P-TEFb
activity might exert profound effects on Tat function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1183248
PMID: 15992410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Blood. 2005 Oct 1;106(7):2513-9. Epub 2005 Jun 21.

Transcription inhibition by flavopiridol: mechanism of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cell death.

Chen R(1), Keating MJ, Gandhi V, Plunkett W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Flavopiridol is active against chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells in vitro 
and in the treatment of advanced stage disease, but the mechanisms of these
actions remain unclear. Originally developed as a general cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor, flavopiridol is a potent transcriptional suppressor through the
inhibition of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb; CDK9/cyclin T).
P-TEFb phosphorylates the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II to promote
transcriptional elongation. Because most CLL cells are not actively cycling, and 
their viability is dependent upon the continuous expression of antiapoptotic
proteins, we hypothesized that flavopiridol induces apoptosis in CLL cells
through the transcriptional down-regulation of such proteins. This study
demonstrated that flavopiridol inhibited the phosphorylation of the CTD of RNA
polymerase II in primary CLL cells and reduced RNA synthesis. This was associated
with a decline of the transcripts and the levels of short-lived antiapoptotic
proteins such as myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1), and resulted in the induction
of apoptosis. The B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) protein level remained stable,
although its mRNA was consistently reduced, suggesting that the outcome of
transcriptional inhibition by flavopiridol is governed by the intrinsic stability
of the individual transcripts and proteins. The dependence of CLL-cell survival
on short-lived oncoproteins may provide the biochemical basis for the therapeutic
index in response to flavopiridol.

PMCID: PMC1895272
PMID: 15972445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 5;280(31):28819-26. Epub 2005 Jun 17.

Analysis of the large inactive P-TEFb complex indicates that it contains one 7SK 
molecule, a dimer of HEXIM1 or HEXIM2, and two P-TEFb molecules containing Cdk9
phosphorylated at threonine 186.

Li Q(1), Price JP, Byers SA, Cheng D, Peng J, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) regulates eukaryotic gene
expression at the level of elongation, and is itself controlled by the reversible
association of 7SK RNA and an RNA-binding protein, HEXIM1 or HEXIM2. To further
understand how P-TEFb is regulated, we analyzed the stoichiometry of all the
known components of the large, inactive P-TEFb complex. Mutational analyses of a 
putative coiled coil region in the carboxyl-terminal portion of HEXIM1 revealed
that the protein is a dimer in solution and remains a dimer after binding to 7SK.
Although a HEXIM1 dimer contains two potential RNA binding motifs and ultimately 
recruits two P-TEFb molecules, it associates with only one molecule of RNA. The
first 172 nucleotides of the 330-nucleotide 7SK are sufficient to bind HEXIM1 or 
HEXIM2, and then recruit and inhibit P-TEFb. Deletion of the first 121 amino
acids of HEXIM1 allowed it to inhibit P-TEFb partially in the absence of 7SK RNA.
Mutation of a conserved tyrosine (Tyr(271) in HEXIM1) to alanine or glutamate or 
mutation of a conserved phenylalanine (Phe(208)) to alanine, aspartate, or
lysine, resulted in loss of inhibition of P-TEFb, but did not affect formation of
the 7SK.HEXIM.P-TEFb complex. Analysis of T-loop phosphorylation in Cdk9
indicated that phosphorylation of Thr(186), but not Ser(175), was essential for
kinase activity and for recruitment of P-TEFb to the 7SK.HEXIM complex. A model
illustrates what is currently known about how HEXIM proteins, 7SK, and P-TEFb
assemble to maintain an activated kinase in a readily available, but inactive
form.

PMID: 15965233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;65(12):5399-407.

Seliciclib (CYC202, R-Roscovitine) induces cell death in multiple myeloma cells
by inhibition of RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription and down-regulation of
Mcl-1.

MacCallum DE(1), Melville J, Frame S, Watt K, Anderson S, Gianella-Borradori A,
Lane DP, Green SR.

Author information: 
(1)Cyclacel Ltd., Dundee Technopole, James Lindsay Place, Dundee, United Kingdom.
dmaccallum@cyclacel.com

Seliciclib (CYC202, R-roscovitine) is a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
that competes for the ATP binding site on the kinase. It has greatest activity
against CDK2/cyclin E, CDK7/cyclin H, and CDK9/cyclin T. Seliciclib induces
apoptosis from all phases of the cell cycle in tumor cell lines, reduces tumor
growth in xenografts in nude mice and is currently in phase II clinical trials.
This study investigated the mechanism of cell death in multiple myeloma cells
treated with seliciclib. In myeloma cells treated in vitro, seliciclib induced
rapid dephosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminal domain of the large subunit of
RNA polymerase II. Phosphorylation at these sites is crucial for RNA polymerase
II-dependent transcription. Inhibition of transcription would be predicted to
exert its greatest effect on gene products where both mRNA and protein have short
half-lives, resulting in rapid decline of the protein levels. One such gene
product is the antiapoptotic factor Mcl-1, crucial for the survival of a range of
cell types including multiple myeloma. As hypothesized, following the inhibition 
of RNA polymerase II phosphorylation, seliciclib caused rapid Mcl-1
down-regulation, which preceded the induction of apoptosis. The importance of
Mcl-1 was confirmed by short interfering RNA, demonstrating that reducing Mcl-1
levels alone was sufficient to induce apoptosis. These results suggest that
seliciclib causes myeloma cell death by disrupting the balance between cell
survival and apoptosis through the inhibition of transcription and
down-regulation of Mcl-1. This study provides the scientific rationale for the
clinical development of seliciclib for the treatment of multiple myeloma.

PMID: 15958589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 12;280(32):29135-43. Epub 2005 Jun 13.

Varicella-zoster virus IE63 protein phosphorylation by roscovitine-sensitive
cyclin-dependent kinases modulates its cellular localization and activity.

Habran L(1), Bontems S, Di Valentin E, Sadzot-Delvaux C, Piette J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, Center for Biomedical Genoproteomics,
Institute of Pathology B23, University of Liège, B-4000, Liège, Belgium.

During the first stage of Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV) infection, IE63 (immediate
early 63 protein) is mostly expressed in the nucleus and also slightly in the
cytoplasm, and during latency, IE63 localizes in the cytoplasm quite exclusively.
Because phosphorylation is known to regulate various cellular mechanisms, we
investigated the impact of phosphorylation by roscovitine-sensitive
cyclin-dependent kinase (RSC) on the localization and functional properties of
IE63. We demonstrated first that IE63 was phosphorylated on Ser-224 in vitro by
CDK1 and CDK5 but not by CDK2, CDK7, or CDK9. Furthermore, by using roscovitine
and CDK1 inhibitor III (CiIII), we showed that CDK1 phosphorylated IE63 on
Ser-224 in vivo. By mutagenesis and the use of inhibitors, we demonstrated that
phosphorylation on Ser-224 was important for the correct localization of the
protein. Indeed, the substitution of these residues by alanine led to an
exclusive nuclear localization of the protein, whereas mutations into glutamic
acid did not modify its subcellular distribution. When transfected or
VZV-infected cells were treated with roscovitine or CiIII, an exclusive nuclear
localization of IE63 was also observed. By using a transfection assay, we also
showed that phosphorylation on Ser-224 and Thr-222 was essential for the
down-regulation of the basal activity of the VZV DNA polymerase gene promoter.
Similarly, roscovitine and CiIII impaired these properties of the wild-type form 
of IE63. These observations clearly demonstrated the importance of CDK1-mediated 
IE63 phosphorylation for a correct distribution of IE63 between both cellular
compartments and for its repressive activity toward the promoter tested.

PMID: 15955820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jun 14;102(24):8555-60. Epub 2005 Jun 7.

HEXIM1 forms a transcriptionally abortive complex with glucocorticoid receptor
without involving 7SK RNA and positive transcription elongation factor b.

Shimizu N(1), Ouchida R, Yoshikawa N, Hisada T, Watanabe H, Okamoto K, Kusuhara
M, Handa H, Morimoto C, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Department of Rheumatology and Allergy,
Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1, Shirokanedai,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

The HEXIM1 protein has been shown to form a protein-RNA complex composed of 7SK
small nuclear RNA and positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which 
is composed of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T1, and to inhibit the
kinase activity of CDK9, thereby suppressing RNA polymerase II-dependent
transcriptional elongation. Here, we biochemically demonstrate that HEXIM1 forms 
a distinct complex with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) without RNA, CDK9, or cyclin
T1. HEXIM1, through its arginine-rich nuclear localization signal, directly
associates with the ligand-binding domain of GR. Introduction of HEXIM1 short
interfering RNA and adenovirus-mediated exogenous expression of HEXIM1 positively
and negatively modulated glucocorticoid-responsive gene activation, respectively.
In the nucleus, HEXIM1 was shown to localize in a distinct compartment from that 
of the p160 coactivator transcriptional intermediary factor 2. Overexpression of 
HEXIM1 decreased ligand-dependent association between GR and transcriptional
intermediary factor 2. Antisense-mediated disruption of 7SK blunted the negative 
effect of HEXIM1 on arylhydrocarbon receptor-dependent transcription but not on
GR-mediated one, indicating that a class of transcription factors are direct
targets of HEXIM1. These results indicate that HEXIM1 has dual roles in
transcriptional regulation: inhibition of transcriptional elongation dependent on
7SK RNA and positive transcription elongation factor b and interference with the 
sequence-specific transcription factor GR via a direct protein-protein
interaction. Moreover, the fact that the central nuclear localization signal of
HEXIM1 is essential for both of these actions may argue the crosstalk of these
functions.

PMCID: PMC1150813
PMID: 15941832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Plant J. 2005 Jun;42(6):810-20.

The Medicago CDKC;1-CYCLINT;1 kinase complex phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal 
domain of RNA polymerase II and promotes transcription.

Fülöp K(1), Pettkó-Szandtner A, Magyar Z, Miskolczi P, Kondorosi E, Dudits D,
Bakó L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, Biological Research Center of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, H-6701 Szeged, Hungary.

The Ms;CDKC;1 kinase is structurally similar to those cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs) that are not involved directly in cell cycle regulation. The presence of a
PITAIRE motif in Ms;CDKC;1 suggests that it interacts with cyclins different from
known PSTAIRE/PPTALRE kinase regulatory subunits. Here we demonstrate that a
Medicago CYCLINT (CYCT) protein is a specific interactor of Ms;CDKC;1 and the
interaction between these two proteins gives rise to an active kinase complex
that localizes to the nucleus and phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal YSPTSPS
heptapeptide repeat domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II in
vitro. Mutation of Ser to Ala at position 5 within the heptapeptide repeat
abolishes substrate phosphorylation by the Ms;CDKC;1 kinase complex. Furthermore,
our data show that addition of the Medicago CDKC;1-CYCT;1 heterodimer completely 
restored the transcriptional activity of a HeLa nuclear extract depleted of
endogeneous CDK9 kinase complexes. Together, these results indicate that the
Medicago CDKC;1-CYCT;1 complex is a positive regulator of transcription in plants
and has a role similar to the CDK9/cyclin T complex of human positive
transcription elongation factor P-TEFb.

PMID: 15941395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genes Dev. 2005 May 15;19(10):1211-26.

A human splicing factor, SKIP, associates with P-TEFb and enhances transcription 
elongation by HIV-1 Tat.

Brès V(1), Gomes N, Pickle L, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

HIV-1 Tat binds human CyclinT1 and recruits the CDK9/P-TEFb complex to the viral 
TAR RNA in a step that links RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) C-terminal domain (CTD)
Ser 2 phosphorylation with transcription elongation. Previous studies have
suggested a connection between Tat and pre-mRNA splicing factors. Here we show
that the splicing-associated c-Ski-interacting protein, SKIP, is required for Tat
transactivation in vivo and stimulates HIV-1 transcription elongation, but not
initiation, in vitro. SKIP associates with CycT1:CDK9/P-TEFb and Tat:P-TEFb
complexes in nuclear extracts and interacts with recombinant Tat:P-TEFb:TAR RNA
complexes in vitro, indicating that it may act through nascent RNA to overcome
pausing by RNAPII. SKIP also associates with U5snRNP proteins and tri-snRNP110K
in nuclear extracts, and facilitates recognition of an alternative Tat-specific
splice site in vivo. The effects of SKIP on transcription elongation, binding to 
P-TEFb, and splicing are mediated through the SNW domain. HIV-1 Tat
transactivation is accompanied by the recruitment of P-TEFb, SKIP, and
tri-snRNP110K to the integrated HIV-1 promoter in vivo, whereas the U5snRNPs
associate only with the transcribed coding region. These findings suggest that
SKIP plays independent roles in transcription elongation and pre-mRNA splicing.

PMCID: PMC1132007
PMID: 15905409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Virol. 2005 Jun;79(11):6757-62.

The carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is phosphorylated by a complex 
containing cdk9 and infected-cell protein 22 of herpes simplex virus 1.

Durand LO(1), Advani SJ, Poon AP, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
910 East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The infected-cell protein 22 (ICP22), a regulatory protein encoded by the alpha22
gene of herpes simplex virus 1, is required for the optimal expression of a set
of late viral proteins that includes the products of the U(S)11, U(L)38, and
U(L)41 genes. ICP22 has two activities. Thus, ICP22 and the U(L)13 protein kinase
mediate the activation of cdc2 and degradation of its partners, cyclins A and B. 
cdc2 and its new partner, the DNA polymerase accessory factor (U(L)42), bind
topoisomerase IIalpha in an ICP22-dependent manner. In addition, ICP22 and U(L)13
mediate an intermediate phosphorylation of the carboxyl terminus of RNA
polymerase II (RNA POL II). Here we report another function of ICP22. Thus, ICP22
physically interacts with cdk9, a constitutively active cyclin-dependent kinase
involved in transcriptional regulation. A protein complex containing ICP22 and
cdk9 phosphorylates in vitro the carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA POL II in a
viral U(S)3 protein kinase-dependent fashion. Finally, the carboxyl-terminal
domain of RNA POL II fused to glutathione S-transferase is phosphorylated in
reaction mixtures containing complexes pulled down with ICP22 or cdk9 immune
precipitated from lysates of wild-type parent virus or deltaU(L)13 but not
deltaU(S)3 mutant-infected cells. The experiments described here place ICP22 and 
cdk9 in a complex with the carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA POL II. At the same
time we confirm the requirement of ICP22 and the U(L)13 protein kinase in the
posttranslational modification of RNA POL II that alters its electrophoretic
mobility, although U(S)3 kinase appears to play a role in a cell-type-dependent
fashion.

PMCID: PMC1112163
PMID: 15890914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24968-77. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

Identification of a cyclin T-binding domain in Hexim1 and biochemical analysis of
its binding competition with HIV-1 Tat.

Schulte A(1), Czudnochowski N, Barboric M, Schönichen A, Blazek D, Peterlin BM,
Geyer M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Physiologie, Abteilung Physikalische
Biochemie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, D-44227 Dortmund, Germany.

The active form of the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb)
consists of cyclin T and the kinase Cdk9. P-TEFb stimulates transcription by
phosphorylating the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. It becomes
inactivated when associated in a tetrameric complex with the abundant 7SK small
nuclear RNA and the recently identified protein Hexim1. In this study, we
identified a stable and soluble C-terminal domain (residues 255-359) in Hexim1 of
12.5-kDa size that binds the cyclin boxes of Cyclin T1. Functional assays in HeLa
cells showed that this cyclin T-binding domain (TBD) is required for the binding 
of Hexim1 to P-TEFb and inhibition of transcriptional activity in vivo.
Analytical gel filtration and GST pull-down experiments revealed that both
full-length Hexim1 and the TBD are homodimers. Isothermal titration calorimetry
yielded a weak multimer for the TBD with a multimerization constant of 1.3 x
10(3) m. The binding affinity between the TBD and cyclin T1 was analyzed with
fluorescence spectroscopy methods, using a dansyl-based fluorescence label at
position G257C. Equilibrium fluorescence titration and stopped flow fast kinetics
yield a dissociation constant of 1.2 mum. Finally, we tested the effect of the
HIV-1 Tat protein on the cyclin T1-TBD complex formation. GST pull-down
experiments and size exclusion chromatography exhibit a mutually exclusive
binding of the two effectors to cyclin T1. Our data suggest a model where HIV-1
Tat competes with Hexim1 for cyclin T1 binding, thus releasing P-TEFb from the
inactive complex to stimulate the transcription of HIV-1 gene expression.

PMID: 15855166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Curr Top Med Chem. 2005;5(2):167-79.

Recent advances in the development of selective small molecule inhibitors for
cyclin-dependent kinases.

Hirai H(1), Kawanishi N, Iwasawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Tsukuba Research Institute, Bamyu
Pharmaceutical Co., LTD. hiroshi_hirai@merck.com

Loss of normal cell cycle regulation is the hallmark of human cancers, and
alteration of the components involved in cell cycle regulation occurs in most
human tumors. This suggests that Cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) are an
attractive target for the development of pharmacological agents for the treatment
of cancer. Recently, CDK family members that are not directly involved in cell
cycle regulation have been identified. This includes CDK7, CDK8, and CDK9, which 
participate in transcription regulation, and CDK5, which plays a role in neuronal
and secretory functions. Given the involvement of CDKs in multiple cellular
processes, development of selective small molecule inhibitors for specific CDKs
is expected to help clarify whether improved specificity of cell cycle CDK
inhibitors will enhance their therapeutic potential in cancer treatment.
Selective inhibitors are also needed as tools to explore the biology of diseases 
in which CDKs may participate and to help develop therapeutics to treat them.
Intensive screening and drug design based on CDK/inhibitor co-crystal structure
and SAR studies have led to the identification of a large variety of chemical
inhibitors of CDKs. Although they are competitive with ATP at the catalytic site,
their kinase selectivity varies greatly, and inhibitors selective for certain
CDKs have begun to be identified. There are currently two categories of selective
CDK inhibitors: those that are selective for CDK2 and CDK1 and those that are
selective for CDK4/6. These two types of inhibitors have different effects on
tumor cells and are expected to be useful in the treatment of cancer.

PMID: 15853645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Ann Oncol. 2005 Jul;16(7):1169-76. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

In vitro activity of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CYC202 (Seliciclib,
R-roscovitine) in mantle cell lymphomas.

Lacrima K(1), Valentini A, Lambertini C, Taborelli M, Rinaldi A, Zucca E,
Catapano C, Cavalli F, Gianella-Borradori A, Maccallum DE, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology and Lymphoma Unit, Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) has the worst prognosis of all B-cell
lymphomas and has poor response to conventional therapy. It is characterized by
the presence of a chromosomal translocation t(11:14) (q13;q32) which results in
deregulated cyclin D1 expression. Since defects in cell cycle regulation and
apoptosis are primary events in MCL, small-molecule inhibitors of cdks-cyclins
may play an important role in the therapy of this disorder. CYC202 (Seliciclib,
R-roscovitine; Cyclacel Ltd., Dundee, UK) is a purine analogue and a selective
inhibitor of the cdk2-cyclin E as well as cdk7-cyclin H and cdk9-cyclin T.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The activity of CYC202 was tested in four human MCL cell
lines: REC, Granta-519, JeKo-1 and NCEB-1. The effect of CYC202 on the cell cycle
and on apoptosis-, cell-cycle- and transcription-regulation-related proteins was 
assessed.
RESULTS: The IC50 was 25 microM for REC, Granta-519 and JeKo-1 cells and 50
microM for NCEB-1 cells. CYC202 caused an accumulation of cells in the G2-M phase
of the cell cycle and apoptosis. CYC202 caused down-regulation of cyclin D1 and
Mcl-1 protein levels, possibly because of the inhibition of transcription
elongation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that CYC202 is an active agent in MCL. The
concomitant decrease of the phosphorylated and total forms of RNA polymerase II
suggests that this could be the main mechanism mediating the biological effects
of CYC202 in MCL cells. The drug might represent a new therapeutic agent in this 
lymphoma subtype.

PMID: 15851403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene. 2005 Apr 25;350(1):51-8.

Characterization of Cdk9(55) and differential regulation of two Cdk9 isoforms.

Shore SM(1), Byers SA, Dent P, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, 100 MERF Room 3130, Iowa City,
IA 52242, USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) controls the fraction of
initiated RNA polymerase II molecules that make full length transcripts. This
important factor is a heterodimer of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) and one of 
four cyclin partners, cyclin T1, T2a, T2b or K. There are two isoforms of Cdk9 in
mammalian cells, Cdk9(42) and Cdk9(55). Cdk9(55) has a 117 residue amino terminal
extension not present in Cdk9(42). An expression vector with a
tetracycline-responsive promoter driving FLAG-tagged Cdk9(55) and a HeLa 37
Tet-Off cell line were constructed. FLAG-tagged Cdk9(55) was inducibly expressed 
and was found to be localized to the nucleus by immunofluorescence. Western
analysis of murine tissues showed that the relative abundance of the two forms of
Cdk9 varied across different tissues with liver having more Cdk9(55) than
Cdk9(42). During adaptation of primary rat hepatocytes to culture the ratio of
the two forms of Cdk9 changed. Initially, Cdk9(55) was the predominate form, but 
as the cells began to enter the cell cycle Cdk9(42) became the major form. During
this change, expression of Cdk9(42) was induced, while Cdk9(55) remained
relatively constant.

PMID: 15780980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Mar;4(3):277-81. Epub 2005 Mar 20.

Cdk9 regulates neural differentiation and its expression correlates with the
differentiation grade of neuroblastoma and PNET tumors.

De Falco G(1), Bellan C, D'Amuri A, Angeloni G, Leucci E, Giordano A, Leoncini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

Cdk9 is a member of the Cdc2-like family of kinases. Its cyclin partners are
members of the family of cyclin T (T1, T2a and T2b) and cyclin K. The Cdk9/Cyclin
T complex appears to be involved in regulating several physiological processes.
Recently, Cdk9 has been identified as a regulator of the differentiation program 
of several cell types, such as muscle cells, monocytes and lymphocytes,
suggesting that it may have a function in controlling specific differentiative
pathways. We analyzed whether Cdk9 and Cyclin T1 may be involved in the
regulation of neuron and astrocyte differentiation. Cdk9 and Cyclin T1 expression
levels were monitored during the differentiation program of neuroblastoma and
astrocytoma cell lines. Our results suggest that Cdk9/Cyclin T1 complex may be
required for neuron differentiation induced by retinoic acid, because the
expression level of the complex varies during differentiation, but no significant
changes were observed in its expression in the astrocytoma cell line. In
addition, the expression of Cdk9 and Cyclin T1 was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in samples of neuroblastoma, PNET (Primary Neuroectodermal
Tumor) and astrocytoma tumors of different grades, in order to assess whether
there was a correlation between Cdk9 expression and tumor grading. Our results
show that in neuroblastoma and PNET tumor samples Cdk9 is more expressed the more
differentiated the tumor is. Conversely, no significant alteration of Cdk9
expression was observed in astrocytoma tumor samples of different grades, thus
confirming the results obtained for the cell lines.

PMID: 15753651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):15673-81. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

The STAT3 transcription factor is a target for the Myc and riboblastoma proteins 
on the Cdc25A promoter.

Barré B(1), Vigneron A, Coqueret O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U564, Cancer Center Paul Papin, 49033 Angers, France.

The STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription) transcription factor
functions as down-stream effector of growth factor signaling. Whereas STAT3
activation is transient in normal cells, constitutively activated forms of the
transcription factor have been detected in several cancer cell lines and primary 
tumors. Through the up-regulation of cell cycle and survival genes, STAT3 plays
important roles in cell growth, anti-apoptosis, and cell transformation yet the
molecular basis for this behavior is poorly understood. In this study, we show
that STAT3 and its transcriptional cofactors are recruited to the promoter of the
Cdc25A gene to activate its expression. Using chromatin immunoprecipitations, we 
observed that Myc is recruited to this promoter following STAT3 DNA binding.
Moreover, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Myc specifically inhibits
the STAT3-mediated activation of Cdc25A. Reduction in Myc protein level results
in defective recruitment of the CREB-binding protein, Cdk9, and RNA polymerase
complexes, indicating that Myc is necessary for STAT3 transcription.
Surprisingly, the association of STAT3 with the Cdc25A promoter does not
necessarily lead to transcriptional induction because this protein also functions
as a transcriptional repressor of the Cdc25A gene. Following hydrogen peroxide
stimulation, STAT3 forms a repressor complex with the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor
suppressor to occupy the Cdc25A promoter and block its induction. In
coimmunoprecipitations and ChIP experiments, Rb was found to associate with STAT3
on DNA and we provide evidence that Rb binds directly to the transcription
factor. Thus, we propose that Myc and STAT3 cooperate to induce the expression of
Cdc25A and that their transcriptional activity is normally regulated by the Rb
tumor suppressor gene.

PMID: 15677471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13648-57. Epub 2005 Jan 14.

Granulin and granulin repeats interact with the Tat.P-TEFb complex and inhibit
Tat transactivation.

Hoque M(1), Tian B, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey
07103-2714, USA.

The cellular positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), containing
cyclin T1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), interacts with the human
immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) regulatory protein Tat to enable viral
transcription and replication. Cyclin T1 is an unusually long cyclin and is
engaged by cellular regulatory proteins. Previous studies showed that the
granulin/epithelin precursor (GEP) binds the histidine-rich region of cyclin T1
and inhibits P-TEFb function. GEP is composed of repeats that vary in sequence
and properties. GEP also binds directly to Tat. Here we show that GEP and some of
its constituent granulin repeats can inhibit HIV-1 transcription via Tat without 
directly binding to cyclin T1. The interactions of granulins with Tat and cyclin 
T1 differ with respect to their binding sites and divalent cation requirements,
and we identified granulin repeats that bind differentially to Tat and cyclin T1.
Granulins DE and E bind Tat but do not interact directly with cyclin T1. These
granulins are present in complexes with Tat and P-TEFb in which Tat forms a
bridge between the cellular proteins. Granulins DE and E repress transcription
from the HIV-1 LTR and gene expression from the viral genome, raising the
possibility of developing granulin-based inhibitors of viral infection.

PMID: 15653695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Curr HIV Res. 2005 Jan;3(1):61-71.

HIV-1 TAR RNA: the target of molecular interactions between the virus and its
host.

Bannwarth S(1), Gatignol A.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University AIDS Centre, Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute 
for Medical Research, Canada.

HIV-1 TAR RNA is the binding site of the viral protein Tat, the trans-activator
of the HIV-1 LTR. It is present at the 5' end of all HIV-1 spliced and unspliced 
mRNAs in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm. It has a highly folded
stem-bulge-loop structure, which also binds cellular proteins to form
ribonucleoprotein complexes. The Tat-Cyclin T1-CDK9 complex is the main component
in the trans-activation of HIV-1 and its affinity for TAR is regulated through
Tat acetylation by histone acetyl transferases. Recent studies show that this
complex is able to recruit other cellular partners to mediate efficient
transcriptional elongation. TRBP, PKR and La bind directly to the TAR RNA
structure and influence translation of HIV-1 in either positive or negative
manners. Some mutations in TAR RNA severely impair HIV-1 trans-activation,
translation and viral production, showing its functional importance. The
overexpression or suppression of several TAR RNA-binding proteins has a strong
impact on viral replication pointing out their major role in the viral life
cycle. TAR RNA has been the target of drug development to inhibit viral
replication. Recent data using small molecules or RNA-based technologies show
that acting on the TAR RNA or on its viral and cellular binding factors
effectively decreases virion production.

PMID: 15638724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Virol. 2004 Dec;78(24):13522-33.

Coordination of transcription factor phosphorylation and histone methylation by
the P-TEFb kinase during human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transcription.

Zhou M(1), Deng L, Lacoste V, Park HU, Pumfery A, Kashanchi F, Brady JN, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein recruits positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) to the transactivation response (TAR) 
RNA structure to facilitate formation of processive transcription elongation
complexes (TECs). Here we examine the role of the Tat/TAR-specified
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) kinase activity in regulation of HIV-1
transcription elongation and histone methylation. In HIV-1 TECs, P-TEFb
phosphorylates the RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) and
the transcription elongation factors SPT5 and Tat-SF1 in a Tat/TAR-dependent
manner. Using in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, we demonstrate the 
following distinct properties of the HIV-1 transcription complexes. First, the
RNAP II CTD is phosphorylated at Ser 2 and Ser 5 near the promoter and at
downstream coding regions. Second, the stable association of SPT5 with the TECs
is dependent upon P-TEFb kinase activity. Third, P-TEFb kinase activity is
critical for the induction of methylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 and lysine 36
on HIV-1 genes. Flavopiridol, a potent P-TEFb kinase inhibitor, inhibits CTD
phosphorylation, stable SPT5 binding, and histone methylation, suggesting that
its potent antiviral activity is due to its ability to inhibit several critical
and unique steps in HIV-1 transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC533906
PMID: 15564463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Gene. 2004 Dec 8;343(1):173-9.

Transcriptional activity and substrate recognition of cyclin T2 from P-TEFb.

Kurosu T(1), Zhang F, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, University
of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0703, USA.

Transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is regulated by the
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which contains Cdk9 and a
C-type cyclin (CycT1, CycT2a, CycT2b, or CycK). Whereas their N-terminal cylin
boxes are almost identical, the C-terminal sequences of CycT1 and CycT2 are
divergent. Previously, a histidine-rich stretch in CycT1 was found to bind the
CTD of RNAPII and direct the transcriptional activity of this P-TEFb complex when
tethered artificially to DNA. The global repressor PIE-1 from C. elegans blocked 
its effects. In this study, C-terminal truncations of CycT2 past its
histidine-rich stretch, to a leucine-rich region next to its cyclin boxes, still 
maintained appreciable transcriptional activity. Moreover, this domain bound
RNAPII via its CTD and PIE-1 blocked its effects. Thus, CycT2 not only contains
two domains that target RNAPII but this substrate recognition is necessary for
its transcriptional activity via DNA.

PMID: 15563843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cell. 2004 Nov 19;16(4):509-20.

Mastermind recruits CycC:CDK8 to phosphorylate the Notch ICD and coordinate
activation with turnover.

Fryer CJ(1), White JB, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Notch signaling releases the Notch receptor intracellular domain (ICD), which
complexes with CBF1 and Mastermind (MAM) to activate responsive genes. We
previously reported that MAM interacts with CBP/p300 and promotes
hyperphosphorylation and degradation of the Notch ICD in vivo. Here we show that 
CycC:CDK8 and CycT1:CDK9/P-TEFb are recruited with Notch and associated
coactivators (MAM, SKIP) to the HES1 promoter in signaling cells. MAM interacts
directly with CDK8 and can cause it to localize to subnuclear foci. Purified
recombinant CycC:CDK8 phosphorylates the Notch ICD within the TAD and PEST
domains, and expression of CycC:CDK8 strongly enhances Notch ICD
hyperphosphorylation and PEST-dependent degradation by the Fbw7/Sel10 ubiquitin
ligase in vivo. Point mutations affecting conserved Ser residues within the ICD
PEST motif prevent hyperphosphorylation by CycC:CDK8 and stabilize the ICD in
vivo. These findings suggest a role for MAM and CycC:CDK8 in the turnover of the 
Notch enhancer complex at target genes.

PMID: 15546612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1103-11. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 is required for tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression in human lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Shan B(1), Zhuo Y, Chin D, Morris CA, Morris GF, Lasky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Section, Department of Medicine, Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

The proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) promotes
tumor progression through activation of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. 
MMP-9 is a gelatinase secreted by both cancer cells and surrounding stromal
cells, and it contributes to TNF-alpha-stimulated tumor invasion and metastasis. 
Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), the catalytic component of positive
transcription elongation factor-b, phosphorylates serine 2 residues in the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II for productive transcription elongation
and is up-regulated upon exposure to various stresses. This study investigated
roles of CDK9 in TNF-alpha-stimulated MMP-9 expression in human lung
adenocarcinoma cells. CDK9 activity was inhibited using three different
strategies, including the CDK9 pharmacological inhibitor
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), a dominant-negative CDK9,
and a CDK9-specific small interfering RNA. All three approaches reduced
TNF-alpha-mediated accumulation of MMP-9 in the conditioned media as demonstrated
by gelatin zymography. In contrast, transforming growth factor-beta1-induced
accumulation of MMP-2 was unaffected by DRB. Expression of the MMP-9 gene was
examined using reverse transcription real time PCR and using a transient
transfection assay to evaluate MMP-9 promoter activity. DRB reduced the
TNF-alpha-induced increase in MMP-9 mRNA levels but did not effect transforming
growth factor-beta1-induced MMP-2 mRNA expression. Consistently DRB and
dominant-negative CDK9 completely abrogated TNF-alpha-stimulated human MMP-9
promoter activity. TNF-alpha did not regulate expression or localization of CDK9 
or its regulatory partner Cyclin T. However, TNF-alpha stimulated CDK9 binding to
Cyclin T and MMP-9 gene occupancy by both CDK9 and the serine 2-phosphorylated
form of RNA polymerase II. Our findings indicate that CDK9 mediates
TNF-alpha-induced MMP-9 transcription. Disruption of TNF-alpha signaling using
CDK9 inhibitors could serve as a potential therapeutic strategy against tumor
invasion and metastasis.

PMID: 15528190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Circ Res. 2004 Oct 29;95(9):867-76.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9: an RNAPII kinase at the nexus of cardiac growth and
death cascades.

Sano M(1), Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Over the past decade and a half, the paradigm has emerged of cardiac hypertrophy 
and ensuing heart failure as fundamentally a problem in signal transduction,
impinging on the altered expression or function of gene-specific transcription
factors and their partners, which then execute the hypertrophic phenotype.
Strikingly, RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is itself a substrate for two protein
kinases-the cyclin-dependent kinases Cdk7 and Cdk9--that are activated by
hypertrophic cues. Phosphorylation of RNAPII in the carboxyl terminal domain
(CTD) of its largest subunit controls a number of critical steps subsequent to
transcription initiation, among them enabling RNAPII to overcome its stalling in 
the promoter-proximal region and to engage in efficient transcription elongation.
Here, we summarize our current understanding of the RNAPII-directed protein
kinases in cardiac hypertrophy. Cdk9 activation is essential in tissue culture
for myocyte enlargement and sufficient in transgenic mice for hypertrophy to
occur and yet is unrelated to the "fetal" gene program that is typical of
pathophysiological heart growth. Although this trophic effect of Cdk9 appears
benign superficially, pathophysiological levels of Cdk9 activity render
myocardium remarkably susceptible to apoptotic stress. Cdk9 interacts adversely
with Gq-dependent pathways for hypertrophy, impairing the expression of numerous 
genes for mitochondrial proteins, and, in particular, suppressing master
regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis and function, perioxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PGC-1), and nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1). Given the dual transcriptional roles of Cdk9 in
hypertrophic growth and mitochondrial dysfunction, we suggest the potential
usefulness of Cdk9 as a target in heart failure drug discovery.

PMID: 15514168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Apr;203(1):251-60.

Differential localization and expression of the Cdk9 42k and 55k isoforms.

Liu H(1), Herrmann CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cdk9, a member of the cyclin-dependent kinase family, is the catalytic subunit of
P-TEFb, a protein kinase complex that stimulates transcriptional elongation.
Cdk9, complexed with its regulatory partner cyclin T1, serves as the cellular
mediator of the transactivation function of the HIV Tat protein. There are two
known isoforms of Cdk9: a 42 kDa protein (42k, originally identified as PITALRE) 
and a more recently identified 55 kDa form (55k). To investigate possible
functional differences between the two isoforms, we examined their kinase
activities, their subcellular distributions, and their expression levels in
primary cells relevant to HIV infection. Both isoforms were found to
hyper-phosphorylate the carboxyl-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA
polymerase II and displayed identical phosphorylation patterns with 144 peptide
substrates. Epitope-tagged transiently-expressed Cdk9 42k localized diffusely in 
the nucleoplasm, while Cdk9 55k accumulated in the nucleolus. In primary
undifferentiated monocytes, Cdk9 55k expression was not detected although 42k was
present at high levels; however, 55k expression was induced upon macrophage
differentiation. In primary lymphocytes, the levels of 55k decreased or remained 
steady following activation, while the levels of 42k increased. The promoter for 
42k was significantly stronger than that of 55k in HeLa cells, and only the 42k
promoter was responsive to activation signals in primary lymphocytes. These
results indicate that expression of the 42k and 55k isoforms is differentially
regulated and suggest that functional differences between the 42k and 55k
isoforms of Cdk9 are likely to depend on access to substrates based on their
differential subcellular localization and expression patterns.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15452830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. BMC Genomics. 2004 Sep 20;5:69.

Comparative genomics of cyclin-dependent kinases suggest co-evolution of the RNAP
II C-terminal domain and CTD-directed CDKs.

Guo Z(1), Stiller JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Howell Science Complex N 108,
Greenville, NC 27858, USA. guoz@mail.ecu.edu

BACKGROUND: Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are a large family of proteins that
function in a variety of key regulatory pathways in eukaryotic cells, including
control over the cell cycle and gene transcription. Among the most important and 
broadly studied of these roles is reversible phosphorylation of the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II, part of a complex array of CTD/protein
interactions that coordinate the RNAP II transcription cycle. The RNAP CTD is
strongly conserved in some groups of eukaryotes, but highly degenerate or absent 
in others; the reasons for these differences in stabilizing selection on CTD
structure are not clear. Given the importance of reversible phosphorylation for
CTD-based transcription, the distribution and evolutionary history of CDKs may be
a key to understanding differences in constraints on CTD structure; however, the 
origins and evolutionary relationships of CTD kinases have not been investigated 
thoroughly. Moreover, although the functions of most CDKs are reasonably well
studied in mammals and yeasts, very little is known from most other eukaryotes.
RESULTS: Here we identify 123 CDK family members from animals, plants, yeasts,
and four protists from which genome sequences have been completed, and 10
additional CDKs from incomplete genome sequences of organisms with known CTD
sequences. Comparative genomic and phylogenetic analyses suggest that cell-cycle 
CDKs are present in all organisms sampled in this study. In contrast, no clear
orthologs of transcription-related CDKs are identified in the most putatively
ancestral eukaryotes, Trypanosoma or Giardia. Kinases involved in CTD
phosphorylation, CDK7, CDK8 and CDK9, all are recovered as well-supported and
distinct orthologous families, but their relationships to each other and other
CDKs are not well-resolved. Significantly, clear orthologs of CDK7 and CDK8 are
restricted to only those organisms belonging to groups in which the RNAP II CTD
is strongly conserved.
CONCLUSIONS: The apparent origins of CDK7 and CDK8, or at least their
conservation as clearly recognizable orthologous families, correlate with strong 
stabilizing selection on RNAP II CTD structure. This suggests co-evolution of the
CTD and these CTD-directed CDKs. This observation is consistent with the
hypothesis that CDK7 and CDK8 originated at about the same time that the CTD was 
canalized as the staging platform RNAP II transcription. Alternatively, extensive
CTD phosphorylation may occur in only a subset of eukaryotes and, when present,
this interaction results in greater stabilizing selection on both CTD and CDK
sequences. Overall, our results suggest that transcription-related kinases
originated after cell-cycle related CDKs, and became more evolutionarily and
functionally diverse as transcriptional complexity increased.

PMCID: PMC521075
PMID: 15380029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biol Proced Online. 2004;6:163-172. Epub 2004 Aug 18.

A uniform procedure for the purification of CDK7/CycH/MAT1, CDK8/CycC and
CDK9/CycT1.

Pinhero R(1), Liaw P, Yankulov K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph. Guelph,
Ontario N1G 2W1. Canada.

We have established a uniform procedure for the expression and purification of
the cyclin-dependent kinases CDK7/CycH/MAT1, CDK8/CycC and CDK9/CycT1. We attach 
a His(6)-tag to one of the subunits of each complex and then co-express it
together with the other subunits in Spodoptera frugiperda insect cells. The CDK
complexes are subsequently purified by Ni(2+)-NTA and Mono S chromatography. This
approach generates large amounts of active recombinant kinases that are devoid of
contaminating kinase activities. Importantly, the properties of these recombinant
kinases are similar to their natural counterparts (Pinhero et al. 2004, Eur J
Biochem 271:1004-14). Our protocol provides a novel systematic approach for the
purification of these three (and possibly other) recombinant CDKs.

PMCID: PMC514536
PMID: 15328539  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Chem Biol. 2004 Aug;11(8):1165-75.

Visualizing a correlation between siRNA localization, cellular uptake, and RNAi
in living cells.

Chiu YL(1), Ali A, Chu CY, Cao H, Rana TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

RNA interference (RNAi) is the process by which short-interfering RNA (siRNA)
target a specific mRNA for degradation through interactions with an RNA-induced
silencing complex (RISC). Here, a clear correlation between siRNA localization,
cellular uptake, and RNAi activity was discovered by delivering siRNA into cells 
using siRNA-TAT(47-57) peptide, siRNA-TAT(47-57)-derived oligocarbamate
conjugates, or nanoparticles. For successful RNAi, the localization of siRNA was 
distinctly perinuclear, suggesting that siRNA is targeted to these regions for
interactions with RISC to induce RNAi. siRNA sequence variation and the presence 
of the target mRNA apparently did not change the subcellular localization pattern
of siRNA. Intriguingly, siRNA conjugated to TAT(47-57) peptide or
TAT(47-57)-derived oligocarbamate resulted in efficient RNAi activity and
perinuclear localization of siRNA that was distinctly different from
nonconjugated free TAT peptide nucleolar localization. These results suggest that
interactions with RISC dictate siRNA localization even when siRNA is conjugated
to TAT(47-57) peptide.

PMID: 15324818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. EMBO J. 2004 Sep 1;23(17):3559-69. Epub 2004 Aug 5.

Activation of cardiac Cdk9 represses PGC-1 and confers a predisposition to heart 
failure.

Sano M(1), Wang SC, Shirai M, Scaglia F, Xie M, Sakai S, Tanaka T, Kulkarni PA,
Barger PM, Youker KA, Taffet GE, Hamamori Y, Michael LH, Craigen WJ, Schneider
MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Hypertrophy allows the heart to adapt to workload but culminates in later pump
failure; how it is achieved remains uncertain. Previously, we showed that
hypertrophy is accompanied by activation of cyclin T/Cdk9, which phosphorylates
the C-terminal domain of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II, stimulating
transcription elongation and pre-mRNA processing; Cdk9 activity was required for 
hypertrophy in culture, whereas heart-specific activation of Cdk9 by cyclin T1
provoked hypertrophy in mice. Here, we report that alphaMHC-cyclin T1 mice appear
normal at baseline yet suffer fulminant apoptotic cardiomyopathy when challenged 
by mechanical stress or signaling by the G-protein Gq. At pathophysiological
levels, Cdk9 activity suppresses many genes for mitochondrial proteins including 
master regulators of mitochondrial function (peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator 1 (PGC-1), nuclear respiratory factor-1). In culture, 
cyclin T1/Cdk9 suppresses PGC-1, decreases mitochondrial membrane potential, and 
sensitizes cardiomyocytes to apoptosis, effects rescued by exogenous PGC-1.
Cyclin T1/Cdk9 inhibits PGC-1 promoter activity and preinitiation complex
assembly. Thus, chronic activation of Cdk9 causes not only cardiomyocyte
enlargement but also defective mitochondrial function, via diminished PGC-1
transcription, and a resulting susceptibility to apoptotic cardiomyopathy.

PMCID: PMC516624
PMID: 15297879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncogene. 2004 Sep 23;23(44):7391-8.

Implication of BRG1 and cdk9 in the STAT3-mediated activation of the p21waf1
gene.

Giraud S(1), Hurlstone A, Avril S, Coqueret O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U564, 4 rue Larrey, CHU Angers, 49033 Angers Cedex, France.

STAT transcription factors (signal transducers and activators of transcription)
are cytoplasmic proteins that induce gene activation in response to cytokine
receptor stimulation. Following tyrosine phosphorylation, STAT proteins
translocate into the nucleus and activate specific target genes. We have
previously reported that STAT3 activates the expression of the p21waf1 gene
through its association with the NcoA/SRC1a and CBP coactivators. In this study, 
we explore the role of BRG1, a component of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex, and the role of cdk9, a component of the elongation factor P-TEFb, in
the STAT3-mediated expression of p21waf1. We found using pull-down experiments
and co-immunoprecipitation assays that both proteins associate with STAT3.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments indicate that STAT3 DNA binding 
results in histone H3 acetylation and BRG1 recruitment. Using Southern blot
analysis, we found that the loading of BRG1 is followed by an increased
accessibility of the proximal p21waf1 promoter and by the association of RNA
polymerase II. As a next step, STAT3 then recruits the cdk9 kinase to
phosphorylate the carboxy-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase at serine 2.
Accordingly, the elongating form of the polymerase can be detected by ChIP
experiments on the coding region of the gene, probably initiating mRNA synthesis.
Therefore, STAT3 not only promotes the initiation of transcription but also
regulates chromatin remodeling and transcription elongation through its
interaction with BRG1 and cdk9.

PMID: 15286705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Gene. 2004 Aug 4;337:15-23.

Cellular control of gene expression by T-type cyclin/CDK9 complexes.

Garriga J(1), Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, 3307 North Broad St., Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

The family of Cyclin-Dependent Kinases (CDKs) can be subdivided into two major
functional groups based on their roles in cell cycle and/or transcriptional
control. This review is centered on CDK9, which is activated by T-type cyclins
and cyclin K generating distinct Positive-Transcription Elongation Factors termed
P-TEFb. P-TEFb positively regulates transcriptional elongation by phosphorylating
the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II), as well as
negative elongation factors, which block elongation by RNA pol II shortly after
the initiation of transcription. Work over the past few years has led to a
dramatic increase in our understanding of how productive transcriptional
elongation occurs. This review will briefly describe the mechanisms regulating
the activity of T-type cyclin/CDK9 complexes and discuss how these complexes
regulate gene expression. For further information, the reader is directed to
excellent existing reviews on transcriptional elongation and HIV transcription.

PMID: 15276198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Pathol. 2004 Aug;203(4):946-52.

CDK9/CYCLIN T1 expression during normal lymphoid differentiation and malignant
transformation.

Bellan C(1), De Falco G, Lazzi S, Micheli P, Vicidomini S, Schürfeld K, Amato T, 
Palumbo A, Bagella L, Sabattini E, Bartolommei S, Hummel M, Pileri S, Tosi P,
Leoncini L, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Italy.

CDK9 is a member of the CDC2-like family of kinases. Its cyclin partners are
members of the CYCLIN T family (T1, T2a, and T2b) and CYCLIN K. The CDK9/CYCLIN
T1 complex is very important in the differentiation programme of several cell
types, controlling specific differentiation pathways. Limited data are available 
regarding the expression of CDK9/CYCLIN T1 in haematopoietic and lymphoid
tissues. The aim of this study was to analyse the expression of the CDK9/CYCLIN
T1 complex in lymphoid tissue, in order to assess its role in B- and T-cell
differentiation and lymphomagenesis. CDK9/CYCLIN T1 expression was found by
immunohistochemistry in precursor B and T cells. In peripheral lymphoid tissues, 
germinal centre cells and scattered B- and T-cell blasts in interfollicular areas
expressed CDK9/CYCLIN T1, while mantle cells, plasma cells, and small resting
T-lymphocytes displayed no expression of either molecule. CDK9/CYCLIN T1
expression therefore appears to be related to particular stages of lymphoid
differentiation/activation. CDK9 and CYCLIN T1 were highly expressed in lymphomas
derived from precursor B and T cells, from germinal centre cells, such as
follicular lymphomas, and from activated T cells (ie anaplastic large cell
lymphomas). Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells of classical Hodgkin's lymphoma also
showed strong nuclear staining. Diffuse large B-cell, Burkitt's lymphomas, and
peripheral T-cell lymphomas, among T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders, showed a
wide range of values. No expression of CDK9 or CYCLIN T1 was detected in mantle
cell and marginal zone lymphomas. However, at the mRNA level, an imbalance in the
CDK9/CYCLIN T1 ratio was found in follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas with germinal centre phenotype, and in the cell lines of classical
Hodgkin's lymphomas, Burkitt's lymphomas, and anaplastic large cell lymphoma, in 
comparison with reactive lymph nodes. These results suggest that the CDK9/CYCLIN 
T1 complex may affect the activation and differentiation programme of lymphoid
cells. The molecular mechanism through which the CDK9/CYCLIN T1 complex is
altered in malignant transformation needs to be elucidated.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15258998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Virol. 2004 Aug;78(15):8114-9.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection induces cyclin T1 expression in
macrophages.

Liou LY(1), Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The Tat protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is essential for
viral replication and activates RNA polymerase II transcriptional elongation
through the association with a cellular protein kinase composed of Cdk9 and
cyclin T1. Tat binds to this kinase complex through a direct protein-protein
interaction with cyclin T1. Monocytes/macrophages are important targets of HIV-1 
infection, and previous work has shown that cyclin T1 but not Cdk9 protein
expression is low in monocytes isolated from blood. While Cdk9 expression is
expressed at a high level during monocyte differentiation to macrophages in
vitro, cyclin T1 expression is induced during the first few days of
differentiation and is shut off after 1 to 2 weeks. We show here that the shutoff
of cyclin T1 expression in late-differentiated macrophages involves
proteasome-mediated proteolysis. We also show that cyclin T1 can be reinduced by 
a number of pathogen-associated molecular patterns that activate macrophages,
indicating that up-regulation of cyclin T1 is part of an innate immune response. 
Furthermore, we found that HIV-1 infection early in macrophage differentiation
results in sustained cyclin T1 expression, while infection at late times in
differentiation results in the reinduction of cyclin T1. Expression of the viral 
Nef protein from an adenovirus vector suggests that Nef contributes to the HIV-1 
induction of cyclin T1. These findings suggest that HIV-1 infection hijacks a
component of the innate immune response in macrophages that results in
enhancement rather than inhibition of viral replication.

PMCID: PMC446126
PMID: 15254183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jul 16;340(4):891-907.

Biochemical and structural studies of the interaction of Cdc37 with Hsp90.

Zhang W(1), Hirshberg M, McLaughlin SH, Lazar GA, Grossmann JG, Nielsen PR,
Sobott F, Robinson CV, Jackson SE, Laue ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.

The heat shock protein Hsp90 plays a key, but poorly understood role in the
folding, assembly and activation of a large number of signal transduction
molecules, in particular kinases and steroid hormone receptors. In carrying out
these functions Hsp90 hydrolyses ATP as it cycles between ADP- and ATP-bound
forms, and this ATPase activity is regulated by the transient association with a 
variety of co-chaperones. Cdc37 is one such co-chaperone protein that also has a 
role in client protein recognition, in that it is required for Hsp90-dependent
folding and activation of a particular group of protein kinases. These include
the cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdk) 4/6 and Cdk9, Raf-1, Akt and many others.
Here, the biochemical details of the interaction of human Hsp90 beta and Cdc37
have been characterised. Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) was then used to
study the solution structure of Hsp90 and its complexes with Cdc37. The results
suggest a model for the interaction of Cdc37 with Hsp90, whereby a Cdc37 dimer
binds the two N-terminal domain/linker regions in an Hsp90 dimer, fixing them in 
a single conformation that is presumably suitable for client protein recognition.

PMID: 15223329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Curr Biol. 2004 Jun 22;14(12):1112-6.

VP16 and ubiquitin; binding of P-TEFb via its activation domain and ubiquitin
facilitates elongation of transcription of target genes.

Kurosu T(1), Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2004 Aug 10;14(15):R622-4.

Acidic or type IIB transcriptional activation domains (AADs) increase rates of
initiation as well as elongation of transcription. For the former effects, AADs
bind general transcription factors and larger coactivator complexes, which
position RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) at sites of initiation of transcription. For 
the latter effects, their ubiquitylation plays an important role. In this study, 
this posttranslational modification increased the binding between a prototypic
AAD and the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which contains a
C-type cyclin (CycT1, CycT2, or CycK) and Cdk9. By phosphorylating negative
elongation factors and the C-terminal domain of RNAPII, P-TEFb modifies the
transcription complex for efficient elongation and cotranscriptional processing
of mRNA. Indeed, the activation domain of VP16 and ubiquitin bound the cyclin
boxes and the C terminus in CycT1, respectively. Moreover, the artificial fusion 
of ubiquitin with VP16 not only increased its activity via DNA and RNA, which was
reflected in increased ratios of elongated to initiated transcripts, but rescued 
the deleterious substitution of alanine for phenylalanine at position 442 in its 
AAD. Thus, the ubiquitylation of AADs increases their interaction with P-TEFb and
augments rates of elongation of transcription.

PMID: 15203006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. EMBO J. 2004 Jul 7;23(13):2608-19. Epub 2004 Jun 17.

Binding of the 7SK snRNA turns the HEXIM1 protein into a P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T)
inhibitor.

Michels AA(1), Fraldi A, Li Q, Adamson TE, Bonnet F, Nguyen VT, Sedore SC, Price 
JP, Price DH, Lania L, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Régulation de l'Expression Génétique,
Paris, France.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) plays a pivotal role in
productive elongation of nascent RNA molecules by RNA polymerase II. Core active 
P-TEFb is composed of CDK9 and cyclin T. In addition, mammalian cell extracts
contain an inactive P-TEFb complex composed of four components, CDK9, cyclin T,
the 7SK snRNA and the MAQ1/HEXIM1 protein. We now report an in vitro
reconstitution of 7SK-dependent HEXIM1 association to purified P-TEFb and
subsequent CDK9 inhibition. Yeast three-hybrid tests and gel-shift assays
indicated that HEXIM1 binds 7SK snRNA directly and a 7SK snRNA-recognition motif 
was identified in the central part of HEXIM1 (amino acids (aa) 152-155). Data
from yeast two-hybrid and pull-down assay on GST fusion proteins converge to a
direct binding of P-TEFb to the HEXIM1 C-terminal domain (aa 181-359).
Consistently, point mutations in an evolutionarily conserved motif (aa 202-205)
were found to suppress P-TEFb binding and inhibition without affecting 7SK
recognition. We propose that the RNA-binding domain of HEXIM1 mediates its
association with 7SK and that P-TEFb then enters the complex through association 
with HEXIM1.

PMCID: PMC449783
PMID: 15201869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;36(9):1767-75.

HIV-1 infection and regulation of Tat function in macrophages.

Liou LY(1), Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The macrophage is an important cell type in the pathophysiology of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Macrophages both support viral
replication and are capable of attracting and activating lymphocytes, thus
rendering CD4+ T lymphocytes highly permissive for infection. The viral Tat
protein, whose function is mediated by the cellular cyclin T1 protein complexed
with CDK9, is required for efficient transcription of the integrated HIV-1
provirus by RNA polymerase II. Cyclin T1 expression is highly regulated during
macrophage differentiation, and this has important implications for HIV-1
replication. In monocytes isolated from healthy blood donors, cyclin T1 protein
expression is low and is induced to high levels within the first few days of
differentiation by a post-transcriptional mechanism. After 1-2 weeks of
macrophage differentiation, however, cyclin T1 expression is shut off. Treatment 
of macrophages with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) can re-induce cyclin T1, indicating 
that the activation status of macrophages can regulate cyclin T1 expression.
Recent results indicate that HIV-1 infection is able to induce cyclin T1
expression in macrophages. Future studies of cyclin T1 regulation in macrophages 
may suggest means of manipulating expression of this crucial cellular co-factor
for therapeutic benefit in HIV-1 infected individuals.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15183343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Novartis Found Symp. 2004;259:182-93; discussion 193-6, 223-5.

Tat acetylation: a regulatory switch between early and late phases in HIV
transcription elongation.

Ott M(1), Dorr A, Hetzer-Egger C, Kaehlcke K, Schnolzer M, Henklein P, Cole P,
Zhou MM, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, University of California, 365 
Vermont Street, San Francisco, CA 94103, USA.

The HIV transcriptional activator Tat enhances the processivity of RNA polymerase
II by recruiting the CyclinT1/CDK9 complex to the TAR RNA element. In addition,
Tat synergizes with the histone acetyltransferase p300 and is acetylated by p300 
at a single lysine residue (K50) in the TAR RNA binding domain. We have recently 
reported that this post-translational modification is necessary for the
interaction and transcriptional synergy of Tat with the transcriptional
coactivator PCAF. We have further studied the relevance of Tat acetylation during
HIV transcription and generated antibodies specific for acetylated Tat (AcTat).
Microinjection of anti-AcTat antibodies inhibited Tat-mediated transactivation in
cells. Similarly, the specific p300 inhibitor Lys-CoA and short inhibitory RNAs
specific for p300 suppressed Tat transcriptional activity. Full-length synthetic 
AcTat bound to TAR RNA and CyclinT1 with high affinity, but formation of the
Tat-TAR-CyclinT1 ternary complex was inhibited when K50 was acetylated. Our data 
collectively show that Tat acetylation by p300 defines a critical step in Tat
transactivation that serves to disrupt the Tat/TAR/CyclinT1 complex and helps in 
recruiting PCAF to the elongating RNA polymerase II.

PMID: 15171254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5094-105.

A human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat-like arginine-rich RNA-binding domain
is essential for HEXIM1 to inhibit RNA polymerase II transcription through 7SK
snRNA-mediated inactivation of P-TEFb.

Yik JH(1), Chen R, Pezda AC, Samford CS, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California,
Berkeley, 94720, USA.

The HEXIM1 protein inhibits the kinase activity of P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T) to
suppress RNA polymerase II transcriptional elongation in a process that
specifically requires the 7SK snRNA, which mediates the interaction of HEXIM1
with P-TEFb. In an attempt to define the sequence requirements for HEXIM1 to
interact with 7SK and inactivate P-TEFb, we have identified the first 18 amino
acids within the previously described nuclear localization signal (NLS) of HEXIM1
as both necessary and sufficient for binding to 7SK in vivo and in vitro. This
7SK-binding motif was essential for HEXIM1's inhibitory action, as the HEXIM1
mutants with this motif replaced with a foreign NLS failed to interact with 7SK
and P-TEFb and hence were unable to inactivate P-TEFb. The 7SK-binding motif
alone, however, was not sufficient to inhibit P-TEFb. A region C-terminal to this
motif was also required for HEXIM1 to associate with P-TEFb and suppress P-TEFb's
kinase and transcriptional activities. The 7SK-binding motif in HEXIM1 contains
clusters of positively charged residues reminiscent of the arginine-rich
RNA-binding motif found in a wide variety of proteins. Part of it is highly
homologous to the TAR RNA-binding motif in the human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) Tat protein, which was able to restore the 7SK-binding ability of a
HEXIM1 NLS substitution mutant. We propose that a similar RNA-protein recognition
mechanism may exist to regulate the formation of both the Tat-TAR-P-TEFb and the 
HEXIM1-7SK-P-TEFb ternary complexes, which may help convert the inactive
HEXIM1/7SK-bound P-TEFb into an active one for Tat-activated and TAR-dependent
HIV-1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC419863
PMID: 15169877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Curr Top Med Chem. 2004;4(9):871-82.

Inhibitors of HIV-1 gene expression and transcription.

Baba M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Antiviral Chemotherapy, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, Faculty
of Medicine, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.
baba@m.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression and transcription is 
an essential step in the viral life cycle, which is considered to be a possible
target for inhibition of HIV-1 replication. Among the factors involved in this
step, the cellular transcription factor nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB is the most
potent inducer of HIV-1 gene expression, while the viral transactivator protein
Tat seems to play a central role in sustaining a high level of HIV-1 replication.
Another important mechanism of HIV-1 gene expression is the nuclear export
control of viral mRNA conducted by the viral regulatory protein Rev. Various
attempts have been undertaken to discover selective inhibitors of HIV-1 gene
expression and transcription. Several small-molecule compounds were reported to
inhibit Tat functions though blocking either the Tat/TAR RNA interaction or the
kinase activity of cellular cofactors, such as cyclin T1/CDK9. In the case of Rev
inhibitors, it appears to be more difficult to find them than Tat inhibitors, and
only a few compounds have been identified as Rev inhibitors. However, the
selectivity of these Tat and Rev inhibitors was not high enough to eliminate the 
cytotoxicity to the host cells. Since the signal transduction pathways leading to
NF-kappaB activation are redox regulated, several antioxidants have been shown to
block HIV-1 transcription. Although some of them have progressed into clinical
trials in HIV-1-infected patients, the results were not conclusive. In addition, 
various compounds have been identified as inhibitors of HIV-1 gene expression and
transcription, yet their precise mechanisms are still unknown.

PMID: 15134546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Curr HIV Res. 2003 Oct;1(4):395-404.

Regulation of TAK/P-TEFb in CD4+ T lymphocytes and macrophages.

Rice AP(1), Herrmann CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. arice@bcm.tmc.edu

Erratum in
    Curr HIV Res. 2004 Apr;2(2):205.

HIV replication occurs principally in activated CD4+ T cells and macrophages. The
HIV-1 Tat protein is essential for HIV replication and requires a cellular
protein kinase activity termed TAK/P-TEFb, composed of CDK9 and cyclin T1, for
its transactivation function. This article reviews recent work indicating that
under some circumstances TAK/P-TEFb is likely to be limiting for HIV replication 
in CD4+ T cells and macrophages, and discusses mechanisms of regulation of the
TAK/P-TEFb subunits in these cell types. In resting CD4+ T lymphocytes,
TAK/P-TEFb function is low. Following lymphocyte activation, even under
conditions of minimal activation in which activation markers and cellular
proliferation are not induced, both CDK9 and cyclin T1 mRNA and protein levels
are increased, leading to an induction of TAK/P-TEFb kinase activity that
correlates with increased viral replication. In macrophages, regulation of
TAK/P-TEFb involves mechanisms distinct from those in lymphocytes. In freshly
isolated monocytes, CDK9 protein levels are high, while cyclin T1 protein levels 
are low to undetectable. Cyclin T1 protein expression is up-regulated during
early macrophage differentiation by a mechanism that involves
post-transcriptional regulation. Later during differentiation, cyclin T1
expression becomes shut off by a post-transcriptional mechanism, and this
correlates with a decrease in Tat transactivation. Interestingly, cyclin T1 can
be re-induced with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These findings suggest that changes 
in cyclin T1 expression can influence HIV-1 replication levels in monocytes and
macrophages. Important areas for future research on Tat and TAK/P-TEFb function
are discussed.

PMID: 15049426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Curr HIV Res. 2003 Jul;1(3):343-62.

Chromatin remodeling and modification during HIV-1 Tat-activated transcription.

Pumfery A(1), Deng L, Maddukuri A, de la Fuente C, Li H, Wade JD, Lambert P,
Kumar A, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George Washington
University, School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is the etiologic agent of AIDS.
Following entry into the host cell, the viral RNA is reverse transcribed into DNA
and subsequently integrated into the host genome as a chromatin template.
Chromatin structure may be responsible for silencing retroviral gene expression. 
Transcriptional activation occurs after ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complexes alter chromatin structure and positioning of nucleosomes. Histone
acetyltransferases (HATs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), kinases, and
methyltransferases (HMTs), covalently modify nucleosomes by adding or removing
chemical moieties in the N-terminal tails of histones. Recent advances have
indicated that HIV-1 encoded proteins interact with chromatin remodeling
complexes and histone modifying enzymes, implying that chromatin remodeling plays
an important role in the HIV-1 life cycle. Nucleosomes are positioned on the
HIV-1 LTR and are barriers to transcription. Following cellular activation, these
nucleosomes are modified and repositioned allowing for activation of viral gene
expression. Tat recruits various HATs to the HIV-1 promoter region and can also
be acetylated by some of these enzymes. Unmodified Tat is involved in binding to 
the CBP/p300 and cdk9/cyclin T complexes and facilitates transcription
initiation. Acetylated Tat dissociates from the TAR RNA structure and recruits
bromodomain-containing chromatin modifying complexes such as p/CAF and SWI/SNF to
facilitate transcription elongation. This review summarizes our current knowledge
and understanding of chromatin remodeling complexes and their regulation of HIV-1
replication, and highlights the important contributions HIV-1 research has made
to further our understanding of the transcription process.

PMID: 15046258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Curr HIV Res. 2003 Apr;1(2):131-52.

Pharmacological cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors as HIV-1 antiviral
therapeutics.

de la Fuente C(1), Maddukuri A, Kehn K, Baylor SY, Deng L, Pumfery A, Kashanchi
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George Washington
University, School of Medicine, Washington DC, 20037, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) can infect quiescent cells; however, 
viral production is restricted to actively proliferating cells. Recent evidence
has indicated that HIV-1 viral proteins, Vpr and Tat, perturb the cell cycle to
optimize HIV-1 replication. Vpr arrests the cell cycle at G2 by inactivating the 
cyclin B/cdk1 complex. Tat regulates the cell cycle by altering factors involved 
in proliferation and differentiation (i.e. the cdk inhibitor p21/waf1) and
associating with cyclin/cdk complexes (i.e. cyclin E/cdk2, cyclin H/cdk7, and
cyclin T/cdk9). These studies indicate the importance of host cellular factors,
such as cyclin/cdk complexes, in regulating HIV-1 replication and therefore
represent novel targets for antiviral therapeutics. Recently, the efficacy of
pharmalogical cdk inhibitors (PCIs) in abrogating viral replication has been
under development. To date there are 25-30 PCIs that have been synthesized
against known cdks, several of which have been shown to inhibit HIV-1 and other
AIDS-associated viruses in vitro and in vivo. Targeting these critical cyclin/cdk
complexes needed for viral propagation may solve the problems inherent in current
HAART therapy, including the emergence of drug-resistant viruses. Thus, PCIs have
the potential to become novel therapeutic antiviral drugs that can inhibit HIV-1 
transcription and opens the possibility of new avenues of treatment.

PMID: 15043199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Med Chem. 2004 Mar 25;47(7):1662-75.

2-Anilino-4-(thiazol-5-yl)pyrimidine CDK inhibitors: synthesis, SAR analysis,
X-ray crystallography, and biological activity.

Wang S(1), Meades C, Wood G, Osnowski A, Anderson S, Yuill R, Thomas M, Mezna M, 
Jackson W, Midgley C, Griffiths G, Fleming I, Green S, McNae I, Wu SY, McInnes C,
Zheleva D, Walkinshaw MD, Fischer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cyclacel Limited, James Lindsay Place, Dundee DD1 5JJ, Scotland, UK.

Following the identification through virtual screening of
4-(2,4-dimethyl-thiazol-5-yl)pyrimidin-2-ylamines as moderately potent inhibitors
of cyclin-dependent kinase-2 (CDK2), a CDK inhibitor analogue program was
initiated. The first aims were to optimize potency and to evaluate the cellular
mode of action of lead candidate molecules. Here the synthetic chemistry, the
structure-guided design approach, and the structure-activity relationships (SARs)
that led to the discovery of 2-anilino-4-(thiazol-5-yl)pyrimidine
ATP-antagonistic CDK2 inhibitors, many with very low nM K(i)s against CDK2, are
reported. Furthermore, X-ray crystal structures of four representative analogues 
from our chemical series in complex with CDK2 are presented, and these structures
are used to rationalize the observed biochemical SARs. Finally results are
reported that show, using the most potent CDK2 inhibitor compound from the
current series, that the observed antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects are 
consistent with cellular CDK2 and CDK9 inhibition.

PMID: 15027857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Mar;271(5):1004-14.

Three cyclin-dependent kinases preferentially phosphorylate different parts of
the C-terminal domain of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II.

Pinhero R(1), Liaw P, Bertens K, Yankulov K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The C-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II plays
critical roles in the initiation, elongation and processing of primary
transcripts. These activities are at least partially regulated by the
phosphorylation of the CTD by three cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs),
namely CDK7, CDK8 and CDK9. In this study, we systematically compared the
phosphorylation of different recombinant CTD substrates by recombinant
CDK7/CycH/MAT1, CDK8/CycC and CDK9/CycT1 kinases. We showed that CDK7, CDK8 and
CDK9 produce different patterns of phosphorylation of the CTD. CDK7/CycH/MAT1
generates mostly hyperphosphorylated full-length and truncated CTD peptides,
while CDK8/CycC and CDK9/CycT1 generate predominantly hypophosphorylated
peptides. Total activity towards different parts of the CTD also differs between 
the three kinases; however, these differences did not correlate with their
ability to hyperphosphorylate the substrates. The last 10 repeats of the CTD can 
act as a suppressor of the activity of the kinases in the context of longer
peptides. Our results indicate that the three kinases possess different
biochemical properties that could reflect their actions in vivo.

PMID: 15009212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Virol. 2004 Mar;78(6):2853-62.

Roscovitine, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, prevents replication of
varicella-zoster virus.

Taylor SL(1), Kinchington PR, Brooks A, Moffat JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, USA.

Understanding the interactions between varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and host
cells can be addressed by using small molecule inhibitors of cellular enzymes.
Roscovitine (Rosco) is a purine derivative that inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase 
1 (cdk1), cdk2, cdk5, cdk7, and cdk9, which are key regulators of the cell cycle 
and transcription. Herpesviruses are known to interact with cell cycle proteins; 
thus, the antiviral effects of Rosco on VZV growth were evaluated. In a plaque
reduction assay, 25 micro M Rosco prevented VZV replication, and the antiviral
effect was reversible for at least up to 24 h posttreatment. Rosco also reduced
expression of the major transactivator, IE62, over 48 h. Confocal microscopy
studies indicated that Rosco caused the immediate-early proteins ORF4 and IE62 to
abnormally localize in infected cells and prevented cell-cell spread of VZV over 
48 h. Rosco was found to inhibit VZV DNA synthesis as measured by real-time PCR, 
and this technique was used to estimate the 50% effective concentration (EC(50)) 
of 14 micro M. This value was close to the EC(50) estimate of 12 micro M
determined from plaque reduction assays. At 25 micro M, Rosco was not cytotoxic
over 48 h in a neutral red uptake assay, and proliferation was slowed as the
cells accumulated in a G(2)-like state. These results demonstrate the importance 
of cdk's in VZV replication and suggest that cdk inhibitors could serve as useful
VZV antivirals.

PMCID: PMC353735
PMID: 14990704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Virology. 2004 Jan 5;318(1):306-17.

Evidence for conformational flexibility in the Tat-TAR recognition motif of
cyclin T1.

Das C(1), Edgcomb SP, Peteranderl R, Chen L, Frankel AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143-2280, USA.

Cyclin T1 (CycT1) is a cellular transcription elongation factor that also
participates in Tat-mediated activation of several lentiviral promoters. In human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), CycT1 is required for Tat to bind tightly to TAR
and interacts in the ternary complex via its Tat-TAR recognition motif (TRM). In 
the related bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV), Tat recognizes its cognate TAR
element with high affinity and specificity in the absence of CycT1. At both
promoters, CycT1 recruits the Cdk9 kinase, which phosphorylates RNA polymerase II
to generate processive transcription complexes. To examine the physical
properties of CycT1, we purified a functional domain corresponding to residues
1-272 and found that it possesses a stably folded core, as judged by partial
proteolysis and circular dichroism experiments. Interestingly, the C-terminal 20 
residues corresponding to the TRM appear conformationally flexible or disordered.
The TRM of the bovine CycT1 (bCycT1) is similarly sensitive to proteolysis yet
differs in sequence from the human protein. In particular, bCycT1 lacks a
cysteine at residue 261 known to be critical for HIV but not BIV ternary complex 
formation, and mutagenesis data are consistent with a proposed role for this
cysteine in metal binding. The apparent flexibility of the TRM suggests that
conformational rearrangements may accompany formation of CycT1-Tat-TAR ternary
complexes and may contribute to different TAR recognition strategies in different
lentiviruses.

PMID: 14972556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Virol. 2004 Mar;78(5):2517-29.

Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication by RNA interference
directed against human transcription elongation factor P-TEFb (CDK9/CyclinT1).

Chiu YL(1), Cao H, Jacque JM, Stevenson M, Rana TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

The human positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb is composed of two
subunits, cyclin T1 (hCycT1) and CDK9, and is involved in transcriptional
regulation of cellular genes as well as human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) mRNA. Replication of HIV-1 requires the Tat protein, which activates
elongation of RNA polymerase II at the HIV-1 promoter by interacting with hCycT1.
To understand the cellular functions of P-TEFb and to test whether suppression of
host proteins such as P-TEFb can modulate HIV infectivity without causing
cellular toxicity or lethality, we used RNA interference (RNAi) to specifically
knock down P-TEFb expression by degrading hCycT1 or CDK9 mRNA. RNAi-mediated gene
silencing of P-TEFb in HeLa cells was not lethal and inhibited Tat
transactivation and HIV-1 replication in host cells. We also found that CDK9
protein stability depended on hCycT1 protein levels, suggesting that the
formation of P-TEFb CDK-cyclin complexes is required for CDK9 stability.
Strikingly, P-TEFb knockdown cells showed normal P-TEFb kinase activity. Our
studies suggest the existence of a dynamic equilibrium between active and
inactive pools of P-TEFb in the cell and indicate that this equilibrium shifts
towards the active kinase form to sustain cell viability when P-TEFb protein
levels are reduced. The finding that a P-TEFb knockdown was not lethal and still 
showed normal P-TEFb kinase activity suggested that there is a critical threshold
concentration of activated P-TEFb required for cell viability and HIV
replication. These results provide new insights into the regulation of P-TEFb
function and suggest the possibility that similar mechanisms for monitoring
protein levels to modulate the activity of proteins may exist for the regulation 
of a variety of other enzymatic pathways.

PMCID: PMC369228
PMID: 14963154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Curr Oncol Rep. 2004 Mar;6(2):123-30.

Small molecule inhibitors targeting cyclin-dependent kinases as anticancer
agents.

Dai Y(1), Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University/Medical
College of Virginia, MCV Station Box 230, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and their related pathways represent some of the 
most attractive targets in the development of anticancer therapeutics. Among a
variety of CDK inhibitors under development, flavopiridol, UCN-01, CYC202, and
BMS-387032 are undergoing clinical evaluation based on evidence of preclinical
antitumor activity. Flavopiridol exerts multiple effects in tumor cells,
including inhibition of multiple CDKs, transcriptional inhibition secondary to
disruption of P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T), induction of apoptosis, and
antiangiogenesis. UCN-01 was initially developed as a protein kinase C (PKC)
inhibitor, but its major antitumor effects appear to be related to CDK inhibition
or "inappropriate" activation of cdc2/CDK1 abrogating the G2 and S checkpoints,
inhibition of PDK1/Akt, and induction of apoptosis through a PKC-independent
mechanism. Significantly, combining these CDK inhibitors with either conventional
cytotoxic drugs or novel agents targeting signal transduction pathways can
markedly enhance antitumor activity, particularly induction of apoptosis, in
various preclinical models. Such findings may serve as a basis for the
introduction of novel combination regimens into clinical trials.

PMID: 14751090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Recent Prog Horm Res. 2004;59:125-39.

Phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II in cardiac hypertrophy: cell enlargement
signals converge on cyclin T/Cdk9.

Kulkarni PA(1), Sano M, Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development and Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cardiac myocyte enlargement is the eponymous characteristic of cardiac
hypertrophy, regardless of the instigating signal. Such triggers include
biomechanical stress (e.g., work load, compensation for ischemic damage),
sarcomeric protein mutations, cytoskeletal protein mutations, abnormal
energetics, G protein-coupled receptors for ligands (including angiotensin II and
endothelin-1), or their signal transducers within cells. In turn, increased
myocyte size reflects increased RNA and protein content per cell as responses to 
these stimuli. In eukaryotic cells, the large subunit of RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) becomes extensively phosphorylated in its serine-rich C-terminal domain 
(CTD) during the transition from transcript initiation to transcript elongation -
that is, "escape" of RNAPII from the promoter-proximal region into the open
reading frame. Although this process is believed to be crucial to productive
synthesis of mRNA and is known to be governed by two atypical cyclin-dependent
kinases, Cdk7 and Cdk9, surprisingly little is understood of how regulatory
pathways within cells intersect these RNAPII-directed protein kinases.
Investigations of the CTD kinase module in cardiac hypertrophy provide a
tentative initial map of a molecular circuit controlling cell size through
regulated phosphorylation of RNAPII.

PMID: 14749500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell. 2004 Jan 16;13(1):67-76.

Phosphorylation of serine 2 within the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain
couples transcription and 3' end processing.

Ahn SH(1), Kim M, Buratowski S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The largest subunit of RNA polymerase II contains a unique C-terminal domain
important for coupling of transcription and mRNA processing. This domain consists
of a repeated heptameric sequence (YSPTSPS) phosphorylated at serines 2 and 5.
Serine 5 is phosphorylated during initiation and recruits capping enzyme. Serine 
2 is phosphorylated during elongation by the Ctk1 kinase, a protein similar to
mammalian Cdk9/P-TEFb. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to map positions of
transcription elongation and mRNA processing factors in strains lacking Ctk1.
Ctk1 is not required for association of elongation factors with transcribing
polymerase. However, in ctk1Delta strains, the recruitment of polyadenylation
factors to 3' regions of genes is disrupted and changes in 3' ends are seen.
Therefore, Serine 2 phosphorylation by Ctk1 recruits factors for
cotranscriptional 3' end processing in vivo.

PMID: 14731395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 1;64(1):262-72.

The Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CYC202 (R-roscovitine) inhibits
retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation, causes loss of Cyclin D1, and activates
the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Whittaker SR(1), Walton MI, Garrett MD, Workman P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer
Research, Haddow Laboratories, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, United Kingdom.

Deregulation of the cell cycle commonly occurs during tumorigenesis, resulting in
unrestricted cell proliferation and independence from mitogens. Cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitors have the potential to induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
cancer cells. CYC202 (R-roscovitine) is a potent inhibitor of CDK2/cyclin E that 
is undergoing clinical trials. Drugs selected to act on a particular molecular
target may exert additional or alternative effects in intact cells. We therefore 
studied the molecular pharmacology of CYC202 in human colon cancer cells.
Treatment of HT29 and KM12 colon carcinoma cell lines with CYC202 decreased both 
retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation and total retinoblastoma protein. In
addition, an increase in the phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1/2 was observed. As a result, downstream activation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway occurred, as demonstrated by an increase
in ELK-1 phosphorylation and in c-FOS expression. Use of mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinases 1/2 inhibitors showed that the CYC202-induced
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 phosphorylation was mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinases 1/2 dependent but did not contribute to the cell cycle
effects of the drug, which included a reduction of cells in G(1), inhibition of
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation during S-phase, and a moderate increase in G(2)-M
phase. Despite activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, cyclin
D1 protein levels were decreased by CYC202, an effect that occurred
simultaneously with loss of retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation and inhibition
of cell cycle progression. The reduced expression of cyclin D1 protein was
independent of the p38(SAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways, which
are known regulators of cyclin D1 protein. Interestingly, CYC202 caused a clear
reduction in cyclins D1, A, and B1 mRNA, whereas c-FOS mRNA increased by 2-fold. 
This was accompanied by a loss of RNA polymerase II phosphorylation and total RNA
polymerase II protein, suggesting that CYC202 was inhibiting transcription,
possibly via inhibition of CDK7 and CDK9 complexes. It can be concluded that
although CYC202 can act as a CDK2 inhibitor, it also has the potential to inhibit
CDK4 and CDK1 activities in cancer cells through the down-regulation of the
corresponding cyclin partners. This provides a possible mechanism by which CYC202
can cause a reduction in retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation at multiple sites
and cell cycle arrest in G(1), S, and G(2)-M phases. In addition to providing
useful insights into the molecular pharmacology of CYC202 in human cancer cells, 
the results also suggest potential pharmacodynamic end points for use in clinical
trials with the drug.

PMID: 14729633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Methods Enzymol. 2003;371:324-36.

Techniques to analyze the HIV-1 Tat and TAR RNA-dependent recruitment and
activation of the cyclin T1: CDK9 (P-TEFb) transcription elongation factor.

Gomes N(1), Garber ME, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037-1099, USA.

PMID: 14712711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):787-95.

Dynamics of human immunodeficiency virus transcription: P-TEFb phosphorylates RD 
and dissociates negative effectors from the transactivation response element.

Fujinaga K(1), Irwin D, Huang Y, Taube R, Kurosu T, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, University
of California at San Francisco, 3rd and Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA
94143-0703, USA. kxf32@cwru.edu

The elongation of transcription is a highly regulated process that requires
negative and positive effectors. By binding the double-stranded stem in the
transactivation response (TAR) element, RD protein from the negative
transcription elongation factor (NELF) inhibits basal transcription from the long
terminal repeat of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIVLTR). Tat and its 
cellular cofactor, the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb),
overcome this negative effect. Cdk9 in P-TEFb also phosphorylates RD at sites
next to its RNA recognition motif. A mutant RD protein that mimics its
phosphorylated form no longer binds TAR nor represses HIV transcription. In sharp
contrast, a mutant RD protein that cannot be phosphorylated by P-TEFb functions
as a dominant-negative effector and inhibits Tat transactivation. These results
better define the transition from abortive to productive transcription and thus
replication of HIV.

PMCID: PMC343783
PMID: 14701750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):4153-60. Epub 2003 Nov 19.

Phosphorylated positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) is tagged for 
inhibition through association with 7SK snRNA.

Chen R(1), Yang Z, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3202, USA.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), comprising CDK9 and
cyclin T, stimulates transcription of cellular and viral genes by phosphorylating
RNA polymerase II. A major portion of nuclear P-TEFb is sequestered and
inactivated by the coordinated actions of the 7SK snRNA and the HEXIM1 protein,
whose induced dissociation from P-TEFb is crucial for stress-induced
transcription and pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy. The 7SK.P-TEFb
interaction, which can occur independently of HEXIM1 and does not by itself
inhibit P-TEFb, recruits HEXIM1 for P-TEFb inactivation. To study the control of 
this interaction, we established an in vitro system that reconstituted the
specific interaction of P-TEFb with 7SK but not other snRNAs. Using this system, 
together with an in vivo binding assay, we show that the phosphorylation of CDK9,
on possibly the conserved Thr-186 in the T-loop, was crucial for the 7SK.P-TEFb
interaction. This phosphorylation was not caused by CDK9 autophosphorylation or
the general CDK-activating kinase CAK, but rather by a novel HeLa nuclear kinase.
Furthermore, the stress-induced disruption of the 7SK.P-TEFb interaction was not 
caused by any prohibitive changes in 7SK but by the dephosphorylation of P-TEFb, 
leading to the loss of the key phosphorylation important for 7SK binding. Thus,
the phosphorylated P-TEFb is tagged for inhibition through association with 7SK. 
We discuss the implications of this mechanism in controlling P-TEFb activity
during normal and stress-induced transcription.

PMID: 14627702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. AIDS. 2003 Nov 21;17(17):2429-36.

Increased association of 7SK snRNA with Tat cofactor P-TEFb following activation 
of peripheral blood lymphocytes.

Haaland RE(1), Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to determine whether 7SK small nuclear RNA
(snRNA), which has been proposed to function as an inhibitor of Tat cofactor
P-TEFb, plays a role in transcriptional latency in T cells.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The association of 7SK snRNA with P-TEFb was investigated in 
resting and activated peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs). Primary PBLs were
isolated by standard methods and activated with phytohemagglutinin (PHA). Levels 
of 7SK snRNA were determined by Northern blotting and levels of the P-TEFb
subunits cyclin-dependent kinase 9 and cyclin T1 were analyzed by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: The association of 7SK snRNA with P-TEFb complexes was specific.
Following activation of PBLs, the levels of 7SK snRNA increased in a manner
similar to U1 and U6 snRNA, sn RNAs involved in positive aspects of cellular gene
expression. Unexpectedly, the association of 7SK snRNA with P-TEFb increased
dramatically following lymphocyte activation.
CONCLUSION: Increased association of 7SK snRNA with P-TEFb in activated
lymphocytes correlates with increased global transcription. This suggests that
7SK snRNA is unlikely to promote transcriptional latency in lymphocytes through
an association with P-TEFb; it also suggests that the proposal that the
association of 7SK snRNA with P-TEFb acts to inhibit transcriptional elongation
needs to be re-evaluated.

PMID: 14600513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2003 Sep;19(9):767-78.

Additive activity between the trans-activation response RNA-binding protein,
TRBP2, and cyclin T1 on HIV type 1 expression and viral production in murine
cells.

Battisti PL(1), Daher A, Bannwarth S, Voortman J, Peden KW, Hiscott J, Mouland
AJ, Benarous R, Gatignol A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Montréal,
Québec H3T 1E2, Canada.

Tat-mediated trans-activation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) occurs
through the phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase 
II. The kinase complex, pTEFb, composed of cyclin T1 (CycT1) and CDK9, mediates
this process. The trans-activation response (TAR) RNA-binding protein 2 (TRBP2)
increases HIV-1 LTR expression through TAR and protein kinase R (PKR) binding,
but not through interactions with the Tat-CycT1-CDK9 complex. TRBP2 and the
Tat-CycT1-CDK9 complex have overlapping binding sites on TAR RNA. TRBP2 and CycT1
increased Tat trans-activation in NIH 3T3 cells with additive effects. Upon
transfection of HIV-1 pLAI, pNL4-3, pMAL, and pAD molecular clones, reverse
transcriptase (RT) activity and p24 concentration were decreased 200- to 900-fold
in NIH 3T3 cells compared with HeLa cells in both cells and supernatants. In
murine cells, cotransfection of the HIV clones with CycT1 or TRBP2 increased
modestly the expression of RT activity in cell extracts. The analysis of Gag
expression in murine cells transfected with CycT1 compared with human cells
showed a 20-fold decrease in expression and a strong processing defect. The
expression of both CycT1 and TRBP2 had a more than additive activity on RT
function in cell extracts and on viral particle production in supernatant of
murine cells. These results suggest an activity of CycT1 and TRBP2 at different
steps in HIV-1 expression and indicate the requirement for another
posttranscriptional factor in murine cells for full HIV replication.

PMID: 14585207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cell. 2003 Oct;12(4):971-82.

Inhibition of P-TEFb (CDK9/Cyclin T) kinase and RNA polymerase II transcription
by the coordinated actions of HEXIM1 and 7SK snRNA.

Yik JH(1), Chen R, Nishimura R, Jennings JL, Link AJ, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The positive transcriptional elongation factor b (P-TEFb), consisting of CDK9 and
cyclin T, stimulates transcription by phosphorylating RNA polymerase II. It
becomes inactivated when associated with the abundant 7SK snRNA. Here, we show
that the 7SK binding alone was not sufficient to inhibit P-TEFb. P-TEFb was
inhibited by the HEXIM1 protein in a process that specifically required 7SK for
mediating the HEXIM1:P-TEFb interaction. This allowed HEXIM1 to inhibit
transcription both in vivo and in vitro. P-TEFb dissociated from HEXIM1 and 7SK
in cells undergoing stress response, increasing the level of active P-TEFb for
stress-induced transcription. P-TEFb was the predominant HEXIM1-associated
protein factor, and thus likely to be the principal target of inhibition
coordinated by HEXIM1 and 7SK. Since HEXIM1 expression is induced in cells
treated with hexamethylene bisacetamide, a potent inducer of cell
differentiation, targeting the general transcription factor P-TEFb by HEXIM1/7SK 
may contribute to the global control of cell growth and differentiation.

PMID: 14580347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Nov;64(5):1101-8.

Acquired cellular resistance to flavopiridol in a human colon carcinoma cell line
involves up-regulation of the telomerase catalytic subunit and telomere
elongation. Sensitivity of resistant cells to combination treatment with a
telomerase inhibitor.

Incles CM(1), Schultes CM, Kelland LR, Neidle S.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Pharmacy, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX, UK.
stephen.neidle@ulsop.ac.uk

Flavopiridol is a broad-spectrum inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases and of
global transcription via the inhibition of positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb). Although flavopiridol is currently undergoing phase II
clinical trials, acquired cellular resistance to the compound during treatment is
a potential problem, as it is with almost all current anticancer agents. A HCT116
human colon carcinoma cell line with an acquired 8-fold resistance to
flavopiridol has been established. We report here that there are changes in these
resistant cells in terms of telomere length and telomerase activity, whereas no
change in the expression of the P-TEFb subunits CDK9, cyclin T1, cyclin T2a, or
cyclin T2b was observed. The level of mRNA expression for the telomerase
catalytic subunit hTERT was increased over 2-fold in the resistant cells, and
mean telomere length was found to be 2 kb longer than the parental length,
although telomerase activity was unchanged. The level of mRNA expression for the 
telomeric binding protein Pot1 was also increased. We also report that treatment 
of HCT116 cells with a combination of the G-quadruplex interacting telomerase
inhibitor BRACO-19 and flavopiridol results in a 3-fold decrease in population
doubling and prevents recovery from treatment with either compound alone.
Treatment of flavopiridol-resistant cells with BRACO-19 alone also led to rapid
inhibition of cell growth, which is not observed in the parental line. The
finding that only the resistant line, with up-regulated telomerase, responds to
this G-quadruplex inhibitor is consistent with the hypothesis that the mechanism 
of BRACO-19 down-regulation of cell growth directly involves the targeting of
telomeres and telomerase.

PMID: 14573759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):12666-71. Epub 2003 Oct 20.

The Tat/TAR-dependent phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain
stimulates cotranscriptional capping of HIV-1 mRNA.

Zhou M(1), Deng L, Kashanchi F, Brady JN, Shatkin AJ, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George Washington University
School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The HIV type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein stimulates transcription elongation by
recruiting P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T1) to the transactivation response (TAR) RNA
structure. Tat-induced CDK9 kinase has been shown to phosphorylate Ser-5 of RNA
polymerase II (RNAP II) C-terminal domain (CTD). Results presented here
demonstrate that Tat-induced Ser-5 phosphorylation of CTD by P-TEFb stimulates
the guanylyltransferase activity of human capping enzyme and RNA cap formation.
Sequential phosphorylation of CTD by Tat-induced P-TEFb enhances the stimulation 
of human capping enzyme guanylyltransferase activity and RNA cap formation by
transcription factor IIH-mediated CTD phosphorylation. Using an immobilized
template assay that permits isolation of transcription complexes, we show that
Tat/TAR-dependent phosphorylation of RNAP II CTD stimulates cotranscriptional
capping of HIV-1 mRNA. Upon transcriptional induction of latently infected cells,
accumulation of capped transcripts occurs along with Ser-5-phosphorylated RNAP II
in the promoter proximal region of the HIV-1 genome. Therefore, these
observations suggest that Tat/TAR-dependent phosphorylation of RNAP II CTD is
crucial not only in promoting transcription elongation but also in stimulating
nascent viral RNA capping.

PMCID: PMC240675
PMID: 14569024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. EMBO J. 2003 Oct 1;22(19):5125-36.

CIITA regulates transcription onset viaSer5-phosphorylation of RNA Pol II.

Spilianakis C(1), Kretsovali A, Agalioti T, Makatounakis T, Thanos D,
Papamatheakis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Crete, Crete, Greece.

We describe the temporal order of recruitment of transcription factors, cofactors
and basal transcriptional components and the consequent biochemical events that
lead to activation of the major histocompatibility class II (MHCII) DRA gene
transcription by IFN-gamma. We found that the gene is 'poised' for activation
since both the activators and a fraction of the basal transcriptional machinery
are pre-assembled at the enhancer and promoter prior to IFN-gamma treatment. The 
class II transactivator is synthesized following IFN-gamma treatment and it is
recruited to the enhanceosome leading to the subsequent recruitment of the CBP
and GCN5 coactivators. This is followed by histone acetylation and recruitment of
the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. CIITA also recruits the CDK7 and CDK9
kinases and enhances the ability of CDK7 to phosphorylate Pol II at Ser5 leading 
to initiation of mRNA synthesis. Thus, the gene-specific class II transactivator 
selects the target genes for expression by coordinating a multiple set of
biochemical activities ranging from chromatin alterations and pre-initiation
complex assembly to promoter clearance.

PMCID: PMC204479
PMID: 14517250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):7005-18.

Bur1 kinase is required for efficient transcription elongation by RNA polymerase 
II.

Keogh MC(1), Podolny V, Buratowski S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) Bur1 (Sgv1) may be
homologous to mammalian Cdk9, which functions in transcriptional elongation.
Although Bur1 can phosphorylate the Rpb1 carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) kinase in 
vitro, it has no strong specificity within the consensus heptapeptide YSPTSPS for
Ser2 or Ser5. BUR1 mutants are sensitive to the drugs 6-azauracil and
mycophenolic acid and interact genetically with the elongation factors Ctk1 and
Spt5. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments show that Bur1 and its cyclin
partner Bur2 are recruited to transcription elongation complexes, cross-linking
to actively transcribing genes. Interestingly, Bur1 shows reduced cross-linking
to transcribed regions downstream of polyadenylation sites. In addition, bur1
mutant strains have a reduced cross-linking ratio of RNA polymerase II at the 3' 
end of genes relative to promoter regions. Phosphorylation of CTD serines 2 and 5
appears normal in mutant cells, suggesting that Bur1 is not a significant source 
of cotranscriptional Rpb1 phosphorylation. These results show that Bur1 functions
in transcription elongation but may phosphorylate a substrate other than the CTD.

PMCID: PMC193923
PMID: 12972617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 28;22(36):5707-11.

c-Myc recruits P-TEFb for transcription, cellular proliferation and apoptosis.

Kanazawa S(1), Soucek L, Evan G, Okamoto T, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Russell Medical
Research Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0703, USA.

c-Myc promotes cellular proliferation, sensitizes cells to apoptosis and prevents
differentiation. It binds cyclin T1 structurally and functionally from the
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). The cyclin-dependent kinase 
9 (Cdk9) in P-TEFb then phosporylates the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II,
which is required for the transition from initiation to elongation of eukaryotic 
transcription. Inhibiting P-TEFb blocks the transcription of its target genes as 
well as cellular proliferation and apoptosis induced by c-Myc.

PMID: 12944920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Cell Physiol. 2003 Oct;197(1):1-7.

Catalytic activity of Cdk9 is required for nuclear co-localization of the
Cdk9/cyclin T1 (P-TEFb) complex.

Napolitano G(1), Majello B, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples,
Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Cdk9 and its binding partner cyclin T1 comprise the positive elongation factor b 
(P-TEFb). P-TEFb phosphorylates the RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal-domain
(CTD) allowing efficient transcription elongation. Recent studies showed that
Cdk9 is a predominant nuclear protein, and here we investigated the functional
requirement for nuclear localization of Cdk9. We found that the catalytic
inactive kinase mutant (Cdk9dn) fails to accumulate in the nucleus showing a
diffuse sub-cellular localization. In addition to the catalityc activity, nuclear
localization of Cdk9 protein requires the presence of the phospho-acceptor sites 
at the C-terminus tail. Finally, enforced expression of wild-type cyclinT1, which
enhances nuclear localization of Cdk9wt, fails to direct the Cdk9 mutants to the 
nucleus. Collectively, these findings implicate that nuclear localization of Cdk9
requires auto-phosphorylation of the kinase, and highlight the presence of a
regulatory mechanism underlying the nuclear localization of the P-TEFb complex.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12942536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43346-56. Epub 2003 Aug 5.

Characterization of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe Cdk9/Pch1 protein kinase: Spt5 
phosphorylation, autophosphorylation, and mutational analysis.

Pei Y(1), Shuman S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Schizosaccharomyces pombe Cdk9/Pch1 protein kinase is a functional ortholog of
the essential Saccharomyces cerevisiae Bur1/Bur2 kinase and a putative ortholog
of metazoan P-TEFb (Cdk9/cyclin T). SpCdk9/Pch1 phosphorylates of the
carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the S. pombe transcription elongation factor
Spt5, which consists of 18 tandem repeats of a nonapeptide of consensus sequence 
1TPAWNSGSK9. We document the divalent cation dependence and specificity of
SpCdk9/Pch1, its NTP dependence and specificity, the dependence of Spt5-CTD
phosphorylation on the number of tandem nonamer repeats, and the specificity for 
phosphorylation of the Spt5-CTD on threonine at position 1 within the nonamer
element. SpCdk9/Pch1 also phosphorylates the CTD heptaptide repeat array of the
largest subunit of S. pombe RNA polymerase II (consensus sequence YSPTSPS) and
does so exclusively on serine. SpCdk9/Pch1 catalyzes autophosphorylation of the
kinase and cyclin subunits of the kinase complex. The distribution of
phosphorylation sites on SpCdk9 (86% Ser(P), 11% Thr(P), 3% Tyr(P)) is distinct
from that on Pch1 (2% Ser(P), 98% Thr(P)). We conducted a structure-guided
mutational analysis of SpCdk9, whereby a total of 29 new mutations of 12
conserved residues were tested for in vivo function by complementation of a yeast
bur1Delta mutant. We identified many lethal and conditional mutations of side
chains implicated in binding ATP and the divalent cation cofactor,
phosphoacceptor substrate recognition, and T-loop dynamics. We surmise that the
lethality of the of T212A mutation in the T-loop reflects an essential
phosphorylation event, insofar as the conservative T212S change rescued wild-type
growth; the phosphomimetic T212E change rescued growth at 30 degrees C; and the
effects of mutating the T-loop threonine were phenocopied by mutations in the
three conserved arginines predicted to chelate the phosphate on the T-loop
threonine.

PMID: 12904290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2003 Aug;3(4):362-70.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors.

Dai Y(1), Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia
Commonwealth University, MCV Station Box 230, Richmond, VA 23298, USA

Cell-cycle dysregulation is one of the cardinal characteristics of neoplastic
cells. For this reason, small molecule inhibitors targeting cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs), of which flavopiridol is a prototype, have been the focus of
extensive interest in cancer therapy. In addition to inhibiting cell-cycle
progression, these agents exhibit a variety of other activities, including the
induction of cell death. Recently, several novel mechanisms of action have been
ascribed to the CDK inhibitor flavopiridol, including interference with
transcription, most likely through disruption of P-TEFb (i.e. the CDK9/cyclin T
complex), and induction of apoptosis, possibly a consequence of downregulation of
various anti-apoptotic proteins. It has also been observed that combining CDK
inhibitors with either conventional cytotoxic drugs or novel signal transduction 
modulators dramatically promotes neoplastic cell death in a variety of
preclinical models. Efforts are underway to uncover inhibitors that selectively
target specific CDKs and to develop these as a new generation of antitumour
drugs. For all of these reasons, it is likely that interest in CDK inhibitors as 
antineoplastic agents will continue for the foreseeable future.

PMID: 12901944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 31;22(31):4882-8.

Functional inactivation of Cdk9 through oligomerization chain reaction.

Napolitano G(1), Mazzocco A, Fraldi A, Majello B, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
Federico II, Naples, Italy.

The oligomerization chain reaction (OCR) strategy is a recently described
technique for inactivation of target proteins that function as homoassociate
complexes. This novel strategy is based on the fusion of self-associating
coiled-coil (CC) domain of the nuclear factor promyelocytic leukemia (PML) to
target proteins. Here, we present the successful application of the OCR strategy 
for inactivation of the heterodimeric Cdk9/cyclin T1 complex. Cyclin T1/Cdk9
(P-TEFb) complex is a positive regulator of gene transcription, whose function is
underlined by the ability to phosphorylate the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of 
the RNA polymerase II conferring productive transcript elongation. Fusion of the 
CC domain to Cdk9 leads to the formation of high molecular complexes to which the
endogenous cyclin T1 is recruited. The CC-Cdk9 chimera effectively inhibits HIV-1
Tat activation, whose transcription activity is exquisitely dependent upon cyclin
T1/Cdk9 function. Furthermore, expression of CC-Cdk9 protein inhibits cell
proliferation, as shown by colony-formation assay. Collectively, our findings add
further support to the OCR strategy for functional inactivation of
hetero-associated factors such as the Cdk9/cyclin T1 complex, and highlight a
putative function of Cdk9 in cell growth control.

PMID: 12894230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5165-73.

CDK9 is constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle, and its steady-state 
expression is independent of SKP2.

Garriga J(1), Bhattacharya S, Calbó J, Marshall RM, Truongcao M, Haines DS, Graña
X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, 3307 North Broad Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

CDK9 is a CDC2-related kinase and the catalytic subunit of the
positive-transcription elongation factor b and the Tat-activating kinase. It has 
recently been reported that CDK9 is a short-lived protein whose levels are
regulated during the cell cycle by the SCF(SKP2) ubiquitin ligase complex (R. E. 
Kiernan et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 21:7956-7970, 2001). The results presented here 
are in contrast to those observations. CDK9 protein levels remained unchanged in 
human cells entering and progressing through the cell cycle from G(0), despite
dramatic changes in SKP2 expression. CDK9 levels also remained unchanged in cells
exiting from mitosis and progressing through the next cell cycle. Similarly, the 
levels of CDK9 protein did not change as cells exited the cell cycle and
differentiated along various lineages. In keeping with these observations, the
kinase activity associated with CDK9 was found to not be regulated during the
cell cycle. We have also found that endogenous CDK9 is a very stable protein with
a half-life (t(1/2)) of 4 to 7 h, depending on the cell type. In contrast, when
CDK9 is overexpressed, it is not stabilized and is rapidly degraded, with a
t(1/2) of less than 1 h, depending on the level of expression. Treatment of cells
with proteasome inhibitors blocked the degradation of short-lived proteins, such 
as p27, but did not affect the expression of endogenous CDK9. Ectopic
overexpression of SKP2 led to reduction of p27 protein levels but had no effect
on the expression of endogenous CDK9. Finally, downregulation of endogenous SKP2 
gene expression by interfering RNA had no effect on CDK9 protein levels, whereas 
p27 protein levels increased dramatically. Therefore, the SCF(SKP2) ubiquitin
ligase does not regulate CDK9 expression in a cell cycle-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC165719
PMID: 12861003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 1;63(13):3626-31.

Epidermal growth factor receptor expression is a candidate target of the
synergistic combination of trastuzumab and flavopiridol in breast cancer.

Nahta R(1), Trent S, Yang C, Schmidt EV.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts
02129, USA.

ErbB2 and cyclin D1 are interacting oncogenes that are particularly important in 
breast cancer. We demonstrated previously synergy between two drugs that
separately address each oncogene, trastuzumab and flavopiridol. Here we examine
the cellular basis for this interaction. Although both drugs are thought to alter
cell cycle progression, the combination of trastuzumab and flavopiridol had
little effect on G(1) progression or retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation.
Instead, trastuzumab-flavopiridol synergistically enhanced apoptosis. Recent data
have suggested that transcription elongation mediated by Cdk9 in P-TEFb is a more
sensitive flavopiridol target than Cdk4. Supporting this view, we found synergy
between 5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole riboside and
trastuzumab, but not between inhibitors of Cdk4 and trastuzumab. Similarly, a
signature set of mRNAs that included the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
responded to the combination of trastuzumab-flavopiridol in a gene expression
array analysis. Three lines of evidence confirmed the EGFR is a potential target 
of flavopiridol-trastuzumab synergy: (a) EGFR protein expression was rapidly and 
completely lost after combination treatment; (b) a cell line that expresses
amplified levels of both erbB2 and the EGFR was resistant to the combined drugs; 
and (c) treatment with epidermal growth factor prevented any therapeutic effects 
of flavopiridol and trastuzumab, singly or in combination. Taken together, our
results suggest that synergy between flavopiridol and trastuzumab can result from
enhanced apoptosis, and that combination effects on EGFR expression are involved 
in the interaction.

PMID: 12839951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jul;23(14):4859-69.

MAQ1 and 7SK RNA interact with CDK9/cyclin T complexes in a
transcription-dependent manner.

Michels AA(1), Nguyen VT, Fraldi A, Labas V, Edwards M, Bonnet F, Lania L,
Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Laboratoire de Régulation de
l'Expression Génétique, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):9405.

Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) comprises a cyclin (T1 or T2)
and a kinase, cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), which phosphorylates the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. P-TEFb is essential for
transcriptional elongation in human cells. A highly specific interaction among
cyclin T1, the viral protein Tat, and the transactivation response (TAR) element 
RNA determines the productive transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus
genome. In growing HeLa cells, half of P-TEFb is kinase inactive and binds to the
7SK small nuclear RNA. We now report on a novel protein termed MAQ1 (for ménage à
quatre) that is also present in this complex. Since 7SK RNA is required for MAQ1 
to associate with P-TEFb, a structural role for 7SK RNA is proposed. Inhibition
of transcription results in the release of both MAQ1 and 7SK RNA from P-TEFb.
Thus, MAQ1 cooperates with 7SK RNA to form a novel type of CDK inhibitor.
According to yeast two-hybrid analysis and immunoprecipitations from extracts of 
transfected cells, MAQ1 binds directly to the N-terminal cyclin homology region
of cyclins T1 and T2. Since Tat also binds to this cyclin T1 N-terminal domain
and since the association between 7SK RNA/MAQ1 and P-TEFb competes with the
binding of Tat to cyclin T1, we speculate that the TAR RNA/Tat lentivirus system 
has evolved to subvert the cellular 7SK RNA/MAQ1 system.

PMCID: PMC162212
PMID: 12832472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. FEBS Lett. 2003 May 22;543(1-3):61-5.

Interaction of Sp1 transcription factor with HIV-1 Tat protein: looking for
cellular partners.

Loregian A(1), Bortolozzo K, Boso S, Caputo A, Palù G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, Microbiology and Medical Biotechnologies, University 
of Padova, via Gabelli 63, 35121, Padua, Italy.

The Tat protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) trans-activates
HIV-1 transcription by functionally interacting with a number of cellular
proteins, among which the Sp1 transcription factor. We recently demonstrated that
Tat does not directly interact with Sp1 either in vitro or in vivo, and we
suggested that other protein(s) could indirectly mediate Tat-Sp1 interaction. In 
keeping, here we showed that addition of HeLa cell nuclear extracts to purified
Tat and Sp1 proteins allows the formation of a Tat/Sp1 complex in in vitro
binding assays. In an attempt to identify the partner(s) that bridge Tat and Sp1,
we developed a yeast multi-protein system, in which cellular proteins recently
shown to play a relevant role in Tat function, namely TATA box-binding protein,
cyclin T1, CDK9, and cyclin T1/CDK9 complex, were coexpressed, individually or in
pair-wise combination, with Tat and Sp1 hybrids. We demonstrated that none of
these candidate partners bridges Tat and Sp1. However, our yeast multi-protein
system, which allows simple and rapid detection of interactions among up to four 
proteins, will be most helpful to further dissect the interaction of Tat and Sp1 
with other candidate partners that participate in the assembly of
transcriptionally active complexes at the HIV-1 LTR.

PMID: 12753906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. EMBO J. 2003 May 1;22(9):2156-66.

Recruitment of human cyclin T1 to nuclear bodies through direct interaction with 
the PML protein.

Marcello A(1), Ferrari A, Pellegrini V, Pegoraro G, Lusic M, Beltram F, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Area Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34012 Trieste,
Italy. marcello@icgeb.org

Human cyclin T1, the cyclin partner of Cdk9 kinase in the positive transcription 
elongation factor b (P-TEFb), is an essential cellular cofactor that is recruited
by the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat transactivator to promote 
transcriptional elongation from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR). Here we
exploit fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) to demonstrate that cyclin 
T1 physically interacts in vivo with the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) protein
within specific subnuclear compartments that are coincident with PML nuclear
bodies. Deletion mutants at the C-terminal region of cyclin T1 are negative for
FRET with PML and fail to localize to nuclear bodies. Cyclin T1 and PML are also 
found associated outside of nuclear bodies, and both proteins are present at the 
chromatinized HIV-1 LTR promoter upon Tat transactivation. Taken together these
results suggest that PML proteins regulate Tat- mediated transcriptional
activation by modulating the availability of cyclin T1 and other essential
cofactors to the transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC156077
PMID: 12727882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell. 2003 Apr;11(4):1055-66.

Methylation of SPT5 regulates its interaction with RNA polymerase II and
transcriptional elongation properties.

Kwak YT(1), Guo J, Prajapati S, Park KJ, Surabhi RM, Miller B, Gehrig P, Gaynor
RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas 75390, USA.

SPT5 and its binding partner SPT4 function in both positively and negatively
regulating transcriptional elongation. The demonstration that SPT5 and RNA
polymerase II are targets for phosphorylation by CDK9/cyclin T1 indicates that
posttranslational modifications of these factors are important in regulating the 
elongation process. In this study, we utilized a biochemical approach to
demonstrate that SPT5 was specifically associated with the protein arginine
methyltransferases PRMT1 and PRMT5 and that SPT5 methylation regulated its
interaction with RNA polymerase II. Specific arginine residues in SPT5 that are
methylated by these enzymes were identified and demonstrated to be important in
regulating its promoter association and subsequent effects on transcriptional
elongation. These results suggest that methylation of SPT5 is an important
posttranslational modification that is involved in regulating its transcriptional
elongation properties in response to viral and cellular factors.

PMID: 12718890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Gene. 2003 Mar 27;307:175-82.

Identification of a novel isoform of Cdk9.

Shore SM(1), Byers SA, Maury W, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Positive transcription factor b (P-TEFb) is required for RNA polymerase II to
make the transition from abortive to productive elongation. This important factor
is a heterodimer of a cyclin-dependent kinase, cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), 
and one of four cyclin partners, cyclin T1, T2a, T2b or K. We demonstrate here
that there exists in cells a second form of Cdk9 that is 13 kDa larger than the
protein originally identified. Both of these forms, which we name Cdk9(42) and
Cdk9(55), are present in HeLa and NIH/3T3 cells. Cdk9(55) is generated from an
mRNA that originates from a second promoter located upstream of the startpoint of
transcription used to generate mRNAs encoding Cdk9(42). Antibodies specific for
Cdk9(55) immunoprecipitate Cdk(55) and cyclin T1, but not Cdk9(42). Cdk9(55) in
the immunoprecipitates is active as judged by its ability to phosphorylate the
carboxyl-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. Recently it
has been shown that the activity of P-TEFb is negatively regulated in cells by
reversible association with a small cellular RNA called 7SK. We show here that
P-TEFb molecules containing either form of Cdk9 are found in association with 7SK
and both complexes are disrupted by treatment with 600 mM KCl. The relative
abundance of Cdk9(55) and Cdk9(42) changes in different cell types, including
HeLa, NIH/3T3, human macrophages and mouse lung tissue. Additionally, treatment
of macrophages with lipopolysaccharides or infection with human immunodeficiency 
virus alters the relative abundance of the two forms of Cdk9.

PMID: 12706900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Cycle. 2003 Mar-Apr;2(2):99-104.

Cyclins that don't cycle--cyclin T/cyclin-dependent kinase-9 determines cardiac
muscle cell size.

Sano M(1), Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Department of Medicine, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A subset of cyclin-dependent protein kinases--Cdk7, Cdk8, and Cdk9--participates 
directly, in complex ways, with the fundamental machinery for gene transcription,
as elements of general transcription factors whose substrate is the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. Here, we review recent data implicating the
CTD kinase Cdk9 as a critical determinant of cardiac hypertrophy, in vitro and in
vivo. Diverse trophic signals that increase cardiac mass all activated Cdk9 (work
load, the small G-protein Gaq, and the calcium-dependent phosphatase calcineurin 
in mouse myocardium; endothelin-1, a hypertrophic agonist, in cultured
cardiomyocytes). Little or no change occurred in levels of the kinase or its
activator, cyclin T. Instead, in all four hypertrophic models, Cdk9 activation
involves the dissociation of 7SK small nuclear RNA (snRNA), an endogenous
inhibitor. In culture, dominant-negative Cdk9 blocked ET-1-induced hypertrophy,
whereas an anti-sense "knockdown" of 7SK snRNA provoked spontaneous cell growth. 
In trans-genie mice, concordant with these results, activation of Cdk9 activity
via cardiac-specific overexpression of cyclin Tl suffices to provoke hypertrophy.
Together, these findings implicate Cdk9 activity as a pivotal regulator of
pathophysiological heart growth. Because hypertrophy, in turn, is a cardinal risk
factor for developing cardiac pump failure, these results support the logic of
examining Cdk9 as a potential drug target in heart disease.

PMID: 12695656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2003 Feb;60(2):401-12.

Novel complexes of cyclin-dependent kinases and a cyclin-like protein from
Arabidopsis thaliana with a function unrelated to cell division.

Barrôco RM(1), De Veylder L, Magyar Z, Engler G, Inzé D, Mironov V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology (VIB), Ghent University, K.L. Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000 Gent,
Belgium.

Although the majority of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play a key role in cell 
cycle progression, recent evidence has shown that CDKs are also implicated in
transcription regulation. Here, we describe two Arabidopsis CDKs designated
Arath;CDKC;1 and Arath; CDKC;2. These CDKs share a PITAIRE signature in the
cyclin-binding domain and the structural characteristics of mammalian CDK9. Yeast
two-hybrid screens and immunoprecipitation assays identified CDKC-interacting
proteins with homology to the animal cyclin T/cyclin K group. We suggest that
these Arabidopsis CDKCs may be part of a kinase complex similar to the animal
positive transcription elongation factor b, whose activity is essential for
transcription control. Expression studies showed that Arath; CDKC transcripts are
mainly confined to epidermal tissues and are most abundant in flower tissues. No 
expression was detected in actively dividing Arabidopsis tissues, suggesting a
role for the CDKC proteins in differentiated cells.

PMID: 12678503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):748-58.

A model of repression: CTD analogs and PIE-1 inhibit transcriptional elongation
by P-TEFb.

Zhang F(1), Barboric M, Blackwell TK, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Russell Medical
Research Center, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) contains cyclin T1
(CycT1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9). For activating the expression of
eukaryotic genes, the histidine-rich sequence in CycT1 binds the heptapeptide
repeats in the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), whereupon
Cdk9 phosphorylates the CTD. We found that alanine-substituted heptapeptide
repeats that cannot be phosphorylated also bind CycT1. When placed near
transcription units, these CTD analogs block effects of P-TEFb. Remarkably, the
transcriptional repressor PIE-1 from Caenorhabditis elegans behaves analogously. 
It binds CycT1 via an alanine-containing heptapeptide repeat and inhibits
transcriptional elongation. Thus, our findings reveal a new mechanism by which
repressors inhibit eukaryotic transcription.

PMCID: PMC196018
PMID: 12651893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genes Cells. 2003 Mar;8(3):215-23.

Mechanism of H-8 inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase 9: study using
inhibitor-immobilized matrices.

Shima D(1), Yugami M, Tatsuno M, Wada T, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb), which
phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), 
is comprised of the catalytic subunit cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and the
regulatory subunit cyclin T. The kinase activity and transcriptional activation
potential of P-TEFb is sensitive to various compounds, including H-8,
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), and flavopiridol.
RESULTS: We investigated the molecular mechanism of the H-8 inhibition of CDK9
using matrices to which H-9, an amino derivative of H-8, was immobilized. CDK9
bound specifically to H-9, and this interaction was competitively inhibited by
ATP and DRB, but not by flavopiridol. Mutational analyses demonstrated that the
central region of CDK9, which encompasses the T-loop region, was important for
its binding to H-9.
CONCLUSIONS: H-9-immobilized latex beads are useful for trapping CDK9 and a
subset of kinases from crude cell extracts. The flavopiridol-binding region of
CDK9 is most likely different from its H-9-binding region. These biochemical data
support previously reported observations which were based on crystallographic
data.

PMID: 12622719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(5):1688-702.

The growth factor granulin interacts with cyclin T1 and modulates
P-TEFb-dependent transcription.

Hoque M(1), Young TM, Lee CG, Serrero G, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey
07013-1709, USA.

Cyclin T1, together with the kinase CDK9, is a component of the transcription
elongation factor P-TEFb which binds the human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) transactivator Tat. P-TEFb facilitates transcription by phosphorylating
the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. Cyclin T1 is an
exceptionally large cyclin and is therefore a candidate for interactions with
regulatory proteins. We identified granulin as a cyclin T1-interacting protein
that represses expression from the HIV-1 promoter in transfected cells. The
granulins, mitogenic growth factors containing repeats of a cysteine-rich motif, 
were reported previously to interact with Tat. We show that granulin formed
stable complexes in vivo and in vitro with cyclin T1 and Tat. Granulin bound to
the histidine-rich domain of cyclin T1, which was recently found to bind to the
CTD, but not to cyclin T2. Binding of granulin to P-TEFb inhibited the
phosphorylation of a CTD peptide. Granulin expression inhibited Tat
transactivation, and tethering experiments showed that this effect was due, at
least in part, to a direct action on cyclin T1 in the absence of Tat. In
addition, granulin was a substrate for CDK9 but not for the other
transcription-related kinases CDK7 and CDK8. Thus, granulin is a cellular protein
that interacts with cyclin T1 to inhibit transcription.

PMCID: PMC151712
PMID: 12588988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Cell Physiol. 2003 Feb;194(2):101-7.

Cyclin T: three forms for different roles in physiological and pathological
functions.

De Luca A(1), De Falco M, Baldi A, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory "C," Department for the Development of Therapeutic Programs, Center
for Experimental Research, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.
deluca@ifo.it

Cyclins are members of family of proteins involved in the cell cycle regulation. 
They are regulatory subunits of complexes with proteins called cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs). There are three forms of cyclin T: cyclin T1, cyclin T2a, and
T2b. All cyclin T contain an N-terminal "cyclin homology box," the most conserved
region among different members of the cyclin family that serves to bind CDK9. In 
addition to the N-terminal cyclin domain, cyclin T contains a putative
coiled-coil motif, a His-rich motif, and a C-terminal PEST sequence. The
CDK9/cyclin T complex is able to activate gene expression in a
catalytic-dependent manner, phosphorylating the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of 
RNA polymerase II. In addition, only cyclin T1 supports interactions between Tat 
and TAR. The interaction of Tat with cyclin T1 alters the conformation of Tat to 
enhance the affinity and specificity of the Tat:TAR interaction. On the other
hand, CDK9/cyclin T2 complexes are involved in the regulation of terminal
differentiation in muscle cells.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12494448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7180-8. Epub 2002 Dec 9.

Interactions between fission yeast Cdk9, its cyclin partner Pch1, and mRNA
capping enzyme Pct1 suggest an elongation checkpoint for mRNA quality control.

Pei Y(1), Schwer B, Shuman S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10021, USA.

RNA polymerase II (pol II) is subject to an early elongation delay induced by
negative factors Spt5/Spt4 and NELF, which is overcome by the positive factor
P-TEFb (Cdk9/cyclin T), a protein kinase that phosphorylates the pol II
C-terminal domain (CTD) and the transcription elongation factor Spt5. Although
the rationale for this arrest and restart is unclear, recent studies suggest a
connection to mRNA capping, which is coupled to transcription elongation via
physical and functional interactions between the cap-forming enzymes, the
CTD-PO(4), and Spt5. Here we identify a novel interaction between fission yeast
RNA triphosphatase Pct1, the enzyme that initiates cap formation, and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe Cdk9. The C-terminal segment of SpCdk9 comprises a
Pct1-binding domain distinct from the N-terminal Cdk domain. We show that the Cdk
domain interacts with S. pombe Pch1, a homolog of cyclin T, and that the purified
recombinant SpCdk9/Pch1 heterodimer can phosphorylate both the pol II CTD and the
C-terminal domain of S. pombe Spt5. We provide genetic evidence that SpCdk9 and
Pch1 are functional orthologs of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae CTD kinase
Bur1/Bur2, a putative yeast P-TEFb. Mutations of the kinase active site and the
regulatory T-loop of SpCdk9 abolish its activity in vivo. Deleting the C-terminal
domain of SpCdk9 causes a severe growth defect. We suggest a model whereby
Spt5-induced arrest of early elongation ensures a temporal window for recruitment
of the capping enzymes, which in turn attract Cdk9 to alleviate the arrest. This 
elongation checkpoint may avoid wasteful rounds of transcription of uncapped
pre-mRNAs.

PMID: 12475973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):6404-10. Epub 2002 Nov 27.

Tat and trans-activation-responsive (TAR) RNA-independent induction of HIV-1 long
terminal repeat by human and murine cyclin T1 requires Sp1.

Yedavalli VS(1), Benkirane M, Jeang KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National
Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0460, USA.

P-TEFb, cyclin T1 + CDK9, is needed for the expression of cellular promoters and 
primate lentiviral long terminal repeats (LTRs). Curiously, cellular and
lentiviral promoters differ dramatically in the requirements for positive
transcriptional elongation factor (P-TEF) b activity. Lentiviral LTRs, but not
cellular promoters, need an RNA-associated P-TEFb/Tat/TAR
(trans-activation-responsive) RNA ternary complex. Ternary complex defective
murine cycT1 is apparently inactive for lentiviral transcription. Why P-TEFb
requires Tat/TAR for LTRs but not for cellular promoters remains unknown. To
explore this question, we sought to determine whether DNA targeting of murine and
human cyclin T1 can reconstitute a Tat/TAR-independent activity to the HIV-1 LTR.
In the absence of Tat and TAR, we found that both HuCycT1 and MuCycT1 can
robustly activate the HIV-1 LTR. We further showed that Sp1 is necessary and
sufficient for this DNA-targeted activity. Thus, like cellular promoters, HIV-1
LTR can use P-TEFb function without a Tat/TAR RNA complex. This activity could
explain recent findings of robust HIV-1 replication in rat cells that cannot form
a P-TEFb/Tat/TAR moiety.

PMID: 12458222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Virol. 2002 Dec;76(24):12963-73.

RNA interference directed against viral and cellular targets inhibits human
immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 replication.

Surabhi RM(1), Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Harold Simmons Cancer
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines
Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression is regulated by both 
cellular transcription factors and Tat. The ability of Tat to stimulate
transcriptional elongation is dependent on its binding to TAR RNA in conjunction 
with cyclin T1 and CDK9. A variety of other cellular factors that bind to the
HIV-1 long terminal repeat, including NF-kappaB, SP1, LBP, and LEF, are also
important in the control of HIV-1 gene expression. Although these factors have
been demonstrated to regulate HIV-1 gene expression by both genetic and
biochemical analysis, in most cases a direct in vivo demonstration of their role 
on HIV-1 replication has not been established. Recently, the efficacy of RNA
interference in mammalian cells has been shown utilizing small interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) to result in the specific degradation of host mRNAs and decreases the
levels of their corresponding proteins. In this study, we addressed whether
siRNAs directed against either HIV-1 tat or reverse transcriptase or the
NF-kappaB p65 subunit could specifically decrease the levels of these proteins
and thus alter HIV-1 replication. Our results demonstrate the specificity of
siRNAs for decreasing the expression of these viral and cellular proteins and
inhibiting HIV-1 replication. These studies suggest that RNA interference is
useful in exploring the biological role of cellular and viral regulatory factors 
involved in the control of HIV-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC136685
PMID: 12438622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Jul-Aug;1(4):342-7.

CDK9: from basal transcription to cancer and AIDS.

De Falco G(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anatomia ed Istologia Patologica, Università degli Studi di Siena,
Italy.

Cdk9 is a member of the Cdc2-like family of kinases. Its cyclin partners are
members of the family of cyclin T (T1, T2a and T2b) and cyclin K. The Cdk9/cyclin
T complexes appear to be involved in regulating several physiological processes. 
Cdk9/cyclin T1 belongs to the P-TEFb complex, and is responsible for the
phosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the RNA Polymerase II,
thus promoting general elongation. Cdk9 has also been described as the kinase of 
the TAK complex, which is homologous to the P-TEFb complex and involved in HIV
replication. Cdk9 also appears to be involved in the differentiation program of
several cell types, such as muscle cells, monocytes and neurons, suggesting that 
it may have a function in controlling specific differentiative pathways. In
addition, Cdk9 seems to have an anti-apoptotic function in monocytes, that may be
related to its control over differentiation of monocytes. This data suggests the 
involvement of Cdk9 in several physiological processes in the cell, the
deregulation of which may be related to the genesis of transforming events, that 
may in turn lead to the onset of cancer. In addition, since the complex
Cdk9/cyclin T1 is able to bind to the HIV-1 product Tat, the study of the
functions of Cdk9/cyclin T may be of interest in understanding the basal
mechanisms that regulate HIV replication.

PMID: 12432243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell. 2002 Sep;10(3):599-609.

Functional coupling of capping and transcription of mRNA.

Moteki S(1), Price D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

In humans, 5' m(7)G cap addition is accomplished cotranscriptionally by the
sequential action of the capping enzyme (Hce1) and the cap methyltransferase
(Hcm1). We found that guanylylation and methylation occur efficiently during
transcription with t(1/2)'s of less than 15 and 70 s, respectively. A two to four
order of magnitude increase was found in the rate of guanylylation of RNA in
transcription complexes compared to free RNA. This stimulation required only the 
RNA polymerase II elongation complex and Hce1. Capping activity was weakly
associated with elongation but not preinitiation complexes. The CTD was not
required for functional coupling but stimulated the rate of capping 4-fold.
Inhibition of Cdk7 but not Cdk9 similarly slowed the rate of capping.

PMID: 12408827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 17;278(3):1433-42. Epub 2002 Oct 24.

Inhibition of Tat-mediated transactivation and HIV-1 replication by human
anti-hCyclinT1 intrabodies.

Bai J(1), Sui J, Zhu RY, Tallarico AS, Gennari F, Zhang D, Marasco WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology & AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) replication requires the interaction
of Tat protein with the human cyclinT1 (hCyclinT1) subunit of the positive
transcription elongation factor (P-TEFb) complex, which then cooperatively binds 
to transactivation response element (TAR) RNA to transactivate HIV transcription.
In this report, a non-immune human single-chain antibody (sFv) phage display
library was used to isolate anti-hCyclinT1 sFvs that could disrupt hCyclinT1-Tat 
interactions. The N-terminal 272 residues of hCyclinT1, including the entire
cyclin domains and the Tat.TAR recognition motif (TRM), that fully support Tat
transactivation was used for panning, and of the five unique anti-hCyclinT1 sFvs 
that were obtained, three bound to the cyclin box domains and two bound to TRM.
All sFvs could be expressed as intrabodies at high levels in transiently
transfected 293T and in stable Jurkat and SupT1 transfectants and could
specifically co-immunoprecipitate co-expressed hCyclinT1 in 293T cells with
varying efficacy without disrupting hCyclinT1-Cdk9 interactions. In addition, two
sFv clones (3R6-1 and 2R6-21) that mapped to the cyclin box domains markedly
inhibited Tat-mediated transactivation in several transiently transfected cell
lines without inhibiting basal transcription or inducing apoptosis. When HIV-1
challenge studies were performed on stable 3R6-1-expressing Jurkat T cells, near 
complete inhibition of viral replication was obtained at a low challenge dose,
and 74-88% inhibition to HIV-1 replication was achieved at a high infection dose 
in SupT1 cells. These results provide proof-in-principle that anti-hCyclinT1
intrabodies can be designed to block HIV-1 replication without causing cellular
toxicity, and as a result, they may be useful agents for "intracellular
immunization"-based gene therapy strategies for HIV-1 infection/AIDS.

PMID: 12401780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 24;21(49):7464-70.

Cdk9, a member of the cdc2-like family of kinases, binds to gp130, the receptor
of the IL-6 family of cytokines.

Falco GD(1), Neri LM, Falco MD, Bellan C, Yu Z, Luca AD, Leoncini L, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research & Molecular Medicine, College of Science 
& Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19122, USA.

Cdk9 is a member of the Cdc2-like family of kinases. It binds to members of the
family of cyclin T (T1, T2a and T2b) and to cyclin K. The Cdk9/cyclin T complex
appears to be involved in regulating several physiological processes. In fact
Cdk9 is the kinase of the P-TEFb complex, involved in basal transcription. Cdk9
has also been described as the kinase of the TAK complex, homologous to P-TEFb
and involved in HIV replication. Here we show that Cdk9 interacts with gp130, the
receptor of the Interleukin-6 (IL-6) family of cytokines, which includes Leukemia
Inhibitory Factor (LIF), Oncostatin M (OSM), Ciliary Neurotrophic Factor (CNTF), 
Interleukin-11 (IL-11) and Cardiotrophin (CT-1). IL-6 is a key regulator of
hematopoiesis, immunological responses and inflammation. In addition, IL-6 plays 
a major role in the endocrine and nervous systems. Signal transduction by gp130
is mediated by physical interaction of the cytoplasmic region of gp130 with
cellular kinases and results in the transcriptional activation of cellular and
viral genes. We found that Cdk9 interacts in vitro with the cytoplasmic region of
gp130 and we succeded in reproducing this interaction in vivo. Cdk9 expression
was found both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm. The binding occurring between
Cdk9 and gp130 increased upon IL-6 stimulation. We also observed that Cdk9
synergized with IL-6 in inducing the activation of an IL-6-responsive reporter
plasmid. In summary, these results point to a previously undisclosed role for
Cdk9 in signal transduction.

PMID: 12386808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nat Med. 2002 Nov;8(11):1310-7. Epub 2002 Sep 30.

Activation and function of cyclin T-Cdk9 (positive transcription elongation
factor-b) in cardiac muscle-cell hypertrophy.

Sano M(1), Abdellatif M, Oh H, Xie M, Bagella L, Giordano A, Michael LH, DeMayo
FJ, Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas, USA.

Hypertrophic growth is a risk factor for mortality in heart diseases. Mechanisms 
are lacking for this global increase in RNA and protein per cell, which underlies
hypertrophy. Hypertrophic signals cause phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II 
C-terminal domain, required for transcript elongation. RNA polymerase II kinases 
include cyclin-dependent kinases-7 (Cdk7) and Cdk9, components of two basal
transcription factors. We report activation of Cdk7 and -9 in hypertrophy
triggered by signaling proteins (Galphaq, calcineurin) or chronic mechanical
stress. Only Cdk9 was activated by acute load or, in culture, by endothelin. A
preferential role for Cdk9 was shown in RNA polymerase II phosphorylation and
growth induced by endothelin, using pharmacological and dominant-negative
inhibitors. All four hypertrophic signals dissociated 7SK small nuclear RNA, an
endogenous inhibitor, from cyclin T-Cdk9. Cdk9 was limiting for cardiac growth,
shown by suppressing its inhibitor (7SK) in culture and preventing downregulation
of its activator (cyclin T1) in mouse myocardium.Note: In the AOP version of this
article, the numbering of the author affiliations was incorrect. This has now
been fixed, and the affiliations appear correctly online and in print.

PMID: 12368904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(21):10873-81.

Optimized chimeras between kinase-inactive mutant Cdk9 and truncated cyclin T1
proteins efficiently inhibit Tat transactivation and human immunodeficiency virus
gene expression.

Fujinaga K(1), Irwin D, Geyer M, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0703, USA.

The human cyclin T1 (hCycT1) protein from the positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) binds the transactivator Tat and the transactivation response
(TAR) RNA stem loop from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV). This complex 
activates the elongation of viral transcription. To create effective inhibitors
of Tat and thus HIV replication, we constructed mutant hCycT1 proteins that are
defective in binding its kinase partner, Cdk9, or TAR. Although these mutant
hCycT1 proteins did not increase Tat transactivation in murine cells, their
dominant-negative effects were small in human cells. Higher inhibitory effects
were obtained when hCycT1 was fused with the mutant Cdk9 protein. Since the
autophosphorylation of the C terminus of Cdk9 is required for the formation of
the stable complex between P-TEFb, Tat, and TAR, these serines and threonines
were changed to glutamate in a kinase-inactive Cdk9 protein. This chimera
inhibited Tat transactivation and HIV gene expression in human cells. Therefore, 
this dominant-negative kinase-inactive mutant Cdk9.hCycT1 chimera could be used
for antiviral gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC136629
PMID: 12368330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Virol. 2002 Nov;76(21):10579-87.

Transient induction of cyclin T1 during human macrophage differentiation
regulates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat transactivation function.

Liou LY(1), Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein is essential for
viral replication and stimulates transcription of the integrated provirus by
recruiting the kinase complex TAK/P-TEFb, composed of cyclin T1 (CycT1) and Cdk9,
to the viral TAR RNA element. TAK/P-TEFb phosphorylates the RNA polymerase II
complex and stimulates transcriptional elongation. In this report, we
investigated the regulation of TAK/P-TEFb in primary human macrophages, a major
target cell of HIV infection. While Cdk9 levels remained constant, CycT1 protein 
expression in freshly isolated monocytes was very low, increased early during
macrophage differentiation, and, unexpectedly, decreased to very low levels after
about 1 week in culture. The kinase activity of TAK/P-TEFb paralleled the changes
in CycT1 protein expression. RNA analysis indicated that the transient induction 
of CycT1 protein expression involves a posttranscriptional mechanism. In
transient transfection assays, the ability of Tat to transactivate the HIV long
terminal repeat (LTR) in the late differentiated macrophages was greatly
diminished relative to its ability to transactivate the HIV LTR in early
differentiated cells, strongly suggesting that CycT1 is limiting for Tat function
in late differentiated macrophages. Interestingly, lipopolysaccharide, a
component of the cell wall of gram-negative bacteria, reinduced CycT1 expression 
late in macrophage differentiation. These results raise the possibility that
regulation of CycT1 expression may be involved in establishing latent infection
in macrophages and that opportunistic infection may reactivate the virus by
inducing CycT1 expression.

PMCID: PMC136632
PMID: 12368300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 25;277(43):40442-8. Epub 2002 Aug 15.

Protein phosphatase-1 dephosphorylates the C-terminal domain of RNA
polymerase-II.

Washington K(1), Ammosova T, Beullens M, Jerebtsova M, Kumar A, Bollen M, Nekhai 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sickle Cell Disease, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Howard University, 2121 Georgia Avenue, Washington, D. C. 20059, USA.

Transcription by RNA polymerase-II (RNAPII) is controlled by multisite
phosphorylation of the heptapeptide repeats in the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the
largest subunit. Phosphorylation of CTD is mediated by the cyclin-dependent
protein kinases Cdk7 and Cdk9, whereas protein serine/threonine phosphatase FCP1 
dephosphorylates CTD. We have recently reported that human immunodeficiency
virus-1 (HIV-1) transcription is positively regulated by protein phosphatase-1
(PP1) and that PP1 dephosphorylates recombinant CTD. Here, we provide further
evidence that PP1 can dephosphorylate RNAPII CTD. In vitro, PP1 dephosphorylated 
recombinant CTD as well as purified RNAPII CTD. HeLa nuclear extracts were found 
to contain a species of PP1 that dephosphorylates both serine 2 and serine 5 of
the heptapeptide repeats. In nuclear extracts, PP1 and FCP1 contributed roughly
equally to the dephosphorylation of serine 2. PP1 co-purified with RNAPII by gel 
filtration and associated with RNAPII on immunoaffinity columns prepared with
anti-CTD antibodies. In cultured cells treated with CTD kinase inhibitors, the
dephosphorylation of RNAPII on serine 2 was inhibited by 45% by preincubation
with okadaic acid, which inhibits phosphatases of PPP family, including PP1 but
not FCP1. Our data demonstrate that RNAPII CTD is dephosphorylated by PP1 in
vitro and by PPP-type phosphatase, distinct from FCP1, in vivo.

PMID: 12185079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Genes Dev. 2002 Aug 15;16(16):2135-46.

CDK-9/cyclin T (P-TEFb) is required in two postinitiation pathways for
transcription in the C. elegans embryo.

Shim EY(1), Walker AK, Shi Y, Blackwell TK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Blood Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The metazoan transcription elongation factor P-TEFb (CDK-9/cyclin T) is essential
for HIV transcription, and is recruited by some cellular activators. P-TEFb
promotes elongation in vitro by overcoming pausing that requires the SPT-4/SPT-5 
complex, but considerable evidence indicates that SPT-4/SPT-5 facilitates
elongation in vivo. Here we used RNA interference to investigate P-TEFb functions
in vivo, in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo. We found that P-TEFb is broadly
essential for expression of early embryonic genes. P-TEFb is required for
phosphorylation of Ser 2 of the RNA Polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) repeat,
but not for most CTD Ser 5 phosphorylation, supporting the model that P-TEFb
phosphorylates CTD Ser 2 during elongation. Remarkably, although heat shock genes
are cdk-9-dependent, they can be activated when spt-4 and spt-5 expression is
inhibited along with cdk-9. This observation suggests that SPT-4/SPT-5 has an
inhibitory function in vivo, and that mutually opposing influences of P-TEFb and 
SPT-4/SPT-5 may combine to facilitate elongation, or insure fidelity of mRNA
production. Other genes are not expressed when cdk-9, spt-4, and spt-5 are
inhibited simultaneously, suggesting that these genes require P-TEFb in an
additional mechanism, and that they and heat shock genes are regulated through
different P-TEFb-dependent elongation pathways.

PMCID: PMC186450
PMID: 12183367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 22;21(37):5797-803.

Interplay between cdk9 and NF-kappaB factors determines the level of HIV-1 gene
transcription in astrocytic cells.

Amini S(1), Clavo A, Nadraga Y, Giordano A, Khalili K, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, 1900 North 12th Street, 015-96, Room 203,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19122, USA.

Basal transcription of the HIV-1 genome is controlled by a variety of ubiquitous 
and inducible regulatory factors, some with the ability to associate with the
viral DNA sequences within the promoter spanning the long terminal repeat (LTR). 
In this report we demonstrate that activation of the HIV-1 promoter through the
inducible DNA binding NF-kappaB transcription factors can be affected by cdk9 in 
human astrocytic cells. Our results show that ectopic expression of cdk9, but not
its mutant variant which lacks the domain responsible for its kinase activity,
augments transcription of the LTR. Moreover, we demonstrate that induction of the
NF-kappaB pathway by PMA, or overexpression of its subunits including p50/p65
have a negative effect on the ability of cdk9 to stimulate viral gene
transcription in these cells. Results from band-shift experiments demonstrated
significant suppression of p50/p65 association to its DNA target motif by cdk9.
Further, data from GST pull-down and combined immunoprecipitation/Western blot
analysis of the protein extracts from cells expressing cdk9, p50 and p65 have
revealed the interaction of cdk9 with both p50 and p65 in the absence of DNA
containing the kappaB motif. All of these observations led us to conclude that
the interaction of cdk9 with the NF-kappaB factors can determine the ability of
NF-kappaB to modulate HIV-1 gene transcription.

PMID: 12173051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Cell Physiol. 2002 Aug;192(2):209-15.

CDK9 has the intrinsic property to shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm, and
enhanced expression of cyclin T1 promotes its nuclear localization.

Napolitano G(1), Licciardo P, Carbone R, Majello B, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, General and Molecular Biology, University of Naples
Federico II, Naples, Italy.

CDK9 in association with cyclin T constitutes the P-TEFb complex that stimulates 
transcription elongation of RNAPII transcripts by phosphorylation of the CTD of
RNAPII. Here we report subcellular distribution of P-TEFb in terms of
localization of CDK9 and cyclin T1. We found that cyclin T1 is exclusively
nuclear and it is present in nuclear-speckled structures. CDK9, albeit mainly
nuclear, was also visualized in the cytoplasm. We determined that CDK9 is
actively exported from the nucleus, and that leptomycin B (LMB), a specific
inhibitor of nuclear export, inhibits this process. Interestingly, enforced
expression of cyclin T1 enhances nuclear localization of CDK9. These findings
reveal a novel control mechanism for the function of the P-TEFb complex.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):33922-9. Epub 2002 Jul 11.

HIV-1 Tat interaction with RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) and a
dynamic association with CDK2 induce CTD phosphorylation and transcription from
HIV-1 promoter.

Deng L(1), Ammosova T, Pumfery A, Kashanchi F, Nekhai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, D.C. 20037, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1), Tat protein activates viral gene
expression through promoting transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII). In this process Tat enhances phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain
(CTD) of RNAPII by activating cell cycle-dependent kinases (CDKs) associated with
general transcription factors of the promoter complex, specifically CDK7 and
CDK9. We reported a Tat-associated T-cell-derived kinase, which contained CDK2.
Here, we provide further evidence that CDK2 is involved in Tat-mediated CTD
phosphorylation and in HIV-1 transcription in vitro. Tat-mediated CTD
phosphorylation by CDK2 required cysteine 22 in the activation domain of Tat and 
amino acids 42-72 of Tat. CDK2 phosphorylated Tat itself, apparently by forming
dynamic contacts with amino acids 15-24 and 36-49 of Tat. Also, amino acids 24-36
and 45-72 of Tat interacted with CTD. CDK2 associated with RNAPII and was found
in elongation complexes assembled on HIV-1 long-terminal repeat template.
Recombinant CDK2/cyclin E stimulated Tat-dependent HIV-1 transcription in
reconstituted transcription assay. Immunodepletion of CDK2/cyclin E in HeLa
nuclear extract blocked Tat-dependent transcription. We suggest that CDK2 is part
of a transcription complex that is required for Tat-dependent transcription and
that interaction of Tat with CTD and a dynamic association of Tat with
CDK2/cyclin E stimulated CTD phosphorylation by CDK2.

PMID: 12114499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biomed Sci. 2002 May-Jun;9(3):234-45.

MCEF, the newest member of the AF4 family of transcription factors involved in
leukemia, is a positive transcription elongation factor-b-associated protein.

Estable MC(1), Naghavi MH, Kato H, Xiao H, Qin J, Vahlne A, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, N.Y., USA.

Positive transcription elongation factor-b (P-TEFb) contains CDK9 and cyclin
T(1). P-TEFb was affinity purified from a stably transfected cell line that
expresses epitope-tagged CDK9, and proteins that appeared to be specifically
bound were sequenced. In addition to CDK9, previously identified isoforms of
cyclin T (including T(1), T(2A) and T(2B)), HSP90 and CDC37, this analysis
identified a novel protein named MCEF. Cloning of its cognate cDNA revealed that 
MCEF is the newest member of the AF4 family of transcription factors involved in 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. MCEF RNA was expressed in all human tissues
examined, and antisera directed against recombinant MCEF specifically
immunoprecipitated P-TEFb. Ectopic expression of MCEF did not activate HIV-1
replication, and tethering of MCEF to a promoter did not activate transcription.

Copyright 2002 National Science Council, ROC and S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12065898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Oncol. 2002 Jul;21(1):171-7.

Role of cyclinT/Cdk9 complex in basal and regulated transcription (review).

Napolitano G(1), Majello B, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
Federico II, 80134 Naples, Italy.

Cell division and proliferation of all eukaryotics must follow a genetic program,
termed the cell cycle. To ensure proper progression through the cell cycle,
proteins that are intimately involved in its regulation must be periodically
expressed within an appropriate window of the cycle. Cyclin and cyclin-dependent 
kinases are the modular components of the core clock machinery of the cell cycle.
Progression through the cell cycle requires the activation of Cdks. The
activities of these classes of kinases are tightly regulated by both positive and
negative factors, and most importantly perturbation of Cdk activities can result 
in tumorigenesis. Progress has been made recently in connecting specific
cyclin-Cdk kinase complexes and transcription. It is still unclear how cyclin/Cdk
complexes regulate transcription, and most importantly what their substrates are.
The aim of this review is to discuss our current understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying the transcription properties of defined cyclin-dependent
kinases, with a particular emphasis on the cyclin T/Cdk9 (P-TEFb) complex, and
its role in the regulation of cell cycle controlling genes.

PMID: 12063565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 26;293(1):566-71.

Structural basis for inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase 9 by flavopiridol.

de Azevedo WF Jr(1), Canduri F, da Silveira NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Física, IBILCE, UNESP, São José do Rio Preto, SP 15054-000,
Brazil. walterfa@df.ibilce.unsep.br

Flavopiridol has been shown to potently inhibit CDK1 and 2 (cyclin-dependent
kinases 1 and 2) and most recently it has been found that it also inhibits CDK9. 
The complex CDK9-cyclin T1 controls the elongation phase of transcription by RNA 
polymerase II. The present work describes a molecular model for the binary
complex CDK9-flavopiridol. This structural model indicates that the inhibitor
strongly binds to the ATP-binding pocket of CDK9 and the structural comparison of
the complex CDK2-flavopiridol correlates the structural differences with
differences in inhibition of these CDKs by flavopiridol. This structure opens the
possibility of testing new inhibitor families, in addition to new substituents
for the already known leading structures such as flavones and adenine
derivatives.

PMID: 12054639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4622-37.

Phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain by CDK9 is
directly responsible for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat-activated
transcriptional elongation.

Kim YK(1), Bourgeois CF, Isel C, Churcher MJ, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH,
United Kingdom.

Stimulation of transcriptional elongation by the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 Tat protein is mediated by CDK9, a kinase that phosphorylates the RNA
polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD). In order to obtain direct evidence 
that this phosphorylation event can alter RNA polymerase processivity, we
prepared transcription elongation complexes that were arrested by the lac
repressor. The CTD was then dephosphorylated by treatment with protein
phosphatase 1. The dephosphorylated transcription complexes were able to resume
the transcription elongation when IPTG (isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside)
and nucleotides were added to the reaction. Under these chase conditions,
efficient rephosphorylation of the CTD was observed in complexes containing the
Tat protein but not in transcription complexes prepared in the absence of Tat
protein. Immunoblots and kinase assays with synthetic peptides showed that Tat
activated CDK9 directly since the enzyme and its cyclin partner, cyclin T1, were 
present at equivalent levels in transcription complexes prepared in the presence 
or absence of Tat. Chase experiments with the dephosphorylated elongation
transcription complexes were performed in the presence of the CDK9 kinase
inhibitor DRB (5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl-benzimidazole). Under these
conditions there was no rephosphorylation of the CTD during elongation, and
transcription through either a stem-loop terminator or bent DNA arrest sequence
was strongly inhibited. In experiments in which the CTD was phosphorylated prior 
to elongation, the amount of readthrough of the terminator sequences was
proportional to the extent of the CTD modification. The change in processivity is
due to CTD phosphorylation alone, since even after the removal of Spt5, the
second substrate for CDK9, RNA polymerase elongation is enhanced by Tat-activated
CDK9 activity. We conclude that phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II CTD by
CDK9 enhances transcription elongation directly.

PMCID: PMC133925
PMID: 12052871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochem J. 2002 Jun 15;364(Pt 3):649-57.

HIV-1 Tat-associated RNA polymerase C-terminal domain kinase, CDK2,
phosphorylates CDK7 and stimulates Tat-mediated transcription.

Nekhai S(1), Zhou M, Fernandez A, Lane WS, Lamb NJ, Brady J, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University, School of Medicine, 2300 Eye Street N.W., Washington, DC 20037, USA.

HIV-1 gene expression is regulated by a viral transactivator protein (Tat) which 
induces transcriptional elongation of HIV-1 long tandem repeat (LTR). This
induction requires hyperphosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) repeats of
RNA polymerase II (Pol II). To achieve CTD hyperphosphorylation, Tat stimulates
CTD kinases associated with general transcription factors of the promoter
complex, specifically TFIIH-associated CDK7 and positive transcription factor
b-associated CDK9 (cyclin-dependent kinase 9). Other studies indicate that Tat
may bind an additional CTD kinase that regulates the target-specific
phosphorylation of RNA Pol II CTD. We previously reported that Tat-associated
T-cell-derived kinase (TTK), purified from human primary T-cells, stimulates
Tat-dependent transcription of HIV-1 LTR in vivo [Nekhai, Shukla, Fernandez,
Kumar and Lamb (2000) Virology 266, 246-256]. In the work presented here, we
characterized the components of TTK by biochemical fractionation and the function
of TTK in transcription assays in vitro. TTK uniquely co-purified with CDK2 and
not with either CDK9 or CDK7. Tat induced the TTK-associated CDK2 kinase to
phosphorylate CTD, specifically at Ser-2 residues. The TTK fraction restored
Tat-mediated transcription activation of HIV-1 LTR in a HeLa nuclear extract
immunodepleted of CDK9, but not in the HeLa nuclear extract double-depleted of
CDK9 and CDK7. Direct microinjection of the TTK fraction augmented Tat
transactivation of HIV-1 LTR in human primary HS68 fibroblasts. The results argue
that TTK-associated CDK2 may function to maintain target-specific phosphorylation
of RNA Pol II that is essential for Tat transactivation of HIV-1 promoter. They
are also consistent with the observed cell-cycle-specific induction of viral gene
transactivation.

PMCID: PMC1222613
PMID: 12049628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 13;21(26):4158-65.

Physical interaction between pRb and cdk9/cyclinT2 complex.

Simone C(1), Bagella L, Bellan C, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19107, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (cdk9) is a multifunctional kinase with roles in
different cellular pathways such as transcriptional elongation, differentiation
and apoptosis. Cdk9/cyclin T differs functionally from other cdk/cyclin complexes
that regulate cell cycle progression, but maintains structural affinity with
those complexes. In addition, previous reports have demonstrated that the cdk9
complex is able to phosphorylate p56/pRb in vitro. In this report we show in
vitro and in vivo interaction between cdk9/cyclinT2 and the protein product of
the retinoblastoma gene (pRb) in human cell lines. The interaction involves the
region composed of residues 129-195 of cdk9, cyclinT2 (1-642 aa) and the
C-terminal domain of pRb (835-928 aa). We located the minimal region of cdk9
phosphorylation on the C-terminus of pRb, by identifying the residues between 793
and 834. This region contains at least three proline-directed serines (sp), S795,
S807 and S811, which have been reported to be phosphorylated in vivo and which
could be targeted by the cdk9 complex. These data suggest that, in
logarithmically growing cells, cdk9/cyclin T2 and pRb are located in a nuclear
multiprotein complex probably involved in transduction of cellular signals to the
basal transcription machinery and that one of these signals could be the cdk9
phosphorylation of pRb.

PMID: 12037672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 13;21(26):4137-48.

Activation of MyoD-dependent transcription by cdk9/cyclin T2.

Simone C(1), Stiegler P, Bagella L, Pucci B, Bellan C, De Falco G, De Luca A,
Guanti G, Puri PL, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA 19122, USA.

Myogenic transcription is repressed in myoblasts by serum-activated
cyclin-dependent kinases, such as cdk2 and cdk4. Serum withdrawal promotes
muscle-specific gene expression at least in part by down-regulating the activity 
of these cdks. Unlike the other cdks, cdk9 is not serum- or cell cycle-regulated 
and is instead involved in the regulation of transcriptional elongation by
phosphorylating the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. While
ectopic expression of cdk2 together with its regulatory subunits (cyclins E and
A) inhibits myogenic transcription, overproduction of cdk9 and its associated
cyclin (cyclin T2a) strengthens MyoD-dependent transcription and stimulates
myogenic differentiation in both MyoD-converted fibroblasts and C2C12 muscle
cells. Conversely, inhibition of cdk9 activity by a dominant negative form
(cdk9-dn) represses the myogenic program. Cdk9, cyclinT2 and MyoD can be detected
in a multimeric complex in C2C12 cells, with the minimal cdk9-binding region of
MyoD mapping within 101-161 aa of the bHLH region. Finally, cdk9 can
phosphorylate MyoD in vitro, suggesting the possibility that cdk9/cycT2a
regulation of muscle differentiation includes the direct enzymatic activity of
the kinase on MyoD.

PMID: 12037670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Virology. 2002 Apr 25;296(1):6-16.

A protein phosphatase from human T cells augments tat transactivation of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long-terminal repeat.

Bharucha DC(1), Zhou M, Nekhai S, Brady JN, Shukla RR, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

HIV-1 Tat protein regulates viral gene expression by modulating the activity and 
association of cellular transcription factors with RNA polymerase II (RNAPII).
Possible mechanisms include Tat-associated protein kinase(s) and phosphatase(s)
that regulate phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit
of RNAPII. Hypophosphorylated RNAPII (RNAPIIa) is recruited to promoters during
formation of a preinitiation complex, whereas hyperphosphorylated RNAPII
(RNAPIIo) is associated with the elongation complex. The role of phosphatases in 
maintaining the equilibrium between the two phosphorylated states of RNAPII,
which is required for sustained transcriptional activation from the HIV-1 LTR, is
not clear. In this study, we discuss the properties of a Tat-associated CTD
phosphatase fractionated from Jurkat T cells. The Tat-associated protein
phosphatase (TAPP) is related to the serine/threonine, type 1, protein
phosphatase (PP1) family. TAPP dephosphorylates the hyperphosphorylated form of
recombinant CTD specifically on serine 2, and augments Tat-mediated
transcriptional transactivation of HIV-1 LTR in an in vitro transcription
reaction. TAPP is associated with the transcription complex during the early
initiation steps, and its release from the HIV-1 promoter coincides with the
Tat-specific activation of CDK9. The results suggest a unique role of the
Tat-associated phosphatase which regulates viral transcription by target-specific
dephosphorylation of RNAPII during the early stages of elongation.

PMID: 12036313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. AIDS Rev. 2002 Jan-Mar;4(1):41-9.

The role of Tat in HIV-1 replication: an activator and/or a suppressor?

Liang C(1), Wainberg MA.

Author information: 
(1)McGill AIDS Centre, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General Hospital, 3755 Cote
Ste Catherine Road, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2. mark.wainberg@mcgill.ca

Tat is a key trans-activator of HIV-1 gene transcription and major progress has
been accomplished in recent years in regard to understanding its mechanism of
action. An important breakthrough was the identification of the TAR-Tat-Cyclin
(Cyc) T1-Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) complex, in which CDK9 can
hyperphosphorylate the carboxyl-terminus domain (CTD) of the RNA polymerase
(RNAP) II complex. A different activity of Tat has recently been identified in
reverse transcription. Notably, mutated HIV-1 that lacks a functional Tat protein
cannot efficiently generate reverse transcription products following infection of
permissive cells. Furthermore, Tat can also inhibit reverse transcriptase
activity in cell-free assays and can act as a suppressor of reverse transcription
at late stages in the viral life cycle. This suppressor activity of Tat can
restrict the premature reverse transcription of viral RNA in the cytoplasm and
allows the viral genome to be packaged as intact RNA molecules.

PMID: 11998784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23854-63. Epub 2002 Apr 16.

HIV-1 Tat protein-mediated transactivation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat
promoter is potentiated by a novel nuclear Tat-interacting protein of 110 kDa,
Tip110.

Liu Y(1), Li J, Kim BO, Pace BS, He JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression and replication is
highly dependent on and modulated by interactions between viral and host cellular
factors. Tat protein, encoded by one of the HIV-1 regulatory genes, tat, is
essential for HIV-1 gene expression. A number of host cellular factors have been 
shown to interact with Tat in this process. During our attempts to determine the 
molecular mechanisms of Tat interaction with brain cells, we isolated a cDNA
clone that encodes a novel Tat-interacting protein of 110 kDa or Tip110 from a
human fetal brain cDNA library. GenBank BLAST search revealed that Tip110 was
almost identical to a previously cloned KIAA0156 gene with unknown functions. In 
vivo binding of Tip110 with Tat was confirmed by immunoprecipitation and Western 
blotting, in combination with mutagenesis. The yeast three-hybrid RNA-protein
interaction assay indicated no direct interaction of Tip110 with Tat
transactivating response element RNA. Nevertheless, Tip110 strongly synergized
with Tat on Tat-mediated chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene
expression and HIV-1 virus production, whereas down-modulation of constitutive
Tip110 expression inhibited HIV-1 virus production. Northern blot analysis showed
that Tip110 mRNA was expressed in a variety of human tissues and cells. Moreover,
digital fluorescence microscopic imaging revealed that Tip110 was expressed
exclusively in the nucleus, and within a nuclear speckle structure that has
recently been described for human cyclin T and CDK9, two critical components for 
Tat transactivation function on HIV-1 long terminal repeat promoter. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that Tip110 regulates Tat transactivation
activity through direct interaction, and suggest that Tip110 is an important
cellular factor for HIV-1 gene expression and viral replication.

PMID: 11959860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Trends Mol Med. 2002;8(4 Suppl):S32-7.

Complexities in the development of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor drugs.

Sausville EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, National Cancer Institute, Executive Plaza
North Room 8018, 6130 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
sausville@nih.gov

Abnormalities in the normal regulation of the cell cycle are a hallmark of
neoplasia. Drugs directed against the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), which
govern the normal orderly progression through the cell cycle, have been proposed 
to address the pathogenic defect in tumors. Recently, CDK family members that do 
not regulate the cell cycle directly but instead influence transcription (CDK7,
CDK8, and CDK9) and neuronal and secretory cell function (CDK5) have been
described. Continued synthetic chemistry efforts have defined important new
selective inhibitors of CDKs, and strategies directed at newly described
CDK-related targets, such as transcription control, can now be envisaged. CDKs
remain important and novel targets whose potential needs to be more fully
explored, albeit in light of the newly emerging complexities of their cellular
physiology.

PMID: 11927285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Mar;13(3):915-29.

FBI-1 can stimulate HIV-1 Tat activity and is targeted to a novel subnuclear
domain that includes the Tat-P-TEFb-containing nuclear speckles.

Pendergrast PS(1), Wang C, Hernandez N, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.
pendergrast@archemix.com

FBI-1 is a cellular POZ-domain-containing protein that binds to the HIV-1 LTR and
associates with the HIV-1 transactivator protein Tat. Here we show that elevated 
levels of FBI-1 specifically stimulate Tat activity and that this effect is
dependent on the same domain of FBI-1 that mediates Tat-FBI-1 association in
vivo. FBI-1 also partially colocalizes with Tat and Tat's cellular cofactor,
P-TEFb (Cdk9 and cyclin T1), at the splicing-factor-rich nuclear speckle domain. 
Further, a less-soluble population of FBI-1 distributes in a novel
peripheral-speckle pattern of localization as well as in other nuclear regions.
This distribution pattern is dependent on the FBI-1 DNA binding domain, on the
presence of cellular DNA, and on active transcription. Taken together, these
results suggest that FBI-1 is a cellular factor that preferentially associates
with active chromatin and that can specifically stimulate Tat-activated HIV-1
transcription.

PMCID: PMC99609
PMID: 11907272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16873-8. Epub 2002 Mar 7.

P-TEFb containing cyclin K and Cdk9 can activate transcription via RNA.

Lin X(1), Taube R, Fujinaga K, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, California 
94143-0703, USA.

Different positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complexes isolated 
from mammalian cells contain a common catalytic subunit (Cdk9) and the unique
regulatory cyclins CycT1, CycT2a, CycT2b, or CycK. The role of CycK as a
transcriptional cyclin was demonstrated in this study. First, CycK activated
transcription when tethered heterologously to RNA, which required the kinase
activity of Cdk9. Although this P-TEFb could phosphorylate the C-terminal domain 
(CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) in vitro, in contrast to CycT1 and CycT2,
CycK did not activate transcription when tethered to DNA. Interestingly, when the
C termini of CycT1 and CycT2 or only the histidine-rich stretch from positions
481 to 551 in CycT1 were added to CycK, the extended chimeras activated
transcription equivalently via DNA. Moreover, these transcriptional effects
required the CTD of RNAPII in cells. Thus, CycK functions as P-TEFb only via RNA,
which suggests the presence of cellular RNA-bound activators that require CycK
for their transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11884399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Curr Eye Res. 2001 Jul;23(1):69-76.

Differential expression analysis by gene array of cell cycle modulators in human 
corneal epithelial cells stimulated with epidermal growth factor (EGF),
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), or keratinocyte growth factor (KGF).

Lee JS(1), Liu JJ, Hong JW, Wilson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington, School of Medicine,
Seattle 98195-6485, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify and differentiate cell cycle and differentiation genes that 
are up-regulated or down-regulated in human corneal epithelial cells in response 
to alternative epithelium-modulating cytokines epidermal growth factor (EGF),
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) or keratinocyte growth factor (KGF).
METHODS: Primary cultures human corneal epithelial cell (HCE) were treated with
25 ng/ml of EGF, 25 ng/ml HGF, 25 ng/ml KGF, or vehicle for 8 hours.
Complementary DNA (cDNA) probes were synthesized from total cellular RNA isolated
from the HCE cells. The cDNA probes were hybridized to the Atlas human cell
cycle/differentiation array membrane. RNAse protection assay was used to confirm 
up-regulation of the serine/threonine-protein kinase PITALRE gene by EGF, KGF,
and HGF.
RESULTS: The expression of one hundred and eleven cell cycle and differentiation 
genes was monitored with the gene array system. It was found that these
epithelial cell-modulating cytokines shared similar effects on some of the cell
cycle and differentiation genes that were monitored, but had specific effects on 
some cytokines. Up-regulation of PITALRE gene expression was confirmed using
RNAse protection assay.
CONCLUSION: EGF, HGF and KGF had differential effects on cell cycle- and
differentiation-related gene expression in corneal epithelial cells. For example,
all three mitogenic growth factors up-regulated the expression of cyclin D1
(BCL-1 oncogene) and serine/threonine-protein kinase PITALRE in the primary
cultured human corneal epithelial cells. However, EGF and KGF, but not HGF,
up-regulated expression of the E2F-1 pRB-binding protein gene. Thus, while these 
three epithelial mitogens have similar effects on many genes that were analyzed, 
important differences were noted that may relate to differing effects of these
growth factors on corneal epithelial cells. Studies to analyze the significance
of the identified differences among these growth factors are in progress.

PMID: 11821989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(4):1079-93.

Spt5 cooperates with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat by preventing
premature RNA release at terminator sequences.

Bourgeois CF(1), Kim YK, Churcher MJ, West MJ, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, England.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein activates
transcription elongation by stimulating the Tat-activated kinase (TAK/p-TEFb), a 
protein kinase composed of CDK9 and its cyclin partner, cyclin T1. CDK9 is able
to hyperphosphorylate the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of 
RNA polymerase during elongation. In addition to TAK, the transcription
elongation factor Spt5 is required for the efficient activation of
transcriptional elongation by Tat. To study the role of Spt5 in HIV transcription
in more detail, we have developed a three-stage Tat-dependent transcription assay
that permits the isolation of active preinitiation complexes, early-stage
elongation complexes, and Tat-activated elongation complexes. Spt5 is recruited
in the transcription complex shortly after initiation. After recruitment of Tat
during elongation through the transactivation response element RNA, CDK9 is
activated and induces hyperphosphorylation of Spt5 in parallel to the
hyperphosphorylation of the CTD of RNA polymerase II. However, immunodepletion
experiments demonstrate that Spt5 is not required for Tat-dependent activation of
the kinase. Chase experiments using the Spt5-depleted extracts demonstrate that
Spt5 is not required for early elongation. However, Spt5 plays an important role 
in late elongation by preventing the premature dissociation of RNA from the
transcription complex at terminator sequences and reducing the amount of
polymerase pausing at arrest sites, including bent DNA sequences. This novel
biochemical function of Spt5 is analogous to the function of NusG, an elongation 
factor found in Escherichia coli that enhances RNA polymerase stability on
templates and shows sequence similarity to Spt5.

PMCID: PMC134635
PMID: 11809800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genes Dev. 2001 Dec 15;15(24):3319-29.

Opposing effects of Ctk1 kinase and Fcp1 phosphatase at Ser 2 of the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain.

Cho EJ(1), Kobor MS, Kim M, Greenblatt J, Buratowski S.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The C-terminal domain (CTD) of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) largest subunit is 
hyperphosphorylated during transcription. Using an in vivo
cross-linking/chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we found previously that
different phosphorylated forms of RNA Pol II predominate at different stages of
transcription. At promoters, the Pol II CTD is phosphorylated at Ser 5 by the
basal transcription factor TFIIH. However, in coding regions, the CTD is
predominantly phosphorylated at Ser 2. Here we show that the
elongation-associated phosphorylation of Ser 2 is dependent upon the Ctk1 kinase,
a putative yeast homolog of Cdk9/P-TEFb. Furthermore, mutations in the Fcp1 CTD
phosphatase lead to increased levels of Ser 2 phosphorylation. Both Ctk1 and Fcp1
cross-link to promoter and coding regions, suggesting that they associate with
the elongating polymerase. Both Ctk1 and Fcp1 have been implicated in regulation 
of transcription elongation. Our results suggest that this regulation may occur
by modulating levels of Ser 2 phosphorylation, which in turn, may regulate the
association of elongation factors with the polymerase.

PMCID: PMC312848
PMID: 11751637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;22(1):321-31.

Interaction between P-TEFb and the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II
activates transcriptional elongation from sites upstream or downstream of target 
genes.

Taube R(1), Lin X, Irwin D, Fujinaga K, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0703, USA.

Transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is regulated by the
positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). P-TEFb is composed of Cdk9
and C-type cyclin T1 (CycT1), CycT2a, CycT2b, or CycK. The role of the C-terminal
region of CycT1 and CycT2 remains unknown. In this report, we demonstrate that
these sequences are essential for the activation of transcription by P-TEFb via
DNA, i.e., when CycT1 is tethered upstream or downstream of promoters and coding 
sequences. A histidine-rich stretch, which is conserved between CycT1 and CycT2
in this region, bound the C-terminal domain of RNAPII. This binding was required 
for the subsequent expression of full-length transcripts from target genes. Thus,
P-TEFb could mediate effects of enhancers on the elongation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC134214
PMID: 11739744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Neuroimmunol. 2001 Dec 3;121(1-2):3-11.

Functional interaction between cyclin T1/cdk9 and Puralpha determines the level
of TNFalpha promoter activation by Tat in glial cells.

Darbinian N(1), Sawaya BE, Khalili K, Jaffe N, Wortman B, Giordano A, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

In addition to its stimulatory effect on transcription of the HIV-1 LTR, the
early protein of HIV-1, Tat, exhibits detrimental effects on the CNS by
deregulating the expression of several cytokines and immunomodulators including
TNFalpha. Activation of the viral promoter by Tat requires several cellular
proteins including cyclin T1 and its partner, cdk9, which upon association with
the TAR sequence of the LTR, forms a complex that enhances the activity of RNA
polymerase II. Here, we examined the involvement of cyclin T1/cdk9 in
Tat-mediated transcriptional activation of the TNFalpha promoter which has no TAR
sequence. Results from transfection of human astrocytic cells revealed that both 
cyclin T1 and cdk9 stimulate the basal promoter activity of TNFalpha, although
the level of such activation is decreased in the presence of Tat. Ectopic
expression of Puralpha, a brain-derived regulatory protein which binds to Tat,
enhanced the basal level of TNFalpha transcription, yet exerted a negative effect
on the level of Tat activation of the TNFalpha promoter. The antagonistic effect 
of Puralpha and Tat upon the TNFalpha promoter was diminished in the presence of 
cyclin T1 and cdk9, suggesting cooperativity of Puralpha with cyclin T1 and cdk9 
in Tat activation of the TNFalpha promoter. Results from protein-protein binding 
studies showed the interaction of Puralpha with both cyclin T1 and cdk9 through
distinct domains of Puralpha which are in juxtaposition with each other.
Interestingly, the site for cyclin T1 binding within Puralpha is adjacent to the 
region which is important for Tat/Puralpha association. In light of these
observations, we propose a model which ascribes a bridging role for Puralpha in
assembling Tat, cyclin T1, and cdk9 around the promoter region of TAR-negative
genes such as TNFalpha, which is responsive to Tat activation.

PMID: 11730934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nature. 2001 Nov 15;414(6861):322-5.

7SK small nuclear RNA binds to and inhibits the activity of CDK9/cyclin T
complexes.

Nguyen VT(1), Kiss T, Michels AA, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 
75230 Paris cedex 05, France.

The transcription of eukaryotic protein-coding genes involves complex regulation 
of RNA polymerase (Pol) II activity in response to physiological conditions and
developmental cues. One element of this regulation involves phosphorylation of
the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest polymerase subunit by a
transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, which comprises the kinase CDK9 and
cyclin T1 or T2 (ref. 1). Here we report that in human HeLa cells more than half 
of the P-TEFb is sequestered in larger complexes that also contain 7SK RNA, an
abundant, small nuclear RNA (snRNA) of hitherto unknown function. P-TEFb and 7SK 
associate in a specific and reversible manner. In contrast to the smaller P-TEFb 
complexes, which have a high kinase activity, the larger 7SK/P-TEFb complexes
show very weak kinase activity. Inhibition of cellular transcription by chemical 
agents or ultraviolet irradiation trigger the complete disruption of the
P-TEFb/7SK complex, and enhance CDK9 activity. The transcription-dependent
interaction of P-TEFb with 7SK may therefore contribute to an important feedback 
loop modulating the activity of RNA Pol II.

PMID: 11713533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nature. 2001 Nov 15;414(6861):317-22.

The 7SK small nuclear RNA inhibits the CDK9/cyclin T1 kinase to control
transcription.

Yang Z(1), Zhu Q, Luo K, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, USA.

The human positive transcription elongation factor P-TEFb, consisting of a
CDK9/cyclin T1 heterodimer, functions as both a general and an HIV-1 Tat-specific
transcription factor. P-TEFb activates transcription by phosphorylating RNA
polymerase (Pol) II, leading to the formation of processive elongation complexes.
As a Tat cofactor, P-TEFb stimulates HIV-1 transcription by interacting with Tat 
and the transactivating responsive (TAR) RNA structure located at the 5' end of
the nascent viral transcript. Here we identified 7SK, an abundant and
evolutionarily conserved small nuclear RNA (snRNA) of unknown function, as a
specific P-TEFb-associated factor. 7SK inhibits general and HIV-1 Tat-specific
transcriptional activities of P-TEFb in vivo and in vitro by inhibiting the
kinase activity of CDK9 and preventing recruitment of P-TEFb to the HIV-1
promoter. 7SK is efficiently dissociated from P-TEFb by treatment of cells with
ultraviolet irradiation and actinomycin D. As these two agents have been shown to
significantly enhance HIV-1 transcription and phosphorylation of Pol II (refs
6,7,8), our data provide a mechanistic explanation for their stimulatory effects.
The 7SK/P-TEFb interaction may serve as a principal control point for the
induction of cellular and HIV-1 viral gene expression during stress-related
responses. Our studies demonstrate the involvement of an snRNA in controlling the
activity of a Cdk-cyclin kinase.

PMID: 11713532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2396-405. Epub 2001 Nov 9.

Nuclear receptor coactivator p160 proteins enhance the HIV-1 long terminal repeat
promoter by bridging promoter-bound factors and the Tat-P-TEFb complex.

Kino T(1), Slobodskaya O, Pavlakis GN, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric and Reproductive Endocrinology Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. kinot@mail.nih.gov

We report that p160 nuclear receptor coactivators potentiate the transactivating 
activity of Tat, the most potent virally encoded transactivator of HIV-1. One of 
the p160 proteins (GRIP1) is tethered to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR)
through kappaB-responsive elements, most likely via NF-kappaB, with which it also
associates through its coactivator motifs (LXXLL motifs, "NR boxes"). Indeed, the
Tat-stimulated kappaB-defective HIV-1 LTR had a markedly impaired response to
GRIP1, whereas NR box-defective GRIP1 proteins lost part of their Tat coactivator
effect on the HIV-1 LTR. Through its N-terminal basic helix-loop-helix and
C-terminal domains, GRIP1 binds to the N-terminal region of Tat and to the host
cell protein cyclin T1, respectively, which is normally complexed with CDK9 as
P-TEFb. Thus, NF-kappaB is crucial for tethering p160 coactivator molecules to
the HIV-1 LTR, allowing full activation of this promoter by Tat. Interestingly,
cotransfection of Tat, GRIP1, and cyclin T1 enhanced not only the activity of the
HIV-1 LTR, but also the glucocorticoid receptor-mediated stimulation of the mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter, suggesting that Tat can also attract the
P-TEFb complex to the MMTV LTR through GRIP1. Thus, it appears that the
coactivator complexes of the HIV-1 and MMTV LTRs both include p160 coactivators
and use similar coactivator and elongation complexes for their transcription. Tat
may function as an adaptor molecule, efficiently stimulating the processes of
transcription initiation and elongation through potentiation of the coupling of
p160 coactivators and the P-TEFb complex.

PMID: 11704662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(23):7956-70.

Interaction between cyclin T1 and SCF(SKP2) targets CDK9 for ubiquitination and
degradation by the proteasome.

Kiernan RE(1), Emiliani S, Nakayama K, Castro A, Labbé JC, Lorca T, Nakayama Ki
K, Benkirane M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire et Transfert de Gène, Institut de
Génétique Humaine, UPR1142, Montpellier, France. rkiernan@igh.cnrs.fr

CDK9 paired with cyclin T1 forms the human P-TEFb complex and stimulates
productive transcription through phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II
C-terminal domain. Here we report that CDK9 is ubiquitinated and degraded by the 
proteasome whereas cyclin T1 is stable. SCF(SKP2) was recruited to CDK9/cyclin T1
via cyclin T1 in an interaction requiring its PEST domain. CDK9 ubiquitination
was modulated by cyclin T1 and p45(SKP2). CDK9 accumulated in p45(SKP2-/-) cells,
and its expression during the cell cycle was periodic. The transcriptional
activity of CDK9/cyclin T1 on the class II major histocompatibility complex
promoter could be regulated by CDK9 degradation in vivo. We propose a novel
mechanism whereby recruitment of SCF(SKP2) is mediated by cyclin T1 while
ubiquitination occurs exclusively on CDK9.

PMCID: PMC99964
PMID: 11689688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Virol. 2001 Dec;75(23):11336-43.

Induction of TAK (cyclin T1/P-TEFb) in purified resting CD4(+) T lymphocytes by
combination of cytokines.

Ghose R(1), Liou LY, Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Combinations of cytokines are known to reactivate transcription and replication
of latent human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) proviruses in resting
CD4(+) T lymphocytes isolated from infected individuals. Transcription of the
HIV-1 provirus by RNA polymerase II is strongly stimulated by the viral Tat
protein. Tat function is mediated by a cellular protein kinase known as TAK
(cyclin T1/P-TEFb) that is composed of Cdk9 and cyclin T1. We have found that
treatment of peripheral blood lymphocytes and purified resting CD4(+) T
lymphocytes with the combination of interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-6, and tumor
necrosis factor alpha resulted in an increase in Cdk9 and cyclin T1 protein
levels and an increase in TAK enzymatic activity. The cytokine induction of TAK
in resting CD4(+) T lymphocytes did not appear to require proliferation of
lymphocytes. These results suggest that induction of TAK by cytokines secreted in
the microenvironment of lymphoid tissue may be involved in the reactivation of
HIV-1 in CD4(+) T lymphocytes harboring a latent provirus.

PMCID: PMC114719
PMID: 11689614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Virology. 2001 Oct 25;289(2):312-26.

Enhancement of the p300 HAT activity by HIV-1 Tat on chromatin DNA.

Deng L(1), Wang D, de la Fuente C, Wang L, Li H, Lee CG, Donnelly R, Wade JD,
Lambert P, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA.

HIV-1 Tat is able to form a ternary complex with P/CAF and p300 and increase the 
affinity for CDK9/P-TEFb CTD kinase complex. Our previous study demonstrated that
Tat binds to p300/CBP in the minimal HAT domain (aa 1253-1790) and that the
interaction results in a change of conformation on p300/CBP. Here, we show that
the Tat-p300 interaction increases the HAT activity of p300 on histone H4 that is
associated with nucleosomal DNA and not with free histones. Nucleosomal histone
H4 was acetylated on lysines 8, 12, and 16. Acetylation of H4 was inhibited by
Lys-coenzyme A (CoA), a selective inhibitor of p300 acetyltransferase activity.
Unexpectedly, we also found that Tat could autoacetylate itself, which was
specific to lysine residues 41 and 71. Peptides lacking these two lysines could
not enhance the HAT activity of p300. Comparison of the sequences of Tat with
other HIV-1 clades and HAT containing transcription factors indicated sequence
identity in the acetyl-CoA binding motif A, KGXG. Furthermore, when utilizing an 
in vitro transcription assay, as well as a Tat mutant virus, we found that
ectopic expression of only wild-type Tat in the presence of p300, and not a
lysine 41 Tat mutant, could activate HIV-1 chromatin DNA, as evidenced by the
absence of HIV-1 virion antigen. Therefore, transcription of integrated viral DNA
in vivo requires the HAT activity of coactivators that are modulated by Tat to
derepress the HIV-1 chromatin structure and aid in activated transcription.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11689053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 21;276(51):48562-71. Epub 2001 Oct 22.

c-Myc mediates activation of the cad promoter via a post-RNA polymerase II
recruitment mechanism.

Eberhardy SR(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The c-Myc protein is a site-specific DNA-binding transcription factor that is
up-regulated in a number of different cancers. We have previously shown that
binding of Myc correlates with increased transcription of the cad promoter. We
have now further investigated the mechanism by which Myc mediates transcriptional
activation of the cad gene. Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we found
high levels of RNA polymerase II bound to the cad promoter in quiescent NIH 3T3
cells and in differentiated U937 cells, even though the promoter is inactive.
However, chromatin immunoprecipitation with an antibody that recognizes the
hyperphosphorylated form of the RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) 
revealed that phosphorylation of the CTD does correlate with c-Myc binding and
cad transcription. We have also found that the c-Myc transactivation domain
interacts with cdk9 and cyclin T1, components of the CTD kinase P-TEFb.
Furthermore, activator bypass experiments have shown that direct recruitment of
cyclin T1 to the cad promoter can substitute for c-Myc to activate the promoter. 
In summary, our results suggest that c-Myc activates transcription of cad by
stimulating promoter clearance and elongation, perhaps via recruitment of P-TEFb.

PMID: 11673469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Antivir Chem Chemother. 2001;12 Suppl 1:33-41.

Spectrum of cdk-9 inhibitor activity against HIV-1 replication among various
models of chronic and latent infection.

Pisell TL(1), Ho O, Lee G, Butera ST.

Author information: 
(1)HIV and Retrovirology Branch, Division of AIDS, STD, and TB Laboratory
Research, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The cellular transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, and its kinase component,
cdk-9, have been implicated in the regulation of HIV-1 transactivation and
transcription. We tested a panel of demonstrated cdk-9 kinase inhibitors for the 
ability to block HIV-1 expression in a variety of cell models representing
chronic and latent/inducible infection. These agents induced cellular toxicity,
in accordance with their potency for cdk-9 inhibition, with more pronounced
toxicity in cultures of T-cell lineage. These agents also inhibited HIV-1
expression, in accordance with their potency for cdk-9 inhibition, in several
latent models tested (representing T-lymphocytic, promonocytic and promyelocytic 
lineages) and using various extracellular stimuli that activate HIV-1 expression 
via distinct intracellular pathways. Such was the case even though some of these 
cell models of latent/inducible HIV-1 infection harbour viral defects in the
HIV-1 transactivation mechanism. Two additional cell models of latent/inducible
HIV-1 infection, both derived from Jurkat T-lymphocytes, were relatively
resistant to inhibition of viral expression by these agents. This apparent lack
of effect was most likely due to the narrow therapeutic range of these agents in 
T-cell cultures. Inhibition of HIV-1 replication by these agents was also
observed in two cell models representing constitutive viral expression in cells
of T-lymphocytic and promyelocytic lineages. Overall, the observed pattern of
viral inhibition with these compounds suggests that cdk-9 enzymatic activity is
important for HIV-1 expression irrespective of cell lineage or cellular pathway
of viral activation. However, because of the non-selective nature of these
inhibitors, other cellular pathways must also be considered. Agents that target
cellular components essential for HIV-1 expression may provide new therapeutic
approaches to limit viral replication, especially when combined with potent
antiretroviral regimens.

PMID: 11594686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Front Biosci. 2001 Oct 1;6:D1358-68.

Control of RNA polymerase II activity by dedicated CTD kinases and phosphatases.

Majello B(1), Napolitano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, General and Molecular Biology, University of Naples
Federico II, and I.I.G.B, CNR, Naples, Italy. majello@dgbm.unina.it

The elongation phase of eukaryotic transcription by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is
an important target for regulation of gene expression. An interplay of positive
and negative elongation factors determines the elongation activity of RNAPII in
different promoters. The phosphorylation status of the carboxyl-terminal-domain
(CTD) of the larger subunit of RNAPII appears to be the regulatory focus of
different factors regulating mRNA processivity. The emerging model of the
transcription cycle proposes that the phosphorylation state of the CTD is dynamic
during elongation with different forms predominating at different stages of
transcription. Shortly after initiation RNA polymerase II comes under the control
of negative elongation factors and enters abortive elongation. Escape from the
action of these negative controls requires the action of at least one positive
elongation factor identified in the P-TEFb complex composed of the
Cyclin-Dependent Kinase CDK9 and its regulatory subunit cyclin T. Finally, the
requirement of CTD phosphatase activity, identified in the FCP1 protein, has been
invoked as necessary to recycle the hypophosphorylated form of the RNA polymerase
II competent to reinitiate the transcription cycle.

PMID: 11578967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Mol Biol. 2001 Sep 28;312(4):675-85.

The peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 interacts with hSpt5 phosphorylated by Cdk9.

Lavoie SB(1), Albert AL, Handa H, Vincent M, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 8541 CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 
75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

We identify and characterize several phosphorylated forms of the hSpt5 subunit of
the DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF). A 175-kDa phosphorylated form of
hSpt5 is bound to nuclei of interphase HeLa cells. This form is rapidly
dephosphorylated when cultured cells are exposed to various drugs belonging to
distinct chemical families. All these compounds are known to inhibit the protein 
kinase Cdk9, which phosphorylates in vitro hSpt5 and Rpb1, the largest subunit of
RNA polymerase II. The efficiency to promote the dephosphorylation of both
proteins matches their capacity to inhibit purified Cdk9 kinase, suggesting that 
Cdk9 is the major kinase phosphorylating hSpt5 and Rpb1 in vivo. We show that
Cdk9 phosphorylates both the CTR1 and the CTR2 domains of recombinant hSpt5.
These domains contain numerous serine-proline and threonine-proline residues
similar to those found in the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of Rpb1. The
structural homology between hSpt5 CTRs and the Rpb1 CTD is further highlighted by
the presence on both proteins of a phosphoepitope recognized by the monoclonal
antibody CC-3. Of particular interest, the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1
interacts with Cdk9-phosphorylated hSpt5. Cdk9 dependent phosphorylation of Rpb1 
and hSpt5 followed by Pin1 interaction might thus contribute to the regulation of
transcription, pre-mRNA maturation, and the dynamics of these proteins in
interphase and mitosis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11575923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44633-40. Epub 2001 Sep 25.

TFIIH inhibits CDK9 phosphorylation during human immunodeficiency virus type 1
transcription.

Zhou M(1), Nekhai S, Bharucha DC, Kumar A, Ge H, Price DH, Egly JM, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Basic Research Laboratory, Division of Basic
Sciences, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Tat stimulates human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1), transcription
elongation by recruitment of the human transcription elongation factor P-TEFb,
consisting of CDK9 and cyclin T1, to the TAR RNA structure. It has been
demonstrated further that CDK9 phosphorylation is required for high affinity
binding of Tat/P-TEFb to the TAR RNA structure and that the state of P-TEFb
phosphorylation may regulate Tat transactivation. We now demonstrate that CDK9
phosphorylation is uniquely regulated in the HIV-1 preinitiation and elongation
complexes. The presence of TFIIH in the HIV-1 preinitiation complex inhibits CDK9
phosphorylation. As TFIIH is released from the elongation complex between +14 and
+36, CDK9 phosphorylation is observed. In contrast to the activity in the
"soluble" complex, phosphorylation of CDK9 is increased by the presence of Tat in
the transcription complexes. Consistent with these observations, we have
demonstrated that purified TFIIH directly inhibits CDK9 autophosphorylation. By
using recombinant TFIIH subcomplexes, our results suggest that the XPB subunit of
TFIIH is responsible for this inhibition of CDK9 phosphorylation. Interestingly, 
our results further suggest that the phosphorylated form of CDK9 is the active
kinase for RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain phosphorylation.

PMID: 11572868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. IUBMB Life. 2001 Mar;51(3):175-81.

Multiple modes of transcriptional regulation by the HIV-1 Tat transactivator.

Marcello A(1), Zoppé M, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology, Trieste, Italy.

Regulation of HIV-1 gene expression by the viral Tat transactivator is a critical
step in the viral life cycle. Tat acts as a highly unusual transcription factor
that interacts with a stem-loop RNA structure (TAR) found at the 5' end of all
viral transcripts. There, it induces a modification of chromatin at the HIV-1
long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter and stimulates the recruitment of
elongation-competent RNA polymerase II complexes capable of processive
transcription. Increase of transcriptional elongation is the consequence of the
interaction of Tat with cyclin T1, the cyclin component of CDK9, which
phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II to enhance its
processivity. Tat-induced transcriptional activation of the LTR promoter is
concomitant with recruitment of the transcriptional coactivators p300 and the
highly homologue cAMP-responsive transcription factor binding protein (CBP).
These large proteins act at the level of transcriptional initiation by bridging
the basal transcription machinery with specific transcriptional activators.
Furthermore, p300/CBP are histone acetyl-transferases capable of modulating the
interaction of nucleosomes with DNA and with chromatin remodeling complexes.
Besides histones, Tat itself is a substrate for the enzymatic activity of
p300/CBP and of the associated factor P/CAF, suggesting a regulatory role of
acetylation on the protein itself. Devising a unifying model for LTR activation
that includes activities of Tat at the levels of both transcriptional initiation 
and transcriptional elongation is a challenging task at this moment.
Nevertheless, protein localization studies indicate that both cyclin T1 and
p300/CBP co-localize in specific subnuclear compartments, thus suggesting
participation of both proteins in the formation of multimolecular complexes
governing coordinated steps of transcriptional activation.

PMID: 11547919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Front Biosci. 2001 Sep 1;6:D1073-82.

New insight in cdk9 function: from Tat to MyoD.

Simone C(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Cdk9 is a serine-threonine cdc2-related kinase and its activity is not cell
cycle-regulated. Cdk9 function depends on its kinase activity and also on its
regulatory units: the T-family cyclins and cyclin K. Recently, several studies
confirmed the role of cdk9 in different cellular processes such as signal
transduction, basal transcription, HIV-Tat- and MyoD-mediated transcription and
differentiation. All the referred data strongly support the concept of a
multifunctional protein kinase with specific cytoplasmic and nuclear functions.

PMID: 11532614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Virol. 2001 Sep;75(18):8524-37.

Activation of human immunodeficiency virus transcription in T cells revisited:
NF-kappaB p65 stimulates transcriptional elongation.

West MJ(1), Lowe AD, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH,
United Kingdom.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is able to establish a persistent
latent infection during which the integrated provirus remains transcriptionally
silent. Viral transcription is stimulated by NF-kappaB, which is activated
following the exposure of infected T cells to antigens or mitogens. Although it
is commonly assumed that NF-kappaB stimulates transcriptional initiation alone,
we have found using RNase protection assays that, in addition to stimulating
initiation, it can also stimulate elongation from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat.
When either Jurkat or CCRF/CEM cells were activated by the mitogens phorbol
myristate acetate and phytohemagglutinin, elongation, as measured by the
proportion of full-length transcripts, increased two- to fourfold, even in the
absence of Tat. Transfection of T cells with plasmids carrying the different
subunits of NF-kappaB demonstrated that the activation of transcriptional
elongation is mediated specifically by the p65 subunit. It seems likely that
initiation is activated because of NF-kappaB's ability to disrupt chromatin
structures through the recruitment of histone acetyltransferases. To test whether
p65 could stimulate elongation under conditions where it did not affect histone
acetylation, cells were treated with the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A. Remarkably, addition of p65 to the trichostatin A-treated cell
lines resulted in a dramatic increase in transcription elongation, reaching
levels equivalent to those observed in the presence of Tat. We suggest that the
activation of elongation by NF-kappaB p65 involves a distinct biochemical
mechanism, probably the activation of carboxyl-terminal domain kinases at the
promoter.

PMCID: PMC115098
PMID: 11507198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Cell Biochem Suppl. 2001;Suppl 36:247-53.

Distinct regions of cyclinT1 are required for binding to CDK9 and for recruitment
to the HIV-1 Tat/TAR complex.

Fraldi A(1), Licciardo P, Majello B, Giordano A, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University Federico II,
Via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy.

Tat-mediated activation of the HIV-1 promoter activity requires Tat-dependent
recruitment of the cyclinT1/CDK9 complex (P-TEFb) to the transacting element
(TAR) RNA. Tat interaction with the cyclinT1, the regulatory partner of CDK9,
results in a specific recruitment of the heterodimer CycT1/CDK9 complex to TAR,
whereby it promotes transcription elongation of the HIV-1 LTR-mediated
transcription. Using the yeast two-hybrid protein interaction assay we analyzed
the binding between cyclinT1 and CDK9. Moreover, using a modified three-hybrid
yeast interaction system, we analyzed the recruitment of CycT1 to the Tat/TAR
complex. The data presented here demonstrated that distinct domains of cyclinT1
interact with CDK9 and Tat/TAR in vivo. These findings will be instrumental for
the designing of proper dominant-negative P-TEFb components capable to interfere 
with Tat function. J. Cell. Biochem. Suppl. 36: 247-253, 2001.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11455589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 24;276(34):31793-9. Epub 2001 Jun 28.

Flavopiridol inactivates P-TEFb and blocks most RNA polymerase II transcription
in vivo.

Chao SH(1), Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Flavopiridol (L86-8275, HMR1275) is a cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor in 
clinical trials as a cancer therapy that has been recently shown to block human
immunodeficiency virus Tat transactivation and viral replication through
inhibition of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Flavopiridol
is the most potent P-TEFb inhibitor reported and the first Cdk inhibitor that is 
not competitive with ATP. We examined the ability of flavopiridol to inhibit
P-TEFb (Cdk9/cyclin T1) phosphorylation of both RNA polymerase II and the large
subunit of the 5, 6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB)
sensitivity-inducing factor and found that the IC(50) determined was directly
related to the concentration of the enzyme. We concluded that the flavonoid
associates with P-TEFb with 1:1 stoichiometry even at concentrations of enzyme in
the low nanomolar range. These results indicate that the apparent lack of
competition with ATP could be caused by a very tight binding of the drug. We
developed a novel immobilized P-TEFb assay and demonstrated that the drug remains
bound for minutes even in the presence of high salt. Flavopiridol remained bound 
in the presence of a 1000-fold excess of the commonly used inhibitor DRB,
suggesting that the immobilized P-TEFb could be used in a simple screening assay 
that would allow the discovery or characterization of compounds with binding
properties similar to flavopiridol. Finally, we compared the ability of
flavopiridol and DRB to inhibit transcription in vivo using nuclear run-on assays
and concluded that P-TEFb is required for transcription of most RNA polymerase II
molecules in vivo.

PMID: 11431468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Int Immunol. 2001 Jul;13(7):951-8.

Combinations of dominant-negative class II transactivator, p300 or CDK9 proteins 
block the expression of MHC II genes.

Kanazawa S(1), Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0703, USA.

The class II transactivator (CIITA) regulates not only the transcription of
HLA-DR, -DQ, -DP, but also invariant chain, DMA and DMB genes. A hybrid mutant
CIITA protein, which contained residues from positions 302 to 1130 in CIITA fused
to the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EdCIITA), inhibited the function of
the wild-type protein. EdCIITA extinguished the inducible and constitutive
expression of MHC II genes in epithelial cells treated with IFN-gamma and B
lymphoblastoid cells respectively. Also, it blocked T cell activation by
superantigen. This inhibition correlated with the localization of EdCIITA but not
CIITA in the cytoplasm of cells. However, when EdCIITA was co-expressed with a
dominant-negative form of the nucleoporin Nup214/CAN, it also accumulated in the 
nucleus. These data suggest that EdCIITA not only competes with the wild-type
protein for the binding to MHC II promoters but sequesters a critical co-factor
of CIITA in the cytoplasm. CIITA also recruits the histone acetyltransferase cAMP
responsive element binding protein (CREB) binding protein and positive
transcription elongation factor b (p-TEFb) for the transcription of MHC II genes.
Dominant-negative p300 (DNp300) or CDK9 (DNCDK9) proteins inhibited the function 
of CIITA and of the DRA promoter. Thus, combinations of EdCIITA and DNp300 and/or
DNCDK9 proteins extinguished the transcription of MHC II genes. They might become
useful for future genetic therapeutic approaches in organ transplantation and
autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 11431425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Immunity. 2001 Jun;14(6):763-77.

Nef triggers a transcriptional program in T cells imitating single-signal T cell 
activation and inducing HIV virulence mediators.

Simmons A(1), Aluvihare V, McMichael A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Immunology Unit, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Gene expression profiling was used to explore the role of Nef in HIV. Nef induces
a transcriptional program in T cells that is 97% identical to that of anti-CD3 T 
cell activation. This program is inhibited in the presence of cyclosporin. A
requirement for TCR zeta and ZAP-70 is demonstrated for formation of the complete
profile. Among eight factors particular to the anti-CD3 activation profile are
IL16 and YY1, negative regulators of HIV transcription. In contrast, Nef
exclusively upregulates factors positively regulating HIV, including Tat-SF1, U1 
SNRNP, and IRF-2. New genes associated with Nef include CDK9, the induction of
which enhances Tat function. Thus, Nef acts as a master switch early in the viral
life cycle, forcing an environment conducive to dynamic viral production.

PMID: 11420046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Histochem Cytochem. 2001 Jun;49(6):693-8.

Cyclin T2a gene maps on human chromosome 2q21.

De Luca A(1), Tosolini A, Russo P, Severino A, Baldi A, De Luca L, Cavallotti I, 
Baldi F, Giordano A, Testa JR, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, CRS, Regina Elena Cancer
Institute, Rome, Italy.

Cyclin T2a was recently identified as one of the regulatory subunits of the
cdk-cyclin complex P-TEFb, the most studied positive factor in the regulation of 
transcription elongation. By fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), the gene
codifying for cyclin T2a has been mapped on human chromosome 2q21. This locus
also has been linked to different forms of myopathy. By use of a new specific
antiserum raised against cyclin T2a, the immunohistochemical pattern of
expression of cyclin T2a in human tissues has been examined and compared to that 
of cyclin T1, described in the previous report. The observation that
immunohistochemical expression of cyclin T2a was high in skeletal muscle cells,
whereas it was undetectable in two cases of centronuclear myopathy, together with
its chromosomal location, suggests an involvement of the cdk9-cyclin T2a complex 
in this disease.

PMID: 11373316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Histochem Cytochem. 2001 Jun;49(6):685-92.

Pattern of expression of cyclin T1 in human tissues.

De Luca A(1), Russo P, Severino A, Baldi A, Battista T, Cavallotti I, De Luca L, 
Baldi F, Giordano A, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, CRS, Regina Elena Cancer
Institute, Rome, Italy.

Cyclin T1 was recently identified, together with cdk9 (previously named PITALRE),
as part of the TAK multiprotein complex, a co-factor targeted by the human
immunodeficiency virus Type 1 (HIV-1) protein named Tat, suggesting a role for
this complex in transcription elongation. Although studies on mRNA and protein
expression have shown that cyclin T1 is ubiquitous in adult human tissues, no
data have yet been reported regarding the expression of this protein in different
cell lineages. Using a polyclonal antiserum raised against cyclin T1, we
investigated the pattern of expression of this protein in adult human tissues by 
immunohistochemistry. Cyclin T1 was expressed ubiquitously, although different
levels of expression were found in various organs. Some specialized tissues, such
as blood, lymphoid tissues, and cells of connective tissue origin, showed high
cyclin T1 expression. These specific expression patterns are only partially
justified by some well-known specialized functions of cyclin T1 in certain cell
types, such as its involvement in peripheral blood lymphocytes and monocyte
differentiation. The high expression level found in other tissues suggests new
possible roles for cyclin T1 in cell types other than those of lymphoid tissue.

PMID: 11373315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. EMBO J. 2001 Apr 2;20(7):1726-38.

The site of HIV-1 integration in the human genome determines basal
transcriptional activity and response to Tat transactivation.

Jordan A(1), Defechereux P, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology and Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94141, USA.

Because of the heterogeneity of chromatin, the site of integration of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the genome could have dramatic effects on its
transcriptional activity. We have used an HIV-1-derived retroviral vector, in
which the green fluorescent protein is under the control of the HIV promoter, to 
generate by infection 34 Jurkat clonal cell lines each containing a single
integration of the HIV-1 vector. In the absence of Tat, a 75-fold difference in
expression level between the highest and lowest expressing clones was observed.
Basal promoter activity was low in 80% of the clones and moderate to high in the 
remaining 20% of clones. We found that differences in expression levels are due
to the integration site and are not controlled by DNA methylation or histone
acetylation. Tat activated transcription in each clone, and an inverse
correlation was observed between basal transcriptional activity and inducibility 
by Tat. These observations demonstrate that the chromatin environment influences 
basal HIV gene expression and that the HIV Tat protein activates transcription
independently of the chromatin environment.

PMCID: PMC145503
PMID: 11285236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Cell Sci. 2001 Apr;114(Pt 8):1491-503.

The Cdk9 and cyclin T subunits of TAK/P-TEFb localize to splicing factor-rich
nuclear speckle regions.

Herrmann CH(1), Mancini MA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. herrmann@bcm.tmc.edu

TAK/P-TEFb is an elongation factor for RNA polymerase II-directed transcription
that is thought to function by phosphorylating the C-terminal domain of the
largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. TAK/P-TEFb is composed of Cdk9 and cyclin T
and serves as the cellular cofactor for the human immunodeficiency virus
transactivator Tat protein. In this study, we examined the subcellular
distribution of Cdk9 and cyclin T1 using high resolution immunofluorescence
microscopy and found that Cdk9 and cyclin T1 localized throughout the
non-nucleolar nucleoplasm, with increased signal present at numerous foci. Both
Cdk9 and cyclin T1 showed only limited colocalization with different
phosphorylated forms of RNA polymerase II. However, significant colocalization
with antibodies to several splicing factors that identify nuclear 'speckles' was 
observed for Cdk9 and especially for cyclin T1. The pattern of Cdk9 and cyclin T1
distribution was altered in cells treated with transcription inhibitors.
Transient expression of cyclin T1 deletion mutants indicated that a region in the
central portion of cyclin T1 is important for accumulation at speckles.
Furthermore, cyclin T1 proteins that accumulated at speckles were capable of
recruiting Cdk9 and the HIV Tat protein to this compartment in overexpression
experiments. These results suggest that cyclin T1 functions to recruit its
binding partners to nuclear speckles and raises the possibility that nuclear
speckles are a site of TAK/P-TEFb function.

PMID: 11282025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 6;276(14):10913-20. Epub 2001 Jan 16.

Three RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain kinases display distinct
substrate preferences.

Ramanathan Y(1), Rajpara SM, Reza SM, Lees E, Shuman S, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07103,
USA.

CDK7, CDK8, and CDK9 are cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) that phosphorylate the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. They have distinct functions in
transcription. Because the three CDKs target only serine 5 in the heptad repeat
of model CTD substrates containing various numbers of repeats, we tested the
hypothesis that the kinases differ in their ability to phosphorylate CTD heptad
arrays. Our data show that the kinases display different preferences for
phosphorylating individual heptads in a synthetic CTD substrate containing three 
heptamer repeats and specific regions of the CTD in glutathione S-transferase
fusion proteins. They also exhibit differences in their ability to phosphorylate 
a synthetic CTD peptide that contains Ser-2-PO(4). This phosphorylated peptide is
a poor substrate for CDK9 complexes. CDK8 and CDK9 complexes, bound to viral
activators E1A and Tat, respectively, target only serine 5 for phosphorylation in
the CTD peptides, and binding to the viral activators does not change the
substrate preference of these kinases. These results imply that the display of
different CTD heptads during transcription, as well as their phosphorylation
state, can affect their phosphorylation by the different transcription-associated
CDKs.

PMID: 11278802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):9978-84. Epub 2000 Dec 21.

Androgen receptor interacts with the positive elongation factor P-TEFb and
enhances the efficiency of transcriptional elongation.

Lee DK(1), Duan HO, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
Urology, Radiation Oncology, and the Cancer Center, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) may communicate with the general transcription machinery
on the core promoter to exert its function as a transcriptional modulator. Our
previous report demonstrated that the AR interacted with transcription factor IIH
(TFIIH) under physiological conditions and that overexpression of Cdk-activating 
kinase, the kinase moiety of TFIIH, enhanced AR-mediated transcription in
prostate cancer cells. In an effort to further dissect the mechanisms implicated 
in AR transactivation, we report here that AR interacts with PITALRE, a kinase
subunit of positive elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Cotransfection of the plasmid
encoding the mutant PITALRE (mtPITALRE), defective in its RNA polymerase II
COOH-terminal domain (CTD)-kinase activity, resulted in preferential inhibition
of AR-mediated transactivation. Indeed, AR transactivation in PC-3 cells was
preferentially inhibited at the low concentration of
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), a CTD kinase inhibitor.
These results suggest that CTD phosphorylation may play an important role in
AR-mediated transcription. Furthermore, a nuclear run-on transcription assay of
the prostate-specific antigen gene, an androgen-inducible gene, showed that
transcription efficiency of the distal region of the gene was enhanced upon
androgen induction. Taken together, our reports suggest that AR interacts with
TFIIH and P-TEFb and enhances the elongation stage of transcription.

PMID: 11266437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 13;276(15):12317-23. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

Positive transcription elongation factor B phosphorylates hSPT5 and RNA
polymerase II carboxyl-terminal domain independently of cyclin-dependent
kinase-activating kinase.

Kim JB(1), Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The CDK9-cyclin T kinase complex, positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb), stimulates the process of elongation of RNA polymerase (Pol) II during 
transcription of human immunodeficiency virus. P-TEFb associates with the human
immunodeficiency virus Tat protein and with the transactivation response element 
to form a specific complex, thereby mediating efficient elongation. Here, we show
that P-TEFb preferentially phosphorylates hSPT5 as compared with the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA Pol II in vitro. Phosphorylation of hSPT5 by
P-TEFb occurred on threonine and serine residues in its carboxyl-terminal repeat 
domains. In addition, we provide several lines of evidence that P-TEFb is a
CDK-activating kinase (CAK)-independent kinase. For example, CDK9 was not
phosphorylated by CAK, whereas CDK2-cyclin A kinase activity was dramatically
enhanced by CAK. Therefore, it is likely that P-TEFb participates in regulation
of elongation by RNA Pol II by phosphorylation of its substrates, hSPT5 and the
CTD of RNA Pol II, in a CAK-independent manner.

PMID: 11145967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Virol. 2001 Feb;75(3):1220-8.

Antiapoptotic function of Cdk9 (TAK/P-TEFb) in U937 promonocytic cells.

Foskett SM(1), Ghose R, Tang DN, Lewis DE, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cdk9 is the catalytic subunit of TAK (cyclinT1/P-TEFb), a cellular protein kinase
that mediates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat transcriptional
activation function. To examine Cdk9 function in cells relevant to HIV-1
infection, we used a murine leukemia virus retrovirus vector to transduce and
overexpress the cDNA of a dominant negative mutant Cdk9 protein (Cdk9-dn) in
Jurkat T cells and U937 promonocytic cells. In Jurkat cells, overexpression of
Cdk9-dn specifically inhibited Tat transactivation and HIV-1 replication but had 
no inhibitory effect on induction of CD69, CD25, and interleukin-2 following
T-cell activation. In U937 cells, overexpression of Cdk9-dn sensitized cells to
apoptosis, especially after phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) treatment to induce
differentiation to macrophage-like cells. Because Cdk9 function is induced in
PMA-treated U937 cells, Cdk9 may play an antiapoptotic role during monocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC114028
PMID: 11152495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(23):8696-708.

Crk1, a novel Cdc2-related protein kinase, is required for hyphal development and
virulence in Candida albicans.

Chen J(1), Zhou S, Wang Q, Chen X, Pan T, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Both mitogen-activated protein kinases and cyclin-dependent kinases play a role
in hyphal development in Candida albicans. Using an oligonucleotide probe-based
screen, we have isolated a new member of the Cdc2 kinase subfamily, designated
Crk1 (Cdc2-related kinase). The protein sequence of Crk1 is most similar to those
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sgv1 and human Pkl1/Cdk9. In S. cerevisiae, CRK1
suppresses some, but not all, of the defects associated with an sgv1 mutant.
Deleting both copies of CRK1 in C. albicans slows growth slightly but leads to a 
profound defect in hyphal development under all conditions examined. crk1/crk1
mutants are impaired in the induction of hypha-specific genes and are avirulent
in mice. Consistent with this, ectopic expression of the Crk1 kinase domain
(CRK1N) promotes filamentous or invasive growth in S. cerevisiae and hyphal
development in C. albicans. The activity of Crk1 in S. cerevisiae requires Flo8
but is independent of Ste12 and Phd1. Similarly, Crk1 promotes filamentation
through a route independent of Cph1 and Efg1 in C. albicans. RAS1(V13) can also
activate filamentation in a cph1/cph1 efg1/efg1 double mutant. Interestingly,
CRK1N produces florid hyphae in ras1/ras1 strains, while RAS1(V13) generates
feeble hyphae in crk1/crk1 strains.

PMCID: PMC86484
PMID: 11073971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Gene. 2000 Aug 22;254(1-2):139-45.

Transcriptional activity of positive transcription elongation factor b kinase in 
vivo requires the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II.

Napolitano G(1), Majello B, Licciardo P, Giordano A, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
'Federico II' and International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, Via
Mezzocannone 8, 80134, Naples, Italy.

Phosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) is an important step in transcription and the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb) has been proposed to facilitate elongation at many
genes. The P-TEFb contains a catalytic subunit (Cdk9) that, in association with a
cyclin subunit (cyclinT1), has the ability to phosphorylate the CTD substrate in 
vitro. Here, we demonstrate that cyclinT1/Cdk9-mediated transcription requires
CTD-containing RNAPII, suggesting that the CTD is the major target of the
cyclinT1/Cdk9 complex in vivo. Unlike Cdk7 and Cdk8, two other cyclin-dependent
kinases that are capable of phosphorylating the CTD in vitro, we found that only 
the Cdk9 activates gene expression in a catalysis-dependent manner. Finally,
unlike cyclinT1 and T2, we found that the targeted recruitment to promoter DNA of
cyclinK (a recently described alternative partner of Cdk9) does not stimulate
transcription in vivo. Collectively, our data strongly indicate that the P-TEFb
kinase subunits cyclinT/Cdk9 are specifically involved in transcription and the
CTD domain of RNAPII is the major functional target of this complex in vivo.

PMID: 10974544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Virology. 2000 Sep 1;274(2):356-66.

An in vitro transcription system that recapitulates equine infectious anemia
virus tat-mediated inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat activity
demonstrates a role for positive transcription elongation factor b and associated
proteins in the mechanism of Tat activation.

Suñé C(1), Goldstrohm AC, Peng J, Price DH, Garcia-Blanco MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. csn@duke.edu

Equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV) activates transcription via a Tat protein, 
a TAR element, and the equine elongation factor positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb). In human cells, EIAV Tat (eTat) can inhibit the ability of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat (hTat) to activate transcription 
from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat, demonstrating that EIAV Tat can interact
nonproductively with human P-TEFb. To study the mechanism of EIAV Tat and HIV-1
Tat activation, we developed an in vitro elongation assay that recapitulates EIAV
Tat-mediated inhibition of HIV-1 Tat trans-activation. We found that eTat
specifically inhibits activation of elongation by HIV-1 Tat while having no
effect on basal transcription elongation. The competitive inhibition of hTat
activation was reversed by an activity present in HeLa cell nuclear extracts,
most likely a form of P-TEFb. Recombinant P-TEFb (cyclin T1 and CDK9) overcame
the inhibition of transcription by eTat but in a nonspecific manner. EIAV Tat
affinity chromatography was used to purify the activity present in nuclear
extract that was capable of reversing eTat inhibition. We characterized the
protein components of this activity, which include cyclin T1, CDK9, Tat-SF1, and 
at least three unidentified proteins. These data suggest that additional factors 
are involved in the mechanism of Tat activation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10964778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(18):6958-69.

CDK9 autophosphorylation regulates high-affinity binding of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 tat-P-TEFb complex to TAR RNA.

Garber ME(1), Mayall TP, Suess EM, Meisenhelder J, Thompson NE, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat interacts with cyclin T1 (CycT1),
a regulatory partner of CDK9 in the positive transcription elongation factor
(P-TEFb) complex, and binds cooperatively with CycT1 to TAR RNA to recruit P-TEFb
and promote transcription elongation. We show here that Tat also stimulates
phosphorylation of affinity-purified core RNA polymerase II and glutathione
S-transferase-C-terminal-domain substrates by CycT1-CDK9, but not CycH-CDK7, in
vitro. Interestingly, incubation of recombinant Tat-P-TEFb complexes with ATP
enhanced binding to TAR RNA dramatically, and the C-terminal half of CycT1 masked
binding of Tat to TAR RNA in the absence of ATP. ATP incubation lead to
autophosphorylation of CDK9 at multiple C-terminal Ser and Thr residues, and
full-length CycT1 (amino acids 728) [CycT1(1-728)], but not truncated
CycT1(1-303), was also phosphorylated by CDK9. P-TEFb complexes containing a
catalytically inactive CDK9 mutant (D167N) bound TAR RNA weakly and independently
of ATP, as did a C-terminal truncated CDK9 mutant that was catalytically active
but unable to undergo autophosphorylation. Analysis of different Tat proteins
revealed that the 101-amino-acid SF2 HIV-1 Tat was unable to bind TAR with
CycT1(1-303) in the absence of phosphorylated CDK9, whereas unphosphorylated CDK9
strongly blocked binding of HIV-2 Tat to TAR RNA in a manner that was reversed
upon autophosphorylation. Replacement of CDK9 phosphorylation sites with
negatively charged residues restored binding of CycT1(1-303)-D167N-Tat, and
rendered D167N a more potent inhibitor of transcription in vitro. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that CDK9 phosphorylation is required for high-affinity
binding of Tat-P-TEFb to TAR RNA and that the state of P-TEFb phosphorylation may
regulate Tat transactivation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC88771
PMID: 10958691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 10;275(45):35209-14.

Cooperative interaction between HIV-1 regulatory proteins Tat and Vpr modulates
transcription of the viral genome.

Sawaya BE(1), Khalili K, Gordon J, Taube R, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The virion-associated protein of human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1),
Vpr, is a small protein with 96 amino acid residues that has the ability to
modulate transcription of HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter activity and 
affects several cellular functions. In this study we have employed molecular
approaches to further investigate the mechanism by which Vpr exerts its
regulatory effect upon the LTR. We show that by structural and functional
interaction with Tat, a potent viral regulatory protein, Vpr synergistically
enhances the transcriptional activity of the HIV-1 LTR. Because Tat utilizes
cyclin T1 and its partner, CDK9 to elevate the level of transcription from the
LTR, we examined the cooperativity between Vpr, Tat, and cyclin T1/CDK9 on viral 
gene transcription. Results from co-transfection studies indicated
superactivation of LTR by Tat and cyclin T1/CDK9 in the presence of wild type
Vpr. This activation was not observed with the R73S mutant of Vpr, which contains
arginine to serine transition at residue 73. Interestingly, expression of R73S
mutant in cells exerts a negative effect on the observed superactivation of the
LTR by Tat, cyclin T1/CDK9, and wild type Vpr. Results from protein-protein
interaction studies indicated that Vpr is associated with both Tat and cyclin T1 
in cells expressing these proteins. Use of deletion mutant proteins in binding
studies revealed that the binding sites for Tat and Vpr within cyclin T1 are
distinct and that association of these two viral proteins with cyclin T1 is
independent from each other. These observations suggest a working model on the
cooperative interaction of Vpr with viral and cellular proteins and its
involvement in control of viral gene transcription and replication. Moreover
identification of R73S mutant of Vpr provides a new therapeutic avenue for
controlling HIV-1 gene transcription and replication in the infected cells.

PMID: 10931842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):5897-907.

Relief of two built-In autoinhibitory mechanisms in P-TEFb is required for
assembly of a multicomponent transcription elongation complex at the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 promoter.

Fong YW(1), Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-3206, USA.

Tat stimulation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcription
requires Tat-dependent recruitment of human positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) to the HIV-1 promoter and the formation on the trans-acting
response element (TAR) RNA of a P-TEFb-Tat-TAR ternary complex. We show here that
the P-TEFb heterodimer of Cdk9-cyclin T1 is intrinsically incapable of forming a 
stable complex with Tat and TAR due to two built-in autoinhibitory mechanisms in 
P-TEFb. Both mechanisms exert little effect on the P-TEFb-Tat interaction but
prevent the P-TEFb-Tat complex from binding to TAR RNA. The first autoinhibition 
arises from the unphosphorylated state of Cdk9, which establishes a P-TEFb
conformation unfavorable for TAR recognition. Autophosphorylation of Cdk9
overcomes this inhibition by inducing conformational changes in P-TEFb, thereby
exposing a region in cyclin T1 for possible TAR binding. An intramolecular
interaction between the N- and C-terminal regions of cyclin T1 sterically blocks 
the P-TEFb-TAR interaction and constitutes the second autoinhibitory mechanism.
This inhibition is relieved by the binding of the C-terminal region of cyclin T1 
to the transcription elongation factor Tat-SF1 and perhaps other cellular
factors. Upon release from the intramolecular interaction, the C-terminal region 
also interacts with RNA polymerase II and is required for HIV-1 transcription,
suggesting its role in bridging the P-TEFb-Tat-TAR complex and the basal
elongation apparatus. These data reveal novel control mechanisms for the assembly
of a multicomponent transcription elongation complex at the HIV-1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC86067
PMID: 10913173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 15;275(37):28345-8.

Flavopiridol inhibits P-TEFb and blocks HIV-1 replication.

Chao SH(1), Fujinaga K, Marion JE, Taube R, Sausville EA, Senderowicz AM,
Peterlin BM, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program and the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Flavopiridol (L86-8275, HMR1275) is a cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor
that is in clinical trials as a cancer treatment because of its antiproliferative
properties. We found that the flavonoid potently inhibited transcription by RNA
polymerase II in vitro by blocking the transition into productive elongation, a
step controlled by P-TEFb. The ability of P-TEFb to phosphorylate the
carboxyl-terminal domain of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II was inhibited 
by flavopiridol with a K(i) of 3 nm. Interestingly, the drug was not competitive 
with ATP. P-TEFb composed of Cdk9 and cyclin T1 is a required cellular cofactor
for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) transactivator, Tat. Consistent with
its ability to inhibit P-TEFb, flavopiridol blocked Tat transactivation of the
viral promoter in vitro. Furthermore, flavopiridol blocked HIV-1 replication in
both single-round and viral spread assays with an IC(50) of less than 10 nm.

PMID: 10906320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Gene. 2000 Jul 11;252(1-2):51-9.

Genomic organization and characterization of promoter function of the human CDK9 
gene.

Liu H(1), Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
77030, Houston, TX, USA.

CDK9 is the catalytic subunit of a general RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) elongation
factor termed p-TEFb which is targeted by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
Tat protein to activate elongation of the integrated proviral genome. CDK9 mRNA
and protein levels have been observed to be induced in activated peripheral blood
lymphocytes, a cell type relevant to HIV infection. To investigate mechanisms
that regulate CDK9 RNA expression, we isolated genomic sequences containing the
human CDK9 gene and found that CDK9 coding sequences are interrupted by six
introns. There is a major transcriptional start site located 79 nucleotides
upstream of the ATG initiator codon at nucleotide +1. Nucleotides -352 to -1
contain all the transcriptional regulatory elements needed for full promoter
activity in transient expression assays. The CDK9 promoter contains features
characteristic of a housekeeping gene, including GC-rich sequences and absence of
a functional TATA element. The CDK9 promoter possesses high constitutive activity
and may therefore have utility in expression vectors or gene therapy vectors.

PMID: 10903437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5077-86.

Tat modifies the activity of CDK9 to phosphorylate serine 5 of the RNA polymerase
II carboxyl-terminal domain during human immunodeficiency virus type 1
transcription.

Zhou M(1), Halanski MA, Radonovich MF, Kashanchi F, Peng J, Price DH, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, LRBGE, Division of Basic Sciences, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Tat stimulates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcriptional
elongation by recruitment of carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) kinases to the HIV-1 
promoter. Using an immobilized DNA template assay, we have analyzed the effect of
Tat on kinase activity during the initiation and elongation phases of HIV-1
transcription. Our results demonstrate that cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7)
(TFIIH) and CDK9 (P-TEFb) both associate with the HIV-1 preinitiation complex.
Hyperphosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) CTD in the HIV-1
preinitiation complex, in the absence of Tat, takes place at CTD serine 2 and
serine 5. Analysis of preinitiation complexes formed in immunodepleted extracts
suggests that CDK9 phosphorylates serine 2, while CDK7 phosphorylates serine 5.
Remarkably, in the presence of Tat, the substrate specificity of CDK9 is altered,
such that the kinase phosphorylates both serine 2 and serine 5. Tat-induced CTD
phosphorylation by CDK9 is strongly inhibited by low concentrations of 5,
6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole, an inhibitor of transcription
elongation by RNAP II. Analysis of stalled transcription elongation complexes
demonstrates that CDK7 is released from the transcription complex between
positions +14 and +36, prior to the synthesis of transactivation response (TAR)
RNA. In contrast, CDK9 stays associated with the complex through +79. Analysis of
CTD phosphorylation indicates a biphasic modification pattern, one in the
preinitiation complex and the other between +36 and +79. The second phase of CTD 
phosphorylation is Tat-dependent and TAR-dependent. These studies suggest that
the ability of Tat to increase transcriptional elongation may be due to its
ability to modify the substrate specificity of the CDK9 complex.

PMCID: PMC85957
PMID: 10866664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Cell Biochem. 2000 Apr;78(1):170-8.

Genomic organization, promoter analysis, and chromosomal mapping of the mouse
gene encoding Cdk9.

Bagella L(1), Stiegler P, De Luca A, Siracusa LD, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Cdk9, previously known as PITALRE, belongs to the Cdc2 family of protein kinases.
We report the isolation and characterization of the complete gene coding for the 
murine Cdk9 protein. The gene contains seven exons spanning over 6 kb of genomic 
DNA, and the exon/intron boundaries conformed to the GT/AG rule. The Cdk9 gene
mapped on mouse chromosome 2, which is consistent with the known region of
synteny with human chromosome 9q34.1. The length of the individual exons ranged
from 82 to 850 bp, and introns ranged from 452 to 1,465 bp. The further 5'
flanking region of the gene showed features of a housekeeping promoter, such as
the lack of a canonical TATA box and the presence of a CCAAT box as well as
several GC boxes, which are potential binding sites for numerous transcription
factors. Additionally, we performed a basic analysis of the transcriptional
activity of the promoter and found that the 364 bp of Cdk9 5' flanking region
were able to elicit high transcriptional levels of a luciferase reporter gene in 
NIH3T3 cells. This study provides the molecular basis for understanding the
transcriptional control of the Cdk9 gene, and could serve to facilitate the
molecular genetic investigation of Cdk9 function during mouse embryonal
development.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10797576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genes Dev. 2000 Apr 1;14(7):792-803.

P-TEFb kinase recruitment and function at heat shock loci.

Lis JT(1), Mason P, Peng J, Price DH, Werner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Biotechnology Building, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. JTL10@cornell.edu

P-TEFb, a heterodimer of the kinase Cdk9 and cyclin T, was isolated as a factor
that stimulates formation of productive transcription elongation complexes in
vitro. Here, we show that P-TEFb is located at >200 distinct sites on Drosophila 
polytene chromosomes. Upon heat shock, P-TEFb, like the regulatory factor HSF, is
rapidly recruited to heat shock loci, and this recruitment is blocked in an HSF
mutant. Yet, HSF binding to DNA is not sufficient to recruit P-TEFb in vivo, and 
HSF and P-TEFb immunostainings within a heat shock locus are not coincident.
Insight to the function of P-TEFb is offered by experiments showing that the
direct recruitment of a Gal4-binding domain P-TEFb hybrid to an hsp70 promoter in
Drosophila cells is sufficient to activate transcription in the absence of heat
shock. Analyses of point mutants show this P-TEFb stimulation is dependent on
Cdk9 kinase activity and on Cdk9's interaction with cyclin T. These results,
coupled with the frequent colocalization of P-TEFb and the hypophosphorylated
form of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) found at promoter-pause sites, support a model
in which P-TEFb acts to stimulate promoter-paused Pol II to enter into productive
elongation.

PMCID: PMC316500
PMID: 10766736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):2970-83.

Domains in the SPT5 protein that modulate its transcriptional regulatory
properties.

Ivanov D(1), Kwak YT, Guo J, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Harold Simmons Cancer
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75235-8594, USA.

SPT5 and its binding partner SPT4 regulate transcriptional elongation by RNA
polymerase II. SPT4 and SPT5 are involved in both
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB)-mediated transcriptional
inhibition and the activation of transcriptional elongation by the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Tat protein. Recent data suggest that
P-TEFb, which is composed of CDK9 and cyclin T1, is also critical in regulating
transcriptional elongation by SPT4 and SPT5. In this study, we analyze the
domains of SPT5 that regulate transcriptional elongation in the presence of
either DRB or the HIV-1 Tat protein. We demonstrate that SPT5 domains that bind
SPT4 and RNA polymerase II, in addition to a region in the C terminus of SPT5
that contains multiple heptad repeats and is designated CTR1, are critical for in
vitro transcriptional repression by DRB and activation by the Tat protein.
Furthermore, the SPT5 CTR1 domain is a substrate for P-TEFb phosphorylation.
These results suggest that C-terminal repeats in SPT5, like those in the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain, are sites for P-TEFb phosphorylation and
function in modulating its transcriptional elongation properties.

PMCID: PMC85557
PMID: 10757782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Front Biosci. 2000 Feb 1;5:D244-57.

Cell cycle regulation and RNA polymerase II.

Bregman DB(1), Pestell RG, Kidd VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The cell cycle and transcription by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) are closely
related. They utilize shared components. RNAP II transcriptional activity is
modulated during the cell cycle. Cell cycle dependent changes in the
phosphorylation status of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest
subunit of RNAP II (RNAP II-LS) alter transcription. Several CTD kinases are
members of the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) superfamily, including p34cdc2
(cdk1), cdk7, cdk8, and cdk9. Each of these cdks, with their respective cyclin
partners, have been linked to cell cycle regulatory events. Other CTD kinases
such as casein kinase II (CKII) and c-abl have also been implicated in cell cycle
dependent modifications of the CTD. In addition, the stalling of RNAP II
complexes at DNA lesions helps stimulate p53 accumulation which largely
determines the cell's DNA damage response, including cell cycle arrest.
Alzheimer's disease pathology results partially from activation of mitotic cdks
in postmitotic neurons which can phosphorylate RNAP II-LS and other targets.

PMID: 10704151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Immunity. 2000 Jan;12(1):61-70.

Tat competes with CIITA for the binding to P-TEFb and blocks the expression of
MHC class II genes in HIV infection.

Kanazawa S(1), Okamoto T, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

AIDS and the bare lymphocyte syndrome (BLS) are severe combined
immunodeficiencies. BLS results from mutations in genes that regulate the
expression of class II major histocompatibility (MHC II) determinants. One of
these is the class II transactivator (CIITA). HIV and its transcriptional
transactivator (Tat) also block the expression of MHC II genes. By binding to the
same surface in the cyclin T1, which together with CDK9 forms the positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complex, Tat inhibits CIITA. CIITA can
also activate transcription when tethered artificially to RNA. Moreover, a
dominant-negative CDK9 protein inhibits the activity of MHC II promoters. Thus,
CIITA is a novel cellular coactivator that binds to P-TEFb for the expression of 
its target genes.

PMID: 10661406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oncogene. 2000 Jan 20;19(3):373-9.

Physical interaction between CDK9 and B-Myb results in suppression of B-Myb gene 
autoregulation.

De Falco G(1), Bagella L, Claudio PP, De Luca A, Fu Y, Calabretta B, Sala A,
Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy & Cell Biology, Jefferson Medical College of 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

B-Myb is a transcription factor belonging to the myb family, whose activity has
been associated with augmented DNA synthesis and cell cycle progression. We
showed recently that B-Myb autoregulates its own expression through promoter
transactivation. We report in this study that CDK9, the cyclin T associated
kinase, which phosphorylates and activates RNA-Polymerase II, suppresses B-Myb
autoregulation through direct interaction with the carboxyl-terminus of the B-Myb
protein. Down-regulation of the transactivating ability of B-Myb is independent
of the kinase activity of CDK9, because a kinase deficient mutant (dn-CDK9) also 
represses B-myb gene autoregulation. Overexpression of CDK9 did not result in
suppression of p53-dependent transactivation or inhibition of the basal activity 
of the promoters tested so far, demonstrating that CDK9 is a B-Myb-specific
repressor. Rather, transfection of the dominant negative dn-CDK9 construct
inhibited the basal activity of the reporter genes, confirming an essential role 
for CDK9 in gene transcription. In addition, Cyclin T1 restores B-Myb
transactivating activity when co-transfected along with CDK9, suggesting that the
down-regulatory effect observed on B-Myb is specifically due to CDK9 alone. Thus,
our data suggest that CDK9 is involved in the negative regulation of activated
transcription mediated by certain transcription factors, such as B-Myb. This may 
indicate the existence of a feedback loop, mediated by the different activities
of CDK9, which links basal with activated transcription.

PMID: 10656684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 7;275(1):279-87.

Requirement for a kinase-specific chaperone pathway in the production of a
Cdk9/cyclin T1 heterodimer responsible for P-TEFb-mediated tat stimulation of
HIV-1 transcription.

O'Keeffe B(1), Fong Y, Chen D, Zhou S, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California at Berkeley,
Berkeley, California 94720-3206, USA.

Tat activation of HIV-1 transcription is mediated by human transcription
elongation factor P-TEFb, which interacts with Tat and phosphorylates the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. The catalytic subunit of the P-TEFb
complex, Cdk9, has been shown to interact with cyclin T and several other
proteins of unknown identity. Consequently, the exact subunit composition of
active P-TEFb has not been determined. Here we report the affinity purification
and identification of the Cdk9-associated proteins. In addition to forming a
heterodimer with cyclin T1, Cdk9 interacted with the molecular chaperone Hsp70 or
a kinase-specific chaperone complex, Hsp90/Cdc37, to form two separate
chaperone-Cdk9 complexes. Although the Cdk9/cyclin T1 dimer was exceptionally
stable and produced slowly in the cell, free and unprotected Cdk9 appeared to be 
degraded rapidly. Several lines of evidence indicate the heterodimer of
Cdk9/cyclin T1 to be the mature, active form of P-TEFb responsible for
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II interaction with
the Tat activation domain, and mediation of Tat activation of HIV-1
transcription. Pharmacological inactivation of Hsp90/Cdc37 function by
geldanamycin revealed an essential role for the chaperone-Cdk9 complexes in
generation of Cdk9/cyclin T1. Our data suggest a previously unrecognized
chaperone-dependent pathway involving the sequential actions of Hsp70 and
Hsp90/Cdc37 in the stabilization/folding of Cdk9 as well as the assembly of an
active Cdk9/cyclin T1 complex responsible for P-TEFb-mediated Tat
transactivation.

PMID: 10617616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 3;274(49):34527-30.

Cyclin K functions as a CDK9 regulatory subunit and participates in RNA
polymerase II transcription.

Fu TJ(1), Peng J, Lee G, Price DH, Flores O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Tularik Inc., South San Francisco, California 92080,
USA.

Important progress in the understanding of elongation control by RNA polymerase
II (RNAPII) has come from the recent identification of the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb) and the demonstration that this factor is a protein 
kinase that phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the RNAPII
largest subunit. The P-TEFb complex isolated from mammalian cells contains a
catalytic subunit (CDK9), a cyclin subunit (cyclin T1 or cyclin T2), and
additional, yet unidentified, polypeptides of unknown function. To identify
additional factors involved in P-TEFb function we performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen using CDK9 as bait and found that cyclin K interacts with CDK9 in vivo.
Biochemical analyses indicate that cyclin K functions as a regulatory subunit of 
CDK9. The CDK9-cyclin K complex phosphorylated the CTD of RNAPII and functionally
substituted for P-TEFb comprised of CDK9 and cyclin T in in vitro transcription
reactions.

PMID: 10574912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Mol Biol. 1999 Oct 22;293(2):235-54.

Tackling Tat.

Karn J(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK.
karn@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Activation of cellular genes typically involves control of transcription
initiation by DNA-binding regulatory proteins. The human immunodeficiency virus
transactivator protein, Tat, provides the first example of the regulation of
viral gene expression through control of elongation by RNA polymerase II. In the 
absence of Tat, initiation from the long terminal repeat is efficient, but
transcription is impaired because the promoter engages poorly processive
polymerases that disengage from the DNA template prematurely. Activation of
transcriptional elongation occurs following the recruitment of Tat to the
transcription machinery via a specific interaction with an RNA regulatory element
called TAR, a 59-residue RNA leader sequence that folds into a specific stem-loop
structure. After binding to TAR RNA, Tat stimulates a specific protein kinase
called TAK (Tat-associated kinase). This results in hyperphosphorylation of the
large subunit of the RNA polymerase II carboxyl- terminal domain. The kinase
subunit of TAK, CDK9, is analogous to a component of a positive acting elongation
factor isolated from Drosophila called pTEFb. Direct evidence for the role of TAK
in transcriptional regulation of the HIV long terminal repeat comes from
experiments using inactive mutants of the CDK9 kinase expressed in trans to
inhibit transcription. A critical role for TAK in HIV transcription is also
demonstrated by selective inhibition of Tat activity by low molecular mass kinase
inhibitors. A second link between TAK and transactivation is the observation that
the cyclin component of TAK, cyclin T1, also participates in TAR RNA recognition.
It has been known for several years that mutations in the apical loop region of
TAR RNA abolish Tat activity, yet this region of TAR is not required for binding 
by recombinant Tat protein in vitro, suggesting that the loop region acts as a
binding site for essential cellular co-factors. Tat is able to form a ternary
complex with TAR RNA and cyclin T1 only when a functional loop sequence is
present on TAR.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10550206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. EMBO J. 1999 Nov 1;18(21):6106-18.

HIV-1 tat transcriptional activity is regulated by acetylation.

Kiernan RE(1), Vanhulle C, Schiltz L, Adam E, Xiao H, Maudoux F, Calomme C, Burny
A, Nakatani Y, Jeang KT, Benkirane M, Van Lint C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire et Transfert de Gène, Institut de
Génétique Humaine, UPR1142 Montpellier, 34396, France.

The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) trans- activator protein, Tat, stimulates 
transcription from the viral long-terminal repeats (LTR) through an RNA hairpin
element, trans-activation responsive region (TAR). We and others have shown that 
trans-activator protein (Tat)-associated histone acetyltransferases (TAHs), p300 
and p300/CBP-associating factor (PCAF), assist functionally in the activation of 
chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTR. Here, we show that p300 and PCAF also
directly acetylate Tat. We defined two sites of acetylation located in different 
functional domains of Tat. p300 acetylated Lys50 in the TAR RNA binding domain,
while PCAF acetylated Lys28 in the activation domain of Tat. In support of a
functional role for acetylation in vivo, histone deacetylase inhibitor
(trichostatin A) synergized with Tat in transcriptional activation of the HIV-1
LTR. Synergism was TAR-dependent and required the intact presence of both Lys28
and Lys50. Mechanistically, acetylation at Lys28 by PCAF enhanced Tat binding to 
the Tat-associated kinase, CDK9/P-TEFb, while acetylation by p300 at Lys50 of Tat
promoted the dissociation of Tat from TAR RNA that occurs during early
transcription elongation. These data suggest that acetylation of Tat regulates
two discrete and functionally critical steps in transcription, binding to an RNAP
II CTD-kinase and release of Tat from TAR RNA.

PMCID: PMC1171675
PMID: 10545121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Dec 1;75(3):357-68.

Regulatory functions of Cdk9 and of cyclin T1 in HIV tat transactivation pathway 
gene expression.

Romano G(1), Kasten M, De Falco G, Micheli P, Khalili K, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Institute, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

HIV-1 gene expression relies upon a complex machinery that is primarily
controlled by two viral regulatory proteins, Tat and Rev. Rev is involved in
regulating post-transcriptional events of HIV-1 gene expression. The Tat protein 
transactivates transcription from the HIV-1 5' long terminal repeat (LTR) and
acts in synergy with specific cellular factors. Recently, it has been shown that 
one set of these cellular factors is a protein kinase activity termed TAK
(Tat-associated kinase), which activates transcription by hyperphosphorylation of
the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II. TAK
also enhances transcription of HIV-2, together with the retroviral
transactivator, Tat-2. The TAK activity appears to be related to the CTD kinase
P-TEFb, which stabilizes transcription elongation of many genes and was
originally isolated from Drosophila extracts. Both TAK and P-TEFb contain at
least two subunits: the cyclin-dependent kinase, CDK9 (PITALRE), the catalytic
subunit, and the regulatory subunit, cyclin T1. CDK9 and cyclin T1 are ubiquitous
factors that affects many cellular processes, including cell differentiation and 
apoptosis. The involvement of TAK in HIV-1 and HIV-2 gene expression is an
important aspect in the biology of these two retroviruses, and may lead to the
development of novel antiretroviral drugs and/or gene therapy approaches for the 
treatment of patients with AIDS.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10536359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Immunol. 1999 Sep 15;163(6):3160-8.

B cell antigen receptor-mediated activation of cyclin-dependent retinoblastoma
protein kinases and inhibition by co-cross-linking with Fc gamma receptors.

Tanguay D(1), Pavlovic S, Piatelli MJ, Bartek J, Chiles TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA.

Cross-linking the B cell Ag receptor (BCR) to surface Fc receptors for IgG (Fc
gamma R) inhibits G1-to-S progression; the mechanism by which this occurs is not 
completely known. We investigated the regulation of three key cell cycle
regulatory components by BCR-Fc gamma R co-cross-linking: G1-cyclins,
cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), and the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb). Rb
functions to suppress G1-to-S progression in mammalian cells. Rb undergoes
cell-cycle-dependent phosphorylation, leading to its inactivation and thereby
promoting S phase entry. We demonstrate in this paper for the first time that
BCR-induced Rb phosphorylation is abrogated by co-cross-linking with Fc gamma R. 
The activation of Cdk4/6- and Cdk2-dependent Rb protein kinases is concomitantly 
blocked. Fc gamma R-mediated inhibition of Cdk2 activity results in part from an 
apparent failure to express Cdk2 protein. By contrast, inhibition of Cdk4/6
activities is not due to suppression of Cdk4/6 or cyclins D2/D3 expression or
inhibition of Cdk-activating kinase activity. Cdk4- and Cdk6-immune complexes
recovered from B cells following BCR-Fc gamma R co-cross-linking are devoid of
coprecipitated D-type cyclins, indicating that inhibition of their Rb protein
kinase activities is due in part to the absence of bound D-type cyclin. Thus,
BCR-derived activation signals that up-regulate D-type cyclin and Cdk4/6 protein 
expression remain intact; however, Fc gamma R-mediated signals block cyclin
D-Cdk4/6 assembly or stabilization. These results suggest that assembly or
stabilization of D-type cyclin holoenzyme complexes 1) is an important step in
the activation of Cdk4/6 by BCR signals, and 2) suffice in providing a mechanism 
to account for inhibition of BCR-stimulated Rb protein phosphorylation by Fc
gamma R.

PMID: 10477583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 1999 Aug 12;18(32):4598-605.

Transcriptional regulation by targeted recruitment of cyclin-dependent CDK9
kinase in vivo.

Majello B(1), Napolitano G, Giordano A, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
'Federico II' and International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR,
Naples, Italy.

The CDK9 kinase in association with Cyclin T is a component of the transcription 
positive-acting complex pTEFb which facilitates the transition from abortive to
productive transcription elongation by phosphorylating the carboxyl-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase II. The Cyclin T1/CDK9 complex is implicated in Tat
transactivation, and it has been suggested that Tat functions by recruiting this 
complex to RNAPII through cooperative binding to RNA. Here, we demonstrate that
targeted recruitment of Cyclin T1/CDK9 kinase complex to specific promoters,
through fusion to a DNA-binding domain of either Cyclin T1 or CDK9 kinase,
stimulates transcription in vivo. Transcriptional enhancement was dependent on
active CDK9, as a catalytically inactive form had no transcriptional effect. We
determined that, unlike conventional activators, DNA-bound CDK9 does not activate
enhancerless TATA-promoters unless TBP is overexpressed, suggesting that CDK9
acts in vivo at a step subsequent to TFIID recruitment DNA-bound. Finally, we
determined that CDK9-mediated transcriptional activation is mediated by
preferentially stimulating productive transcription elongation.

PMID: 10467404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. AIDS. 1999 Aug 20;13(12):1453-9.

The CDK9-associated cyclins T1 and T2 exert opposite effects on HIV-1 Tat
activity.

Napolitano G(1), Licciardo P, Gallo P, Majello B, Giordano A, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Naples Federico II, and International
Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the functional interaction between HIV-1 Tat protein and
the cyclin T1 and T2 proteins which, in association with cyclin dependent kinase 
(CDK)9, are the regulatory subunits of the TAK/P-TEFb cellular complex strictly
required for Tat transactivation.
DESIGN: HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) reporter plasmid was co-transfected into
human and rodent cells with expression vectors encoding Tat and vectors encoding 
the cyclins T1, T2a and T2b, respectively.
METHODS: Tat-mediated transactivation of HIV-1 LTR-driven transcription was
compared in the presence or absence of different cyclins T (T1, T2a and T2b),
upon co-transfections into human and rodent cell lines. Protein interactions were
analysed by in vitro binding assays.
RESULTS: It was found that Tat function in rodent cells is enhanced by
co-expression of cyclin T1 but not cyclin T2. The N-terminal region (amino acids 
1-290) of cyclin T1 is sufficient for this function and for binding to Tat and
CDK9. Cyclin T2 binds to CDK9 but not to Tat. Moreover, enforced expression of
cyclin T2 inhibits cyclin T1-mediated enhancement of Tat in rodent cells and it
represses Tat activity in human cells.
CONCLUSION: Efficient Tat transactivation in rodent cells occurs in the presence 
of human cyclin T1 but not in the presence of cyclin T2; overexpression of cyclin
T2 inhibits Tat function in both rodent and human cells.

PMID: 10465067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Mol Biol. 1999 Jul 30;290(5):929-41.

Direct evidence that HIV-1 Tat stimulates RNA polymerase II carboxyl-terminal
domain hyperphosphorylation during transcriptional elongation.

Isel C(1), Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK.

The human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) Tat protein regulates
transcription by stimulating RNA polymerase processivity. Using immobilised
templates, we have been able to study the effects of Tat on protein kinase
activity during the pre-initiation and elongation stages of HIV-1 transcription. 
In pre-initiation complexes formed at the HIV-1 LTR, the C-terminal domain (CTD) 
of RNA polymerase II is rapidly phosphorylated by transcription factor IIH
(TFIIH). Addition of Tat does not affect either the rate or the extent of CTD
phosphorylation in the pre-initiation complexes. By contrast, Tat is able to
stimulate additional CTD phosphorylation in elongation complexes. This reaction
creates a novel form of the RNA polymerase that we have called RNA polymerase
IIo*. Formation of the RNA polymerase IIo* occurs only after transcription of
templates carrying a functional TAR RNA element and is strongly inhibited by low 
concentrations of 5,6-dichloro-1-beta- D -ribofuranosyl benzimidazole (DRB), a
potent inhibitor of CDK9, the protein kinase subunit of the Tat-associated kinase
(TAK). Immunoblotting experiments have shown that CDK9 and its associated cyclin,
cyclin T1, are present at equivalent levels in both the pre-initiation and
elongation complexes. We conclude that activation of the CDK9 kinase, leading to 
CTD phosphorylation, occurs only in elongation complexes that have transcribed
through the Tat-recognition element, TAR RNA.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10438593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jul 6;96(14):7791-6.

Recruitment of cyclin T1/P-TEFb to an HIV type 1 long terminal repeat promoter
proximal RNA target is both necessary and sufficient for full activation of
transcription.

Bieniasz PD(1), Grdina TA, Bogerd HP, Cullen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, Box 3025, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the HIV type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR)
promoter element by the viral Tat protein is an essential step in the HIV-1 life 
cycle. Tat function is mediated by the TAR RNA target element encoded within the 
LTR and is known to require the recruitment of a complex consisting of Tat and
the cyclin T1 (CycT1) component of positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb) to TAR. Here, we demonstrate that both TAR and Tat become entirely
dispensable for activation of the HIV-1 LTR promoter when CycT1/P-TEFb is
artificially recruited to a heterologous promoter proximal RNA target. The level 
of activation observed was indistinguishable from the level induced by Tat and
was neither inhibited nor increased when Tat was expressed in trans. Activation
by artificially recruited CycT1 depended on the ability to bind the CDK9
component of P-TEFb. In contrast, although binding to both Tat and TAR was
essential for the ability of CycT1 to act as a Tat cofactor, these interactions
became dispensable when CycT1 was directly recruited to the LTR. Importantly,
activation of the LTR both by Tat and by directly recruited CycT1 was found to be
at the level of transcription elongation. Together, these data demonstrate that
recruitment of CycT1/P-TEFb to the HIV-1 LTR is fully sufficient to activate this
promoter element and imply that the sole role of the Tat/TAR axis in viral
transcription is to permit the recruitment of CycT1/P-TEFb.

PMCID: PMC22140
PMID: 10393900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Virol. 1999 Jul;73(7):5448-58.

Human and rodent transcription elongation factor P-TEFb: interactions with human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1 tat and carboxy-terminal domain substrate.

Ramanathan Y(1), Reza SM, Young TM, Mathews MB, Pe'ery T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07103,
USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transcriptional regulator Tat increases
the efficiency of elongation, and complexes containing the cellular kinase CDK9
have been implicated in this process. CDK9 is part of the Tat-associated kinase
TAK and of the elongation factor P-TEFb (positive transcription elongation
factor-b), which consists minimally of CDK9 and cyclin T. TAK and P-TEFb are both
able to phosphorylate the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II, but
their relationships to one another and to the stimulation of elongation by Tat
are not well characterized. Here we demonstrate that human cyclin T1 (but not
cyclin T2) interacts with the activation domain of Tat and is a component of TAK 
as well as of P-TEFb. Rodent (mouse and Chinese hamster) cyclin T1 is defective
in Tat binding and transactivation, but hamster CDK9 interacts with human cyclin 
T1 to give active TAK in hybrid cells containing human chromosome 12. Although
TAK is phosphorylated on both serine and threonine residues, it specifically
phosphorylates serine 5 in the CTD heptamer. TAK is found in the nuclear and
cytoplasmic fractions of human cells as a large complex (approximately 950 kDa). 
Magnesium or zinc ions are required for the association of Tat with the kinase.
We suggest a model in which Tat first interacts with P-TEFb to form the TAK
complex that engages with TAR RNA and the elongating transcription complex,
resulting in hyperphosphorylation of the CTD on serine 5 residues.

PMCID: PMC112601
PMID: 10364292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16097-106.

The transcriptional inhibitors, actinomycin D and alpha-amanitin, activate the
HIV-1 promoter and favor phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain.

Cassé C(1), Giannoni F, Nguyen VT, Dubois MF, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 
75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Actinomycin D and alpha-amanitin are commonly used to inhibit transcription.
Unexpectedly, however, the transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV-1) long terminal repeats (LTR) is shown to be activated at the level of
elongation, in human and murine cells exposed to these drugs, whereas the Rous
sarcoma virus LTR, the human cytomegalovirus immediate early gene (CMV), and the 
HSP70 promoters are repressed. Activation of the HIV LTR is independent of the
NFkappaB and TAR sequences and coincides with an enhanced average phosphorylation
of the C-terminal domain (CTD) from the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II.
Both the HIV-1 LTR activation and the bulk CTD phosphorylation enhancement are
prevented by several CTD kinase inhibitors, including 5,
6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole. The efficacies of the various
compounds to block CTD phosphorylation and transcription in vivo correlate with
their capacities to inhibit the CDK9/PITALRE kinase in vitro. Hence, the positive
transcription elongation factor, P-TEFb, is likely to contribute to the average
CTD phosphorylation in vivo and to the activation of the HIV-1 LTR induced by
actinomycin D.

PMID: 10347161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Mol Biol. 1999 Apr 23;288(1):57-69.

Role of the human and murine cyclin T proteins in regulating HIV-1
tat-activation.

Kwak YT(1), Ivanov D, Guo J, Nee E, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Harold Simmons Cancer
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75235-8594, 
USA.

Human cyclin T1 markedly stimulates tat-activation in rodent cells which are
normally poorly responsive to the effects of Tat. This result suggests that there
are likely to be critical differences in the murine and human cyclin T1 proteins.
Here, we analyzed the role of the murine and human cyclin T1 proteins in addition
to the human cyclin T2a and T2b proteins on regulating tat-activation. Only the
human cyclin T1 protein efficiently formed a complex with Tat bound to TAR RNA.
This difference in function was due to the presence of a cysteine residue in
human cyclin T1 at position 261 rather than a tyrosine or asparagine residue
which are found in the murine cyclin T1 protein and the human cyclin T2a and T2b 
proteins, respectively. A mouse cyclin T1 protein containing a substitution of
tyrosine residue 261 with a cysteine residue, was able to interact with Tat and
stimulate tat-transactivation in rodent cells. Likewise, substitution of a
cysteine residue for an asparagine residue at position 260 of the cyclin T2a and 
T2b proteins also resulted in their ability to interact with Tat and stimulate
tat-activation in rodent cells. The data indicate that a specific residue in the 
cyclin T proteins is required for their in vitro interaction with Tat and their
ability to stimulate in vivo tat-activation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Mol Biol. 1999 Apr 23;288(1):41-56.

Cyclin T1 domains involved in complex formation with Tat and TAR RNA are critical
for tat-activation.

Ivanov D(1), Kwak YT, Nee E, Guo J, García-Martínez LF, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Harold Simmons Cancer
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75235-8594, 
USA.

Tat activates transcription from the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) 
long terminal repeat (LTR) by increasing the processivity of RNA polymerase II.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that the cellular kinase CDK9 and its binding 
partner cyclin T1 are involved in regulating transcriptional elongation and
tat-activation. Cyclin T1, CDK9 and Tat bind as a complex to elements in TAR RNA 
that are required for tat-activation. Here, we used cyclin T1 mutants to define
domains in this protein that bind to both CDK9 and Tat and are involved in
stimulating tat-activation. The region of cyclin T1 extending from amino acid
residues 1 to 263 is necessary for complex formation with Tat bound to TAR RNA
and for stimulation of tat-activation in murine cells that are normally poorly
responsive to the actions of Tat. In contrast, a smaller region of cyclin T1 was 
required to bind to CDK9 and stimulate its kinase activity. Recombinant cyclin T1
and CDK9 stimulated both basal and tat-induced in vitro transcriptional
elongation from the HIV-1 LTR. The effects of Tat on transcriptional elongation
may be mediated by its ability to increase CDK9 phosphorylation of the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain. These results demonstrate that cyclin T1
interactions with Tat and TAR RNA are critical for activation of HIV-1 gene
expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Dec;177(4):501-6.

CDK9 (PITALRE): a multifunctional cdc2-related kinase.

de Falco G(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy, and Cell Biology, Sbarro Institute for
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

CDK9 is a cdc2-related kinase protein. Previously named PITALRE, this protein is 
a serine-threonine kinase involved in many physiological processes. Unlike most
of the cdc2-like kinases, its activity is not cell cycle-regulated. CDK9 acts
preferentially in processes different from cell-cycle regulation, such as
differentiation. Its cyclin partners, cyclins of T family, recently have been
isolated. CDK9 immunoprecipitates with several unidentified polypeptides that may
regulate its kinase activity. CDK9 has been shown to associate with the HIV-Tat
protein, suggesting a possible involvement in AIDS. CDK9 recently was shown to be
responsible for the kinase activity associated with the TAK complex and with the 
P-TEFb complex, suggesting activity also in the transcription process.

PMID: 10092203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2863-71.

Tat activates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transcriptional elongation
independent of TFIIH kinase.

Chen D(1), Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Tat stimulates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcriptional
elongation by recruitment of the human transcription elongation factor P-TEFb,
consisting of Cdk9 and cyclin T1, to the HIV-1 promoter via cooperative binding
to the nascent HIV-1 transactivation response RNA element. The Cdk9 kinase
activity has been shown to be essential for P-TEFb to hyperphosphorylate the
carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II and mediate Tat
transactivation. Recent reports have shown that Tat can also interact with the
multisubunit transcription factor TFIIH complex and increase the phosphorylation 
of CTD by the Cdk-activating kinase (CAK) complex associated with the core TFIIH.
These observations have led to the proposal that TFIIH and P-TEFb may act
sequentially and in a concerted manner to promote phosphorylation of CTD and
increase polymerase processivity. Here, we show that under conditions in which a 
specific and efficient interaction between Tat and P-TEFb is observed, only a
weak interaction between Tat and TFIIH that is independent of critical amino acid
residues in the Tat transactivation domain can be detected. Furthermore,
immunodepletion of CAK under high-salt conditions, which allow CAK to be
dissociated from core-TFIIH, has no effect on either basal HIV-1 transcription or
Tat activation of polymerase elongation in vitro. Therefore, unlike the P-TEFb
kinase activity that is essential for Tat activation of HIV-1 transcriptional
elongation, the CAK kinase associated with TFIIH appears to be dispensable for
Tat function.

PMCID: PMC84079
PMID: 10082552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 16;96(6):2728-33.

Specific interaction of Tat with the human but not rodent P-TEFb complex mediates
the species-specific Tat activation of HIV-1 transcription.

Chen D(1), Fong Y, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720-3206, USA.

Tat stimulation of HIV-1 transcriptional elongation is species-specific and is
believed to require a specific cellular cofactor present in many human and
primate cells but not in nonpermissive rodent cells. Human P-TEFb, composed of
Cdk9 and cyclin T1, is a general transcription elongation factor that
phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. Previous studies have 
also implicated P-TEFb as a Tat-specific cellular cofactor and, in particular,
human cyclin T1 as responsible for the species-specific Tat activation. To obtain
functional evidence in support of these hypotheses, we generated and examined the
activities of human-rodent "hybrid" P-TEFb complexes. We found that P-TEFb
complexes containing human cyclin T1 complexed with either human or rodent Cdk9
supported Tat transactivation and interacted with the Tat activation domain and
the HIV-1 TAR RNA element to form TAR loop-dependent ribonucleoprotein complexes.
Although a stable complex containing rodent cyclin T1 and human Cdk9 was capable 
of phosphorylating CTD and mediating basal HIV-1 elongation, it failed to
interact with Tat and to mediate Tat transactivation, indicating that the
abilities of P-TEFb to support basal elongation and Tat activation can be
separated. Together, our data indicated that the specific interaction of human
P-TEFb with Tat/TAR, mostly through cyclin T1, is crucial for P-TEFb to mediate a
Tat-specific and species-restricted activation of HIV-1 transcription. Amino acid
residues unique to human Cdk9 also contributed partially to the formation of the 
P-TEFb-Tat-TAR complex. Moreover, the cyclin box of cyclin T1 and its immediate
flanking region are largely responsible for the specific P-TEFb-Tat interaction.

PMCID: PMC15837
PMID: 10077579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. EMBO J. 1999 Mar 1;18(5):1378-86.

Stimulation of Tat-associated kinase-independent transcriptional elongation from 
the human immunodeficiency virus type-1 long terminal repeat by a cellular
enhancer.

West MJ(1), Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK.

The human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR)
initiates transcription efficiently but produces only short transcripts in the
absence of the trans-activator protein, Tat. To determine whether a cellular
enhancer could provide the signals required to recruit an elongation-competent
polymerase to the HIV-1 LTR, the B cell-specific immunoglobulin heavy chain gene 
enhancer (IgHE) was inserted upstream of the LTR. The enhancer increased
transcription in the absence of Tat between 6- and 7-fold in transfected B cells,
but the full-length transcripts remained at basal levels in HeLa cells, where the
enhancer is inactive. RNase-protection studies showed that initiation levels in
the presence and absence of the enhancer were constant, but the enhancer
significantly increased the elongation capacity of the polymerases.
Tat-stimulated elongation is strongly inhibited by the nucleoside analogue
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), which inhibits the
Tat-associated kinase, TAK (CDK9). However, polymerases initiating transcription 
from LTRs carrying the enhancer were able to efficiently elongate in the presence
of DRB. Specific repression of TAK by expression in trans of the CDK9 kinase also
inhibited Tat-stimulated elongation but did not inhibit enhancer-dependent
transcription significantly. Thus, the activation of polymerase processivity by
the IgHE involves a unique mechanism which is independent of TAK.

PMCID: PMC1171227
PMID: 10064603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Virology. 1999 Mar 1;255(1):182-9.

Interactions between Tat and TAR and human immunodeficiency virus replication are
facilitated by human cyclin T1 but not cyclins T2a or T2b.

Wimmer J(1), Fujinaga K, Taube R, Cujec TP, Zhu Y, Peng J, Price DH, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0703, USA.

The transcriptional transactivator (Tat) from the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) does not function efficiently in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Only
somatic cell hybrids between CHO and human cells and CHO cells containing human
chromosome 12 (CHO12) support high levels of Tat transactivation. This
restriction was mapped to interactions between Tat and TAR. Recently, human
cyclin T1 was found to increase the binding of Tat to TAR and levels of Tat
transactivation in rodent cells. By combining individually with CDK9, cyclin T1
or related cyclins T2a and T2b form distinct positive transcription elongation
factor b (P-TEFb) complexes. In this report, we found that of these three
cyclins, only cyclin T1 is encoded on human chromosome 12 and is responsible for 
its effects in CHO cells. Moreover, only human cyclin T1, not mouse cyclin T1 or 
human cyclins T2a or T2b, supported interactions between Tat and TAR in vitro.
Finally, after introducing appropriate receptors and human cyclin T1 into CHO
cells, they became permissive for infection by and replication of HIV.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10049833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Virol. 1999 Mar;73(3):2499-508.

Functional domains of Tat required for efficient human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 reverse transcription.

Ulich C(1), Dunne A, Parry E, Hooker CW, Gaynor RB, Harrich D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Departments of Internal Medicine and
Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75235-8594, USA.

Tat expression is required for efficient human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) reverse transcription. In the present study, we generated a series of 293
cell lines that contained a provirus with a tat gene deletion (Deltatat). Cell
lines that contained Deltatat and stably transfected vectors containing either
wild-type tat or a number of tat mutants were obtained so that the abilities of
these tat genes to stimulate HIV-1 gene expression and reverse transcription
could be compared. tat genes with mutations in the amino terminus did not
stimulate either viral gene expression or HIV-1 reverse transcription. In
contrast, tat mutants in the activation, core, and basic domains of Tat did not
stimulate HIV-1 gene expression but markedly stimulated HIV-1 reverse
transcription. No differences in the levels of virion genomic RNA or tRNA3Lys
were seen in the HIV-1 Deltatat viruses complemented with either mutant or
wild-type tat. Finally, overexpression of the Tat-associated kinases CDK7 and
CDK9, which are involved in Tat activation of HIV-1 transcription, was not able
to complement the reverse transcription defects associated with the lack of a
functional tat gene. These results indicate that the mechanism by which tat
modulates HIV-1 reverse transcription is distinct from its ability to activate
HIV-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC104497
PMID: 9971835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 17;17(24):3093-102.

Upregulation of cyclin T1/CDK9 complexes during T cell activation.

Garriga J(1), Peng J, Parreño M, Price DH, Henderson EE, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Cyclin T1 has been identified recently as a regulatory subunit of CDK9 and as a
component of the transcription elongation factor P-TEFb. Cyclin T1/CDK9 complexes
phosphorylate the carboxy terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) in
vitro. Here we report that the levels of cyclin T1 are dramatically upregulated
by two independent signaling pathways triggered respectively by PMA and PHA in
primary human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs). Activation of these two
pathways in tandem is sufficient for PBLs to enter and progress through the cell 
cycle. However, the expression of cyclin T1 is not growth and/or cell cycle
regulated in other cell types, indicating that regulation of cyclin T1 expression
is dependent on tissue-specific signaling pathways. Upregulation of cyclin T1 in 
stimulated PBLs results in induction of the CTD kinase activity of the cyclin
T1/CDK9 complex, which in turn correlates directly with phosphorylation of RNAP
II in vivo, linking for the first time activation of the cyclin T1/ CDK9 pair
with phosphorylation of RNAP II in vivo. In addition, we report here that
endogenous CDK9 and cyclin T1 complexes associate with HIV-1 generated Tat in
relevant cells and under physiological conditions (HIV-1 infected T cells). This,
together with our results showing that HIV-1 replication in stimulated PBLs
correlates with the levels of cyclin T1 protein and associated CTD kinase
activity, suggests that the cyclin T1/CDK9 pair is one of the HIV-1 required host
cellular cofactors generated during T cell activation.

PMID: 9872325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. EMBO J. 1998 Dec 15;17(24):7395-403.

Evidence that P-TEFb alleviates the negative effect of DSIF on RNA polymerase
II-dependent transcription in vitro.

Wada T(1), Takagi T, Yamaguchi Y, Watanabe D, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Recently, a positive and a negative elongation factor, implicated in
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB) inhibition of
transcription elongation, has been identified. P-TEFb is a positive transcription
elongation factor and the DRB-sensitive kinase that phosphorylates the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (Pol II). PITALRE, a
member of the Cdc2 family of protein kinases, is the catalytic subunit of P-TEFb.
DSIF is a human homolog of the yeast Spt4-Spt5 complex and renders elongation of 
transcription sensitive to DRB. DRB sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF) binds to
RNA Pol II and may directly regulate elongation. Here we show a functional
interaction between P-TEFb and DSIF. The reduction of P-TEFb activity induced by 
either DRB, antibody against PITALRE, or immunodepletion resulted in a negative
effect of DSIF on transcription. DSIF acts at an early phase of elongation, and
the prior action of P-TEFb makes transcription resistant to DSIF. The state of
phosphorylation of CTD determines the DSIF-RNA Pol II interaction, and may
provide a direct link between P-TEFb and DSIF. Taken together, this study reveals
a molecular basis for DRB action and suggests that P-TEFb stimulates elongation
by alleviating the negative action of DSIF.

PMCID: PMC1171084
PMID: 9857195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Genes Dev. 1998 Nov 15;12(22):3512-27.

The interaction between HIV-1 Tat and human cyclin T1 requires zinc and a
critical cysteine residue that is not conserved in the murine CycT1 protein.

Garber ME(1), Wei P, KewalRamani VN, Mayall TP, Herrmann CH, Rice AP, Littman DR,
Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037-1099, USA.

HIV-1 Tat activates transcription through binding to human cyclin T1, a
regulatory subunit of the TAK/P-TEFb CTD kinase complex. Here we show that the
cyclin domain of hCycT1 is necessary and sufficient to interact with Tat and
promote cooperative binding to TAR RNA in vitro, as well as mediate Tat
transactivation in vivo. A Tat:TAR recognition motif (TRM) was identified at the 
carboxy-terminal edge of the cyclin domain, and we show that hCycT1 can interact 
simultaneously with Tat and CDK9 on TAR RNA in vitro. Alanine-scanning
mutagenesis of the hCycT1 TRM identified residues that are critical for the
interaction with Tat and others that are required specifically for binding of the
complex to TAR RNA. Interestingly, we find that the interaction between Tat and
hCycT1 requires zinc as well as essential cysteine residues in both proteins.
Cloning and characterization of the murine CycT1 protein revealed that it lacks a
critical cysteine residue (C261) and forms a weak, zinc-independent complex with 
HIV-1 Tat that greatly reduces binding to TAR RNA. A point mutation in mCycT1
(Y261C) restores high-affinity, zinc-dependent binding to Tat and TAR in vitro,
and rescues Tat transactivation in vivo. Although overexpression of hCycT1 in
NIH3T3 cells strongly enhances transcription from an integrated proviral
promoter, we find that this fails to overcome all blocks to productive HIV-1
infection in murine cells.

PMCID: PMC317238
PMID: 9832504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Dec 15;71(4):467-78.

Binding of CDK9 to TRAF2.

MacLachlan TK(1), Sang N, De Luca A, Puri PL, Levrero M, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

CDK9 has been recently shown to have increased kinase activity in differentiated 
cells in culture and a differentiated tissue-specific expression in the
developing mouse. In order to identify factors that contribute to CDK9's
differentiation-specific function, we screened a mouse embryonic library in the
yeast two-hybrid system and found a tumor necrosis factor signal transducer,
TRAF2, to be an interacting protein. CDK9 interacts with a conserved domain in
the TRAF-C region of TRAF2, a motif that is known to bind other kinases involved 
in TRAF-mediated signaling. Endogenous interaction between the two proteins
appears to be specific to differentiated tissue. TRAF2-mediated signaling may
incorporate additional kinases to signal cell survival in myotubes, a cell type
that is severely affected in TRAF2 knockout mice.

PMID: 9827693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Virol. 1998 Dec;72(12):9881-8.

Tat-associated kinase, TAK, activity is regulated by distinct mechanisms in
peripheral blood lymphocytes and promonocytic cell lines.

Herrmann CH(1), Carroll RG, Wei P, Jones KA, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. hermann@bcm.tmc.edu

TAK, a multisubunit cellular protein kinase that specifically associates with the
human immunodeficiency virus Tat proteins and hyperphosphorylates the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, is a cofactor for Tat and mediates
its transactivation function. The catalytic subunit of TAK has been identified as
cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9, and its regulatory partner has been identified as
cyclin T1; these proteins are also components of positive transcription
elongation factor P-TEFb. TAK activity is up-regulated upon activation of
peripheral blood lymphocytes and following macrophage differentiation of
promonocytic cell lines. We have found that activation of peripheral blood
lymphocytes results in increased mRNA and protein levels of both Cdk9 and cyclin 
T1. Cdk9 and cyclin T1 induction occurred in purified CD4(+) primary T cells
activated by a variety of stimuli. In contrast, phorbol ester-induced
differentiation of promonocytic cell lines into macrophage-like cells produced a 
large induction of cyclin T1 protein expression from nearly undetectable levels, 
while Cdk9 protein levels remained at a constant high level. Measurements of
cyclin T1 mRNA levels in a promonocytic cell line suggested that regulation of
cyclin T1 occurs at a posttranscriptional level. These results suggest that
cyclin T1 and TAK function may be required in differentiated monocytes and
further show that TAK activity can be regulated by distinct mechanisms in
different cell types.

PMCID: PMC110500
PMID: 9811724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Nov;177(2):206-13.

Cloning of murine CDK9/PITALRE and its tissue-specific expression in development.

Bagella L(1), MacLachlan TK, Buono RJ, Pisano MM, Giordano A, De Luca A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Sbarro Institute for Cancer
Research and Molecular Medicine, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The cdc2-family of serine/threonine kinases and their binding partners recently
were implicated in developmental roles. We previously cloned a cdc2-related
kinase, cdk9/PITALRE, that is able to phosphorylate the retinoblastoma protein in
vitro. We describe here the cloning and the characterization of the mouse homolog
of cdk9/PITALRE. The murine cDNA is 98% identical with humans and is expressed at
high levels in brain and kidney tissues. The kinase activity and protein
expression of cdk9/PITALRE were highest in terminally differentiated tissues such
as the muscle and brain. In situ immunohistology and immunofluorescence detected 
cdk9/PITALRE protein not only within terminally differentiated cells such as
muscle and neuronal cells, but also in proliferating cells. C2C12 and P19 cells
induced to differentiate along muscle and neural lineages peaked in cdk9/PITALRE 
kinase activity at the end of differentiation. These results suggest that, among 
other roles, cdk9/PITALRE plays a role not unlike cdk5 in the differentiation of 
certain cell types.

PMID: 9766517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):4994-9.

Phosphorylation of nuclear MyoD is required for its rapid degradation.

Song A(1), Wang Q, Goebl MG, Harrington MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

MyoD is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved in the activation 
of genes encoding skeletal muscle-specific proteins. Independent of its ability
to transactivate muscle-specific genes, MyoD can also act as a cell cycle
inhibitor. MyoD activity is regulated by transcriptional and posttranscriptional 
mechanisms. While MyoD can be found phosphorylated, the functional significance
of this posttranslation modification has not been established. MyoD contains
several consensus cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) phosphorylation sites. In these
studies, we examined whether a link could be established between MyoD activity
and phosphorylation at putative CDK sites. Site-directed mutagenesis of potential
CDK phosphorylation sites in MyoD revealed that S200 is required for MyoD
hyperphosphorylation as well as the normally short half-life of the MyoD protein.
Additionally, we determined that turnover of the MyoD protein requires the
proteasome and Cdc34 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme activity. Results of these
studies demonstrate that hyperphosphorylated MyoD is targeted for rapid
degradation by the ubiquitin pathway. The targeted degradation of MyoD following 
CDK phosphorylation identifies a mechanism through which MyoD activity can be
regulated coordinately with the cell cycle machinery (CDK2 and CDK4) and/or
coordinately with the cellular transcriptional machinery (CDK7, CDK8, and CDK9).

PMCID: PMC109084
PMID: 9710583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Virol. 1998 Sep;72(9):7154-9.

The ability of positive transcription elongation factor B to transactivate human 
immunodeficiency virus transcription depends on a functional kinase domain,
cyclin T1, and Tat.

Fujinaga K(1), Cujec TP, Peng J, Garriga J, Price DH, Graña X, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94143-0703, USA.

By binding to the transactivation response element (TAR) RNA, the transcriptional
transactivator (Tat) from the human immunodeficiency virus increases rates of
elongation rather than initiation of viral transcription. Two cyclin-dependent
serine/threonine kinases, CDK7 and CDK9, which phosphorylate the C-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase II, have been implicated in Tat transactivation in vivo 
and in vitro. In this report, we demonstrate that CDK9, which is the kinase
component of the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) complex, can
activate viral transcription when tethered to the heterologous Rev response
element RNA via the regulator of expression of virion proteins (Rev). The kinase 
activity of CDK9 and cyclin T1 is essential for these effects. Moreover, P-TEFb
binds to TAR only in the presence of Tat. We conclude that Tat-P-TEFb complexes
bind to TAR, where CDK9 modifies RNA polymerase II for the efficient copying of
the viral genome.

PMCID: PMC109937
PMID: 9696809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Aug 15;26(16):3784-8.

Targeting of CDK8 to a promoter-proximal RNA element demonstrates
catalysis-dependent activation of gene expression.

Gold MO(1), Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

During transcription of mRNA genes, there is a correlation between the
phosphorylation state of the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of RNA 
polymerase II (RNAP II) and the ability of the RNAP II complex to processively
transcribe the gene. To examine the involvement of CTD phosphorylation in
modulation of RNAP II function, we have analyzed the ability of a known CTD
kinase, human Cdk8, to modulate HIV-1 LTR-driven gene expression upon directed
targeting to a promoter-proximal nascent RNA element. The results indicated that 
Cdk8, when localized to an RNA element, activates gene expression in a
catalysis-dependent manner. Also, Cdk8 targeted to RNA was observed to act in a
synergystic manner with DNA-targeted Sp1 but not with DNA-targeted HIV-1 Tat,
suggesting that RNA-targeted Cdk8 acts on similar rate limiting post-initiation
events as Tat. As recent observations suggest that Tat/TAR-mediated transcription
of the proviral genome of HIV depends on specific phosphorylation of RNAP II in
its CTD by the Tat-associated kinase (TAK/p-TEFb/Cdk9), our results indicate that
Cdk8 shares with Cdk9 the ability to modulate transcription upon targeting to a
nascent RNA element.

PMCID: PMC147767
PMID: 9685496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. EMBO J. 1998 Jul 1;17(13):3681-91.

Transcription elongation factor P-TEFb mediates Tat activation of HIV-1
transcription at multiple stages.

Zhou Q(1), Chen D, Pierstorff E, Luo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. qzhou@uclink4.berkeley.edu

Tat stimulates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcription
elongation through recognition of the transactivation response (TAR) RNA
stem-loop structure at the 5' end of nascent viral transcripts. Recently, a human
transcription elongation factor P-TEFb, consisting of CDK9 kinase, cyclin T and
other associated factors, has been shown to interact with Tat to restore Tat
activation in HeLa nuclear extract depleted of P-TEFb. Here, we report the
purification of a P-TEFb complex fraction containing epitope-tagged wild-type
CDK9 or kinase-inactive CDK9 and five tightly associated polypeptides. Only
wild-type P-TEFb complex with an active CDK9 kinase was able to
hyperphosphorylate the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II and mediate Tat
transactivation in P-TEFb-depleted HeLa nuclear extract. Tat also stimulated
transcription elongation by recruitment of the P-TEFb complex to the HIV-1
promoter through a Tat-TAR interaction. A possible mechanism for P-TEFb to become
associated with polymerase elongation complexes and function as a general
elongation factor was demonstrated by an interaction of P-TEFb with
double-stranded RNA molecules through an 87 kDa subunit. Finally, P-TEFb was
found to interact with and phosphorylate Tat-SF1, a Tat cofactor required for Tat
transactivation. Our data indicate that the various subunits of the human P-TEFb 
complex may play distinct roles at multiple stages to mediate Tat activation of
HIV-1 transcription elongation.

PMCID: PMC1170704
PMID: 9649438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13855-60.

Identification of a cyclin subunit required for the function of Drosophila
P-TEFb.

Peng J(1), Marshall NF, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

P-TEFb is required for the transition from abortive elongation into productive
elongation and is capable of phosphorylating the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD)
of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. We cloned a cDNA encoding the large 
subunit of Drosophila P-TEFb and found the predicted protein contained a cyclin
motif. We now name the large subunit cyclin T and the previously cloned small
subunit (Zhu, Y. R., Peery, T., Peng, J. M., Ramanathan, Y., Marshall, N.,
Marshall, T., Amendt, B., Mathews, M. B., and Price, D. H. (1997) Genes Dev. 11, 
2622-2632) cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9). Recombinant P-TEFb produced in
baculovirus-transfected Sf9 cells exhibited 5,
6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole-sensitive kinase activity similar 
to native P-TEFb. Kc cell nuclear extract depleted of P-TEFb failed to generate
long DRB-sensitive transcripts, but this activity was restored upon addition of
either native or recombinant P-TEFb. Like other CDKs, CDK9 is essentially
inactive in the absence of its cyclin partner. P-TEFb containing a CDK9 mutation 
that knocked out the kinase activity did not function in transcription. Deletion 
of the carboxyl-terminal domain of cyclin T in P-TEFb reduced both the kinase and
transcription activity to about 10%. The CDK-activating kinase in TFIIH was
unable to activate the CTD kinase activity of P-TEFb.

PMID: 9593731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):4448-53.

PITALRE, the catalytic subunit of TAK, is required for human immunodeficiency
virus Tat transactivation in vivo.

Gold MO(1), Yang X, Herrmann CH, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The human cdc2-related kinase PITALRE is the catalytic component of TAK, the
Tat-associated kinase. Previously, we have proposed that TAK is a cellular factor
that mediates Tat transactivation function. Here we demonstrate that transient
overexpression of PITALRE specifically squelches Tat-1 activation of both a
transfected and an integrated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) long
terminal repeat (LTR), suggesting that PITALRE mediates Tat function as a
multiprotein complex. A catalytic mutant of PITALRE, D167N, was found to be more 
efficient than wild-type PITALRE in squelching Tat transactivation. Neither
wild-type PITALRE nor D167N was able to squelch transactivation of the human
T-cell leukemia type 1 LTR by the Tax protein. Additionally, we show that
artificial targeting of PITALRE to a nascent RNA element, in the absence of Tat, 
activated HIV-1 LTR expression. These results indicate that a PITALRE-containing 
complex mediates transactivation by Tat and suggest that Tat proteins function by
localizing such a PITALRE-containing complex to the site of the transcribing
provirus.

PMCID: PMC109679
PMID: 9557739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Genes Dev. 1998 Mar 1;12(5):755-62.

Identification of multiple cyclin subunits of human P-TEFb.

Peng J(1), Zhu Y, Milton JT, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

The transition from abortive into productive elongation is proposed to be
controlled by a positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) through
phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of
RNA polymerase II. Drosophila P-TEFb was identified recently as a
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK9) paired with a cyclin subunit (cyclin T). We
demonstrate here the cloning of multiple cyclin subunits of human P-TEFb (T1 and 
T2). Cyclin T2 has two forms (T2a and T2b) because of alternative splicing. Both 
cyclin T1 and T2 are ubiquitously expressed. Immunoprecipitation and
immunodepletion experiments carried out on HeLa nuclear extract (HNE) indicated
that cyclin T1 and T2 were associated with CDK9 in a mutually exclusive manner
and that almost all CDK9 was associated with either cyclin T1 or T2. Recombinant 
CDK9/cyclin T1, CDK9/cyclin T2a, and CDK9/cyclin T2b produced in Sf9 cells
possessed DRB-sensitive kinase activity and functioned in transcription
elongation in vitro. Either cyclin T1 or T2 was required to activate CDK9, and
the truncation of the carboxyl terminus of the cyclin reduced, but did not
eliminate, P-TEFb activity. Cotransfection experiments indicated that all three
CDK9/cyclin combinations dramatically activated the CMV promoter.

PMCID: PMC316581
PMID: 9499409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cell. 1998 Feb 20;92(4):451-62.

A novel CDK9-associated C-type cyclin interacts directly with HIV-1 Tat and
mediates its high-affinity, loop-specific binding to TAR RNA.

Wei P(1), Garber ME, Fang SM, Fischer WH, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037-1099, USA.

The HIV-1 Tat protein regulates transcription elongation through binding to the
viral TAR RNA stem-loop structure. We have isolated a novel 87 kDa cyclin
C-related protein (cyclin T) that interacts specifically with the transactivation
domain of Tat. Cyclin T is a partner for CDK9, an RNAPII transcription elongation
factor. Remarkably, the interaction of Tat with cyclin T strongly enhances the
affinity and specificity of the Tat:TAR RNA interaction, and confers a
requirement for sequences in the loop of TAR that are not recognized by Tat
alone. Moreover, overexpression of human cyclin T rescues Tat activity in
nonpermissive rodent cells. We propose that Tat directs cyclin T-CDK9 to RNAPII
through cooperative binding to TAR RNA.

PMID: 9491887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Genes Dev. 1997 Oct 15;11(20):2633-44.

P-TEFb kinase is required for HIV Tat transcriptional activation in vivo and in
vitro.

Mancebo HS(1), Lee G, Flygare J, Tomassini J, Luu P, Zhu Y, Peng J, Blau C,
Hazuda D, Price D, Flores O.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, Inc., South San Francisco, California 94080 USA.

To identify novel inhibitors of transcriptional activation by the HIV Tat
protein, we used a combination of in vitro and in vivo Tat-dependent
transcription assays to screen >100,000 compounds. All compounds identified
blocked Tat-dependent stimulation of transcriptional elongation. Analysis of a
panel of structurally diverse inhibitors indicated that their target is the human
homolog of Drosophila positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Loss
of Tat transactivation in extracts depleted of the kinase subunit of human
P-TEFb, PITALRE, was reversed by addition of partially purified human P-TEFb.
Transfection experiments with wild-type or kinase knockout PITALRE demonstrated
that P-TEFb is required for Tat function. Our results suggest that P-TEFb
represents an attractive target for the development of novel HIV therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC316604
PMID: 9334326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genes Dev. 1997 Oct 15;11(20):2622-32.

Transcription elongation factor P-TEFb is required for HIV-1 tat transactivation 
in vitro.

Zhu Y(1), Pe'ery T, Peng J, Ramanathan Y, Marshall N, Marshall T, Amendt B,
Mathews MB, Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242 USA.

P-TEFb is a key regulator of the process controlling the processivity of RNA
polymerase II and possesses a kinase activity that can phosphorylate the
carboxy-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. Here we
report the cloning of the small subunit of Drosophila P-TEFb and the finding that
it encodes a Cdc2-related protein kinase. Sequence comparison suggests that a
protein with 72% identity, PITALRE, could be the human homolog of the Drosophila 
protein. Functional homology was suggested by transcriptional analysis of an RNA 
polymerase II promoter with HeLa nuclear extract depleted of PITALRE. Because the
depleted extract lost the ability to produce long DRB-sensitive transcripts and
this loss was reversed by the addition of purified Drosophila P-TEFb, we propose 
that PITALRE is a component of human P-TEFb. In addition, we found that PITALRE
associated with the activation domain of HIV-1 Tat, indicating that P-TEFb is a
Tat-associated kinase (TAK). An in vitro transcription assay demonstrates that
the effect of Tat on transcription elongation requires P-TEFb and suggests that
the enhancement of transcriptional processivity by Tat is attributable to
enhanced function of P-TEFb on the HIV-1 LTR.

PMCID: PMC316609
PMID: 9334325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Cell Physiol. 1997 Aug;172(2):265-73.

CDC2-related kinase PITALRE phosphorylates pRb exclusively on serine and is
widely expressed in human tissues.

De Luca A(1), Esposito V, Baldi A, Claudio PP, Fu Y, Caputi M, Pisano MM, Baldi
F, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA 19107,
USA.

Mammalian cell cycle progression is regulated by sequential activation and
inactivation of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks). Recently, several new members of
the cdk family were cloned, and some of these were shown to complex with
different cyclins and to be active at discrete stages of the cell cycle. PITALRE,
a new member of this family, was cloned by our laboratory and was shown to be
able to phosphorylate pRb protein in vitro. In the current work, we found that
PITALRE kinase activity phosphorylated pRb at sites similar to those
phosphorylated by the CDC2 kinase, which itself is known to mimic, in vitro, the 
in vivo phosphorylation of pRb. Phosphorylation of pRb by the PITALRE-associated 
kinase activity was on Ser residues exclusively. Moreover, we investigated the
expression pattern of PITALRE in normal human tissues, using immunohistochemical 
techniques so as to gain additional data on the characteristics of this new cdk
family member. The protein was widely expressed, although a different tissue
distribution and/or level of expression was found in various organs. Some
specialized tissues such as blood, lymphoid tissue, ovarian cells, and the
endocrine portion of the pancreas showed a high expression level of PITALRE. The 
specific expression pattern found suggests that PITALRE may be involved in
specialized functions in certain cell types.

PMID: 9258347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem J. 1996 Dec 15;320 ( Pt 3):983-9.

Phosphorylation site specificity of the CDC2-related kinase PITALRE.

Garriga J(1), Segura E, Mayol X, Grubmeyer C, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

PITALRE is a human protein kinase belonging to the cell division cycle 2 (CDC2)
kinase family, and is the catalytic subunit of a multimeric complex that contains
several cellular proteins. PITALRE complexes from several cell lines and tissues 
phosphorylate retinoblastoma protein and myelin basic protein (MBP). In the
present work, we have found that MBP is phosphorylated by PITALRE complexes on
both Ser and Thr residues. Two different antibodies raised to PITALRE purified
virtually identical kinase activities, as analysed by MBP phosphopeptide mapping 
and phosphoamino acid analysis. We have identified the proline-directed residue
Ser-162 of MBP as a major phosphorylation site for PITALRE. In addition, our
results suggest that one of the two MBP proline-directed threonine residues,
Thr-97, is also selectively phosphorylated by PITALRE. These data, together with 
analysis of different peptide substrates derived from sites on MBP that are
phosphorylated by PITALRE, indicate that PITALRE is a Ser/Thr proline-directed
kinase. In addition, our results show that PITALRE has a substrate site
specificity distinguishable from those of the CDC2 and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 
(CDK2).

PMCID: PMC1218024
PMID: 9003389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 1;319 ( Pt 1):293-8.

The CDC2-related kinase PITALRE is the catalytic subunit of active multimeric
protein complexes.

Garriga J(1), Mayol X, Graña X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

PITALRE is a human protein kinase identified by means of its partial sequence
identity to the cell division cycle regulatory kinase CDC2. Immunopurified
PITALRE protein complexes exhibit an in vitro kinase activity that phosphorylates
the retinoblastoma protein, suggesting that PITALRE catalyses this
phosphorylation reaction. However, the presence of other kinases in the
immunopurified complex could not be ruled out. In the present work, an inactive
mutant of the PITALRE kinase has been used to demonstrate that PITALRE is the
catalytic subunit responsible for the PITALRE-complex-associated kinase activity,
Ectopic overexpression of PITALRE did not increase the total PITALRE kinase
activity in the cell, suggesting that PITALRE is regulated by limiting cellular
factor(s). Characterization of the PITALRE-containing protein complexes indicated
that most of the cellular PITALRE protein exists as a subunit in at least two
different active multimeric complexes. Although monomeric PITALRE is also active 
in vitro, PITALRE present in multimeric complexes exhibits several-fold higher
activity than monomeric PITALRE. In addition, overexpression of PITALRE
demonstrated the existence of two new associated proteins of approx. 48 and 98
kDa. Altogether these results suggest that, in contrast to the situation with
cyclin-dependent kinases, monomeric PITALRE is active, and that association with 
other proteins modulates its activity and/or its ability to recognize substrates 
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1217767
PMID: 8870681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Mar 17;208(2):562-8.

Cloning of a full-length cDNA sequence encoding a cdc2-related protein kinase
from human endothelial cells.

Best JL(1), Presky DH, Swerlick RA, Burns DK, Chu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation/Autoimmune Diseases, Hoffmann-La Roche Inc.,
Nutley, NJ 07110.

cDNA clones encoding a novel serine/threonine protein kinase were isolated from
human endothelial cell cDNA libraries. The compiled nucleotide sequence is 1757
base pairs in length and contains an open reading frame encoding a 372 amino acid
protein, designated C-2k, with a calculated molecular weight of 43 kDa. Sequence 
analysis indicates that C-2k contains a conserved protein kinase catalytic domain
of 308 residues which exhibits its highest sequence identity of 42% to members of
the cdc2 kinase family and contains the structural elements characteristic to
cdc2-like kinases. C-2k may therefore represent a new member of the cdc2 kinase
family.

PMID: 7695608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer Res. 1995 Mar 15;55(6):1199-205.

Chromosomal mapping of members of the cdc2 family of protein kinases, cdk3, cdk6,
PISSLRE, and PITALRE, and a cdk inhibitor, p27Kip1, to regions involved in human 
cancer.

Bullrich F(1), MacLachlan TK, Sang N, Druck T, Veronese ML, Allen SL, Chiorazzi
N, Koff A, Heubner K, Croce CM, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Insititute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107.

Orderly progression through the cell cycle requires sequential activation and
inactivation of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks). This is achieved in part through
the association of cdks with positive regulators called cyclins and inactivation 
of cyclin-cdk complexes by a rapidly growing number of cyclin-cdk inhibitors.
Recently, the role of cell cycle control proteins both as primary effectors and
as mediators of tumorigenesis has become a subject of increased interest. Here we
report the chromosomal mapping of two cdks, cdk3 and cdk6, two putative cdks,
PISSLRE and PITALRE, and one cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p27, to
chromosomal regions which may be altered in human tumors and examine their
possible involvement in some of these malignancies. In particular, two of the
kinases, cdk3 and PISSLRE and PITALRE, the cdc2-related kinases recently cloned
by us, map to regions previously shown to exhibit loss of heterozygosity in
breast and other tumors.

PMID: 7882308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Apr 26;91(9):3834-8.

PITALRE, a nuclear CDC2-related protein kinase that phosphorylates the
retinoblastoma protein in vitro.

Graña X(1), De Luca A, Sang N, Fu Y, Claudio PP, Rosenblatt J, Morgan DO,
Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Department of
Pathology, Temple University, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140.

Members of the cell division cycle 2 (CDC2) family of kinases play a pivotal role
in the regulation of the eukaryotic cell cycle. In this communication, we report 
the isolation of a cDNA that encodes a CDC2-related human protein kinase
temporarily designated PITALRE for the characteristic Pro-Ile-Thr-Ala-Leu-Arg-Glu
motif. Its deduced amino acid sequence is 47% identical to that of the human
cholinesterase-related cell division controller (CHED) kinase, which is required 
during hematopoiesis, and 42% identical to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SGV1 gene
product, a putative kinase involved in the response to pheromone via its guanine 
nucleotide-binding protein alpha subunit. PITALRE expression is ubiquitous, but
its expression levels are different in various human tissues. PITALRE is an
approximately 43-kDa protein that associates with three cellular polypeptides of 
80, 95, and 155 kDa. PITALRE is localized primarily to the nucleus. In addition, 
we have identified a retinoblastoma protein kinase activity associated with
PITALRE immunocomplexes that cannot phosphorylate histone H1, suggesting that the
target phosphorylation site of PITALRE differs from that of CDC2 kinase.
Interestingly, the retinoblastoma kinase activity associated with PITALRE does
not oscillate during the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC43676
PMID: 8170997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


