
1. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Nov 15;8(11):19895-904. eCollection 2015.

Temporal and spatial expression of caudal-type homeobox proteins in the midgut of
human embryos.

Tang XB(1), Zhang J(1), Wang WL(1), Yuan ZW(2), Bai YZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University 
Shenyang 110004, P. R. China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Health Ministry for
Congenital Malformation Shenyang 110004, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to determine the spatiotemporal expression of
caudal-type homeobox genes (CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4) during development of the midgut
in human embryos and to explore the possible roles of CDX genes during the
morphogenesis of human midgut. Human embryos (n=28) were sectioned serially and
sagittally and CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins were detected on the midline from the
5th to 9th weeks of gestation by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins were weakly expressed in epithelium and
mesenchyme of the midgut in the 6th and 7th weeks of gestation and reached
estimated optimal level on the 8th and 9th weeks of gestation. In the 9th week of
gestation, immunoreactivities specific to CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 were restricted in 
epithelium of the midgut.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins began to express in human midgut in the
6th week of gestation. From the 6th to 9th week of gastation, the expression of
CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins gradually increase and exhibited overlapping
expression patterns, suggesting that CDX genes may be involved in early
development of the epithelium of human midgut. Cross-regulatory interactions may 
exist among CDX genes with respect to human midgut development.

PMCID: PMC4723747
PMID: 26884902  [PubMed]


2. J Gastroenterol. 2016 Feb 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Intestine-specific homeobox (ISX) induces intestinal metaplasia and cell
proliferation to contribute to gastric carcinogenesis.

Sue S(1), Shibata W(1,)(2), Kameta E(1), Sato T(1), Ishii Y(1), Kaneko H(1), Miwa
H(1), Sasaki T(1), Tamura T(1), Kondo M(1), Maeda S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan. (2)Advanced Medical Research Center,
Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan. (3)Department of Gastroenterology,
Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan. 
smaeda@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori induces chronic inflammation and intestinal
metaplasia (IM) through genetic and epigenetic changes and activation of
intracellular signaling pathways that contribute to gastric carcinogenesis.
However, the precise mechanism of IM in gastric carcinogenesis has not been fully
elucidated. We previously found that intestine-specific homeobox (ISX) mRNA
expression increased in organoids cultured from Helicobacter-infected mouse
mucosa. In this study, we elucidate the role of ISX in the development of IM and 
gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: ISX expression was assessed in Helicobacter-infected mouse and human
gastric mucosa. MKN45 gastric cancer cells were co-cultured with H. pylori to
determine whether Helicobacter infection induced ISX expression. We established
stable MKN45 transfected cells expressing ISX (Stable-ISX MKN45) and performed a 
spheroid colony formation assay and a xenograft model. We performed ISX
immunohistochemistry in cancer and adjacent gastric tissues.
RESULTS: ISX expression was increased in mouse and human gastric mucosa infected 
with Helicobacter. The presence of IM and H. pylori infection in human stomach
was correlated with ISX expression. H. pylori induced ISX mRNA and protein
expression. CDX1/2, cyclinD1, and MUC2 were upregulated in Stable-ISX MKN45,
whereas MUC5AC was downregulated. Stable-ISX MKN45 cells formed more spheroid
colonies, and had high tumorigenic ability. ISX expression in gastric cancer and 
adjacent mucosa were correlated.
CONCLUSIONS: ISX expression induced by H. pylori infection may lead to IM and
hyperproliferation of gastric mucosa through CDX1/2 and cyclinD1 expression,
contributing to gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 26872890  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Dig Dis Sci. 2016 Apr;61(4):1051-9. doi: 10.1007/s10620-016-4048-y. Epub 2016 Feb
3.

Follow-Up Study on CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA Expression in Noncancerous Gastric Mucosae 
After Helicobacter pylori Eradication.

Shin CM(1), Kim N(2,)(3), Chang H(1), Kim JS(4), Lee DH(1,)(4), Jung HC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
173-82, Gumi-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, 463-707, South Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
173-82, Gumi-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, 463-707, South Korea.
nayoungkim49@empas.com. (3)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
nayoungkim49@empas.com. (4)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Changes in CDX1/CDX2 in gastric mucosae following Helicobacter pylori
eradication have not been clarified yet.
AIMS: To evaluate the changes in CDX1/CDX2 expression after H. pylori
eradication, in relation to the reversibility of intestinal metaplasia (IM).
METHODS: Time course of CDX1/CDX2 expressions was investigated in 176 subjects
with various gastroduodenal disorders. Among them, 132 patients were H. pylori
positives; H. pylori were eradicated in 107 of them; 13 failed to eradicate; and 
12 did not receive H. pylori eradication therapy. Forty-four subjects were H.
pylori negatives. Expression levels in CDX1 and CDX2 from noncancerous gastric
mucosae of the corpus, as well as the histologic findings of gastric mucosae,
were evaluated during the follow-up.
RESULTS: Average follow-up duration was 33.7 months (range 2-97 months).
Expression levels in both CDX1 and CDX2 mRNAs were correlated with IM grade in
the corpus (<U+03C1> = 0.633 and 0.554, respectively, all P < 0.001). Changes in
CDX1/CDX2 mRNA expressions following H. pylori eradication showed only
insignificant results; IM grade at the antrum and corpus showed a tendency to
decrease after H. pylori eradication without statistical significance (P > 0.05).
However, histologic improvement of IM at the corpus was associated with a
decrease in CDX2 mRNA expression during the follow-up (linear mixed model, P for 
slope = 0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, eradication of H. pylori did not show any beneficial 
effects on aberrant CDX1/CDX2 expressions or IM. Reversibility of IM may be
associated with a decrease in CDX2 mRNA expression.

PMID: 26841784  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Gastric Cancer. 2015 Dec;15(4):246-55. doi: 10.5230/jgc.2015.15.4.246. Epub
2015 Dec 31.

Helicobacter pylori Eradication Reduces the Metachronous Recurrence of Gastric
Neoplasms by Attenuating the Precancerous Process.

Jung da H(1), Kim JH(1), Lee YC(2), Lee SK(2), Shin SK(2), Park JC(2), Chung
HS(2), Kim H(3), Kim H(3), Kim YH(1), Park JJ(1), Youn YH(1), Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: The importance of Helicobacter pylori eradication after endoscopic
resection (ER) of gastric neoplasms remains controversial. In this study, we
clarified the importance of H. pylori eradication for metachronous lesions after 
ER.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included 3,882 patients with gastric neoplasms 
who underwent ER. We included patients infected with H. pylori who received
eradication therapy. Among them, 34 patients with metachronous lesions after ER
and 102 age- and sex-matched patients (nonmetachronous group) were enrolled.
Background mucosal pathologies such as atrophy and intestinal metaplasia (IM)
were evaluated endoscopically. The expression levels of CDX1, CDX2, Sonic
hedgehog (SHH), and SOX2 were evaluated based on H. pylori eradication and the
development of metachronous lesions.
RESULTS: The eradication failure rate was higher in the metachronous group than
in the nonmetachronous group (P=0.036). Open-type atrophy (P=0.003) and
moderate-to-severe IM (P=0.001) occurred more frequently in the metachronous
group. In patients with an initial diagnosis of dysplasia, the eradication
failure rate was higher in the metachronous group than in the nonmetachronous
group (P=0.002). In addition, open-type atrophy was more frequent in the
metachronous group (P=0.047). In patients with an initial diagnosis of carcinoma,
moderate-to-severe IM occurred more frequently in the metachronous group
(P=0.003); however, the eradication failure rate was not significantly different 
between the two groups. SHH and SOX2 expression was increased, and CDX2
expression was decreased in the nonmetachronous group after eradication (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Open-type atrophy, moderate-to-severe IM, and H. pylori eradication 
failure were significantly associated with metachronous lesions. However,
eradication failure was significantly associated with dysplasia, but not
carcinoma, in the metachronous group. Thus, H. pylori eradication may play an
important role in preventing metachronous lesions after ER for precancerous
lesions before carcinomatous transformation.

PMCID: PMC4722992
PMID: 26819804  [PubMed]


5. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):4507-21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6607.

Genome-wide profiling of DNA methylation and gene expression in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen C(1), Peng H(2), Huang X(3), Zhao M(4), Li Z(5), Yin N(3), Wang X(1), Yu
F(1), Yin B(1), Yuan Y(1), Lu Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, P.R. China. (2)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular
Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, P.R.
China. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, P.R. China. (4)Hunan Key Laboratory of
Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, The Second Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha, P.R. China. (5)Beijing Genomics Institute at 
Shenzhen, Shenzhen, P.R. China.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the leading cause of cancer-related 
death worldwide. Previous studies have suggested that DNA methylation involved in
the development of ESCC. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the
regulation and maintenance of the methylome as well as their relationship with
ESCC remain poorly understood. Herein, we used methylated DNA immunoprecipitation
sequencing (MeDIP-Seq) and RNA-Seq to investigate whole-genome DNA methylation
patterns and the genome expression profiles in ESCC samples. The results of
MeDIP-Seq analyses identified differentially methylated regions (DMRs) covering
almost the entire genome with sufficient depth and high resolution. The gene
ontology (GO) analysis showed that the DMRs related genes belonged to several
different ontological domains, such as cell cycle, adhesion, proliferation and
apoptosis. The RNA-Seq analysis identified a total of 6150 differentially
expressed genes (3423 up-regulated and 2727 down-regulated). The significant GO
terms showed that these genes belonged to several molecular functions and
biological pathways. Moreover, the bisulfite-sequencing of genes MLH1, CDH5,
TWIST1 and CDX1 confirmed the methylation status identified by MeDIP-Seq. And the
mRNA expression levels of MLH1, TWIST1 and CDX1 were consistent with their DNA
methylation profiles. The DMR region of MLH1 was found to correlate with
survival. The identification of whole-genome DNA methylation patterns and gene
expression profiles in ESCC provides new insight into the carcinogenesis of ESCC 
and represents a promising avenue through which to investigate novel therapeutic 
targets.

PMID: 26683359  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Jan;15(1):124-40. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.051235. Epub
2015 Nov 4.

N-glycosylation Profiling of Colorectal Cancer Cell Lines Reveals Association of 
Fucosylation with Differentiation and Caudal Type Homebox 1 (CDX1)/Villin mRNA
Expression.

Holst S(1), Deuss AJ(1), van Pelt GW(2), van Vliet SJ(3), Garcia-Vallejo JJ(3),
Koeleman CA(1), Deelder AM(1), Mesker WE(2), Tollenaar RA(2), Rombouts Y(4),
Wuhrer M(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics. (2)§Department of Surgery,
and. (3)<U+2016>Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology and. (4)From the
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, ¶Department of RheumatologyLeiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands; Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR
8576, UGSF, Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, F 59 000 Lille, 
France. (5)From the Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, <U+2016>Department of
Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology and **Division of BioAnalytical Chemistry, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; m.wuhrer@lumc.nl.

Various cancers such as colorectal cancer (CRC) are associated with alterations
in protein glycosylation. CRC cell lines are frequently used to study these
(glyco)biological changes and their mechanisms. However, differences between CRC 
cell lines with regard to their glycosylation have hitherto been largely
neglected. Here, we comprehensively characterized the N-glycan profiles of 25
different CRC cell lines, derived from primary tumors and metastatic sites, in
order to investigate their potential as glycobiological tumor model systems and
to reveal glycans associated with cell line phenotypes. We applied an optimized, 
high-throughput membrane-based enzymatic glycan release for small sample amounts.
Released glycans were derivatized to stabilize and differentiate between a2,3-
and a2,6-linked N-acetylneuraminic acids, followed by N-glycosylation analysis by
MALDI-TOF(/TOF)-MS. Our results showed pronounced differences between the
N-glycosylation patterns of CRC cell lines. CRC cell line profiles differed from 
tissue-derived N-glycan profiles with regard to their high-mannose N-glycan
content but showed a large overlap for complex type N-glycans, supporting their
use as a glycobiological cancer model system. Importantly, we could show that the
high-mannose N-glycans did not only occur as intracellular precursors but were
also present at the cell surface. The obtained CRC cell line N-glycan features
were not clearly correlated with mRNA expression levels of glycosyltransferases, 
demonstrating the usefulness of performing the structural analysis of glycans.
Finally, correlation of CRC cell line glycosylation features with cancer cell
markers and phenotypes revealed an association between highly fucosylated glycans
and CDX1 and/or villin mRNA expression that both correlate with cell
differentiation. Together, our findings provide new insights into CRC-associated 
glycan changes and setting the basis for more in-depth experiments on glycan
function and regulation.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4762531
PMID: 26537799  [PubMed - in process]


7. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 27;5:10642. doi: 10.1038/srep10642.

Tight junction CLDN2 gene is a direct target of the vitamin D receptor.

Zhang YG(1), Wu S(1), Lu R(1), Zhou D(2), Zhou J(3), Carmeliet G(4), Petrof E(5),
Claud EC(6), Sun J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Kansas City University of Medicine and Bioscience,
Kansas City, Missouri, USA. (4)Lab of Experimental Medicine and Endocrinology,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (5)Department of Medicine, GI
Diseases Research Unit and Division of Infectious Diseases, Queen's University,
Ontario, Canada. (6)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, The University of
Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (7)1] Department of Biochemistry,
Rush University, Chicago, Illinois, USA [2] Department of Pathology, University
of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA.

The breakdown of the intestinal barrier is a common manifestation of many
diseases. Recent evidence suggests that vitamin D and its receptor VDR may
regulate intestinal barrier function. Claudin-2 is a tight junction protein that 
mediates paracellular water transport in intestinal epithelia, rendering them
"leaky". Using whole body VDR(-/-) mice, intestinal epithelial VDR conditional
knockout (VDR(<U+0394>IEC)) mice, and cultured human intestinal epithelial cells, we
demonstrate here that the CLDN2 gene is a direct target of the transcription
factor VDR. The Caudal-Related Homeobox (Cdx) protein family is a group of the
transcription factor proteins which bind to DNA to regulate the expression of
genes. Our data showed that VDR-enhances Claudin-2 promoter activity in a Cdx1
binding site-dependent manner. We further identify a functional vitamin D
response element (VDRE) 5<U+0384>-AGATAACAAAGGTCA-3<U+0384> in the Cdx1 site of the Claudin-2
promoter. It is a VDRE required for the regulation of Claudin-2 by vitamin D.
Absence of VDR decreased Claudin-2 expression by abolishing VDR/promoter binding.
In vivo, VDR deletion in intestinal epithelial cells led to significant decreased
Claudin-2 in VDR(-/-) and VDR(<U+0394>IEC) mice. The current study reveals an important 
and novel mechanism for VDR by regulation of epithelial barriers.

PMCID: PMC4650691
PMID: 26212084  [PubMed - in process]


8. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 1;22(1):250-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-0373. Epub
2015 Jul 13.

Prognostic Impact of Novel Molecular Subtypes of Small Intestinal Neuroendocrine 
Tumor.

Karpathakis A(1), Dibra H(2), Pipinikas C(2), Feber A(2), Morris T(2), Francis
J(3), Oukrif D(2), Mandair D(1), Pericleous M(4), Mohmaduvesh M(4), Serra S(5),
Ogunbiyi O(4), Novelli M(2), Luong T(4), Asa SL(5), Kulke M(6), Toumpanakis C(4),
Meyer T(1), Caplin M(4), Meyerson M(3), Beck S(2), Thirlwell C(7).

Author information: 
(1)University College London, London, United Kingdom. The Royal Free Hospital,
London, United Kingdom. (2)University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)The Royal
Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom. (5)UHN Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Canada. (6)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (7)University College London, London, United Kingdom. The Royal
Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom. christina.thirlwell@ucl.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SINET) are the commonest
malignancy of the small intestine; however, underlying pathogenic mechanisms
remain poorly characterized. Whole-genome and -exome sequencing has demonstrated 
that SINETs are mutationally quiet, with the most frequent known mutation in the 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B gene (CDKN1B) occurring in only ~8% of
tumors, suggesting that alternative mechanisms may drive tumorigenesis. The aim
of this study is to perform genome-wide molecular profiling of SINETs in order to
identify pathogenic drivers based on molecular profiling. This study represents
the largest unbiased integrated genomic, epigenomic, and transcriptomic analysis 
undertaken in this tumor type.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Here, we present data from integrated molecular analysis of 
SINETs (n = 97), including whole-exome or targeted CDKN1B sequencing (n = 29),
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Illumina) array profiling (n = 69), methylated DNA 
immunoprecipitation sequencing (n = 16), copy-number variance analysis (n = 47), 
and Whole-Genome DASL (Illumina) expression array profiling (n = 43).
RESULTS: Based on molecular profiling, SINETs can be classified into three
groups, which demonstrate significantly different progression-free survival after
resection of primary tumor (not reached at 10 years vs. 56 months vs. 21 months, 
P = 0.04). Epimutations were found at a recurrence rate of up to 85%, and 21
epigenetically dysregulated genes were identified, including CDX1 (86%), CELSR3
(84%), FBP1 (84%), and GIPR (74%).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive integrated molecular analysis of
SINETs. We have demonstrated that these tumors are highly epigenetically
dysregulated. Furthermore, we have identified novel molecular subtypes with
significant impact on progression-free survival. Clin Cancer Res; 22(1); 250-8.
©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26169971  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 10;290(28):17293-305. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.632109. Epub
2015 May 26.

Structure-Function Analysis of the Drosophila melanogaster Caudal Transcription
Factor Provides Insights into Core Promoter-preferential Activation.

Shir-Shapira H(1), Sharabany J(1), Filderman M(1), Ideses D(1), Ovadia-Shochat
A(1), Mannervik M(2), Juven-Gershon T(3).

Author information: 
(1)From The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel and. (2)The Wenner-Gren Institute,
Developmental Biology, Stockholm University, Arrhenius Laboratories E3, SE-106 91
Stockholm, Sweden. (3)From The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences,
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel and tamar.gershon@biu.ac.il.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 21;290(34):20747.

Regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription is critical for the proper
development, differentiation, and growth of an organism. The RNA polymerase II
core promoter is the ultimate target of a multitude of transcription factors that
control transcription initiation. Core promoters encompass the RNA start site and
consist of functional elements such as the TATA box, initiator, and downstream
core promoter element (DPE), which confer specific properties to the core
promoter. We have previously discovered that Drosophila Caudal, which is a master
regulator of genes involved in development and differentiation, is a DPE-specific
transcriptional activator. Here, we show that the mouse Caudal-related homeobox
(Cdx) proteins (mCdx1, mCdx2, and mCdx4) are also preferential core promoter
transcriptional activators. To elucidate the mechanism that enables Caudal to
preferentially activate DPE transcription, we performed structure-function
analysis. Using a systematic series of deletion mutants (all containing the
intact DNA-binding homeodomain) we discovered that the C-terminal region of
Caudal contributes to the preferential activation of the fushi tarazu (ftz)
Caudal target gene. Furthermore, the region containing both the homeodomain and
the C terminus of Caudal was sufficient to confer core promoter-preferential
activation to the heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain. Importantly, we
discovered that Drosophila CREB-binding protein (dCBP) is a co-activator for
Caudal-regulated activation of ftz. Strikingly, dCBP conferred the ability to
preferentially activate the DPE-dependent ftz reporter to mini-Caudal proteins
that were unable to preferentially activate ftz transcription themselves. Taken
together, it is the unique combination of dCBP and Caudal that enables the
co-activation of ftz in a core promoter-preferential manner.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4498068 [Available on 2016-07-10]
PMID: 26018075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Jul;36(7):719-29. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv060. Epub 2015 May 
4.

Reducing DNA methylation suppresses colon carcinogenesis by inducing tumor cell
differentiation.

Hatano Y(1), Semi K(2), Hashimoto K(2), Lee MS(3), Hirata A(4), Tomita H(1), Kuno
T(1), Takamatsu M(1), Aoki K(5), Taketo MM(6), Kim YJ(7), Hara A(1), Yamada Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (2)Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application (CiRA), Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 138-736, Korea. (4)Division of
Animal Experiment, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido,
Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (5)Division of Pharmacology, University of Fukui School of 
Medicine, 23-3 Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji-cho, Yoshida-gun, Fukui 910-1193,
Japan. (6)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan and. (7)Department of Integrated Omics for
Biomedical Sciences, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul
120-749, Korea. (8)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Institute
for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan, y-yamada@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

The forced reduction of global DNA methylation suppresses tumor development in
several cancer models in vivo. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying these
suppressive effects remain unclear. In this report, we describe our findings
showing that a genome-wide reduction in the DNA methylation levels induces
cellular differentiation in association with decreased cell proliferation in Apc 
(Min/+) mouse colon tumor cells in vivo. Colon tumor-specific DNA methylation at 
Cdx1 is reduced in the DNA-hypomethylated tumors accompanied by Cdx1 derepression
and an increased expression of intestinal differentiation-related genes.
Furthermore, a histological analysis revealed that Cdx1 derepression in the
DNA-hypomethylated tumors is correlated with the differentiation of colon tumor
cells. Similarly, the treatment of human colon cancer cell lines with a
hypomethylating agent induces differentiation-related genes, including CDX1. We
herein propose that DNA demethylation exerts a tumor suppressive effect in the
colon by inducing tumor cell differentiation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25939752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Clin Neuropathol. 2015 Sep-Oct;34(5):288-93. doi: 10.5414/NP300850.

Intraparenchymal mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of the frontal lobe--a case report
and molecular detection of specific gene fusions from archival FFPE sample.

Sajjad EA, Sikora K, Paciejewski T, Garbicz F, Paskal W, Szacht M, Grajkowska W, 
Wlodarski PK.

Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma is a rare tumor of cartilaginous origin characterized 
by its bimorphic pattern composed of highly undifferentiated small round cells
separated by islands of well-differentiated hyaline cartilage. It exhibits higher
malignancy and earlier occurrence in comparison to classic chondrosarcomas.
Recently identified HEY1-NCOA2 and IRF2BP2-CDX1 gene fusions confirm their
distinct molecular origin and pose a promising diagnostic marker. The majority of
cases arise from craniofacial bones. In this study, we present a rare case of
mesenchymal chondrosarcoma encompassed within the brain parenchyma of the frontal
lobe without any dural or bone attachment. We demonstrate histopathological
findings and confirm the HEY1-NCOA2 gene fusion in a formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded archival sample using simple reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. IRF2BP2-CDX1 gene fusion was absent in the
analyzed sample. The clinical follow-up is also presented with a review of
treatment modalities for this entity.

PMID: 25907264  [PubMed - in process]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):E1550-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503370112. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

The CDX1-microRNA-215 axis regulates colorectal cancer stem cell differentiation.

Jones MF(1), Hara T(2), Francis P(3), Li XL(2), Bilke S(3), Zhu Y(3), Pineda
M(3), Subramanian M(2), Bodmer WF(4), Lal A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom; and Regulatory RNAs and Cancer Section and.
(2)Regulatory RNAs and Cancer Section and. (3)Molecular Genetics Section,
Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (4)Cancer and Immunogenetics
Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Oncology,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom;
and walter.bodmer@hertford.ox.ac.uk ashish.lal@nih.gov. (5)Regulatory RNAs and
Cancer Section and walter.bodmer@hertford.ox.ac.uk ashish.lal@nih.gov.

The transcription factor caudal-type homeobox 1 (CDX1) is a key regulator of
differentiation in the normal colon and in colorectal cancer (CRC). CDX1
activates the expression of enterocyte genes, but it is not clear how the
concomitant silencing of stem cell genes is achieved. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
important mediators of gene repression and have been implicated in tumor
suppression and carcinogenesis, but the roles of miRNAs in differentiation,
particularly in CRC, remain poorly understood. Here, we identified microRNA-215
(miR-215) as a direct transcriptional target of CDX1 by using high-throughput
small RNA sequencing to profile miRNA expression in two pairs of CRC cell lines: 
CDX1-low HCT116 and HCT116 with stable CDX1 overexpression, and CDX1-high LS174T 
and LS174T with stable CDX1 knockdown. Validation of candidate miRNAs identified 
by RNA-seq in a larger cell-line panel revealed miR-215 to be most significantly 
correlated with CDX1 expression. Quantitative ChIP-PCR and promoter luciferase
assays confirmed that CDX1 directly activates miR-215 transcription. miR-215
expression is depleted in FACS-enriched cancer stem cells compared with unsorted 
samples. Overexpression of miR-215 in poorly differentiated cell lines causes a
decrease in clonogenicity, whereas miR-215 knockdown increases clonogenicity and 
impairs differentiation in CDX1-high cell lines. We identified the genome-wide
targets of miR-215 and found that miR-215 mediates the repression of cell cycle
and stemness genes downstream of CDX1. In particular, the miR-215 target gene
BMI1 has been shown to promote stemness and self-renewal and to vary inversely
with CDX1. Our work situates miR-215 as a link between CDX1 expression and BMI1
repression that governs differentiation in CRC.

PMCID: PMC4386393
PMID: 25775580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Biol. 2015 Jun 1;402(1):17-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.02.007. Epub 2015
Mar 6.

The orphan GPCR, Gpr161, regulates the retinoic acid and canonical Wnt pathways
during neurulation.

Li BI(1), Matteson PG(2), Ababon MF(2), Nato AQ Jr(3), Lin Y(4), Nanda V(5),
Matise TC(3), Millonig JH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ, United States; Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ, United States. Electronic address:
bl2535@columbia.edu. (2)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ, United States; Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United States. (3)Department of Genetics;
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United States. (4)Division of Biometrics,
Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, United States.
(5)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ, United States; Department of Biochemistry, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ, United States; Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ, United States. (6)Center for Advanced Biotechnology
and Medicine, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United States; Department of
Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United States;
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United
States; Department of Genetics; Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, United
States. Electronic address: millonig@cabm.rutgers.edu.

The vacuolated lens (vl) mouse mutation arose on the C3H/HeSnJ background and
results in lethality, neural tube defects (NTDs) and cataracts. The vl phenotypes
are due to a deletion/frameshift mutation in the orphan GPCR, Gpr161. A recent
study using a null allele demonstrated that Gpr161 functions in primary cilia and
represses the Shh pathway. We show the hypomorphic Gpr161(vl) allele does not
severely affect the Shh pathway. To identify additional pathways regulated by
Gpr161 during neurulation, we took advantage of naturally occurring genetic
variation in the mouse. Previously Gpr161(vl-C3H) was crossed to different inbred
backgrounds including MOLF/EiJ and the Gpr161(vl) mutant phenotypes were rescued.
Five modifiers were mapped (Modvl: Modifier of vl) including Modvl5(MOLF). In
this study we demonstrate the Modvl5(MOLF) congenic rescues the
Gpr161(vl)-associated lethality and NTDs but not cataracts. Bioinformatics
determined the transcription factor, Cdx1, is the only annotated gene within the 
Modvl5 95% CI co-expressed with Gpr161 during neurulation and not expressed in
the eye. Using Cdx1 as an entry point, we identified the retinoid acid (RA) and
canonical Wnt pathways as downstream targets of Gpr161. QRT-PCR, ISH and IHC
determined that expression of RA and Wnt genes are down-regulated in
Gpr161(vl/vl) but rescued by the Modvl5(MOLF) congenic during neurulation.
Intraperitoneal RA injection restores expression of canonical Wnt markers and
rescues Gpr161(vl/vl) NTDs. These results establish the RA and canonical Wnt as
pathways downstream of Gpr161 during neurulation, and suggest that Modvl5(MOLF)
bypasses the Gpr161(vl) mutation by restoring the activity of these pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25753732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Med Microbiol. 2015 Apr;64(Pt 4):348-54. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000039. Epub 2015
Feb 9.

Effect of probiotics on the expression of Barrett's oesophagus biomarkers.

Mozaffari namin B(1), Daryani NE(2), Mirshafiey A(3), Yazdi MK(4), Dallal MM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology of Pathobiology, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, International Campus (TUMS-IC), Tehran, Iran
Microbiology and Gut Biology Group, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital
Medical School, Dundee, UK. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Division of Immunology, Department of Pathobiology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Zoonosis Research Centre,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran Department of Medical
Laboratory Sciences, School of Para Medicine, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences. Tehran, Iran. (5)Division of Food Microbiology, Department of
Pathobiology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran Food Microbiology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran msoltandallal@gmail.com.

Barrett's oesophagus (BO) is a complicated condition at the gastroesophageal
junction in which normal squamous epithelium is changed to columnar and leads to 
oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OA). In the past decades, the prevalence of Barrett's
disease and mortality rate of adenocarcinoma has significantly increased
throughout the word. Data has shown that molecular pathogenesis of disease has
not been clearly identified. However, a wide-range and successful administration 
of probiotics in cancer and gastrointestinal diseases has lead to the
investigation into the possible inhibitory role of probiotics in oesophageal
cancer. This study was conducted to evaluate the inhibitory effect of probiotics 
on the expression of biomarkers in an in vitro model. Two different Barrett's
oesophageal cell lines were selected to co-culture with B. longum and
Lactobacillus acidophilus to measure expression of IL-18, TNFa, p53 (tumour
suppressor gene), cyclooxygenase 2 and CDX1 (caudal type homeobox 1) genes. In
addition, two different aspects of probiotic administration, therapeutic and
prophylactic test were also examined. Results showed that micro-organisms could
inhibit expression of biomarkers and therapeutic culture conditions were more
effective than prophylactic tests. The results obtained suggest that it is
possible to incorporate the administration of probiotics in BO and OA prevention.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMID: 25666837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Med Oncol. 2015 Mar;32(3):48. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0492-3. Epub 2015 Jan 31.

Interaction of sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway with cancer stem cell genes in
gastric cancer.

Samadani AA(1), Akhavan-Niaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran.

Gastric cancer may appear by frequent genetic or epigenetic changes in oncogenes,
tumor suppressor or DNA mismatch repair genes. Molecular studies show the
possibility of involvement of certain cancer pathways in gastric cancer. In this 
respect, DNA methylation is one of the most important epigenetic alterations in
gastric cancer and identifying the signaling mechanism and also methylation of
some genes that are involved in gastric cancer can help to improve treatment
strategies. Relatively, there are many reported methylation alteration of genes
in stem cells in all kinds of tumors with some of these genes having a key role
in tumor development. Correspondingly, KLF5, CDX1/2, WNT1 and FEM1A are
considerable genes in gastric cancer, although many researches and studies have
illustrated that sonic hedgehog and expression of its signaling cascade proteins 
are related in gastric cancer. Relatively, modification in these genes causes
many eclectic cancers such as rhabdomyosarcoma and diverse kinds of digestive
system tumor development. Conspicuously, these master genes have a noticeable
role in stem cell's growth regulation as well as other kinds of cancer such as
breast cancer and leukemia. Hence, we concluded that research and studies on
methylation and expression of these genes and also the investigation of molecular
signaling in gastric cancer can acquire impressive conclusions in order to
control and treat this common place and serious problem.

PMID: 25636508  [PubMed - in process]


16. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(24):3857-66. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.972875.

Inhibition of Notch signaling enhances transdifferentiation of the esophageal
squamous epithelium towards a Barrett's-like metaplasia via KLF4.

Vega ME(1), Giroux V, Natsuizaka M, Liu M, Klein-Szanto AJ, Stairs DB, Nakagawa
H, Wang KK, Wang TC, Lynch JP, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Gastroenterology; Department of Medicine ; University of
Pennsylvania ; Philadelphia , PA , USA.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is defined as an incomplete intestinal metaplasia
characterized generally by the presence of columnar and goblet cells in the
formerly stratified squamous epithelium of the esophagus. BE is known as a
precursor for esophageal adenocarcinoma. Currently, the cell of origin for human 
BE has yet to be clearly identified. Therefore, we investigated the role of Notch
signaling in the initiation of BE metaplasia. Affymetrix gene expression
microarray revealed that BE samples express decreased levels of Notch receptors
(NOTCH2 and NOTCH3) and one of the the ligands (JAG1). Furthermore, BE tissue
microarray showed decreased expression of NOTCH1 and its downstream target HES1. 
Therefore, Notch signaling was inhibited in human esophageal epithelial cells by 
expression of dominant-negative-Mastermind-like (dnMAML), in concert with MYC and
CDX1 overexpression. Cell transdifferentiation was then assessed by 3D
organotypic culture and evaluation of BE-lineage specific gene expression. Notch 
inhibition promoted transdifferentiation of esophageal epithelial cells toward
columnar-like cells as demonstrated by increased expression of columnar keratins 
(K8, K18, K19, K20) and glandular mucins (MUC2, MUC3B, MUC5B, MUC17) and
decreased expression of squamous keratins (K5, K13, K14). In 3D culture,
elongated cells were observed in the basal layer of the epithelium with Notch
inhibition. Furthermore, we observed increased expression of KLF4, a potential
driver of the changes observed by Notch inhibition. Interestingly, knockdown of
KLF4 reversed the effects of Notch inhibition on BE-like metaplasia. Overall,
Notch signaling inhibition promotes transdifferentiation of esophageal cells
toward BE-like metaplasia in part via upregulation of KLF4. These results support
a novel mechanism through which esophageal epithelial transdifferentiation
promotes the evolution of BE.

PMCID: PMC4614677
PMID: 25558829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 25;9(11):e113071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113071.
eCollection 2014.

Predictive gene signatures: molecular markers distinguishing colon adenomatous
polyp and carcinoma.

Drew JE(1), Farquharson AJ(1), Mayer CD(2), Vase HF(1), Coates PJ(3), Steele
RJ(3), Carey FA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Health, Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB21 9SB, Scotland. (2)Biomathematics and Statistics
Scotland, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB21 9SB, Scotland. (3)Ninewells
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SU, Scotland.

Cancers exhibit abnormal molecular signatures associated with disease initiation 
and progression. Molecular signatures could improve cancer screening, detection, 
drug development and selection of appropriate drug therapies for individual
patients. Typically only very small amounts of tissue are available from patients
for analysis and biopsy samples exhibit broad heterogeneity that cannot be
captured using a single marker. This report details application of an in-house
custom designed GenomeLab System multiplex gene expression assay, the
hCellMarkerPlex, to assess predictive gene signatures of normal, adenomatous
polyp and carcinoma colon tissue using archived tissue bank material. The
hCellMarkerPlex incorporates twenty-one gene markers: epithelial (EZR, KRT18,
NOX1, SLC9A2), proliferation (PCNA, CCND1, MS4A12), differentiation (B4GANLT2,
CDX1, CDX2), apoptotic (CASP3, NOX1, NTN1), fibroblast (FSP1, COL1A1), structural
(ACTG2, CNN1, DES), gene transcription (HDAC1), stem cell (LGR5), endothelial
(VWF) and mucin production (MUC2). Gene signatures distinguished normal,
adenomatous polyp and carcinoma. Individual gene targets significantly
contributing to molecular tissue types, classifier genes, were further
characterised using real-time PCR, in-situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry
revealing aberrant epithelial expression of MS4A12, LGR5 CDX2, NOX1 and SLC9A2
prior to development of carcinoma. Identified gene signatures identify aberrant
epithelial expression of genes prior to cancer development using in-house custom 
designed gene expression multiplex assays. This approach may be used to assist in
objective classification of disease initiation, staging, progression and
therapeutic responses using biopsy material.

PMCID: PMC4244109
PMID: 25423035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Dev Biol. 2014;58(5):307-14. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.140003sg.

Synergistic action in P19 pluripotential cells of retinoic acid and Wnt3a on Cdx1
enhancer elements.

Gaunt SJ(1), Paul YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.

Cdx1 encodes a homeodomain protein that regulates expression of some Hox genes.
Cdx1 itself is known to be regulated in the primitive streak/tailbud by both
retinoic acid (RA) and Wnt3a. Cdx1 in eutherian mammals has two retinoic acid
response elements (RAREs), located upstream and in the first intron, and each is 
adjacent to structural Lef/Tcf motifs. Upstream Lef/Tcf motifs respond to
canonical Wnt signalling to activate Cdx1 synergistically with RA. By combined
use of reporter assays, immunofluorescence and flow cytometry in mouse P19
embryonal carcinoma cells we show that the Cdx1 intron Lef/Tcf motif also
responds to Wnt3a signalling. Synergy between individual Cdx1 RARE and Lef/Tcf
motifs can occur whether they are adjacent or distant in the gene. Part, though
not all, of the Cdx1 stimulation by RA (in absence of added Wnt3a) likely depends
upon Wnt protein produced by the cells themselves, since it is inhibited by
mutation of Lef/Tcf motifs, or by IWP-2, an inhibitor of Wnt production. RA and
Wnt3a stimulate Cdx1 by increasing both the proportion of P19 cells that are
expressing and also their mean level of expression. The expressing/non-expressing
sub-populations do not simply correspond with those that express a marker of
pluripotentiality, Nanog. We conclude that RA and Wnt3a activate Cdx1
synergistically by overlapping use of both upstream and intron enhancers, and
that mouse embryonal carcinoma cell populations display heterogeneity in their
response to these activators.

PMID: 25354450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;289(48):33343-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.583823. Epub
2014 Oct 15.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 function as tumor suppressors.

Hryniuk A(1), Grainger S(1), Savory JG(1), Lohnes D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada. (2)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada
dlohnes@uottawa.ca.

In humans, colorectal cancer is often initiated through APC loss of function,
which leads to crypt hyperplasia and polyposis driven by unrestricted canonical
Wnt signaling. Such polyps typically arise in the colorectal region and are at
risk of transforming to invasive adenocarcinomas. Although colorectal cancer is
the third most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide, the processes
impacting initiation, transformation, and invasion are incompletely understood.
Murine APC(Min/+) mutants are often used to model colorectal cancers; however,
they develop nonmetastatic tumors confined largely to the small intestine and are
thus not entirely representative of the human disease. APC(Min/+) alleles can
collaborate with mutations impacting other pathways to recapitulate some aspects 
of human colorectal cancer. To this end, we assessed APC(Min/+)-induced polyposis
following somatic loss of the homeodomain transcription factor Cdx2, alone or
with a Cdx1 null allele, in the adult gastrointestinal tract. APC(Min/+)-Cdx2
mutants recapitulated several aspects of human colorectal cancer, including an
invasive phenotype. Notably, the concomitant loss of Cdx1 led to a significant
increase in the incidence of tumors in the distal colon, relative to
APC(Min/+)-Cdx2 offspring, demonstrating a previously unrecognized role for this 
transcription factor in colorectal tumorigenesis. These findings underscore
previously unrecognized roles for Cdx members in intestinal tumorigenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4246091
PMID: 25320087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 10;9(10):e107947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107947.
eCollection 2014.

DNA methylation status of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)--related genes 
is associated with severe clinical phenotypes in ulcerative colitis (UC).

Tahara T(1), Shibata T(1), Okubo M(1), Ishizuka T(1), Nakamura M(2), Nagasaka
M(1), Nakagawa Y(1), Ohmiya N(1), Arisawa T(2), Hirata I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine,
Toyoake, Japan. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa Medical University,
Ishikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a phenomenon that
allows the conversion of adherent epithelial cells to a mesenchymal cell
phenotype, which enhances migratory capacity and invasiveness. Recent studies
have suggested that EMT contributes to the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis
(UC). We investigated the promoter DNA methylation status of EMT-related genes in
the colonic mucosa in UC.
METHODS: Colonic biopsies were obtained from the rectal inflammatory mucosa of 86
UC patients and the non-inflammatory proximal colonic mucosa of 10 paired
patients. Bisulfite pyrosequencing was used to quantify the methylation of 5
candidate CpG island promoters (NEUROG1, CDX1, miR-1247, CDH1, and CDH13) and
LINE1.
RESULTS: Using an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, inflamed rectal 
mucosa was well separated from mucosa that appeared normal. The CDH1 and CDH13
promoters were significantly associated with patient age (p = 0.04, 0.03,
respectively). A similar trend was found between those genes and the duration of 
disease (CDH1: p = 0.07, CDH13: p = 0.0002, mean of both: p<0.00001). Several
positive associations were found between hypermethylation and severe clinical
phenotypes (CDX1 and miR-1247 and a refractory phenotype: p = 0.04 and 0.006,
respectively. miR-1247 and CDH1 hyper methylation and a more severe Mayo
endoscopic subscore: miR-1247: p = 0.0008, CDH1: p = 0.03, mean of both: p =
0.003). When the severe clinical phenotype was defined as having any of five
phenotypes (hospitalized more than twice, highest Mayo endoscopic subscore,
steroid dependence, refractory, or a history of surgery) miR-1247
hypermethylation was associated with the same phenotype (p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that variability in the methylation status of
EMT-related genes is associated with more severe clinical phenotypes in UC.

PMCID: PMC4193736
PMID: 25303049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 2;9(9):e108819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108819. eCollection
2014.

RAGE, receptor of advanced glycation endoproducts, negatively regulates
chondrocytes differentiation.

Kosaka T(1), Fukui R(1), Matsui M(1), Kurosaka Y(1), Nishimura H(1), Tanabe M(1),
Takakura Y(1), Iwai K(1), Waki T(1), Fujita T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology lab, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ritsumeikan
University, Shiga, Japan.

RAGE, receptor for advanced glycation endoproducts (AGE), has been characterized 
as an activator of osteoclastgenesis. However, whether RAGE directly regulates
chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation is unclear. Here, we show that RAGE
has an inhibitory role in chondrocyte differentiation. RAGE expression was
observed in chondrocytes from the prehypertrophic to hypertrophic regions. In
cultured cells, overexpression of RAGE or dominant-negative-RAGE (DN-RAGE)
demonstrated that RAGE inhibited cartilaginous matrix production, while DN-RAGE
promoted production. Additionally, RAGE regulated Ihh and Col10a1 negatively but 
upregulated PTHrP receptor. Ihh promoter analysis and real-time PCR analysis
suggested that downregulation of Cdxs was the key for RAGE-induced inhibition of 
chondrocyte differentiation. Overexpression of the NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor I-<U+03BA>B-SR
inhibited RAGE-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation, but did not influence inhibition of
cartilaginous matrix production by RAGE. The inhibitory action of RAGE was
restored by the Rho family GTPases inhibitor Toxin B. Furthermore, inhibitory
action on Ihh, Col10a1 and Cdxs was reproduced by constitutively active forms,
L63RhoA, L61Rac, and L61Cdc42, but not by I-<U+03BA>B-SR. Cdx1 induced Ihh and Col10a1
expressions and directly interacted with Ihh promoter. Retinoic acid (RA)
partially rescued the inhibitory action of RAGE. These data combined suggests
that RAGE negatively regulates chondrocyte differentiation at the prehypertrophic
stage by modulating NF-<U+03BA>B-independent and Rho family GTPases-dependent
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4183532
PMID: 25275461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e103271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103271.
eCollection 2014.

A novel role of CDX1 in embryonic epicardial development.

Chu M(1), Wang L(1), Wang H(1), Shen T(2), Yang Y(3), Sun Y(1), Tang N(1), Ni
T(2), Zhu J(3), Mailman RB(4), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Genetics Engineering & MOE Key Laboratory of
Contemporary Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (3)Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Penn State
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The molecular mechanism that regulates epicardial development has yet to be
understood. In this study, we explored the function of CDX1, a Caudal-related
family member, in epicardial epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and in
the migration and the differentiation of epicardium-derived progenitors into
vascular smooth muscle cells. We detected a transient expression of CDX1 in
murine embryonic hearts at 11.5 days post coitum (dpc). Using a
doxycycline-inducible CDX1 mouse model, primary epicardium, and ex vivo heart
culture, we further demonstrated that ectopic expression of CDX1 promoted
epicardial EMT. In addition, a low-dose CDX1 induction led to enhanced migration 
and differentiation of epicardium-derived cells into a-SMA+ vascular smooth
muscles. In contrast, either continued high-level induction of CDX1 or CDX1
deficiency attenuated the ability of epicardium-derived cells to migrate and to
mature into smooth muscles induced by TGF-ß1. Further RNA-seq analyses showed
that CDX1 induction altered the transcript levels of genes involved in neuronal
development, angiogenesis, and cell adhesions required for EMT. Our data have
revealed a previously undefined role of CDX1 during epicardial development, and
suggest that transient expression of CDX1 promotes epicardial EMT, whereas
subsequent down-regulation of CDX1 after 11.5 dpc in mice is necessary for
further subepicardial invasion of EPDCs and contribution to coronary vascular
endothelium or smooth muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC4113346
PMID: 25068460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jul;32(1):40-4. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3180. Epub 2014 May 15.

Chromosome aberrations and HEY1-NCOA2 fusion gene in a mesenchymal
chondrosarcoma.

Panagopoulos I(1), Gorunova L(1), Bjerkehagen B(2), Boye K(3), Heim S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Cancer Genetics and
Informatics, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway. (2)Department of Pathology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (3)Department of Oncology, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

Mesenchymal chondrosarcomas are fast-growing tumors that account for 2-10% of
primary chondrosarcomas. Cytogenetic information is restricted to 12 cases that
did not show a specific aberration pattern. Recently, two fusion genes were
described in mesenchymal chondrosarcomas: a recurrent HEY1-NCOA2 found in tumors 
that had not been cytogenetically characterized and an IRF2BP2-CDX1 found in a
tumor carrying a t(1;5)(q42;q32) translocation as the sole chromosomal
abnormality. Here, we present the cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis of a
mesenchymal chondrosarcoma in which the patient had two histologically
indistinguishable tumor lesions, one in the neck and one in the thigh. An
abnormal clone with the G-banding karyotype
46,XX,add(6)(q23),add(8)(p23),del(10)(p11),+12,-15[6] was found in the neck tumor
whereas a normal karyotype, 46,XX, was found in the tumor of the thigh. RT-PCR
and Sanger sequencing showed that exon 4 of HEY1 was fused to exon 13 of NCOA2 in
the sample from the thigh lesion; we did not have spare material to perform a
similar analysis of the neck tumor. Examining the published karyotypes we
observed numerical or structural aberrations of chromosome 8 in the majority of
the karyotyped mesenchymal chondrosarcomas. Chromosome 8 was also structurally
affected in the present study. The pathogenetic mechanisms behind this nonrandom 
involvement are unknown, but the presence on 8q of two genes, HEY1 and NCOA2, now
known to be involved in mesenchymal chondrosarcoma tumorigenesis is, of course,
suggestive.

PMCID: PMC4067431
PMID: 24839999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Placenta. 2014 Jul;35(7):450-4. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.04.011. Epub 2014
May 1.

CDX1 restricts the invasion of HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells by inhibiting MMP-9 
expression.

Jia RZ(1), Rui C(1), Li JY(2), Cui XW(3), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Nanjing
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Tianfei Street, Nanjing 210004, China.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Nanjing
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Tianfei Street, Nanjing 210004, China.
Electronic address: lijingyun175@gmail.com. (3)Nanjing Maternal and Child Health 
Medical Institute, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and
Child Health Hospital, Tianfei Street, Nanjing 210004, China. (4)Department of
Obstetrics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child
Health Hospital, Tianfei Street, Nanjing 210004, China. Electronic address:
wangxin_dr@163.com.

INTRODUCTION: Pathogenesis of early-onset preeclampsia (PE) is generally
recognized by impaired trophoblast invasion of the myometrial arteries, which
results in placental insufficiency. Recently, we reported that CDX1 is
hypermethylated in the human preeclampsia placenta. However, whether CDX1
participates in trophoblast invasion has not been clearly elucidated.
METHODS: We investigated the function of CDX1 in the extravillous trophoblast
cell line HTR-8/SVneo using stable transfection of CDX1. Using a CDX1 stable
transfected cell line, we determined the cell invasion using a QCM ECMatrix
24-well kit. The cell viability was detected using an MTT (3-[4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay. Quantitative
RT-PCR and western blotting analyses were performed to examine the changes in the
expression of downstream target genes and proteins. To disrupt PI3K/AKT
signaling, we used the PI3K inhibitor perifosine.
RESULTS: Cell invasion assays demonstrated that CDX1 restricts trophoblast cell
invasiveness. In contrast, quantification of cumulative cell numbers revealed
that CDX1 did not affect cell proliferation. Western blotting analysis and
quantitative real time PCR demonstrated that MMP-9 expression was reduced,
whereas TIMP-1 expression was increased in CDX1-overexpressed cells. However,
overexpression of CDX1 did not affect PI3K/AKT signaling in HTR-8/SVneo
trophoblast cells. In contrast, CDX1 was regulated by the PI3K/AKT signaling
pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, we found that in trophoblast cells, CDX1 reduced
invasion independently of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. Furthermore, CDX1
functions in concert with PI3K/AKT signaling to regulate trophoblast invasion. We
concluded that CDX1 restricts the invasion of HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells by
inhibiting MMP-9 expression independently of the PI3K/AKT pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24836459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1839(7):546-58. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.04.023.
Epub 2014 May 9.

Induction and dorsal restriction of Paired-box 3 (Pax3) gene expression in the
caudal neuroectoderm is mediated by integration of multiple pathways on a short
neural crest enhancer.

Sanchez-Ferras O(1), Bernas G(1), Laberge-Perrault E(1), Pilon N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics of Development Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences and BioMed Research Center, Faculty of Sciences, University of Quebec at
Montreal (UQAM), Canada. (2)Molecular Genetics of Development Laboratory,
Department of Biological Sciences and BioMed Research Center, Faculty of
Sciences, University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM), Canada. Electronic address:
pilon.nicolas@uqam.ca.

Pax3 encodes a paired-box transcription factor with key roles in neural crest and
neural tube ontogenesis. Robust control of Pax3 neural expression is ensured by
two redundant sets of cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) that integrate
anterior-posterior (such as Wnt-ßCatenin signaling) as well as dorsal-ventral
(such as Shh-Gli signaling) instructive cues. In previous work, we sought to
characterize the Wnt-mediated regulation of Pax3 expression and identified the
Cdx transcription factors (Cdx1/2/4) as critical intermediates in this process.
We identified the neural crest enhancer-2 (NCE2) from the 5'-flanking region of
Pax3 as a Cdx-dependent CRM that recapitulates the restricted expression of Pax3 
in the mouse caudal neuroectoderm. While this is consistent with a key role in
relaying the inductive signal from posteriorizing Wnt ligands, the broad
expression of Cdx proteins in the tailbud region is not consistent with the
restricted activity of NCE2. This implies that other positive and/or negative
inputs are required and, here, we report a novel role for the transcription
factor Zic2 in this regulation. Our data strongly suggests that Zic2 is involved 
in the induction (as a direct Pax3NCE2 activator and Cdx neural cofactor) as well
as the maintenance of Pax3 dorsal restriction (as a target of the ventral Shh
repressive input). We also provide evidence that the inductive Cdx-Zic2
interaction is integrated on NCE2 with a positive input from the neural-specific 
transcription factor Sox2. Altogether, our data provide important mechanistic
insights into the coordinated integration of different signaling pathways on a
short Pax3 CRM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24815547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Exp Pathol. 2014 Jun;95(3):216-28. doi: 10.1111/iep.12083. Epub 2014 Apr 8.

Pulsatile exposure to simulated reflux leads to changes in gene expression in a
3D model of oesophageal mucosa.

Green NH(1), Nicholls Z, Heath PR, Cooper-Knock J, Corfe BM, MacNeil S, Bury JP.

Author information: 
(1)Kroto Research Institute, North Campus, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
UK.

Oesophageal exposure to duodenogastroesophageal refluxate is implicated in the
development of Barrett's metaplasia (BM), with increased risk of progression to
oesophageal adenocarcinoma. The literature proposes that reflux exposure
activates NF-<U+03BA>B, driving the aberrant expression of intestine-specific
caudal-related homeobox (CDX) genes. However, early events in the pathogenesis of
BM from normal epithelium are poorly understood. To investigate this, our study
subjected a 3D model of the normal human oesophageal mucosa to repeated,
pulsatile exposure to specific bile components and examined changes in gene
expression. Initial 2D experiments with a range of bile salts observed that
taurochenodeoxycholate (TCDC) impacted upon NF-<U+03BA>B activation without causing cell
death. Informed by this, the 3D oesophageal model was repeatedly exposed to TCDC 
in the presence and absence of acid, and the epithelial cells underwent gene
expression profiling. We identified ~300 differentially expressed genes following
each treatment, with a large and significant overlap between treatments.
Enrichment analysis (Broad GSEA, DAVID and Metacore; GeneGo Inc) identified
multiple gene sets related to cell signalling, inflammation, proliferation,
differentiation and cell adhesion. Specifically NF-<U+03BA>B activation, Wnt signalling,
cell adhesion and targets for the transcription factors PTF1A and HNF4a were
highlighted. Our data suggest that HNF4a isoform switching may be an early event 
in Barrett's pathogenesis. CDX1/2 targets were, however, not enriched, suggesting
that although CDX1/2 activation reportedly plays a role in BM development, it may
not be an initial event. Our findings highlight new areas for investigation in
the earliest stages of BM pathogenesis of oesophageal diseases and new potential 
therapeutic targets.

© 2014 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2014
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

PMCID: PMC4351858
PMID: 24713057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Curr Drug Metab. 2014 Feb;15(2):182-95.

Gene variants and haplotypes modifying transcription factor binding sites in the 
human cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 (PTGS1 and PTGS2) genes.

Agundez JA, Gonzalez-Alvarez DL, Vega-Rodriguez MA, Botello E, Garcia-Martin
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Extremadura, Avda de la Universidad 
s/n, 10071, Caceres, Spain. jagundez@unex.es.

Cyclooxygenases (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthases, (EC 1.14.99.1) 1 and 2
(COX-1 and COX-2)) are key enzymes with a highly functional and pharmacological
relevance. Genetic variations in the corresponding genes PTGS1 and PTGS2 are
related to diverse human disorders and adverse drug reactions. Although COX-2 is 
highly inducible, most genetic association studies have focused on coding region 
gene variants. The aim of this study is to analyze the genetic variants modifying
transcription factor binding sites in human PTGS genes based on the combined use 
of bioinformatics with 1,000 genomes data and replication by next generation
sequencing. Updated information on gene sequences and variants was obtained from 
the 1,000 genomes website and from a replication sequencing study. Of the 570
upstream PTGS1 gene variants, 43 altered binding sites, either by disrupting
existing sequences or by creating new binding sites. The most relevant are the
SNP rs72769722, which creates a new binding site for NFKB, and the SNPs
rs73559017 and rs76403914, both disrupting binding sites for CDX1. Of the 682
upstream PTGS2 gene variants, 31 altered binding sites, the most relevant being
rs689466 and rs20417, which disrupt binding sequences for MYB and E2F,
respectively; rs689462 which creates a new binding site for POU3F2; and a
haplotype combining the SNPs rs34984585+rs10911904, which creates a new binding
site for SRY. This study provides a detailed catalog of variant and invariant
transcription factor binding sites for PTGS genes and related haplotypes. This
information can be useful to identify potential genetic targets for studies
related to COX enzymes.

PMID: 24694232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jan 7;20(1):175-82. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i1.175.

Bile acid increases expression of the histamine-producing enzyme, histidine
decarboxylase, in gastric cells.

Ku HJ(1), Kim HY(1), Kim HH(1), Park HJ(1), Cheong JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hye Jin Ku, Hee Ju Park, Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Pusan 
National University, Busan 601-721, South Korea.

AIM: To investigate the effect of bile acid on the expression of histidine
decarboxylase (HDC), which is a major enzyme involved in histamine production,
and gene expression of gastric transcription factors upon cooperative activation.
METHODS: HDC expression was examined by immunohistochemistry, reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and promoter assay in human gastric
precancerous tissues, normal stomach tissue, and gastric cancer cell lines. The
relationship between gastric precancerous state and HDC expression induced by
bile acid was determined. The association between the expression of HDC and
various specific transcription factors in gastric cells was also evaluated. MKN45
and AGS human gastric carcinoma cell lines were transfected with farnesoid X
receptor (FXR), small heterodimer partner (SHP), and caudal-type homeodomain
transcription factor (CDX)1 expression plasmids. The effects of various
transcription factors on HDC expression were monitored by luciferase-reporter
promoter assay.
RESULTS: Histamine production and secretion in the stomach play critical roles in
gastric acid secretion and in the pathogenesis of gastric diseases. Here, we show
that bile acid increased the expression of HDC, which is a rate-limiting enzyme
of the histamine production pathway. FXR was found to be a primary regulatory
transcription factor for bile acid-induced HDC expression. In addition, the
transcription factors CDX1 and SHP synergistically enhanced bile acid-induced
elevation of HDC gene expression. We confirmed similar expression patterns for
HDC, CDX1, and SHP in patient tissues.
CONCLUSION: HDC production in the stomach is associated with bile acid exposure
and its related transcriptional regulation network of FXR, SHP, and CDX1.

PMCID: PMC3886006
PMID: 24415870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. FASEB J. 2014 Feb;28(2):946-55. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-236273. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Transcriptional control of the B3GALT5 gene by a retroviral promoter and
methylation of distant regulatory elements.

Zulueta A(1), Caretti A, Signorelli P, Dall'olio F, Trinchera M.

Author information: 
(1)1University of Insubria, via J. H. Dunant 5, 21100, Varese, Italy.
marco.trinchera@uninsubria.it.

We focused on transcription factors and epigenetic marks that regulate the
B3GALT5 gene through its retroviral long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter. We
compared the expression levels of the B3GALT5 LTR transcript, quantitated by
competitive RT-PCR, with those of the candidate transcription factors HNF1a/ß and
Cdx1/2, determined by Western blot analysis, in colon cancer biopsies, various
cell lines, and cell models serving as controls. We found that HNF1a/ß were
easily detected, irrespective of the amount of LTR transcript expressed by the
source, whereas Cdx1/2 were undetectable, and no sample lacking HNF1a/ß expressed
the LTR transcript. On transfection in proper host cells, both HNF1a and HNF1ß
provided detectable LTR transcript, whereas shRNA-mediated silencing of HNF1ß
impaired transcription. Treating cells with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AZA)
strongly reduced expression, without affecting HNF1a/ß, despite the lack of CpG
islands in the LTR and proximal sequences. By electrophoresis mobility shift and 
luciferase reporter assays, the LTR promoter binding and activity did not
correlate with the amounts of LTR transcript expressed in the cells and depended 
on the levels of the transcription factors. We conclude that HNF1a/ß are
necessary but insufficient to activate and regulate B3GALT5 LTR transcription,
which depends on unknown regulatory elements that are active when methylated and 
located outside of and far from the LTR promoter.

PMID: 24128890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013 Oct;1300:144-65. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12241.

The esophageal mucosa and submucosa: immunohistology in GERD and Barrett's
esophagus.

Appelman HD(1), Streutker C, Vieth M, Neumann H, Neurath MF, Upton MP, Sagaert X,
Wang HH, El-Zimaity H, Abraham SC, Bellizzi AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

This paper presents commentaries on the microscopic morphology of esophageal
squamous epithelium; the frequency of duplication of the muscularis mucosae (MM) 
in Barrett's esophagus (BE); the significance of multilayered epithelium; whether
cells in the lamina propria reflect those in the epithelium; how stem cells are
identified in the squamous esophagus; dilated intercellular spaces; the
metastasizing potential of early carcinoma-dependent, molecular or
immunohistochemical tests that improve diagnosis; the role of
immunohistochemistry IHC in grading of neoplasia in Barrett's esophagus and
defining the risk of progression to adenocarcinoma; the roles of CDX1 and CDX2 in
squamous and cardiac mucosa; and the role of desmosomal cadherins and lectins in 
squamous and cardiac mucosa.

© 2013 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 24117640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Apr;68(3):463-73. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9749-7.

Molecular insight in gastric cancer induction: an overview of cancer stemness
genes.

Akhavan-Niaki H(1), Samadani AA.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran.

Gastric cancer is one of the most outgoing human cancers in the world. Two main
functional types were described: Intestinal adenocarcinoma and diffuse one. The
most important purpose of this review is to analyze and investigate the main
genetic factors involved in tumorogenesis of stomach and the molecular mechanism 
of their expression regulation alongside with the importance of cancer stem cells
and their relationship with gastric cancer. It is evident that proper diagnosis
of molecular case of cancer may lead to absolute treatment and at least reduction
in the disease severity. However, stemness factors such as Sox2, Oct3/4, and
Nanog were related with induced pluripotent stem cells, proposing a correlation
between these stemness factors and cancer stem cells. Moreover, aberrant
induction by Helicobacter pylori of the intestinal-specific homeobox
transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, also plays an important role in this
modification. There are some genes which are directly activated by CDX1 in
gastric cancer and distinguished stemness-related reprogramming factors like
SALL4 and KLF5. Correspondingly, we also aimed to present the main important
epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation, histone modification, and chromatin
modeling of stemness genes in disease development. Remarkably, a better
understanding of molecular bases of cancer may lead to novel diagnostic,
therapeutic, and preventive approaches by some genetic and epigenetic changes
such as gene amplifications, gene silencing by DNA methylation, losses of
imprinting, LOH, and mutations. Consequently, genome-wide searches of gene
expression are widely important for surveying the proper mechanisms of cancer
emergence and development. Conspicuously, this review explains an outline of the 
molecular mechanism and new approaches in gastric cancer.

PMID: 24078401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):16-8. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2861-0.

Are caudal-type homeobox genes causal for gastro-esophageal reflux disease and
Barrett's esophagus?

Laßmann S(1), Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany,
silke.lassmann@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Comment on
    Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):57-63.

PMID: 24052194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):57-63. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2804-9. Epub 2013 Aug 
6.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of caudal type homeobox 1 and 2 are associated
with Barrett's esophagus.

Ren D(1), Zheng G, Bream S, Tevebaugh W, Shaheen NJ, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Julius L. Chambers Biomedical Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, 700 George Street, Durham, NC,
27707, USA, rendrjxau@hotmail.com.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):16-8.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE), the premalignant lesion of esophageal
adenocarcinoma, is believed to develop as a result of chronic gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD). Approximately 10 % of subjects with GERD progress to BE.
Genetic, epigenetic and other risk factors may contribute to this
inter-individual variability. Caudal type homeobox 1 (Cdx1) and Caudal type
homeobox 2 (Cdx2) play important regulatory roles in the development of human BE.
AIMS: To determine associations between Cdx1 and Cdx2 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and BE.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples collected from BE (n = 109)
and GERD (n = 223) patients for genotyping of 5 SNPs each of Cdx1 and Cdx2 using 
TaqMan allelic discrimination assays. Odds ratios and 95 % confidence intervals
of SNPs and haplotypes were calculated with a logistic regression model adjusted 
for factors including age, sex and hiatal hernia. Interactions between genetic
variants and these three risk factors were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Older age (=50 years), male sex and hiatal hernia were significantly
associated with BE (P < 0.001). Five variants of Cdx1 SNPs (rs3776082, rs717746
and rs3776083), one Cdx1 haplotype, and three variants of Cdx2 SNPs (rs4769585
and rs3812863) were associated with BE (P < 0.05). Statistically significant
interactions were detected between most of these SNPs and the three risk factors 
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Certain SNPs of Cdx1 and Cdx2 and their interactions with other risk 
factors are associated with BE, and may contribute to human susceptibility to BE.

PMCID: PMC3947210
PMID: 23918153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 15;73(18):5798-809. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0454. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Stem cell differentiation and lumen formation in colorectal cancer cell lines and
primary tumors.

Ashley N(1), Yeung TM, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Single cancer stem-like cells (CSC) from colorectal cancers can be functionally
identified by their ability to form large lumen-containing colonies in
three-dimensional Matrigel cultures. These colonies contain the three types of
differentiated colorectal epithelial cells, and single cells obtained from them
can reproduce themselves and form tumors efficiently in immunodeficient mice. In 
this study, we show how hypoxia affects these CSC-derived lumens to control
differentiation of stem-like cells and enterocytes via the homeobox gene CDX1.
Lumens were identified by F-actin staining and they expressed many
characteristics associated with normal differentiated intestinal epithelium,
including brush border enzymes, polarization, and tight junctions. RNA
interference-mediated silencing of CDX1 reduced lumen formation. Inhibitory
effects of hypoxia on lumen formation and stem cell differentiation, including
suppression of CDX1 expression, could be mimicked by inhibiting
prolyl-hydroxylases that activate HIF1, suggesting that HIF1 is a critical
mediator of the effects of hypoxia in this setting. Cell line-derived lumens were
phenotypically indistinguishable from colorectal tumor glandular structures used 
by pathologists to grade tumor differentiation. Parallel results to those
obtained with established cell lines were seen with primary cultures from fresh
tumors. This in vitro approach to functional characterization of CSCs and their
differentiation offers a valid model to study colorectal tumor differentiation
and differentiation of colorectal CSCs, with additional uses to enable
high-throughput screening for novel anticancer compounds.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23867471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 May 14;19(18):2736-9. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i18.2736.

Relationships of CDXs and apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter in
Barrett's esophagus.

Zhao J(1), Gregersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Mech-Sense, Department of Gastroenterology and Surgery, Aalborg University
Hospital, DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark. jz@rn.dk

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):G123-33.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is characterized by intestinal metaplasia with the
differentiated epithelium replaced by another type of epithelium morphologically 
similar to normal intestinal epithelium. The metaplasia is preceded by bile and
acid reflux into the esophagus. BE is a premalignant condition associated with
increased risk of esophageal cancer, especially esophageal adenocarcinoma. The
Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors Caudal-related homeodomain
transcription factor CDX1 and CDX2 are expressed exclusively in the small and
large intestine, playing important roles in proliferation and differentiation of 
intestinal epithelial cells. Ectopic expression of CDX1 and CDX2 occurs in BE.
The apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) is expressed primarily
in terminal ileum where it is a key factor for intestinal reabsorption of bile
salts. In addition to upregulation of CDX1 and CDX2, ASBT expression is
up-regulated in BE. Furthermore, both CDX1/CDX2 and ASBT expressions are
down-regulated in high-grade esophageal dysplasia. The alteration of the
above-mentioned factors calls for attention: what is the relationship between
CDXs and ASBT aberrant expression in BE? In this commentary, we discuss this
issue on basis of the recent study done by Ma et al.

PMCID: PMC3653147
PMID: 23687410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e62274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062274. Print 2013.

Transcriptomic analysis of murine embryos lacking endogenous retinoic acid
signaling.

Paschaki M(1), Schneider C, Rhinn M, Thibault-Carpentier C, Dembélé D,
Niederreither K, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Stem Cells Department, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104), Institut National de la Santé et de
la Recherche Médicale (Unité 964), Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch-Strasbourg,
France.

Retinoic acid (RA), an active derivative of the liposoluble vitamin A (retinol), 
acts as an important signaling molecule during embryonic development, regulating 
phenomenons as diverse as anterior-posterior axial patterning, forebrain and
optic vesicle development, specification of hindbrain rhombomeres, pharyngeal
arches and second heart field, somitogenesis, and differentiation of spinal cord 
neurons. This small molecule directly triggers gene activation by binding to
nuclear receptors (RARs), switching them from potential repressors to
transcriptional activators. The repertoire of RA-regulated genes in embryonic
tissues is poorly characterized. We performed a comparative analysis of the
transcriptomes of murine wild-type and Retinaldehyde Dehydrogenase 2 null-mutant 
(Raldh2 (-/-)) embryos - unable to synthesize RA from maternally-derived retinol 
- using Affymetrix DNA microarrays. Transcriptomic changes were analyzed in two
embryonic regions: anterior tissues including forebrain and optic vesicle, and
posterior (trunk) tissues, at early stages preceding the appearance of overt
phenotypic abnormalities. Several genes expected to be downregulated under RA
deficiency appeared in the transcriptome data (e.g. Emx2, Foxg1 anteriorly, Cdx1,
Hoxa1, Rarb posteriorly), whereas reverse-transcriptase-PCR and in situ
hybridization performed for additional selected genes validated the changes
identified through microarray analysis. Altogether, the affected genes belonged
to numerous molecular pathways and cellular/organismal functions, demonstrating
the pleiotropic nature of RA-dependent events. In both tissue samples, genes
upregulated were more numerous than those downregulated, probably due to feedback
regulatory loops. Bioinformatic analyses highlighted groups (clusters) of genes
displaying similar behaviors in mutant tissues, and biological functions most
significantly affected (e.g. mTOR, VEGF, ILK signaling in forebrain tissues;
pyrimidine and purine metabolism, calcium signaling, one carbon metabolism in
posterior tissues). Overall, these data give an overview of the gene expression
changes resulting from embryonic RA deficiency, and provide new candidate genes
and pathways that may help understanding retinoid-dependent molecular events.

PMCID: PMC3634737
PMID: 23638021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 17;434(4):898-903. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.053. Epub 2013 Apr 23.

Autophagy of cancer stem cells is involved with chemoresistance of colon cancer
cells.

Wu S(1), Wang X, Chen J, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410008, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Chemoresistance is a major cause of treatment failure in colon
cancer, and cancer stem cells have been found to be involved in the
chemoresistance of colon cancer. However, the mechanisms driving the
chemoresistance of colon cancer stem cells have not been addressed.
METHODS: In this study, we investigated the cytotoxicity of paclitaxel in
CD44(+)CD24(+) SW1222 colon cancer cells expressing Cdx1 (CD44(+)CD24(+)Cdx1(+)
stem cells) and CD44(+)CD24(+) HCT116 colon cancer cells expressing wild-type p53
(CD44(+)CD24(+)p53wt stem cells).
RESULTS: SW1222 cells were more resistant to paclitaxel-induced cytotoxicity than
HCT116 cells. Conversely, HCT-116 cells had higher matrigel colony formation
ability than SW1222 cells. The isolated CD44(+)CD24(+)Cdx1(+) cells showed higher
resistance to paclitaxel-induced cytotoxicity than CD44(+)CD24(+)p53wt cells. The
resistance of CD44(+)CD24(+)Cdx1(+) cells to paclitaxel is associated with
upregulation of Cdx1 and Bcl-2 expression, caspase-3 activity, and the ratio of
LC3-II/LC3-I. The sensitivity of CD44(+)CD24(+)p53wt cells to paclitaxel is
associated with the downregulation of Bcl-2 expression, upregulation of Bax
levels, and upregulation of caspase-3 activity. Silencing of Cdx1 expression and 
treatment with lysosomal inhibitor bafilomycin A increased paclitaxel-induced
cytotoxicity in CD44(+)CD24(+)Cdx1(+) cells. Conversely, overexpression of Cdx1
decreased cell death in CD44(+)CD24(+)p53wt cells. Intratumoral injection of Cdx1
siRNA significantly inhibited tumor growth in a xenograft tumor model inoculated 
with CD44(+)CD24(+)Cdx1(+) cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: Cdx1 exerts a protective role in colon cancer stem cells, which play 
a crucial role in chemoresistance to paclitaxel through activation of autophagy. 
Autophagy is activated though the Cdx1-Bcl-2-LC3 pathway. In contrast, p53 exerts
a major role in apoptosis and inhibits autophagy in colon cancer stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23624503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Gene. 2013 Jul 25;524(2):214-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.024. Epub 2013 Apr
22.

Oxidative stress causes epigenetic alteration of CDX1 expression in colorectal
cancer cells.

Zhang R(1), Kang KA, Kim KC, Na SY, Chang WY, Kim GY, Kim HS, Hyun JW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Jiangsu
212013, PR China.

The intestine-specific transcription factor, caudal type homeobox-1 (CDX1), is a 
candidate tumor suppressor gene that plays key roles in regulating intestinal
epithelial differentiation and proliferation. It is aberrantly down-regulated in 
colorectal cancers and colon cancer-derived cell lines by promoter
hypermethylation. Since the effects of oxidative stress on the transcription of
tumor suppressor genes are largely unknown, this study explored the epigenetic
alterations that occur during reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced silencing of 
CDX1 in colorectal cancer cells. Oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
down-regulated CDX1 mRNA levels and protein expression in the human colorectal
cancer cell line, T-84. This down-regulation was abolished by pretreatment with
the ROS scavenger, N-acetylcysteine. In addition, the DNA methylation inhibitor, 
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) markedly attenuated the decrease in mRNA and
protein expression levels induced by H2O2. Moreover, methylation-specific PCR
data revealed that H2O2 treatment increased CDX1 promoter methylation, and
treatment with 5-Aza-dC reversed this effect, suggesting that an epigenetic
regulatory mechanism triggered by ROS-induced methylation may be involved in CDX1
expression. Furthermore, H2O2 treatment resulted in up-regulation of DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) expression and
activity, and enhanced the association between DNMT1 and HDAC1. Taken together,
these results suggest that ROS-induced oxidative stress silences the tumor
suppressor CDX1 through epigenetic regulation, and may therefore be associated
with the progression of colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23618814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Sep;66(9):819-22. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201448. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

Dysregulation of CDX1, CDX2 and SOX2 in patients with gastric cancer also affects
the non-malignant mucosa.

Bornschein J(1), Tóth K, Selgrad M, Kuester D, Wex T, Molnár B, Tulassay Z,
Malfertheiner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-v.-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.

The interplay between gastric and intestinal transcription factors has an
important impact on gastric carcinogenesis. We compared the gene expression of
CDX1, CDX2, SOX2 and related downstream genes in tumour and tumour surrounding
gastric tissue of 48 gastric cancer patients with 30 healthy controls. There was 
no difference of gene expression of CDX1 and CDX2 between tumour or
tumour-adjacent and tumour-distant mucosa, but both factors were significantly
higher expressed in cancer patients compared with controls (p<0.01). SOX2 was
downregulated in tumour tissue compared to controls, whereas tumour-adjacent and 
tumour-distant mucosa showed intermediate SOX2 expression. Laurén type and
Helicobacter pylori infection had no significant impact on expression of the
transcription factors. Expression of CDX1 and CDX2 was higher in the presence of 
intestinal metaplasia. The differential regulation of the gene expression of
CDX1, CDX2 and SOX2 in patients with gastric cancer affects not only the tumour
but also the non-neoplastic tumour-distant mucosa.

PMID: 23613102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Rheumatol Int. 2013 Oct;33(10):2483-91. doi: 10.1007/s00296-013-2740-1. Epub 2013
Apr 11.

The association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the calcitonin gene with
primary osteoarthritis of the knee in Mexican mestizo population.

Magaña JJ(1), Muñoz B, Borgonio-Cuadra VM, Razo-Estrada C, González-Huerta C,
Cortés-González S, Albores A, Miranda-Duarte A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación (INR), Calzada
México-Xochimilco No. 289, Col. Arenal Guadalupe, Deleg. Tlalpan, 14389, Mexico, 
DF, Mexico.

Primary osteoarthritis (OA) is a multifactorial disorder with several genetics
factors involved. Calcitonin (CT) has been suggested to possess chondroprotective
effects and could play an important role in the pathogenesis of OA. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether genetic variations in or adjacent to the CT
gene may be associated with primary OA of the knee in Mexican mestizo population.
We conducted a case-control study to investigate the association between six
single nucleotide polymorphisms at the CT locus and OA of the knee in 107 cases
and 106 controls. Cases were patients >40 years of age, with a body mass index
(BMI) = 27 and a radiologic score for OA of the knee = 2. Controls were subjects 
>40 years of age with a radiologic score <2. Non-conditional logistic regression 
was developed to evaluate risk magnitude. The G allele and GT genotype
frequencies of the G-706T polymorphism and the C allele and CC genotype of the
C-778T polymorphism were significantly higher in patients with OA than in control
subjects. The GG genotype of the G-706T was associated with lower risk of the
development of OA of the knee. According to the results, the G-706T and the
C-778T polymorphisms were related to the Cdx1 and Mzf1 transcription factor
binding sites, respectively. Therefore, these could be related to regulation
sequences in the CT gene promoter. In conclusion, G-706T and C-778T polymorphisms
in the CT gene are significantly associated with the development of primary OA of
the knee.

PMID: 23575548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58857. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058857. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Zebrafish hoxd4a acts upstream of meis1.1 to direct vasculogenesis, angiogenesis 
and hematopoiesis.

Amali AA(1), Sie L, Winkler C, Featherstone M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore.

Mice lacking the 4th-group paralog Hoxd4 display malformations of the anterior
vertebral column, but are viable and fertile. Here, we report that zebrafish
embryos having decreased function of the orthologous hoxd4a gene manifest
striking perturbations in vasculogenesis, angiogenesis and primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis. These defects are preceded by reduced expression of the
hemangioblast markers scl1, lmo2 and fli1 within the posterior lateral plate
mesoderm (PLM) at 13 hours post fertilization (hpf). Epistasis analysis revealed 
that hoxd4a acts upstream of meis1.1 but downstream of cdx4 as early as the
shield stage in ventral-most mesoderm fated to give rise to hemangioblasts,
leading us to propose that loss of hoxd4a function disrupts hemangioblast
specification. These findings place hoxd4a high in a genetic hierarchy directing 
hemangioblast formation downstream of cdx1/cdx4 and upstream of meis1.1. An
additional consequence of impaired hoxd4a and meis1.1 expression is the
deregulation of multiple Hox genes implicated in vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis
which may further contribute to the defects described here. Our results add to
evidence implicating key roles for Hox genes in their initial phase of expression
early in gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3598951
PMID: 23554940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057241. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Chiari malformation type I: a case-control association study of 58 developmental 
genes.

Urbizu A(1), Toma C, Poca MA, Sahuquillo J, Cuenca-León E, Cormand B, Macaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Chiari malformation type I (CMI) is a disorder characterized by hindbrain
overcrowding into an underdeveloped posterior cranial fossa (PCF), often causing 
progressive neurological symptoms. The etiology of CMI remains unclear and is
most likely multifactorial. A putative genetic contribution to CMI is suggested
by familial aggregation and twin studies. Experimental models and human
morphometric studies have suggested an underlying paraxial mesoderm
insufficiency. We performed a case-control association study of 303 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) across 58 candidate genes involved in early
paraxial mesoderm development in a sample of 415 CMI patients and 524 sex-matched
controls. A subgroup of patients diagnosed with classical, small-PCF CMI by means
of MRI-based PCF morphometry (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>186), underwent additional analysis. The genes 
selected are involved in signalling gradients occurring during segmental
patterning of the occipital somites (FGF8, Wnt, and retinoic acid pathways and
from bone morphogenetic proteins or BMP, Notch, Cdx and Hox pathways) or in
placental angiogenesis, sclerotome development or CMI-associated syndromes.
Single-marker analysis identified nominal associations with 18 SNPs in 14 genes
(CDX1, FLT1, RARG, NKD2, MSGN1, RBPJ1, FGFR1, RDH10, NOG, RARA, LFNG, KDR,
ALDH1A2, BMPR1A) considering the whole CMI sample. None of these overcame
corrections for multiple comparisons, in contrast with four SNPs in CDX1, FLT1
and ALDH1A2 in the classical CMI group. Multiple marker analysis identified a
risk haplotype for classical CMI in ALDH1A2 and CDX1. Furthermore, we analyzed
the possible contributions of the most significantly associated SNPs to different
PCF morphometric traits. These findings suggest that common variants in genes
involved in somitogenesis and fetal vascular development may confer
susceptibility to CMI.

PMCID: PMC3578784
PMID: 23437350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054757. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 exhibit transcriptional specificity in the intestine.

Grainger S(1), Hryniuk A, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

The caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed 
in the developing endoderm with expression persisting into adulthood. Cdx1(-/-)
mutants are viable and fertile and display no overt intestinal phenotype. Cdx2
null mutants are peri-implantation lethal; however, conditional mutation
approaches have revealed that Cdx2 is required for patterning the intestinal
epithelium and specification of the colon. Cdx2 is also necessary for homeostasis
of the intestinal tract in the adult, where Cdx1 and Cdx2 appear to functionally 
overlap in the distal colon, but not during intestinal development. Cdx1 and Cdx2
exhibit complete overlap of expression in the intestine, although they differ in 
their relative levels, with Cdx1 maximal in the distal colon and Cdx2 peaking in 
the proximal cecum. Moreover, Cdx1 protein is graded along the crypt-villus axis,
being abundant in the crypts and diminishing towards the villi. Cdx2 is expressed
uniformly along this axis, but is differentially phosphorylated; the functional
relevance of these expression domains and phosphorylation is currently unknown.
Cdx1 and Cdx2 have been suggested to exhibit functional specificity in the
intestinal tract. In the present study, using cell-based models, we found that
relative to Cdx1, Cdx2 was significantly less potent at effecting a
transcriptional response from the Cdx1 promoter, a known Cdx target gene. We
subsequently assessed this relationship in vivo using a "gene swap" approach and 
found that Cdx2 cannot substitute for Cdx1 in this autoregulatory loop. This is
in marked contrast with the ability of Cdx2 to support Cdx1 expression and
function in paraxial mesoderm and vertebral patterning, thus providing novel in
vivo evidence of context-dependent transcriptional specificity between these
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3559873
PMID: 23382958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 6;33(6):783-93. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.637. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

MicroRNA-296-5p increases proliferation in gastric cancer through repression of
Caudal-related homeobox 1.

Li T(1), Lu YY(1), Zhao XD(1), Guo HQ(1), Liu CH(1), Li H(1), Zhou L(1), Han
YN(1), Wu KC(1), Nie YZ(1), Shi YQ(1), Fan DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Department of Gastroenterology,
Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Caudal-related homeobox 1 (CDX1), an intestinal-specific transcription factor,
has been reported to have vital roles in gastric intestinal metaplasia (IM).
Although IM is a high-risk factor for gastric cancer (GC), the specific role of
CDX1 in GC is largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the expression of
CDX1 and its functional roles in GC, and its upstream regulatory mechanisms at
the microRNA (miRNA) level were further explored. We found that CDX1 is lost in
GC when compared with adjacent IM tissues. Gain-of-function studies showed that
CDX1 significantly inhibited GC cell growth by inducing cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. Interestingly, we identified and verified an onco-mir, miR-296-5p, as 
a direct upstream regulator of CDX1. miR-296-5p overexpression significantly
promoted GC cell growth and attenuated the CDX1-induced anti-growth effects by
recurring cell cycle distribution and apoptotic status, whereas knockdown of
miR-296-5p decreased GC cell growth. Furthermore, we found that the extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) activation and the subsequent
downstream changes in protein levels related to cell cycle and apoptosis partly
account for the miR-296-5p-CDX1-induced GC growth promotion. In addition, the
detection of miR-296-5p and expression of CDX1 in primary GC tissues and adjacent
IM tissues revealed that miR-296-5p is inversely correlated with CDX1, further
supporting our in vitro results. Our results showed an anti-growth effect of CDX1
and identified its miRNA regulatory mechanism in GC. The identification of this
novel miR-296-5p-CDX1-ERK1/2 axis sheds new light on the understanding of the
process from IM to GC and may provide therapeutic targets for the treatment of
GC.

PMID: 23353818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Med Sci. 2013;10(2):191-7. doi: 10.7150/ijms.4929. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Mutations and down-regulation of CDX1 in children with anorectal malformations.

Zhang T(1), Tang XB, Wang LL, Bai YZ, Qiu GR, Yuan ZW, Wang WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
Shenyang, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Anorectal malformations (ARMs) represent a variety of congenital
disorders that involve abnormal termination of the anorectum. This study was to
reveal relation between CDX1 and human ARMs phenotypes.
METHODS: 108 Chinese patients and 120 Chinese controls were included in this
study. We analyzed the relation between two by PCR, qRT-PCR, western blot and
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Four heterozygous mutations in CDX1 gene were identified in ARMs
patients (3.7%, 4/108), no found in controls. CDX1 protein expression was
significantly decreased in the ARMs compared with the control anorectum. All
samples analyzed in ARMs group exhibited down-regulated CDX1 mRNA expression in
comparison to matched normal group, demonstrated significant differences
statistically.
CONCLUSION: The findings represented the relation between CDX1 mutations and CDX1
genotype. Furthermore, it was suggested that the downregulation of CDX1 might be 
related to the development of ARMs.

PMCID: PMC3547218
PMID: 23329892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 15;375(2):128-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.010. Epub 2012 
Dec 22.

Kruppel-like factor 5 controls villus formation and initiation of
cytodifferentiation in the embryonic intestinal epithelium.

Bell SM(1), Zhang L, Xu Y, Besnard V, Wert SE, Shroyer N, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Divisions of Neonatology-Perinatal-Pulmonary Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Kruppel-like factor 5 (Klf5) is a transcription factor expressed by embryonic
endodermal progenitors that form the lining of the gastrointestinal tract. A Klf5
floxed allele was efficiently deleted from the intestinal epithelium by a Cre
transgene under control of the Shh promoter resulting in the inhibition of villus
morphogenesis and epithelial differentiation. Although proliferation of the
intestinal epithelium was maintained, the expression of Elf3, Ppar<U+03B3>, Atoh1,
Ascl2, Neurog3, Hnf4a, Cdx1, and other genes associated with epithelial cell
differentiation was inhibited in the Klf5-deficient intestines. At E18.5,
Klf5(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) fetuses lacked the apical brush border characteristic of enterocytes,
and a loss of goblet and enteroendocrine cells was observed. The failure to form 
villi was not attributable to the absence of HH or PDGF signaling, known
mediators of this developmental process. Klf5-deletion blocked the decrease in
FoxA1 and Sox9 expression that accompanies normal villus morphogenesis. KLF5
directly inhibited activity of the FoxA1 promoter, and in turn FOXA1 inhibited
Elf3 gene expression in vitro, linking the observed loss of Elf3 with the
persistent expression of FoxA1 observed in Klf5-deficient mice. Genetic network
analysis identified KLF5 as a key transcription factor regulating intestinal cell
differentiation and cell adhesion. These studies indicate a novel requirement for
KLF5 to initiate morphogenesis of the early endoderm into a compartmentalized
intestinal epithelium comprised of villi and terminally differentiated cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582784
PMID: 23266329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cell Sci. 2013 Feb 15;126(Pt 4):999-1008. doi: 10.1242/jcs.119701. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

RAR<U+03B3> is essential for retinoic acid induced chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional activation in embryonic stem cells.

Kashyap V(1), Laursen KB, Brenet F, Viale AJ, Scandura JM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 
York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

We have utilized retinoic acid receptor <U+03B3> (gamma) knockout (RAR<U+03B3>(-/-)) embryonic 
stem (ES) cells as a model system to analyze RAR<U+03B3> mediated transcriptional
regulation of stem cell differentiation. Most of the transcripts regulated by
all-trans retinoic acid (RA) in ES cells are dependent upon functional RAR<U+03B3>
signaling. Notably, many of these RA-RAR<U+03B3> target genes are implicated in retinoid
uptake and metabolism. For instance, Lrat (lecithin:retinol acyltransferase),
Stra6 (stimulated by retinoic acid 6), Crabp2 (cellular retinoic acid binding
protein 2), and Cyp26a1 (cytochrome p450 26a1) transcripts are induced in wild
type (WT), but not in RAR<U+03B3>(-/-) cells. Transcripts for the transcription factors 
Pbx1 (pre-B cell leukemia homeobox-1), Wt1 (Wilm's tumor gene-1), and Meis1
(myeloid ecotropic viral integration site-1) increase upon RA treatment of WT,
but not RAR<U+03B3>(-/-) cells. In contrast, Stra8, Dleu7, Leftb, Pitx2, and Cdx1 mRNAs 
are induced by RA even in the absence of RAR<U+03B3>. Mapping of the epigenetic
signature of Meis1 revealed that RA induces a rapid increase in the H3K9/K14ac
epigenetic mark at the proximal promoter and at two sites downstream of the
transcription start site in WT, but not in RAR<U+03B3>(-/-) cells. Thus, RA-associated
increases in H3K9/K14ac epigenetic marks require RAR<U+03B3> and are associated with
increased Meis1 transcript levels, whereas H3K4me3 is present at the Meis1
proximal promoter even in the absence of RAR<U+03B3>. In contrast, at the Lrat proximal 
promoter primarily the H3K4me3 mark, and not the H3K9/K14ac mark, increases in
response to RA, independently of the presence of RAR<U+03B3>. Our data show major
epigenetic changes associated with addition of the RAR<U+03B3> agonist RA in ES cells.

PMCID: PMC3625813
PMID: 23264745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049705. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Whole-transcriptome sequencing identifies novel IRF2BP2-CDX1 fusion gene brought 
about by translocation t(1;5)(q42;q32) in mesenchymal chondrosarcoma.

Nyquist KB(1), Panagopoulos I, Thorsen J, Haugom L, Gorunova L, Bjerkehagen B,
Fosså A, Guriby M, Nome T, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI, Heim S, Micci F.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Medical Informatics, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
k.b.nyquist@medisin.uio.no

Mesenchymal chondrosarcomas (MCs) account for 3-10% of primary chondrosarcomas.
The cytogenetic literature includes only ten such tumours with karyotypic
information and no specific aberrations have been identified. Using a purely
molecular genetic approach a HEY1-NCOA2 fusion gene was recently detected in 10
of 15 investigated MCs. The fusion probably arises through intrachromosomal
rearrangement of chromosome arm 8 q. We report a new case of MC showing a
t(1;5)(q42;q32) as the sole karyotypic aberration. Through FISH and whole
transcriptome sequencing analysis we found a novel fusion between the IRF2BP2
gene and the transcription factor CDX1 gene arising from the translocation. The
IRF2BP2-CDX1 has not formerly been described in human neoplasia. In our
hospital's archives three more cases of MC were found, and we examined them
looking for the supposedly more common HEY1-NCOA2 fusion, finding it in all three
tumours but not in the case showing t(1;5) and IRF2BP2-CDX1 gene fusion. This
demonstrates that genetic heterogeneity exists in mesenchymal chondrosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3504151
PMID: 23185413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20173-4. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1218345110. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Gastric-to-intestinal transdifferentiation and cancer.

Noto JM(1), Peek RM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20584-9.

PMCID: PMC3528517
PMID: 23184987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Ann Pathol. 2012 Nov;32(5 Suppl):S24-7. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2012.08.005. Epub
2012 Oct 12.

[Identity and intestinal pathologies: the Cdx2 homeotic gene].

[Article in French]

Freund JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U682, 3, avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France. freund@unistra.fr

PMID: 23127929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochemistry. 2012 Dec 4;51(48):9698-705. doi: 10.1021/bi301241q. Epub 2012 Nov
16.

Cdx1 interacts physically with a subset of Hox proteins.

Lafontaine CA(1), Grainger S, Hess BL, Béland M, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Cdx and Hox gene families encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors
involved in anterior-posterior vertebral patterning. Although Cdx proteins are
direct transcriptional regulators of Hox gene expression, both Hox and Cdx
proteins are known to interact with other homeodomain transcription factors,
leading us to speculate that Cdx and Hox proteins may also interact physically.
In testing this, we found that that Cdx1 is indeed capable of associating with a 
subset of Hox proteins. This interaction is localized to the homeodomain region
of both classes of proteins, is reliant on specific arginine residues in helix I 
of the Hox homeodomain, and is further modulated by N-terminal Hox sequences.
More promiscuous interactions were seen with Hox proteins expressed in vivo,
suggestive of bridging factors or post-translational modifications. Finally, we
demonstrate that this interaction modulates Cdx-Hox transcriptional activity on a
Hox-responsive element. This study is the first example of Cdx-Hox protein
interactions and suggests that such complexes may modulate Hox and/or Cdx
function.

PMID: 23121490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20584-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1208651109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

CDX1 confers intestinal phenotype on gastric epithelial cells via induction of
stemness-associated reprogramming factors SALL4 and KLF5.

Fujii Y(1), Yoshihashi K, Suzuki H, Tsutsumi S, Mutoh H, Maeda S, Yamagata Y,
Seto Y, Aburatani H, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20173-4.

Intestinal metaplasia of the stomach, a mucosal change characterized by the
conversion of gastric epithelium into an intestinal phenotype, is a precancerous 
lesion from which intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma arises. Chronic
infection with Helicobacter pylori is a major cause of gastric intestinal
metaplasia, and aberrant induction by H. pylori of the intestine-specific
caudal-related homeobox (CDX) transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, plays a key
role in this metaplastic change. As such, a critical issue arises as to how these
factors govern the cell- and tissue-type switching. In this study, we explored
genes directly activated by CDX1 in gastric epithelial cells and identified
stemness-associated reprogramming factors SALL4 and KLF5. Indeed, SALL4 and KLF5 
were aberrantly expressed in the CDX1(+) intestinal metaplasia of the stomach in 
both humans and mice. In cultured gastric epithelial cells, sustained expression 
of CDX1 gave rise to the induction of early intestinal-stemness markers, followed
by the expression of intestinal-differentiation markers. Furthermore, the
induction of these markers was suppressed by inhibiting either SALL4 or KLF5
expression, indicating that CDX1-induced SALL4 and KLF5 converted gastric
epithelial cells into tissue stem-like progenitor cells, which then
transdifferentiated into intestinal epithelial cells. Our study places the
stemness-related reprogramming factors as critical components of CDX1-directed
transcriptional circuitries that promote intestinal metaplasia. Requirement of a 
transit through dedifferentiated stem/progenitor-like cells, which share
properties in common with cancer stem cells, may underlie predisposition of
intestinal metaplasia to neoplastic transformation.

PMCID: PMC3528493
PMID: 23112162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Aug;1266:47-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06625.x.

Caudal genes in blood development and leukemia.

Lengerke C(1), Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen Medical Center-Hematology & Oncology, Tübingen,
Germany. claudia.lengerke@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Members of the caudal gene family (in mice and humans: Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) have
been studied during early development as regulators of axial elongation and
anteroposterior patterning. In the adult, Cdx1 and Cdx2, but not Cdx4, have been 
intensively explored for their function in intestinal tissue homeostasis and the 
pathogenesis of gastrointestinal cancers. Involvement in embryonic hematopoiesis 
was first demonstrated in zebrafish, where cdx genes render posterior lateral
plate mesoderm competent to respond to genes specifying hematopoietic fate, and
compound mutations in cdx genes thus result in a bloodless phenotype. Parallel
studies performed in zebrafish embryos and murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
delineate conserved pathways between fish and mammals, corroborating a
BMP/Wnt-Cdx-Hox axis during blood development that can be employed to augment
derivation of blood progenitors from pluripotent stem cells in vitro. The
molecular regulation of Cdx genes appears complex, as more recent data suggest
involvement of non-Hox-related mechanisms and the existence of auto- and
cross-regulatory loops governed by morphogens. Here, we will review the role of
Cdx genes during hematopoietic development by comparing effects in zebrafish and 
mice and discuss their participation in malignant blood diseases.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3431192
PMID: 22901255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3248-59. doi: 10.1172/JCI61216. Epub 2012 Aug 6.

Notch1 counteracts WNT/ß-catenin signaling through chromatin modification in
colorectal cancer.

Kim HA(1), Koo BK, Cho JH, Kim YY, Seong J, Chang HJ, Oh YM, Stange DE, Park JG, 
Hwang D, Kong YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Crosstalk between the Notch and wingless-type MMTV integration site (WNT)
signaling pathways has been investigated for many developmental processes.
However, this negative correlation between Notch and WNT/ß-catenin signaling
activity has been studied primarily in normal developmental and physiological
processes in which negative feedback loops for both signaling pathways are
intact. We found that Notch1 signaling retained the capability of suppressing the
expression of WNT target genes in colorectal cancers even when ß-catenin
destruction by the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) complex was disabled.
Activation of Notch1 converted high-grade adenoma into low-grade adenoma in an
Apcmin mouse colon cancer model and suppressed the expression of WNT target genes
in human colorectal cancer cells through epigenetic modification recruiting
histone methyltransferase SET domain bifurcated 1 (SETDB1). Extensive microarray 
analysis of human colorectal cancers also showed a negative correlation between
the Notch1 target gene, Notch-regulated ankyrin repeat protein 1 (NRARP), and WNT
target genes. Notch is known to be a strong promoter of tumor initiation, but
here we uncovered an unexpected suppressive role of Notch1 on WNT/ß-catenin
target genes involved in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3428081
PMID: 22863622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochem J. 2012 Nov 1;447(3):449-55. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120434.

Multiple microRNAs induced by Cdx1 suppress Cdx2 in human colorectal tumour
cells.

Tagawa T(1), Haraguchi T, Hiramatsu H, Kobayashi K, Sakurai K, Inada K, Iba H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Host-Parasite Interaction, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

The mammalian transcriptional factors, Cdx1 and Cdx2 (Cdx is caudal-type
homeobox) are paralogues and critical for the cellular differentiation of
intestinal or colorectal epithelia. It has been reported previously that in Cdx1 
transgenic or knockout mice, endogenous Cdx2 levels are inversely correlated with
Cdx1 levels. Recently, we found that exogenous Cdx1 expression can suppress
Cdx2 in a human colorectal tumour cell line, SW480, although the underlying
molecular mechanisms were unclear. In the present study, we show that several
microRNAs induced by exogenous Cdx1 expression directly bind to the CDX2 mRNA
3'UTR (untranslated region) to destabilize these transcripts, finally leading to 
their degradation. Using microarray analysis, we found that several miRNAs that
were computationally predicted to target CDX2 mRNAs are up-regulated by exogenous
Cdx1 expression in SW480 cells. Among these molecules, we identified miR-9,
miR-16 and miR-22 as having the potential to suppress Cdx2 through the binding of
the 3'UTR to its transcript. Importantly, simultaneous mutations of both the
miR-9- and miR-16-binding sites in the CDX2 3'UTR were shown to be sufficient to 
block Cdx2 suppression. The results of the present study suggest a unique feature
of miRNAs in which they contribute to homoeostasis by limiting the levels of
transcription factors belonging to the same gene family.

PMID: 22849325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Am J Pathol. 2012 Aug;181(2):487-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.04.028. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Methylation-dependent activation of CDX1 through NF-<U+03BA>B: a link from inflammation 
to intestinal metaplasia in the human stomach.

Rau TT(1), Rogler A, Frischauf M, Jung A, Konturek PC, Dimmler A, Faller G,
Sehnert B, El-Rifai W, Hartmann A, Voll RE, Schneider-Stock R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
tilman.rau@uk-erlangen.de

The caudal homeobox factor 1 (CDX1) is an essential transcription factor for
intestinal differentiation. Its aberrant expression in intestinal metaplasia of
the upper gastrointestinal tract is a hallmark within the
gastritis-metaplasia-carcinoma sequence. CDX1 expression is influenced by certain
pathways, such as Wnt, Ras, or NF-<U+03BA>B signaling; however, these pathways alone
cannot explain the transient expression of CDX1 in intestinal metaplasia or the
molecular inactivation mechanism of its loss in cases of advanced gastric cancer.
In this study, we investigated the epigenetic inactivation of CDX1 by promoter
methylation, as well as the functional link of CDX1 promoter methylation to the
inflammatory NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway. We identified methylation-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B
binding to the CDX1 promoter and quantified it using competitive electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation. A methylated CDX1
promoter was associated with closed chromatin structure, reduced NF-<U+03BA>B binding,
and transcriptional silencing. Along the gastritis-metaplasia-carcinoma sequence,
we observed a biphasic pattern of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) protein
expression and an inverse biphasic pattern of CDX1 promoter methylation; both are
highly consistent with CDX1 protein expression. The stages of hyper-, hypo-, and 
hyper-methylation patterns of the CDX1 promoter were inversely correlated with
the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling activity along this sequence. In conclusion, these
functionally interacting events drive CDX1 expression and contribute to
intestinal metaplasia, epithelial dedifferentiation, and carcinogenesis in the
human stomach.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3409443
PMID: 22749770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e37174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037174. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Caudal homeobox protein Cdx-2 cooperates with Wnt pathway to regulate claudin-1
expression in colon cancer cells.

Bhat AA(1), Sharma A, Pope J, Krishnan M, Washington MK, Singh AB, Dhawan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Dysregulation of tight junctions (TJs) is often associated with human diseases
including carcinogenesis and recent studies support role of TJ integral proteins 
in the regulation of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). In this regard, 
expression of claudin-1, a key constituent of TJs, is highly increased in colon
cancer and is causally associated with the tumor growth and progression. However,
mechanism/s underlying regulation of claudin-1 expression in intestinal
epithelial cells remains poorly understood. In our studies, we have identified
putative binding sites for intestinal transcription factors Cdx1, -2 and GATA4 in
the 5'-flanking region of the claudin-1 gene. Our further studies using full
length and/or deletion mutant constructs in two different human colon cancer cell
lines, SW480 and HCT116, showed key role of Cdx1, Cdx2 and GATA4 in the
regulation of claudin-1 mRNA expression. However, overexpression of Cdx2 had the 
most potent effect upon claudin-1 mRNA expression and promoter activity. Also, in
colon cancer patient samples, we observed a significant and parallel correlation 
between claudin-1 and Cdx2 expressions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay confirmed the Cdx2 binding with claudin-1 promoter in vivo. Using Cdx2
deletion mutant constructs, we further mapped the Cdx2 C-terminus domain to be
important in the regulation of claudin-1 promoter activity. Interestingly,
co-expression of activated ß-catenin further induced the Cdx2-dependent
upregulation of claudin-1 promoter activity while expression of the dominant
negative (dn)-TCF-4 abrogated this activation. Taken together, we conclude that
homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1, Cdx2 and GATA4 regulate claudin-1 gene
expression in human colon cancer cells. Moreover, a functional crosstalk between 
Wnt-signaling and transcriptional activation related to caudal-related homeobox
(Cdx) proteins and GATA-proteins is demonstrated in the regulation of claudin-1
promoter-activation.

PMCID: PMC3376107
PMID: 22719836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Development. 2012 Jul;139(14):2576-83. doi: 10.1242/dev.079848. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Evolutionarily conserved requirement of Cdx for post-occipital tissue emergence.

van Rooijen C(1), Simmini S, Bialecka M, Neijts R, van de Ven C, Beck F,
Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan 
8, 3584 CT Utrecht, and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Mouse Cdx genes are involved in axial patterning and partial Cdx mutants exhibit 
posterior embryonic defects. We found that mouse embryos in which all three Cdx
genes are inactivated fail to generate any axial tissue beyond the cephalic and
occipital primordia. Anterior axial tissues are laid down and well patterned in
Cdx null embryos, and a 3' Hox gene is initially transcribed and expressed in the
hindbrain normally. Axial elongation stops abruptly at the post-occipital level
in the absence of Cdx, as the posterior growth zone loses its progenitor
activity. Exogenous Fgf8 rescues the posterior truncation of Cdx mutants, and the
spectrum of defects of Cdx null embryos matches that resulting from loss of
posterior Fgfr1 signaling. Our data argue for a main function of Cdx in enforcing
trunk emergence beyond the Cdx-independent cephalo-occipital region, and for a
downstream role of Fgfr1 signaling in this function. Cdx requirement for the
post-head section of the axis is ancestral as it takes place in arthropods as
well.

PMID: 22675207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jul;30(1):133-41. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.983. Epub 2012 Apr
25.

Screening for differential methylation status in human placenta in preeclampsia
using a CpG island plus promoter microarray.

Jia RZ(1), Zhang X, Hu P, Liu XM, Hua XD, Wang X, Ding HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, P.R. China.

The development of preeclampsia (PE) seriously affects the health of the mother
and the child, but the precise pathogenesis of PE remains elusive. The placenta
is considered to play a key role and DNA methylation may be associated with
altered placental development and function. The aim of this study was to perform 
a genome-wide analysis of the DNA methylation profile in placentas from
pregnancies with severe preeclampsia. The authors analyzed normal and placental
tissues with PE for aberrant DNA methylation using methylated DNA
immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and a human CpG island plus promoter microarray. The 
methylation status of identified candidate genes were validated by bisulfite
sequencing PCR (BSP). Microarray analysis identified 296 genes that showed
significantly aberrant DNA methylation in preeclampsia (PE). These genes were
located more frequently in chromosome 1 (10.5%, P=0.005), chromosome 12 (8.1%,
P=0.062) and chromosome 19 (7.4%, P=0.117). Functional analysis divided these
genes into different functional networks. In addition, the methylation profile of
six of these genes (CAPN2, EPHX2, ADORA2B, SOX7, CXCL1 and CDX1) in nine patients
with PE was validated by BSP. This study demonstrated aberrant patterns of DNA
methylation in PE, which may be involved in the pathophysiology of PE. Future
work will assess the potential prognostic and therapeutic value for these
findings in PE.

PMID: 22552323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16623-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.356394. Epub
2012 Mar 28.

Caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) protein-dependent integration of canonical Wnt
signaling on paired-box 3 (Pax3) neural crest enhancer.

Sanchez-Ferras O(1), Coutaud B, Djavanbakht Samani T, Tremblay I, Souchkova O,
Pilon N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics of Development, Department of Biological Sciences, and
BioMed Research Center, Faculty of Sciences, University of Quebec, Montreal,
Quebec H2X 3Y7, Canada.

One of the earliest events in neural crest development takes place at the neural 
plate border and consists in the induction of Pax3 expression by posteriorizing
Wnt·ß-catenin signaling. The molecular mechanism of this regulation is not well
understood, but several observations suggest a role for posteriorizing Cdx
transcription factors (Cdx1/2/4) in this process. Cdx genes are known as
integrators of posteriorizing signals from Wnt, retinoic acid, and FGF pathways. 
In this work, we report that Wnt-mediated regulation of murine Pax3 expression is
indirect and involves Cdx proteins as intermediates. We show that Pax3
transcripts co-localize with Cdx proteins in the posterior neurectoderm and that 
neural Pax3 expression is reduced in Cdx1-null embryos. Using Wnt3a-treated P19
cells and neural crest-derived Neuro2a cells, we demonstrate that Pax3 expression
is induced by the Wnt-Cdx pathway. Co-transfection analyses, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and transgenic studies
further indicate that Cdx proteins operate via direct binding to an
evolutionarily conserved neural crest enhancer of the Pax3 proximal promoter.
Taken together, these results suggest a novel neural function for Cdx proteins
within the gene regulatory network controlling neural crest development.

PMCID: PMC3351347
PMID: 22457346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. FASEB J. 2012 Jun;26(6):2674-84. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-191403. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Cdx1 is essential for the initiation of HoxC8 expression during early
embryogenesis.

Schyr RB(1), Shabtai Y, Shashikant CS, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, P.O. Box 12272,
Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The Hox genes pattern the anterior-posterior axis in developing embryos through
tightly regulated, partially overlapping, temporal and spatial expression
domains. Initial regulation of Hox expression is important to establish these
overlapping transcription domains. The Cdx homeodomain factors have been proposed
as Hox regulators, but their precise role and mechanism during this regulatory
interaction remain unclear. In Xenopus embryos, HoxC8 transcripts begin to
accumulate during mid/late gastrula. Cdx1 overexpression and knockdown lead to
precocious or slower HoxC8 expression, respectively. The mouse HoxC8 early
enhancer when introduced into Xenopus embryos recapitulates the endogenous XHoxC8
temporal expression pattern and shows the same responsiveness to Cdx1 regulation.
Three pairs of conserved Cdx binding sites were identified within the HoxC8 early
enhancer. We demonstrate that Cdx1 binds directly these responsive elements
during embryogenesis, as part of the mechanism for the timely activation of HoxC8
expression. We define the function and mechanism of Cdx1 regulation on HoxC8
expression and suggest the possibility that the temporal changes in Cdx activity 
levels during gastrulation, combined with differential DNA binding affinity,
might play a role in the establishment of Hox sequential activation.

PMID: 22426122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Nutr Biochem. 2012 Nov;23(11):1490-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2011.10.001. Epub 
2012 Mar 8.

Perinatal undernutrition alters intestinal alkaline phosphatase and its main
transcription factors KLF4 and Cdx1 in adult offspring fed a high-fat diet.

Lallès JP(1), Orozco-Solís R, Bolaños-Jiménez F, de Coppet P, Le Dréan G, Segain 
JP.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1079, Systèmes d'Elevage, Nutrition Animale et Humaine, F-35000
Rennes, France. jean-paul.lalles@rennes.inra.fr

Nutrient restriction during gestation and/or suckling is associated with an
increased risk of developing inflammation, obesity and metabolic diseases in
adulthood. However, the underlying mechanisms, including the role of the small
intestine, are unclear. We hypothesized that intestinal adaptation to the diet in
adulthood is modulated by perinatal nutrition. This hypothesis was tested using a
split-plot design experiment with 20 controls and 20 intrauterine growth-retarded
(IUGR) rats aged 240 days and randomly assigned to be fed a standard chow or a
high-fat (HF) diet for 10 days. Jejunal tissue was collected at necropsy and
analyzed for anatomy, digestive enzymes, goblet cells and mRNA levels. Cecal
contents and blood serum were analyzed for alkaline phosphatase (AP). IUGR rats
failed to adapt to HF by increasing AP activity in jejunal tissue and cecal
content as observed in controls. mRNA levels of transcription factors KLF4 and
Cdx1 were blunted in jejunal epithelial cell of IUGR rats fed HF. mRNA levels of 
TNF-a were lower in IUGR rats. They also displayed exacerbated aminopeptidase N
response and reduced jejunal goblet cell density. Villus and crypt architecture
and epithelial cell proliferation increased with HF in both control and IUGR
rats. Serum AP tended to be lower, and serum levamisole inhibition-resistant AP
fraction was lower, in IUGR than controls with HF. Serum fatty acids and
triglycerides were higher in IUGR rats and higher with HF. In conclusion, the
adult intestine adapts to an HF diet differentially depending on early nutrition,
jejunal AP and transcription factors being blunted in IUGR individuals fed HF.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22405696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Pathol. 2012 Apr;180(4):1509-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.01.006. Epub
2012 Feb 18.

Villin expression is frequently lost in poorly differentiated colon cancer.

Arango D(1), Al-Obaidi S, Williams DS, Dopeso H, Mazzolini R, Corner G, Byun DS, 
Carr AA, Murone C, Tögel L, Zeps N, Aaltonen LA, Iacopetta B, Mariadason JM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Research Center-Nanomedicine, Vall d'Hebron
University Hospital Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Colorectal cancers (CRCs) are classified as having microsatellite instability
(MSI) or chromosomal instability (CIN); herein termed microsatellite stable
(MSS). MSI colon cancers frequently display a poorly differentiated histology for
which the molecular basis is not well understood. Gene expression and
immunohistochemical profiling of MSS and MSI CRC cell lines and tumors revealed
significant down-regulation of the intestinal-specific cytoskeletal protein
villin in MSI colon cancer, with complete absence in 62% and 17% of MSI cell
lines and tumors, respectively. Investigation of 577 CRCs linked loss of villin
expression to poorly differentiated histology in MSI and MSS tumors. Furthermore,
mislocalization of villin from the membrane was prognostic for poorer outcome in 
MSS patients. Loss of villin expression was not due to coding sequence mutations,
epigenetic inactivation, or promoter mutation. Conversely, in transient
transfection assays villin promoter activity reflected endogenous villin
expression, suggesting transcriptional control. A screen of gut-specific
transcription factors revealed a significant correlation between expression of
villin and the homeobox transcription factor Cdx-1. Cdx-1 overexpression induced 
villin promoter activity, Cdx-1 knockdown down-regulated endogenous villin
expression, and deletion of a key Cdx-binding site within the villin promoter
attenuated promoter activity. Loss of Cdx-1 expression in CRC lines was
associated with Cdx-1 promoter methylation. These findings demonstrate that loss 
of villin expression due to Cdx-1 loss is a feature of poorly differentiated
CRCs.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22349300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 15;363(2):426-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.01.010. Epub 2012 
Jan 21.

Cdx function is required for maintenance of intestinal identity in the adult.

Hryniuk A(1), Grainger S, Savory JG, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, K17 8M5.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed in the
intestinal epithelium from early development, with expression persisting
throughout the life of the animal. While our understanding of the function of Cdx
members in intestinal development has advanced significantly, their roles in the 
adult intestine is relatively poorly understood. In the present study, we found
that ablation of Cdx2 in the adult small intestine severely impacted villus
morphology, proliferation and intestinal gene expression patterns, resulting in
the demise of the animal. Long-term loss of Cdx2 in a chimeric model resulted in 
loss of all differentiated intestinal cell types and partial conversion of the
mucosa to a gastric-like epithelium. Concomitant loss of Cdx1 did not exacerbate 
any of these phenotypes. Loss of Cdx2 in the colon was associated with a shift to
a cecum-like epithelial morphology and gain of cecum-associated genes which was
more pronounced with subsequent loss of Cdx1. These findings suggest that Cdx2 is
essential for differentiation of the small intestinal epithelium, and that both
Cdx1 and Cdx2 contribute to homeostasis of the colon.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Osteoporos Int. 2012 Jul;23(7):1877-87. doi: 10.1007/s00198-011-1861-1. Epub 2012
Jan 4.

Association of CDX1 binding site of periostin gene with bone mineral density and 
vertebral fracture risk.

Xiao SM(1), Gao Y, Cheung CL, Bow CH, Lau KS, Sham PC, Tan KC, Kung AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. xiaosm@hku.hk

SUMMARY: Periostin (POSTN) as a regulator of osteoblast differentiation and bone 
formation may affect susceptibility to osteoporosis. This study suggests POSTN as
a candidate gene for bone mineral density (BMD) variation and vertebral fracture 
risk, which could better our understanding about the genetic pathogenesis of
osteoporosis and will be useful in clinic in the future.
INTRODUCTION: The genetic determination of osteoporosis is complex and
ill-defined. Periostin (POSTN), an extracellular matrix secreted by osteoblasts
and a regulator of osteoblast differentiation and bone formation, may affect
susceptibility to osteoporosis.
METHODS: We adopted a tag-single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) based association 
method followed by imputation-based verification and identification of a causal
variant. The association was investigated in 1,572 subjects with extreme-BMD and 
replicated in an independent population of 2,509 subjects. BMD was measured by
dual X-ray absorptiometry. Vertebral fractures were identified by assessing
vertebral height from X-rays of the thoracolumbar spine. Association analyses
were performed with PLINK toolset and imputation analyses with MACH software. The
top imputation finding was subsequently validated by genotyping. Interactions
between POSTN and another BMD-related candidate gene sclerostin (SOST) were
analyzed using MDR program and validated by logistical regression analyses. The
putative transcription factor binding with target sequence was confirmed by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS: Several SNPs of POSTN were associated with BMD or vertebral fractures.
The most significant polymorphism was rs9547970, located at the -2,327 bp
upstream (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.8<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4)) of POSTN. Carriers of the minor allele G per copy of 
rs9547970 had 1.33 higher risk of vertebral fracture (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). An interactive 
effect between POSTN and SOST upon BMD variation was suggested (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). A
specific binding of CDX1 to the sequence of POSTN with the major allele A of
rs9547970 but not the variant G allele was confirmed by EMSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest POSTN as a candidate gene for BMD variation and 
vertebral fracture risk.

PMCID: PMC3368110
PMID: 22215184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012 Feb;16(2):227-37; discussion 237. doi:
10.1007/s11605-011-1758-5. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Activation of the BMP4 pathway and early expression of CDX2 characterize
non-specialized columnar metaplasia in a human model of Barrett's esophagus.

Castillo D(1), Puig S, Iglesias M, Seoane A, de Bolós C, Munitiz V, Parrilla P,
Comerma L, Poulsom R, Krishnadath KK, Grande L, Pera M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Parc de Salut Mar and Institut de Recerca
Hospital del Mar (IMIM-Hospital del Mar), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Passeig Maritim 25-29, 08003, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A human model of gastroesophageal reflux disease was used to examine 
the contribution of a non-specialized columnar type of metaplasia (NSCM) and key 
molecular events (BMP4 and CDX2) in the development of Barrett's esophagus.
METHODS: Biopsies of the remnant esophagus from 18 patients undergoing
esophagectomy with gastric preservation were taken at 6-36-month intervals
postoperatively and examined for activation of the BMP pathway (BMP4/P-Smad
1/5/8) and CDX2 and CDX1 expression by imunohistochemistry, quantitative
real-time PCR, Western blot, and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: A short segment (mean 15.6 mm) of NSCM was detected in 10 (56%)
patients, with an increasing prevalence from 17% at 6 months to 62% at 36 months.
Nuclear expression of P-Smad 1/5/8 in the squamous epithelium close to the
anastomosis with strong expression in all epithelial cells of NSCM areas was
found. Forty-eight (63%) biopsies with NSCM showed scattered nuclear expression
of CDX2. Two cases showed isolated glands at 18, 24, and 36 months that fully
expressed CDX2 and co-expressed CDX1. BMP4 mRNA and CDX2 mRNA levels were
significantly greater in NSCM than in squamous epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: BMP4 activation in NSCM and early expression of CDX2 are involved in
the columnar epithelial differentiation of Barrett's esophagus.

PMID: 22076569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):G123-33. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00102.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Regulation of the gene encoding the intestinal bile acid transporter ASBT by the 
caudal-type homeobox proteins CDX1 and CDX2.

Ma L(1), Jüttner M, Kullak-Ublick GA, Eloranta JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    World J Gastroenterol. 2013 May 14;19(18):2736-9.

The apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) is expressed abundantly 
in the ileum and mediates bile acid absorption across the apical membranes.
Caudal-type homeobox proteins CDX1 and CDX2 are transcription factors that
regulate genes involved in intestinal epithelial differentiation and
proliferation. Aberrant expression of both ASBT and CDXs in Barrett's esophagus
(BE) prompted us to study, whether the expression of the ASBT gene is regulated
by CDXs. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of CDXs resulted in reduced
ASBT mRNA expression in intestinal cells. CDXs strongly induced the activity of
the ASBT promoter in reporter assays in esophageal and intestinal cells. Nine CDX
binding sites were predicted in silico within the ASBT promoter, and binding of
CDXs to six of them was verified in vitro and within living cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
respectively. RNAs were extracted from esophageal biopsies from 20 BE patients
and analyzed by real-time PCR. Correlation with ASBT expression was found for
CDX1, CDX2, and HNF-1a in BE biopsies. In conclusion, the human ASBT promoter is 
activated transcriptionally by CDX1 and CDX2. Our finding provides a possible
explanation for the reported observation that ASBT is aberrantly expressed in
esophageal metaplasia that also expresses CDX transcription factors.

PMID: 22016432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 1;361(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.034. Epub 2011 Oct
8.

Cdx regulates Dll1 in multiple lineages.

Grainger S(1), Lam J, Savory JG, Mears AJ, Rijli FM, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Vertebrate Cdx genes encode homeodomain transcription factors related to caudal
in Drosophila. The murine Cdx homologues Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 play important roles
in anterior-posterior patterning of the embryonic axis and the intestine, as well
as axial elongation. While our understanding of the ontogenic programs requiring 
Cdx function has advanced considerably, the molecular bases underlying these
functions are less well understood. In this regard, Cdx1-Cdx2 conditional mutants
exhibit abnormal somite formation, while loss of Cdx1-Cdx2 in the intestinal
epithelium results in a shift in differentiation toward the Goblet cell lineage. 
The aim of the present study was to identify the Cdx-dependent mechanisms
impacting on these events. Consistent with prior work implicating Notch signaling
in these pathways, we found that expression of the Notch ligand Dll1 was reduced 
in Cdx mutants in both the intestinal epithelium and paraxial mesoderm. Cdx
members occupied the Dll1 promoter both in vivo and in vitro, while genetic
analysis indicated interaction between Cdx and Dll1 pathways in both
somitogenesis and Goblet cell differentiation. These findings suggest that Cdx
members operate upstream of Dll1 to convey different functions in two distinct
lineages.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22015720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biol Chem. 2011 Nov;392(11):983-93. doi: 10.1515/BC.2011.096. Epub 2011 Aug 28.

Studies of intestinal morphology and cathepsin B expression in a transgenic mouse
aiming at intestine-specific expression of Cath B-EGFP.

Arampatzidou M(1), Mayer K, Iolyeva ME, Asrat SG, Ravichandran M, Günther T,
Schüle R, Reinheckel T, Brix K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Science, Research Center MOLIFE - Molecular Life
Science, Jacobs University Bremen, Campus Ring 6, D-28759 Bremen, Germany.

Cathepsin B has been shown to not only reside within endo-lysosomes of intestinal
epithelial cells, but it was also secreted into the extracellular space of
intestinal mucosa in physiological and pathological conditions. In an effort to
further investigate the function of this protease in the intestine, we generated 
a transgenic mouse model that would enable us to visualize the localization of
cathepsin B in vivo. Previously we showed that the A33-antigen promoter could be 
successfully used in vitro in order to express cathepsin B-green fluorescent
protein chimeras in cells that co-expressed the intestine-specific transcription 
factor Cdx1. In this study an analog approach was used to express chimeric
cathepsin B specifically in the intestine of transgenic animals. No overt
phenotype was observed for the transgenic mice that reproduced normally.
Biochemical and morphological studies confirmed that the overall intestinal
phenotype including the structure and polarity of this tissue as well as cell
numbers and differentiation states were not altered in the A33-CathB-EGFP mice
when compared to wild type animals. However, transgenic expression of chimeric
cathepsin B could not be visualized because it was not translated in situ
although the transgene was maintained over several generations.

PMID: 21871011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Dec;1814(12):1891-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.07.021. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Caudal-related homeodomain proteins CDX1/2 bind to DNA replication-related
element binding factor.

Park SY(1), Jeong MS, Yoo MA, Jang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic of
Korea.

In the intestinal epithelium, the CDX1 and CDX2 homeodomain genes play
proliferative and tumor suppressor roles, respectively. The transcription factor 
DNA replication-related element binding factor (DREF), is an 80kDa polypeptide
homodimer that plays an important role in regulating cell proliferation-related
genes. Homeodomain genes encode DNA-binding proteins that play crucial roles
during development by defining the body plan and determining cell fate. However, 
until now, the regulation of DREF function by caudal-related homeodomain proteins
is poorly understood. In this study, recombinant CDX1/2 homeodomains (CDX1, amino
acids [aa] 152-216 and CDX2, aa 184-248) and the DNA-binding domain of Drosophila
DREF (dDREF; aa 1-125) were isolated in order to investigate the regulatory
mechanism of their interaction. The expression and purification of the truncated 
CDX1/2 and DREF proteins were successfully performed in Escherichia coli. Models 
of the CDX1/2 homeodomain and dDREF were constructed using SWISS-MODEL software, 
a program for relative protein structure modeling. The binding of CDX1/2 and DREF
proteins was detected by fluorescence measurement, size-exclusion column (SEC)
chromatography, His-tagged pull-down assay, and surface plasmon resonance
spectroscopy (BIAcore). In addition, we identified that four different mutants of
CDX1 (S185A, N190A, T194A, and V212A) were bound to dDREF with different degrees 
of interaction. Our results indicate that CDX1/2 homeodomains interact with the
DNA-binding domain of dDREF, thereby regulating its transcription activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21821154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Gastroenterology. 2011 Oct;141(4):1302-13, 1313.e1-6. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.06.086. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Krüppel-like factor 5 is important for maintenance of crypt architecture and
barrier function in mouse intestine.

McConnell BB(1), Kim SS, Yu K, Ghaleb AM, Takeda N, Manabe I, Nusrat A, Nagai R, 
Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Krüppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) is transcription factor that is
expressed by dividing epithelial cells of the intestinal epithelium. KLF5
promotes proliferation in vitro and in vivo and is induced by mitogens and
various stress stimuli. To study the role of KLF5 in intestinal epithelial
homeostasis, we examined the phenotype of mice with conditional deletion of Klf5 
in the gut.
METHODS: Mice were generated with intestinal-specific deletion of Klf5
(Vil-Cre;Klf5fl/fl). Morphologic changes in the small intestine and colon were
examined by immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting, and real-time polymerase chain 
reaction.
RESULTS: Klf5 mutant mice were born at a normal Mendelian ratio but had high
mortality compared with controls. Complete deletion of Klf5 from the intestinal
mucosa resulted in neonatal lethality that corresponded with an absence of
epithelial proliferation. Variegated intestinal-specific deletion of Klf5 in
adult mice resulted in morphologic changes that included a regenerative
phenotype, impaired barrier function, and inflammation. Adult mutant mice
exhibited defects in epithelial differentiation and migration. These changes were
associated with reduced expression of Caudal type homeobox (Cdx) 1, Cdx2, and Eph
and ephrin signaling proteins. Concomitantly, Wnt signaling to ß-catenin was
reduced. Proliferation in regenerative crypts was associated with increased
expression of the progenitor cell marker Sox9.
CONCLUSIONS: Deletion of Klf5 in the gut epithelium of mice demonstrated that
KLF5 maintains epithelial proliferation, differentiation, and cell positioning
along the crypt radial axis. Morphologic changes that occur with deletion of Klf5
are associated with disruption of canonical Wnt signaling and increased
expression of Sox9.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3186863
PMID: 21763241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Nov;17(11):710-9. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar036. Epub 2011 May 
25.

Hypoxia induces expression of COX-2 through the homeodomain transcription factor 
CDX1 and orphan nuclear receptor SHP in human endometrial cells.

Kim KH(1), Kim HY, Kim HH, Lee KS, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University Hospital, Busan, 
Korea.

Endometriosis, the presence of ectopic endometrial tissue outside the uterine
cavity, is a common disease affecting women during their reproductive years. The 
aim of this study was to identify the molecular mechanism of transcriptional
regulation of inflammatory cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) gene during endometriosis by 
hypoxia. Hypoxia induced COX-2 expression in endometrial cells together with the 
induction of the orphan nuclear receptor SHP and intestinal-specific
transcription factor Caudal-related transcription factor 1 (CDX1).
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a was responsible for SHP induction mediated by a
hypoxia. In addition, we observed that ectopic expression of CDX1 enhanced COX-2 
gene expression in hypoxia-dependent fashion. Additionally, we evaluated that
induction of CDX1 by hypoxia was mediated by SHP. Expression of COX-2, CDX1, SHP 
and HIF-1a mRNA in hypoxia-treated human endometrial cells were significantly
higher than normal control cells. These results suggest that the SHP and CDX1
expression increased by hypoxia play an active role in inducing inflammatory
COX-2 expression in the pathogenesis of endometriosis.

PMID: 21613300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 May;26(5):647-53. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.5.647. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

CDX1 and CDX2 expression in intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and gastric cancer.

Kang JM(1), Lee BH, Kim N, Lee HS, Lee HE, Park JH, Kim JS, Jung HC, Song IS.

Author information: 
(1)Healthcare Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital Healthcare
System Gangnam Center, Seoul, Korea.

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) has been regarded as a premalignant condition.
However, the pathogenesis of IM is not fully understood. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the role of CDX1 and CDX2 in the formation of IM and the
progression to dysplasia and gastric cancer (GC). A total of 270 subjects
included 90 with GC, dysplasia and age- and sex-matched controls. Real-time PCR
(RT-PCR) was performed with body specimens for CDX1 and CDX2. The expression of
CDX2 was significantly higher in H. pylori positive group than H. pylori negative
group (P = 0.045). CDX1 and CDX2 expression increased proportional to the IM
grade of the body (P < 0.001). CDX2 expression was significantly higher in
incomplete type of IM than in complete type (P = 0.045). The expression of CDX1
in dysplasia group was significantly higher than in the control group (P =
0.001); in addition, CDX1 and CDX2 in cancer group was significantly higher than 
control group (P < 0.001, and P < 0.001, respectively). Aberrant expression of
CDX1 and CDX2 correlated with H. pylori infection and grade of IM in the body.
Furthermore, the results suggest that CDX1 and CDX2 play a role in the
progression to GC and dysplasia.

PMCID: PMC3082117
PMID: 21532856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;19(2):298-302.

[Expression and clinical significance of caudal type homeobox transcription
factor-2 in adult acute lymphocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu HY(1), Xia HL, Chen XW, Zhu LX, Wang QY, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Anhui Medical University First Hospital, Heifei
230022, Anhui Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the expression and clinical significance of
CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 genes in acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). Expressions of
CDX1, CDX2, and CDX4 in 51 adult acute lymphocytic leukemia patients and 14
healthy subjects were detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The results indicated that CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 were not expressed in 14
healthy persons and 15 CR ALL patients, the positive expression rate of CDX2 gene
in de novo ALL patients was 60.8%, while it obviously decreased in patients with 
complete remission (CR) (p < 0.05); the expression of CDX2 was increased again in
relapsed patients (81.8%). When the expression of CDX2 was analyzed in different 
risk groups of ALL patients, the CDX2 expression rate in high risk (HR) patients 
was 91.7%, and that in the standard risk (SR) group was 45.7%. Furthermore,
analyses of CDX1 and CDX4 expression in series of ALL samples did not show the
expression of these genes. In patients with adult ALL at diagnosis and relapse,
the CR rate of patients with CDX2 positive expression was lower than that of
patients with CDX2 negative expression (p < 0.05). The median survival time in
CDX2 positive expression patients was shorter than that in negative expression
patient. It is concluded that expression of CDX2 may correlated with pathogenesis
and relapse of adult ALL, but the expression of CDX1 and CDX4 don' t associated
with pathogenesis and relapse of adult ALL; the CR rate and prognosis of patients
with CDX2 positive expression is lower and poor. The expression of CDX2 may be
used as a marker for occurrence, relapse and poor prognosis of adult ALL
patients.

PMID: 21518475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Aug;68(15):2513-23. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0687-5. Epub 
2011 Apr 21.

Regulation of self-renewal and differentiation by the intestinal stem cell niche.

Yeung TM(1), Chia LA, Kosinski CM, Kuo CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Center for Clinical Sciences Research 1155, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The gastrointestinal epithelium is a highly organised tissue that is constantly
being renewed. In order to maintain homeostasis, the balance between intestinal
stem cell (ISC) self-renewal and differentiation must be carefully regulated. In 
this review, we describe how the intestinal stem cell niche provides a unique
environment to regulate self-renewal and differentiation of ISCs. It has
traditionally been believed that the mesenchymal myofibroblasts play an important
role in the crosstalk between ISCs and the niche. However, recent evidence in
Drosophila and in vertebrates suggests that epithelial cells also contribute to
the niche. We discuss the multiple signalling pathways that are utilised to
regulate stemness within the niche, including members of the Wnt, BMP and
Hedgehog pathways, and how aberrations in these signals lead to disruption of the
normal crypt-villus axis. Finally, we also discuss how CDX1 and inhibition of the
Notch pathway are important in specifying enterocyte and goblet cell
differentiation respectively.

PMCID: PMC4165857
PMID: 21509540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 6;6(4):e18280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018280.

Ectopic Cdx2 expression in murine esophagus models an intermediate stage in the
emergence of Barrett's esophagus.

Kong J(1), Crissey MA, Funakoshi S, Kreindler JL, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is an intestinal metaplasia that occurs in the setting
of chronic acid and bile reflux and is associated with a risk for adenocarcinoma.
Expression of intestine-specific transcription factors in the esophagus likely
contributes to metaplasia development. Our objective was to explore the effects
of an intestine-specific transcription factor when expressed in the mouse
esophageal epithelium. Transgenic mice were derived in which the transcription
factor Cdx2 is expressed in squamous epithelium using the murine Keratin-14 gene 
promoter. Effects of the transgene upon cell proliferation and differentiation,
gene expression, and barrier integrity were explored. K14-Cdx2 mice express the
Cdx2 transgene in esophageal squamous tissues. Cdx2 expression was associated
with reduced basal epithelial cell proliferation and altered cell morphology.
Ultrastructurally two changes were noted. Cdx2 expression was associated with
dilated space between the basal cells and diminished cell-cell adhesion caused by
reduced Desmocollin-3 mRNA and protein expression. This compromised epithelial
barrier function, as the measured trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TEER)
of the K14-Cdx2 epithelium was significantly reduced compared to controls (1189
Ohm*cm(2) ±343.5 to 508 Ohm*cm(2)±92.48, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0532). Secondly, basal cells with 
features of a transitional cell type, intermediate between keratinocytes and
columnar Barrett's epithelial cells, were observed. These cells had reduced
keratin bundles and increased endoplasmic reticulum levels, suggesting the
adoption of secretory-cell features. Moreover, at the ultrastructural level they 
resembled "Distinctive" cells associated with multilayered epithelium. Treatment 
of the K14-Cdx2 mice with 5'-Azacytidine elicited expression of BE-associated
genes including Cdx1, Krt18, and Slc26a3/Dra, suggesting the phenotype could be
advanced under certain conditions. We conclude that ectopic Cdx2 expression in
keratinocytes alters cell proliferation, barrier function, and differentiation.
These altered cells represent a transitional cell type between normal squamous
and columnar BE cells. The K14-Cdx2 mice represent a useful model to study
progression from squamous epithelium to BE.

PMCID: PMC3071814
PMID: 21494671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2011 Jun 1;354(1):134-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.03.027. Epub 2011
Apr 3.

Interactions between Cdx genes and retinoic acid modulate early cardiogenesis.

Lengerke C(1), Wingert R, Beeretz M, Grauer M, Schmidt AG, Konantz M, Daley GQ,
Davidson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Tuebingen Medical Center 
II, Tuebingen, Germany. claudia.lengerke@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Cdx transcription factors regulate embryonic positional identities and have
crucial roles in anteroposterior patterning (AP) processes of all three germ
layers. Previously we have shown that the zebrafish homologues cdx1a and cdx4
redundantly regulate posterior mesodermal derivatives inducing embryonic blood
cell fate specification and patterning of the embryonic kidney. Here we
hypothesize that cdx factors restrict formation of anterior mesodermal
derivatives such as cardiac cells by imposing posterior identity to developing
mesodermal cells. We show that ectopic expression of Cdx1 or Cdx4 applied during 
the brief window of mesoderm patterning in differentiating murine embryonic stem 
cell (ESC) strongly suppresses cardiac development as assayed by expression of
cardiac genes and formation of embryoid bodies (EB) containing "beating" cell
clusters. Conversely, in loss-of-function studies performed in cdx-deficient
zebrafish embryos, we observed a dose-dependent expansion of tbx5a(+)
anterior-lateral plate mesoderm giving rise to cardiac progenitors. However,
further cardiac development of these mesodermal cells required additional
suppression of the retinoic acid (RA) pathway, possibly due to differential
activity of inhibitory RA signals in cdx mutants. Together, our data suggest that
cdx proteins affect cardiogenesis by regulating the formation of cardiogenic
mesoderm and together with the RA pathway control the early development of
cardiac precursor cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502019
PMID: 21466798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Dev Biol. 2011;55(1):93-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.103252sg.

Origins of Cdx1 regulatory elements suggest roles in vertebrate evolution.

Gaunt SJ(1), Paul YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

Cdx1, an upstream regulator of Hox genes, is best characterized for its homeotic 
effects upon the developing axial skeleton, particularly in the neck. It responds
to retinoic acid (RA) in both mouse embryos and embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells.
By use of beta-galactosidase chemiluminescence, we show that a mouse Cdx1/lacZ
reporter expressed in P19 EC cells responds to RA by the combined activities of
an intron retinoic acid response element (RARE) and an upstream RARE. In
contrast, a chicken Cdx1/lacZ reporter responds only by activity of the intron
RARE. Database analyses upon Cdx1 from twenty three vertebrate species reveal
that the intron RARE is structurally conserved in amniotes (eutherian mammals,
marsupials, birds and Anole lizard), but not in Xenopus or fish. The upstream
RARE is structurally conserved only in eutherian mammals. We conclude that the
intron RARE originated at around the amphibian/amniote division, and the upstream
RARE appeared around the marsupial/eutherian mammal division. In view of the site
of action of Cdx1, we propose that acquisition of the intron RARE may have
facilitated the substantial changes that occurred in the neck and anterior thorax
at the advent of the amniotes. We present evidence that Cdx1 is also a
developmental regulator of the female urogenital system, and we suggest that
acquisition of the upstream RARE may have contributed to morphological divergence
of marsupial and eutherian mammals.

PMID: 21425084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(10):2026-39. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01250-10. Epub 2011 Mar 
14.

Essential and redundant functions of caudal family proteins in activating adult
intestinal genes.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, Ho LL, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factors that potently induce cell fate often remain expressed in
the induced organ throughout life, but their requirements in adults are uncertain
and varied. Mechanistically, it is unclear if they activate only tissue-specific 
genes or also directly repress heterologous genes. We conditionally inactivated
mouse Cdx2, a dominant regulator of intestinal development, and mapped its genome
occupancy in adult intestinal villi. Although homeotic transformation, observed
in Cdx2-null embryos, was absent in mutant adults, gene expression and cell
morphology were vitally compromised. Lethality was significantly accelerated in
mice lacking both Cdx2 and its homolog Cdx1, with particular exaggeration of
defects in villus enterocyte differentiation. Importantly, Cdx2 occupancy
correlated with hundreds of transcripts that fell but not with equal numbers that
rose with Cdx loss, indicating a predominantly activating role at intestinal
cis-regulatory regions. Integrated consideration of a transcription factor's
mutant phenotype and cistrome hence reveals the continued and distinct
requirement in adults of a critical developmental regulator that activates
tissue-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3133364
PMID: 21402776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Epigenetics. 2011 May;6(5):610-22. Epub 2011 May 1.

Class I and III HDACs and loss of active chromatin features contribute to
epigenetic silencing of CDX1 and EPHB tumor suppressor genes in colorectal
cancer.

Rönsch K(1), Jäger M, Schöpflin A, Danciu M, Lassmann S, Hecht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Faculty of Biology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Aberrant Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is a driving force during initiation and
progression of colorectal cancer. Yet, the Wnt/ß-catenin targets CDX1, EPHB2,
EPHB3 and EPHB4 (EPHB2-4) act as tumor suppressors in intestinal epithelial cells
and frequently appear to be transcriptionally silenced in carcinomas. The
molecular mechanisms which underlie the apparent loss of expression of a subset
of Wnt/ß-catenin targets in a background of persistent pathway activity are
largely unknown. To gain insight into this, we quantified expression of CDX1 and 
EPHB2-4 in human tissue specimens of case-matched colorectal normal mucosa,
adenoma and invasive carcinoma. In particular EPHB2-4 display biphasic, albeit
not strictly coincident, expression profiles with elevated levels in adenomas and
decreased transcription in approximately 30% of the corresponding carcinomas.
Consistent with their divergent and variable expression we observed considerable 
heterogeneity among the epigenetic landscapes at CDX1 and EPHB2-4 in a model of
colorectal carcinoma cell lines. Unlike the inactive CDX1 locus, EPHB2-4 maintain
DNA hypomethylation of their promoter regions in the silent state. A strong
reduction of active histone modifications consistently parallels reduced
expression of CDX1 and EPHB3 and to some extent of EPHB2. Accordingly, treatment 
with inhibitors for DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone deacetylases
(HDACs) restored CDX1 and EPHB2-4 expression depending upon epigenetic features
at their promoters but also upon cellular background. Overall our findings show
that downregulation of CDX1 and EphB receptor genes occurs independently and that
different branches of epigenetic control systems including class I and III HDACs 
contribute to epigenetic silencing of Wnt/ß-catenin targets during colorectal
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21393996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 15;108(11):4382-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1014519107. Epub 2011 Feb 23.

Hypoxia and lineage specification of cell line-derived colorectal cancer stem
cells.

Yeung TM(1), Gandhi SC, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, United
Kingdom.

Hypoxia is an important regulator of normal and cancer stem cell (CSC)
differentiation. Colorectal CSCs from SW1222, LS180, and CCK81 colorectal
cancer-derived cell lines are able to differentiate into complex 3D
lumen-containing structures in normoxia, whereas in hypoxia, they form
undifferentiated dense colonies that have reduced expression of the enterocyte
differentiation marker CDX1, lack goblet cell formation, and have increased
expression of BMI1 and activated Notch1. Hypoxia increases the clonogenicity of
CSCs, which is cumulative as each round of hypoxia enriches for more CSCs. The
hypoxic phenotype is reversible, because cells from hypoxic-dense colonies are
able to reform differentiated structures when regrown in normoxia. We show that
CDX1 is able to stimulate the generation of lumens even in hypoxia and has a
negative feedback on BMI1 expression. Knockdown of CDX1 reduces lumen formation
but does not affect goblet cell formation, suggesting that enterocytes and goblet
cells form from different progenitor cells. Notch inhibition by dibenzazepine
(DBZ) allowed CSCs to form goblet cells in both normoxia and hypoxia. Finally, we
show that Hif1a, but not CA9, is an important mediator of the effects of hypoxia 
on the clonogenicity and differentiation of CSCs. In summary, hypoxia maintains
the stem-like phenotype of colorectal cell line-derived CSCs and prevents
differentiation of enterocytes and goblet cells by regulating CDX1 and Notch1,
suggesting that this regulation is an important component of how hypoxia controls
the switch between stemness and differentiation in CSCs.

PMCID: PMC3060223
PMID: 21368208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Dyn. 2011 Apr;240(4):796-807. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22588. Epub 2011 Feb 28.

Negative autoregulation of Oct3/4 through Cdx1 promotes the onset of
gastrulation.

Rousso SZ(1), Schyr RB, Gur M, Zouela N, Kot-Leibovich H, Shabtai Y,
Koutsi-Urshanski N, Baldessari D, Pillemer G, Niehrs C, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Gastrulation marks the onset of germ layer formation from undifferentiated
precursor cells maintained by a network including the Pou5f1 gene, Oct3/4.
Negative regulation of the undifferentiated state is a prerequisite for germ
layer formation and subsequent development. A novel cross-regulatory network was 
characterized including the Pou5f1 and Cdx1 genes as part of the signals
controlling the onset of gastrulation. Of particular interest was the observation
that, preceding gastrulation, the Xenopus Oct3/4 factors, Oct60, Oct25, and
Oct91, positively regulate Cdx1 expression through FGF signaling, and during
gastrulation the Oct3/4 factors become repressors of Cdx1. Cdx1 negatively
regulates the Pou5f1 genes during gastrulation, thus contributing to the
repression of the network maintaining the undifferentiated state and promoting
the onset of gastrulation. These regulatory interactions suggest that Oct3/4
initiates its own negative autoregulation through Cdx1 up-regulation to begin the
repression of pluripotency in preparation for the onset of gastrulation and germ 
layer differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21360791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2011 Apr;138(7):1361-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.056622. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Cdx mediates neural tube closure through transcriptional regulation of the planar
cell polarity gene Ptk7.

Savory JG(1), Mansfield M, Rijli FM, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.

The vertebrate Cdx genes (Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4) encode homeodomain transcription
factors with well-established roles in anteroposterior patterning. To circumvent 
the peri-implantation lethality inherent to Cdx2 loss of function, we previously 
used the Cre-loxP system to ablate Cdx2 at post-implantation stages and confirmed
a crucial role for Cdx2 function in events related to axial extension. As
considerable data suggest that the Cdx family members functionally overlap, we
extended this analysis to assess the consequence of concomitant loss of both Cdx1
and Cdx2. Here, we report that Cdx1-Cdx2 double mutants exhibit a severely
truncated anteroposterior axis. In addition, these double mutants exhibit fused
somites, a widened mediolateral axis and craniorachischisis, a severe form of
neural tube defect in which early neurulation fails and the neural tube remains
open. These defects are typically associated with deficits in planar cell
polarity (PCP) signaling in vertebrates. Consistent with this, we found that
expression of Ptk7, which encodes a gene involved in PCP, is markedly reduced in 
Cdx1-Cdx2 double mutants, and is a candidate Cdx target. Genetic interaction
between Cdx mutants and a mutant allele of Scrib, a gene involved in PCP
signaling, is suggestive of a role for Cdx signaling in the PCP pathway. These
findings illustrate a novel and pivotal role for Cdx function upstream of Ptk7
and neural tube closure in vertebrates.

PMID: 21350009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Development. 2011 Jan;138(1):65-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.058727. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

Cdx1 refines positional identity of the vertebrate hindbrain by directly
repressing Mafb expression.

Sturgeon K(1), Kaneko T, Biemann M, Gauthier A, Chawengsaksophak K, Cordes SP.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.

An interplay of transcription factors interprets signalling pathways to define
anteroposterior positions along the vertebrate axis. In the hindbrain, these
transcription factors prompt the position-appropriate appearance of seven to
eight segmental structures, known as rhombomeres (r1-r8). The evolutionarily
conserved Cdx caudal-type homeodomain transcription factors help specify the
vertebrate trunk and tail but have not been shown to directly regulate hindbrain 
patterning genes. Mafb (Kreisler, Krml1, valentino), a basic domain leucine
zipper transcription factor, is required for development of r5 and r6 and is the 
first gene to show restricted expression within these two segments. The
homeodomain protein vHnf1 (Hnf1b) directly activates Mafb expression. vHnf1 and
Mafb share an anterior expression limit at the r4/r5 boundary but vHnf1
expression extends beyond the posterior limit of Mafb and, therefore, cannot
establish the posterior Mafb expression boundary. Upon identifying regulatory
sequences responsible for posterior Mafb repression, we have used in situ
hybridization, immunofluorescence and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analyses to determine that Cdx1 directly inhibits early Mafb expression in the
neural tube posterior of the r6/r7 boundary, which is the anteriormost boundary
of Cdx1 expression in the hindbrain. Cdx1 dependent repression of Mafb is
transient. After the 10-somite stage, another mechanism acts to restrict Mafb
expression in its normal r5 and r6 domain, even in the absence of Cdx1. Our
findings identify Mafb as one of the earliest direct targets of Cdx1 and show
that Cdx1 plays a direct role in early hindbrain patterning. Thus, just as Cdx2
and Cdx4 govern the trunk-to-tail transition, Cdx1 may regulate the
hindbrain-to-spinal cord transition.

PMID: 21098558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Aug;20(8):1465-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0226. Epub 2011 Jan
5.

Differential Hox expression in murine embryonic stem cell models of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis.

Wheadon H(1), Ramsey JM, Dobbin E, Dickson GJ, Corrigan PM, Freeburn RW, Thompson
A.

Author information: 
(1)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.

The Hox family are master transcriptional regulators of developmental processes, 
including hematopoiesis. The Hox regulators, caudal homeobox factors (Cdx1-4),
and Meis1, along with several individual Hox proteins, are implicated in stem
cell expansion during embryonic development, with gene dosage playing a
significant role in the overall function of the integrated Hox network. To
investigate the role of this network in normal and aberrant, early hematopoiesis,
we employed an in vitro embryonic stem cell differentiation system, which
recapitulates mouse developmental hematopoiesis. Expression profiles of Hox,
Pbx1, and Meis1 genes were quantified at distinct stages during the hematopoietic
differentiation process and compared with the effects of expressing the leukemic 
oncogene Tel/PDGFRß. During normal differentiation the Hoxa cluster, Pbx1 and
Meis1 predominated, with a marked reduction in the majority of Hox genes (27/39) 
and Meis1 occurring during hematopoietic commitment. Only the posterior Hoxa
cluster genes (a9, a10, a11, and a13) maintained or increased expression at the
hematopoietic colony stage. Cdx4, Meis1, and a subset of Hox genes, including a7 
and a9, were differentially expressed after short-term oncogenic (Tel/PDGFRß)
induction. Whereas Hoxa4-10, b1, b2, b4, and b9 were upregulated during oncogenic
driven myelomonocytic differentiation. Heterodimers between Hoxa7/Hoxa9, Meis1,
and Pbx have previously been implicated in regulating target genes involved in
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) expansion and leukemic progression. These results
provide direct evidence that transcriptional flux through the Hox network occurs 
at very early stages during hematopoietic differentiation and validates embryonic
stem cell models for gaining insights into the genetic regulation of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis.

PMID: 21083428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2010;96:231-70. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-381280-3.00010-5.

Cdx genes, inflammation, and the pathogenesis of intestinal metaplasia.

Stairs DB(1), Kong J, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is a biologically interesting and clinically relevant 
condition in which one differentiated type of epithelium is replaced by another
that is morphologically similar to normal intestinal epithelium. Two classic
examples of this are gastric IM and Barrett's esophagus (BE). In both, a chronic 
inflammatory microenvironment, provoked either by Helicobacter pylori infection
of the stomach or acid and bile reflux into the esophagus, precedes the
metaplasia. The Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2
are critical regulators of the normal intestinal epithelial cell phenotype.
Ectopic expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 occurs in both gastric IM as well as in BE.
This expression precedes the onset of the metaplasia and implies a causal role
for these factors in this process. We review the observations regarding the role 
of chronic inflammation and the Cdx transcription factors in the pathogenesis of 
gastric IM and BE.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21075347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mech Dev. 2011 Jan-Feb;128(1-2):41-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.09.004. Epub 2010
Oct 7.

Cdx4 is a Cdx2 target gene.

Savory JG(1), Mansfield M, St Louis C, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

The products of the Cdx genes, Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4, play multiple roles in early 
vertebrate development, and have been proposed to serve to relay signaling
information from Wnt, RA and FGF pathways to orchestrate events related to
anterior-posterior vertebral patterning and axial elongation. In addition, Cdx1
and Cdx2 have been reported to both autoregulate and to be subject to cross
regulation by other family members. We have now found that Cdx4 expression is
significantly down regulated in Cdx2(-/-) mutants suggesting previously
unrecognized cross-regulatory interactions. Moreover, we have previously shown
that Cdx4 is a direct target of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, and that
Cdx1 physically interacts with LEF/TCF members in an autoregulatory loop. We
therefore investigated the means by which Cdx2 impacted on Cdx4 expression and
assessed potential interaction between Cdx2 and canonical Wnt signaling on the
Cdx4 promoter. We found that the Cdx4 promoter was regulated by Cdx2 in transient
transfection assays. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that Cdx2 bound
to predicted Cdx response elements in the Cdx4 promoter which, when mutated,
significantly reduced activity. Consistent with these data, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays from embryos demonstrated occupancy of the Cdx4
promoter by Cdx2 in vivo. However, we failed to observe an interaction between
Cdx2 and components of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. These findings
suggest that, while both canonical Wnt and Cdx2 can regulate the activity of the 
Cdx4 promoter, they appear to operate through distinct mechanisms.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20933081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Mol Med. 2010 Nov;26(5):743-9.

Differential regulation of proliferation, cell cycle control and gene expression 
in cultured human aortic and pulmonary artery endothelial cells by resveratrol.

Hsieh TC(1), Lu X, Guo J, Wu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Resveratrol is a grape polyphenol with cardioprotective attributes, supported in 
part by its demonstrated anti-mitogenic, apoptosis-inducing and gene modulatory
activities in various cell types known to play an integral role in atherogenesis.
To test whether resveratrol exerts similar effects on systemic and pulmonary
vasculature, cells derived from different anatomical sites, cultured human aortic
and pulmonary artery endothelial cells, respectively denoted HAECs and HPAECs,
were exposed to resveratrol for assessment of effects on proliferation, cell
cycle distribution, induction of apoptosis, and specific gene expression.
Resveratrol inhibited cell proliferation in a time- and dose-dependent manner in 
HAECs and HPAECs, accompanied by disruption of cell cycle control and progression
as assayed by flow cytometry. Analysis of gene changes in resveratrol-treated
endothelial cells by RT-PCR showed suppression of nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)
and preproendothelin-1 (ppET-1) expression in both cell types. To discover group 
gene alterations resulting from exposure to resveratrol, changes in mRNA levels
were determined by human signal transduction pathway finder cDNA array analysis. 
The results showed that resveratrol up-regulated levels of cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p57, egr-1, forkhead box A2 and c-jun in HAECs, and elevated
expression of cathepsin D, ICAM-1, c-jun and patched 1 in HPAECs. In addition,
treatment by resveratrol also resulted in attenuated expression of bcl-xl,
fibronectin-1, HIP, mdm2, PIG3 and WSB1/SWIP-1 in HAECs, and CDX1, engrailed
homolog 1, FASN, fibronectin-1, forkhead box A2, Hoxa-1, hsp27, PIG3,
ELAM-1/E-selectin and WSB1/SWIP-1 in HPAECs. These results suggest that
resveratrol acts by distinct and overlapping signaling pathways and mechanisms in
HAECs and HPAECs, further supporting the notion that the cardioactive activities 
and effects of this grape polyphenol are contingent upon or influenced by the
vascular bed of origin.

PMID: 20878097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):353-7. doi: 10.1042/BST0380353.

The role of Cdx genes in the gut and in axial development.

Beck F(1), Stringer EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Henry Wellcome Building, University of Leicester, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE17RH, UK. fb22@le.ac.uk

The Cdx (Caudal-type homeobox) group of ParaHox genes (Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 in the
mouse) perform multiple functions in mammalian development. Cdx1 is concerned
with axial positional information, and its deletion appears to have no important 
effect other than a disturbance of axial patterning. In contrast, Cdx2 is
required for trophoblast differentiation, axial patterning and extension, as well
as for morphological specification (i.e. patterning) of gut endoderm.
Cdx4-knockout animals do not present an abnormal phenotype, but, when combined
with Cdx2 haploinsufficiency, present a dramatic picture involving abnormal
cloacal specification. The latter is probably due in large part to defective
paraxial mesodermal development in the caudal region, but may also involve
defective endodermal growth. A significant degree of redundancy is apparent
between the Cdx genes with respect to caudal extension and possibly also during
gut development.

PMID: 20298182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 23;107(8):3722-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0915135107. Epub 2010 Feb 2.

Cancer stem cells from colorectal cancer-derived cell lines.

Yeung TM(1), Gandhi SC, Wilding JL, Muschel R, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
9DS, UK.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are the subpopulation of cells within a tumor that can
self-renew, differentiate into multiple lineages, and drive tumor growth. Here we
describe a two-pronged approach for the identification and characterization of
CSCs from colorectal cancer cell lines, using a Matrigel-based differentiation
assay, and cell surface markers CD44 and CD24. About 20 to 30% of cells from the 
SW1222 cell line form megacolonies in Matrigel that have complex 3D structures
resembling colonic crypts. The megacolonies' capacity to self-renew in vitro is
direct evidence that they contain the CSCs. Furthermore, just 200 cells from
SW1222 megacolonies initiate tumors in NOD/SCID mice. We also showed that
CD44(+)CD24(+) cells enriched for colorectal CSCs in the HT29 and SW1222 cell
lines, which can self-renew and reform all four CD44/CD24 subpopulations, are the
most clonogenic in vitro and can initiate tumors in vivo. A single SW1222
CD44(+)CD24(+) CSC, when grown in Matrigel, can form large megacolonies that
differentiate into enterocyte, enteroendocrine, and goblet cell lineages. The
HCT116 line does not differentiate or express CDX1, nor does it contain
subpopulations of cells with greater tumor-forming capacity, suggesting that
HCT116 contains mainly CSCs. However, forced expression of CDX1 in HCT116 leads
to reduced clonogenicity and production of differentiating crypt-containing
colonies, which can explain the selection for reduced CDX1 expression in many
colorectal cancers. In summary, colorectal cancer cell lines contain
subpopulations of CSCs, characterized by their cell surface markers and colony
morphology, which can self-renew and differentiate into multiple lineages.

PMCID: PMC2840416
PMID: 20133591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):507-18. doi: 10.1242/dev.043257.

Insights into the organization of dorsal spinal cord pathways from an
evolutionarily conserved raldh2 intronic enhancer.

Castillo HA(1), Cravo RM, Azambuja AP, Simões-Costa MS, Sura-Trueba S, Gonzalez
J, Slonimsky E, Almeida K, Abreu JG, de Almeida MA, Sobreira TP, de Oliveira SH, 
de Oliveira PS, Signore IA, Colombo A, Concha ML, Spengler TS, Bronner-Fraser M, 
Nobrega M, Rosenthal N, Xavier-Neto J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética e Cardiologia Molecular, InCor-FMUSP, 05403-000, São
Paulo, Brazil.

Comparative studies of the tetrapod raldh2 (aldh1a2) gene, which encodes a
retinoic acid (RA) synthesis enzyme, have led to the identification of a dorsal
spinal cord enhancer. Enhancer activity is directed dorsally to the roof plate
and dorsal-most (dI1) interneurons through predicted Tcf- and Cdx-homeodomain
binding sites and is repressed ventrally via predicted Tgif homeobox and ventral 
Lim-homeodomain binding sites. Raldh2 and Math1/Cath1 expression in mouse and
chicken highlights a novel, transient, endogenous Raldh2 expression domain in dI1
interneurons, which give rise to ascending circuits and intraspinal commissural
interneurons, suggesting roles for RA in the ontogeny of spinocerebellar and
intraspinal proprioceptive circuits. Consistent with expression of raldh2 in the 
dorsal interneurons of tetrapods, we also found that raldh2 is expressed in
dorsal interneurons throughout the agnathan spinal cord, suggesting ancestral
roles for RA signaling in the ontogenesis of intraspinal proprioception.

PMCID: PMC4074295
PMID: 20081195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 1;339(1):155-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.025. Epub 2010
Jan 4.

Cdx2 regulates patterning of the intestinal epithelium.

Grainger S(1), Savory JG, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 encode homeodomain transcription factors that are involved in
vertebral anterior-posterior (AP) patterning. Cdx1 and Cdx2 are also expressed in
the intestinal epithelium during development, suggesting a role in this tissue.
Intestinal defects have not been reported in Cdx1 null mutants, while Cdx2 null
mutants die at embryonic day 3.5 (E3.5), thus precluding assessment of the null
phenotype at later stages. To circumvent this latter shortcoming, we have used a 
conditional Cre-lox strategy to inactivate Cdx2 in the intestinal epithelium.
Using this approach, we found that ablation of Cdx2 at E13.5 led to a
transformation of the small intestine to a pyloric stomach-like identity,
although the molecular nature of the underlying mesenchyme remained unchanged.
Further analysis of Cdx1-Cdx2 double mutants suggests that Cdx1 does not play a
critical role in the development of the small intestine, at least after E13.5.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20043902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4099-110. doi: 10.1242/dev.041582. Epub 2009 Nov
11.

Cdx2 regulation of posterior development through non-Hox targets.

Savory JG(1), Bouchard N, Pierre V, Rijli FM, De Repentigny Y, Kothary R, Lohnes 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 play essential roles in
anteroposterior vertebral patterning through regulation of Hox gene expression.
Cdx2 is also expressed in the trophectoderm commencing at E3.5 and plays an
essential role in implantation, thus precluding assessment of the cognate-null
phenotype at later stages. Cdx2 homozygous null embryos generated by tetraploid
aggregation exhibit an axial truncation indicative of a role for Cdx2 in
elaborating the posterior embryo through unknown mechanisms. To better understand
such roles, we developed a conditional Cdx2 floxed allele in mice and effected
temporal inactivation at post-implantation stages using a tamoxifen-inducible
Cre. This approach yielded embryos that were devoid of detectable Cdx2 protein
and exhibited the axial truncation phenotype predicted from previous studies.
This phenotype was associated with attenuated expression of genes encoding
several key players in axial elongation, including Fgf8, T, Wnt3a and Cyp26a1,
and we present data suggesting that T, Wnt3a and Cyp26a1 are direct Cdx2 targets.
We propose a model wherein Cdx2 functions as an integrator of caudalizing
information by coordinating axial elongation and somite patterning through
Hox-independent and -dependent pathways, respectively.

PMID: 19906845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;138(2):627-35. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.10.047. Epub
2009 Nov 10.

CDX transcription factors positively regulate expression of solute carrier family
5, member 8 in the colonic epithelium.

Kakizaki F(1), Aoki K, Miyoshi H, Carrasco N, Aoki M, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Sakyo, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2
regulate gut development and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells; they
are candidate tumor suppressors of colorectal carcinomas. Because the functions
of CDX1 and CDX2 in the colonic epithelium are not fully understood, we sought to
identify genes that they target.
METHODS: We conducted a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) screen to identify
genes that bind the CDX transcription factors. Expression of target genes was
analyzed in colon cells and tissues from Cdx1(-/-), Cdx2(+/-), Apc(+/Delta716),
and wild-type (control) mice.
RESULTS: Using the ChIP screen, we identified solute carrier family 5, member 8
(SLC5A8, also known as SMCT1) as a direct target of CDX1 and CDX2. CDX
transcription factors bind to the promoter region of SLC5A8 and transactivate
SLC5A8 reporter constructs. Overexpression of Cdx1 or Cdx2 in human colon cancer 
cell lines induced expression of endogenous SLC5A8, whereas CDX1 and CDX2
knockdowns reduced its level. Consistently, Slc5a8 expression was significantly
reduced in colons of Cdx1(-/-) or Cdx2(+/-) mice compared with wild-type mice.
Slc5a8 levels were also reduced in colonic adenomatous polyps and hamartomas from
Apc(+/Delta716) and Cdx2(+/-) mutant mice, respectively, compared with adjacent
normal colon tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1 and CDX2 bind the promoter region of SLC5A8 and up-regulate its
expression in cultured cells and in colonic epithelium. SLC5A8 transports
monocarboxylates such as pyruvate, lactate, and butyrate; CDX1 and CDX2 might
therefore regulate the uptake of these substances in the colon.

PMID: 19900445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cancer. 2009 Sep 25;8:77. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-77.

Selective activation of tumor growth-promoting Ca2+ channel MS4A12 in colon
cancer by caudal type homeobox transcription factor CDX2.

Koslowski M(1), Türeci O, Huber C, Sahin U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Experimental and Translational Oncology, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Obere Zahlbacherstr, 63, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
koslowsk@uni-mainz.de

Colon cancer-associated MS4A12 is a novel colon-specific component of
store-operated Ca2+ (SOC) entry sensitizing cells for epidermal growth factor
(EGF)-mediated effects on proliferation and chemotaxis. In the present study, we 
investigated regulation of the MS4A12 promoter to understand the mechanisms
responsible for strict transcriptional restriction of this gene to the colonic
epithelial cell lineage. DNA-binding assays and luciferase reporter assays showed
that MS4A12 promoter activity is governed by a single CDX homeobox transcription 
factor binding element. RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated silencing of
intestine-specific transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2 and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in LoVo and SW48 colon cancer cells revealed that
MS4A12 transcript and protein expression is essentially dependent on the presence
of endogenous CDX2. In summary, our findings provide a rationale for
colon-specific expression of MS4A12. Moreover, this is the first report
establishing CDX2 as transactivator of tumor growth-promoting gene expression in 
colon cancer, adding to untangle the complex and conflicting biological functions
of CDX2 in colon cancer and supporting MS4A12 as important factor for normal
colonic development as well as for the biology and treatment of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2759907
PMID: 19781065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. FEBS J. 2009 Oct;276(20):5821-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07263.x. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

Transgenic Cdx2 induces endogenous Cdx1 in intestinal metaplasia of
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.

Mutoh H(1), Hayakawa H, Sakamoto H, Sashikawa M, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Cdx1 and Cdx2, which are transcription factors regulating normal intestinal
development, have been studied as potential key molecules in the pathogenesis of 
the precancerous intestinal metaplasia of the human stomach. However, the
regulation of Cdx1 expression in the intestinal metaplasia is poorly understood. 
Cdx2-expressing gastric mucosa of Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach was replaced by
intestinal metaplastic mucosa. The aim of this study was to investigate the
following: (a) Cdx1 expression in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa of the
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach; and (b) the relationship between Cdx1 and Cdx2. A 
mouse model of intestinal metaplasia, the Cdx2-transgenic mouse, was used to
investigate Cdx1 gene expression by RT-PCR. DNA methylation profile analysis was 
performed by bisulfite sequencing, and the interaction of Cdx2 with the Cdx1
promoter was examined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, and luciferase reporter assays. Cdx2 mRNA was expressed in 
the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. However, endogenous Cdx2 mRNA was not
expressed in the intestinal metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. On
the other hand, endogenous Cdx1 mRNA and protein were expressed in the intestinal
metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. The Cdx1 promoter was
unmethylated in the intestinal metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that Cdx2 was bound to the Cdx1 promoter region in the intestinal
metaplasia and the normal intestine. Cdx2 upregulated and siRNA-Cdx2
downregulated the transcriptional activity of the Cdx1 gene in the human gastric 
carcinoma cell lines AGS, MKN45, and MKN74. In conclusion, transgenic Cdx2
induced endogenous Cdx1 through the binding of Cdx2 to the unmethylated Cdx1
promoter region in the intestinal metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse
stomach.

PMID: 19725873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jan;239(1):191-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22075.

Beta-catenin-mediated signaling and cell adhesion in postgastrulation mouse
embryos.

Hierholzer A(1), Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
Freiburg, Germany.

beta-Catenin plays two major roles during the development of multicellular
organisms. It is the downstream effector of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade, 
which is involved in many developmental processes and in tumor formation.
Additionally, it is linked to classic cadherins and is required for the correct
assembly and function of adherens junctions. beta-Catenin loss of function
mutants show early gastrulation lethality. To address the role of beta-catenin in
postgastrulation stages and to overcome the early embryonic lethality, we
performed conditional gene targeting, using Cdx1::Cre, a newly established mouse 
line. By this approach, beta-catenin was depleted in the entire posterior embryo 
after the gastrulation process at embryonic day 8.0, when the three germ layers
were established. We observed defects in signaling and adhesion which are
temporarily separated. At an early event, known targets of Wnt/beta-catenin are
down-regulated in the paraxial mesoderm. Moreover, Fgf8 and Wnt3a, the key
players of the segmentation process, are down-regulated in the neural ectoderm
(NE). Wnt3a expression was rescued in mutant embryos by exogenous Fgf and
inhibition of Fgf signaling in wild-type embryos resulted in Wnt3a
down-regulation. Based on these results, we assume the existence of an
autoregulatory feedback loop in the NE where Fgf8 regulates Wnt3a, which in turn,
by means of beta-catenin, maintains Fgf8 expression. In later stages, the lack of
beta-catenin caused a progressive posterior disintegration. We found that
beta-catenin is required for the correct localization of N-cadherin at the
membrane of neural ectodermal cells and that its absence causes a disintegration 
of the neural tube.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19705445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2009;88:235-55. doi: 10.1016/S0070-2153(09)88008-3.

Hox, Cdx, and anteroposterior patterning in the mouse embryo.

Young T(1), Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cdx and Hox gene families descend from the same ProtoHox cluster, already present
in the common ancestors of bilaterians and cnidarians, and thought to act by
providing anteroposterior (A-P) positional identity to axial tissues in all
bilaterians. Mouse Cdx and Hox genes still exhibit common features in their early
expression and function. The initiation and early shaping of Hox and Cdx
transcriptional domains in mouse embryos are very similar, in keeping with their 
common involvement in conveying A-P information to the nascent tissues during
embryonic axial elongation. Considerations of the impact on axial patterning of
the early expression phase of these genes that correlates with the temporally
collinear expression of 3'-5'Hox genes suggest that it is concerned with the
acquisition of A-P information by the three germ layers as the axis extends. This
early A-P information acquired by all cells emerging from the primitive streak or
tailbud and their neighbors in the caudal neural plate gets further modulated by 
the second phase of gene expression occurring later as the tissues mature and
differentiate along the growing axis. We discuss the possibility that regulatory 
phase 1, common to all Cdx and Hox genes, is inherent to the concerted mechanism 
sequentially turning on 3'-5'Hox genes at early stages, and keeping expression of
the initiated genes subsequently in the new materials added posteriorly at the
axis extends. The posterior Hox gene expression domain would be subsequently
complemented by Hox regulatory phase 2, consisting in a variety of gene-specific,
region-specific, and/or tissue-specific gene expression controls. We also touch
on the unanswered question whether vertebrate Cdx gene expression delivers A-P
positional information in its own right, as Caudal does in Drosophila, or whether
it does so exclusively by upregulating Hox genes.

PMID: 19651307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Aug;44(8):1568-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2008.10.002.

Temporal and spatial expression of caudal-type homeobox gene-1 in the development
of anorectal malformations in rat embryos.

Zhang T(1), Bai YZ, Zhang D, Zhang SW, Wang da J, Jia HM, Yuan ZW, Wang WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
Shenyang 110004, PR China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine caudal-type homeobox gene-1
(Cdx1) expressions during anorectal development in normal and anorectal
malformation (ARMs) embryos and investigate the possible role of Cdx1 in the
pathogenesis of ARM.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Anorectal malformation was induced by ethylenethiourea on 
the 10th gestational day (GD10) in rat embryos. Cesarean deliveries were
performed to harvest embryos from GD13 to GD21. The temporal and spatial
expression of Cdx1 was evaluated in normal rat embryos (n = 334) and ARM embryos 
(n = 328) from GD13 to GD20 using immunohistochemistry staining, reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Immunostaining revealed that in normal embryos, on GD13.5, Cdx1
expression was mainly located on the epithelium of the dorsal urorectal septum
(URS), cloacal membrane, and the hindgut. On GD15, increased positive tissue
staining was noted on the fused tissue of URS, especially in the very thin anal
membrane. In the ARM embryos, however, the epithelium of the cloaca, URS, and
anorectum was negative or faint for Cdx1. In Western blot and RT-PCR, in the
normal group, Cdx1 protein and Cdx1 messenger RNA expression showed
time-dependent changes in the developing hindgut, on GD14, GD14.5, and GD15. The 
expression level reached a peak when the anus was forming. Once the anus was
open, Cdx1 expression gradually decreased. In addition, the expression level of
Cdx1 in the ARM group from GD13 to GD16 was significant lower than that of the
normal group (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: In ARM embryos, an imbalance of spatiotemporal expression of Cdx1
was noted during anorectal morphogenesis from GD13 to GD16. This suggests that
downregulation of Cdx1 at the time of cloacal separation into rectum and urethra 
might be related to the development of ARM.

PMID: 19635307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Trends Mol Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):313-22. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2009.05.001. Epub
2009 Jun 27.

Cdx genes, inflammation and the pathogenesis of Barrett's metaplasia.

Colleypriest BJ(1), Palmer RM, Ward SG, Tosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. bc248@bath.ac.uk

Metaplasia is the conversion of one cell or tissue type to another and can
predispose patients to neoplasia. Perhaps one of the best-known examples of
metaplasia is Barrett's metaplasia (BM), a pathological condition in which the
distal oesophageal epithelium switches from stratified squamous to
intestinal-type columnar epithelium. BM predisposes to oesophageal adenocarcinoma
and is the consequence of long-term acid bile reflux. The incidence of BM and
oesophageal adenocarcinoma has risen dramatically in recent years. A key event in
the pathogenesis of BM is the induction of oesophageal CDX2 expression.
Importantly, recent data reveal the molecular mechanisms that link inflammation
in the development of Barrett's metaplasia, CDX2 and the progression to cancer.
This review highlights the relationship between inflammation, metaplasia and
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19564133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Sep;9(6):430-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.06.003. Epub
2009 Jun 17.

Effect of retinoic acid signaling on Wnt/beta-catenin and FGF signaling during
body axis extension.

Zhao X(1), Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, Development and Aging Program, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Cell-cell signaling regulated by retinoic acid (RA), Wnt/beta-catenin, and
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) is important during body axis extension, and
interactions between these pathways have been suggested. At early somite stages, 
Wnt/beta-catenin and FGF signaling domains exist both anterior and posterior to
the developing trunk, whereas RA signaling occurs in between in the trunk under
the control of the RA-synthesizing enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (Raldh2).
Previous studies demonstrated that vitamin A deficient quail embryos and
Raldh2(-/-) mouse embryos lacking RA synthesis exhibit ectopic expression of Fgf8
and Wnt8a in the developing trunk. Here, we demonstrate that Raldh2(-/-) mouse
embryos display an expansion of FGF signaling into the trunk monitored by
Sprouty2 and Pea3 expression, and an expansion of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
detected by expression of Axin2, Tbx6, Cdx2, and Cdx4. Following loss of RA
signaling, the caudal expression domains of Fgf8, Wnt8a, and Wnt3a expand
anteriorly into the trunk, but no change is observed in caudal expression of Fgf4
or Fgf17 plus caudal expression of Fgf18 and Cdx1 is reduced. These findings
suggest that RA repression of Fgf8, Wnt8a, and Wnt3a in the developing trunk
functions to down-regulate FGF signaling and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling as the
body axis extends.

PMCID: PMC2791796
PMID: 19539783  [PubMed]


103. J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(9):897-911. doi: 10.1007/s00535-009-0082-2. Epub 2009
May 27.

Differential gene expression in normal esophagus and Barrett's esophagus.

Wang J(1), Qin R, Ma Y, Wu H, Peters H, Tyska M, Shaheen NJ, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Julius L. Chambers Biomedical/Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, 700 George Street, Durham, NC
27707, USA.

PURPOSE: As the premalignant lesion of human esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC),
Barrett's esophagus (BE) is characterized by intestinal metaplasia in the normal 
esophagus (NE). Gene expression profiling with microarray and serial analysis of 
gene expression (SAGE) may help us understand the potential molecular mechanism
of human BE.
METHODS: We analyzed three microarray datasets (two cDNA arrays and one
oligonucleotide array) and one SAGE dataset with statistical tools, significance 
analysis of microarrays (SAM) and SAGE(Poisson), to identify individual genes
differentially expressed in BE. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to
identify a priori defined sets of genes that were differentially expressed. These
gene sets were grouped according to either certain signaling pathways (GSEA
curated), or the presence of consensus binding sequences of known transcription
factors (GSEA motif). Immunohistochemical staining (IHC) was used to validate
differential gene expression.
RESULTS: Both SAM and SAGE(Poisson) identified 68 differentially expressed genes 
(55 BE genes and 13 NE genes) with an arbitrary cutoff ratio (> or =4-fold). With
IHC on matched pairs of NE and BE tissues from 6 patients, these genes were
grouped into 6 categories: category I (25 genes only expressed in BE), category
II (5 genes only expressed in NE), category III (8 genes expressed more in BE
than in NE), and category IV (2 genes expressed more in NE than in BE).
Differential expression of the remaining genes was not confirmed by IHC either
due to false discovery (category V), or lack of proper antibodies (category VI). 
Besides individual genes, the TGFbeta pathway and several transcription factors
(CDX2, HNF1, and HNF4) were identified by GSEA as enriched pathways and motifs in
BE. Apart from 9 target genes known to be up-regulated in BE, IHC staining
confirmed up-regulation of 19 additional CDX1 and CDX2 target genes in BE.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested an important role of CDX1 and CDX2 in the
development of BE. The IHC-confirmed gene list will lead to future studies on the
molecular mechanism of BE.

PMCID: PMC3811010
PMID: 19468668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Jun 10;315(10):1779-89. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.01.006. Epub
2009 Jan 22.

Cdx2 and the Brm-type SWI/SNF complex cooperatively regulate villin expression in
gastrointestinal cells.

Yamamichi N(1), Inada K, Furukawa C, Sakurai K, Tando T, Ishizaka A, Haraguchi T,
Mizutani T, Fujishiro M, Shimomura R, Oka M, Ichinose M, Tsutsumi Y, Omata M, Iba
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Host-Parasite
Interaction, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Shirokanedai
Minato-ku, Tokyo Japan.

In our recent study showing a correlation between Brm-deficiency and
undifferentiated status of gastric cancer, we found that the Brm-type SWI/SNF
complex is required for villin expression. To elucidate intestinal villin
regulation more precisely, we here analyzed structure and function of the
promoter of human villin. About 1.1 kb upstream of the determined major
transcription start site, we identified a highly conserved region (HCR-Cdx) among
mammals, which contains two binding sites for Cdx. Expression analyses of 30
human gastrointestinal cell lines suggested that villin is regulated by Cdx2.
Introduction of Cdx family genes into colorectal SW480 cells revealed that villin
is strongly induced strongly by Cdx2, moderately by Cdx1, and marginally by Cdx4.
Knockdown of Cdx2 in SW480 cells caused a clear downregulation of villin, and
reporter assays showed that HCR-Cdx is crucial for Cdx2-dependent and
Brm-dependent villin expression. Immunohistochemical analyses of gastric
intestinal metaplasia and cancer revealed that villin and Cdx2 expression are
tightly coupled. GST pull-down assays demonstrated a direct interaction between
Cdx2 and several SWI/SNF subunits. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses showed 
the recruitment of Cdx2 and Brm around HCR-Cdx. From these results, we concluded 
that Cdx2 regulates intestinal villin expression through recruiting Brm-type
SWI/SNF complex to the villin promoter.

PMID: 19371634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 1;330(1):114-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.03.016. Epub 2009
Mar 27.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 are functionally equivalent in vertebral patterning.

Savory JG(1), Pilon N, Grainger S, Sylvestre JR, Béland M, Houle M, Oh K, Lohnes 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

The Cdx transcription factors regulate anterior-posterior (AP) vertebral
patterning, at least in part, through direct regulation of Hox gene expression.
Analysis of allelic series of Cdx mutant mice suggests functional overlap between
these family members. However, the lack of a Cdx2 null mutant makes these
analyses incomplete. Moreover, Hox proteins are sometimes redundant, making it
difficult to discern whether Cdx members regulate identical Hox target genes in a
redundant manner, or whether they regulate separate Hox genes which then converge
on events related to vertebral patterning. To more directly assess this question,
we developed a "knock in" model whereby Cdx2 was substituted for Cdx1. Consistent
with functional redundancy Cdx2 "knock-in" mice exhibited perfect complementation
of the Cdx1-null phenotype, as evidenced by the lack of skeletal defects or
altered expression of Hox genes typically impacted by Cdx1 loss-of-function. It
has been proposed that vertebral AP patterning is reliant on a gradient of the
sum total of Cdx proteins, a posit that is consistent with functional redundancy 
between Cdx family members. To further assess this, we generated a
gain-of-function model using BAC transgenesis to alter Cdx1 dosage. Cdx1 BAC
transgenic mice overexpressed Cdx1 mRNA and protein, and fully complemented the
Cdx1 null allele. However, gain of Cdx1 dosage via this BAC transgene in an
otherwise wild type background had no discernible effects on vertebral patterning
or Hox gene expression, suggesting that a moderate alteration in the Cdx protein 
gradient is of no consequence.

PMID: 19328777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dev Dyn. 2009 Apr;238(4):835-52. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21901.

Overlapping functions of Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4 in the development of the amphibian
Xenopus tropicalis.

Faas L(1), Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Using Xenopus tropicalis, we present the first analysis of the developmental
effects that result from knocking down the function of the three Cdx genes
present in the typical vertebrate genome. Knockdowns of individual Cdx genes lead
to a similar range of posterior defects; compound Cdx knockdowns result in
increasingly severe posterior truncations, accompanied by posterior shifts and
reduction of 5' Hox gene expression. We provide evidence that Cdx and Wnt3A genes
are components of a positive feedback loop operating in the posterior axis. We
show that Cdx function is required during later, but not early stages of
development, for correct regional specification of the endoderm and morphogenesis
of the gut. Our results support the hypothesis that during amphibian development 
the overall landscape of Cdx activity in the embryo is more important than the
specific function of individual Cdx proteins.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2701559
PMID: 19301404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genesis. 2009 Mar;47(3):204-9. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20484.

Cdx1::Cre allele for gene analysis in the extraembryonic ectoderm and the three
germ layers of mice at mid-gastrulation.

Hierholzer A(1), Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany.

Transgenic mice with a defined cell- or tissues-specific expression of
Cre-recombinase are essential tools to study gene function. Here we report the
generation and analysis of a transgenic mouse line (Cdx1::Cre) with restricted
Cre-expression from Cdx1 regulatory elements. The expression of Cre-recombinase
mimicked the endogenous expression pattern of Cdx1 at midgastrulation (from E7.5 
to early headfold stage) inducing recombination in the three germlayers of the
primitive streak region throughout the posterior embryo and caudal to the heart. 
This enables gene modifications to investigate patterning of the caudal embryo
during and after gastrulation. Interestingly, we identified Cdx1 expression in
the trophectoderm (TE) of blastocyst stage embryos. Concordantly, we detected
extensive Cre-mediated recombination in the polar TE and, although to lesser
extent, in the mural TE. In E7.5 postimplantation embryos, almost all cells of
the extraembryonic ectoderm (ExE), which are derived from the polar TE, are
recombined although the ExE itself is negative for Cdx1 and Cre at this stage.
These results indicate that Cdx1::Cre mice are also a valuable tool to study gene
function in tissues essential for placental development.

PMID: 19241391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Blood. 2009 Apr 23;113(17):4049-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-196634. Epub 2009 
Feb 13.

Aberrant expression of the homeobox gene CDX2 in pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Riedt T(1), Ebinger M, Salih HR, Tomiuk J, Handgretinger R, Kanz L, Grünebach F, 
Lengerke C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Tuebingen Medical Center II, 
Tuebingen, Germany.

Members of the caudal (cdx) family of homeobox proteins are essential regulators 
of embryonic blood development in zebrafish. Previously, we reported that the
murine homologues (Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) affect formation and differentiation of 
embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells. Consistent with
the notion that embryonic pathways can reactivate during adult oncogenesis,
recent studies suggest involvement of CDX2 in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Here we study CDX2 in healthy and leukemic human lymphoid cells, and show that a 
majority of leukemic samples display various degrees of aberrant CDX2 expression.
Analysis of a cohort of 37 childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients 
treated in our hospital reveals that high CDX2 expression levels at diagnosis
correlate with persistence of minimal residual disease (MRD) during the course of
treatment. Thus, CDX2 expression levels may serve as a marker for adverse
prognosis in pediatric ALL.

PMID: 19218548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 10;106(6):1936-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812904106. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Gastrointestinal differentiation marker Cytokeratin 20 is regulated by homeobox
gene CDX1.

Chan CW(1), Wong NA, Liu Y, Bicknell D, Turley H, Hollins L, Miller CJ, Wilding
JL, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

CDX1 is a transcription factor that plays a key role in intestinal development
and differentiation. However, the downstream targets of CDX1 are less well
defined than those of its close homologue, CDX2. We report here the
identification of downstream targets of CDX1 using microarray gene-expression
analysis and other approaches. Keratin 20 (KRT20), a member of the intermediate
filament and a well-known marker of intestinal differentiation, was initially
identified as one of the genes likely to be directly regulated by CDX1. CDX1 and 
KRT20 mRNA expression were significantly correlated in a panel of 38 colorectal
cancer cell lines. Deletion and mutation analysis of the KRT20 promoter showed
that the minimum regulatory region for the control of KRT20 expression by CDX1 is
within 246 bp upstream of the KRT20 transcription start site. ChIP analysis
confirmed that CDX1 binds to the predicted CDX elements in this region of the
KRT20 promoter in vivo. In addition, immunohistochemistry showed expression of
CDX1 parallels that of KRT20 in the normal crypt, which further supports their
close relationship. In summary, our observations strongly imply that KRT20 is
directly regulated by CDX1, and therefore suggest a role for CDX1 in maintaining 
differentiation in intestinal epithelial cells. Because a key feature of the
development of a cancer is an unbalanced program of proliferation and
differentiation, dysregulation of CDX1 may be an advantage for the development of
a colorectal carcinoma. This could, therefore, explain the relatively frequent
down regulation of CDX1 in colorectal carcinomas by hypermethylation.

PMCID: PMC2644142
PMID: 19188603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Gut. 2009 May;58(5):620-8. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.152975. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Roles of caudal-related homeobox gene Cdx1 in oesophageal epithelial cells in
Barrett's epithelium development.

Kazumori H(1), Ishihara S, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Izumo City General Medical Center, 613
Nadabun-cho, Izumo, Shimane 691-0003, Japan. kazumori-hideaki@izumo-hospital.jp

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The mechanism of transformation to intestinal metaplasia in 
Barrett's oesophagus has not been clarified. We previously reported that bile
acids activate the Cdx2 promoter via nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) and
stimulate production of Cdx2 protein in oesophageal keratinocytes with a
resulting production of intestinal type mucin. In addition to Cdx2, Cdx1 may play
an important role in the development of Barrett's oesophagus. Therefore, we
studied the direct effects of bile acids on the expression of Cdx1 as well as the
precise mechanisms of Cdx1 expression in cultured oesophageal squamous epithelial
cells. Furthermore, we investigated the relationship between Cdx1 and Cdx2
expression in cultured oesophageal squamous epithelial cells.
METHODS: A rat model of Barrett's oesophagus was produced by anastomosing the
oesophagus and jejunum. The expression of Cdx1 was investigated by
immunohistochemistry, while the response of that expression to bile acids was
studied using a Cdx1 promoter luciferase assay. In addition, oesophageal squamous
epithelial cells were transfected with a Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression vector, after
which their possible transformation to intestinal-type epithelial cells was
investigated.
RESULTS: In our Barrett's rat model, the metaplastic epithelium and adjoining
squamous epithelium strongly expressed Cdx1. Further, the bile acids mixture
dose-dependently increased Cdx1 promoter activity and Cdx1 protein in oesophageal
epithelial cells. Transfection of the Cdx1 expression vector in cultured
oesophageal epithelial cells induced production of Cdx2 protein.
CONCLUSION: Bile acid-induced sequential expression of Cdx1 followed by Cdx2 may 
have an important role in the development of Barrett's epithelium.

PMID: 19136512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Akush Ginekol (Sofiia). 2009;48(4):32-4.

[CDX2--an immunochystochemistry marker of intestinal differentiation of
adenocarcinomas].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Porjazova E, Zaprjanov Z, Milchev N, Markova D, Batashki I.

CDX2 is a nuclear transcribing factor, important for the development and
differentiation of the bowels. According to the recent publications, CDX2
expression is immunochystochemisry detector in the normal enterocytes of the
bowels and is normally met in the most, but not at all colorectal carcinomas. Two
homeostatic genes are detected at people CDX1 u CDX2. We present examination of
CDX2 expression at 15 adenomas and 30 colorectal carcinomas. All the adenomas are
positive for CDX2, 27 /90%/ of the adenocarcinomas show nuclear expression of
CDX2.

PMID: 20198783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Pancreas. 2009 Jan;38(1):49-57. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31817fa2ba.

Homeobox gene CDX2 inhibits human pancreatic cancer cell proliferation by
down-regulating cyclin D1 transcriptional activity.

Takahashi K(1), Hirano F, Matsumoto K, Aso K, Haneda M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism and Biosystemic Sciences, Department of Medicine,
Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, Japan. t-kenji@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: Homeobox gene caudal related homeobox gene 2 (CDX2) is an
intestine-specific tumor suppressor gene. This study is intended to investigate
the effect of CDX2 expression on cell proliferation and cyclin D1 expression in
pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: Four pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines (PancQGO-1, BxPC-3,
MIAPaCa-2, CFPAC-1), 1 islet carcinoma cell line (QGP-1), and 1 adenosquamous
carcinoma cell line (KP-3) were analyzed for CDX1 and CDX2 expression using
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot
analysis. Proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells was analyzed using WST-1 assay
after CDX2 transfection. Luciferase assay was performed to examine the effects of
CDX2 on cyclin D1 transcriptional activity.
RESULTS: CDX2 was expressed at a significantly higher level in QGP-1 cells than
in KP-3 cells. Moreover, CDX2 was expressed at a middle level in 4 pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma cells. Cell proliferation and cyclin D1 mRNA level were
inhibited significantly after CDX2 transfection in pancreatic cancer cells.
Furthermore, CDX2 inhibited exogenous nuclear factor kappaB-p65-induced
luciferase gene expression in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, CDX2
inhibited pGL2HIVD1kappaB2-luciferase activity.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 might play a role in inhibiting cell proliferation and
repressing cyclin D1 transcriptional activity through the proximal nuclear factor
kappaB binding site in pancreatic cancer cells.

PMID: 19106744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jan;238(1):194-203. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21816.

Cloning and expression analysis of the anterior parahox genes, Gsh1 and Gsh2 from
Xenopus tropicalis.

Illes JC(1), Winterbottom E, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Gsx class proteins are members of the ParaHox homeodomain transcription factor
family with conserved roles in specification and patterning of the nervous
system. We report the cloning of two Gsx genes, Gsh1 and Gsh2, from the frog
Xenopus tropicalis. We demonstrate the existence of a single, intact Xenopus
ParaHox cluster, containing Gsh1, Pdx, and Cdx2, plus three degenerate clusters
containing Gsh2, Cdx1, and Cdx4. Anterior expression boundaries of genes from the
intact ParaHox cluster are co-linear with respect to their genomic organization. 
We show that Gsh1 and Gsh2 exhibit complex, overlapping patterns of expression
within the anterior nervous system from open neural plate stages. We also find
that expression of Gsh2, Nkx6, and Msx1 across the medio-lateral axis of the
amphibian neural plate is strikingly similar to that of related genes in the
Drosophila neuroectoderm. These findings provide further evidence for a conserved
pathway regulating dorso-ventral patterning in the Bilateria.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19097192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jan 5;583(1):29-35. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.11.030. Epub 2008
Dec 4.

Homeodomain transcription factor CDX1 is required for the transcriptional
induction of PPARgamma in intestinal cell differentiation.

Park MJ(1), Kim HY, Kim K, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.

The caudal-associated homeobox transcription factor, CDX1, performs critical
functions in intestinal cell proliferation, differentiation, and neoplasia. In
this study, we have identified the molecular mechanism underlying the
CDX1-mediated regulation of intestinal cell differentiation. CDX1 enhanced the
expression of PPARgamma gene, a master transcriptional regulator of intestinal
differentiation, at the transcriptional level, via functional interaction with
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha). Butyrate, an intestinal
differentiation inducer, increased the protein interaction of CDX1 and
C/EBPalpha, thereby resulting in a significant increase in PPARgamma expression. 
These results show that the regulation of target gene expression for intestinal
determination is dependent on a transcriptional cascade of CDX1, C/EBPalpha, and 
PPARgamma.

PMID: 19059241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biol Chem. 2008 Aug;389(8):1085-96. doi: 10.1515/BC.2008.112.

Intestine-specific expression of green fluorescent protein-tagged cathepsin B:
proof-of-principle experiments.

Mayer K(1), Iolyeva ME, Meyer-Grahle U, Brix K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs University Bremen, Campus Ring 6,
D-28759 Bremen, Germany.

We hypothesized that tissue-specific expression of cathepsin B-enhanced green
fluorescent protein (CB-EGFP) can be driven by the A33-antigen promoter that
contains positive cis-regulatory elements, including caudal-related homeobox
(CDX) binding sites. The intestine-specific transcription factor Cdx1 is crucial 
for A33-antigen promoter activation and could thereby induce expression of
CB-EGFP. This concept was tested by construction of the vector pA33-CathB-EGFP
encoding CB-EGFP downstream of the A33-antigen promoter. Its Cdx1 dependence, as 
an indication of its intestine-specific expression, was tested in Cdx1-negative
CHO-K1 cells. Cdx1 expression was achieved upon transfection with
pCdx1-DsRed-Express and was indicated by red fluorescence of the simultaneously
translated reporter protein. Immunolabeling with Cdx1-specific antibodies showed 
correct targeting of the transcription factor to its point of action in nuclei of
transfected cells. Co-transfection experiments with plasmids pA33-CathB-EGFP and 
pCdx1-DsRed-Express confirmed the hypothesis that Cdx1 indeed activates CB-EGFP
expression in a manner dependent on the A33-antigen promoter. Co-localization
with compartment-specific markers and subcellular fractionation confirmed CB-EGFP
trafficking along the expected route to endolysosomal compartments. Hence, the
A33-antigen promoter represents a potent tool for induction of Cdx1-dependent
CB-EGFP expression in vitro. Our proof-of-principle studies confirm the
suitability of this approach in visualizing protease transport in Cdx1-positive
tissues of the gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 18979632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3534. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003534. Epub 2008 Oct 27.

Cdx1 and c-Myc foster the initiation of transdifferentiation of the normal
esophageal squamous epithelium toward Barrett's esophagus.

Stairs DB(1), Nakagawa H, Klein-Szanto A, Mitchell SD, Silberg DG, Tobias JW,
Lynch JP, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Abramson Cancer Center, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus is a premalignant condition whereby the normal
stratified squamous esophageal epithelium undergoes a transdifferentiation
program resulting in a simple columnar epithelium reminiscent of the small
intestine. These changes are typically associated with the stratified squamous
epithelium chronically exposed to acid and bile salts as a result of
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Despite this well-defined epidemiologic
association between acid reflux and Barrett's esophagus, the genetic changes that
induce this transdifferentiation process in esophageal keratinocytes have
remained undefined.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To begin to identify the genetic changes
responsible for transdifferentiaiton in Barrett's esophagus, we performed a
microarray analysis of normal esophageal, Barrett's esophagus and small
intestinal biopsy specimens to identify candidate signaling pathways and
transcription factors that may be involved. Through this screen we identified the
Cdx1 homeodomain transcription factor and the c-myc pathway as possible
candidates. Cdx1 and c-myc were then tested for their ability to induce
transdifferentiation in immortalized human esophageal keratinocytes using
organotypic culturing methods. Analyses of these cultures reveal that c-myc and
cdx1 cooperate to induce mucin production and changes in keratin expression that 
are observed in the epithelium of Barrett's esophagus.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data demonstrate the ability of Cdx1 and c-myc to
initiate the earliest stages of transdifferentiation of esophageal keratinocytes 
toward a cell fate characteristic of Barrett's esophagus.

PMCID: PMC2568822
PMID: 18953412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Sep;6(9):1478-90. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2161.

Repression of the desmocollin 2 gene expression in human colon cancer cells is
relieved by the homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2.

Funakoshi S(1), Ezaki T, Kong J, Guo RJ, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Desmosomes are intracellular junctions that provide strong cell-cell adhesion in 
epithelia and cardiac muscle. Their disruption causes several human diseases and 
contributes to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition observed in cancer.
Desmocollin 2 (DSC2) is a cadherin superfamily member and a critical component of
desmosomes found in intestinal epithelium. However, the mechanism regulating DSC2
gene expression in intestinal cells is not known. Cdx1 and Cdx2 are homeodomain
transcription factors that regulate intestine-specific gene expression. Cdx
expression in the past has been associated with the induction of desmosomes. We
now show that the DSC2 gene is a transcriptional target for Cdx1 and Cdx2. Colon 
cancer cell lines retaining Cdx2 expression typically express DSC2. Restoration
of Cdx expression in Colo 205 cells induced DSC2 mRNA and protein and the
formation of desmosomes. The 5'-flanking region of the DSC2 promoter contains two
consensus Cdx-binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that Cdx1
and Cdx2 bind these sites in vitro, and chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed
Cdx2 binding in vivo. DSC2 promoter truncations established that these regions
are Cdx responsive. The truncations also identify a region of the promoter in
which potent transcriptional repressors act. This repressor activity is relieved 
by Cdx binding. We conclude that the homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and
Cdx2 regulate DSC2 gene expression in intestinal epithelia by reversing the
actions of a transcriptional repressor. The regulation of desmosomal junctions by
Cdx contributes to normal intestinal epithelial columnar morphology and likely
antagonizes the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition necessary for the metastasis
of colon cancer cells in humans.

PMID: 18819935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Dec;29(12):2385-93. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn207. Epub 2008
Sep 4.

Bile acid induces expression of COX-2 through the homeodomain transcription
factor CDX1 and orphan nuclear receptor SHP in human gastric cancer cells.

Park MJ(1), Kim KH, Kim HY, Kim K, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan, Korea.

The caudal-related homeobox gene, CDX1, encodes for an intestinal-specific
transcription factor and is involved in the induction of intestinal metaplasia
(IM) of the stomach in gastric cancer. Gastric IM induced by bile reflux is a
precancerous gastric adenocarcinomal lesion and has been associated with the
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). In this study, we demonstrate the
molecular mechanisms underlying the transcriptional regulation of COX-2 by bile
acid in gastric cells. We noted that the ectopic expression of CDX1 enhanced
COX-2 gene expression and that bile acid was associated with the induction of
CDX1 expression. Furthermore, the induction of CDX1 by bile acid was mediated by 
the orphan nuclear receptor, small heterodimer partner (SHP). Finally, it was
verified that the expression of COX-2, CDX1, SHP and CCAAT element-binding
protein beta messenger RNA in human IM lesions were significantly higher than in 
lesions associated with gastritis. Collectively, these results reveal that bile
acid induces an increase in the gene expression of COX-2 via the sequential
transcriptional induction of SHP and CDX1 in precancerous lesions of human
gastric cancer.

PMID: 18775915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Development. 2008 Aug;135(15):2511-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.015909. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Increased Cdx protein dose effects upon axial patterning in transgenic lines of
mice.

Gaunt SJ(1), Drage D, Trubshaw RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

To investigate the link between Cdx protein concentration and axial patterning in
embryos, we made lines of mice OE1, OE2 and OE4 that overexpress each of the Cdx 
genes Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4, respectively. The lines carry Cdx transgenes under the
transcriptional control of their own promoter/enhancer elements. Transgenic
embryos show Cdx transcription at 8.5 to 8.7 days within normal spatial domains
for Cdx expression (primitive streak/tailbud), yet, overall, they contain
elevated levels of Cdx proteins. Increased doses of Cdx proteins result in
homeotic shifts in vertebral types along most of the vertebral column, with
transformations being most obvious within the cervical region. Most of the shifts
are anterior-to-posterior transformations and the anterior limits of these are
commonly skull/vertebra 1 (v1) for OE1, v1/v2 for OE2 and v7 for OE4. OE embryos 
display anterior shifts in the expression of a Hoxa7/lacZ reporter within neural,
paraxial and lateral plate mesoderm tissues. Hoxa7/lacZ expression commences at
the normal time in OE1 and OE4 embryos. OE2 embryos display a forward shift in
the gradient of Cdx2 protein along the axis, suggesting that a Cdx morphogen
gradient model could account, at least in part, for the homeotic shifts in
vertebral types. OE mice display additional defects: forelimb deficiencies in
OE1, multiple tail axes, vertebral mis-alignments and axial truncations in OE2.

PMID: 18579683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):G211-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90250.2008. Epub 2008 Jun 12.

Acid, bile, and CDX: the ABCs of making Barrett's metaplasia.

Souza RF(1), Krishnan K, Spechler SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs North Texas Health Care System and
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, USA.
rhonda.souza@utsouthwestern.edu

Barrett's esophagus, a squamous-to-columnar cell metaplasia that develops as a
result of chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), is a risk factor for
esophageal adenocarcinoma. The molecular events underlying the pathogenesis of
Barrett's metaplasia are poorly understood, but recent studies suggest that
interactions among developmental signaling pathways, morphogenetic factors, and
Caudal homeobox (Cdx) genes play key roles. Strong expression of Cdx genes
normally is found in the intestine but not in the esophagus and stomach. When
mice are genetically engineered so that their gastric cells express Cdx, the
stomach develops a metaplastic, intestinal-type epithelium similar to that of
Barrett's esophagus. Exposure to acid and bile has been shown to activate the Cdx
promoter in certain esophageal cell lines, and Cdx expression has been found in
inflamed esophageal squamous epithelium and in the specialized intestinal
metaplasia of Barrett's esophagus. Barrett's metaplasia must be sustained by stem
cells, which might be identified by putative, intestinal stem cell markers like
leucine-rich repeat-containing G protein-coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5) and
doublecortin and CaM kinase-like-1 (DCAMKL-1). Emerging concepts in tumor biology
suggest that Barrett's cancers may develop from growth-promoting mutations in
metaplastic stem cells or their progenitor cell progeny. This report reviews the 
roles of developmental signaling pathways and the Cdx genes in the development of
normal gut epithelia and the potential mechanisms whereby GERD may induce the
esophageal expression of Cdx genes and other morphogenetic factors that mediate
the development of Barrett's metaplasia. The role of stem cells in the
development of metaplasia and in carcinogenesis and the potential for therapies
directed at those stem cells also is addressed.

PMID: 18556417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 3;105(22):7756-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708951105. Epub 2008 May 29.

Cdx gene deficiency compromises embryonic hematopoiesis in the mouse.

Wang Y(1), Yabuuchi A, McKinney-Freeman S, Ducharme DM, Ray MK, Chawengsaksophak 
K, Archer TK, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

Cdx genes (Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) encode a family of caudal-related transcription 
factors that mediate anterior-posterior patterning during embryogenesis through
Hox gene regulation. Homologues in the zebrafish have been shown to play key
roles in blood formation. To define the role of Cdx genes during embryonic
hematopoiesis in a mammalian system, we examined the hematopoietic potential of
Cdx-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in vitro and in vivo. Individual 
Cdx-deficient ESCs exhibited impaired embryonic hematopoietic progenitor
formation and altered Hox gene expression, most notably for Cdx2 deficiency. A
more severe hematopoietic defect was observed with compound Cdx deficiency than
loss of function of any single Cdx gene. Reduced hematopoietic progenitor
formation of ESCs deficient in multiple Cdx genes could be rescued by ectopic
expression of Cdx4, concomitant with partially restored Hox gene expression.
These results reveal an essential and partially redundant role for multiple Cdx
genes during embryonic hematopoiesis in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC2409377
PMID: 18511567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dig Liver Dis. 2008 Jul;40(7):510-22. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2008.02.029. Epub 2008
Apr 9.

Biology of intestinal metaplasia in 2008: more than a simple phenotypic
alteration.

Gutiérrez-González L(1), Wright NA.

Author information: 
(1)Histopathology Unit, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, London,
UK. lydia.gutierrez@cancer.org.uk

This review concentrates on one main aspect of cancerization in the oesophagus
and stomach: principally, intestinal metaplasia. There are at least two other
important pathways that lead to cancer and do not need such a morphological
transformation. One is the gastric type of carcinoma on the Lauren
classification, which arises directly from the stem cell zone and is the signet
ring form of cancer, while the other is spasmolytic polypeptide-expressing
metaplasia (SPEM)--spasmolytic polypeptide (TFF2) expressing metaplasia, where
the gastric glands become filled with TFF2-expressing cells and may also lead to 
gastric dysplasia and cancer. The development of intestinal metaplasia is
complex. Here, we examine intestinal metaplasia in molecular terms, noting the
over-expression of Cdx1, Cdx2, Pdx1, Oct1, TFF3 and the downregulation of
Hedgehog signalling; Runx3 is deactivated by epigenetic silencing, and pathways
such as Wnt and MARK/ERK are involved. These changes start to explain the
principles of the development of intestinal metaplasia and suggest that the
regulation of these genes is of importance in the development of gastric cancer.

PMID: 18400571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 24;27(32):4497-502. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.78. Epub 2008 Mar
31.

Cdx1, a dispensable homeobox gene for gut development with limited effect in
intestinal cancer.

Bonhomme C(1), Calon A, Martin E, Robine S, Neuville A, Kedinger M, Domon-Dell C,
Duluc I, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 is involved in anteroposterior patterning in embryos and
its expression selectively persists in the intestinal epithelium throughout life.
In human colon cancers, Cdx1 is overexpressed in few cases and lost in the
majority of adenocarcinomas. We used mouse models of gain and loss-of-function to
investigate the role of Cdx1 in intestinal development and cancers. Transgenic
mice overexpressing Cdx1 and knockout mice exhibited a morphologically normal
intestine. Cell proliferation, specification into the four differentiated
lineages and migration along the crypt-villus axis were unchanged compared to
wild-type mice. Changing Cdx1 caused an inverse and dose-dependent modification
of the expression of the paralogous gene Cdx2, indicating that Cdx1 fine-tunes
Cdx2 activity. Transgenenic and knockout mice failed to spontaneously develop
tumours. Overexpressing Cdx1 was without incidence on the frequency of intestinal
tumours induced chemically by azoxymethane treatment or genetically in
Apc(Delta14/+) mice. However, it augmented the severity of the tumours in
Apc(Delta14/+) mice. Inversely, the loss-of-function of Cdx1 in knockout mice was
without incidence on the growth of tumours induced by azoxymethane. We conclude
that Cdx1 is dispensable for intestinal development and that its overexpression
could increase malignancy in early stages of tumourigenesis.

PMID: 18372917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Jan 10;2(1):72-82. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.10.022.

BMP and Wnt specify hematopoietic fate by activation of the Cdx-Hox pathway.

Lengerke C(1), Schmitt S, Bowman TV, Jang IH, Maouche-Chretien L,
McKinney-Freeman S, Davidson AJ, Hammerschmidt M, Rentzsch F, Green JB, Zon LI,
Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and Dana
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The formation of blood in the embryo is dependent on bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP), but how BMP signaling intersects with other regulators of hematopoietic
development is unclear. Using embryonic stem (ES) cells, we show that BMP4 first 
induces ventral-posterior (V-P) mesoderm and subsequently directs mesodermal
cells toward blood fate by activating Wnt3a and upregulating Cdx and Hox genes.
When BMP signaling is blocked during this latter phase, enforced expression of
either Cdx1 or Cdx4 rescues hematopoietic development, thereby placing BMP4
signaling upstream of the Cdx-Hox pathway. Wnt signaling cooperates in
BMP-induced hemogenesis, and the Wnt effector LEF1 mediates BMP4 activation of
Cdx genes. Our data suggest that BMP signaling plays two distinct and sequential 
roles during blood formation, initially as an inducer of mesoderm, and later to
specify blood via activation of Wnt signaling and the Cdx-Hox pathway.

PMID: 18371423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Int J Biol Sci. 2008 Feb 6;4(1):48-57.

ParaHox genes in pancreatic cell cultures: effects on the insulin promoter
regulation.

Rosanas-Urgell A(1), Garcia-Fernàndez J, Marfany G.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

The gene encoding PDX1 (pancreatic duodenum homeobox 1), the main transcription
factor regulating the glucose-dependent transactivation of the insulin promoter
in pancreatic beta-cells, clusters with two closely related homeobox genes (Gsh1 
and Cdx2/3), all of them belonging to the ParaHox gene family. The ParaHox gene
evolutionary history in the vertebrate lineage involved duplications of the
cluster and subsequent loss of some members, so that eventually, the human and
murine genomes contain only 6 ParaHox genes. The crucial role of PDX1 in pancreas
development, beta-cell formation and insulin transcription regulation has long
been established. There is some data on CDX2/3 function in alpha-cells, but
remarkably, nothing is known on the role of the other ParaHox genes, which are
also expressed in the endocrine pancreas. Homeobox transcription factors that
belong to the same family show high conservation of the homeodomain and share
similar target sites and oligomeric partners, and thus may act redundantly,
synergistically or antagonistically on the same promoters. Therefore, we explored
the effects of the Parahox proteins (GSH1, GSH2, CDX1, CDX2/3 and CDX4) on the
regulation of the insulin promoter in transfected alpha- and beta- cultured cell 
lines at different glucose concentrations and compared them to those of PDX1.
Noticeably, several ParaHox transcription factors are able to transactivate or
inhibit the insulin promoter, depending on the cell type and glucose
concentration, thus suggesting their possible participation in the regulation of 
similar target genes, such as insulin, either by silencing or activating them, in
the absence of PDX1.

PMCID: PMC2238182
PMID: 18274620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):4944-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-124644. Epub 2008 
Feb 5.

Modulation of murine embryonic stem cell-derived CD41+c-kit+ hematopoietic
progenitors by ectopic expression of Cdx genes.

McKinney-Freeman SL(1), Lengerke C, Jang IH, Schmitt S, Wang Y, Philitas M, Shea 
J, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA;

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):4834-5.

Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4 comprise the caudal-like Cdx gene family in mammals, whose
homologues regulate hematopoietic development in zebrafish. Previously, we
reported that overexpression of Cdx4 enhances hematopoietic potential from murine
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Here we compare the effect of ectopic Cdx1, Cdx2,
and Cdx4 on the differentiation of murine ESC-derived hematopoietic progenitors. 
The 3 Cdx genes differentially influence the formation and differentiation of
hematopoietic progenitors within a CD41(+)c-kit(+) population of embryoid body
(EB)-derived cells. Cdx1 and Cdx4 enhance, whereas Cdx2 strongly inhibits, the
hematopoietic potential of CD41(+)ckit(+) EB-derived cells, changes that are
reflected by effects on hematopoietic lineage-specific and Hox gene expression.
When we subject stromal cell and colony assay cultures of EB-derived
hematopoietic progenitors to ectopic expression of Cdx genes, Cdx4 dramatically
enhances, whereas Cdx1 and Cdx2 both inhibit hematopoietic activity, probably by 
blocking progenitor differentiation. These data demonstrate distinct effects of
Cdx genes on hematopoietic progenitor formation and differentiation, insights
that we are using to facilitate efforts at in vitro culture of hematopoietic
progenitors from ESC. The behavior of Cdx genes in vitro suggests how derangement
of these developmental regulators might contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2384126
PMID: 18252864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 2008 Mar;135(5):941-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.010595. Epub 2008 Jan 30.

Zebrafish cdx1b regulates expression of downstream factors of Nodal signaling
during early endoderm formation.

Cheng PY(1), Lin CC, Wu CS, Lu YF, Lin CY, Chung CC, Chu CY, Huang CJ, Tsai CY,
Korzh S, Wu JL, Hwang SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

We identified a zebrafish caudal-related homeobox (cdx1b) gene, which shares
syntenic conservation with both human and mouse Cdx1. Zebrafish cdx1b transcripts
are maternally deposited. cdx1b is uniformly expressed in both epiblast and
hypoblast cells from late gastrulation to the 1-2s stages and can be identified
in the retinas, brain and somites during 18-22 hpf stages. After 28 hours of
development, cdx1b is exclusively expressed in the developing intestine. Both
antisense morpholino oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown and overexpression
experiments were conducted to analyze cdx1b function. Hypoplastic development of 
the liver and pancreas and intestinal abnormalities were observed in 96 hpf cdx1b
morphants. In 85% epiboly cdx1b morphants, twofold decreases in the respective
numbers of gata5-, cas-, foxa2- and sox17-expressing endodermal precursors were
identified. Furthermore, ectopic cdx1b expression caused substantial increases in
the respective numbers of gata5-, cas-, foxa2- and sox17-expressing endodermal
precursors and altered their distribution patterns in 85% epiboly injected
embryos. Conserved Cdx1-binding motifs were identified in both gata5 and foxa2
genes by interspecific sequence comparisons. Cdx1b can bind to the Cdx1-binding
motif located in intron 1 of the foxa2 gene based on an electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay. Co-injection of either zebrafish or mouse foxa2 mRNA with the cdx1b 
MO rescued the expression domains of ceruloplasmin in the liver of 53 hpf
injected embryos. These results indicate that zebrafish cdx1b regulates foxa2
expression and may also modulate gata5 expression, thus affecting early endoderm 
formation. This study underscores a novel role of zebrafish cdx1b in the
development of different digestive organs compared with its mammalian homologs.

PMID: 18234726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Neoplasia. 2008 Jan;10(1):8-19.

The homeodomain transcription factor Cdx1 does not behave as an oncogene in
normal mouse intestine.

Crissey MA(1), Guo RJ, Fogt F, Li H, Katz JP, Silberg DG, Suh ER, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 600 Clinical Research Building, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA
19104 USA.

The Caudal-related homeobox genes Cdx1 and Cdx2 are intestine-specific
transcription factors that regulate differentiation of intestinal cell types.
Previously, we have shown Cdx1 to be antiproliferative and to promote cell
differentiation. However, other studies have suggested that Cdx1 may be an
oncogene. To test for oncogenic behavior, we used the murine villin promoter to
ectopically express Cdx1 in the small intestinal villi and colonic surface
epithelium. No changes in intestinal architecture, cell differentiation, or
lineage selection were observed with expression of the transgene. Classic
oncogenes enhance proliferation and induce tumors when ectopically expressed.
However, the Cdx1 transgene neither altered intestinal proliferation nor induced 
spontaneous intestinal tumors. In a murine model for colitis-associated cancer,
the Cdx1 transgene decreased, rather than increased, the number of adenomas that 
developed. In the polyps, the expression of the endogenous and the transgenic
Cdx1 proteins was largely absent, whereas endogenous Villin expression was
retained. This suggests that transgene silencing was specific and not due to a
general Villin inactivation. In conclusion, neither the ectopic expression of
Cdx1 was associated with changes in intestinal cell proliferation or
differentiation nor was there increased intestinal cancer susceptibility. Our
results therefore suggest that Cdx1 is not an oncogene in normal intestinal
epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2213897
PMID: 18231635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochimie. 2008 May;90(5):697-704. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2007.12.002. Epub 2007
Dec 23.

Differential regulation of CDX1 and CDX2 gene expression by deficiency in methyl 
group donors.

Lu X(1), Freund JN, Muller M, Ravey J, Nicolas JP, Gueant JL, Namour F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR-S0724, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy F-54505, France.

The CDX2 and CDX1 homeobox genes have respectively a tumour suppressor and
proliferative role in the intestinal epithelium. We analyzed DNA methylation and 
histones modifications associated with CDX2 and CDX1 promoters in two human colon
cancer cell lines expressing differentially these genes, Caco2/TC7 [CDX2
positive-CDX1 negative] and HT29 [CDX2 negative-CDX1 negative] cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments indicated that CDX2 and CDX1 gene expression
correlated with a histone modifications pattern characterizing active chromatin
(H3K4 trimethylated and H3 acetylated). Bisulfite DNA sequencing and
methylation-specific PCR showed that CDX2 and CDX1 promoters display no
methylation in HT29 cells even though both genes are not expressed. In contrast, 
the CDX1 promoter is methylated in Caco2/TC7. DNA demethylation by 5aza-dC or the
combination of 5aza-dC plus SAHA, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases, restored 
CDX1 expression in Caco2/TC7 cells but these treatments were inefficient on both 
CDX2 and CDX1 in HT29 cells. Thus, in colon cancer cells the changes in chromatin
conformation are heterogeneous and repression of CDX2 and CDX1 in HT29 cells is
not due to epigenetic mechanisms. In vivo, dietary deprivation of methyl groups
in rats upregulated CDX1 mRNA and downregulated to a lesser extent CDX2 mRNA
expression. Moreover, methyl group deprivation downregulated CDX2 protein by
changing its phosphorylation pattern. The changes in CDX2 and CDX1 expression
determined by methyl group deprivation may constitute one of the mechanisms
sustaining the protective role attributed to folate in colon cancer.

PMID: 18187048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Feb 1;44(3):430-43. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Regulation of NOX1 expression by GATA, HNF-1alpha, and Cdx transcription factors.

Valente AJ(1), Zhou Q, Lu Z, He W, Qiang M, Ma W, Li G, Wang L, Banfi B, Steger
K, Krause KH, Clark RA, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA. valente@uthscsa.edu

NOX1, a member of the NOX family of NADPH oxidases, is expressed primarily in
colon epithelium, where it may function in host defense and growth regulation. We
investigated factors responsible for its transcriptional regulation in vitro and 
its expression in vivo. Analysis of promoter constructs in the CaCo2 cell line
identified a complex element between -422 and -291 critical for promoter
activity. This element contained four sites that bound GATA-4, -5, and -6 in
vitro with varied affinities. One site also bound the caudal-related homeodomain 
proteins Cdx1 and Cdx2, whereas another also bound hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, and Cdx2 also bound to this
region in the intact chromatin of CaCo2 cells. These factors demonstrated
cooperativity when transactivating the NOX1 promoter. NOX1 mRNA was detected in
human colon epithelial cells along the crypt-villus axis. A gradient of NOX1 mRNA
expression was seen in the colons of normal as well as germ-free mice, with
significantly higher levels in distal compared with proximal segments. The
expression gradients of NOX1 mRNA in the colon paralleled those of GATA-6,
HNF-1alpha, and Cdx1. These data indicate that developmental, tissue-restricted
transcription factors play a key role in NOX1 regulation in vivo.

PMID: 18005670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(23):8352-63. Epub 2007 Sep 24.

A unique DNA binding domain converts T-cell factors into strong Wnt effectors.

Atcha FA(1), Syed A, Wu B, Hoverter NP, Yokoyama NN, Ting JH, Munguia JE,
Mangalam HJ, Marsh JL, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Wnt regulation of gene expression requires binding of LEF/T-cell factor (LEF/TCF)
transcription factors to Wnt response elements (WREs) and recruitment of the
activator beta-catenin. There are significant differences in the abilities of
LEF/TCF family members to regulate Wnt target genes. For example, alternatively
spliced isoforms of TCF-1 and TCF-4 with a C-terminal "E" tail are uniquely
potent in their activation of LEF1 and CDX1. Here we report that the mechanism
responsible for this unique activity is an auxiliary 30-amino-acid DNA
interaction motif referred to here as the "cysteine clamp" (or C-clamp). The
C-clamp contains invariant cysteine, aromatic, and basic residues, and surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) studies with recombinant C-clamp protein showed that it
binds double-stranded DNA but not single-stranded DNA or RNA (equilibrium
dissociation constant = 16 nM). CASTing (Cyclic Amplification and Selection of
Targets) experiments were used to test whether this motif influences WRE
recognition. Full-length LEF-1, TCF-1E, and TCF-1E with a mutated C-clamp all
bind nearly identical WREs (TYYCTTTGATSTT), showing that the C-clamp does not
alter WRE specificity. However, a GC element downstream of the WRE (RCCG) is
enriched in wild-type TCF-1E binding sites but not in mutant TCF-1E binding
sites. We conclude that the C-clamp is a sequence-specific DNA binding motif.
C-clamp mutations destroy the ability of beta-catenin to regulate the LEF1
promoter, and they severely impair the ability of TCF-1 to regulate growth in
colon cancer cells. Thus, E-tail isoforms of TCFs utilize two DNA binding
activities to access a subset of Wnt targets important for cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2169181
PMID: 17893322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):309-19. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Overexpression of CDX2 perturbs HOX gene expression in murine progenitors
depending on its N-terminal domain and is closely correlated with deregulated HOX
gene expression in human acute myeloid leukemia.

Rawat VP(1), Thoene S, Naidu VM, Arseni N, Heilmeier B, Metzeler K, Petropoulos
K, Deshpande A, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Bohlander SK, Spiekermann K, Hiddemann W,
Feuring-Buske M, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Germany.

The mechanisms underlying deregulation of HOX gene expression in AML are poorly
understood. The ParaHox gene CDX2 was shown to act as positive upstream regulator
of several HOX genes. In this study, constitutive expression of Cdx2 caused
perturbation of leukemogenic Hox genes such as Hoxa10 and Hoxb8 in murine
hematopoietic progenitors. Deletion of the N-terminal domain of Cdx2 abrogated
its ability to perturb Hox gene expression and to cause acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) in mice. In contrast inactivation of the putative Pbx interacting site of
Cdx2 did not change the leukemogenic potential of the gene. In an analysis of 115
patients with AML, expression levels of CDX2 were closely correlated with
deregulated HOX gene expression. Patients with normal karyotype showed a 14-fold 
higher expression of CDX2 and deregulated HOX gene expression compared with
patients with chromosomal translocations such as t(8:21) or t(15;17). All
patients with AML with normal karyotype tested were negative for CDX1 and CDX4
expression. These data link the leukemogenic potential of Cdx2 to its ability to 
dysregulate Hox genes. They furthermore correlate the level of CDX2 expression
with HOX gene expression in human AML and support a potential role of CDX2 in the
development of human AML with aberrant Hox gene expression.

PMID: 17855634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Jun;16(3):393-402.

Simultaneous differentiation of endothelial and trophoblastic cells derived from 
human embryonic stem cells.

Peiffer I(1), Belhomme D, Barbet R, Haydont V, Zhou YP, Fortunel NO, Li M,
Hatzfeld A, Fabiani JN, Hatzfeld JA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Laboratory, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
94801 Villejuif Cedex, France. peiffeisa@yahoo.fr

Here we present a simple two-step in vitro model of vascularized trophoblastic
tissue derived from human embryonic stem (hES) cells. The first step is the
formation of cystic embryoid bodies (EBs) in suspension in a semisolid methyl
cellulose medium, within which an endothelial platelet/endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (PECAM-1(+)) cell network develops. In a second step, deposition of
these EBs on the bottom of nontreated, polystyrene tissue culture plates, leads
by centrifugal outgrowth of the EB to the emergence of an adherent cell layer,
with which a PECAM-1(+) network is associated. Cells of this adherent layer
expressed VE-cadherin (CD144), PECAM-1 (CD31), and alpha-fetoprotein (alpha-FP). 
Trophoblastic differentiation was strongly suggested by the secretion of
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) and by the presence of the
cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast marker GB25. The INSL4 gene, a cyto and
syncytio-trophoblast marker, was also highly expressed in the adherent layer, as 
well as other trophoblast genes such as CGA, CDX1, CDX2, and HAND1, compared to
hES cell gene expression taken as reference. In contrast, expression of
self-renewal genes, such as TERT, POU5F1, ZFP42, GDF3, and NODAL were decreased. 
No ectodermal or endodermal genes were expressed, but the mesodermal genes
PECAM-1 and GATA2 were. The possibility of removing the EBs during the second
step would permit analysis of their relative contribution to angiogenesis or
possible hemangioblast formation, compared to that of the trophoblastic adherent 
layer. This primitive vascularized trophoblastic model could also provide a tool 
to study early steps of normal and pathological placental development.

PMID: 17610369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Gut. 2007 Dec;56(12):1688-95. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Different effects of the Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeobox genes in a murine model of
intestinal inflammation.

Calon A(1), Gross I, Lhermitte B, Martin E, Beck F, Duclos B, Kedinger M, Duluc
I, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, 3 Avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

AIMS: The CDX1 and CDX2 homeoproteins are intestine-specific transcription
factors regulating homeostasis. We investigated their relevance in
experimentally-induced intestinal inflammation.
METHODS: The response to intestinal inflammation induced by dextran sodium
sulfate (DSS) was compared in wild type, Cdx1(-/-) and Cdx2(+/-) mice. Intestinal
permeability was determined in wild type and Cdx2(+/-) mice. Protein-protein
interactions were investigated by co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pulldown, and
their functional consequences were assessed using Luciferase reporter systems.
RESULTS: Heterozygous Cdx2(+/-) mice, but not Cdx1(-/-) mice, were hypersensitive
to DSS-induced acute inflammation as all these mice showed blood in the stools at
day 1 of DSS treatment. Hypersensitivity was associated to a 50% higher
intestinal permeability. In Cdx2(+/-) mice, the colonic epithelium was repaired
during the week after the end of DSS treatment, whereas two weeks were required
for wild type animals. Subsequently, no colonic tumour was observed in Cdx2(+/-) 
mice subjected to 5 repeated cycles of DSS, in contrast to the 2.7 tumours found 
per wild type mouse. Based on the fact that Smad3(+/-) mice, like Cdx2(+/-) mice,
better repair the damaged intestinal epithelium, we found that the CDX2 protein
interacts with SMAD3, independently of SMAD4, resulting in a 5-fold stimulation
of SMAD3 transcriptional activity. CDX1 also interacted with SMAD3 but it
inhibited by 10-fold the SMAD3/SMAD4-dependent transcription.
CONCLUSION: The Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeobox genes have distinct effects on the outcome
of a pro-inflammatory challenge. This is mirrored by different functional
interactions of the CDX1 and CDX2 proteins with SMAD3, a major element of the
TGFbeta signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2095714
PMID: 17595234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Development. 2007 Jun;134(12):2315-23.

Wnt signaling is a key mediator of Cdx1 expression in vivo.

Pilon N(1), Oh K, Sylvestre JR, Savory JG, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

In the mouse, Cdx1 is essential for normal anteroposterior vertebral patterning
through regulation of a subset of Hox genes. Retinoic acid (RA) and certain Wnts 
have also been implicated in vertebral patterning, although the relationship
between these signaling pathways and the regulation of mesodermal Hox gene
expression is not fully understood. Prior work has shown that Cdx1 is a direct
target of both Wnt and retinoid signaling pathways, and might therefore act to
relay these signals to the Hox genes. Wnt and RA are believed to impact on Cdx1
through an atypical RA-response element (RARE) and Lef/Tcf-response elements
(LRE), respectively, in the proximal promoter. To address the roles of these
regulatory motifs and pathways, we derived mice mutated for the LRE or the LRE
plus the RARE. In contrast to RARE-null mutants, which exhibit limited vertebral 
defects, LRE-null and LRE+RARE-null mutants exhibited vertebral malformations
affecting the entire cervical region that closely phenocopied the malformations
seen in Cdx1-null mutants. Mutation of the LRE also greatly reduced induction of 
Cdx1 by RA, demonstrating a requirement for Wnt signaling in the regulation of
this gene by retinoids. LRE and LRE+RARE mutants also exhibited vertebral
fusions, suggesting a defect in somitogenesis. As Wnt signaling is implicated in 
somitogenesis upstream of the Notch pathway, it is conceivable that Cdx1 might
play a role in this process. However, none of the Notch pathway genes assessed
was overtly affected.

PMID: 17537796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):G54-65. Epub 2007 Apr
26.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 induce E-cadherin adhesion
activity by reducing beta- and p120-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation.

Ezaki T(1), Guo RJ, Li H, Reynolds AB, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology/650 CRB, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are regulators of
intestine-specific gene expression. They also regulate intestinal cell
differentiation and proliferation; however, these effects are poorly understood. 
Previously, we have shown that expression of Cdx1 or Cdx2 in human Colo 205 cells
induces a mature colonocyte morphology characterized by the induction of a
polarized, columnar shape with apical microvilli and strong cell-cell adhesion.
To elucidate the mechanism underlying this phenomenon, we investigated the
adherens junction complex. Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression reduced Colo 205 cell
migration and invasion in vitro, suggesting a physiologically significant change 
in cadherin function. However, Cdx expression did not significantly effect
E-cadherin, alpha-, beta-, or gamma-catenin, or p120-catenin protein levels.
Additionally, no alteration in their intracellular distribution was observed. Cdx
expression did not alter the coprecipitation of beta-catenin with E-cadherin;
however, it did reduce p120-catenin-E-cadherin coprecipitation. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of beta- and p120-catenin is known to disrupt E-cadherin-mediated
cell adhesion and is associated with robust p120-catenin/E-cadherin interactions.
We specifically investigated beta- and p120-catenin for tyrosine phosphorylation 
and found that it was significantly diminished by Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression. We
restored beta- and p120-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation in Cdx2-expressing cells
by knocking down the expression of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B and noted a
significant decline in cell-cell adhesion. We conclude that Cdx expression in
Colo 205 cells induces E-cadherin-dependent cell-cell adhesion by reducing beta- 
and p120-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation. Ascertaining the mechanism for this
novel Cdx effect may improve our understanding of the regulation of cell-cell
adhesion in the colonic epithelium.

PMID: 17463179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Oncol Rep. 2007 Apr;17(4):753-60.

Dysregulated expression of HOX and ParaHOX genes in human esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.

Takahashi O(1), Hamada J, Abe M, Hata S, Asano T, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Miyamoto
M, Kondo S, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Homeobox genes function as master regulators in embryonic morphogenesis. We
hypothesized that homeobox genes are essential to maintain tissue- or
organ-specificity even in adult body and that the dysregulated expression of
homeobox genes results in tumor development and progression. To better understand
the roles of homeobox genes in development and progression of esophageal cancer, 
we analyzed the expression patterns of 39 HOX genes and 4 ParaHOX (CDX1, CDX2,
CDX4 and PDX1) genes in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and normal
esophageal mucosa tissues. A total of 48 primary ESCC tissues and 7 normal
esophageal mucosa tissues were resected from patients who underwent radical
surgery without any preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The expression of 
HOX and ParaHOX genes were analyzed by a quantitative real-time RT-PCR method and
immunohistochemistry. The expression levels of 24 HOX genes, CDX1, CDX2 and PDX1 
were significantly higher in ESCC compared to normal mucosa (p<0.01, Mann-Whitney
U test). The Immunohistochemical study revealed that HOXA5 and D9 proteins were
more cytoplasmic in ESCC than normal mucosa cells. Our data indicate that the
disordered expression of HOX and ParaHOX genes are involved in the development of
ESCC or its malignancy.

PMID: 17342311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1106:197-208. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

The cdx-hox pathway in hematopoietic stem cell formation from embryonic stem
cells.

Lengerke C(1), McKinney-Freeman S, Naveiras O, Yates F, Wang Y, Bansal D, Daley
GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) differentiated in vitro will yield a multitude of
hematopoietic derivatives, yet progenitors displaying true stem cell activity
remain difficult to obtain. Possible causes are a biased differentiation to
primitive yolk sac-type hematopoiesis, and a variety of developmental or
functional deficiencies. Recent studies in the zebrafish have identified the
caudal homeobox transcription factors (cdx1/4) and posterior hox genes (hoxa9a,
hoxb7a) as key regulators for blood formation during embryonic development.
Activation of Cdx and Hox genes during the in vitro differentiation of mouse ESCs
followed by co-culture on supportive stromal cells generates ESC-derived
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) capable of multilineage repopulation of lethally 
irradiated adult mice. We show here that brief pulses of ectopic Cdx4 or HoxB4
expression are sufficient to enhance hematopoiesis during ESC differentiation,
presumably by acting as developmental switches to activate posterior Hox genes.
Insights into the role of the Cdx-Hox gene pathway during embryonic hematopoietic
development in the zebrafish have allowed us to improve the derivation of
repopulating HSCs from murine ESCs.

PMID: 17303828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 12;26(32):4617-26. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Helicobacter pylori CagA interacts with E-cadherin and deregulates the
beta-catenin signal that promotes intestinal transdifferentiation in gastric
epithelial cells.

Murata-Kamiya N(1), Kurashima Y, Teishikata Y, Yamahashi Y, Saito Y, Higashi H,
Aburatani H, Akiyama T, Peek RM Jr, Azuma T, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Infection with Helicobacter pylori cagA-positive strains is associated with
gastric adenocarcinoma. Intestinal metaplasia is a precancerous lesion of the
stomach characterized by transdifferentiation of the gastric mucosa to an
intestinal phenotype. The H. pylori cagA gene product, CagA, is delivered into
gastric epithelial cells, where it undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation by Src
family kinases. Tyrosine-phosphorylated CagA specifically binds to and activates 
SHP-2 phosphatase, thereby inducing cell-morphological transformation. We report 
here that CagA physically interacts with E-cadherin independently of CagA
tyrosine phosphorylation. The CagA/E-cadherin interaction impairs the complex
formation between E-cadherin and beta-catenin, causing cytoplasmic and nuclear
accumulation of beta-catenin. CagA-deregulated beta-catenin then transactivates
beta-catenin-dependent genes such as cdx1, which encodes intestinal specific CDX1
transcription factor. In addition to beta-catenin signal, CagA also
transactivates p21(WAF1/Cip1), again, in a phosphorylation-independent manner.
Consequently, CagA induces aberrant expression of an intestinal-differentiation
marker, goblet-cell mucin MUC2, in gastric epithelial cells that have been
arrested in G1 by p21(WAF1/Cip1). These results indicate that perturbation of the
E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex by H. pylori CagA plays an important role in the 
development of intestinal metaplasia, a premalignant transdifferentiation of
gastric epithelial cells from which intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma
arises.

PMID: 17237808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eur J Cancer. 2007 Mar;43(5):947-54. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Cytostatic drug treatment causes seeding of gene promoter methylation.

Bredberg A(1), Bodmer W.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Epigenetic changes in multiple genes are emerging as an important mechanism for
tumour cells to acquire resistance to chemotherapy. In the present work, we test 
the hypothesis that epigenetic organisation in cancer cells can be affected by
cytostatic drugs. Colorectal cancer cells were cultured for several weeks in the 
presence of 6-thioguanine. Bisulphite sequencing of the CpG-rich promoter regions
of two expressed genes showed a significantly increased frequency of methylated
CpG sites in drug-treated cells, as compared with controls: 4.7% and 1.7%,
respectively, for the HPRT gene; and 11.1% and 8.2% for CDX1. Essentially, all of
the increase for the CDX1 gene was in a four CpG sub-region previously found to
correlate with gene activity (P=0.006). This pattern of sparse promoter
methylation fits with a recently proposed 'seeding' two-step mechanism leading up
to gene inactivation in cancer cells. Taken together, our findings suggest
activation in cancer cells of an epigenetic process enabling a tumour to generate
drug-resistant variant cells.

PMCID: PMC2430383
PMID: 17236756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jan;1769(1):41-8. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Transcriptional regulation of the Drosophila caudal homeobox gene by bHLH-PAS
proteins.

Choi YJ(1), Kwon EJ, Park JS, Kang HS, Kim YS, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Korea.

Caudal-related homeobox transcription factors are involved in the definition of
the anteroposterior axis and intestinal development. Recent reports indicate that
dysregulation of CDX1 and CDX2, the human homologues of Drosophila caudal, are
associated with several types of cancer. Very little is known, however, about the
regulatory mechanisms that direct the caudal-related homeobox gene expression. In
this study, we have identified the binding sites for bHLH-PAS proteins, referred 
to as CNS midline element (CME), in the 5'-flanking region of the Drosophila
caudal gene. Analyses using transgenic flies carrying a caudal-lacZ fusion gene
bearing a wild-type or mutant CME indicate that the CME sites are required for
caudal gene expression in vivo. We also determined that the caudal promoter
activity can be regulated by Trachealess (Trh)/Tango (Tgo) bHLH-PAS proteins, via
the CME sites. Our results suggest that the Drosophila caudal gene is a target of
the Trh/Tgo bHLH-PAS proteins.

PMID: 17207870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(1):175-85. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

Functional interaction between the homeoprotein CDX1 and the transcriptional
machinery containing the TATA-binding protein.

Calon A(1), Gross I, Davidson I, Kedinger M, Duluc I, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682 and University Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

We have previously reported that the CDX1 homeoprotein interacts with the
TATA-box binding protein (TBP) on the promoter of the glucose-6-phosphatase
(G6Pase) gene. We show here that CDX1 interacts with TBP via the homeodomain and 
that the transcriptional activity additionally requires the N-terminal domain
upstream of the homeodomain. CDX1 interacting with TBP is connected to members of
the TFIID and Mediator complexes, two major elements of the general
transcriptional machinery. Transcription luciferase assays performed using an
altered-specificity mutant of TBP provide evidence for the functionality of the
interaction between CDX1 and TBP. Unlike CDX1, CDX2 does not interact with TBP
nor does it transactivate the G6Pase promoter. Swapping experiments between the
domains of CDX1 and CDX2 indicate that, despite opposite functional effects of
the homeoproteins on the G6Pase promoter, the N-terminal domains and homeodomains
of both CDX1 and CDX2 have the intrinsic ability to activate transcription and to
interact with TBP. However, the carboxy domains define the specificity of CDX1
and CDX2. Thus, intra-molecular interactions control the activity and partner
recruitment of CDX1 and CDX2, leading to different molecular functions.

PMCID: PMC1802564
PMID: 17158164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16924-9. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Cdx4 dysregulates Hox gene expression and generates acute myeloid leukemia alone 
and in cooperation with Meis1a in a murine model.

Bansal D(1), Scholl C, Fröhling S, McDowell E, Lee BH, Döhner K, Ernst P,
Davidson AJ, Daley GQ, Zon LI, Gilliland DG, Huntly BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

HOX genes have emerged as critical effectors of leukemogenesis, but the
mechanisms that regulate their expression in leukemia are not well understood.
Recent data suggest that the caudal homeobox transcription factors CDX1, CDX2,
and CDX4, developmental regulators of HOX gene expression, may contribute to HOX 
gene dysregulation in leukemia. We report here that CDX4 is expressed normally in
early hematopoietic progenitors and is expressed aberrantly in approximately 25% 
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient samples. Cdx4 regulates Hox gene
expression in the adult murine hematopoietic system and dysregulates Hox genes
that are implicated in leukemogenesis. Furthermore, bone marrow progenitors that 
are retrovirally engineered to express Cdx4 serially replate in methylcellulose
cultures, grow in liquid culture, and generate a partially penetrant,
long-latency AML in bone marrow transplant recipients. Coexpression of the Hox
cofactor Meis1a accelerates the Cdx4 AML phenotype and renders it fully
penetrant. Structure-function analysis demonstrates that leukemic transformation 
requires intact Cdx4 transactivation and DNA-binding domains but not the putative
Pbx cofactor interaction motif. Together, these data indicate that Cdx4 regulates
Hox gene expression in adult hematopoiesis and may serve as an upstream regulator
of Hox gene expression in the induction of acute leukemia. Inasmuch as many human
leukemias show dysregulated expression of a spectrum of HOX family members, these
collective findings also suggest a central role for CDX4 expression in the
genesis of acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC1636555
PMID: 17068127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 15;299(2):478-88. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

FGF signal transduction and the regulation of Cdx gene expression.

Keenan ID(1), Sharrard RM, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York, YO10 5YW, UK.

Cdx homeodomain transcription factors play important roles in the development of 
the vertebrate body axis and gut epithelium. Signaling involving FGF, wnt and
retinoic acid ligands has been implicated in the regulation of individual Cdx
genes. In this study we examine the requirement for FGF-dependent signal
transduction pathways in the regulation of Cdx gene expression. In the amphibian 
Xenopus laevis the earliest expression of Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 is within the
developing mesoderm. We show that a functional FGF signaling pathway is required 
for the normal expression of all three amphibian Cdx genes during gastrula
stages. We show that FGF stimulation activates signaling through both the MAP
kinase pathway and the PI-3 kinase pathway in Xenopus tissue explants. However,
our analysis of these pathways in gastrula stage embryos indicates that the MAP
kinase pathway is required for Cdx gene expression, whereas the PI-3 kinase
pathway is not. We show that FGF and wnt signaling can interact in the regulation
of Cdx genes and during gastrula stages the normal expression of the Cdx genes
requires the activity of both pathways. Furthermore, we show that wnt mediated
Cdx regulation is independent of the MAP kinase pathway.

PMID: 16982047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Gastric Cancer. 2006;9(3):156-66.

Gastric-and-intestinal mixed-type intestinal metaplasia: aberrant expression of
transcription factors and stem cell intestinalization.

Tsukamoto T(1), Mizoshita T, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8681, Japan.

Helicobacter pylori plays a causative role in the development of chronic atrophic
gastritis, intestinal metaplasia (IM), and stomach cancer. Although IM has long
attracted attention as a putative preneoplastic lesion for stomach cancers, its
clinicopathologic significance has yet to be clarified in detail. Using gastric
and intestinal epithelial cell markers, IM was here divided into two major types:
a gastric-and-intestinal (GI) mixed type and a solely intestinal (I) type. In the
former, gastric and intestinal phenotypic markers appeared not only at the
glandular but also at the cellular level. Furthermore, neuroendocrine cells also 
showed intestinalization along with their exocrine counterparts. In animal
models, GI-type IM was found to appear first, followed by the solely I type.
Summarizing these data, it was suggested that IM might be caused by the gradual
intestinalization of stem cells from the GI to the I type. The molecular
mechanisms of IM include the ectopic expression of CDX1, CDX2, OCT-1, and members
of the Erk pathway. Suppression of the expression of gastric transcription
factors such as SOX2, genes that are involved in the Sonic hedgehog pathway, and 
RUNX3, a tumor suppressor gene, could be additional relevant alterations. The
expression of PDX1 may also be associated with pseudopyloric gland metaplasia and
IM. Detailed analysis of gene regulation may shed light on the molecular bases of
gastric lesions, leading to strategies for chemoprevention.

PMID: 16952033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gastroenterology. 2006 Jul;131(1):246-58.

Gastric inflammation, metaplasia, and tumor development in gastrin-deficient
mice.

Friis-Hansen L(1), Rieneck K, Nilsson HO, Wadström T, Rehfeld JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. lfh@rh.dk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gastrin deficiency and proton pump inhibitor treatment cause
achlorhydria, which predisposes to disease. To elucidate the underlying molecular
biology, we examined the changes in gastric gene expression in both types of
achlorhydria. We also explored the associated changes in the gastric microflora
and the long-term consequences of gastrin-deficient achlorhydria.
METHODS: Expression profiles were generated from gastric RNA from wild-type mice,
gastrin knockout (KO) mice, gastrin KO mice after 1 week of gastrin infusion, and
wild-type mice treated for 1 month with a proton pump inhibitor. The results were
confirmed using real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Selective media were used to characterize the gastric microflora.
RESULTS: The number of gastric bacteria was increased in both gastrin KO and
PPI-treated mice. The expression profiles revealed activation of immune defense
genes, interferon-regulated response genes, and intestinal metaplasia of the
gastric mucosa. In young gastrin-deficient mice, gastrin infusions reversed the
changes. Over time, the changes accumulated, became irreversible, and progressed 
into metaplasia and polyp development. Finally, the study showed that gastrin
regulated the expression of genes encoding extracellular matrix proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Independently of gastrin, achlorhydria is associated with gastric
bacterial overgrowth and intestinal gene expression patterns and is associated
with predisposition to disease. Gastrin is therefore essential for prevention of 
gastric disease, mainly through control of acid secretion but to a lesser extent 
also through control of gastric gene expression. The gastrin-deficient mouse
serves as a useful new model for gastric metaplasia and neoplasia.

PMID: 16831607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Reprod Biomed Online. 2006 Jun;12(6):751.

Trophectodermal markers in cleaving embryos.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 16792852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(5):391-6. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

Cancer genetics: colorectal cancer as a model.

Bodmer WF(1).

Author information: 
(1)CR-UK Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute for Molecular
Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK. walter.bodmer@hertford.ox.ac.uk

Cancer is essentially a somatic evolutionary process and is, therefore,
effectively defined by the genetic and epigenetic changes underlying this
process. An understanding of the function of these changes is fundamental to
devising new approaches to prevention and treatment. Colorectal cancer (CRC),
apart from its obvious importance as one of the most frequent cancers, provides
an excellent model for such studies because of the availability of precursor
adenoma lesions and the existence of several clear-cut familial inherited
susceptibilities. These include familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), which led
to the identification of the APC gene and the importance of the Wnt pathway, and 
hereditary non-polyposis CRC (HNPCC), which identified the role of the mismatch
repair genes in colorectal and other cancers. The presently known range of
genetic and epigenetic changes in CRCs and adenomas is reviewed in this paper and
the evidence against a requirement for genomic instability presented, together
with a discussion of patterns of gene methylation, including especially our work 
on the homeobox gene, CDX1. Clearly, familial cancers, such as FAP and HNPCC,
cannot account for more than perhaps 5% of the incidence of CRC. There is,
however, evidence that approximately a further 25-30% have some inherited
susceptibility. Based on the association of APC missense variants with multiple
adenomas, we proposed that much of this may be due to the cumulative effects of
low frequency, low penetrance variants, and the "rare variant hypothesis". The
evidence for this from our work on multiple adenoma cases, and certain other
examples, is discussed.

PMCID: PMC2537991
PMID: 16596323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 15;176(6):3642-51.

Functional characterization of the CCL25 promoter in small intestinal epithelial 
cells suggests a regulatory role for caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) transcription 
factors.

Ericsson A(1), Kotarsky K, Svensson M, Sigvardsson M, Agace W.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Section, Stem Cell Center, Biomedical Centre I-13, Lund University,
S-22184 Lund, Sweden.

The chemokine CCL25 is selectively and constitutively expressed in the small
intestinal epithelium and plays an important role in mediating lymphocyte
recruitment to this site. In this study, we demonstrate that CCL25 expression in 
murine small intestinal epithelial cells is independent of signaling through the 
lymphotoxin beta receptor and is not enhanced by inflammatory stimuli, pathways
involved in driving the expression of most other chemokines. We define a
transcriptional start site in the CCL25 gene and a region -141 to -5 proximal of 
exon 1 that is required for minimal promoter activity in the small intestinal
epithelial cell lines, MODE-K and mICc12. These cell lines expressed far less
CCL25 mRNA than freshly isolated small intestinal epithelial cells indicating
that they are missing important factors driving CCL25 expression. The CCL25
promoter contained putative binding sites for the intestinal
epithelial-associated Caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) transcription factors Cdx-1
and Cdx-2, and small intestinal epithelial cells but not MODE-K and mICc12 cells 
expressed Cdx-1 and Cdx-2. EMSA analysis demonstrated that Cdx proteins were
present in nuclear extracts from freshly isolated small intestinal epithelial
cells but not in MODE-K or mICcl2 cells, and bound to putative Cdx sites within
the CCL25 promoter. Finally, cotransfection of MODE-K cells with Cdx
transcription factors significantly increased CCL25 promoter activity as well as 
endogenous CCL25 mRNA levels. Together these results demonstrate a unique pattern
of regulation for CCL25 and suggest a role for Cdx proteins in regulating CCL25
transcription.

PMID: 16517733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Clin Chem. 2006 Mar;52(3):520-3.

Identification of mRNA markers for molecular staging of lymph nodes in colorectal
cancer.

Xi L(1), Gooding W, McCarty K, Godfrey TE, Hughes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

BACKGROUND: One evolving approach to improved prognostication of cancer patients 
is the identification of previously occult disease by use of quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR. Surprisingly, no systematic analysis of potential mRNA markers
for colorectal cancer has been reported. We therefore performed an extensive mRNA
marker survey for colorectal cancers.
METHODS: We identified potential markers through literature and database
searches. We analyzed all markers by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR on a 
limited set of primary tumors and benign lymph nodes. Selected markers were
further evaluated on a larger tissue set with positive lymph nodes.
RESULTS: We evaluated 43 markers and undertook further analysis of 6 in the
secondary screening. Five gene markers--CDX1, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
CK20, TACSTD1, and Villin1 (VIL1)--provided perfect classification of lymph node 
status.
CONCLUSIONS: Several mRNA markers are capable of providing exceptionally accurate
characterization of lymph node status in colorectal cancer. An automated,
multimarker, quantitative reverse transcription-PCR assay for characterization of
lymph nodes from colorectal cancer patients may be useful for improved staging
and therapeutic decision making in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 16510433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Korean J Intern Med. 2005 Dec;20(4):317-24.

Relationships between the expressions of CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA and clinicopathologic
features in colorectal cancers.

Kim GH(1), Lee DH, Kim HW, Cheong JY, Seo SB, Heo J, Kang DH, Song GA, Cho M,
Yang US, Park DY, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University College of
Medicine, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: CDX1 and CDX2 are members of the caudal-type homeobox gene family and
control the proliferation and differentiation of intestinal mucosal cells. Their 
expressions are commonly reduced in colorectal cancer, but reports about the
relationships between their expressions and clinicopathologic features are rare. 
The aim of this study was to examine the expressions of CDX1 and CDX2 mRNAs in
colorectal cancers and to assess the relationships between their expressions and 
clinicopathologic features.
METHODS: CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA expressions were analyzed by real-time polymerase
chain reaction in 48 colorectal cancers and in adjacent non-tumorous normal
mucosal tissue.
RESULTS: CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA expressions were significantly reduced in colorectal 
cancer tissues versus normal mucosal tissues (p=0.001, p=0.042, respectively). As
compared with paired normal mucosal tissues, colorectal tissues showed reduced
CDX1 mRNA expression in 64.6% (31/48) and reduced CDX2 mRNA expression in 66.7%
(32/48) of cases. A statistically significant positive correlation was found
between the expressions of CDX1 mRNA and CDX2 mRNA in colorectal cancer (r=0.543,
p<0.001). However, the expressions of CDX1 and CDX2 mRNAs were not related to
age, sex, cancer location, differentiation, lymphatic or vascular invasion, lymph
node metastasis, stage or serum carcinoembryonic antigen level.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA expressions were found to be significantly
reduced in colorectal cancers but these expressional changes were not found to be
related to clinicopathologic features.

PMCID: PMC3891078
PMID: 16491830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Biol. 2006 Apr 15;292(2):506-18. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

The caudal-related homeobox genes cdx1a and cdx4 act redundantly to regulate hox 
gene expression and the formation of putative hematopoietic stem cells during
zebrafish embryogenesis.

Davidson AJ(1), Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Department of Pediatrics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The hox genes play a central role in organogenesis and are implicated in the
formation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The cdx genes encode homeodomain
transcription factors that act as master regulators of the hox genes. In
zebrafish, mutations in cdx4 cause a severe, but not complete, deficit in
embryonic blood cells. Here, we report the expression and function of cdx1a, a
zebrafish Cdx1 paralogue. Using morpholino-mediated knockdown of cdx1a in a cdx4 
mutant background, we show that a deficiency in both cdx genes causes a severe
perturbation of hox gene expression and a complete failure to specify blood. The 
hematopoietic defect in cdx-deficient embryos does not result from a general
block in posterior mesoderm differentiation as endothelial cells and kidney
progenitors are still formed in the doubly deficient embryos. In addition,
cdx-deficient embryos display a significant reduction in runx1a(+) putative HSCs 
in the zebrafish equivalent to the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region.
Overexpressing hoxa9a in cdx-deficient embryos rescues embryonic erythropoiesis
in the posterior mesoderm as well as the formation of HSCs in the AGM region.
Taken together, these results suggest that the cdx-hox pathway plays an essential
role in the formation of both embryonic erythroid cells and definitive HSCs
during vertebrate embryogenesis.

PMID: 16457800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):419-28. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

The Cdx4 mutation affects axial development and reveals an essential role of Cdx 
genes in the ontogenesis of the placental labyrinth in mice.

van Nes J(1), de Graaff W, Lebrin F, Gerhard M, Beck F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht.

Caudal related homeobox (Cdx) genes have so far been shown to be important for
embryonic axial elongation and patterning in several vertebrate species. We have 
generated a targeted mutation of mouse Cdx4, the third member of this family of
transcription factor encoding genes and the last one to be inactivated
genetically. Cdx4-null embryos were born healthy and appeared morphologically
normal. A subtle contribution of Cdx4 to anteroposterior (AP) vertebral
patterning was revealed in Cdx1/Cdx4 and Cdx2/Cdx4 compound mutants. Neither
Cdx4-null nor Cdx1/Cdx4 double mutants are impaired in their axial elongation,
but a redundant contribution of Cdx4 in this function was unveiled when combined 
with a Cdx2 mutant allele. In addition, inactivation of Cdx4 combined with
heterozygous loss of Cdx2 results in embryonic death around E10.5 and reveals a
novel function of Cdx genes in placental ontogenesis. In a subset of Cdx2/Cdx4
compound mutants, the fully grown allantois failed to fuse with the chorion. The 
remaining majority of these mutants undergo successful chorio-allantois fusion
but fail to properly extend their allantoic vascular network into the chorionic
ectoderm and do not develop a functional placental labyrinth. We present evidence
that Cdx4 plays a crucial role in the ontogenesis of the allantoic component of
the placental labyrinth when one Cdx2 allele is inactivated. The axial patterning
role of Cdx transcription factors thus extends posteriorly to the
epiblast-derived extra-embryonic mesoderm and, consequent upon the evolution of
placental mammals, is centrally involved in placental morphogenesis. The relative
contribution of Cdx family members in the stepwise ontogenesis of a functional
placenta is discussed, with Cdx2 playing an obligatory part, assisted by Cdx4.
The possible participation of Cdx1 was not documented but cannot be ruled out
until allelic combinations further decreasing Cdx dose have been analyzed. Cdx
genes thus operate in a redundant way during placentogenesis, as they do during
embryonic axial elongation and patterning, and independently from the previously 
reported early Cdx2-specific role in the trophectoderm at implantation.

PMID: 16396910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 20;1731(3):168-78. Epub 2005 Nov 4.

C/EBP and Cdx family factors regulate liver fatty acid binding protein transgene 
expression in the small intestinal epithelium.

Staloch LJ(1), Divine JK, Witten JT, Simon TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box
8208, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

A transgene constructed from the rat liver fatty acid binding protein gene
(Fabp1) promoter is active in all murine small intestinal crypt and villus
epithelial cells. Coincident Cdx and C/EBP transcription factor binding sites
were identified spanning Fabp1 nucleotides -90 to -78. CDX-1, CDX-2, C/EBPalpha, 
and C/EBPbeta activated the Fabp1 transgene in CaCo-2 cells, and mutagenizing the
-78 site prevented activation by these factors. CDX but not C/EBP factors bound
to the site in vitro, although C/EBP factors competed with CDX factors for
transgene activation. The -78 site adjoins an HNF-1 site, and CDX and C/EBP
family factors cooperated with HNF-1alpha but not HNF-1beta to activate the
transgene. Furthermore, CDX-1, CDX-2, C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPbeta bound to
HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta. The transgene with a mutagenized -78 site was silenced 
in vivo specifically in small intestinal crypt epithelial cells but remained
active in villus cells. These results demonstrate functional interactions between
HNF-1, C/EBP, and CDX family factors and suggest that these interactions may
contribute to differential transcriptional regulation in the small intestinal
crypt and villus compartments.

PMID: 16321657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 1;289(1):55-63. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Cdx4 is a direct target of the canonical Wnt pathway.

Pilon N(1), Oh K, Sylvestre JR, Bouchard N, Savory J, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

There is considerable evidence that the Cdx gene products impact on vertebral
patterning by direct regulation of Hox gene expression. Data from a number of
vertebrate model systems also suggest that Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 are targets of
caudalizing signals such as RA, Wnt and FGF. These observations have lead to the 
hypothesis that Cdx members serve to relay information from signaling pathways
involved in posterior patterning to the Hox genes. Regulation of Cdx1 expression 
by RA and Wnt in the mouse has been well characterized; however, the means by
which Cdx2 and Cdx4 are regulated is less well understood. In the present study, 
we present data suggesting that Cdx4 is a direct target of the canonical Wnt
pathway. We found that Cdx4 responds to exogenous Wnt3a in mouse embryos ex vivo,
and conversely, that its expression is down-regulated in Wnt3a(vt/vt) embryos and
in embryos cultured in the presence of Wnt inhibitors. We also found that the
Cdx4 promoter responds to Wnt signaling in P19 embryocarcinoma cells and have
identified several putative LEF/TCF response elements mediating this effect.
Consistent with these data, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays from either
embryocarcinoma cells or from the tail bud of embryos revealed that LEF1 and
beta-catenin co-localize with the Cdx4 promoter. Taken together, these results
suggest that Cdx4, like Cdx1, is a direct Wnt target.

PMID: 16309666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(8):901-8.

cdx4/lacZ and cdx2/lacZ protein gradients formed by decay during gastrulation in 
the mouse.

Gaunt SJ(1), Drage D, Trubshaw RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK.
stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

Expression of the mouse caudal genes cdx4 and cdx2 is examined by use of lacZ
reporter constructs expressed in transgenic mouse embryos. During early
gastrulation, up to at least 8.5 days of development, reporter mRNA distributions
are apparently similar to those of endogenous cdx mRNAs. By 8.25 to 8.8 days,
cdx/lacZ protein activities have become distributed as posterior-to-anterior
gradients along the neural and mesoderm tissues. The gradients form by decay of
activity as cells become distanced from the regressing tailbud. In situ
hybridization studies indicate that the decay is primarily in cdx/lacZ protein
activities rather than mRNAs. As gastrulation proceeds, the locations of the
gradients regress progressively posteriorly along the growing axis. Our results
indicate how cdx4 and cdx2 protein gradients might be generated by decay during
normal development. The smoothness of the gradients that we detect shows that
there cannot be extensive mixing of cells once they leave the tailbud to
contribute to the growing axis. An enhancer element located in the first intron
of the cdx4 gene is essential for correct transgene expression.

PMID: 16281167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 6;281(1):638-47. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

The related retinoblastoma (pRb) and p130 proteins cooperate to regulate
homeostasis in the intestinal epithelium.

Haigis K(1), Sage J, Glickman J, Shafer S, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

pRb, p107, and p130 are related proteins that play a central role in the
regulation of cell cycle progression and terminal differentiation in mammalian
cells. Nevertheless, it is still largely unclear how these proteins achieve this 
regulation in vivo. The intestinal epithelium is an ideal in vivo system in which
to study the molecular pathways that regulate proliferation and differentiation
because it exists in a constant state of development throughout an animal's
lifetime. We studied the phenotypic effects on the intestinal epithelium of
mutating Rb and p107 or p130. Although mutating these genes singly had little or 
no effect, loss of pRb and p107 or p130 together produced chronic hyperplasia and
dysplasia of the small intestinal and colonic epithelium. In Rb/p130 double
mutants this hyperplasia was associated with defects in terminal differentiation 
of specific cell types and was dependent on the increased proliferation seen in
the epithelium of mutant animals. At the molecular level, dysregulation of the Rb
pathway led to an increase in the expression of Math1, Cdx1, Cdx2, transcription 
factors that regulate proliferation and differentiation in the intestinal
epithelium. The absence of Cdx1 function in Rb/p130 double mutant mice partially 
reverted the histologic phenotype by suppressing ectopic mitosis in the
epithelium. These studies implicate the Rb pathway as a regulator of epithelial
homeostasis in the intestine.

PMID: 16258171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncogene. 2006 Feb 9;25(6):888-98.

Oct transcription factors mediate t(14;18) lymphoma cell survival by directly
regulating bcl-2 expression.

Heckman CA(1), Duan H, Garcia PB, Boxer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Palo Alto VAHCS, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Oct-1 and Oct-2 are members of the POU homeodomain family of transcriptional
regulators and are critical for normal embryonic development. Gene-targeting
studies showed that Oct-1 and Oct-2 are largely dispensable for B-cell
development and immunoglobulin production, although both Oct-2 and Bob-1 are
required for a proper immune response and germinal center formation. In these
studies, we investigated the role of Oct factors in B-cell lymphomas. Recent
investigations have shown increased expression of Oct-2 and Bob-1 in lymphomas,
and we observed greatly increased levels of Oct-2 in lymphoma cells with the
t(14;18) translocation. Decreased expression of Oct-1, Oct-2, or Bob-1 by RNA
interference resulted in apoptosis and down-regulation of bcl-2 expression.
Furthermore, Oct-2 induced bcl-2 promoter activity and mediated this effect
through three regions in the bcl-2 P2 promoter. Although these regions did not
contain canonical octamer motifs, we observed the direct interaction of Oct-2
with all three sites both in vitro by EMSA and in vivo by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Moreover, by mutation analysis we found that the
ability of Oct-2 to activate bcl-2 required C/EBP, Cdx, and TATA-binding sites.
Oct-2, therefore, acts as a cell survival factor in t(14;18) lymphoma cells by
directly activating the antiapoptotic gene bcl-2.

PMID: 16186795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Aug;63(8):1367-71.

[Expression of transcription factor in Barrett's esophagus].

[Article in Japanese]

Mutoh H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School.

Barrett's esophagus is the result of chronic injury which is usually caused by
gastroesophageal reflux. NF-kappaB is expressed in the reflux esophagitis.
Specialized columnar epithelium (SCE) is characteristic of Barrett's esophagus
and has a malignant predisposition. SCE expresses Cdx1 and Cdx2. Adenocarcinoma
in Barrett's esophagus is believed to develop through the
metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence. P53, beta-catenin, PPARgamma, and
estrogen receptor beta are closely related to the development of esophageal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16101223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Dec;289(6):G1108-14. Epub 2005 Aug 
4.

Decreased sucrase and lactase activity in iron deficiency is accompanied by
reduced gene expression and upregulation of the transcriptional repressor PDX-1.

West AR(1), Oates PS.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology, School of Biomedical and Chemical Sciences, The University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia.

Disaccharidases are important digestive enzymes whose activities can be reduced
by iron deficiency. We hypothesise that this is due to reduced gene expression,
either by impairment to enterocyte differentiation or by iron-sensitive
mechanisms that regulate mRNA levels in enterocytes. Iron-deficient Wistar rats
were generated by dietary means. The enzyme activities and kinetics of sucrase
and lactase were tested as well as the activity of intestinal alkaline
phosphatase (IAP)-II because it is unrelated to carbohydrate digestion. mRNA
levels of beta-actin, sucrase, lactase, and the associated transcription factors 
pancreatic duodenal homeobox (PDX)-1, caudal-related homeobox (CDX)-2,
GATA-binding protein (GATA)-4, and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 were
measured by real-time PCR. Spatial patterns of protein and gene expression were
assessed by immunofluorescence and in situ hybridization, respectively. It was
found that iron-deficient rats had significantly lower sucrase (19.5% lower) and 
lactase (56.8% lower) but not IAP-II activity than control rats. Kinetic
properties of both enzymes remained unchanged from controls, suggesting a
decrease in the quantity of enzyme present. Sucrase and lactase mRNA levels were 
reduced by 44.5% and 67.9%, respectively, by iron deficiency, suggesting that
enzyme activity is controlled primarily by gene expression. Iron deficiency did
not affect the pattern of protein and gene expression along the crypt to villus
axis. Expression of PDX-1, a repressor of sucrase and lactase promoters, was
4.5-fold higher in iron deficiency, whereas CDX-2, GATA-4, and HNF-1 levels were 
not significantly different. These data suggest that decreases in sucrase and
lactase activities result from a reduction in gene expression, following from
increased levels of the transcriptional repressor PDX-1.

PMID: 16081762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Biol. 2005 Jun 15;282(2):509-23.

A consensus Oct1 binding site is required for the activity of the Xenopus Cdx4
promoter.

Reece-Hoyes JS(1), Keenan ID, Pownall ME, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Area 11, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.

Cdx homeodomain transcription factors have multiple roles in early vertebrate
development. Furthermore, mis-regulation of Cdx expression has been demonstrated 
in metaplasias and cancers of the gut epithelium. Given the importance of Cdx
genes in development and disease, the mechanisms underlying their expression are 
of considerable interest. We report an analysis of the upstream regulatory
regions from the amphibian Xenopus laevis Cdx4 gene. We show that a GFP reporter 
containing 2.8 kb upstream of the transcription start site is expressed in the
posterior of transgenic embryos. Deletion analysis of the upstream sequence
reveals that a 247-bp proximal promoter fragment will drive posterior expression 
in transgenic embryos. We show that 63 bp of upstream sequence, that includes a
consensus site for POU-domain octamer-binding proteins, retains significant
promoter activity. Co-expression of the octamer-binding protein Oct1 induces
expression from a Cdx4 reporter and mutation of the octamer site abolishes
activity of the same reporter. We show that the octamer site is highly conserved 
in the promoters of the human, mouse, chicken, and zebrafish Cdx4 genes and
within the promoters of amphibian Cdx1 and Cdx2. These data suggest a conserved
function for octamer-binding proteins in the regulation of Cdx family members.

PMID: 15950614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Histopathology. 2005 Jun;46(6):649-58.

Sox2 expression in human stomach adenocarcinomas with gastric and
gastric-and-intestinal-mixed phenotypes.

Tsukamoto T(1), Mizoshita T, Mihara M, Tanaka H, Takenaka Y, Yamamura Y, Nakamura
S, Ushijima T, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Centre Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. ttsukamt@aichi-cc.jp

AIMS: Other than ectopic expression of intestinal transcription factors, Cdx1 and
Cdx2, the molecular mechanisms underlying gastric and intestinal phenotypes of
human stomach adenocarcinomas have yet to be clarified in detail. We have
reported that Sox2, an HMG-box gastric transcription factor, is expressed in
normal gastric mucosa and down-regulated in intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analysed mRNA levels of Sox2 and other differentiation
markers in 50 surgically resected stomach adenocarcinomas, immunohistochemically 
classified into gastric (G), gastric-and-intestinal (GI)-mixed, solely intestinal
(I), and null (N) types. Sox2 was found to be transcribed in G and GI-mixed type 
adenocarcinomas in accordance with MUC5AC and MUC6 expression, while Cdx1 and
Cdx2 were up-regulated in GI-mixed and I types along with the expression of MUC2 
and villin. In the N type, both gastric and intestinal transcription factors were
suppressed. Immunohistochemistry confirmed expression of Sox2 in MUC5AC+ lesions 
and Cdx2 localization together with MUC2. A stomach adenocarcinoma cell line,
KATOIII, demonstrated both MUC5AC and Sox2, although MUC5AC mRNA was not detected
in the Sox2+ AGS cell line.
CONCLUSIONS: Sox2 may play an important role in maintaining a gastric phenotype
in stomach cancers as well as in normal tissue, in cooperation with other
cofactor(s).

PMID: 15910596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 May 24;102(21):7565-70. Epub 2005 May 13.

CDX1 is an important molecular mediator of Barrett's metaplasia.

Wong NA(1), Wilding J, Bartlett S, Liu Y, Warren BF, Piris J, Maynard N, Marshall
R, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

The molecular pathogenesis of Barrett's metaplasia (BM) of the esophagus is
poorly understood. The change to an intestinal phenotype occurs on a background
of esophagitis due to refluxing acid and bile. CDX1, an important regulator of
normal intestinal development, was studied as a potential key molecule in the
pathogenesis of BM. CDX1 mRNA and protein were universally expressed in all
samples of BM tested but not in normal esophageal squamous or gastric body
epithelia. This tissue-specific expression was attributable to the methylation
status of the CDX1 promoter. Conjugated bile salts and the inflammatory cytokines
TNF-alpha and IL-1beta were all found to increase CDX1 mRNA expression in vitro. 
These effects were primarily mediated by NF-kappaB signaling but only occurred
when the CDX1 promoter was unmethylated or partially methylated. The data suggest
that CDX1 is a key molecule linking etiological agents of BM to the development
of an intestinal phenotype. Although the initial trigger for CDX1 promoter
demethylation is not yet identified, it seems likely that demethylation of its
promoter may be the key to the induction and maintenance of CDX1 expression and
so of the BM phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1140438
PMID: 15894614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2005 Jun 15;237(1-2):59-66.

Pdx1-related homeodomain transcription factors are distinctly expressed in mouse 
adult pancreatic islets.

Rosanas-Urgell A(1), Marfany G, Garcia-Fernàndez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Av.
Diagonal, 645, E-08028, Barcelona, Spain.

Complex gene networks are responsible for the proper operation of the endocrine
pancreas. A central member of such networks, the homeodomain transcription factor
Pdx1, belongs to the ParaHox gene cluster, an array of Hox-like homeobox genes.
With a combination of mRNA in situ hybridisation and immunodetection, we have
found that the rest of ParaHox cluster genes, Cdx1, Cdx2/3, and Cdx4, and Gsh1
and Gsh2, are all expressed in specific islet cell types of the endocrine
pancreas. To our knowledge, this is the first report that locates ParaHox genes
other than Pdx1 and Cdx2/3 in a place as to be involved in the pancreatic
transcriptional regulatory networks, potentially regulating glucagon-insulin
homeostasis.

PMID: 15888377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dig Dis. 2004;22(4):306-12.

Pathogenesis of pre-neoplastic lesions of the stomach: targets for prevention.

Leung WK(1), Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Gastric atrophy and intestinal metaplasia are generally considered to be
precancerous lesions of the stomach. Chronic Helicobacter pylori infection is one
the most important factors in the development of these pre-malignant gastric
lesions. In addition to bacterial factors, polymorphisms in the cytokine genes of
the host that modulate inflammatory responses are found to have a synergistic
effect in the development of gastric cancer as well as pre-neoplastic lesions.
Recently, inappropriate activation of the intestine-specific transcription factor
like the homeobox gene complex CDX1 and CDX2 are found to be an important
contributing factor in the induction of intestinal metaplasia in the stomach.
Aberrant expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and epigenetic changes are also
frequently detected in pre-neoplastic gastric lesions. One of the most important 
questions relating to these pre-neoplastic gastric lesions is that whether H.
pylori eradication could reverse these changes. However, most controlled studies 
showed no or just modest improvement in intestinal metaplasia after H. pylori
eradication. Further studies should evaluate the role of other chemopreventive
agents, particularly cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, on regression of pre-neoplastic 
lesions.

Copyright (c) 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15812152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Aug;289(2):G285-90. Epub 2005 Mar
17.

Differential regulation of intestinal alkaline phosphatase gene expression by
Cdx1 and Cdx2.

Alkhoury F(1), Malo MS, Mozumder M, Mostafa G, Hodin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Gray 504, 55 Fruit Street,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

We have examined the role that the caudal-related homeobox transcription factors 
Cdx1 and Cdx2 play in activating the enterocyte differentiation marker gene
intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP). Human colon cancer Caco-2 cells were
transiently transfected with Cdx1 and/or Cdx2, and semiquantitative RT-PCR was
used to study the effects on IAP mRNA expression. Transfections with a variety of
IAP-luciferase reporter constructs were used to identify a Cdx response element
located within the human IAP gene promoter. Protein-DNA interactions were
examined by EMSA. Results showed that Cdx1 markedly induced IAP mRNA expression, 
whereas Cdx2 did not, and, in fact, inhibited the Cdx1 effects. Functional
analysis revealed that Cdx1 transactivates (fourfold, P < 0.05) the IAP promoter 
through a novel Cdx response element (GTTTAGA) located between -2369 and -2375
upstream of the translational start site. EMSA showed that both Cdx1 and Cdx2
could bind to the cis element, but in cotransfection experiments, Cdx2 inhibited 
the Cdx1 effects by approximately 50%. Thus we have identified a previously
unrecognized interaction between two important gut transcription factors, Cdx1
and Cdx2, in the context of IAP gene regulation. Cdx1 activates the IAP gene via 
a novel cis element, whereas Cdx2 inhibits the Cdx1 effects.

PMID: 15774940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Mar 20;23(9):1811-8.

Expression of the caudal-type homeodomain transcription factors CDX 1/2 and
outcome in carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater.

Hansel DE(1), Maitra A, Lin JW, Goggins M, Argani P, Yeo CJ, Piantadosi S, Leach 
SD, Biankin AV.

Author information: 
(1)MBBS, Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
720 Rutland Ave, Ross 771, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. abianki1@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE: Adenocarcinomas of the ampulla of Vater demonstrate a characteristic
histology but vary significantly in outcome. As a consequence, prognostic factors
for these cancers are poorly defined. The caudal-type homeodomain transcription
factors 1 (CDX1) and 2 (CDX2) regulate axial development and intestinal
differentiation. We assessed the expression of these putative intestinal
epithelial-specific transcription factors and their influence on patient outcome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty-three resected carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater, 31
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, and 15 extrahepatic biliary carcinomas were
analyzed for CDX1 and CDX2 expression using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Forty percent of carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater but less than 5% of 
pancreatic and biliary adenocarcinomas expressed CDX. Expression of CDX was
associated with a better prognosis (P = .0009). Individually, both CDX1 (P = .02)
and CDX2 (P = .02) expression were associated with a survival advantage on
univariate analysis. Advanced T stage (P = .02), lymph node metastases (P =
.004), and vascular space invasion (P = .0009) were associated with a poor
prognosis. Multivariate analysis revealed vascular space invasion (P = .01) and
CDX expression (P = .01) to be independent prognostic factors.
CONCLUSION: Expression of CDX was an independent marker of outcome in patients
with resected adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater. Expression of CDX may
distinguish good prognosis intestinal-like tumors, which potentially arise within
intestinal epithelium, from poorer prognosis pancreatobiliary tumors, which arise
in adjacent pancreatic and/or biliary ductal epithelium.

PMID: 15774774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Oncol. 2005 Apr;26(4):891-6.

Aberrant expression of the gastric mucin MUC6 in human pulmonary adenocarcinoma
xenografts.

Hamamoto A(1), Abe Y, Nishi M, Fujimori S, Ohnishi Y, Yamazaki H, Oida Y,
Miyazaki N, Inada K, Ueyama Y, Iwasaki M, Inoue H, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Bohseidai, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

Certain pulmonary adenocarcinomas show gastrointestinal differentiation with the 
expression of various mucins. The CDX homeobox gene, an intestine-specific
transcription factor, is related to gastric carcinogenesis with MUC2 and MUC6
expression. The intestinal mucin MUC2 is expressed in the normal lung, while the 
gastric mucin MUC6 is not. Previously, we have reported that the expressions of
MUC2 and MUC6 were related to a poor prognosis in small adenocarcinomas of the
lung. We estimated the expressions of the mucin (MUC2 and MUC6) and CDX (CDX1 and
CDX2) to examine how CDX relates to the gastrointestinal mucin production in the 
pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Thirty-nine human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
xenografts were examined (13 adenocarcinoma, 18 squamous cell carcinoma and 8
large cell carcinoma). Significant expression of the MUC6 gene was observed in 7 
out of 39 (17.9%) NSCLC xenografts. The expressions of the MUC6 genes were noted 
in 6 out of 13 (46.2%) adenocarcinoma xenografts, but only in 1 of 18 (0.06%)
squamous cell carcinoma xenografts. The adenocarcinoma xenografts significantly
showed higher expression of the MUC6 gene than squamous cell carcinoma xenografts
(t-test, p=0.0343). Four adenocarcinoma-xenografts co-expressed both the MUC2 and
MUC6 genes, and the residual 2 adenocarcinoma-xenografts expressed only the MUC6 
gene. One MUC6 overexpressing squamous cell carcinoma focally contained an
adenocarcinoma component. The expression patterns of the gastrointestinal mucins 
were analogous to gastric cancer. The cellular morphology of these carcinoma
xenografts was of the gastric cancer type. The proteins of the MUC2 and MUC6 were
immunohistochemically confirmed in the xenografts. The expression of the MUC6
gene was significantly correlated with the expressions of the CDX1 and CDX2 genes
in the xenografts (Fisher's test, p<0.0001 and p=0.0005, respectively), while
there was no significant association between the expression of the MUC2 and CDX
genes. These results suggest that the expression of CDX molecules in the
pulmonary carcinogenesis pathway relates to gastric cancerous features of
aberrant MUC6 expression.

PMID: 15753982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 1;65(5):1619-26.

Gene expression profiles in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia reflect the
effects of Hedgehog signaling on pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

Prasad NB(1), Biankin AV, Fukushima N, Maitra A, Dhara S, Elkahloun AG, Hruban
RH, Goggins M, Leach SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Invasive pancreatic cancer is thought to develop through a series of noninvasive 
duct lesions known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). We used cDNA 
microarrays interrogating 15,000 transcripts to identify 49 genes that were
differentially expressed in microdissected early PanIN lesions (PanIN-1B/2)
compared with microdissected normal duct epithelium. In this analysis, a cluster 
of extrapancreatic foregut markers, including pepsinogen C, MUC6, KLF4, and TFF1,
was found to be up-regulated in PanIN. Up-regulation of these genes was further
validated using combinations of real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemistry in a total of 150 early PanIN lesions
from 81 patients. Identification of these gastrointestinal transcripts in human
PanIN prompted assessment of other foregut markers by both semiquantitative and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, revealing similar up-regulation of Sox-2,
Gastrin, HoxA5, GATA4/5/6, Villin and Forkhead 6 (Foxl1). In contrast to frequent
expression of multiple gastric epithelial markers, the intestinal markers
intestinal fatty acid binding protein, CDX1 and CDX2 were rarely expressed either
in PanIN lesions or in invasive pancreatic cancer. Hedgehog pathway activation
induced by transfection of immortalized human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells 
with Gli1 resulted in up-regulation of the majority of foregut markers seen in
early PanIN lesions. These data show frequent up-regulation of foregut markers in
early PanIN lesions and suggest that PanIN development may involve
Hedgehog-mediated conversion to a gastric epithelial differentiation program.

PMID: 15753353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2005 Mar;21(2):135-40.

Recent findings in the cell and molecular biology of the small intestine.

Walters JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
julian.walters@imperial.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recently published research exploring new aspects of the
molecular and cell biology of the small intestine is reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: The importance has become apparent of several paracrine and
autocrine signaling pathways that regulate stem cell proliferation in the crypts 
and differentiation on the villus. These growth factor systems include: the Wnt
pathway, with molecules such as Dickkopf, APC, beta-catenin and SOX9; the
Hedgehog system; and members of the TGF-beta family such as bone morphogenetic
proteins. Transcription factors activating the expression of genes in the
intestine include CDX1, CDX2 and HNF1alpha and their actions are increasingly
well characterized. Important findings are being made relating to the Toll-like
receptors, which have a major role in innate immunity and intestinal homeostasis.
SUMMARY: Many new discoveries using increasingly sophisticated techniques have
demonstrated the complexity of the cellular and molecular interactions in the
intestinal mucosa.

PMID: 15711203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2004 Mar;20(2):70-6.

Cell and molecular biology of the small intestine: new insights into
differentiation, growth and repair.

Walters JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
julian.walters@imperial.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This paper will discuss recent research that has provided new 
insights into the molecular and cell biology of the small intestine.
RECENT FINDINGS: Differentiation of the epithelial cell lineages, including the
enterocytes, enteroendocrine, Goblet and Paneth cells, from the stem cells is
better understood. Important interactions have been demonstrated between these
cells, luminal bacteria, and underlying mesenchymal tissue. Intestine-specific
gene expression is regulated by transcription factors that are becoming well
characterized, including CDX1, CDX2 and HNF1. The actions of growth factors such 
as GLP-2 and EGF are now known to be complex, demonstrating multiple effects in
this tissue at a number of levels.
SUMMARY: Progress in the cellular and molecular biology of the small intestine is
producing many intriguing new findings.

PMID: 15703624  [PubMed]


172. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13858-62. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor members repress retinoic
acid-induced Cdx1 expression.

Béland M(1), Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins ouest,
Canada.

It is well established that Hox genes are key players in specifying positional
identity along the anterior-posterior axis and are targets of diverse
transcription factors implicated in axial patterning. Members of the CDX family
(CDX1, -2, and -4) are among such effectors of Hox expression as pertains to
vertebral patterning in the mouse. Cdx members are themselves targets of
signaling molecules that are also implicated in axial patterning, including
retinoic acid (RA) and certain members of Wnt and fibroblast growth factor
families. In this regard, we have previously shown that, in the mouse, Cdx1 is
directly regulated by RA at the late primitive streak stage (embryonic day (E)
7.5) through a RA response element in the proximal Cdx1 promoter. At E8.5, Cdx1
expression remains essentially limited to the posterior embryo. RA, however, is
excluded from the caudal embryo at this later stage, but is found in a more
anterior domain encompassing the prospective trunk region. These observations
suggest the existence of a repressor mechanism that prevents expression of Cdx1
in these anterior domains of retinoid signaling at E8.5. In the present study, we
present evidence suggesting that chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF) members antagonize RA-induced Cdx1
expression by competing with retinoid X receptor-retinoic acid receptor
heterodimers for binding to the Cdx1 RA response element. Consistent with this,
in situ hybridization analysis revealed that COUP-TFs are highly expressed in the
anterior embryo in domains where Cdx1 transcripts are excluded. Together with
other data, these findings suggest a model by which COUP-TF expression is induced
by RA in the trunk region as a negative feedback mechanism to restrict Cdx1
expression to the caudal embryo.

PMID: 15677473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):13195-202. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Cdx binding determines the timing of enhancer activation in postnatal duodenum.

Maier EA(1), Dusing MR, Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental Biology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

In mammalian intestine, adenosine deaminase (ADA) is expressed at high levels
only along the villi of the duodenal epithelium. A duodenum-specific enhancer
identified in the second intron of the human ADA gene controls this pattern of
expression. This enhancer faithfully recapitulates this expression pattern in
transgenic mice, when included in CAT reporter gene constructions. Multiple
binding sites for PDX-1 and GATA factors were previously identified within the
approximately 300-bp region that encompasses the enhancer. Mutation analyses
demonstrated that binding of PDX-1 and of GATA-4 was absolutely essential for
enhancer function. In the present study, we have identified additional enhancer
binding sites for Cdx factors, for YY1, and for NFI family members. Detailed EMSA
studies were used to confirm binding at these sites. This brings the number of
confirmed binding sites within the enhancer to thirteen, with five different
factors or family of factors contributing to the putative enhanceosome complex.
Mutation analysis was utilized to examine the specific roles of the newly
identified sites. Two sites were identified that bound both Cdx1 and Cdx2.
Mutations were identified in these two sites that completely and specifically
eliminated Cdx binding. In transgenic mice, these enhancer mutations dramatically
changed the developmental timing of enhancer activation (delaying it by 2-3
weeks) without affecting other aspects of enhancer function. In the chromatin
context of certain transgenic insertion sites, mutation of the two YY1 sites to
specifically ablate binding caused a delay in enhancer activation similar to that
observed with the Cdx mutations. No overt changes were observed from mutation of 
the NFI site.

PMID: 15677472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Feb 15;303(2):252-62.

Growth of intestinal epithelium in organ culture is dependent on EGF signalling.

Abud HE(1), Watson N, Heath JK.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, PO Box 2008,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. helen.abud@ludwig.edu.au

Differentiation of endoderm into intestinal epithelium is initiated at E13.5 of
mouse development when there are significant changes in morphology resulting in
the conversion of undifferentiated stratified epithelium into a mature epithelial
monolayer. Here we demonstrate that monolayer formation is associated with the
selective apoptosis of superficial cells lining the lumen while cell
proliferation is progressively restricted to cells adjacent to the basement
membrane. We describe an innovative embryonic gut culture system that maintains
the three-dimensional architecture of gut and in which these processes are
recapitulated in vitro. Explants taken from specific regions of the gut and
placed into organ culture develop and express molecular markers (Cdx1, Cdx2 and
A33 antigen) in the same spatial and temporal pattern observed in vivo indicating
that regional specification is maintained. Inhibition of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase using the specific inhibitor AG1478
significantly reduced the proliferation and survival of cells within the
epithelial cell layer of cultured gut explants. This demonstrates an essential
role for the EGF signalling pathway during the early stages of intestinal
development.

PMID: 15652340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Endocr Pathol. 2004 Fall;15(3):247-52.

Cdx2 as a marker for neuroendocrine tumors of unknown primary sites.

Erickson LA(1), Papouchado B, Dimashkieh H, Zhang S, Nakamura N, Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2 are homeobox genes that regulate
development of the epithelium of the small and large intestine. A few studies
have shown that Cdx2 protein expression is useful in the diagnosis of
adenocarcinomas as well as neuroendocrine tumors of the small and large
intestine. To examine the utility of Cdx2 in recognizing neuroendocrine tumors of
unknown primary sites, we analyzed 224 primary and metastatic neuroendocrine
tumors by immunohistochemistry. The specificity of the antibody reaction was
confirmed by Western blotting. Cdx2 antibody stained all primary and most
metastatic midgut carcinoid tumors. A few rectal and pulmonary carcinoids were
positive, while gastric carcinoids were negative for Cdx2. One of five small cell
carcinomas (20%) of the colon was positive for Cdx2, while all pulmonary small
cell carcinomas were negative. Neuroendocrine tumors of the pituitary,
parathyroid, medullary thyroid carcinomas, paragangliomas, pheochromocytomas and 
Merkel cell carcinomas were all negative for Cdx2. Western blot analysis of seven
cases showed a 40 kDa band in both primary and metastatic midgut carcinoid
tumors. These results indicate that Cdx2 can be very useful in recognizing
metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas of unknown primary sites, especially when
they are derived from the small intestine.

PMID: 15640551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):G1074-83. Epub 2004 Dec 
2.

Regulation of RELM/FIZZ isoform expression by Cdx2 in response to innate and
adaptive immune stimulation in the intestine.

Wang ML(1), Shin ME, Knight PA, Artis D, Silberg DG, Suh E, Wu GD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6144, USA.

Host immune responses to commensal flora and enteric pathogens are known to
influence gene expression in the intestinal epithelium. Although the Cdx family
of caudal-related transcription factors represents critical regulators of gene
expression in the intestinal epithelium, the effect of intestinal immune
responses on Cdx expression and function has not been determined. We have shown
that bacterial colonization and Th2 immune stimulation by intestinal nematode
infection induce expression of the intestinal goblet cell-specific gene RELM
beta. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of
resistin-like molecule/found in inflammatory zone (RELM/FIZZ, RELM beta) and its 
isoforms RELM alpha and RELM gamma to ascertain the role of Cdx in modifying
intestinal gene expression associated with innate and adaptive immune responses. 
Analysis of the RELM beta promoter showed that Cdx2 plays a critical role in
basal gene activation in vitro. This was confirmed in vivo using transgenic mice,
where ectopic gastric and hepatic expression of Cdx2 induces expression of RELM
beta, but not RELM alpha or RELM gamma, exclusively in the stomach. Although
there was no quantitative change in colonic Cdx2 mRNA expression, protein
distribution, or phosphorylation of Cdx2, bacterial colonization induced
expression of RELM beta, but not RELM alpha or RELM gamma. In contrast, parasitic
nematode infections activated colonic expression of all three RELM isoforms
without alteration in Cdx2 expression. These results demonstrated that Cdx2
participates in directing intestine-specific expression of RELM beta in the
presence of commensal bacteria and that adaptive Th2 immune responses to
intestinal nematode infections can activate intestinal goblet cell-specific gene 
expression independent of Cdx2.

PMID: 15576623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. World J Gastroenterol. 2004 Dec 1;10(23):3441-54.

Methylation profile of the promoter CpG islands of 31 genes that may contribute
to colorectal carcinogenesis.

Xu XL(1), Yu J, Zhang HY, Sun MH, Gu J, Du X, Shi DR, Wang P, Yang ZH, Zhu JD.

Author information: 
(1)The State-Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Cancer Institute of 
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200032, China.

AIM: To establish the methylation profile of the promoter CpG islands of 31 genes
that might play etiological roles in colon carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The methylation specific PCR in conjunction of sequencing verification
was used to establish the methylation-profile of the promoter CpG islands of 31
genes in colorectal cancer (n = 65), the neighboring non-cancerous tissues (n =
5), colorectal adenoma (n = 8), and normal mucosa (n = 1). Immunohistochemically,
expression of 10 genes was assessed on the home-made tissue microarrays of
tissues from 58 patients. The correlation of tumor specific changes with each of 
clinical-pathologic features was scrutinized with relevant statistic tools.
RESULTS: In comparison with the normal mucosa of the non-cancer patients, the
following 14 genes displayed no tumor associated changes: breast cancer 1, early 
onset (BRCA1), cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (epithelial) (CDH1),
death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1), DNA (cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase 1 
(DNMT1), melanoma antigen, family A, 1 (directs expression of antigen MZ2-E)
(MAGEA1), tumor suppressor candidate 3 (N33), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
1A (p21, Cip1) (p21(WAF1)), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (p27, Kip1)
(p27(KIP1)), phosphatase and tensin homolog (mutated in multiple advanced cancers
1) (PTEN), retinoic acid receptor, beta (RAR- , Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6)
domain family 1 C (RASSF1C), secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinase 3 (Sorsby fundus dystrophy, pseudoinflammatory)
(TIMP3), and von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL). The rest 17 targets exhibited to
various extents the tumor associated changes. As changes in methylation of the
following genes occurred marginally, their impact on the formation of colorectal 
cancer were trivial: adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) (8%, 5/65), Ras association
(RalGDS/AF-6) domain family 1A (RASSF1A) (3%, 2/65) and cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A, alternated reading frame (p14(ARF)) (6%, 4/65). The following genes
exhibited moderate changes in methylation: O-6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) (20%, 13/65), mutL homolog 1, colon cancer, nonpolyposis
type 2 (E. coli) (hMLH1) (18%, 12/65), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A
(melanoma, p16, inhibits CDK4) (p16(INK4a)) (10%, 10/65), methylated in tumor 1
(MINT1) (15%, 10/65), methylated in tumor 31 (MINT31) (11%, 7/65). The rest
changed greatly in the methylation pattern in colorectal cancer (CRC): cyclin A1 
(cyclin a1) (100%, 65/65), caudal type homeobox transcription factor 1 (CDX1)
(100%, 65/65), RAR- (85%, 55/65), myogenic factor 3 (MYOD1) (69%, 45/65),
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B (p15, inhibits CDK4) (p15(INK4b)) (68%,
44/65), prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (prostaglandin G/H synthase and
cyclooxygenase) (COX2) (72%, 47/65), cadherin 13, H-cadherin (heart) (CDH13)
(65%, 42/65), CAAX box 1 (CXX1) (58%, 38/65), tumor protein p73 (p73) (63%,
41/65) and Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) (58%, 38/65). However, no significant correlation 
of changes in methylation with any given clinical-pathological features was
detected. Furthermore, the frequent changes in methylation appeared to be an
early phase event of colon carcinogenesis. The in situ expression of 10 genes was
assessed by the immunohistochemical approach at the protein level: CDH1, CDH13,
COX2, cyclin A1, hMLH1, MGMT, p14(ARF), p73, RAR- , and TIMP3 genes in the
context of the methylation status in colorectal cancer. No clear correlation
between the hypermethylation of the promoter CpG islands and the negative
expression of the genes was established.
CONCLUSION: The methylation profile of 31 genes was established in patients with 
colon cancer and colorectal adenomas, which provides new insights into the DNA
methylation mediated mechanisms underlying the carcinogenesis of colorectal
cancer and may be of prognostic values for colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4576225
PMID: 15526363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Dev Biol. 2004 Sep;48(7):613-22.

Additional enhancer copies, with intact cdx binding sites, anteriorize
Hoxa-7/lacZ expression in mouse embryos: evidence in keeping with an
instructional cdx gradient.

Gaunt SJ(1), Cockley A, Drage D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk.

Expression of a Hoxa-7/lacZ reporter construct in transgenic mouse embryos is
shifted anteriorly when the upstream enhancer is multimerized. The shift occurs
in spinal ganglia, neurectoderm and in both paraxial and lateral plate mesoderms.
Much of the multimer effect is inhibited by destruction of a single caudal (cdx) 
binding motif in the additional copies of the enhancer. These observations are in
agreement with earlier enhancer multimerization analyses made for Hoxb-8 (Charite
et al., 1998). Our findings therefore provide further evidence that the anterior 
limit of a Hox gene's expression domain is normally dependent upon and is
determined by, the dosage of transcription factor(s) which bind to its enhancer
element(s) and that these factors may be, or must include, the cdx proteins. We
consider these findings in terms of both instructional (morphogen-like) gradient 
and timing models for the establishment of Hox gene expression domains. Enhancer 
multimerization results in an earlier onset of Hoxa-7/lacZ activity in the
embryo. In neurectoderm at 8.7 days and in mesoderm at 10.5 days, the anterior
boundaries of expression are located posterior to those seen at some earlier
stages of development. We discuss how these findings are in keeping with a model 
where Hox expression boundaries become set along instructional cdx gradients,
formed by cdx decay in cells moving away from the primitive streak region.

PMID: 15470633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Pathol. 2004 Nov;204(3):289-95.

CDX1 expression is reduced in colorectal carcinoma and is associated with
promoter hypermethylation.

Pilozzi E(1), Onelli MR, Ziparo V, Mercantini P, Ruco L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Sant'Andrea Hospital,
University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. emanuela.pilozzi@uniroma1.it

The CDX1 homeobox gene encodes a transcription factor specifically expressed in
normal intestinal and colonic epithelia, and CDX1 gene expression is affected
during colorectal tumour progression. In this study, real-time quantitative
RT-PCR was used to investigate CDX1 expression in 26 colorectal carcinomas.
Reduced expression of CDX1 was observed in 19 of 26 colon carcinomas compared to 
matched normal colonic mucosa: the decrease in CDX1 expression ranged between
0.10 and 0.79 (21-90% decrease; mean 64.75% +/-22; p = 0.001). Mutation and loss 
of heterozygosity (LOH) analyses were then used to determine if reduced CDX1
expression was due to genetic alteration. No CDX1 gene mutations, but two known
polymorphisms in exon 1, were observed. LOH was observed in 33% of the tumours
investigated but this was not related to CDX1 expression. Since aberrant promoter
methylation is a well-known mechanism that participates in gene silencing, the
methylation status of the CDX1 5' CpG island promoter was also investigated. PCR 
amplification of bisulphite-treated DNA followed by cloning was performed in 7
carcinomas that showed low expression of CDX1 and in 1 colonic carcinoma without 
reduced expression. Promoter hypermethylation occurred in carcinomas in which
CDX1 reduced expression was present. These results suggest that CDX1 promoter
hypermethylation is one of the molecular mechanisms that accounts for reduced
CDX1 gene expression in colorectal carcinoma.

Copyright (c) 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 15378566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Gut. 2004 Oct;53(10):1416-23.

Cdx1 induced intestinal metaplasia in the transgenic mouse stomach: comparative
study with Cdx2 transgenic mice.

Mutoh H(1), Sakurai S, Satoh K, Osawa H, Hakamata Y, Takeuchi T, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachi-machi, Kawachigun, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Comment on
    Gut. 2004 Oct;53(10):1394-6.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Gastric intestinal metaplasia, which is mainly induced by
Helicobacter pylori infection, is thought to be a precancerous lesion of gastric 
adenocarcinoma. Intestinal metaplastic mucosa expresses intestine specific
homeobox genes, Cdx1 and Cdx2, in the human gastric mucosa. We and others have
reported that ectopic expression of Cdx2 in the gastric epithelium generates
intestinal metaplasia in the transgenic mouse model.
METHODS: To clarify the differences in the roles of Cdx1 and Cdx2 in intestinal
metaplasia, we generated transgenic mice expressing Cdx1 in the gastric mucosa
and compared Cdx1 induced gastric mucosal morphological changes with Cdx2 induced
intestinal metaplasia.
RESULTS: The gastric mucosa in Cdx1 transgenic mice was completely replaced by
intestinal metaplastic mucosa, consisting of all four intestinal epithelial cell 
types: absorptive enterocytes, goblet, enteroendocrine, and Paneth cells. Paneth 
cells, which were not recognised in Cdx2 transgenic mice, were in the upper
portion of the intestinal metaplastic mucosa. Pseudopyloric gland metaplasia,
which was induced in Cdx2 transgenic mice, was not recognised in Cdx1 transgenic 
mice. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) positive cells were diffusely
scattered in Cdx1 induced intestinal metaplastic mucosa while PCNA positive cells
in Cdx2 induced intestinal metaplastic mucosa were in the base of the metaplastic
mucosa. Intestinal metaplastic mucosa of Cdx1 transgenic mouse stomach was
significantly thicker than that of wild-type or Cdx2 transgenic mouse stomach.
CONCLUSIONS: We have confirmed that Cdx1 induced gastric intestinal metaplasia
but that it differed from Cdx2 induced intestinal metaplasia in differentiation, 
structure, and proliferation.

PMCID: PMC1774241
PMID: 15361487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Differentiation. 2004 Jun;72(5):209-23.

Differential regulation of osteogenic marker gene expression by Wnt-3a in
embryonic mesenchymal multipotential progenitor cells.

Derfoul A(1), Carlberg AL, Tuan RS, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Department of Health and Human Services,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The Wnt family of secreted glycoproteins plays an integral role in embryonic
development and differentiation. To explore the role of Wnt's in one aspect of
differentiation, namely osteogenesis, we employed a retroviral gene transfer
approach to express Wnt-3a in the multipotent murine embryonic mesenchymal cell
line C3H10T1/2. We found that expression of Wnt-3a in these cells had a
significant, positive effect on cell growth in serum-containing medium, in that
the cells grew to very high densities compared to the control cells.
Additionally, apoptosis was markedly inhibited by Wnt-3a. However, when the cells
were grown in serum-deficient medium, the Wnt-3a-expressing cells arrested
efficiently in G1 phase, indicating that serum growth factors were needed in
addition to Wnt-3a for enhanced proliferation. Wnt-3a-expressing cells exhibited 
high levels of alkaline phosphatase gene expression and enzymatic activity, but
did not show any matrix mineralization. Unexpectedly, basal expression of bone
sialoprotein, osteocalcin, and osteopontin were markedly inhibited by Wnt-3a, as 
were other known target genes of Wnt-3a, such as Brachyury, FGF-10, and Cdx1.
When Wnt-3a-expressing cells were treated with osteogenic supplements in the
presence of BMP-2, alkaline phosphatase gene expression and activity were further
elevated. Additionally, BMP-2 was able to reverse the inhibitory effect of Wnt-3a
on osteocalcin and osteopontin gene expression. These results indicate that while
Wnt-3a represses basal expression of some osteogenic genes, this repression can
be partially reversed by BMP-2. Finally, the enhanced gene expression of alkaline
phosphatase induced by Wnt-3a could be effectively suppressed by the combined
action of dexamethasone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3). These data show for the
first time that Wnt-3a has an unusual effect on multipotential embryonic cells,
in that it enhances cellular proliferation and expression of alkaline
phosphatase, while it represses most other marker genes of osteogenic
differentiation.

PMID: 15270777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36865-75. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Cdx1 inhibits human colon cancer cell proliferation by reducing
beta-catenin/T-cell factor transcriptional activity.

Guo RJ(1), Huang E, Ezaki T, Patel N, Sinclair K, Wu J, Klein P, Suh ER, Lynch
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, the Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The cessation of proliferation and the induction of differentiation are highly
coordinated processes that occur continuously in the intestinal crypts. The
homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 regulate intestine-specific gene 
expression and enterocyte differentiation. Their roles in regulating
proliferation are recognized but remain poorly understood. Previously, we
demonstrated that Cdx1 expression diminished the proliferation of human colon
cancer cells in part by reducing cyclin D1 gene expression. In order to elucidate
further the molecular mechanisms underlying this phenomenon, we first
hypothesized that Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression reduces colon cancer cell proliferation
by inhibiting beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) transcriptional activity. We
report that Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression does inhibit beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional
activity in colon cancer cells. This inhibitory effect is dose-dependent and is
observed in different colon cancer cell lines, and the degree of inhibition
correlates with the ability of Cdx1 to reduce cell proliferation. Cdx1 expression
does not alter beta-catenin protein levels or intracellular distribution nor does
it induce an inhibitory TCF isoform. We also find that Cdx1 expression is lost in
Min mouse polyps with increased nuclear localization of beta-catenin, suggesting 
that Cdx1 does not support beta-catenin-mediated transformation. Finally, we show
that colon cancer cells effectively reduce Cdx2-mediated inhibition of
Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity when compared with other model
systems. This suggests that colon cancer and possibly crypt epithelial cells can 
modulate the effects of Cdx2 on beta-catenin signaling and proliferation. We
conclude that Cdx1 and Cdx2 inhibit colon cancer cell proliferation by blocking
beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity.

PMID: 15215241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol. 2004;3(3):11. Epub 2004 Jun 8.

Hyperactive Wnt signaling changes the developmental potential of embryonic lung
endoderm.

Okubo T(1), Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA. t.okubo@cellbio.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Studies in many model systems have shown that canonical signaling
through the pathway downstream of ligands of the Wnt family can regulate multiple
steps in organogenesis, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and
lineage specification. In addition, misexpression of the Wnt-family member
Wingless in Drosophila imaginal disc cells can lead to transdetermination of
progenitors from one lineage to another. Conditional deletion of the beta-catenin
component of the Wnt signaling pathway has indicated a role for Wnt signaling in 
mouse lung endoderm development. The full range of effects of this pathway, which
includes the transcription factor Lef1, has not been explored, however.
RESULTS: To explore this issue, we expressed a constitutively active
beta-catenin-Lef1 fusion protein in transgenic embryos using a
lung-endoderm-specific promoter from the surfactant protein C gene. Transgenic
lungs appeared grossly normal, but internally they contained highly
proliferative, cuboidal epithelium lacking fully differentiated lung cell types. 
Unexpectedly, microarray analysis and in situ hybridization revealed a mosaic of 
cells expressing marker genes characteristic of intestinal Paneth and goblet
cells and other non-lung secretory cell types. In addition, there was strong
ectopic expression of genes such as Cdx1 and Atoh1 that normally regulate gut
development and early allocation of cells to intestinal secretory lineages.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that hyperactive Wnt signaling in lung progenitors 
expressing a lung-specific gene can induce a dramatic switch in lineage
commitment and the generation of intestinal cell types. We discuss the relevance 
of our findings to the poorly understood pathological condition of intestinal
metaplasia in humans.

PMCID: PMC469027
PMID: 15186480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):5028-38.

Cdx1 autoregulation is governed by a novel Cdx1-LEF1 transcription complex.

Béland M(1), Pilon N, Houle M, Oh K, Sylvestre JR, Prinos P, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest,
Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

The Cdx1 gene product is essential for normal anterior-posterior vertebral
patterning. Expression of Cdx1 is regulated by several pathways implicated in
anterior-posterior patterning events, including retinoid and Wnt signaling. We
have previously shown that retinoic acid plays a key role in early stages of Cdx1
expression at embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5), while both Wnt3a signaling and an
autoregulatory loop, dependent on Cdx1 itself, are involved in later stages of
expression (E8.5 to E9.5). This autoregulation is reflected by the ability of
Cdx1 to affect expression from proximal Cdx1 promoter sequences in tissue
culture. However, this region is devoid of a demonstrable Cdx response
element(s). We have now found that Cdx1 and LEF1, a nuclear effector of Wnt
signaling, synergize to induce expression from the Cdx1 promoter through
previously documented LEF/T-cell factor response elements. We also found a direct
physical interaction between the homeodomain of Cdx1 and the B box of LEF1,
suggesting a basis for this synergy. Consistent with these observations, analysis
of Cdx1 Wnt3a(vt) compound mutants demonstrated that Wnt and Cdx1 converged on
Cdx1 expression and vertebral patterning in vivo. Further data suggest that
Cdx-high-mobility group box interactions might be involved in a number of
additional pathways.

PMCID: PMC416402
PMID: 15143193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Jul;3(7):593-601. Epub 2004 Jul 9.

The role of Cdx proteins in intestinal development and cancer.

Guo RJ(1), Suh ER, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Since their original identification in Drosophila, the caudal related homologues 
(Cdx1 and Cdx2) have been known to be evolutionarily conserved both in molecular 
structure and function. In a great variety of organisms they are recognized to
function critically during antero-posterior patterning and the development of the
intestinal epithelium. The Cdx homologues, when expressed, modulate a diverse set
of processes including proliferation, apoptosis, cell-adhesion, and columnar
morphology. They are also necessary for the expression of an increasing number of
intestine-specific genes. By targeting these processes and genes, the Cdx
homologues promote the appearance of a mature intestinal cell phenotype. In
addition to these critical roles during development, accumulating evidence
suggests that the Cdx homologues may play significant roles in oncogenesis in the
gastrointestinal tract and other tissues. In the colon, several studies suggest
the Cdx homologues may act as tumor suppressors. However, ectopic Cdx1 and Cdx2
expression is involved in the development of the precancerous intestinal
metaplasia in the stomach and esophagus, and may be a transforming event in one
form of acute myelogenous leukemia. This review will explore our current
understanding of the roles of the caudal homologues Cdx1 and Cdx2 in intestinal
development and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15136761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Actas Urol Esp. 2004 Feb;28(2):101-5.

[Expression of CDX2 in urinary bladder and urethra lesions].

[Article in Spanish]

Ortiz-Rey JA(1), Antón Badiola I, San Miguel Fraile P, Alvarez Alvarez C,
Iglesias Rodríguez B, Zungri-Telo E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Patología, Centro Médico POVISA, Vigo, Pontevedra.

BACKGROUND: CDX1 and CDX2 are transcription factors involved in the development
and maintenance of the intestinal epithelial cell. Expression of CDX2 has been
reported in normal and metaplastic intestinal epithelium, and in those
adenocarcinomas with that cellular origin. We have analyzed the expression of
this marker in reactive and tumoral lesions arising in urinary bladder, urethra
and urachus.
METHOD: CDX2 was investigated through immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded
tissue, using the labelled streptavidin-biotin method (LSAB2, Dako) with a
monoclonal antibody (CDX2-88, BioGenex).
RESULTS: Expression of CDX2 was observed in intestinal-type cistitis glandularis,
intestinal metaplasia of urinary bladder, bladder adenocarcinoma, mucinous
urothelial-type carcinoma of prostatic urethra and urachal mucinous carcinoma.
CDX2 was not detected in normal urothelium and prostatic glandular epithelium,
Von Brunn nests, typical-type cistitis glandularis, glandular adenosis and
transitional carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Lesions, both benign and malignant, with enteric-cell morphological 
features show positivity for CDX2. Expression of this marker is not
organ-specific but is just related to a cellular phenotype. Reactivity for CDX2
in an adenocarcinoma can be consistent with an origin in urinary tract or
urachus.

PMID: 15074058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Jul;287(1):G104-14. Epub 2004 Feb
19.

Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression activates E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and
compaction in human COLO 205 cells.

Keller MS(1), Ezaki T, Guo RJ, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology/660 CRB, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie
Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

A mature columnar intestinal epithelium develops late in embryogenesis and is
maintained throughout the life of the organism. Although the mechanisms driving
intestine-specific gene expression have been well studied, those promoting the
acquisition of cell-cell junctions, columnar morphogenesis, and polarization have
been less studied. The Cdx homeodomain transcription factors (Cdx1 and Cdx2)
regulate intestine-specific gene expression and intestinal epithelial
differentiation. We report here that Cdx expression induces E-cadherin activity
and cell-cell adhesion in human COLO 205 cancer cells. Within days of Cdx1 or
Cdx2 expression, a new homotypic cell-cell adhesion phenotype is induced. This is
a specific response to Cdx, inasmuch as a Cdx1 mutant failed to elicit the
effect. Additionally, Cdx-expressing COLO 205 cells demonstrate a reduced
proliferative capacity and an increase in the mRNA expression of
differentiation-associated genes. Electron micrographs of these cells demonstrate
induction of tight, adherens, and desmosomal junctions, as well as a columnar
shape and apical microvilli. Investigations of the adhesion phenotype determined 
that it was Ca(2+) dependent and could be blocked by an E-cadherin-blocking
antibody. However, E-cadherin protein levels and intracellular distribution were 
unchanged. Cdx expression restored the ability of the cell membranes to adhere
and undergo compaction. We conclude that Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression is sufficient to
induce an E-cadherin-dependent adhesion of COLO 205 cells. This adhesion is
associated with polarization and cell-cell membrane compaction, as well as
induction of a differentiated gene-expression pattern. Ascertaining the mechanism
for this novel Cdx effect may yield insight into the development of mature
colonic epithelium.

PMID: 14977637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Feb 20;314(4):1001-7.

Functional crosstalk between Wnt signaling and Cdx-related transcriptional
activation in the regulation of the claudin-2 promoter activity.

Mankertz J(1), Hillenbrand B, Tavalali S, Huber O, Fromm M, Schulzke JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectiology and Rheumatology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 
12200, Berlin, Germany. joachim.mankertz@medizin.fu-berlin.de

Assembly of tight junctions at the most apical part of the lateral cell membrane 
is a key event in the differentiation of polarized epithelial cells. Claudin-2, a
transmembrane protein involved in tight junction strand formation, has turned out
to play a crucial role for the paracellular barrier function by opening pores for
small cations. Physiological and pathological variations of epithelial barrier
function are accompanied by differential expression of tight junction proteins.
Therefore, we characterized molecular mechanisms regulating claudin-2 gene
expression. Genomic DNA containing the transcription start point of human
claudin-2 was isolated and functionally characterized by reporter gene assays.
Activity of the claudin-2 promoter was elevated in mouse mammary epithelial C57
cells expressing Wnt-1. LEF-1, a nuclear effector of the Wnt signaling pathway
which is involved in the regulation of cell differentiation and polarization, was
found to bind directly to the claudin-2 promoter as revealed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. Expression of LEF-1 and beta-catenin both enhanced
claudin-2 promoter activity. This increase was reduced after mutation of LEF-1
binding sites within the claudin-2 promoter. Furthermore, claudin-2 promoter
activity was found to be enhanced by the TCF-4/beta-catenin transcription
complex. Therefore, we conclude that gene expression mediated by the promoter of 
the human tight junction protein claudin-2 is regulated by factors involved in
Wnt signaling. Moreover, a functional crosstalk between Wnt signaling and
transcriptional activation related to caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) proteins
could be demonstrated in the regulation of claudin-2 promoter-mediated gene
expression.

PMID: 14751232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 May;286(5):G872-80. Epub 2004 Jan
8.

Putative intestine-specific enhancers located in 5' sequence of the CDX1 gene
regulate CDX1 expression in the intestine.

Rankin EB(1), Xu W, Silberg DG, Suh E.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Div., Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Ste. 600, 415
Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

CDX1 is a homeobox transcription factor that plays a critical role in intestinal 
epithelial cell growth and differentiation. CDX1 gene expression is tightly
regulated in a temporal and cell-type specific manner. However, very little is
known about the regulatory mechanisms that direct CDX1 gene expression in the
intestine. To elucidate these mechanisms, we employed a series of transgenic
mouse studies using the 5' flanking sequences of the human CDX1 gene. Transgenic 
mice containing nucleotides between -5667 and +68 relative to the transcription
start site of the CDX1 gene demonstrated ectopic expression of the transgene in
the brain and gastric smooth muscle. However, transgenic expression of the
nucleotides -15601 to +68 of the CDX1 gene was restricted to the intestinal
epithelium, which was identical to endogenous CDX1 gene expression. Taken
together, the upstream sequences between -15601 and -5667 contain regulatory
elements that direct transgene expression specifically to the intestinal
epithelium. Furthermore, DNase I hypersensitivity assays revealed two active
chromatin regions in the CDX1 gene (hypertensive sites 1 and 2) located at
approximately -5.8 and -6.8 kb upstream of the CDX1 gene, respectively, which may
function as potential intestine-specific enhancers.

PMID: 14715525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 13;101(2):574-9. Epub 2004 Jan 2.

Loss of CDX1 expression in colorectal carcinoma: promoter methylation, mutation, 
and loss of heterozygosity analyses of 37 cell lines.

Wong NA(1), Britton MP, Choi GS, Stanton TK, Bicknell DC, Wilding JL, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Expression of the homeobox protein CDX1 is lost or reduced in a significant
proportion of colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) but the underlying mechanism for this 
is unclear. We have demonstrated absence of CDX1 mRNA expression in 7 of 37 CRC
cell lines and shown that all 7 cell lines have a methylated CDX1 promoter.
Twenty-five cell lines showed both CDX1 mRNA expression and an unmethylated CDX1 
promoter. The five remaining cell lines had a partially methylated CDX1 promoter 
and all expressed CDX1 mRNA; when treated with the demethylating agent,
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, these five cell lines all showed increased CDX1
expression. No mutations were found in the promoter and coding regions of CDX1.
One polymorphism was demonstrated in each of the promoter, 5' UTR, and coding
region of exon 1 of CDX1, but there were no associations between CDX1 mRNA
expression and different polymorphic genotypes. Similarly, there was no
association between CDX1 mRNA expression and loss of heterozygosity at the CDX1
locus. In conclusion, absence or reduction of CDX1 expression in CRC seems to be 
primarily regulated by promoter methylation and is probably selected for because 
of its impact on the differentiation of colonocytes.

PMCID: PMC327189
PMID: 14704280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Development. 2003 Dec;130(26):6555-67.

Retinoic acid regulates a subset of Cdx1 function in vivo.

Houle M(1), Sylvestre JR, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, 110 ave des Pins,
ouest, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Hox gene products are key players in establishing positional identity along the
anteroposterior (AP) axis. In vertebrates, gain or loss of Hox expression along
the AP axis often leads to inappropriate morphogenesis, typically manifesting as 
homeotic transformations that affect the vertebrae and/or hindbrain. Various
signalling pathways are known to impact on Hox expression, including the retinoid
signalling pathway. Exogenous retinoic acid (RA), disruption of enzymes involved 
in maintaining normal embryonic RA distribution or mutation of the retinoid
receptors (RARs and RXRs) can all impact on Hox expression with concomitant
effects on AP patterning. Several Hox loci have well characterized RA response
elements (RAREs), which have been shown to regulate functionally relevant Hox
expression in the neurectoderm. A similar crucial function for any RARE in
mesodermal Hox expression has, however, not been documented. The means by which
RA regulates mesodermal Hox expression could therefore be either through an
undocumented direct mechanism or through an intermediary; these mechanisms are
not necessarily exclusive. In this regard, we have found that Cdx1 may serve as
such an intermediary. Cdx1 encodes a homeobox transcription factor that is
crucial for normal somitic expression of several Hox genes, and is regulated by
retinoid signalling in vivo and in vitro likely through an atypical RARE in the
proximal promoter. In order to more fully understand the relationship between
retinoid signalling, Cdx1 expression and AP patterning, we have derived mice in
which the RARE has been functionally inactivated. These RARE-null mutants exhibit
reduced expression of Cdx1 at all stages examined, vertebral homeotic
transformations and altered Hox gene expression which correlates with certain of 
the defects seen in Cdx1-null offspring. These findings are consistent with a
pivotal role for retinoid signalling in governing a subset of expression of Cdx1 
crucial for normal vertebral patterning.

PMID: 14660544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2004 Mar;130(3):135-45. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Down-regulation of a gastric transcription factor, Sox2, and ectopic expression
of intestinal homeobox genes, Cdx1 and Cdx2: inverse correlation during
progression from gastric/intestinal-mixed to complete intestinal metaplasia.

Tsukamoto T(1), Inada K, Tanaka H, Mizoshita T, Mihara M, Ushijima T, Yamamura Y,
Nakamura S, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Nagoya, Chikusa-ku, Japan. ttsukamt@aichi-cc.jp

PURPOSE: The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of intestinal
metaplasia (IM) of the human stomach have yet to be clarified in detail. Besides 
ectopic expression of intestinal transcription factors, Cdx1 and Cdx2, little
information is available regarding other regulatory factors. Hence, we here
analyzed Sox2, a human homolog of a chicken gastric transcription factor, with
reference to our new classification for gastric/intestinal (GI)-mixed type IM.
METHODS: Twenty specimens of surgically resected antral mucosa were subjected to 
a gland isolation technique. Isolated glands were classified into gastric (G),
GI-mixed, and solely intestinal (I) types according to Alcian blue and
paradoxical concanavalin A staining and were quantified for mRNA levels of
gastrointestinal markers.
RESULTS: MUC5AC and MUC6 transcripts decreased with the progression of IM, while 
MUC2 and villin-1 were inversely correlated. Sox2 showed a gradual decrease from 
G, through GI, to the I type (G vs GI and GI vs I, P<0.01 and P<0.005,
respectively). On the other hand, Cdx1 (G vs GI and GI vs I, P<0.0001 and
P=0.337, respectively) and Cdx2 (G vs GI and GI vs I, P<0.0001 and P<0.05,
respectively) appeared in IM. Immunohistochemical study confirmed decreased
expression of Sox2 and ectopic emergence of Cdx2 protein in IM glands.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of Sox2, besides ectopic expression of Cdx genes, may
be important factors for the development of IM.

PMID: 14655050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2004 Jan;130(1):29-36. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

Expression of the intestine-specific transcription factors, Cdx1 and Cdx2,
correlates shift to an intestinal phenotype in gastric cancer cells.

Mizoshita T(1), Inada K, Tsukamoto T, Nozaki K, Joh T, Itoh M, Yamamura Y,
Ushijima T, Nakamura S, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, 464-8681 Nagoya, Japan.

PURPOSE: It is well known that gastric cancers (GCs) at early stages, independent
of the histological type, mainly consist of gastric phenotype malignant cells,
while those at advanced stage tend to have a more intestinal phenotype with
progression. However, the connection between this shift and expression of
homeobox genes, which are important factors to maintain tissue character, has
remained unclear. We therefore evaluated the expression of Cdx1/2 in relation to 
the phenotype of GCs.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression of Cdx1/2 mRNAs by Northern blotting and Cdx2
protein by immunohistochemistry in seventy advanced GCs, and evaluated
phenotypically using mucin- and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Seventy GCs were divided phenotypically into 16 gastric (G type), 18
gastric and intestinal mixed (GI type), 18 intestinal (I type), and 18 null (N
type) phenotypes, independent of the histological classification. Cdx1 and Cdx2
mRNAs statistically demonstrated an increase with shift from G to I ( P=0.042 and
P=0.0082, respectively). Cdx2 nuclear staining was observed immunohistochemically
in the intestinal phenotypic cancer cells, but could not be detected in those
with only the gastric phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that Cdx1 and Cdx2 might be indispensable for
intestinal phenotypic expression even in gastric cancer cells.

PMID: 14615935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51549-56. Epub 2003 Oct 2.

Human MUC2 mucin gene is transcriptionally regulated by Cdx homeodomain proteins 
in gastrointestinal carcinoma cell lines.

Mesquita P(1), Jonckheere N, Almeida R, Ducourouble MP, Serpa J, Silva E, Pigny
P, Silva FS, Reis C, Silberg D, Van Seuningen I, David L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology (IPATIMUP), University of
Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias s/n, 4200 Porto, Portugal. pmesquita@ipatimup.pt

In intestinal metaplasia and 30% of gastric carcinomas, MUC2 intestinal mucin and
the intestine-specific transcription factors Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 are aberrantly
expressed. The involvement of Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 in the intestinal development and
their role in transcription of several intestinal genes support the hypothesis
that Cdx-1 and/or Cdx-2 play important roles in the aberrant intestinal
differentiation program of intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinoma. To
clarify the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of the MUC2 mucin gene in
gastric cells, pGL3 deletion constructs covering 2.6 kb of the human MUC2
promoter were used in transient transfection assays, enabling us to identify a
relevant region for MUC2 transcription in all gastric cell lines. To evaluate the
role of Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 in MUC2 transcription we performed co-transfection
experiments with expression vectors encoding Cdx-1 and Cdx-2. In two of the four 
gastric carcinoma cell lines and in all colon carcinoma cell lines we observed
transactivation of the MUC2 promoter by Cdx-2. Using gel shift assays we
identified two Cdx-2 binding sites at -177/-171 and -191/-187. Only simultaneous 
mutation of the two sites resulted in inhibition of Cdx-2-mediated
transactivation of MUC2 promoter, implying that both Cdx-2 sites are active.
Finally, stable expression of Cdx-2 in a gastric cell line initially not
expressing Cdx-2, led to induction of MUC2 expression. In conclusion, this work
demonstrates that Cdx-2 activates the expression of MUC2 mucin gene in gastric
cells, inducing an intestinal transdifferentiation phenotype that parallels what 
is observed both in intestinal metaplasia and some gastric carcinomas.

PMID: 14525978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 25;22(41):6395-407.

Cdx1 inhibits the proliferation of human colon cancer cells by reducing cyclin D1
gene expression.

Lynch J(1), Keller M, Guo RJ, Yang D, Traber P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. lynchj@mail.med.upenn.edu

The transcription factor Cdx1 regulates intestine-specific gene expression and
enterocyte differentiation. It has been hypothesized to play a role in regulating
intestinal cell proliferation; however, the mechanism for this effect remains
elusive. In a prior study, we demonstrated that Cdx1 expression reduced the
proliferation of a nontransformed intestinal cell line. This study tests the
hypothesis that Cdx1 expression inhibits colon cancer cell proliferation by
reducing cyclin D1 gene expression. Cdx1 expression markedly reduced cancer cell 
proliferation and DNA synthesis and induced an accumulation of cells in G0/G1. A 
transcriptionally inactive Cdx1 mutant could not elicit this effect, suggesting
that it required Cdx1 transcriptional activity. Cdx1 expression increased the
hypophosphorylation of the retinoblastoma (pRb) and p130 proteins. Reductions in 
G1 cyclin-dependant kinase (cdk) activity accompanied this effect. Cyclin D1 mRNA
and protein levels were diminished by Cdx1 expression. Restoration of cyclin D1
expression reversed the G0/G1 block and induced pRb hyperphosphorylation. Lastly,
Cdx1 expression did not alter cyclin D1 mRNA stability but did reduce cyclin D1
promoter activity, suggesting that Cdx1 acts to diminish cyclin D1 gene
transcription. We conclude that Cdx1 reduces the proliferation of human colon
cancer cells by reducing cyclin D1 gene transcription.

PMID: 14508520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Bioessays. 2003 Oct;25(10):971-80.

The Cdx1 homeodomain protein: an integrator of posterior signaling in the mouse.

Lohnes D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, Division of
Experimental Medicine, McGill University, and the Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal, 110 ave des Pins ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H2W 1R7.
lohnesd@ircm.qc.ca

The vertebrate Cdx genes (Cdx1 Cdx2 and Cdx4 in the mouse) encode homeodomain
transcription factors related to the Drosophila caudal gene. The vertebrate Cdx
gene products have been implicated in the development of the posterior embryo. In
particular, loss- and gain-of-function experiments suggest that Cdx members are
direct regulators of Hox genes and likely impart posterior information, in part, 
through this mechanism. Several signaling molecules, notably retinoic acid (RA*) 
and members of the Wnt (wingless) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) families,
are also implicated in patterning of the posterior vertebrate embryo.
Interestingly, recent work indicates that members of the Cdx family are targets
of Wnt, RA and FGF signaling, suggesting that Cdx factors act to convey the
activity of these signaling molecules to Hox genes. This article will briefly
review Cdx expression and function, with particular emphasis on vertebrate model 
systems.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 14505364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 11;22(39):7913-21.

Cdx1 homeobox gene during human colon cancer progression.

Domon-Dell C(1), Schneider A, Moucadel V, Guerin E, Guenot D, Aguillon S, Duluc
I, Martin E, Iovanna J, Launay JF, Duclos B, Chenard MP, Meyer C, Oudet P,
Kedinger M, Gaub MP, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 3 Avenue
Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

The Cdx1 homeobox gene encodes an intestine-specific transcription factor with a 
pro-oncogenic function in vitro. Here we have analysed the pattern of Cdx1 in
human colon cancer progression. Cdx1 expression remains at a high level in the
majority of the polyps and it is even overexpressed in more than one-third of the
specimens, consistent with the fact that the gene is an intestine-specific target
of oncogenic pathways. However, Cdx1 decreases in one-fifth of the polyps, which 
is reminiscent of the loss of expression previously reported in the majority of
carcinomas. Allelic imbalance analysis demonstrates that the Cdx1 locus located
on chromosome 5q is a major site of genomic rearrangement in colorectal cancers, 
and that the frequency of the rearrangements increases during polyps to carcinoma
progression. Allelic imbalance at the Cdx1 locus occurs in relation to, although 
not invariably in association with, the rearrangements at the APC locus on the
same chromosomal arm. Xenografts of primary human colon carcinomas indicate that 
the level of Cdx1 mRNA correlates with the intensity of allelic imbalance.
Together, these data show that Cdx1 exhibits a complex pattern during colorectal 
cancer progression. Given that Cdx1 has a pro-oncogenic function in vitro, the
maintenance of a high level of expression in polyps, and even its overexpression 
in one-third of the specimens, suggest that this homeobox gene may be an
important factor in the process toward malignant transformation during the first 
steps of tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12970739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15;31(18):5238-46.

Differential regulation of the glucose-6-phosphatase TATA box by
intestine-specific homeodomain proteins CDX1 and CDX2.

Gautier-Stein A(1), Domon-Dell C, Calon A, Bady I, Freund JN, Mithieux G, Rajas
F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.449, Faculté de Médecine Laennec, Rue Guillaume Paradin, 69372 Lyon
cedex 08, France.

Glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc6Pase), the last enzyme of gluconeogenesis, is only
expressed in the liver, kidney and small intestine. The expression of the
Glc6Pase gene exhibits marked specificities in the three tissues in various
situations, but the molecular basis of the tissue specificity is not known. The
presence of a consensus binding site of CDX proteins in the minimal Glc6Pase gene
promoter has led us to consider the hypothesis that these intestine-specific CDX 
factors could be involved in the Glc6Pase-specific expression in the small
intestine. We first show that the Glc6Pase promoter is active in both hepatic
HepG2 and intestinal CaCo2 cells. Using gel shift mobility assay, mutagenesis and
competition experiments, we show that both CDX1 and CDX2 can bind the minimal
promoter, but only CDX1 can transactivate it. Consistently, intestinal IEC6 cells
stably overexpressing CDX1 exhibit induced expression of the Glc6Pase protein. We
demonstrate that a TATAAAA sequence, located in position -31/-25 relating to the 
transcription start site, exhibits separable functions in the preinitiation of
transcription and the transactivation by CDX1. Disruption of this site
dramatically suppresses both basal transcription and the CDX1 effect. The latter 
may be restored by inserting a couple of CDX- binding sites in opposite
orientation similar to that found in the sucrase-isomaltase promoter. We also
report that the specific stimulatory effect of CDX1 on the Glc6Pase TATA-box,
compared to CDX2, is related to the fact that CDX1, but not CDX2, can interact
with the TATA-binding protein. Together, these data strongly suggest that CDX
proteins could play a crucial role in the specific expression of the Glc6Pase
gene in the small intestine. They also suggest that CDX transactivation might be 
essential for intestine gene expression, irrespective of the presence of a
functional TATA box.

PMCID: PMC203330
PMID: 12954759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5103-11. Epub 2003 Aug 27.

Carboxypeptidase Z (CPZ) modulates Wnt signaling and regulates the development of
skeletal elements in the chicken.

Moeller C(1), Swindell EC, Kispert A, Eichele G.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Hannover, Germany 30625.

Carboxypeptidase Z (CPZ) is a secreted Zn-dependent enzyme whose biological
function is largely unknown. CPZ has a bipartite structure consisting of an
N-terminal cysteine-rich domain (CRD) and a C-terminal catalytic domain. In the
early chicken embryo CPZ is initially expressed throughout the somites and
subsequently becomes restricted to the sclerotome. To initiate a functional
analysis of CPZ, a CPZ producing retroviral vector was applied to the presomitic 
mesoderm at the level of the future wing. This resulted in a loss of the scapular
blade and of rostral ribs. Such dysmorphogenesis is preceded by ectopic Pax3
expression in the hypaxial part of the dermomyotome, a region from which the
blade of the scapula normally derives. A mutant CPZ, lacking a critical active
site glutamate, fails to induce Pax3 expression and does not cause skeletal
defects. The induction of Pax3, a Wnt-responsive gene in somites, and the
presence of a CRD prompted us to examine whether CPZ affects Wnt signaling. In an
in vitro assay we found that CPZ, but not its inactive mutant form, enhances the 
Wnt-dependent induction of the homeobox gene Cdx1. In addition,
immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that the CRD of CPZ acts as a binding
domain for Wnt. Taken together these data provide the first evidence for CPZ
playing a role in Wnt signaling.

PMID: 12944424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Endocr J. 2003 Jun;50(3):271-9.

Morphological changes and increased sucrase and isomaltase activity in small
intestines of insulin-deficient and type 2 diabetic rats.

Adachi T(1), Mori C, Sakurai K, Shihara N, Tsuda K, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research and Development of Bioresources, Research Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology, Osaka Prefecture University, Osaka 599-8570,
Japan.

The small intestine plays an important role in the digestion and absorption of
many nutrients. To investigate the contribution of carbohydrate digestion to
diabetes mellitus, we examined the morphological changes of the small intestine, 
and the expression of sucrase-isomaltase, which is one of the intestinal
disaccharidases, in diabetic model rat, that is the streptozotocin-induced (STZ) 
diabetic rat (insulin-deficient model), and the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty
(OLETF) rats and the Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats (type 2 diabetic models). Intestinal
hyperplasia was observed in STZ, OLETF, and GK rats. Moreover, in the small
intestine of each diabetic strain, the proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA)-labeling index, which is a marker of proliferation, was higher than in the
respective control. Cdx1 and Cdx2, known to be transcriptional factors related to
intestinal proliferation and differentiation, were more highly expressed in STZ, 
OLETF and GK rats than in the respective controls. These findings indicate that
small intestinal hyperplasia, and thereby the resultant increase of total
activity of disaccharidases such as sucrase and isomaltase in the entire small
intestine, might be one of the reasons for postprandial hyperglycemia in diabetes
mellitus.

PMID: 12940455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36611-20. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Lewis type 1 antigen synthase (beta3Gal-T5) is transcriptionally regulated by
homeoproteins.

Isshiki S(1), Kudo T, Nishihara S, Ikehara Y, Togayachi A, Furuya A, Shitara K,
Kubota T, Watanabe M, Kitajima M, Narimatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Life Science, Soka University,
Tangi-cho, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-8577, Japan.

The type 1 carbohydrate chain, Galbeta1-3GlcNAc, is synthesized by
UDP-galactose:beta-N-acetylglucosamine beta1,3-galactosyltransferase
(beta3Gal-T). Among six beta3Gal-Ts cloned to date, beta3Gal-T5 is an essential
enzyme for the synthesis of type 1 chain in epithelium of digestive tracts or
pancreatic tissue. It forms the type 1 structure on glycoproteins produced from
such tissues. In the present study, we found that the transcriptional regulation 
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene is controlled by homeoproteins, i.e. members of
caudal-related homeobox protein (Cdx) and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
families. We found an important region (-151 to -121 from the transcription
initiation site), named the beta3Gal-T5 control element (GCE), for the promoter
activity. GCE contained the consensus sequences for members of the Cdx and HNF
families. Mutations introduced into this sequence abolished the transcriptional
activity. Four factors, Cdx1, Cdx2, HNF1alpha, and HNF1beta, could bind to GCE
and transcriptionally activate the beta3Gal-T5 gene. Transcriptional regulation
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene was consistent with that of members of the Cdx and HNF1
families in two in vivo systems. 1) During in vitro differentiation of Caco-2
cells, transcriptional up-regulation of beta3Gal-T5 was observed in correlation
with the increase in transcripts for Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. 2) Both transcript and
protein levels of beta3Gal-T5 were determined to be significantly reduced in
colon cancer. This down-regulation was correlated with the decrease of Cdx1 and
HNF1beta expression in cancer tissue. This is the first finding that a
glycosyltransferase gene is transcriptionally regulated under the control of
homeoproteins in a tissue-specific manner. beta3Gal-T5, controlled by the
intestinal homeoproteins, may play an important role in the specific function of 
intestinal cells by modifying the carbohydrate structure of glycoproteins.

PMID: 12855703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mech Dev. 2003 May;120(5):573-86.

Vertebrate caudal gene expression gradients investigated by use of chick
cdx-A/lacZ and mouse cdx-1/lacZ reporters in transgenic mouse embryos: evidence
for an intron enhancer.

Gaunt SJ(1), Drage D, Cockley A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge CB2 4AT, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

The vertebrate caudal proteins, being upstream regulators of the Hox genes, play 
a role in establishment of the body plan. We describe analysis of two orthologous
caudal genes (chick cdx-A and mouse cdx-1) by use of lacZ reporters expressed in 
transgenic mouse embryos. The expression patterns show many similarities to the
expression of endogenous mouse cdx-1. At 8.7 days, cdx/lacZ activity within
neurectoderm and mesoderm forms posterior-to-anterior gradients, and we discuss
the possibility that similar gradients of cdx gene expression may function as
morphogen gradients for the establishment of Hox gene expression boundaries. Our 
observations suggest that gradients form by decay of cdx/lacZ activity in cells
that have moved anterior to the vicinity of the node. The cdx-A/lacZ expression
pattern requires an intron enhancer that includes two functional control
elements: a DR2-type retinoic acid response element and a Tcf/beta-catenin
binding motif. These motifs are structurally conserved in mouse cdx-1.

PMID: 12782274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Sci. 2003 Feb;94(2):135-41.

Stem cells and gastric cancer: role of gastric and intestinal mixed intestinal
metaplasia.

Tatematsu M(1), Tsukamoto T, Inada K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8681. mtatemat@aichi-cc.jp

All of the different types of stomach epithelial cells are known to be derived
from a single progenitor cell in each gland. Similarly, cancers develop from
single cells, based on data from clonality analysis in C3H/HeN<-->BALB/c chimeric
mice. Using gastric and intestinal epithelial cell markers, intestinal metaplasia
(IM) can be divided into two major types: a gastric and intestinal (GI) mixed
type, and a solely intestinal (I) type. Ectopic expression of Cdx genes and
down-regulation of Sox2 in isolated single GI mixed IM glands suggests abnormal
differentiation of stem cells that can produce both gastric (G) and I type cells.
Similarly, phenotypic expression of gastric cancer cells of each histological
type can be clearly classified into G and I type epithelial cells. The
heterogeneity of phenotypic expression of gastric cancer cells in individual
cancers is assumed to reflect this intrinsic potential for differentiation in two
directions. Gastric cancers at early stages, independent of the histological
type, mainly consist of G type cells, and phenotypic shift from G to I type
expression is clearly observed with progression. The data thus suggest IM may not
be a preneoplastic change in gastric carcinoma, but rather that cells of the I
type may appear independently in the gastric mucosa in IM and in gastric cancers.
Intestinalization of gastric mucosa and cancer cells may represent a kind of
homeotic transformation. Whether disturbance of the regulation of Sox2 and Cdx
genes may be of importance to the biological behavior of gastric cancers should
therefore be clarified in future studies.

PMID: 12708487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Intern Med. 2003 Mar;42(3):283-4.

Molecular abnormalities in the precancerous conditions of the stomach.

Sugano K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Minamikawachi, Tochigi.

PMID: 12705797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Gastroenterol. 2003;38(1):14-22.

Aberrant expression of CDX2 in Barrett's epithelium and inflammatory esophageal
mucosa.

Eda A(1), Osawa H, Satoh K, Yanaka I, Kihira K, Ishino Y, Mutoh H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji, Kawachi,
Tochigi 329-0438, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There have been no detailed reports directly comparing the expression
of CDX1 with that of CDX2 in the inflammatory esophageal mucosa and Barrett's
epithelium. The present study was designed to examine the expression of CDX 1/2
in inflammatory esophageal mucosa with or without Barrett's epithelium.
METHODS: The expression of CDX1/2 genes was analyzed using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 34 human esophageal biopsy
specimens, and CDX2 expression was also evaluated immunohistochemically, using
anti-human CDX2 monoclonal antibody. The biopsy specimens for RNA extraction were
taken endoscopically from esophageal mucosa with mucosal break due to
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Barrett's epithelium, and normal
epithelium. The expressions of mucin markers (MUC2) and intestine-specific genes 
(sucrase-isomal-tase, human defensin-5, alkaline phosphatase) were also
comparatively analyzed.
RESULTS: CDX1/2 expression was not found in the normal esophageal mucosa. The
prevalence of CDX1/2 mRNA expression was significantly higher in the mucosa with 
Barrett's epithelium than in the mucosa without Barrett's epithelium. It is
noteworthy, however, that the CDX2 mRNA expression was initiated at the stage of 
esophagitis, when neither CDX1 nor intestine-specific genes had emerged yet. In
contrast to CDX2, CDX1 was expressed only in Barrett's epithelium.
Immunohistochemical study demonstrated strong and extensive nuclear
immunoreactivity for CDX2 in Barrett's epithelium. Furthermore, fine granular
cytoplasmic staining was also observed in the cytoplasm in Barrett's epithelium, 
as well as in inflammatory esophageal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: We report here, for the first time, that CDX2 is expressed in
patients with Barrett's epithelium and inflammatory esophageal mucosa. These
findings imply that the expression of CDX2 may be an early event leading to the
development of Barrett's esophagus.

PMID: 12560917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 24;300(4):813-8.

Homeodomain protein CDX2 regulates goblet-specific MUC2 gene expression.

Yamamoto H(1), Bai YQ, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519,
Japan.

Intestinal mucin gene MUC2 is abundantly expressed in goblet cells. To identify
the transcriptional activator that regulates goblet-specific expression of MUC2, 
we analyzed the interaction between the MUC2 promoter and homeodomain proteins
CDX1/2, which are involved in the regulation of intestinal development and
differentiation. COS-7 cells were transiently transfected with a CDX1 or CDX2
expression construct and then used for the luciferase assay, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). The CDX2 expression construct activated the MUC2 promoter and increased
the endogenous MUC2 mRNA level, while the CDX1 one did not. EMSA revealed that
CDX2 bound to the MUC2 gene cis element, MUC2-WT. These results suggest that
CDX2, but not CDX1, interacts with the MUC2 promoter and activates MUC2
transcription, and plays an important role in the differentiation of goblet
cells.

PMID: 12559945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7600-6. Epub 2002 Dec 18.

Developmental regulation of apolipoprotein B mRNA editing is an autonomous
function of small intestine involving homeobox gene Cdx1.

Patterson AP(1), Chen Z, Rubin DC, Moucadel V, Iovanna JL, Brewer HB Jr, Eggerman
TL.

Author information: 
(1)NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
pettersa@od.nih.gov

Apolipoprotein B mRNA editing is developmentally regulated in the human and
rodent small intestine, changing from <1% at day 14 to approximately 90% by day
20 in the rat fetus. This regulation is coincident with the developmental
formation of the crypt-to-villus axis functional unit, a continuous and rapidly
renewing system involving cell generation, migration, and differentiation.
Utilizing small intestine isografts implanted into the subcutaneous tissue of
adult recipients, apolipoprotein B mRNA editing was developmentally up-regulated,
parallel to that seen with an intact control. In contrast, apoB mRNA expression
remains nearly constant in the isograft, unlike the normal intact small
intestine. Immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that apoB-48 protein existed
predominantly in well differentiated enterocytes along the villus surface whereas
apoB-100 was in the lamina propria and crypts. ApoB mRNA editing levels were very
low in the crypt-like rat intestinal cell line, IEC-6 ( approximately 0.3%), but 
very high in well differentiated enterocytes ( approximately 91.5%). The
expression of homeobox gene Cdx1 increased 18-fold in small intestine in vivo
during the same time course when apoB mRNA editing increased from approximately 2
to approximately 90%. The overexpression of Cdx1 in IEC-6 cells increased apoB
mRNA editing over 10-fold compared with the vector control. This increase was
associated with a significant increase of activating factor ACF, a component of
the apoB mRNA editing complex. Taken together, these data suggest that the
developmental regulation of apoB mRNA editing is an autonomous
cytodifferentiation function of small intestine for which homeobox gene Cdx1 may 
play an important role.

PMID: 12493769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Gut. 2003 Jan;52(1):1-4.

Is intestinal metaplasia of the stomach reversible?

Walker MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, London, UK. mm.walker@ic.ac.uk

Comment in
    Gut. 2003 Sep;52(9):1387-8.

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) of the stomach is a risk factor in developing
intestinal-type gastric cancer and hence the question of reversibility is vital. 
There is emerging epidemiological evidence that with long term follow up, IM may 
be reversible although a combination of antioxidant agents and eradication of H
pylori may be necessary to achieve this. The pathogenesis of IM is currently
being elucidated and it is likely that a combination of bacterial, host, and
environmental factors will be shown to lead to IM. In assessing gastric cancer
risk, histochemical typing of IM will most probably be replaced by molecular
markers.

PMCID: PMC1773527
PMID: 12477745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Pathol. 2003 Jan;199(1):36-40.

Expression of intestine-specific transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, in
intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinomas.

Almeida R(1), Silva E, Santos-Silva F, Silberg DG, Wang J, De Bolós C, David L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), 4200 Porto, Portugal. raquel.almeida@ipatimup.pt

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is part of a stepwise sequence of alterations of the
gastric mucosa, leading ultimately to gastric cancer, and is strongly associated 
with chronic Helicobacter pylori infection. The molecular mechanisms underlying
the onset of IM remain elusive. The aim of this study was to assess the putative 
involvement of two intestine-specific transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, in
the pathogenesis of gastric IM and gastric carcinoma. Eighteen foci of IM and 46 
cases of gastric carcinoma were evaluated by immunohistochemistry for CDX1 and
CDX2 expression. CDX1 was expressed in all foci of IM and in 41% of gastric
carcinomas; CDX2 was expressed in 17/18 foci of IM and in 54% of gastric
carcinomas. In gastric carcinomas, a strong association was observed between the 
expression of CDX1 and CDX2, as well as between the intestinal mucin MUC2 and
CDX1 and CDX2. No association was observed between the expression of CDX1 and
CDX2 and the histological type of gastric carcinoma. In conclusion, these results
show that aberrant expression of CDX1 and CDX2 is consistently observed in IM and
in a subset of gastric carcinomas. The association of CDX1 and CDX2 with
expression of the intestinal mucin MUC2, both in IM and in gastric carcinoma,
indirectly implies that CDX1 and CDX2 may be involved in intestinal
differentiation along the gastric carcinogenesis pathway.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12474224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Dec 1;30(23):5029-35.

The caudal homeodomain protein activates Drosophila E2F gene expression.

Hwang MS(1), Kim YS, Choi NH, Park JH, Oh EJ, Kwon EJ, Yamaguchi M, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735,
Korea.

The Drosophila caudal homeobox gene is required for definition of the
anteroposterior axis and for gut development, and CDX1 and CDX2, human homologs, 
play crucial roles in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation in
the intestine. Most studies have indicated tumor suppressor functions of Cdx2,
with inhibition of proliferation, while the effects of Cdx1 are more
controversial. The influence of Drosophila Caudal on cell proliferation is
unknown. In this study, we found three potential Caudal binding sequences in the 
5'-flanking region of the Drosophila E2F (DE2F) gene and showed by transient
transfection assays that they are involved in Caudal transactivation of the dE2F 
gene promoter. Analyses with transgenic flies carrying an E2F-lacZ fusion gene,
with and without mutation in the Caudal binding site, indicated that the Caudal
binding sites are required for expression of dE2F in living flies. Caudal-induced
E2F expression was also confirmed with a GAL4-UAS system in living flies. In
addition, ectopic expression of Caudal with heat-shock promotion induced
melanotic tumors in larvae. These results suggest that Caudal is involved in
regulation of proliferation through transactivation of the E2F gene in
Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC137955
PMID: 12466526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):3776-85. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Identification of a promoter-specific transcriptional activation domain at the C 
terminus of the Wnt effector protein T-cell factor 4.

Hecht A(1), Stemmler MP.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.
hecht@mm11.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Wnt growth factors control numerous cell fate decisions in development by
altering specific gene expression patterns through the activity of heterodimeric 
transcriptional activators. These consist of beta-catenin and one of the four
members of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding proteins. How can the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway control various sets of target genes in distinct
cellular settings with such a limited number of nuclear effectors? Here we asked 
whether different TCF proteins could perform specific, nonredundant functions at 
natural beta-catenin/TCF-regulated promoters. We found that TCF4E but not LEF1
supported beta-catenin-dependent activation of the Cdx1 promoter, whereas LEF1
specifically activated the Siamois promoter. Deletion of a C-terminal domain of
TCF4E prevented Cdx1 promoter induction. A chimeric protein consisting of LEF1
and the C terminus of TCF4E was fully functional. Therefore, the TCF4E C terminus
harbors a promoter-specific transactivation domain. This domain influences the
DNA binding properties of TCF4 and additionally mediates an interaction with the 
transcriptional coactivator p300. Apparently, the C terminus of TCF4E cooperates 
with beta-catenin and p300 to form a specialized transcription factor complex
that specifically supports the activation of the Cdx1 promoter.

PMID: 12446687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mech Dev. 2002 Nov;119(1):81-90.

Hox cluster polarity in early transcriptional availability: a high order
regulatory level of clustered Hox genes in the mouse.

Roelen BA(1), de Graaff W, Forlani S, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The molecular mechanism underlying the 3' to 5' polarity of induction of mouse
Hox genes is still elusive. While relief from a cluster-encompassing repression
was shown to lead to all Hoxd genes being expressed like the 3'most of them,
Hoxd1 (Kondo and Duboule, 1999), the molecular basis of initial activation of
this 3'most gene, is not understood yet. We show that, already before primitive
streak formation, prior to initial expression of the first Hox gene, a dramatic
transcriptional stimulation of the 3'most genes, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2, is observed
upon a short pulse of exogenous retinoic acid (RA), whereas it is not in the case
for more 5', cluster-internal, RA-responsive Hoxb genes. In contrast, the
RA-responding Hoxb1lacZ transgene that faithfully mimics the endogenous gene
(Marshall et al., 1994) did not exhibit the sensitivity of Hoxb1 to precocious
activation. We conclude that polarity in initial activation of Hoxb genes
reflects a greater availability of 3'Hox genes for transcription, suggesting a
pre-existing (susceptibility to) opening of the chromatin structure at the 3'
extremity of the cluster. We discuss the data in the context of prevailing models
involving differential chromatin opening in the directionality of clustered Hox
gene transcription, and regarding the importance of the cluster context for
correct timing of initial Hox gene expression.Interestingly, Cdx1 manifested the 
same early transcriptional availability as Hoxb1.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12385756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 27;297(3):607-15.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 belongs to the p53-p21(WAF)-Bcl-2 network in intestinal
epithelial cells.

Moucadel V(1), Totaro MS, Dell CD, Soubeyran P, Dagorn JC, Freund JN, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche INSERM, EMI 0116, 163 av de Luminy, 13009 Marseille,
France.

Because the Cdx1 homeobox gene stimulates proliferation and induces
transformation and tumorigenesis, it has been investigated whether it is involved
in the complex network comprising p53, p21(WAF), and Bcl-2 in intestinal
epithelial cells. Non-transformed intestinal IEC-6 cells and colon adenocarcinoma
SW480 cells were used to study the putative molecular relationship between Cdx1, 
p53, p21(WAF), and Bcl-2. Wild-type p53 inhibited the transcriptional activity of
the Cdx1 promoter whereas the inactive mutant p53(mut22/23) had no effect.
Induction of Cdx1 expression had no direct effect on p53 expression and activity.
However, it inhibited the transcriptional activity of the p21(WAF) promoter
through Cdx1 binding to the p21(WAF) TATA-box and increased the transcriptional
activity of the Bcl-2 promoter P2 through a consensus Cdx-binding site. Finally, 
compared to control cells, Cdx1-overexpressing cells were more resistant to
adriamycin-induced apoptosis, probably because they do not show concomitant
decrease in endogenous Bcl-2 level. In conclusion, Cdx1 is a negatively regulated
target of p53 in intestinal cells. Its regulation of p21(WAF) and Bcl-2 is
opposite to that of p53 and is p53-independent. Cdx1 belongs to the regulatory
networks of apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation. These results
emphasize the oncogenic potential of Cdx1.

PMID: 12270138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Dev Dyn. 2002 Oct;225(2):216-20.

Functional analysis of cis-regulatory elements controlling initiation and
maintenance of early Cdx1 gene expression in the mouse.

Lickert H(1), Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany.

Members of the Caudal-related homeobox gene family are implicated in
anteroposterior (AP) patterning and posterior axis elongation in mammals.
Previously, we found that Caudal-related homeobox gene1 (Cdx1) is directly
regulated by the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, and we identified
Wnt/beta-catenin responsive elements in the Cdx1 promoter. Here, we have
generated a series of transgenic mouse lines to determine if the Cdx1 promoter
region (-3.6 kb to -0.7 kb) sufficient to drive reporter gene expression in the
normal Cdx1 expression domains. A 0.7-kb Cdx1 upstream regulatory sequence is
sufficient to give the early phase of Cdx1 expression in the primitive streak.
However, none of the reporter constructs was able to drive expression in the
definitive endoderm at later stages of development. More detailed analysis of the
cis-regulatory elements of this 0.7-kb Cdx1 promoter region revealed that two
Wnt/beta-catenin responsive elements are important for initiation of Cdx1
expression in the primitive streak and one retinoic acid response element for
maintenance. Our analysis demonstrates that the early Cdx1 expression is
regulated through the caudalizing Wnt/beta-catenin and RA activities.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12242722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):35795-800. Epub 2002 Jul 17.

DNA methylation down-regulates CDX1 gene expression in colorectal cancer cell
lines.

Suh ER(1), Ha CS, Rankin EB, Toyota M, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. suher@mail.med.upenn.edu

CDX1 is a homeobox protein that inhibits proliferation of intestinal epithelial
cells and regulates intestine-specific genes involved in differentiation. CDX1
expression is developmentally and spatially regulated, and its expression is
aberrantly down-regulated in colorectal cancers and colon cancer-derived cell
lines. However, very little is known about the molecular mechanism underlying the
regulation of CDX1 gene expression. In this study, we characterized the CDX1 gene
structure and identified that its gene promoter contained a typical CpG island
with a CpG observed/expected ratio of 0.80, suggesting that the CDX1 gene is a
target of aberrant methylation. Alterations of DNA methylation in the CDX1 gene
promoter were investigated in a series of colorectal cancer cell lines. Combined 
Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) and bisulfite sequencing analysis revealed
that the CDX1 promoter is methylated in CDX1 non-expressing colorectal cancer
cell lines but not in human normal colon tissue and T84 cells, which express
CDX1. Treatment with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaC), a DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor, induced CDX1 expression in the colorectal cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, de novo methylation was determined by establishing stably
transfected clones of the CDX1 promoter in SW480 cells and demethylation by
5-azaC-activated reporter gene expression. These results indicate that aberrant
methylation of the CpG island in the CDX1 promoter is one of the mechanisms that 
mediate CDX1 down-regulation in colorectal cancer cell lines.

PMID: 12124393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Gut. 2002 Aug;51(2):184-90.

Expression of CDX2 in normal and neoplastic human colon tissue and during
differentiation of an in vitro model system.

Qualtrough D(1), Hinoi T, Fearon E, Paraskeva C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Colorectal Tumour Biology Research Group, Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

BACKGROUND: The Cdx genes are expressed in the colorectal epithelium and are
frequently downregulated during tumorigenesis. Overexpression of Cdx genes has
been shown previously to result in cellular differentiation.
AIM: To study expression of CDX2 in normal and neoplastic human colon using a
newly isolated monoclonal antibody. To define expression of CDX1 and CDX2 in an
in vitro model system of colorectal tumour progression and to ascertain whether
these are subject to regulation during differentiation.
METHODS: Normal and neoplastic human colon was immunostained for CDX2. CDX1 and
CDX2 expression was assayed in cell lines derived from premalignant colonic
adenomas by western blotting. Differentiation was induced by sodium butyrate
treatment or post confluent growth, and changes in CDX expression compared with
carcinoma cell lines with low levels of CDX expression.
RESULTS: CDX2 protein displayed no gradient of expression within the colonic
crypt. Cell lines derived from adenomas, with high levels of CDX1 and CDX2,
showed no regulation of these proteins when induced to differentiate by butyrate 
or confluency. CDX expression in these cell lines was independent of their APC or
Ras status. CDX1 and CDX2 were expressed at very low levels in some carcinoma
cell lines and were modestly upregulated on differentiation but were not restored
to levels seen in adenoma cells.
CONCLUSION: The lack of significant regulation on cellular differentiation and
the absence of a detectable gradient in the crypt implies that CDX2 may confer
tissue specificity but may not play the previously suggested role in crypt
patterning.

PMCID: PMC1773308
PMID: 12117877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):34531-9. Epub 2002 Jul 11.

Analysis of the regulation of the A33 antigen gene reveals intestine-specific
mechanisms of gene expression.

Johnstone CN(1), White SJ, Tebbutt NC, Clay FJ, Ernst M, Biggs WH, Viars CS,
Czekay S, Arden KC, Heath JK.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Melbourne Branch, Post Office Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

The A33 antigen is a transmembrane protein expressed almost exclusively by
intestinal epithelial cells. The level of its expression is robust and uniform
throughout the rostrocaudal axis of the human and mouse intestines. In the colon,
strong expression is found in the basolateral membranes of both the proliferating
cells in the lower regions of the crypts and the differentiating cells in the
upper regions of crypts. Similarly, in the small intestine, the protein is highly
expressed by all the epithelial cells in the crypts and by the differentiated
cells migrating over the villi. Thus, the A33 antigen has emerged as a definitive
marker for all intestinal epithelial cells, irrespective of cell lineage and
differentiation status. To understand the molecular mechanisms mediating this
rare tissue-specific expression pattern, we undertook a comprehensive analysis of
the 5'-regulatory region of the human A33 antigen gene. This allowed us to point 
to positive cis-regulatory elements incorporating consensus Krüppel-like factor
and caudal-related homeobox (CDX)-binding sites, located just upstream from the
human A33 antigen transcription start site, as being important for the
intestine-specific expression pattern of this gene. Further analysis provided
evidence that the A33 antigen gene may be one of only a few target genes to be
described thus far for the intestine-specific homeobox transcription factor,
CDX1. Taken together, our data lead us to propose that the activity of CDX1 is
pivotal in mediating the exquisite, intestine-specific expression pattern of the 
A33 antigen gene.

PMID: 12114523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 May;46(3):325-8.

Retinoic acid response element in HOXA-7 regulatory region affects the rate, not 
the formation of anterior boundary expression.

Kim MH(1), Shin JS, Park S, Hur MW, Lee MO, Park H, Lee CS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Anatomy, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. mhkim1@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

Since it is known that a 307 bp fragment of the position specific regulatory
element of human HOXA-7 contains two (DR3 and DR5) retinoic acid response
elements (RAREs) at its 3' end, we constructed several deletion constructs
containing different numbers of RAREs and examined their effects in vitro and in 
vivo. The 5' deletion constructs, BM112 and OM213, retaining both RAREs, were
highly responsible (about 8 fold induction) for RA in F9 teratocarcinoma cells,
versus NM307 (4-5 fold). The construct NS218, with both RAREs deleted but
retaining the 5' sequences lost RA responsibility completely, whereas NR271, with
one RARE(DR5) deleted retained a 50% inducibility (2.5 fold). In vivo transgenic 
analysis revealed that the constructs NM307 and NR271, but not OM213 nor BM112,
directed the position specific expression pattern. Sequence analysis revealed
that HOXA-7 enhancer sequences, including the RARE repeat sequences, were well
conserved in human, mouse and chick. Part of the RAREs overlaps with the CDX1
binding site, and sequences of the DR3 RAREs were identical in this species. Two 
GAGA binding sites were also found to be strictly conserved. Because OM213, which
had one GAGA site disrupted but retaining both RAREs, did not direct anterior
boundary formation in transgenic mice, these results suggest the importance of
the 5' 94 bp region, including the GAGA binding site, in anterior boundary
formation and the involvement of the RARE in the rate of expression not in
anterior boundary formation.

PMID: 12068955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31909-17. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha, GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain protein
Cdx2 interact functionally to modulate intestinal gene transcription. Implication
for the developmental regulation of the sucrase-isomaltase gene.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, van Wering HM, Kim RK, Swain GP, Krasinski SD, Moffett
J, Grand RJ, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), an intestine-specific gene, is induced in the
differentiated small intestinal villous epithelium during the suckling-weaning
transition in mice. We have previously identified cis-acting elements within a
short evolutionarily conserved SI promoter. However, the nature and profile of
expression of the interacting proteins have not been fully characterized during
this developmental transition. Herein, we show that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1 alpha), GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and
Cdx1 are the primary transcription factors from the adult mouse intestinal
epithelium to interact with the SIF3, GATA, and SIF1 elements of the SI promoter.
We wanted to study whether HNF-1 alpha, GATA-4, and Cdx2 can cooperate in the
regulation of SI gene expression. Immunolocalization experiments revealed that
HNF-1 alpha is detected in rare epithelial cells of suckling mice and becomes
progressively more expressed in the villous epithelial cells during the
suckling-weaning transition. GATA-4 protein is expressed exclusively in villous
differentiated epithelial cells of the proximal small intestine, decreases in
expression in the ileum, and becomes undetectable in the colon. HNF-1 alpha,
GATA-4, and Cdx2 interact in vitro and in vivo. These factors activate SI
promoter activity in cotransfection experiments where GATA-4 requires the
presence of both HNF-1 alpha and Cdx2. These findings imply a combinatory role of
HNF-1 alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 for the time- and position-dependent regulation of 
SI transcription during development.

PMID: 12060663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. FEBS Lett. 2002 May 8;518(1-3):83-7.

Stimulation of Cdx1 by oncogenic beta-catenin/Tcf4 in colon cancer cells;
opposite effect of the CDX2 homeoprotein.

Domon-Dell C(1), Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 3 avenue
Molière, 67200, Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 is a regulator of intestinal epithelial cell proliferation
and differentiation. Using a transfection approach, we showed here that the
oncogenic activation of the beta-catenin pathway stimulates the endogenous
expression of the Cdx1 mRNA as well as the activity of the Cdx1 promoter in
cancer cells of the human colon. Reciprocally, the paralogue homeobox gene Cdx2
exerts an inhibitory effect on the basal and on the beta-catenin-stimulated
activity of the Cdx1 promoter. The inhibitory effect of CDX2 requires the intact 
homeodomain. It is not dependent on canonical CDX binding sites in the Cdx1
promoter nor on the cis-elements specifically targeted by the beta-catenin/Tcf
complex. We conclude that the oncogenically activated beta-catenin and CDX2 have 
opposite and independent effects on the Cdx1 homeobox gene.

PMID: 11997022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2181-93.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 have overlapping functions in anteroposterior patterning and
posterior axis elongation.

van den Akker E(1), Forlani S, Chawengsaksophak K, de Graaff W, Beck F, Meyer BI,
Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mouse Cdx and Hox genes presumably evolved from genes on a common ancestor
cluster involved in anteroposterior patterning. Drosophila caudal (cad) is
involved in specifying the posterior end of the early embryo, and is essential
for patterning tissues derived from the most caudal segment, the analia. Two of
the three mouse Cdx paralogues, Cdx 1 and Cdx2, are expressed early in a Hox-like
manner in the three germ layers. In the nascent paraxial mesoderm, both genes are
expressed in cells contributing first to the most rostral, and then to
progressively more caudal parts of the vertebral column. Later, expression
regresses from the anterior sclerotomes, and is only maintained for Cdx1 in the
dorsal part of the somites, and for both genes in the tail bud. Cdx1 null mutants
show anterior homeosis of upper cervical and thoracic vertebrae. Cdx2-null
embryos die before gastrulation, and Cdx2 heterozygotes display anterior
transformations of lower cervical and thoracic vertebrae. We have analysed the
genetic interactions between Cdx1 and Cdx2 in compound mutants. Combining mutant 
alleles for both genes gives rise to anterior homeotic transformations along a
more extensive length of the vertebral column than do single mutations. The most 
severely affected Cdx1 null/Cdx2 heterozygous mice display a posterior shift of
their cranio-cervical, cervico-thoracic, thoraco-lumbar, lumbo-sacral and
sacro-caudal transitions. The effects of the mutations in Cdx1 and Cdx2 were
co-operative in severity, and a more extensive posterior shift of the expression 
of three Hox genes was observed in double mutants. The alteration in Hox
expression boundaries occurred early. We conclude that both Cdx genes cooperate
at early stages in instructing the vertebral progenitors all along the axis, at
least in part by setting the rostral expression boundaries of Hox genes. In
addition, Cdx mutants transiently exhibit alterations in the extent of Hox
expression domains in the spinal cord, reminding of the strong effects of
overexpressing Cdx genes on Hox gene expression in the neurectoderm. Phenotypical
alterations in the peripheral nervous system were observed at mid-gestation
stages. Strikingly, the altered phenotype at caudal levels included a posterior
truncation of the tail, mildly affecting Cdx2 heterozygotes, but more severely
affecting Cdx1/Cdx2 double heterozygotes and Cdx1 null/Cdx2 heterozygotes.
Mutations in Cdx1 and Cdx2 therefore also interfere with axis elongation in a
cooperative way. The function of Cdx genes in morphogenetic processes during
gastrulation and tail bud extension, and their relationship with the Hox genes
are discussed in the light of available data in Amphioxus, C. elegans, Drosophila
and mice.

PMID: 11959827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21361-70. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

Cloning of the human claudin-2 5'-flanking region revealed a TATA-less promoter
with conserved binding sites in mouse and human for caudal-related homeodomain
proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha.

Sakaguchi T(1), Gu X, Golden HM, Suh E, Rhoads DB, Reinecker HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital & Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Claudin-2 is a structural component of tight junctions in the kidneys, liver, and
intestine, but the mechanisms regulating its expression have not been defined.
The 5'-flanking region of the claudin-2 gene contains binding sites for
intestine-specific Cdx homeodomain proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1, which are conserved in human and mouse. Both Cdx1 and Cdx2 activated the
claudin-2 promoter in the human intestinal epithelial cell line Caco-2.
HNF-1alpha augmented the Cdx2-induced but not Cdx1-induced transcriptional
activation of the human claudin-2 promoter. In mice, HNF-1alpha was required for 
claudin-2 expression in the villus epithelium of the ileum and within the liver
but not in the kidneys, indicating an organ-specific function of HNF-1alpha in
the regulation of claudin-2 gene expression. Tight junction structural
components, which determine epithelial polarization and intestinal barrier
function, can be regulated by homeodomain proteins that control the
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11934881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(2):94-100.

Expression of homeobox gene CDX2 precedes that of CDX1 during the progression of 
intestinal metaplasia.

Eda A(1), Osawa H, Yanaka I, Satoh K, Mutoh H, Kihira K, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(2):147-8.

BACKGROUND: The CDX1 and CDX2 genes are intestinal transcription factors that may
be involved in the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of intestinal 
epithelial cells. There have been no detailed reports directly comparing the
expression of CDX1 with that of CDX2 in chronic gastritis and intestinal
metaplasia. Accordingly, we examined the expression of CDX1/2 and its association
with the expression of other intestinal metaplasia-associated genes during the
development of intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS: The expression of CDX1/2 genes was analyzed, using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, in 44 human gastric tissue samples
obtained endoscopically. The expressions of mucin markers (MUC2, MUC5AC),
intestine-specific genes (sucrase-isomaltase, human defensin-5, alkaline
phosphatase), a gene marker for fundic gland area (H+/K+ATPase beta subunit), and
a gene for entire gastric glands (pepsinogen C) were also comparatively analyzed.
RESULTS: There was no expression of CDX1/2 in gastric mucosa not infected by
Helicobacter pylori. The prevalence of CDX1 mRNA expression was significantly
higher in mucosa with intestinal metaplasia than in mucosa without intestinal
metaplasia. It is noteworthy that CDX2 was expressed in the antral and fundic
mucosa in the absence of the expression of CDX1 and gene markers for intestinal
metaplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of CDX2 precedes those of CDX1, sucrase-isomaltase,
other intestine-specific genes (human defensin-5, alkaline phosphatase), and MUC2
during the progression of intestinal metaplasia. These findings imply that the
expression of CDX2 may trigger the initiation and development of intestinal
metaplasia.

PMID: 11871772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(2):147-8.

Key molecules in metaplastic gastritis: sequential analysis of CDX1/2 homeobox
gene expression.

Chiba T, Seno H.

Comment on
    J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(2):94-100.

PMID: 11871768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Gastric Cancer. 2001;4(4):185-91.

Expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNAs and relevance of this expression to
differentiation in human gastrointestinal mucosa--with special emphasis on
participation in intestinal metaplasia of the human stomach.

Mizoshita T(1), Inada K, Tsukamoto T, Kodera Y, Yamamura Y, Hirai T, Kato T, Joh 
T, Itoh M, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The caudal-type homeobox genes, Cdx1 and Cdx2, are candidates for
directing intestinal development, differentiation, and maintenance of the
intestinal phenotype. The aims of this study were: (1) to assess the normal
tissue expression patterns of Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the human gastrointestinal tract
and (2) to ascertain levels in intestinal metaplasia (IM) of the stomach
associated with gastritis.
METHODS: Fresh human tissues were collected by surgical resection from 39
patients after informed consent had been received. RNAs were extracted from 11
distinct sites in the gastrointestinal mucosa (gastric body, gastric antrum,
duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending
colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum), and Northern hybridization was performed for
Cdr1 and Cdx2 mRNAs. In addition, RNAs were also extracted from normal gastric
mucosa, and gastric mucosa with mild to severe IM, confirmed histopathologically.
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was then carried out for
Cdx1 and Cdx2.
RESULTS: The expression of Cdx1 mRNA increased gradually from the duodenum to the
distal colon, with no expression detected in the stomach. Compared with the
distribution of Cdx1 mRNA in the mouse gastrointestinal tract, the expression of 
Cdr1 mRNA in the human gastrointestinal tract showed greater predominance in the 
jejunum and ileum. The expression of Cdx2 mRNA increased gradually from the
duodenum to the proximal colon and decreased from the ascending colon to the
rectum. Compared with the expression pattern of Cdx2 mRNA in the mouse
gastrointestinal tract, the expression of Cdx2 mRNA in the human gastrointestinal
tract showed greater predominance in the ileum. By RT-PCR, both Cdx1 and Cdx2
mRNAs were detected in the mild and severe types of IM. However, neither of these
mRNAs was identified in normal gastric mucosa without IM.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdr1 and Cdx2 mRNAs are widely present in the human intestinal and
colonic mucosae, but not in the gastric mucosa, suggesting that their expression 
may contribute to the intestinal phenotype. The high levels of these mRNAs in IM 
mucosa associated with chronic atrophic gastritis point to an association with
this phenotypic shift in the gastric mucosa.

PMID: 11846061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cancer Lett. 2002 Feb 8;176(1):47-55.

Ectopic expression of homeodomain protein CDX2 in intestinal metaplasia and
carcinomas of the stomach.

Bai YQ(1), Yamamoto H, Akiyama Y, Tanaka H, Takizawa T, Koike M, Kenji Yagi O,
Saitoh K, Takeshita K, Iwai T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

The roles of CDX2 and CDX1 homeobox genes during gastric carcinogenesis remain
poorly defined. We have studied the expression of CDX2/1 in gastric cancers and
intestinal metaplasia (IM) of 69 gastric carcinoma patients by
immunohistochemistry. CDX2/1 were shown to be ectopically overexpressed in IM in 
41 (85%) of 48, and 47 (90%) of 52 cases, respectively. The expression of CDX2/1 
was detected in 38 (55%) and 51 (74%) of the 69 gastric carcinomas, respectively.
The histological type of the gastric carcinomas was independently associated with
CDX2 expression, but not with that of CDX1, with higher CDX2 expression in
intestinal type (differentiated type) than in diffuse type (undifferentiated
type) gastric carcinomas. Our results thus suggest that CDX2 and CDX1 may play a 
role during IM formation and gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 11790453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Dev Biol. 2001 Dec 1;240(1):46-60.

RARgamma and Cdx1 interactions in vertebral patterning.

Allan D(1), Houle M, Bouchard N, Meyer BI, Gruss P, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology, Institut
de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 ave des Pins, ouest, Montréal, Québec,
H2W 1R7, Canada.

Exogenous retinoic acid (RA) can evoke vertebral homeosis when administered
during late gastrulation. These vertebral transformations correlate with
alterations of the rostral limit of Hox gene expression in the prevertebrae,
suggesting that retinoid signaling regulates the combinatorial expression of Hox 
genes dictating vertebral identity. Conversely, loss of certain RA receptors
(RARs) results in anterior homeotic transformations principally affecting the
cervical region. Despite these observations, the relationship between retinoid
signaling, somitic Hox expression, and vertebral patterning is poorly understood.
The members of the murine Cdx family (Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) are the homologues of
Drosophila caudal and encode homeobox-containing transcription factors. Cdx1
homozygous null mutants exhibit anterior homeotic transformations, some of which 
are reminiscent of those in RARgamma null offspring. In Cdx1 mutants, these
transformations occur concomitant with posteriorized prevertebral expression of
certain Hox genes. Cdx1 has recently been demonstrated to be a direct RA target, 
suggesting an indirect means by which retinoid signaling may impact vertebral
patterning. To further investigate this relationship, a complete allelic series
of Cdx1-RARgamma mutants was generated and the skeletal phenotype assessed either
following normal gestation or after administration of RA. Synergistic
interactions between these null alleles were observed in compound mutants, and
the full effects of exogenous RA on vertebral morphogenesis required Cdx1. These 
findings are consistent with a role for RA upstream of Cdx1 as regards axial
patterning. However, exogenous RA attenuated several defects inherent to Cdx1
null mutants. This finding, together with the increased phenotypic severity of
RARgamma-Cdx1 double null mutants relative to single nulls, suggests that these
pathways also function in parallel, likely by converging on common targets.

(c) 2001 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11784046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Dev Biol. 2001 Nov 15;239(2):257-69.

Multiple pathways governing Cdx1 expression during murine development.

Prinos P(1), Joseph S, Oh K, Meyer BI, Gruss P, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 ave des Pins, ouest,
Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Cdx1 encodes a mammalian homeobox gene involved in vertebral patterning. Retinoic
acid (RA) is likewise implicated in vertebral patterning. We have previously
shown that Cdx1 is a direct retinoid target gene, suggesting that Cdx1 may convey
some of the effects of retinoid signaling. However, RA appears to be essential
for only early stages of Cdx1 expression, and therefore other factors must be
involved in maintaining later stages of expression. Based on function and pattern
of expression, Wnt family members, in particular Wnt3a, are candidates for
regulation of expression of Cdx1. Consistent with this, we confirm prior results 
which demonstrated that Cdx1 can be directly regulated by Wnt signaling, and
identify functional LEF/TCF response motifs essential for this response. We also 
find that Cdx1 expression is markedly attenuated in a stage- and tissue-specific 
fashion in the Wnt3a hypomorph vestigial tail, and present data demonstrating
that Wnt3a and RA synergize strongly to activate Cdx1. Finally, we show that Cdx1
positively regulates its own expression. These data prompt a model whereby
retinoid and Wnt signaling function directly and synergistically to initiate Cdx1
expression in the caudal embryo. Expression is then maintained, at least in part,
by an autoregulatory mechanism at later stages.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11784033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Int J Oncol. 2002 Jan;20(1):23-9.

The caudal-related homeodomain protein CDX1 activates proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen expression in hepatocellular and colorectal carcinoma cells.

Oh EJ(1), Park JH, Cho M, Lee WJ, Choi YH, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735,
Korea.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 are known as Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors
important in the early differentiation and maintenance of intestinal epithelial
cells. Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed in the small intestine and colon of fetus and 
adult. Most previous studies suggested that Cdx2 inhibits proliferation. Several 
target genes of Cdx2 have been identified. However, the effect of Cdx1 on cell
proliferation is currently controversial and its target genes except for Hox-A7
remain unknown. In this study, we found several potential Caudal-related
homeodomain binding sequences in the 5'-flanking region of human PCNA gene.
Cotransfection experiments, using human PCNA reporter plasmid and CDX1 and CDX2
expression plasmids, showed that CDX1 transactivates human PCNA gene promoter
activity in hepatocellular cell line (HepG2) and colorectal carcinoma cell lines 
(Colo320HSR and HCT116), while CDX2 does not. CDX1-induced PCNA expression was
also detected in immunoblot and cytochemistry experiments. In BrdU incorporation 
experiments, CDX1 enhanced the incorporated BrdU. Taken together, our results
suggest that CDX1 have a pro-proliferative effect on proliferation through
transactivation of PCNA promoter activity.

PMID: 11743638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):297-301.

Expression of homeobox-containing genes in cDNA libraries derived from cattle
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo.

Ponsuksili S(1), Wimmers K, Adjaye J, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee,
53115 Bonn, Germany. spon@itz.uni-bonn.de

The homeobox-containing gene family plays a pivotal role in regulating,
patterning, and axial morphogenesis in the developing embryo. But there is still 
very little known about the expression and function of these genes in mammalian
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos. In this study we have used degenerate 
primers corresponding to the highly conserved regions of Antennapedia class
homeodomains as a rapid and an efficient method to survey bovine cDNA libraries
derived from unfertilised oocytes, single 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and
blastocyst stage embryos for the presence of homeobox sequences. Our results
provide, for the first time, evidence for the transcription of Hoxa3 and Hoxd1 in
oocytes; Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the 2-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, Hoxd1, and Hoxd4 in the
4-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, and Hoxc9 in the 8-cell; Cdx2, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in the
morula; Cdx2, Hoxb7, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in blastocyst stage cattle embryos. These
are candidate genes for the developmental capacity of in vivo and in vitro
produced bovine embryos.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Sep 28;1537(2):89-100.

CDX-1 and CDX-2 are expressed in human colonic mucosa and are down-regulated in
patients with Hirschsprung's disease associated enterocolitis.

Lui VC(1), Li L, Sham MH, Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Hong Kong Medical Centre, Queen Mary
Hospital, Pokfulam, SAR, PR China.

Caudal type homeobox gene-1 and -2 (CDX-1 and CDX-2), homologues of the
Drosophila homeobox gene caudal, encode transcription factors in endoderm derived
tissues of the intestine. CDX genes control proliferation and differentiation of 
intestinal mucosal cells and colon cancer cells. Hirschsprung's Disease (HD) or
congenital intestinal aganglionosis, a major developmental anomaly of intestine, 
which causes functional intestinal obstruction, is frequently associated with
enterocolitis. Aetiology of HD-associated enterocolitis (HDEC) remains obscure.
Reduction of gut mucosal enteroendocrine cells, and inefficient transfer of the
secretory immunoglobulin A across the gut mucosal cell were shown to be
associated with enterocolitis in HD patients suggesting that mucosa may directly 
involve in the pathophysiology of HDEC. This study aims to ascertain whether the 
CDX-1 and CDX-2 genes, that control the proliferation and differentiation of
mucosal cells, play a role in HDEC. Using semi-quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and in situ hybridisation, we
analysed the expression of CDX-1 and CDX-2 genes in colon specimens of normal
controls, necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) infants, and HD patients with and
without enterocolitis. We showed for the first time that CDX-1 and CDX-2 genes
were expressed in the colonic mucosal epithelium in normal, NEC and in HD
infants. However, the expressions of both genes were reduced in patients with
HDEC. Our findings suggest that reduced expression of CDX-1 and CDX-2 genes in
mucosa may be associated with the development of HDEC.

PMID: 11566252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Oncogene. 2001 Jul 12;20(31):4180-7.

Homeobox gene Cdx1 regulates Ras, Rho and PI3 kinase pathways leading to
transformation and tumorigenesis of intestinal epithelial cells.

Soubeyran P(1), Haglund K, Garcia S, Barth BU, Iovanna J, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)U.315 INSERM, Laboratoire de Physiologie et Pathologie Digestives, 46
Boulevard de la Gaye, F 13009 Marseille, France.

The Cdx1 homeobox gene encodes for an intestine-specific transcription factor
involved in the control of proliferation and differentiation of epithelial cells.
Although it has been indicated that Cdx1 may act as a proto-oncogene in cultured 
fibroblasts, its direct role in the regulation of intestinal tumorigenesis has
not been demonstrated. Here we show that expression of Cdx1 in an intestinal
epithelial cell line (IEC-6) induces anchorage-independent growth in soft agar
and promotes the formation of adenocarcinoma in vivo. The phenotype of
Cdx1-induced tumors was exacerbated when IEC-6/Cdx1 cells were injected together 
with matrigel containing mitogens and extracellular matrix components. These
changes were correlated with an increase in the GTP-bound form of Ras, modulation
of Cdc42 and Rho-A activities, and accumulation of phosphatidyl inositol 3 (PI3) 
kinase products. Moreover, combined inhibition of Ras/Rho and PI3 kinase
signaling by synthethic inhibitors blocked colony formation of IEC-6/Cdx1 cells
in soft agar. Taken together, these results demonstrate a direct involvement of
Cdx1, and its collaboration with Ras, Rho and PI3 kinase pathways, in
transformation and tumorigenesis of intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 11464284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(14):4761-72.

Functional interference between thyroid hormone receptor alpha (TRalpha) and
natural truncated TRDeltaalpha isoforms in the control of intestine development.

Plateroti M(1), Gauthier K, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN, Samarut J, Chassande O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de l'ENS de Lyon, UMR 5665
CNRS, LA 913 INRA, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France.

Thyroid hormone is known to participate in the control of intestine maturation at
weaning. Its action is mediated by the thyroid hormone nuclear receptors, encoded
by the TRalpha and TRbeta genes. Since previous studies have shown that TRbeta
plays a minor role in the gut, we focused here our analysis on the TRalpha gene. 
The TRalpha locus generates the TRalpha1 receptor together with the splicing
variant TRalpha2 and the truncated products TRDeltaalpha1 and TRDeltaalpha2,
which all lack an intact ligand binding domain. The TRDeltaalpha isoforms are
transcribed from an internal promoter located in intron 7, and their distribution
is restricted to a few tissues including those of the intestine. In order to
define the functions of the different isoforms encoded by the TRalpha locus in
the intestinal mucosa, we produced mice either lacking all known TRalpha products
or harboring a mutation which inactivates the intronic promoter. We performed a
detailed analysis of the intestinal phenotypes in these mice and compared it to
that of the previously described TRalpha(-/-) mice, in which TRalpha isoforms are
abolished but the TRDeltaalpha isoforms remain. This comparative analysis leads
us to the following conclusions: (i) the TRalpha1 receptor mediates the
T3-dependent functions in the intestine at weaning time and (ii) the TRDeltaalpha
products negatively control the responsiveness of the epithelial cells to T3.
Moreover, we show that TRDeltaalpha proteins can interfere with the transcription
of the intestine-specific homeobox genes cdx1 and cdx2 and that their activity is
regulated by TRalpha1. Altogether these data demonstrate that cooperation of
TRalpha and TRDeltaalpha products is essential to ensure the normal postnatal
development of the intestine and that mutations in the TRalpha locus can generate
different phenotypes caused by the disruption of the equilibrium between these
products.

PMCID: PMC87160
PMID: 11416151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mech Dev. 2001 May;103(1-2):27-33.

Wnt-3a is required for somite specification along the anteroposterior axis of the
mouse embryo and for regulation of cdx-1 expression.

Ikeya M(1), Takada S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Science,
Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa, Sakyo-ku, 606-8502, Kyoto, Japan.

In vertebrates, each vertebra along the anteroposterior axis has a characteristic
structure. It has recently been shown that several transcription factors and cell
signaling molecules expressed in the primitive streak ectoderm and/or the tailbud
play essential roles in establishing the correct anteroposterior specification of
vertebrae during mouse development. Here, we report that Wnt-3a mutants exhibit
homeotic transformations in the vertebrae along their entire body axis. In
addition, reduced expression of cdx-1, the mutation of which results in an
anterior transformation, as occurs in Wnt-3a mutants, was observed in the
primitive streak and tail bud region of Wnt-3a mutant embryos. These results
indicate that Wnt-3a is necessary for correct anteroposterior patterning of
vertebra, and that cdx-1 may be one of the mediator genes of Wnt-3a signaling in 
this process.

PMID: 11335109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Eur J Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;80(2):156-63.

Cdx1 promotes cellular growth of epithelial intestinal cells through induction of
the secretory protein PAP I.

Moucadel V(1), Soubeyran P, Vasseur S, Dusetti NJ, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche de Physiologie et Pathologie Digestives, INSERM
U.315, Marseille, France.

Expression of the Cdx1 homeobox gene in epithelial intestinal cells promotes
cellular growth and differentiation. Cdx1and the Pancreatitis Associated Protein 
I (PAP I) are concomitantly expressed in the epithelial cells of the lower part
of the intestinal crypts. Because Cdx1 is a transcription factor and PAP I, in
other tissues, is a proliferative factor, we looked for a relationship between
these two proteins in the intestinal-derived IEC-6 cells. After stable
transfection with a Cdx1 expression vector, they produce high levels of the PAP I
transcript and protein indicating a functional link between the two genes.
Demonstration of Cdx1 binding to the PAP I promoter region and suppression of PAP
I induction after deletion of the corresponding sequence indicated that Cdx1 is a
transcription factor controlling PAP I gene expression in intestinal cells. By
infecting IEC-6 cells with adenoviruses expressing PAP I, we demonstrated that
PAP I induces mitosis in these cells. On the other hand, inhibition of the PAP I 
expression in the IEC-6 Cdxl-expressing cells using an antisense strategy
confirmed the requirement of this protein for the effect of Cdx1 on cell growth. 
Finally, addition of the immunopurified PAP I to the culture medium promotes cell
growth of the IEC-6 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Maximal effect was obtained
at 1 ng/ml. Taken together these results demonstrate that PAP I is a target of
the Cdx1 homeobox gene in intestinal cells which participates in the regulation
of intestinal cell growth via an autocrine and/or paracrine mechanism.

PMID: 11302520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):G149-56.

Clusterin gene transcription is activated by caudal-related homeobox genes in
intestinal epithelium.

Suh E(1), Wang Z, Swain GP, Tenniswood M, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. suher@mail.med.upenn.edu

Caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) proteins play an important role in development and 
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium. Using cDNA differential display, we
identified clusterin as a prominently induced gene in a Cdx2-regulated cellular
model of intestinal differentiation. Transfection experiments and DNA-protein
interaction assays showed that clusterin is an immediate downstream target gene
for Cdx proteins. The distribution of clusterin protein in the intestine was
assessed during development and in the adult epithelium using
immunohistochemistry. In the adult mouse epithelium, clusterin protein was
localized in both crypt and villus compartments but not in interstitial cells of 
the intestinal mucosa. Together, these data suggest that clusterin is a direct
target gene for Cdx homeobox proteins, and the pattern of clusterin protein
expression suggests that it is associated with the differentiated state in the
intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11123208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gastroenterology. 2000 Oct;119(4):961-71.

Cdx1 and cdx2 expression during intestinal development.

Silberg DG(1), Swain GP, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. silberg@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The intestine-specific transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are
candidate genes for directing intestinal development, differentiation, and
maintenance of the intestinal phenotype. This study focused on the complex
patterns of expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 during mouse gastrointestinal
development.
METHODS: Embryonic and postnatal mouse tissues were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry to determine protein expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the
developing intestinal tract.
RESULTS: Cdx2 protein expression was observed at 9. 5 postcoitum (pc), whereas
weak expression of Cdx1 protein was first seen at 12.5 pc in the distal
developing intestine (hindgut). Expression of Cdx1 increased from 13.5 to 14.5 pc
during the endoderm/epithelial transition with predominately distal expression.
In contrast to Cdx1, there was intense expression of Cdx2 in all but the distal
portions of the developing intestine. Cdx2 expression remained low in the distal 
colon throughout postnatal development. A gradient of expression formed in the
crypt-villus axis, with Cdx1 primarily in the crypt and Cdx2 primarily in the
villus.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct comparison of the patterns of Cdx1 and Cdx2 protein
expression during development as performed in this study provides new insights
into their potential functional roles. The relative expression of Cdx1 to Cdx2
protein may be important in the anterior to posterior patterning of the
intestinal epithelium and in defining patterns of proliferation and
differentiation along the crypt-villus axis.

PMID: 11040183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 2000 May;3(5):271-6.

Overexpression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeogenes enhances expression of the HLA-I in
HT-29 cells.

Soubeyran P(1), Mallo GV, Moucadel V, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche de Physiologie et Pathologie Digestives, INSERM
U.315, 46 Boulevard de la Gaye, Marseille, 13009, France.

We have previously reported that down-regulation of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA expression
is associated with colon carcinogenesis, and that coordinated reexpression of
these genes in the HT29 colon cancer-derived cell line leads to a reduced
malignant phenotype. Here we show that restoring Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression in HT29
cells enhanced the antigen presentation system, as reflected by a strong
induction of the concentration of HLA-I molecules at the cell surface, resulting 
from increased expression of the HLA-I mRNA. Expression of the LMP2 proteasomal
protein was also strongly induced by Cdx1 and Cdx2 at the transcriptional level, 
whereas TAP1 expression which is under the control of the same bidirectional
promoter as LMP2 remained unchanged. Furthermore, expression of the adhesion
molecule ICAM-1, which works in concert with HLA-I, and of the cell death
promoter Fas was also increased upon Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression. Taken together,
these results suggest that loss of Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression during colorectal
carcinogenesis could favor the escape of tumor cells from the immune system. In
conclusion, restoration of Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression should be considered in
immunotherapeutic strategies for colorectal cancer.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10964750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Jul;28(3):184-8.

Distinct expression of CDX2 and GATA4/5, development-related genes, in human
gastric cancer cell lines.

Bai Y(1), Akiyama Y, Nagasaki H, Yagi OK, Kikuchi Y, Saito N, Takeshita K, Iwai
T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

CDX2 is a tumor-suppressor homeobox gene involved in colon carcinogenesis, but
its role in gastric cancer is unknown. Although GATA4, -5 and, -6 transcription
factors have distinct functions in the regulation of gastrointestinal epithelial 
cell differentiation, there have been no reports regarding GATA4/5/6 alterations 
in gastrointestinal carcinomas. By using a semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay, we studied the expression of gut
development-related genes CDX2/1 and GATA4/5/6 in 11 human gastric cancer cell
lines. The expression of CDX2 appeared to progressively decrease with the
transition from well differentiated to poorly differentiated cancer cell lines.
CDX1 was below detectable levels in all cell lines. The expression of GATA4 and
GATA5 was undetectable in four and six cell lines, respectively, whereas the
majority of the cell lines expressed GATA6 abundantly. These results suggest that
CDX2 and GATA4/5 may be associated with the carcinogenesis of the stomach. Mol.
Carcinog. 28:184-188, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10942535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mech Dev. 2000 Aug;96(1):125-8.

Regional gene expression in the epithelia of the Xenopus tadpole gut.

Chalmers AD(1), Slack JM, Beck CW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, BA2 7AY, Bath, UK.

In recent years much progress has been made in the understanding of the genes and
mechanisms involved in specification of the cells of the endoderm, which give
rise to the epithelium of the gut and respiratory system. However, little is
known about the way in which the gut becomes patterned along its
anterior-posterior axis, that is, how boundaries are established between the
different epithelia of the gut tube. Here we show that the expression patterns of
five genes divide the Xenopus tadpole gut epithelium into at least four regions
along this axis in the undifferentiated, 3-day-old gut (stage 41), and that these
divisions are maintained until at least 7 days, when cell differentiation is well
under way. In addition, the restricted expression patterns of these genes clearly
mark the anterior and posterior boundaries of the intestine. Xsox2 is expressed
in the anterior gut, spanning the oesophagus and stomach but terminating at the
stomach/intestine boundary. Xcad1 and Xcad2, two caudal-type homeobox genes, are 
expressed in a region with an anterior limit at this boundary and a posterior
limit between the colon and proctodeum, therefore covering the whole of the small
and large intestines. Intestinal fatty acid binding protein (IFABP) is expressed 
only in the anterior small intestine, and the even-skipped homeobox gene Xhox3 is
expressed in the most posterior part of the gut, the proctodeum.

PMID: 10940633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mech Dev. 2000 Aug;96(1):79-89.

Murine hoxd4 expression in the CNS requires multiple elements including a
retinoic acid response element.

Zhang F(1), Nagy Kovács E, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler,
Québec H3G 1Y6, Montréal, Canada.

We have identified a retinoic acid response element (RARE) within a neural
enhancer located 3' to the Hoxd4 gene. This RARE is required for the initiation
and maintenance of Hoxd4 transgene expression in neurectoderm, and for full
anteriorized expression upon retinoic acid (RA) treatment. Mutations within the
sequence TTTTCTG, located 2 bp downstream of the RARE, posteriorized transgene
activity. However, the onset of transgene expression and its response to RA were 
indistinguishable from wild type. While the TTTTCTG motif resembles a CDX binding
site, human CDX1 protein did not interact with this element in vitro. Three
additional regions were also shown to control transgene expression in
neurectoderm, establishing that multiple elements constitute the Hoxd4 neural
enhancer.

PMID: 10940626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6579-86.

Retinoic acid regulation of Cdx1: an indirect mechanism for retinoids and
vertebral specification.

Houle M(1), Prinos P, Iulianella A, Bouchard N, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada H2W 1R7.

Retinoic acid (RA) is required for diverse developmental programs, including
vertebral specification. Both RA receptor disruption and excess RA result in
homeotic transformations of the axial skeleton. These effects are believed to
occur through altered expression of Hox genes, several of which have been
demonstrated to be direct RA targets. Members of the cdx (caudal) homeobox gene
family are also implicated in regulating Hox expression. Disruption of cdx1
results in vertebral homeotic transformations and alteration of Hox expression
boundaries; similar homeosis is also observed in cdx2 heterozygotes. In Xenopus, 
gain or loss of Cdx function affects vertebral morphogenesis through a mechanism 
that also correlates with altered Hox expression. Taken together with the finding
of putative Cdx binding motifs in several Hox promoters, these data strongly
support a role for Cdx members in direct regulation of expression of at least
some Hox genes. Most retinoid-responsive Hox genes have not been demonstrated to 
be direct RA targets, suggesting that intermediaries are involved. Based on these
findings, we hypothesized that one or more cdx members may transduce the effects 
of RA on Hox transcription. Consistent with this, we present evidence that cdx1
is a direct RA target gene, suggesting an additional pathway for
retinoid-dependent vertebral specification.

PMCID: PMC86138
PMID: 10938132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3805-13.

Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling regulates the expression of the homeobox gene Cdx1
in embryonic intestine.

Lickert H(1), Domon C, Huls G, Wehrle C, Duluc I, Clevers H, Meyer BI, Freund JN,
Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

During mammalian development, the Cdx1 homeobox gene exhibits an early period of 
expression when the embryonic body axis is established, and a later period where 
expression is restricted to the embryonic intestinal endoderm. Cdx1 expression is
maintained throughout adulthood in the proliferative cell compartment of the
continuously renewed intestinal epithelium, the crypts. In this study, we provide
evidence in vitro and in vivo that Cdx1 is a direct transcriptional target of the
Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling pathway. Upon Wnt stimulation, expression of Cdx1
can be induced in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as well as in undifferentiated 
rat embryonic endoderm. Tcf4-deficient mouse embryos show abrogation of Cdx1
protein in the small intestinal epithelium, making Tcf4 the likely candidate to
transduce Wnt signal in this part of gut. The promoter region of the Cdx1 gene
contains several Tcf-binding motifs, and these bind Tcf/Lef1/(beta)-catenin
complexes and mediate (beta)-catenin-dependent transactivation. The
transcriptional regulation of the homeobox gene Cdx1 in the intestinal epithelium
by Wnt/(beta)-catenin signaling underlines the importance of this signaling
pathway in mammalian endoderm development.

PMID: 10934025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Pathol. 2000 Feb;156(2):621-7.

Expression of an intestine-specific transcription factor (CDX1) in intestinal
metaplasia and in subsequently developed intestinal type of cholangiocarcinoma in
rat liver.

Ren P(1), Silberg DG, Sirica AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Cellular Pathogenesis, Medical College of
Virginia, Campus of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

CDX1 is a caudal-type homeobox intestine-specific transcription factor that has
been shown to be selectively expressed in epithelial cells in intestinal
metaplasia of the human stomach and esophagus and variably expressed in human
gastric and esophageal adenocarcinomas (Silberg DG, Furth EE, Taylor JK, Schuck
T, Chiou T, Traber PG: Gastroenterology 1997, 113: 478-486). Through the use of
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting, we investigated whether CDX1 is also
uniquely associated with the intestinal metaplasia associated with putative
precancerous cholangiofibrosis induced in rat liver during furan
cholangiocarcinogenesis, as well as expressed in neoplastic glands in a
subsequently developed intestinal type of cholangiocarcinoma. In normal, control 
adult rat small intestine, specific nuclear immunoreactivity for CDX1 was most
prominent in enterocytes lining the crypts. In comparison, epithelium from
intestinal metaplastic glands within furan-induced hepatic cholangiofibrosis and 
neoplastic epithelium from later developed primary intestinal-type
cholangiocarcinoma each demonstrated strong nuclear immunoreactivity for CDX1.
CDX1-positive cells were detected in hepatic cholangiofibrotic tissue as early as
3 weeks after the start of chronic furan treatment. We further determined that
the percentages of CDX1-positive neoplastic glands and glandular nuclei are
significantly higher in primary tumors than in a derived, transplantable
cholangiocarcinoma serially-propagated in vivo. Western blotting confirmed our
immunohistochemical results, and no CDX1 immunoreactivity was detected in normal 
adult rat liver or in hyperplastic biliary epithelial cells. These findings
indicate that CDX1 is specifically associated with early intestinal metaplasia
and a later developed intestinal-type of cholangiocarcinoma induced in the liver 
of furan-treated rats.

PMCID: PMC1850055
PMID: 10666391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):4499-506.

The caudal-related homeodomain protein Cdx1 inhibits proliferation of intestinal 
epithelial cells by down-regulation of D-type cyclins.

Lynch J(1), Suh ER, Silberg DG, Rulyak S, Blanchard N, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine and Genetics, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Cdx1 is a homeodomain transcription factor that regulates intestine-specific gene
expression. Experimental evidence suggests that Cdx1 may be involved in cell
cycle regulation, but its role is ill defined and the mechanisms have not been
explored. We used stable transfection of inducible constructs and transient
expression with a replication-deficient adenovirus to induce Cdx1 expression in
rat IEC6 cells, a non-transformed intestinal epithelial cell line that does not
express Cdx1 protein. Expression of Cdx1 markedly reduced proliferation of IEC6
cells with accumulation of cells in the G(0)/G(1) phase of the cell cycle. Cell
cycle arrest was accompanied by an increase in the hypophosphorylated forms of
the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and the pRb-related p130 protein. Protein levels
of multiple cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors were either unchanged (p16, p18,
p21, p27, and p57) or were not detected (p15 and p19). Most significantly, levels
of cyclins D1 and D2 were markedly diminished with Cdx1 expression, but not
cyclins D3, E, or the G(1) kinases. Additionally, cyclin-dependent kinase-4
activity was decreased in association with decreased cyclin D protein. We
conclude that Cdx1 regulates intestinal epithelial cell proliferation by
inhibiting progression through G(0)/G(1), most likely via modulation of cyclin D1
and D2 protein levels.

PMID: 10660624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Gastroenterology. 1999 Dec;117(6):1326-38.

Cdx1 promotes differentiation in a rat intestinal epithelial cell line.

Soubeyran P(1), André F, Lissitzky JC, Mallo GV, Moucadel V, Roccabianca M,
Rechreche H, Marvaldi J, Dikic I, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 315, Laboratoire de Physiologie et Pathologie Digestives,
Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Homeobox genes are involved in establishing and maintaining
differentiated patterns in adult tissues. Cdx1 might carry out that function in
the intestinal epithelium because its expression is specific to that tissue and
increases during development.
METHODS: Cdx1 expression was induced in IEC-6 intestinal epithelial cells by
stable transfection, and subsequent changes in cell growth, resistance to
apoptosis, migration, and differentiation were monitored.
RESULTS: Compared with control, IEC-6/Cdx1 cells proliferated more rapidly, were 
more resistant to apoptosis, and migrated 3-4 times faster, as shown by an in
vitro wound assay. IEC-6/Cdx1 cells in culture formed multilayers. Morphology of 
the top layer was similar to that of columnar epithelium, with cells showing
typical features of differentiated enterocytes, including complex junctions and
well-developed microvilli with glycocalix. Expression of 2 markers of enterocyte 
differentiation, aminopeptidase N and villin, was induced in IEC-6/Cdx1 cells.
Aminopeptidase N was targeted to the basolateral membrane, and villin was
localized to the cytoplasm. Actin filaments, which were mostly present in
transcytoplasmic stress fibers in control cells, were redistributed to the cortex
in Cdx1-transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdx1 expression in IEC-6 cells induces phenotypic changes
characteristic of differentiating enterocytes, suggesting an important role for
Cdx1 in the transition from stem cells to proliferating/transit cells.

PMID: 10579974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochem Cell Biol. 1998;76(6):957-69.

The Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 homeobox genes in the intestine.

Freund JN(1), Domon-Dell C, Kedinger M, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381,
Strasbourg, France. jean-noel.freund@inserm.u-strasbg.fr

The past years have witnessed an increasing number of reports relative to
homeobox genes in endoderm-derived tissues. In this review, we focus on the
caudal-related Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 homeobox genes to give an overview of the in vivo,
in vitro, and ex vivo approaches that emphasize their primary role in intestinal 
development and in the control of intestinal cell proliferation, differentiation,
and identity. The participation of these genes in colon tumorigenesis and their
identification as important actors of the oncogenic process are also discussed.

PMID: 10392709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Carcinogenesis. 1999 Mar;20(3):493-7.

Promotion of intestinal carcinogenesis by dietary methionine.

Duranton B(1), Freund JN, Galluser M, Schleiffer R, Gossé F, Bergmann C,
Hasselmann M, Raul F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire du Contrôle Métabolique et Nutritionnel en Oncologie Digestive de 
l'Université Louis Pasteur, Institut de Recherche sur les Cancers de l'Appareil
Digestif, Strasbourg, France.

The metabolism of the polyamines spermidine and spermine is known to be enhanced 
in rapidly proliferating cells. Methionine is a precursor of the aminopropyl
moieties of these amines. Therefore, it was of interest to study the effects of a
methionine supplemented diet on polyamine metabolism and preneoplastic changes
occurring in the intestinal tract of rats treated with the chemical carcinogen
azoxymethane (AOM). Adult Wistar rats received 15 mg AOM/kg body wt (i.p.) once
each week for 2 weeks. Thereafter, the rats were randomly divided into two groups
and received controlled isoenergetic diets containing the same amount of folate, 
choline and vitamin B12 during 12 weeks: one group was kept on a standard diet;
the other was fed the same diet, except that 1% L-methionine was added at the
expense of carbohydrates. After 12 weeks, the administration of the
methionine-supplemented diet stimulated the turnover rate of ileal epithelial
cells, indicating enhanced crypt cell proliferation. Furthermore, in this group, 
a 2-fold increase in the number of aberrant hyperproliferative crypts and the
appearance of tumors was observed in the colon. These effects were accompanied by
the increased formation of spermidine and spermine due to the enhancement of
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase activity and by the upregulation of Cdx-1, a
homeobox gene with oncogenic potentials. The experimental data do not support the
view of a chemopreventive effect of dietary methionine supplementation on
intestinal carcinogenesis in rats, even at an early phase of preneoplastic
development, but rather suggest that methionine promotes intestinal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 10190567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 7;18(1):87-92.

Downregulation of the colon tumour-suppressor homeobox gene Cdx-2 by oncogenic
ras.

Lorentz O(1), Cadoret A, Duluc I, Capeau J, Gespach C, Cherqui G, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 381, Strasbourg, France.

Downregulation of the colon tumour-suppressor homeobox gene Cdx-2 by oncogenic
ras Constitutive activation of the ras proto-oncogene is a frequent and early
event in colon cancers, but the downstream nuclear targets are not fully
understood. The Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 homeobox genes play crucial roles in intestinal
cell proliferation and differentiation. In addition, Cdx-2 is a colonic
tumour-suppressor gene, whereas Cdx-1 has oncogenic potential. Here, we show that
constitutive activation of ras alters Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 expression in human colonic
Caco-2 and HT-29 cells that harbour a normal ras proto-oncogene. Oncogenic ras
downregulates Cdx-2 through activation of the PKC pathway and a decline in
activity of the Cdx-2 promoter AP-1 site. This decline results from a
PKC-dependent decrease in the relative expression of c-Jun, an activator of Cdx-2
transcription, compared to c-Fos, an inhibitor of Cdx-2. Unlike Cdx-2, Cdx-1 is
upregulated by oncogenic ras and this effect is mediated by activation of the
MEK1 pathway. These results indicate that oncogenic ras activation has opposite
effects on Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 expression through distinct signalling pathways and
they provide the first evidence for a functional link between ras activation and 
the downregulation of the Cdx-2 tumour-suppressor gene in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 9926923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Differentiation. 1998 Nov;64(1):11-8.

The murine Cdx1 gene product localises to the proliferative compartment in the
developing and regenerating intestinal epithelium.

Subramanian V(1), Meyer B, Evans GS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, UK.

The mouse Cdx1 gene encodes a homeobox-containing transcription factor and is one
of the few homeobox genes known to be expressed in endodermally derived tissues
of the intestine in fetal and adult mice. A detailed and systematic study of the 
expression of the Cdx1 protein was carried out during embryonic intestinal
development, postnatal cytodifferentiation and in the regenerating (after
radiation-induced damage) intestine of the mouse. Using antibodies directed
against Cdx1, we show for the first time that the Cdx1 protein is localised in
the proliferating immature epithelium during intestinal development. It becomes
restricted to the proliferative crypt compartment during postnatal
differentiation, as well as in the adult intestine. The mesenchymal layer was
completely negative both during embryonic development and in the postnatal
intestine. The expression of the protein was first clearly detected throughout
the simple columnar epithelium at day 15 of development. This expression
progressively became restricted to the regions of epithelial proliferation in the
crypts of the adult mouse by day 40 of post-natal development. There were
occasional cells that were Cdx1 positive in the villi. During regeneration of the
epithelium after radiation-induced damage, Cdx1 expression diminished during the 
initial phase of cellular regression. The expression was then very strong in the 
regenerating epithelial foci, but not in the quiescent sterilised crypts between 
day 4 and 6. The normal pattern was restored between day 6 and 7. The Paneth
cells were negative. The physical segregation of Cdx1 with the proliferative
compartment and the hierarchy of cell renewal in the intestinal epithelium is an 
important example of how regulatory genes function in the maintenance and in the 
dysfunction of renewing tissues.

PMID: 9921649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):14030-6.

Expression of the Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeotic genes leads to reduced malignancy in
colon cancer-derived cells.

Mallo GV(1), Soubeyran P, Lissitzky JC, André F, Farnarier C, Marvaldi J, Dagorn 
JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)U.315 INSERM, F 13009 Marseille, France.

We have previously described an inverse relationship between Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA
levels and the extent of dysplasia and severity of clinical outcome in colorectal
carcinoma, suggesting that altered expression of these genes was associated with 
colorectal carcinogenesis or tumor progression. To investigate further their
involvement in the physiopathology of colorectal cancer, HT29 colon carcinoma
cells that show very low Cdx expression were transfected with Cdx1 and/or Cdx2
cDNA to elicit their overexpression. Growth rate, tumorigenicity, resistance to
apoptosis, and migration potential of the corresponding cells were analyzed.
Growth rate of cells overexpressing Cdx2 decreased by half, whereas
overexpression of Cdx1 had no effect. However, cells overexpressing both Cdxs had
a growth rate reduced to 20% of control. In cells overexpressing Cdx1 or Cdx2,
tumorigenicity and resistance to apoptosis induced by serum starvation, ceramide,
or staurosporine were not changed compared with control cells; yet phorbol
ester-stimulated cell migration was decreased by 50%. In cells overexpressing
both Cdx1 and Cdx2, tumorigenicity was decreased by 50%, resistance to apoptosis 
was significantly lowered, and stimulated cell migration was further decreased to
15% of control compared with cells expressing Cdx1 or Cdx2. Finally, cells
overexpressing both Cdxs showed strongly decreased Bcl-2 expression, which could 
account for their increased sensitivity to apoptosis. These findings show that,
in HT29 cells, both Cdx1 and Cdx2 genes must be expressed to reduce tumorigenic
potential, to increase sensitivity to apoptosis, and to reduce cell migration,
suggesting that the two genes control the normal phenotype by independent
pathways. This may explain why loss of Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression is associated with
tumor development and invasiveness in colorectal tumors.

PMID: 9593754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Cell Biol. 1997 Dec 15;139(6):1553-65.

Key role of the Cdx2 homeobox gene in extracellular matrix-mediated intestinal
cell differentiation.

Lorentz O(1), Duluc I, Arcangelis AD, Simon-Assmann P, Kedinger M, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 67200
Strasbourg, France.

To explore the role of homeobox genes in the intestine, the human colon
adenocarcinoma cell line Caco2-TC7 has been stably transfected with plasmids
synthesizing Cdx1 and Cdx2 sense and antisense RNAs. Cdx1 overexpression or
inhibition by antisense RNA does not markedly modify the cell differentiation
markers analyzed in this study. In contrast, Cdx2 overexpression stimulates two
typical markers of enterocytic differentiation: sucrase-isomaltase and lactase.
Cells in which the endogenous expression of Cdx2 is reduced by antisense RNA
attach poorly to the substratum. Conversely, Cdx2 overexpression modifies the
expression of molecules involved in cell-cell and cell-substratum interactions
and in transduction process: indeed, E-cadherin, integrin-beta4 subunit,
laminin-gamma2 chain, hemidesmosomal protein, APC, and alpha-actinin are
upregulated. Interestingly, most of these molecules are preferentially expressed 
in vivo in the differentiated villi enterocytes rather than in crypt cells. Cdx2 
overexpression also results in the stimulation of HoxA-9 mRNA expression, an
homeobox gene selectively expressed in the colon. In contrast,
Cdx2-overexpressing cells display a decline of Cdx1 mRNA, which is mostly found
in vivo in crypt cells. When implanted in nude mice, Cdx2-overexpressing cells
produce larger tumors than control cells, and form glandular and villus-like
structures. Laminin-1 is known to stimulate intestinal cell differentiation in
vitro. In the present study, we demonstrate that the differentiating effect of
laminin-1 coatings on Caco2-TC7 cells is accompanied by an upregulation of Cdx2. 
To further document this observation, we analyzed a series of Caco2 clones in
which the production of laminin-alpha1 chain is differentially inhibited by
antisense RNA. We found a positive correlation between the level of Cdx2
expression, that of endogenous laminin-alpha1 chain mRNA and that of
sucrase-isomaltase expression in these cell lines. Taken together, these results 
suggest (a) that Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeobox genes play distinct roles in the
intestinal epithelium, (b) that Cdx2 provokes pleiotropic effects triggering
cells towards the phenotype of differentiated villus enterocytes, and (c) that
Cdx2 expression is modulated by basement membrane components. Hence, we conclude 
that Cdx2 plays a key role in the extracellular matrix-mediated intestinal cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2132620
PMID: 9396760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1419-28.

Comparison of intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes suggest a common structure for enterocyte-specific promoters.

Taylor JK(1), Boll W, Levy T, Suh E, Siang S, Mantei N, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase (IPAL) is an intestine-specific
brush-border enzyme expressed during development and along the intestinal
crypt-villus axis in a pattern similar to another well characterized brush-border
enzyme, sucrase-isomaltase (SI). A tissue-specific DNase I hypersensitive site
was identified in chromatin from intestinal nuclei immediately upstream from the 
transcriptional start site of the IPAL gene. Footprinting analysis showed that
two DNA elements within the IPAL promoter were protected by intestinal nuclear
proteins. The IPAL-FP1 element was shown to be a monomer binding site for Cdx1
and Cdx2, intestine-specific homeobox proteins. Moreover, this site was important
for transcriptional activation of the promoter in intestinal cell lines via
interaction with Cdx proteins. Nuclear proteins from both liver and intestine
interacted with the IPAL-FP2 element, forming a complex consistent with binding
to HNF1. Cdx and HNF1 binding sites have also been shown to be the two major
regulatory elements responsible for transcriptional activation of the SI gene
promoter, which directs intestine-specific transcription in transgenic mice.
These findings suggest that enterocyte genes that are expressed in similar
developmental patterns may be regulated by the interaction of common DNA elements
and their associated transcription factors.

PMID: 9428790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Gastroenterology. 1997 Aug;113(2):478-86.

CDX1 protein expression in normal, metaplastic, and neoplastic human alimentary
tract epithelium.

Silberg DG(1), Furth EE, Taylor JK, Schuck T, Chiou T, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 1997 Aug;113(2):680-2.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: CDX1 is an intestine-specific transcription factor expressed
early in intestinal development that may be involved in regulation of
proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. We examined the
pattern of CDX1 protein expression in metaplastic and neoplastic tissue to
provide insight into its possible role in abnormal differentiation.
METHODS: Tissue samples were stained by immunohistochemistry using an
affinity-purified, polyclonal antibody against a peptide epitope of CDX1.
RESULTS: Specific nuclear staining was found in epithelial cells of the small
intestine and colon. Esophagus and stomach did not express CDX1 protein; however,
adjacent areas of intestinal metaplastic tissue intensely stained for CDX1.
Adenocarcinomas of the stomach and esophagus had both positive and negative
nuclear staining for CDX1. Colonic epithelial cells in adenomatous polyps and
adenocarcinomas had a decreased intensity of staining compared with normal
colonic crypts in the same specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1 may be important in the transition from normal gastric and
esophageal epithelium to intestinal-type metaplasia. The variability in
expression of CDX1 in gastric and esophageal adenocarcinomas suggests more than
one pathway in the development of these carcinomas. The decrease of CDX1 in
colonic adenocarcinomas may indicate a role for CDX1 in growth regulation and in 
the maintenance of the differentiated phenotype.

PMID: 9247467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Cell Sci. 1997 Jun;110 ( Pt 11):1317-24.

Changing intestinal connective tissue interactions alters homeobox gene
expression in epithelial cells.

Duluc I(1), Lorentz O, Fritsch C, Leberquier C, Kedinger M, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381,
Strasbourg, France.

In segmented organs, homeobox genes are involved in axial patterning and cell
identity. Much less is known about their role in non-segmented endoderm
derivatives such as the digestive epithelium. Using a xenograft model of fetal
intestinal anlagen implanted under the skin of nude mice, we have investigated
whether the expression of five homeobox genes (HoxA-4, HoxA-9, HoxC-8, Cdx-1 and 
Cdx-2) is modified when intestinal epithelium undergoes normal development or
displays heterodifferentiation in association with heterotopic mesenchyme. In
homotypic associations of fetal endoderm and mesenchyme that recapitulate normal 
development, the overall pattern of homeobox gene expression was maintained:
HoxA-9 and HoxC-8 were the highest in the colon and ileum, respectively, and
HoxA-4 was expressed all along the intestine; Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 exhibited an
increasing gradient of expression from small intestine to colon. Yet, grafting
per se caused a faint upregulation of HoxA-9 and HoxC-8 in small intestinal
regions in which these genes are not normally expressed, while the
endoderm-mesenchyme dissociation-association step provoked a decay of Cdx-1 in
the colon. In heterotopic associations of colonic endoderm with small intestinal 
mesenchyme, the colonic epithelium exhibited heterodifferentiation to a small
intestinal-like phenotype. In this case, we observed a decay of HoxA-9 expression
and an upregulation of HoxC-8. Additionally, heterodifferentiation of the colonic
epithelium was accompanied by a downregulation of Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 to a level
similar to that found in the normal small intestine. To demonstrate that
mesenchyme-derived cells can influence Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 expression in the bowel
epithelium, fetal jejunal endoderm was associated with intestinal fibroblastic
cell lines that either support small intestinal-like or colonic-like
morphogenesis. A lower expression of both homeobox genes was shown in grafts
presenting the small intestinal phenotype than in those showing glandular
colonic-like differentiation. Taken together, these results suggest that homeobox
genes participate in the control of the positional information and/or cell
differentiation in the intestinal epithelium. They also indicate that the level
of Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 homeobox gene expression is influenced by
epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the intestinal mucosa.

PMID: 9202392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3013-20.

Distinct retinoid X receptor-retinoic acid receptor heterodimers are
differentially involved in the control of expression of retinoid target genes in 
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Chiba H(1), Clifford J, Metzger D, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch, France.

The F9 murine embryonal carcinoma cell line represents a well-established system 
for the study of retinoid signaling in vivo. We have investigated the functional 
specificity of different retinoid X receptor (RXR)-retinoic acid (RA) receptor
(RAR) isotype pairs for the control of expression of endogenous RA-responsive
genes, by using wild-type (WT), RXR alpha(-/-), RAR alpha(-/-), RAR gamma(-/-),
RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR alpha(-/-), and RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR gamma(-/-) F9 cells, as
well as panRXR and RAR isotype (alpha, beta, and gamma)-selective retinoids. We
show that in these cells the control of expression of different sets of
RA-responsive genes is preferentially mediated by distinct RXR-RAR isotype
combinations. Our data support the conclusion that RXR-RAR heterodimers are the
functional units transducing the retinoid signal and indicate in addition that
these heterodimers exert both specific and redundant functions on the expression 
of particular sets of RA-responsive genes. We also show that the presence of a
given receptor isotype can hinder the activity of another isotype and therefore
that functional redundancy between retinoid receptor isotypes can be
artifactually generated by gene knockouts.

PMCID: PMC232153
PMID: 9154799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 27;232(3):742-8.

Human colorectal carcinogenesis is associated with deregulation of homeobox gene 
expression.

Vider BZ(1), Zimber A, Hirsch D, Estlein D, Chastre E, Prevot S, Gespach C, Yaniv
A, Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.

In the present study, the possible involvement of homeobox-containing genes in
colorectal cancer (CRC) development was investigated. Using a stepwise screening 
approach and RT-PCR, we have demonstrated that the human HOXB6, B8, C8 and C9 are
overexpressed at various stages of CRC. In contrast, all CRC cases exhibited a
marked decrease in the homeodomain-containing Cdx1 gene expression. Recent data
which suggest a regulatory link between HOXB8 and several tumor suppressor genes,
such as DCC, APC, and TGF beta, sustain a possible implication of homeobox genes 
in colon carcinogenesis. Moreover, our data showing a decrease in Cdx1 expression
are consistent with the notion that genes functioning in the establishment and
maintenance of the intestinal epithelium might, upon deregulation, disturb the
normal control of cellular proliferation, differentiation, and death, thus
leading to cancer development.

PMID: 9126347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nature. 1997 Mar 6;386(6620):84-7.

Homeosis and intestinal tumours in Cdx2 mutant mice.

Chawengsaksophak K(1), James R, Hammond VE, Köntgen F, Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

In Drosophila, disturbing the expression of the homeobox gene caudal causes a
severe disruption in body segmentation and global body patterning. There are
three mouse homologues of Drosophila caudal: Cdx1 (ref. 2), Cdx2 (ref. 3) and
Cdx4 (ref. 4). We have generated a null mutation of murine Cdx2 by homologous
recombination. Cdx2 homozygote null mutants die between 3.5 and 5.5 days post
coitum (d.p.c.). Cdx2 heterozygote mutants exhibit a variable phenotype, with
many showing tail abnormalities or stunted growth. Skeletal analysis demonstrates
a homeotic shift of vertebrae and compatible malformations of the ribs. Within
the first three months of life, 90% of Cdx2 heterozygotes develop multiple
intestinal adenomatous polyps, particularly in the proximal colon. These polyps
occasionally contain areas of true metaplasia. In contrast to the surrounding
intestinal epithelium, the neoplastic cells do not express Cdx2 from the
remaining allele. These results suggest that Cdx2 mutation is the primary event
in the genesis of some intestinal tumours.

PMID: 9052785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Cancer. 1997 Feb 20;74(1):35-44.

Molecular cloning, sequencing and expression of the mRNA encoding human Cdx1 and 
Cdx2 homeobox. Down-regulation of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA expression during colorectal
carcinogenesis.

Mallo GV(1), Rechreche H, Frigerio JM, Rocha D, Zweibaum A, Lacasa M, Jordan BR, 
Dusetti NJ, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)U.315 INSERM, Marseille, France.

Defining the molecular mechanisms involved in cancer formation and progression is
still a major challenge in colorectal-cancer research. Our strategy was to
characterize genes whose expression is altered during colorectal carcinogenesis. 
To this end, the phenotype of a colorectal tumour was previously established by
partial sequencing of a large number of its transcripts and the genes of interest
were selected by differential screening on high-density filters with mRNA of
colorectal cancer and normal adjacent mucosa. Fifty-one clones were found
over-expressed and 23 were underexpressed in the colorectal-cancer tissues of the
5 analyzed patients. Among the latter, clones 6G2 and 32D6 were found of
particular interest, since they had significant homology with several
homeodomain-containing genes. The highest degree of similarity was with the
murine Cdx1 for 6G2, and with the murine Cdx2 and hamster Cdx3 for 32D6. Using a 
RT-PCR approach, complete sequence of both types of homeobox-containing cDNA was 
obtained. The amino-acid sequence of the human Cdx1 is 85% identical to the mouse
protein, and human Cdx2 has 94% identity with the mouse Cdx2 and hamster Cdx3.
Tissue-distribution analysis of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA showed that both transcripts
were specifically expressed in small intestine, in colon and rectum. Twelve
tissue samples from colorectal adenocarcinomas and the corresponding normal
mucosa were analyzed by Northern blot. Expression of the 2 types of mRNA was
either reduced or absent in 10 of them. Several colon-cancer cell lines were also
analyzed. Cdx2 mRNA was absent from LS174T cells and Cdx1 mRNA was absent in
PF11, TC7 and SW480 cells; none was detected in HT29 cells. It was concluded that
decrease in human Cdx1 and/or Cdx2 expression is associated with colorectal
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9036867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cell. 1995 Nov 17;83(4):641-53.

Disruption of the murine homeobox gene Cdx1 affects axial skeletal identities by 
altering the mesodermal expression domains of Hox genes.

Subramanian V(1), Meyer BI, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Göttingen, Federal Republic of Germany.

Cdx1 is expressed along the embryonic axis from day 7.5 postcoitum until day 12, 
by which time the anterior limit of expression has regressed from the hindbrain
level to the forelimb bud region. To assign a functional role for Cdx1 in murine 
embryonic development, we have inactivated the gene via homologous recombination.
Viable fertile homozygous mutant mice were obtained that show anterior homeotic
transformations of vertebrae. These abnormalities were concomitant with posterior
shifts of Hox gene expression domains in the somitic mesoderm. The presence of
putative Cdx1-binding sites in Hox gene control regions as well as in vitro
transactivation of Hoxa-7 indicates a direct regulation.

PMID: 7585967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Aug 15;92(17):7854-8.

Reexpression of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) gamma or overexpression of RAR alpha
or RAR beta in RAR gamma-null F9 cells reveals a partial functional redundancy
between the three RAR types.

Taneja R(1), Bouillet P, Boylan JF, Gaub MP, Roy B, Gudas LJ, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Medicale/Université Louis Pasteur, Collège de France, Illkirch.

Disruption of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) gamma in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells 
leads to aberrent differentiation and reduced activation of expression of several
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA)-induced genes. We have analyzed the expression of
several additional RA-responsive genes in RAR alpha- and RAR gamma-null F9 cells.
The RA-induced activation of Cdx1, Gap43, Stra4, and Stra6 was specifically
impaired in RAR gamma-null cells, supporting the idea that each RAR may regulate 
distinct subsets of target genes. To further investigate the role of RAR gamma in
F9 cell differentiation, "rescue" cell lines reexpressing RAR gamma 2 or
overexpressing either RAR alpha 1 or RAR beta 2 were established in RAR
gamma-null cells. Reexpression of RAR gamma or overexpression of RAR alpha
restored both target-gene activation and the differentiation potential. In
contrast, over-expression of RAR beta only poorly restored differentiation,
although it could replace RAR gamma for the activation of target genes.
Functional redundancy between the various RARs is discussed.

PMCID: PMC41244
PMID: 7644503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):206-11.

Isolation, characterization, and precise physical localization of human CDX1, a
caudal-type homeobox gene.

Bonner CA(1), Loftus SK, Wasmuth JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, College of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine 92717, USA.

The human CDX1 gene has been isolated from a small intestine cDNA library using a
murine Cdx1 cDNA probe. The nucleotide sequence of CDX1 is 81% identical to
murine Cdx1 and predicts a 265-amino-acid protein with 85% identity to the mouse 
protein (98% identity, including conservative amino acid changes). The CDX1 locus
has been mapped to a cosmid contig from chromosome 5q31-q33, placing CDX1
approximately 100 kb distal to CSFIR. Expression of CDX1 in adults appears to be 
limited to the intestine and colon by Northern analysis, suggesting a possible
role in the terminal differentiation of the intestine. Further analysis of CDX1
should elucidate the function of caudal-type homeobox genes in human development.

PMID: 8530027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 25;268(36):27214-25.

Isolation and characterization of the murine homeobox gene Cdx-1. Regulation of
expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

Hu Y(1), Kazenwadel J, James R.

Author information: 
(1)Melbourne Tumor Biology Branch, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The murine homeobox gene Cdx-1 is postulated to play an important role in the
process of cellular commitment in the intestinal epithelium based upon its
graded, tissue-specific expression pattern in the adult animal. We have isolated 
and sequenced both cDNA and genomic clones in order to understand how this
expression pattern is regulated and to determine the amino acid sequence of the
encoded protein. Our studies show that the Cdx-1 gene contains 3 exons and 2
introns and encodes a 268-amino acid protein which is translated from a
1.7-1.8-kilobase mRNA. Transcription of the Cdx-1 gene initiates some 30 base
pairs downstream from a typical TATA box which, together with the 5' end of the
gene, is located within a CpG island. Transient transfection experiments have
shown three regions which regulate Cdx-1 gene expression. These include a typical
silencer element at -589 to -380, an element at -887 to -1040 which blocks the
effect of the silencer and a positive element at -47 to +66; the only one which
shows epithelial cell specificity. Using gel shift and footprinting assays we
have detected proteins in nuclear extracts prepared from colonic epithelial cells
which bind to the silencer element. These initial results suggest that Cdx-1 gene
expression is regulated by multiple positive and negative transcription factors.

PMID: 7903305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Development. 1993 Jan;117(1):191-203.

Mouse Cdx-1 expression during gastrulation.

Meyer BI(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Göttingen, FRG.

We describe the expression pattern of the mouse Cdx-1 gene during early
development, examined by both RNA and protein analyses. Cdx-1 expression began
with the onset of the head process formation (day 7.5) in ectodermal and
mesodermal cells of the primitive streak. Expression extended initially to the
middle of the prospective hindbrain and subsequently regressed caudad to the
spinal cord level by day 9.5. The mesoderm-specific expression was detected in
the first somites and could be followed during their differentiation to the
myotome of the dorsal somitic edge by day 12. The developing limb buds and the
mesonephros exhibited expression up to day 12. No signal could be detected in
notochordal cells and cells of the definitive endoderm. Thus, Cdx-1 is expressed 
during gastrulation when anterior-posterior positional values are established
along the embryonic axes. Furthermore, the expression correlates with the
formation of segmented tissue in the posterior hindbrain, the spinal cord and
structures like the mesonephros.

PMID: 7900985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. FEBS Lett. 1992 Dec 14;314(2):163-6.

Gradient expression of Cdx along the rat intestine throughout postnatal
development.

Freund JN(1), Boukamel R, Benazzouz A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U61, Strasbourg, France.

Rat genomic DNA was isolated by homology with Cdx1, a murine homeogene
selectively expressed in intestinal cells of endodermal origin. Southern blot
analysis indicated that the rat genome contains a single or a small number of
closely related Cdx gene(s). A major 1.7 kb Cdx mRNA was detected in neonate,
suckling and adult rats whereas a 6.5 kb mRNA was restricted to sucklings and
adults. Both transcripts showed decreasing concentration from the colon towards
the proximal part of the small intestine. No obvious correlation could be
established with the patterns of expression of transcripts corresponding to
markers of cell proliferation and cell differentiation during postnatal
development.

PMID: 1360907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 1991 May;112(1):207-19.

A chicken caudal homologue, CHox-cad, is expressed in the epiblast with posterior
localization and in the early endodermal lineage.

Frumkin A(1), Rangini Z, Ben-Yehuda A, Gruenbaum Y, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel.

CHox-cad is a chicken homeobox gene whose homeodomain is homologous to the
Drosophila caudal and the murine Cdx1 genes. Based on sequence analysis of a 2.5 
kb CHox-cad cDNA clone, we deduced that the primary translation product consists 
of 248 amino acids. Comparison between the cDNA and genomic clones revealed the
presence of an intron within the CHox-cad homeodomain between amino acids 44 and 
45. The onset of CHox-cad transcription correlates temporarily with the beginning
of gastrulation. During primitive streak stages CHox-cad exhibits a caudally
localized pattern of expression restricted to the epiblast and the primitive
streak. At these stages, CHox-cad transcripts can also be detected in the
definitive endoderm cells. Later in embryogenesis CHox-cad is expressed in the
epithelial lining of the embryonic gut and yolk sac. After four days of chicken
development, no CHox-cad transcripts could be detected. The early CHox-cad
posterior expression in the germ layer undergoing gastrulation and its continuous
expression in the early endodermal lineage raise the possibility of CHox-cad
involvement in the establishment of the definitive endoderm.

PMID: 1685114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Gene. 1985;34(2-3):325-34.

A DEX gene conferring production of extracellular amyloglucosidase on yeast.

Meaden P, Ogden K, Bussey H, Tubb RS.

A DEX gene from Saccharomyces diastaticus (strain BRG536 alpha DEX1) has been
cloned in the hybrid vector pJDB207. The gene is included within a 3.6-kb
fragment and confers production of extracellular amylo-alpha-1,4-glucosidase
(AMG) and, thereby the ability to hydrolyse starch or dextrins on Dex- strains of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The cloned gene hybridizes to three fragments produced 
by ClaI digestion of DNA from BRG536; one of these (11 kb) cosegregates in
crosses with DEX1, while another (10 kb) is present in all Dex+ and Dex- strains 
examined. Accumulation of extracellular AMG by Dex+ transformants is up to
five-fold that of BRG536, and escapes regulation by the CDX1 gene under
conditions of excess glucose. The enzyme produced by Dex+ transformants resembles
that of BRG536 with respect to Mr (approx. 150 X 10(3)) and effects of
temperature and pH. The cloned DEX gene can be used as a selectable marker for
introducing recombinant plasmids into wild-type strains of S. cerevisiae.

PMID: 3924740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


