
1. Dev Growth Differ. 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12276. [Epub ahead of print]

Roles of ERa during mouse trophectoderm lineage differentiation: revealed by
antagonist and agonist of ERa.

Cheng X(1), Xu S(2), Song C(1), He L(2), Lian X(2), Liu Y(1), Wei J(1,)(2), Pang 
L(1), Wang S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Engineering Center, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, China. (2)Department
of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, China.

During mouse early embryogenesis, blastomeres increase in number by the morula
stage. Among them, the outer cells are polarized and differentiated into
trophectoderm (TE), while the inner cells remain unpolarized and give rise to
inner cell mass (ICM). TE provides an important liquid environment for ICM
development. In spite of extensive research, the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TE formation are still obscure. In order to investigate the roles of estrogen
receptor a (ERa) in this course, mouse 8-cell embryos were collected and cultured
in media containing ERa specific antagonist MPP and/or agonist PPT. The results
indicated that MPP treatment inhibits blastocyst formation in a dose-dependent
manner, while PPT, at proper concentration, promotes the cavitation ratio of
mouse embryos. Immunofluorescence staining results showed that MPP significantly 
decreased the nuclear expression of CDX2 in morula, but no significant changes of
OCT4 were observed. Moreover, after MPP treatment, the expression levels of the
genes related to TE specification, Tead4, Gata3 and Cdx2, were significantly
reduced. Overall, these results indicated that ERa might affect mouse embryo
cavitation by regulating TE lineage differentiation.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 27037955  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Pathol Int. 2016 Mar 27. doi: 10.1111/pin.12402. [Epub ahead of print]

A case of adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation of the ampulla of
Vater.

Mitsuma K(1), Taniguchi H(1), Kishi Y(2), Hiraoka N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories. (2)Hepato-Biliary and
Pancreatic Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Cancer of the ampulla of Vater is rare, though it has various histological types 
and its histogenesis is fascinating in view of the anatomically complex nature of
the ampulla. Fetal gut-like adenocarcinoma, usually found in the stomach, can
also develop in the ampullary region in extremely rare cases. Here we present a
case of ampullary adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic and neuroendocrine
differentiation. A 55-year-old woman presented with an epigastric pain.
Endoscopic examination revealed a 2-cm submucosal tumor-like lesion in the
ampulla. The surgical specimen showed that an exposed protruding type of tumor
appeared as a well-demarcated whitish-yellow solid mass. Microscopically, the
tumor had proliferated in the common channel and invaded the duodenal submucosa
with mucosal lesion of intestinal-type adenocarcinoma. The main tumor consisted
of three different histological types showing transitional areas: adenocarcinoma 
with enteroblastic differentiation (ENT), neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC), and
well differentiated adenocarcinoma (WEL). Morphologically the ENT resembled fetal
gut and immunohistochemically expressed SALL4 and glypican 3. The WEL was
positive for CK20 and CDX2, revealing an intestinal-type phenotype. AFP and
HepPar1 were not evident in any part of the lesion. We speculated this tumor had 
arisen from intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the common channel and acquired
enteroblastic and neuroendocrine differentiation during growth.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 27016918  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell. 2016 Mar 24;165(1):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.047.

Heterogeneity in Oct4 and Sox2 Targets Biases Cell Fate in 4-Cell Mouse Embryos.

Goolam M(1), Scialdone A(2), Graham SJ(1), Macaulay IC(3), Jedrusik A(1),
Hupalowska A(1), Voet T(4), Marioni JC(5), Zernicka-Goetz M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development & Neuroscience, University of Cambridge,
Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)European Bioinformatics Institute,
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Genome Campus,
Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, 
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome
Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (4)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome
Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK; Laboratory of Reproductive Genomics,
Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(5)European Bioinformatics Institute, European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK; Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK; Cancer Research
UK-Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge
CB2 0RE, UK. Electronic address: marioni@ebi.ac.uk. (6)Department of Physiology, 
Development & Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge
CB2 3EG, UK. Electronic address: mz205@cam.ac.uk.

The major and essential objective of pre-implantation development is to establish
embryonic and extra-embryonic cell fates. To address when and how this
fundamental process is initiated in mammals, we characterize transcriptomes of
all individual cells throughout mouse pre-implantation development. This
identifies targets of master pluripotency regulators Oct4 and Sox2 as being
highly heterogeneously expressed between blastomeres of the 4-cell embryo, with
Sox21 showing one of the most heterogeneous expression profiles. Live-cell
tracking demonstrates that cells with decreased Sox21 yield more extra-embryonic 
than pluripotent progeny. Consistently, decreasing Sox21 results in premature
upregulation of the differentiation regulator Cdx2, suggesting that Sox21 helps
safeguard pluripotency. Furthermore, Sox21 is elevated following increased
expression of the histone H3R26-methylase CARM1 and is lowered following CARM1
inhibition, indicating the importance of epigenetic regulation. Therefore, our
results indicate that heterogeneous gene expression, as early as the 4-cell
stage, initiates cell-fate decisions by modulating the balance of pluripotency
and differentiation.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27015307  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Comp Pathol. 2016 Mar 20. pii: S0021-9975(16)00032-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jcpa.2016.02.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Urachal Adenocarcinoma in a Dog.

Shrader S(1), Lauridson J(2), King Z(3), Loch J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Auburn, USA. Electronic address: sms0059@auburn.edu. (2)528 Seminole Place,
Montgomery, USA. (3)Taylor Crossing Animal Hospital, 6897 Atlanta Hwy,
Montgomery, AL, USA.

An 8-year-old neutered female Labrador retriever was presented with a 3-year
history of intermittent haematuria. Ultrasonographic evaluation of the urinary
bladder revealed a 2 × 3 × 0.5 cm intraluminal mass arising at the dome. The mass
was excised via partial cystectomy. Histopathological examination revealed
neoplastic epithelial cells arranged in sheets, irregularly-branching tubules and
acini within a fibrovascular stroma. Neoplastic cells were cuboidal to polygonal 
with abundant foamy amphophilic cytoplasm, typically with a single, large, clear 
intracytoplasmic vacuole and eccentric nucleus ('signet ring' cells). Neoplastic 
tubules were often ectatic and contained abundant mucin. Immunohistochemically,
the neoplastic cells had weak, cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for cytokeratin 7 and
rare, but strong, nuclear immunoreactivity for CDX2. Based on the cellular
morphology, immunolabelling characteristics and anatomical location, a diagnosis 
of adenocarcinoma of urachal origin was made. To the authors' knowledge, this is 
the first reported case of urachal adenocarcinoma in a dog.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27009748  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 24;14(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s12958-016-0149-x.

Genetic mouse embryo assay: improving performance and quality testing for
assisted reproductive technology (ART) with a functional bioassay.

Gilbert RS(1), Nunez B(2), Sakurai K(2), Fielder T(3), Ni HT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, Irvine Scientific, 1830 E. Warner Ave,
Santa Ana, CA, 92705, USA. rgilbert@irvinesci.com. (2)Department of Research and 
Development, Irvine Scientific, 1830 E. Warner Ave, Santa Ana, CA, 92705, USA.
(3)Transgenic Mouse Facility, University of California Irvine (UCI), 121 Bison
Modular, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.

BACKGROUND: Growing concerns about safety of ART on human gametes, embryos,
clinical outcomes and long-term health of offspring require improved methods of
risk assessment to provide functionally relevant assays for quality control
testing and pre-clinical studies prior to clinical implementation. The one-cell
mouse embryo assay (MEA) is the most widely used for development and quality
testing of human ART products; however, concerns exist due to the
insensitivity/variability of this bioassay which lacks standardization and
involves subjective analysis by morphology alone rather than functional analysis 
of the developing embryos. We hypothesized that improvements to MEA by the use of
functional molecular biomarkers could enhance sensitivity and improve detection
of suboptimal materials/conditions.
RESULTS: Fresh one-cell transgenic mouse embryos with green fluorescent protein
(GFP) expression driven by Pou6f1 or Cdx2 control elements were harvested and
cultured to blastocysts in varied test and control conditions to compare
assessment by standard morphology alone versus the added dynamic expression of
GFP for screening and selection of critical raw materials and detection of
suboptimal culture conditions. Transgenic mouse embryos expressing functionally
relevant biomarkers of normal early embryo development can be used to monitor the
developmental impact of culture conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: This novel approach provides a superior MEA that is more meaningful 
and sensitive for detection of embryotoxicity than morphological assessment
alone.

PMCID: PMC4806453
PMID: 27009109  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nutr Cancer. 2016 Mar 23:1-5. [Epub ahead of print]

Reduction in Cell Viability and in Homeobox Protein Levels Following in Vitro
Exposure to d-tocopherol in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Collins J(1), Safah H(2), Lobelle-Rich P(2), Whaley S(3), Campbell S(3), S Saba
N(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Tulane University , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA. 
(2)b Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology , Department of Medicine, Tulane 
University , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA. (3)c Department of Biomedical
Sciences , Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University , Johnson
City , Tennessee , USA.

d-Tocopherol (d-T), the least prevalent tocopherol in our diet, was described to 
have a more potent anticancer activity in solid tumors compared to the other
tocopherols. d-T induces tumor cell death through peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR-<U+03B3>) induction, cyclin-D1 inhibition, and
modulation of redox balance. Nevertheless, the role of d-T in preventing or
treating hematologic malignancies has not been studied. In this study, we
screened the efficacy of d-T against six cell lines representing a wide spectrum 
of hematologic malignancies: Jurkat (acute T-cell leukemia), K-562 (chronic
myeloid leukemia), KG-1 [acute myeloid leukemia (AML)], THP-1 (acute monocytic
leukemia), TOM-1 (acute lymphoblastic leukemia), and UMCL01-101 (AIDS-associated 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma). Interestingly, the AML cell line KG-1 was the
only one to be significantly affected at concentrations of d-T as low as 20 µM.
The antileukemic activity of d-T in AML was verified in a set of primary cells
collected from patients newly diagnosed with AML. Apoptotic induction and cell
cycle arrest explained the efficacy of d-T against KG-1 cells. The mechanism of
cell growth inhibition of d-T was through downregulation of cyclin-D1 and a set
of homeobox proteins (HOXA9, PBX1, and Cdx2) that have a well-documented role in 
the pathobiology of AML.

PMID: 27008503  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Case Rep Pathol. 2016;2016:8608412. doi: 10.1155/2016/8608412. Epub 2016 Feb 23.

Urinary Bladder Adenocarcinoma Metastatic to the Abdominal Wall: Report of a Case
with Cytohistologic Correlation.

Nath V(1), Baliga M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 North 
State Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.

We report a case of adenocarcinoma metastatic to the abdominal wall in a
71-year-old man with a history of primary bladder adenocarcinoma. CT-guided core 
biopsy was performed; imprints and histologic sections showed malignant glands
lined by tumor cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent nucleoli,
infiltrating through skeletal muscle. Immunohistochemistry revealed positivity
for CK7, membranous/cytoplasmic ß-catenin, caudal-type homeobox transcription
factor 2 (CDX2), and a-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase and negativity for CK20,
p63, prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and prostate-specific acid phosphatase
(PSAP). These findings were interpreted as metastatic adenocarcinoma, consistent 
with bladder primary. Primary bladder adenocarcinoma is a rare malignancy arising
within glandular metaplasia and is associated with cystitis cystica and cystitis 
glandularis. Predisposing factors include bladder exstrophy, schistosomiasis, and
other causes of chronic bladder irritation. This tumor is divided into
intestinal, clear cell, and signet ring cell subtypes. Treatment involves radical
cystectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection, and prognosis is unfavorable.
Primary bladder adenocarcinoma should be differentiated from urachal
adenocarcinoma, which arises from urachal remnants near the bladder dome, and
secondary adenocarcinoma, or vesical involvement by adenocarcinoma from a
different primary. CK7, CK20, CDX2, thrombomodulin, and ß-catenin can help
distinguish primary bladder adenocarcinoma from colonic adenocarcinoma; PSA and
PSAP can help distinguish primary bladder adenocarcinoma from prostate
adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4781945
PMID: 27006847  [PubMed]


8. Pol J Pathol. 2015 Dec;66(4):376-82.

The prognostic significance of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase and the receptors for 
transforming growth factor ß and interferon <U+03B3> in metastatic lymph nodes in
malignant melanoma.

Pelak MJ, Snietura M, Lange D, Nikiel B, Pecka KM.

We analyzed the prognostic significance of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and 
type 1 receptors for transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ßR1) and interferon
gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>R1) in resected nodal metastases of 48 malignant melanoma patients.
In 32 cases the corresponding skin tumors were available. We used
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining which was assessed by pathologists and by a
computer-aided algorithm that yielded quantitative results, both absolute and
relative. We correlated the results with the patient outcome. We identified
absolute computer-assessed IDO levels as positively correlated with increased
risk of death in a multivariate model (HR = 1.02; 95% CI: 1.002-1.04; p = 0.03). 
In univariate analysis, patients with IDO levels below the median had a better
overall survival time (30.3 vs. 17.5 months; p = 0.03). TGF-ßR1 and IFN-<U+03B3>R1
expression was modestly correlated (R = 0.34; p lt; 0.05) and TGF-ßR1 expression 
was lower in lymph nodes than in matched primary skin tumors (Z = 2.87; p =
0.004). The pathologists' and computer-aided IHC assessment demonstrated high
correlation levels (R = 0.61, R = 0.74 and R = 0.88 for IDO, TGF-ßR1 and IFN-<U+03B3>R1,
respectively). Indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase is prognostic for the patient outcome 
in melanoma with nodal involvement and should be investigated prospectively for
its predictive significance. IHC assessment by computer-aided methods is
recommended as its gives IHC more objectivity and reproducibility. ecting
mismatch repair deficiency. Association of CDX2 and PMS2 in the present study is 
necessary to conduct further genetic and pathological studies focusing on these
two markers together.

PMID: 27003769  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Pediatr Surg. 2016 Mar 2. pii: S0022-3468(16)00162-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.02.074. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-term renewable human intestinal epithelial stem cells as monolayers: A
potential for clinical use.

Scott A(1), Rouch JD(1), Jabaji Z(1), Khalil HA(1), Solorzano S(2), Lewis M(3),
Martín MG(4), Stelzner MG(5), Dunn JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. (2)Department
of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Mattel Children's
Hospital and the David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. (3)Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare
System, Department of Pathology, Los Angeles, CA. (4)Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Mattel Children's Hospital and the
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. (5)Veterans
Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Department of Surgery, Los
Angeles, CA. (6)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA; School of Engineering,
Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA. Electronic address: jdunn@mednet.ucla.edu.

PURPOSE: Current culture schema for human intestinal stem cells (hISCs)
frequently rely on a 3D culture system using Matrigel, a laminin-rich matrix
derived from murine sarcoma that is not suitable for clinical use. We have
developed a novel 2D culture system for the in vitro expansion of hISCs as an
intestinal epithelial monolayer without the use of Matrigel.
METHODS: Cadaveric duodenal samples were processed to isolate intestinal crypts
from the mucosa. Crypts were cultured on a thin coat of type I collagen or
laminin. Intestinal epithelial monolayers were supported with growth factors to
promote self-renewal or differentiation of the hISCs. Proliferating monolayers
were sub-cultured every 4-5days.
RESULTS: Intestinal epithelial monolayers were capable of long-term cell renewal.
Less differentiated monolayers expressed high levels of gene marker LGR5, while
more differentiated monolayers had higher expressions of CDX2, MUC2, LYZ, DEF5,
and CHGA. Furthermore, monolayers were capable of passaging into a 3D culture
system to generate spheroids and enteroids.
CONCLUSION: This 2D system is an important step to expand hISCs for further
experimental studies and for clinical cell transplantation.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 1 Experimental.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26995514  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Cytotechnology. 2016 Mar 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Exogenous expression of homeoprotein EGAM1N prevents in vitro cardiomyogenesis by
impairing expression of T and Nkx2.5, but not Mef2c, in mouse embryonic stem
cells.

Nonaka A(1), Yoshida M(1), Iha M(1), Kubo Y(1), Kihara Y(1), Kikuchi T(1),
Kumagai Y(1), Sasaki A(1,)(2), Kobayashi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita, 010-0195, Japan. (2)Akita Research
Institute of Food and Brewing, Akita, 010-1623, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Advanced
Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource Sciences, Akita
Prefectural University, Akita, 010-0195, Japan. makoba@akita-pu.ac.jp.

Generation of multiple cell types from embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced
pluripotent stem cells is crucial to provide materials for regenerative medicine.
EGAM1N has been found in preimplantation mouse embryos and mouse ES cells as a
functionally unclassified homeoprotein. Recently, we reported that expression of 
EGAM1N suppressed the in vitro differentiation of ES cells into progenitor cells 
that arise in early embryogenesis. To clarify the effect of EGAM1N on terminal
differentiation, embryoid bodies (EBs) were prepared from ES cells expressing
exogenous Egam1n. In EBs expressing Egam1n, cardiomyogenesis was inhibited by
impairing the expression of crucial transcription factors Brachyury T and Nkx2.5 
in the generation of mesoderm and cardiomyocytes, respectively. Expression levels
of Mef2c, another crucial gene for cardiomyogenesis, were unaffected. Conversely,
the expression levels of Gata6 and Plat, markers for the primitive endoderm
lineage, and Cdx2, a marker for the trophectoderm lineage, were increased. These 
results suggested that certain cell populations in EBs expressing Egam1n
preferentially differentiated to such cell lineages. Our results suggest that
EGAM1N not only affects the generation of progenitor cells during early
embryogenesis, but also the progression of terminal differentiation, such as
cardiomyogenesis, in mouse ES cells.

PMID: 26983934  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Anticancer Res. 2016 Mar;36(3):921-4.

Expression Pattern of CDX2, Estrogen and Progesterone Receptors in Primary
Gastroenteropancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors and Metastases.

Zimmermann N(1), Lazar-Karsten P(1), Keck T(2), Billmann F(2), Schmid S(3),
Brabant G(3), Thorns C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (2)Deparment of
Surgery, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (3)Medical Clinic 1, University
of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology, University of Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany christoph.thorns@uksh.de.

BACKGROUND: A significant number of patients with gastroenteropancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (GEP NETs) present with metastatic disease and with unknown
primary in about 15% of cases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed 163 primaries of GEP NET and 115 metastases
for expression of caudal type homebox 2 (CDX2), estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), somatostatin receptor 2a (SSTR2a) and Ki67.
RESULTS: PR was most often positive in pancreatic NET and only rarely in
non-pancreatic NET (p<0.001). ER was more frequently expressed in non-pancreatic 
NET (p<0.001) and was more often positive in females than males (p=0.019). CDX2
was positive in all primaries of the duodenum, ileum and appendix, but was also
detected in 24% of metastases with pancreatic primary. SSTR2a and Ki67 did not
differ significantly between primaries and metastases.
CONCLUSION: Our data substantiate the value of PR, ER and CDX2 in GEP NET, and
steroid hormone receptors, being differentially expressed in male and female
patients. Differences between primaries and metastases were small but potentially
relevant.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26976979  [PubMed - in process]


12. Diagn Pathol. 2016 Feb 29;11(1):23. doi: 10.1186/s13000-016-0473-7.

Increasing diagnostic accuracy to grade dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus using an
immunohistochemical panel for CDX2, p120ctn, c-Myc and Jagged1.

Karamchandani DM(1), Lehman HL(2), Ohanessian SE(3), Massé J(4), Welsh PA(5),
Odze RD(6), Goldblum JR(7), Berg AS(8), Stairs DB(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, 500 University Drive,
Hershey, PA, 17033, USA. dkaramchandani@hmc.psu.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, 
The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Penn State Milton S.
Hershey Medical Center, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA, 17033, USA.
hlehman@hmc.psu.edu. (3)Department of Pathology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, 500 
University Drive, Hershey, PA, 17033, USA. saraohanessian@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, 500 University Drive,
Hershey, PA, 17033, USA. julimasse@gmail.com. (5)Department of Pathology, The
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey
Medical Center, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA, 17033, USA. paw14@psu.edu.
(6)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
rodze@partners.org. (7)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 
USA. goldblj@ccf.org. (8)Department of Public Health Sciences, The Pennsylvania
State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA. aberg1@hmc.psu.edu.
(9)Department of Pathology, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, 500 University Drive,
Hershey, PA, 17033, USA. dbs18@psu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Patients with non-dysplastic Barrett's esophagus (ND-BE) and
low-grade dysplasia (LGD) are typically monitored by periodic endoscopic
surveillance, while those with high-grade dysplasia (HGD) and esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC) are usually treated by more aggressive interventions like
endoscopic mucosal resection, ablation or surgery. Therefore, the accurate
grading of dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus (BE) is essential for proper patient 
care. However, there is significant interobserver and intraobserver variability
in the histologic grading of BE dysplasia. The objective of this study was to
create an immunohistochemical (IHC) panel that facilitates the grading of BE
dysplasia and can be used as an adjunct to histology in challenging cases.
METHODS: 100 BE biopsies were re-graded for dysplasia independently by 3
subspecialized gastrointestinal pathologists. IHC staining for CDX2, p120ctn,
c-Myc and Jagged1 proteins was then performed and assessed by two separate
methods of semi-quantitative scoring. Scores were integrated using a principal
component analysis (PCA) and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve.
RESULTS: Principal component analysis demonstrated the ability of this panel of
proteins to segregate ND-BE/LGD and HGD/EAC, as the expression of the four
proteins is significantly altered between the two subsets. Analysis of the
receiver operating characteristic curve showed that this panel has the potential 
to aid in the grading of dysplasia in these two subcategories with both high
sensitivity and specificity. While not able to discriminate between ND-BE and
LGD, this panel of four proteins may be used as an adjunct to help discriminate
subsets of ND-BE/LGD from HGD/EAC.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that the maximum utility of this IHC panel of CDX2,
p120ctn, c-Myc, and Jagged1 proteins would be to distinguish between LGD and HGD 
in histologically challenging cases, given the aggressive interventions still
used for HGD in many institutions, and hence may aid in the optimal patient
management. The results of this initial study are promising, though further
validation is needed before this panel can be used clinically, including future
randomized prospective studies with larger patient cohorts from diverse
locations.

PMCID: PMC4772649
PMID: 26926447  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cell Adh Migr. 2016 Feb 25:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Unique trophoblast stem cell- and pluripotency marker staining patterns depending
on gestational age and placenta-associated pregnancy complications.

Weber M(1), Göhner C(1,)(2), Martin SS(3), Vattai A(4), Hutter S(4), Parraga
M(3), Jeschke U(4), Schleussner E(1), Markert UR(1), Fitzgerald JS(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Obstetrics , Placenta Lab, University Hospital Jena , Jena ,
Germany. (2)b Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands. (3)c
Reproductive Biology Research Center, School of Medicine, Universidad de
Valparaiso , Chile. (4)d Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Ludwig
Maximilians University of Munich , Munich , Germany. (5)e Praxisklinik am Anger, 
Kinderwunschzentrum Erfurt , Erfurt , Germany.

Preeclampsia (PE) and intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) are rare but severe 
pregnancy complications that are associated with placental insufficiency often
resulting in premature birth. The clinical pathologies are related to gross
placental pathologies and trophoblastic deficiencies that might derive from
inflammatory processes and oxidative stress injury. The mesenchymal core of
placental villi has been identified as a possible niche for trophoblast
progenitor cells that are called upon to replenish the injured
syncytiotrophoblast layer. These progenitor cells are known to express
trophoblast stem cell (CDX2) and pluripotency (SOX2, NANOG and OCT4A) markers,
however only little data is available characterizing the expression of these
transcription factors beyond the blastocyst stage. We aimed to describe the
expression of these factors in healthy 1st and 3rd trimester placentae as well as
PE, IUGR and combined PE+IUGR placentae. We analyzed 8 respective samples derived
from 1st trimester (elective abortions), and 3rd trimester (healthy controls, PE,
IUGR and combined PE+IUGR). We accomplished immunoperoxidase staining to detect
the stem cell markers: CDX2 (trophectoderm), SOX2, NANOG and OCT4A (embryonal).
Immunoreative scoring was used for objective analyses of staining patterns. All
markers display clearly elevated signals in 1st trimester villous samples as
compared to healthy 3rd trimester counterparts. Especially CDX2 and NANOG were
specific to the cytotrophoblast layer and the mesenchymal core. Specific and
differential expression patterns were visible in the villous/extravillous
compartment of each placenta-associated pregnancy complication (PE: pan elevated 
expression; IUGR elevated SOX2 in basal plate; combined PE+IUGR pan loss of
expression). Reduction of stem cell transcription factor expression in term
placentae indicates temporal regulation, and probably a specific function which
is yet to be elucidated. The differential expression patterns within placentae
complicated with placenta-associated pregnancy complications indicate that PE,
IUGR and combined PE+IUGR are separate entities. It is unclear whether the
alterations are the cause or the effect of the clinical pathology.

PMID: 26914354  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7554. [Epub ahead of print]

Chemopreventive activity of GEN-27, a genistein derivative, in colitis-associated
cancer is mediated by p65-CDX2-ß-catenin axis.

Du Q(1), Wang Y(1), Liu C(1), Wang H(1), Fan H(1), Li Y(2), Wang J(3), Zhang
X(4), Lu J(5), Ji H(1), Hu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, Department of Physiology, China
Pharmaceutical University, Jiangsu, Nanjing, P.R. China. (2)Department of Chronic
Communicable Disease, Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease Prevention and
Control, Jiangsu, Nanjing, P.R.China. (3)Neurobiology Laboratory, Jiangsu Center 
for Drug Screening, China Pharmaceutical University, Jiangsu, Nanjing, P.R.China.
(4)College of Clinical Medicine, Chengdu University of TCM, Chengdu, P.R. China. 
(5)Department of Organic Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical University, Jiangsu,
Nanjing, P.R. China.

Nonresolving inflammation in the intestine predisposes individuals to
colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CAC), which leads to high morbidity and
mortality. Here we show that genistein-27 (GEN-27), a derivative of genistein,
inhibited proliferation of human colorectal cancer cells through inhibiting
ß-catenin activity. Our results showed that GEN-27 increased expressions of
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and axis inhibition protein 2 (AXIN2), and
reduced ß-catenin nuclear localization, which resulted from the inhibition of
NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 nuclear localization and up-regulation of caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2). Furthermore, GEN-27 decreased binding of p65 to
the silencer region of CDX2 and increased binding of CDX2 to the promoter regions
of APC and AXIN2, thus inhibiting the activation of ß-catenin induced by TNF-a.
Importantly, GEN-27 protected mice from azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS)-induced colon carcinogenesis, with reduced mortality, tumor number and
tumor volume. Histopathology, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry revealed
that dietary GEN-27 significantly decreased secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines and macrophage infiltration. Moreover, GEN-27 inhibited AOM/DSS-induced
p65 and ß-catenin nuclear translocation, while promoted the expression of CDX2,
APC, and AXIN2. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that the
anti-proliferation effect of GEN-27 in vitro and the prevention of CAC in vivo is
mediated by p65-CDX2-ß-catenin axis via inhibiting ß-catenin target genes. Our
results imply that GEN-27 could be a promising candidate for the chemoprevention 
of CAC.

PMID: 26910375  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. World J Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2016 Feb 15;7(1):131-7. doi:
10.4291/wjgp.v7.i1.131.

Role of nitric oxide in the pathogenesis of Barrett's-associated carcinogenesis.

Kusaka G(1), Uno K(1), Iijima K(1), Shimosegawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gen Kusaka, Kaname Uno, Katsunori Iijima, Tooru Shimosegawa, Division of
Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Miyagi 981-8574, Japan.

Barrett's esophagus (BE), a premalignant condition to Barrett's adenocarcinoma
(BAC), is closely associated with chronic inflammation due to gastro-esophageal
reflux. Caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), a representative marker of BE, is
increased during the metaplastic and neoplastic transformation of BE. Nitric
oxide (NO) has been proposed to be a crucial mediator of Barrett's
carcinogenesis. We previously demonstrated that CDX2 might be induced directly
under stimulation of large amounts of NO generated around the gastro-esophageal
junction (GEJ) by activating epithelial growth factor receptor in a
ligand-independent manner. Thus, we reviewed recent developments on the role of
NO in Barrett's carcinogenesis. Notably, recent studies have reported that
microbial communities in the distal esophagus are significantly different among
groups with a normal esophagus, reflux esophagitis, BE or BAC, despite there
being no difference in the bacterial quantity. Considering that microorganism
components can be one of the major sources of large amounts of NO, these studies 
suggest that the bacterial composition in the distal esophagus might play an
important role in regulating NO production during the carcinogenic process.
Controlling an inflammatory reaction due to gastro-esophageal reflux or bacterial
composition around the GEJ might help prevent the progression of Barrett's
carcinogenesis by inhibiting NO production.

PMCID: PMC4753179
PMID: 26909236  [PubMed]


16. Mol Hum Reprod. 2016 Feb 7. pii: gaw011. [Epub ahead of print]

Statins inhibit blastocyst formation by preventing geranylgeranylation.

Alarcon VB(1), Marikawa Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry and
Physiology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 
96813, USA vernadet@hawaii.edu. (2)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department 
of Anatomy, Biochemistry and Physiology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: Statins, inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A
(HMG-CoA) reductase of the mevalonate pathway and prescription drugs that treat
hypercholesterolemia, compromise preimplantation mouse development via modulation
of HIPPO signaling.
STUDY FINDING: HMG-CoA reductase activity is required for trophectoderm
specification, namely blastocyst cavity formation and Yes-associated protein
(YAP) nuclear localization, through the production of isoprenoid geranylgeranyl
pyrophosphate (GGPP) and the action of geranylgeranyl transferase.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Previous studies have shown that treatment of mouse
embryos with mevastatin prevents blastocyst formation, but how HMG-CoA reductase 
is involved in preimplantation development is unknown. HIPPO signaling regulates 
specification of the trophectoderm lineage of the mouse blastocyst by controlling
the nuclear localization of YAP. In human cell lines, the mevalonate pathway
regulates YAP to mediate self-renewal and survival through geranylgeranylation of
RHO proteins. These studies suggest that in preimplantation development, statins 
may act through HIPPO pathway to interfere with trophectoderm specification and
thereby inhibit blastocyst formation.
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: Eight-cell stage (E2.5) mouse embryos
were treated in hanging drop culture with chemical agents, namely statins
(lovastatin, atorvastatin, cerivastatin and pravastatin), mevalonic acid (MVA),
cholesterol, squalene, farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP), geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate
(GGPP), geranylgeranyltransferase inhibitor GGTI-298, RHO inhibitor I, and
squalene synthase inhibitor YM-53601, up to the late blastocyst stage (E4.5).
Efficiency of blastocyst formation was assessed based on gross morphology and the
measurement of the cavity size using an image analysis software. Effects on cell 
lineages and HIPPO signaling were analyzed using immunohistochemistry with
confocal microscopy based on the expression patterns of the lineage-specific
markers and the nuclear accumulation of YAP. Effects on cell lineages were also
examined by quantitative RT-PCR based on the transcript levels of the
lineage-specific marker genes. Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA and
two-sample t-test.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: All four statins examined inhibited
blastocyst formation. The adverse impact of statins was rescued by
supplementation of MVA (P < 0.01) or GGPP (P < 0.01) but not squalene nor
cholesterol. Blastocyst formation was also prevented by GGTI-298 (P < 0.01).
These results indicate that HMG-CoA reductase activity is required for blastocyst
formation mainly through the production of GGPP but not cholesterol. Inhibition
of RHO proteins, known targets of geranylgeranylation, impaired blastocyst
formation, which was not reversed by GGPP supplementation. Nuclear localization
of YAP was diminished by statin treatment but fully restored by supplementation
of MVA (P < 0.01) or GGPP (P < 0.01). This suggests that HIPPO signaling is
regulated by GGPP-dependent mechanisms, possibly geranylgeranylation of RHO, to
enable trophectoderm formation. YM-53601 prevented blastocyst formation (P <
0.01), but its adverse impact was not rescued by supplementation of squalene or
cholesterol, suggesting that squalene synthesis inhibition was not the cause of
blastocyst defects.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Analyses were conducted on embryos cultured ex 
vivo, but they enable the determination of specific concentrations that impair
embryo development which can be compared with drug concentrations in the
reproductive tract when testing in vivo impact of statins through animal
experimentations. Also, analyses were conducted in only one species, the mouse.
Epidemiological studies on the effects of various types of statins on the
fertility of women are necessary.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our study reveals how the mevalonate pathway 
is required for blastocyst formation and intersects with HIPPO pathway to provide
a mechanistic basis for the embryotoxic effect of statins. This bears relevance
for women who are taking statins while trying to conceive, since statins have
potential to prevent the conceptus from reaching the blastocyst stage and to
cause early conceptus demise.
LARGE SCALE DATA: Not applicable.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This study was supported by grants from
the George F. Straub Trust of the Hawaii Community Foundation (13ADVC-60315 to
V.B.A.) and the National Institutes of Health, USA (P20GM103457 to V.B.A.). The
authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26908642  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Cancer Lett. 2016 May 1;374(2):208-15. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.026. Epub
2016 Feb 19.

Distinct mechanisms for opposite functions of homeoproteins Cdx2 and HoxB7 in
double-strand break DNA repair in colon cancer cells.

Soret C(1), Martin E(1), Duluc I(1), Dantzer F(2), Vanier M(1), Gross I(1),
Freund JN(1), Domon-Dell C(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR_S1113, 3 avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France; Université de
Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, FMTS, 67081 Strasbourg, France. (2)Université de
Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, FMTS, 67081 Strasbourg, France; CNRS UMR7242,
Institut de Recherche de l'Ecole de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, 67412 Illkirch,
France. (3)INSERM UMR_S1113, 3 avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France;
Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, FMTS, 67081 Strasbourg, France.
Electronic address: Claire.domon@inserm.fr.

Homeobox genes, involved in embryonic development and tissues homeostasis in
adults, are often deregulated in cancer, but their relevance in pathology is far 
from being fully elucidated. In colon cancers, we report that the homeoproteins
HoxB7 and Cdx2 exhibit different heterogeneous patterns, Cdx2 being localized in 
moderately altered neoplasic glands in contrast to HoxB7 which predominates in
poorly-differentiated areas; they are coexpressed in few cancer cells. In human
colon cancer cells, both homeoproteins interact with the DNA repair factor
KU70/80, but functional studies reveal opposite effects: HoxB7 stimulates DNA
repair and cell survival upon etoposide treatment, whereas Cdx2 inhibits both
processes. The stimulatory effect of HoxB7 on DNA repair requires the
transactivation domain linked to the homeodomain involved in the interaction with
KU70/80, whereas the transactivation domain of Cdx2 is dispensable for its
inhibitory function, which instead needs the homeodomain to interact with KU70/80
and the C-terminal domain. Thus, HoxB7 and Cdx2 respectively use
transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms to stimulate and inhibit DNA 
repair. In addition, in cells co-expressing both homeoproteins, Cdx2 lessens DNA 
repair activity through a novel mechanism of inhibition of the transcriptional
function of HoxB7, whereby Cdx2 forms a molecular complex with HoxB7 and prevents
it to recognize its target in the chromatin. These results point out the complex 
interplay between the DSB DNA repair activity and the homeoproteins HoxB7 and
Cdx2 in colon cancer cells, making the balance between these factors a
determinant and a potential indicator of the efficacy of genotoxic drugs.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26902420  [PubMed - in process]


18. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 19;11(2):e0146390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146390.
eCollection 2016.

Embryo Aggregation in Pig Improves Cloning Efficiency and Embryo Quality.

Buemo CP(1,)(2), Gambini A(1,)(2), Moro LN(1,)(2), Hiriart MI(1,)(2),
Fernández-Martín R(1,)(2), Collas P(3), Salamone DF(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, University of
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (2)National Institute of Scientific and
Technological Research, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (3)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, and Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research, Oslo, Norway.

In this study, we analyzed the effects of the cloned embryo aggregation on in
vitro embryo development and embryo quality by measuring blastocyst diameter and 
cell number, DNA fragmentation levels and the expression of genes associated with
pluripotency, apoptosis, trophoblast and DNA methylation in the porcine.
Zona-free reconstructed cloned embryos were cultured in the well of the well
system, placing one (1x non aggregated group) or three (3x group) embryos per
microwell. Our results showed that aggregation of three embryos increased
blastocyst formation rate and blastocyst diameter of cloned pig embryos. DNA
fragmentation levels in 3x aggregated cloned blastocysts were significantly
decreased compared to 1x blastocysts. Levels of Oct4, Klf4, Igf2, Bax and Dnmt 1 
transcripts were significantly higher in aggregated embryos, whereas Nanog levels
were not affected. Transcripts of Cdx2 and Bcl-xl were essentially
non-detectable. Our study suggests that embryo aggregation in the porcine may be 
beneficial for cloned embryo development and embryo quality, through a reduction 
in apoptotic levels and an improvement in cell reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4760708
PMID: 26894831  [PubMed - in process]


19. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Nov 15;8(11):19895-904. eCollection 2015.

Temporal and spatial expression of caudal-type homeobox proteins in the midgut of
human embryos.

Tang XB(1), Zhang J(1), Wang WL(1), Yuan ZW(2), Bai YZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University 
Shenyang 110004, P. R. China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Health Ministry for
Congenital Malformation Shenyang 110004, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to determine the spatiotemporal expression of
caudal-type homeobox genes (CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4) during development of the midgut
in human embryos and to explore the possible roles of CDX genes during the
morphogenesis of human midgut. Human embryos (n=28) were sectioned serially and
sagittally and CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins were detected on the midline from the
5th to 9th weeks of gestation by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins were weakly expressed in epithelium and
mesenchyme of the midgut in the 6th and 7th weeks of gestation and reached
estimated optimal level on the 8th and 9th weeks of gestation. In the 9th week of
gestation, immunoreactivities specific to CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 were restricted in 
epithelium of the midgut.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins began to express in human midgut in the
6th week of gestation. From the 6th to 9th week of gastation, the expression of
CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 proteins gradually increase and exhibited overlapping
expression patterns, suggesting that CDX genes may be involved in early
development of the epithelium of human midgut. Cross-regulatory interactions may 
exist among CDX genes with respect to human midgut development.

PMCID: PMC4723747
PMID: 26884902  [PubMed]


20. Cancer Cytopathol. 2016 Feb;124(2):89-100. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21660.

Young investigator challenge: Validation and optimization of immunohistochemistry
protocols for use on cellient cell block specimens.

Sauter JL(1), Grogg KL(1), Vrana JA(1), Law ME(1), Halvorson JL(1), Henry MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

BACKGROUND: The objective of the current study was to establish a process for
validating immunohistochemistry (IHC) protocols for use on the Cellient cell
block (CCB) system.
METHODS: Thirty antibodies were initially tested on CCBs using IHC protocols
previously validated on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPE). Cytology
samples were split to generate thrombin cell blocks (TCB) and CCBs. IHC was
performed in parallel. Antibody immunoreactivity was scored, and concordance or
discordance in immunoreactivity between the TCBs and CCBs for each sample was
determined. Criteria for validation of an antibody were defined as concordant
staining in expected positive and negative cells, in at least 5 samples each, and
concordance in at least 90% of the samples total. Antibodies that failed initial 
validation were retested after alterations in IHC conditions.
RESULTS: Thirteen of the 30 antibodies (43%) did not meet initial validation
criteria. Of those, 8 antibodies (calretinin, clusters of differentiation [CD] 3,
CD20, CDX2, cytokeratin 20, estrogen receptor, MOC-31, and p16) were optimized
for CCBs and subsequently validated. Despite several alterations in conditions, 3
antibodies (Ber-EP4, D2-40, and paired box gene 8 [PAX8]) were not successfully
validated.
CONCLUSIONS: Nearly one-half of the antibodies tested in the current study failed
initial validation using IHC conditions that were established in the study
laboratory for FFPE material. Although some antibodies subsequently met
validation criteria after optimization of conditions, a few continued to
demonstrate inadequate immunoreactivity. These findings emphasize the importance 
of validating IHC protocols for methanol-fixed tissue before clinical use and
suggest that optimization for alcohol fixation may be needed to obtain adequate
immunoreactivity on CCBs. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2016;124:89-99. © 2016
American Cancer Society.

© 2016 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26882197  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Cancer Res Ther. 2015 Oct-Dec;11(4):1033. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.148722.

Adenocarcinoma of urinary bladder: A report of two patients.

Kumari N, Vasudeva P, Kumar A, Agrawal U(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pathology, Indian Council of Medical Research, New
Delhi, India.

Adenocarcinoma of the bladder is a rare tumor. Primary and metastatic
adenocarcinomas of urinary bladder are morphologically similar, but
histogenetically different. We present two cases, a signet ring cell
adenocarcinoma with follow-up and another of glandular adenocarcinoma of urinary 
bladder. Pathological evaluation and immunohistochemical panel of eight markers
(E-cadherin, CK20, CK7, CDX2, estrogen receptor (ER), gross cystic disease fluid 
protein 15 (GCDFP15), 34bE12, and prostate specific antigen (PSA) provides a
diagnostic confirmation of primary adenocarcinoma with the positive expression of
E-cadherin and CK20 in case 1 and metastatic adenocarcinoma of prostate with
profile of E-cadherin+, CK20-, GCDFP15+, 34bE12+, and PSA+ in case 2.

PMID: 26881627  [PubMed - in process]


22. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar;13(3):134-5. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2016.18. Epub
2016 Feb 16.

Gastrointestinal cancer: CDX2: prognostic marker for high-risk colon cancer.

Hutchinson L.

PMID: 26880474  [PubMed - in process]


23. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1859(4):591-598. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2016.02.005. Epub 2016 Feb 6.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 coordinates multiple processes in a model of
intestinal epithelial cell function.

Yang R(1), Kerschner JL(1), Harris A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
IL 60614, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie
Children's Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA;
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 transcription factors (HNF1a/ß) are
associated with diabetes. These factors are well studied in the liver, pancreas
and kidney, where they direct tissue-specific gene regulation. However, they also
have an important role in the biology of many other tissues, including the
intestine. We investigated the transcriptional network governed by HNF1 in an
intestinal epithelial cell line (Caco2). We used chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by direct sequencing (ChIP-seq) to identify HNF1 binding sites
genome-wide. Direct targets of HNF1 were validated using conventional ChIP assays
and confirmed by siRNA-mediated depletion of HNF1, followed by RT-qPCR. Gene
ontology process enrichment analysis of the HNF1 targets identified multiple
processes with a role in intestinal epithelial cell function, including
properties of the cell membrane, cellular response to hormones, and regulation of
biosynthetic processes. Approximately 50% of HNF1 binding sites were also
occupied by other members of the intestinal transcriptional network, including
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A), caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), and forkhead
box A2 (FOXA2). Depletion of HNF1 in Caco2 cells increases FOXA2 abundance and
decreases levels of CDX2, illustrating the coordinated activities of the network.
These data suggest that HNF1 plays an important role in regulating intestinal
epithelial cell function, both directly and through interactions with other
intestinal transcription factors.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26855178  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. J Reprod Dev. 2016 Feb 6. [Epub ahead of print]

Selection of accurate reference genes in mouse trophoblast stem cells for reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

Motomura K(1), Inoue K, Ogura A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN BioResource Center, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) form colonies of different sizes and
morphologies, which might reflect their degrees of differentiation. Therefore,
each colony type can have a characteristic gene expression profile; however, the 
expression levels of internal reference genes may also change, causing
fluctuations in their estimated gene expression levels. In this study, we
validated seven housekeeping genes by using a geometric averaging method and
identified Gapdh as the most stable gene across different colony types. Indeed,
when Gapdh was used as the reference, expression levels of Elf5, a TSC marker
gene, stringently classified TSC colonies into two groups: a high expression
groups consisting of type 1 and 2 colonies, and a lower expression group
consisting of type 3 and 4 colonies. This clustering was consistent with our
putative classification of undifferentiated/differentiated colonies based on
their time-dependent colony transitions. By contrast, use of an unstable
reference gene (Rn18s) allowed no such clear classification. Cdx2, another TSC
marker, did not show any significant colony type-specific expression pattern
irrespective of the reference gene. Selection of stable reference genes for
quantitative gene expression analysis might be critical, especially when cell
lines consisting of heterogeneous cell populations are used.

PMID: 26853688  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Adv Anat Pathol. 2016 Mar;23(2):71-83. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000110.

Updates in the Pathologic Diagnosis and Classification of Epithelial Neoplasms of
Urachal Origin.

Paner GP(1), Lopez-Beltran A, Sirohi D, Amin MB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Surgery, Section of Urology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL §Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, CA Champalimaud Clinical Center, Lisbon, Portugal.

Since the publication of the World Health Organization "blue book" in 2004,
several recent studies have provided new insights on the pathologic aspects of
urachal neoplasms. The proposed updates include modified criteria for the
diagnosis of urachal carcinoma. A uniform nomenclature for cystic tumors was
lacking, and it is recommended that urachal mucinous cystic tumors should be
separated and classified in a manner similar to ovarian mucinous neoplasms. The
spectrum includes mucinous cystadenoma, mucinous cystic tumor of low malignant
potential, mucinous cystic tumor of low malignant potential with intraepithelial 
carcinoma, and microscopically or frankly invasive mucinous cystadenocarcinoma,
with 65% of cystic tumors classified as mucinous cystic tumor of low malignant
potential. Most importantly, it has been shown that progression-free survival of 
noninvasive mucinous cystic tumors is significantly better than noncystic
invasive adenocarcinoma. This development, along with prior descriptions of
urachal villous adenoma, has also reaffirmed the occurrence of benign tumors of
urachal epithelial origin. For noncystic (usual) invasive adenocarcinomas, the
traditionally described histologic subtypes of enteric, mucinous, signet ring
cell, not otherwise specified, and mixed remain appropriate, with 50% of tumors
classified as mucinous subtype. Although this subtyping is helpful in diagnosis
and differential diagnosis, the clinical significance of subtyping adenocarcinoma
is still uncertain. Rare nonglandular morphologies such as urothelial, squamous, 
and neuroendocrine carcinoma in urachal carcinomas have been described in detail 
with proposals for their own set of diagnostic criteria. These criteria are based
on unique features of urachal nonglandular carcinomas. Among the immunomarkers
studied, only ß-catenin and CK7 may be of help in the distinction of urachal from
colorectal adenocarcinoma. Awareness of the expression profile of immunomarkers
such as CDX2, P504S (racemase), PSMA, claudin-18, and REG IV in urachal tumors
and in tumors in the differential diagnosis is important to avoid overreliance of
these markers in the diagnosis. Limited studies have identified KRAS mutations
interestingly only in mucinous adenocarcinoma and exclusive of MSI loss, and
mutations in BRAF are not present. Several alternative tumor staging approaches
(eg, Mayo, Ontario, TNM systems) different from the traditional staging proposed 
by Sheldon are used that provide better tumor distribution across stages;
however, the prognostic utility of the stage substratification has yet to be
validated in large prospective studies. Evidence though suggests that staging
urachal cancer is most pertinent when dichotomized to tumors that have spread
outside versus within the perivesical tissue. Only high tumor stage and residual 
tumor after surgery have been shown to be independent predictors of outcome. This
review updates the contemporary classification of urachal epithelial tumors,
which has informed the upcoming 2016 classification of World Health Organization 
tumors. We provide modified criteria for diagnosing urachal adenocarcinomas,
which remains a clinico-pathologic exercise. The role of ancillary diagnostic
methodology and issues pertaining to staging and prognostication are presented.

PMID: 26849813  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Feb 4;18(2):168-9. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2016.01.011.

CDX2: Linking Cell and Patient Fates in Colon Cancer.

Fearon ER(1), Huang EH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Human Genetics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA; Department of
Colorectal Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address:
huange2@ccf.org.

Administering adjuvant chemotherapy to stage II colon cancer patients is
controversial due to limited benefit observed for this subpopulation. Recently,
Dalerba et al. (2016) identified a subgroup of stage II patients that might
benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy based on lack of CDX2 expression in their
cancer stem cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26849302  [PubMed - in process]


27. Fiziol Zh. 2015;61(5):21-7.

Influence of single nucleotide polymorphisms of vitamin D receptor-gene on the
level of osteoassociated hormones linkage with postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Ziablitsev DS, Larin OS.

The levels of osteoassociated hormones, macroelements, interleukines, cyclic
nucleotides and activity of alkaline phosphatase were being detected in the blood
plasma of 74 postmenopausal women with and without osteoporosis (OP). Bone
mineral density (BMD) and the metacarpal index were being assessed according to
the results of densitometry. The allele polymorphisms vitamin D receptor gene
(VDR) Cdx2 (rs11568820) and TaqI (rs731236) were being identified with the help
of the polymerase chain reaction. The major genotype CC TaqI was found in the
group without OP 3.4 times more often than with OP, while the minor genotype TT
was found 3.4 times more often with the presence of OP. The presence of the
genotype CC TaqI decreased the risk of OP progress by 5.5 times, and the genotype
TT TaqI increased by 5.4 times. The presence of the minor allele T was associated
with the higher levels of interleukin 1ß, BMD and lower testosterone blood level.
The major homozygote AA Cdx2 was found in women without OP 2.9 times more often, 
while the minor genotype GG - 5.4 times more often with the presence of OP. The
presence of the major homozygote decreased the risk of OP progress by more than
5.3 times, while the minor homozygote increased the risk by 8 times. The presence
of the minor allele G in the genotype was associated with the increase of
parathyroid hormone, phosphorus, magnesium, alkaline phosphatase activity in
blood, BMD and with the decrease of testosterone, progesterone and calcium blood 
levels.

PMID: 26845840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dig Dis Sci. 2016 Apr;61(4):1051-9. doi: 10.1007/s10620-016-4048-y. Epub 2016 Feb
3.

Follow-Up Study on CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA Expression in Noncancerous Gastric Mucosae 
After Helicobacter pylori Eradication.

Shin CM(1), Kim N(2,)(3), Chang H(1), Kim JS(4), Lee DH(1,)(4), Jung HC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
173-82, Gumi-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, 463-707, South Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
173-82, Gumi-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, 463-707, South Korea.
nayoungkim49@empas.com. (3)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
nayoungkim49@empas.com. (4)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Changes in CDX1/CDX2 in gastric mucosae following Helicobacter pylori
eradication have not been clarified yet.
AIMS: To evaluate the changes in CDX1/CDX2 expression after H. pylori
eradication, in relation to the reversibility of intestinal metaplasia (IM).
METHODS: Time course of CDX1/CDX2 expressions was investigated in 176 subjects
with various gastroduodenal disorders. Among them, 132 patients were H. pylori
positives; H. pylori were eradicated in 107 of them; 13 failed to eradicate; and 
12 did not receive H. pylori eradication therapy. Forty-four subjects were H.
pylori negatives. Expression levels in CDX1 and CDX2 from noncancerous gastric
mucosae of the corpus, as well as the histologic findings of gastric mucosae,
were evaluated during the follow-up.
RESULTS: Average follow-up duration was 33.7 months (range 2-97 months).
Expression levels in both CDX1 and CDX2 mRNAs were correlated with IM grade in
the corpus (<U+03C1> = 0.633 and 0.554, respectively, all P < 0.001). Changes in
CDX1/CDX2 mRNA expressions following H. pylori eradication showed only
insignificant results; IM grade at the antrum and corpus showed a tendency to
decrease after H. pylori eradication without statistical significance (P > 0.05).
However, histologic improvement of IM at the corpus was associated with a
decrease in CDX2 mRNA expression during the follow-up (linear mixed model, P for 
slope = 0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, eradication of H. pylori did not show any beneficial 
effects on aberrant CDX1/CDX2 expressions or IM. Reversibility of IM may be
associated with a decrease in CDX2 mRNA expression.

PMID: 26841784  [PubMed - in process]


29. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2016 Feb 2;13:7. doi: 10.1186/s12986-016-0066-1. eCollection
2016.

Leptin receptor signaling is required for high-fat diet-induced atrophic
gastritis in mice.

Inagaki-Ohara K(1), Okamoto S(2), Takagi K(2), Saito K(2), Arita S(3), Tang L(2),
Hori T(4), Kataoka H(5), Matsumoto S(4), Minokoshi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, National Center for Global Health and Medicine (NCGM),
1-21-1, Toyama Shinjuku, Tokyo, 162-0052 Japan ; Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Department of Developmental Physiology, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences (NIPS), 38 Nishigonaka Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8585
Japan ; Division of Host Defense, Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Life
and Environmental Sciences, Prefectural University of Hiroshima, 562 Nanatsuka,
Shobara, Hiroshima 727-0023 Japan. (2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Developmental Physiology, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences (NIPS), 38 Nishigonaka Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8585 Japan.
(3)Division of Host Defense, Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Prefectural University of Hiroshima, 562 Nanatsuka,
Shobara, Hiroshima 727-0023 Japan. (4)Yakult Central Institute for
Microbiological Research, 5-11 Izumi, Kunitachi, Tokyo, 186-8650 Japan.
(5)Section of Oncopathology and Regenerative Biology, Department of Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki,
889-1692 Japan.

BACKGROUND: Obesity increases the risk for malignancies in various tissues
including the stomach. Atrophic gastritis with precancerous lesions is an
obesity-associated disease; however, the mechanisms that underlie the development
of obesity-associated atrophic gastritis are unknown. Leptin is a hormone derived
from stomach as well as adipose tissue and gastric leptin is involved in the
development of gastric cancer. The aim of the current study is to investigate the
involvement of leptin receptor signaling in the development of atrophic gastritis
during diet-induced obesity.
METHODS: Male C57BL/6, ob/ob and db/db mice were fed a high-fat diet (HFD) or a
control diet (CD) from 1 week to 5 months. Pathological changes of the gastric
mucosa and the expression of molecules associated with atrophic gastritis were
evaluated in these mice.
RESULTS: HFD feeding induced gastric mucosal hyperplasia with increased gastric
leptin expression. Mucosal hyperplasia was accompanied by a higher frequency of
Ki67-positive proliferating cells and atrophy of the gastric glands in the
presence of inflammation, which increased following HFD feeding. Activation of
ObR signaling-associated molecules such as ObR, STAT3, Akt, and ERK was detected 
in the gastric mucosa of mice fed the HFD for 1 week. The morphological
alterations associated with gastric mucosal atrophy and the expression of Muc2
and Cdx2 resemble those associated with human intestinal metaplasia. In contrast 
to wild-type mice, leptin-deficient ob/ob mice and leptin receptor-mutated db/db 
mice did not show increased Cdx2 expression in response to HFD feeding.
CONCLUSION: Together, these results suggest that activation of the leptin
signaling pathway in the stomach is required to develop obesity-associated
atrophic gastritis.

PMCID: PMC4736478
PMID: 26839577  [PubMed]


30. Cancer Biol Ther. 2016 Jan 30:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Identifying Cancer Origin Using Circulating Tumor Cells.

Lu SH(1,)(2), Tsai WS(3), Chang YH(4), Chou TY(5), Pang ST(4), Lin PH(4), Tsai
CM(6), Chang YC(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Graduate Institute of Life Sciences , National Defense Medical Center ,
Taiwan. (2)b Genomics Research Center , Academia Sinica , Taiwan. (3)c Division
of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Colorectal Section, Department of Surgery , Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital, School of Medicine, Chang Gung University , Taiwan. (4)d 
Division of Urology , Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang 
Gung University , Taiwan. (5)e Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Department ,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital , Taiwan. (6)f Chest Department , Taipei
Veterans General Hospital , Taiwan.

Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have become an established clinical evaluation
biomarker. CTC count provides a good correlation with the prognosis of cancer
patients, but has only been used with known cancer patients, and has been unable 
to predict the origin of the CTCs. This study demonstrates the analysis of CTCs
for the identification of their primary cancer source. 12 mL blood samples were
equally dispensed on six CMx chips, microfluidic chips coated with an
anti-EpCAM-conjugated supported lipid bilayer, for CTC capture and isolation.
Captured CTCs were eluted to an immunofluorescence (IF) staining panel consisting
of six groups of antibodies: anti-panCK, anti-CK18, anti-CK7, anti-TTF-1,
anti-CK20/anti-CDX2, and anti-PSA/anti-PSMA. Cancer cell lines of lung (H1975),
colorectal (DLD-1, HCT-116), and prostate (PC3, DU145, LNCaP) were selected to
establish the sensitivity and specificity for distinguishing CTCs from lung,
colorectal, and prostate cancer. Spiking experiments performed in 2 mL of culture
medium or whole blood proved the CMx platform can enumerate cancer cells of lung,
colorectal, and prostate. The IF panel was tested on blood samples from lung
cancer patients (n = 3), colorectal cancer patients (n = 5), prostate cancer
patients (n = 5), and healthy individuals (n = 12). Peripheral blood samples
found panCK(+) and CK18(+) CTCs in lung, colorectal, and prostate cancers. CTCs
expressing CK7(+) or TTF-1(+), (CK20/ CDX2)(+), or (PSA/ PSMA)(+) corresponded to
lung, colorectal, or prostate cancer, respectively. In conclusion, we have
designed an immunofluorescence staining panel to identify CTCs in peripheral
blood to correctly identify cancer cell origin.

PMID: 26828696  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. J Gastric Cancer. 2015 Dec;15(4):246-55. doi: 10.5230/jgc.2015.15.4.246. Epub
2015 Dec 31.

Helicobacter pylori Eradication Reduces the Metachronous Recurrence of Gastric
Neoplasms by Attenuating the Precancerous Process.

Jung da H(1), Kim JH(1), Lee YC(2), Lee SK(2), Shin SK(2), Park JC(2), Chung
HS(2), Kim H(3), Kim H(3), Kim YH(1), Park JJ(1), Youn YH(1), Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: The importance of Helicobacter pylori eradication after endoscopic
resection (ER) of gastric neoplasms remains controversial. In this study, we
clarified the importance of H. pylori eradication for metachronous lesions after 
ER.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included 3,882 patients with gastric neoplasms 
who underwent ER. We included patients infected with H. pylori who received
eradication therapy. Among them, 34 patients with metachronous lesions after ER
and 102 age- and sex-matched patients (nonmetachronous group) were enrolled.
Background mucosal pathologies such as atrophy and intestinal metaplasia (IM)
were evaluated endoscopically. The expression levels of CDX1, CDX2, Sonic
hedgehog (SHH), and SOX2 were evaluated based on H. pylori eradication and the
development of metachronous lesions.
RESULTS: The eradication failure rate was higher in the metachronous group than
in the nonmetachronous group (P=0.036). Open-type atrophy (P=0.003) and
moderate-to-severe IM (P=0.001) occurred more frequently in the metachronous
group. In patients with an initial diagnosis of dysplasia, the eradication
failure rate was higher in the metachronous group than in the nonmetachronous
group (P=0.002). In addition, open-type atrophy was more frequent in the
metachronous group (P=0.047). In patients with an initial diagnosis of carcinoma,
moderate-to-severe IM occurred more frequently in the metachronous group
(P=0.003); however, the eradication failure rate was not significantly different 
between the two groups. SHH and SOX2 expression was increased, and CDX2
expression was decreased in the nonmetachronous group after eradication (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Open-type atrophy, moderate-to-severe IM, and H. pylori eradication 
failure were significantly associated with metachronous lesions. However,
eradication failure was significantly associated with dysplasia, but not
carcinoma, in the metachronous group. Thus, H. pylori eradication may play an
important role in preventing metachronous lesions after ER for precancerous
lesions before carcinomatous transformation.

PMCID: PMC4722992
PMID: 26819804  [PubMed]


32. World J Surg Oncol. 2016 Jan 25;14(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s12957-016-0774-z.

Cytokeratin 7-positive/cytokeratin 20-negative cecal adenocarcinoma metastatic to
the uterine cervix: a case report.

Toyoshima M(1,)(2), Momono Y(3), Makino H(4), Kudo T(5), Oka N(6), Sakurada J(7),
Suzuki H(8), Kodama H(9), Yoshinaga K(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sendai Medical Center, National
Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. m-toyo@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Present
address: Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-8-8, Miyagino, Miyagino-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, 983-8520,
Japan. m-toyo@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Sendai Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan.
my_5amm1320@yahoo.co.jp. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sendai
Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. hmakino@snh.go.jp.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sendai Medical Center, National
Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. zipperxxxty@snh.go.jp. (6)Department of
Pathology, Sendai Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. 
canpieo@snh.go.jp. (7)Department of Pathology, Sendai Medical Center, National
Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. sakura02@shn.go.jp. (8)Department of
Pathology, Sendai Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. 
hirosuz@snh.go.jp. (9)Department of Surgery, Sendai Medical Center, National
Hospital Organization, Sendai, Japan. akenkodama@snh.go.jp. (10)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sendai Medical Center, National Hospital Organization,
Sendai, Japan. y-kou-m@mtb.biglobe.ne.jp.

BACKGROUND: The vast majority of uterine cervical malignancies are primary
carcinomas, and secondary neoplasms that metastasize to the uterine cervix from a
distant organ are uncommon. Although relatively rare, metastases to the uterine
cervix from a primary colon cancer have been reported. We report a rare case of
metastatic carcinoma originating from a cecal adenocarcinoma with an unusual
cytokeratin 7/cytokeratin 20 immunophenotype.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 74-year-old postmenopausal Japanese woman was referred to
our hospital for the evaluation of a uterine tumor. She had a past medical
history of cecal cancer and had undergone laparoscopically assisted right
hemicolectomy at the age of 69 years. During follow-up, she was found to have
elevated levels of the tumor markers carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (179.7 IU/mL) and 
carcinoembryonic antigen (26.9 µg/L). Positron emission tomography/computed
tomography showed a focus of high 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in her uterus.
Examination of a cervical biopsy found a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma
that was immunopositive for cytokeratin (CK)7 and caudal-related homeobox 2
(CDX2) expression and immunonegative for cytokeratin 20 expression. The patient
underwent radical hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
Histopathological examination found invasive growth of irregular and atypical
ductal hyperplasia. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor specimen revealed
the same immunophenotype as the biopsy specimen. The cecal cancer specimen from
her previous surgery was also examined and found to have the same
immunophenotype. The histopathological diagnosis was cecal adenocarcinoma
metastatic to the uterine cervix. The patient is currently receiving adjuvant
chemotherapy and to date is without evidence of recurrent disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our report illustrates the importance of immunohistochemistry for
the correct diagnosis of the origin of a uterine cervical adenocarcinoma in a
patient with a medical history of colorectal cancer. Re-examination of a previous
oncological specimen is critical for cases with a uterine lesion that is
difficult to identify as primary or metastatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4727413
PMID: 26810414  [PubMed - in process]


33. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 1;411(1):50-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.011. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Early preimplantation cells expressing Cdx2 exhibit plasticity of specification
to TE and ICM lineages through positional changes.

Toyooka Y(1), Oka S(2), Fujimori T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Embryology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan; 
Department of Basic Biology, School of Life Science, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi, Japan. Electronic address:
yayoi@nibb.ac.jp. (2)Division of Embryology, National Institute for Basic
Biology, Okazaki, Japan. (3)Division of Embryology, National Institute for Basic 
Biology, Okazaki, Japan; Department of Basic Biology, School of Life Science,
SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.
Electronic address: fujimori@nibb.ac.jp.

The establishment of the trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM) is the 
first cell lineage segregation to occur in mouse preimplantation development.
These two cell lineages arise in a position-dependent manner at the blastocyst
stage: the outer cells form TE, which will generate the future placenta, while
the inner cells give rise to the ICM, from which the epiblast (EPI) and primitive
endoderm (PrE) arise. Previous studies have shown that a portion of cells
relocate from the outside position to the inside during this preimplantation
stage, but few studies have investigated the correlation between cell relocation 
and the expression of key transcription factors critical for cell
differentiation. To monitor cell movement and the status of the TE-specification 
pathway in living embryos, we established Cdx2-GFP reporter mice allowing us to
visualize the expression of Caudal-type transcriptional factor (Cdx2), a key
regulator of the initiation of TE differentiation. Observation of Cdx2-GFP
preimplantation embryos by live cell imaging revealed that all cells localized in
an initial outer position initiated the expression of Cdx2. Subsequently, cells
that changed their position from an outer to an inner position downregulated Cdx2
expression and contributed to the ICM. Finally we showed that internalized cells 
likely contribute to both the EPI and PrE. Our datas indicate that cells
expressing even high levels of Cdx2 can internalize, deactivate an activated
TE-specification molecular pathway and integrate into the pluripotent cell
population.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26806703  [PubMed - in process]


34. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2015 Nov;42(12):1854-6.

[A Case of Surgical Resection of a Liver Metastasis from Colorectal Cancer with a
Macroscopic Portal Vein Tumor Thrombus].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki K(1), Tomimaru Y, Wada H, Ogawa H, Yamada D, Tomokuni A, Asaoka T, Noda T,
Gotoh K, Kawamoto K, Marubashi S, Eguchi H, Nagano H, Doki Y, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University.

The patient was a 65-year-old man. In July 2014, he was diagnosed with rectal
cancer in a different hospital and underwent high anterior resection(type 2,
T3N0M0, Stage<U+2161> [TMN classification, 7th edition]). During the operation, a small 
nodule was detected in segment 4 of the liver. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT
revealed a tumor measuring 5 cm in diameter located in segment 4/8 of the liver
with a tumor thrombus in the main trunk of the portal vein. In August 2014, the
patient was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. MR
imaging showed a lobulated tumor located in segment 4/8 of the liver. Gadoxeticac
id-enhanced hepatobiliary phase MR imaging showed that the tumor was less
enhanced than was the adjacent liver parenchyma. 18F-FDG-PET/CT demonstrated
abnormal accumulation of 18F-FDG in the main tumor(SUVmax=18.3). There was no
obvious abnormal accumulation in the other organs. In September 2014, he
underwent extended left hepatectomy and portal vein tumor thrombectomy. The
resected specimen showed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical staining results were CK7/CK20 (-/+) and CDX2 (+), which
suggested that the tumor was derived from the gastrointestinal tract rather than 
the liver. The pathological diagnosis was a liver metastasis from rectal cancer. 
In the 6 months after the operation, intrahepatic recurrence was detected, and
the patient was treated with systemicchemotherapy.

PMID: 26805195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2015 Nov;42(12):1662-4.

[A Case of Sigmoid Colon Cancer with Metastasis to the Uterus].

[Article in Japanese]

Tokoro Y(1), Tonooka T, Souda H, Takiguchi N, Chibana T, Kobayashi R, Arimitsu H,
Yanagibashi H, Chou A, Ikeda A, Nabeya N, Kainuma O, Yamamoto H, Nagata M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Gastroenterological Surgery, Chiba Cancer Center.

A 65-year-old woman complaining of fetor ex vagina was diagnosed with endometrial
adenocarcinoma of the uterus based on the pathological findings of an endometrial
biopsy. Sigmoid colon cancer was found on a pre-operative CT scan. Diagnosis of
double cancer was made and we performed sigmoidectomy and panhysterectomy with
associated resection of both adnexa. Histopathological examination found that the
tumor accounted for almost all of the uterine mucosa and over half of the
muscular layer. Immunostaining showed CK7 (-), CK20 (+), CDX2 (+), ER (-), and
PgR (-), and we diagnosed it as a metastasis to the uterus of the sigmoid colon
cancer. The pathological diagnosis was a moderately differentiated
adenocarcinoma, pT4b (SI: urinary bladder), pN0 (0/12), H0, P1,M1a (uterus),
pStage <U+2163>. As adjuvant chemotherapy, she was administered XELOX for 6 months.
Although colorectal cancer rarely metastasizes to the uterus, due to the increase
in the prevalence of colorectal cancer, it may be also increase. To choose the
best treatment course, it is necessary to diagnose whether it is a primary
uterine cancer or a metastatic uterine cancer.

PMID: 26805130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Pathol Oncol Res. 2016 Jan 21. [Epub ahead of print]

PAX2, PAX8 and CDX2 Expression in Metastatic Mucinous, Primary Ovarian Mucinous
and Seromucinous Tumors and Review of the Literature.

Ates Ozdemir D(1), Usubutun A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey. denizates010@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University,
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

Ovarian cancer is the most common cause of gynecologic cancer death. Both
morphologically and immunohistochemically, metastatic mucinous tumors are the
best mimickers of mucinous ovarian tumors; its pathogenesis still remains a
mystery. PAX2 and PAX8 immunohisyochemistries are useful for differentiating
numerous primary tumour types from metastatic ones. There are few studies in
literature about PAX expressions in mucinous and seromucinous tumors. None of
these are takes into account the histologic type (whether it is seromucinous or
mucinous) or the metastatic origin. With this purpose hematoxylin and eosine
slides of ovarian mucinous and seromucinous tumors were re-evaluated and one
block was chosen for each case. The study included 76 ovarian mucinous and
seromucinous tumors of the ovary reported in Hacettepe University department of
pathology between 2000 and 2013. Tissue microarray (TMA) was designed from the
chosen blocks, PAX2, PAX8, CDX2 immunostains was preformed to the TMA slides. As 
a result, most of the metastatic cases were negative for PAX2 (91.2 %) and PAX8
(86.3 %), many were diffusely and strongly positive for CDX2 (68.2 %).
Seromucinous tumors were devoid of CDX2 expression; but all cases (except one)
displayed strong and diffuse positivity with PAX8. In other words differing from 
mucinous tumors, seromucinous tumors show strong PAX8 positivity-similar to
serous tumors. This study shows that PAX8 and CDX2 could be useful in
differentiating primary mucinous from metastatic tumor. Furthermore unlike the
homogeneity in seromucinous tumors for PAX8 and CDX2 mucinous tumors shows
heterogeneity with different expression patterns.

PMID: 26797858  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jan 21;374(3):211-22. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1506597.

CDX2 as a Prognostic Biomarker in Stage II and Stage III Colon Cancer.

Dalerba P(1), Sahoo D, Paik S, Guo X, Yothers G, Song N, Wilcox-Fogel N, Forgó E,
Rajendran PS, Miranda SP, Hisamori S, Hutchison J, Kalisky T, Qian D, Wolmark N, 
Fisher GA, van de Rijn M, Clarke MF.

Author information: 
(1)From the Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Departments of
Pathology and Cell Biology and Medicine, Columbia University, New York (P.D.);
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (P.D., D.S., P.S.R.,
S.P.M., S.H., J.H., D.Q., M.F.C.) and the Departments of Pathology (X.G., E.F.,
M.R.), and Medicine, Division of Oncology (N.W.-F., G.A.F., M.F.C.), Stanford
University, Stanford, and the Departments of Pediatrics and Computer Science and 
Engineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego (D.S.) - both in
California; Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
(T.K.); the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, NRG Oncology
(S.P., G.Y., N.S., N.W.) and the Allegheny Cancer Center at Allegheny General
Hospital (N.W.) - both in Pittsburgh; Severance Biomedical Science Institute,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea (S.P.); and the
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School of Henan
University, Kaifeng, China (X.G.).

Background The identification of high-risk stage II colon cancers is key to the
selection of patients who require adjuvant treatment after surgery.
Microarray-based multigene-expression signatures derived from stem cells and
progenitor cells hold promise, but they are difficult to use in clinical
practice. Methods We used a new bioinformatics approach to search for biomarkers 
of colon epithelial differentiation across gene-expression arrays and then ranked
candidate genes according to the availability of clinical-grade diagnostic
assays. With the use of subgroup analysis involving independent and retrospective
cohorts of patients with stage II or stage III colon cancer, the top candidate
gene was tested for its association with disease-free survival and a benefit from
adjuvant chemotherapy. Results The transcription factor CDX2 ranked first in our 
screening test. A group of 87 of 2115 tumor samples (4.1%) lacked CDX2
expression. In the discovery data set, which included 466 patients, the rate of
5-year disease-free survival was lower among the 32 patients (6.9%) with
CDX2-negative colon cancers than among the 434 (93.1%) with CDX2-positive colon
cancers (hazard ratio for disease recurrence, 3.44; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.60 to 7.38; P=0.002). In the validation data set, which included 314 patients, 
the rate of 5-year disease-free survival was lower among the 38 patients (12.1%) 
with CDX2 protein-negative colon cancers than among the 276 (87.9%) with CDX2
protein-positive colon cancers (hazard ratio, 2.42; 95% CI, 1.36 to 4.29;
P=0.003). In both these groups, these findings were independent of the patient's 
age, sex, and tumor stage and grade. Among patients with stage II cancer, the
difference in 5-year disease-free survival was significant both in the discovery 
data set (49% among 15 patients with CDX2-negative tumors vs. 87% among 191
patients with CDX2-positive tumors, P=0.003) and in the validation data set (51% 
among 15 patients with CDX2-negative tumors vs. 80% among 106 patients with
CDX2-positive tumors, P=0.004). In a pooled database of all patient cohorts, the 
rate of 5-year disease-free survival was higher among 23 patients with stage II
CDX2-negative tumors who were treated with adjuvant chemotherapy than among 25
who were not treated with adjuvant chemotherapy (91% vs. 56%, P=0.006).
Conclusions Lack of CDX2 expression identified a subgroup of patients with
high-risk stage II colon cancer who appeared to benefit from adjuvant
chemotherapy. (Funded by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, the National 
Institutes of Health, and others.).

PMCID: PMC4784450 [Available on 2016-07-21]
PMID: 26789870  [PubMed - in process]


38. Rare Tumors. 2015 Dec 29;7(4):5982. doi: 10.4081/rt.2015.5982. eCollection 2015.

Small Cell Carcinoma of the Urinary Bladder: KIT and PDGFRA Gene Mutations.

Eliyakin N(1), Postaci H(2), Baskin Y(3), Kozacioglu Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Adnan Menderes University,
Aydin; Basic Oncology, Institute of Oncology, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir.
(2)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Turkish Ministry of Health, Izmir
Bozyaka Research and Training Hospital , Izmir, Turkey. (3)Basic Oncology,
Institute of Oncology, Dokuz Eylul University , Izmir. (4)Urology, Turkish
Ministry of Health, Izmir Bozyaka Research and Training Hospital , Izmir, Turkey.

Primary small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder is very rare. A 72-year-old
was admitted to our hospital because of hematuria and dysuria. Cystoscopy
revealed a bladder full of multiple, solid and papillary tumors. Biopsies from
the deep and papillary tumors were taken. Histologically, tumor was pure small
cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for
cytokeratin, chromo-granin, synaptophysin, neuron-specific enolase, CD56, CD117
and Ki67 (labeling 70%). The tumor cells were negative for CK7, CK20, CD3, CD20, 
LCA, CDX2, uroplakin, thyroid transcription factor 1, PSA and p63. Metastatic
workup was performed an no primary or metastatic lung lesions were noted. Due to 
the clinical, radiologic and immunohistochemical findings, the patient was
diagnosed as primary small cell carcinoma of bladder. A molecular genetic
analysis for KIT (exons 9, 11, 13 and 17) and PDGFRA (exons 12 and 18) genes was 
performed, in paraffin micro dissection specimens, by the PCR-direct sequencing
method. According to the sequencing analyses, two mutations were found at
positions 558 (p.K558N) and 562 (p.E562D) in KIT gene exon 11 in our case. The
another hand the same case presented two mutations in PDGFRA gene exon 14 at
position 631 (p.P631A) and 638 (p.638Q_639AinsC). The disease process was
fulminant and the patient was lost due to several complications prior to any
chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4703920
PMID: 26788274  [PubMed]


39. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:218518. doi: 10.1155/2015/218518. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

A Resource for the Transcriptional Signature of Bona Fide Trophoblast Stem Cells 
and Analysis of Their Embryonic Persistence.

Kuales G(1), Weiss M(1), Sedelmeier O(1), Pfeifer D(2), Arnold SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research, University Medical Centre,
Breisacher Strasse 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Centre, Freiburg,
Germany. (3)Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research, University Medical
Centre, Breisacher Strasse 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Institute of Experimental
and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany; BIOSS, Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, Albert Ludwigs
University, Freiburg, Germany.

Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) represent the multipotent progenitors that give
rise to the different cells of the embryonic portion of the placenta. Here, we
analysed the expression of key TSC transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes, and Elf5 in
the early developing placenta of mouse embryos and in cultured TSCs and reveal
surprising heterogeneity in protein levels. We analysed persistence of TSCs in
the early placenta and find that TSCs remain in the chorionic hinge until E9.5
and are lost shortly afterwards. To define the transcriptional signature of bona 
fide TSCs, we used inducible gain- and loss-of-function alleles of Eomes or Cdx2,
and Eomes (GFP), to manipulate and monitor the core maintenance factors of TSCs, 
followed by genome-wide expression profiling. Combinatorial analysis of resulting
expression profiles allowed for defining novel TSC marker genes that might
functionally contribute to the maintenance of the TSC state. Analyses by qRT-PCR 
and in situ hybridisation validated novel TSC- and chorion-specific marker genes,
such as Bok/Mtd, Cldn26, Duox2, Duoxa2, Nr0b1, and Sox21. Thus, these expression 
data provide a valuable resource for the transcriptional signature of bona fide
and early differentiating TSCs and may contribute to an increased understanding
of the transcriptional circuitries that maintain and/or establish stemness of
TSCs.

PMCID: PMC4691490
PMID: 26783396  [PubMed]


40. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 19;6:19648. doi: 10.1038/srep19648.

Conversion of embryonic stem cells into extraembryonic lineages by
CRISPR-mediated activators.

Wei S(1,)(2), Zou Q(1,)(2), Lai S(1,)(2), Zhang Q(1,)(2), Li L(1,)(2), Yan
Q(1,)(2), Zhou X(1,)(2), Zhong H(1,)(2), Lai L(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China. (2)Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. 
(3)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering, Institute of
Zoonosis, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, 130062,
China.

The recently emerged CRISPR/Cas9 technique has opened a new perspective on
readily editing specific genes. When combined with transcription activators, it
can precisely manipulate endogenous gene expression. Here, we enhanced the
expression of endogenous Cdx2 and Gata6 genes by CRISPR-mediated activators, thus
mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) were directly converted into two extraembryonic
lineages, i.e., typical trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and extraembryonic endoderm
cells (XENCs), which exhibited characters of TSC or XENC derived from the
blastocyst extraembryonic lineages such as cell morphology, specific gene
expression, and differentiation ability in vitro and in vivo. This study
demonstrates that the cell fate can be effectively manipulated by directly
activating of specific endogenous gene expression with CRISPR-mediated activator.

PMCID: PMC4726097
PMID: 26782778  [PubMed - in process]


41. APMIS. 2016 Apr;124(4):263-70. doi: 10.1111/apm.12504. Epub 2016 Jan 17.

Immunohistochemistry of ductal adenocarcinoma of the prostate and adenocarcinomas
of non-prostatic origin: a comparative study.

Seipel AH(1), Samaratunga H(2), Delahunt B(3), Wiklund P(4), Clements M(5),
Egevad L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Aquesta Pathology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (3)Wellington School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Surgical Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Ductal adenocarcinoma of the prostate (DAC) has morphological similarities to
adenocarcinomas of other organs. DAC behaves in an aggressive manner and may
present with metastases. These metastases may occur at unusual sites, which
itself may cause diagnostic difficulties. It is important for therapeutic
decisions that a prostatic origin of these metastases be established. Our aim was
to compare the protein expression of DAC and adenocarcinomas of colon,
endometrium, lung, pancreas, stomach and urinary bladder. A tissue microarray was
constructed using 60 DAC, 6 colonic, 7 endometrial, 7 lung, 5 pancreatic, 5
gastric, and 9 urinary bladder adenocarcinomas. Slides were stained for estrogen,
progesterone and androgen receptor, prolactin, PSA, prostein, PSMA, PSAP, CDX2,
lysozyme, villin, monoclonal CEA, CK7, CK20, HMWCK, p63, p504s, c-Myc, EGFR,
Ki-67, p16, p21, p27, p53, PTEN, ERG, and PAX-8. Androgen receptor, prostein,
PSA, and PSAP were almost invariably expressed in DAC. Ki-67-labeling index was
lower in DAC than in other adenocarcinomas. The expression patterns of intestinal
markers and cytokeratins in DAC were less specific and may lead to diagnostic
errors if not combined with prostate-specific markers.

© 2016 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26778368  [PubMed - in process]


42. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2016 Jan 5. pii: S2210-7401(15)00288-0. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2015.11.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Sulfasalazine, a therapeutic agent for ulcerative colitis, inhibits the growth of
CD44v9(+) cancer stem cells in ulcerative colitis-related cancer.

Seishima R(1), Okabayashi K(2), Nagano O(3), Hasegawa H(4), Tsuruta M(4), Shimoda
M(5), Kameyama K(5), Saya H(3), Kitagawa Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of surgery, Keio university school of medicine, 35, Shinano-machi, 
1608582 Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Division of gene regulation, institute for
advanced medical research, Keio university school of medicine, 35, Shinano-machi,
1608582 Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of surgery, Keio university
school of medicine, 35, Shinano-machi, 1608582 Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
Electronic address: okabayashikoji@gmail.com. (3)Division of gene regulation,
institute for advanced medical research, Keio university school of medicine, 35, 
Shinano-machi, 1608582 Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of surgery, Keio 
university school of medicine, 35, Shinano-machi, 1608582 Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Department of pathology, Keio university school of medicine, 35,
Shinano-machi, 1608582 Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Sulfasalazine reduces the risk of ulcerative colitis
(UC)-related cancer through its anti-inflammatory effect and induction of
oxidative stress in cancer cells by inhibiting the glutamate-cystine transporter,
which is closely associated with the cancer stem cell surface marker CD44v9. This
study aimed to quantify the effects of sulfasalazine on CD44v9 expression and
pathological factors in colorectal cancers (CRCs) arising from UC.
METHODS: Twenty-six patients with UC-related cancer were classified into groups
according to the length of sulfasalazine treatment as follows: (1) long-term (LT)
(= 5 years) and (2) short-term (ST) (< 5 years). Using immunohistochemistry, we
compared CD44v9 and Ki-67 expression and pathological characteristics of each
group's tumors. In vitro assay was performed to investigate the effect of
sulfasalazine on epithelial differentiation and proliferation of CD44(+) cancer
cells.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that CD44v9 expression tended to
be lower in the LT group (LT:ST=15.4%:46.2%, P=0.20), and Ki-67/CD44v9
double-stained cells were significantly lower in the LT group (LT:ST=0%:6.9%,
P=0.01). Pathologically, the frequency of well-differentiated adenocarcinomas was
higher in the LT group (LT:ST=84.6%:38.5%, P=0.04). In vitro assay revealed that 
sulfasalazine promoted the expression of epithelial differentiation markers
(E-cadherin and CDX2) and inhibited the proliferation of CD44(+) cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term sulfasalazine administration reduced proliferative
CD44v9(+) cells and increased the degree of differentiation of adenocarcinomas.
These findings indicate the importance of CD44v9(+) cells in UC-related cancer
progression and suggest that sulfasalazine may serve as a novel therapeutic agent
that targets CD44v9(+) cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26775891  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Hum Pathol. 2016 Feb;48:18-24. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.028. Epub 2015 Oct 
23.

The utility of CDX2, GATA3, and DOG1 in the diagnosis of testicular neoplasms: an
immunohistochemical study of 109 cases.

Osman H(1), Cheng L(1), Ulbright TM(1), Idrees MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46020. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46020.
Electronic address: midrees@iupui.edu.

We identified 109 testicular tumors, including pure and mixed germ cell tumors
and sex cord-stromal tumors, and conducted immunohistochemical staining for CDX2,
DOG1, and GATA3 to address the potential utility of these readily available and
commonly used markers in the evaluation of testicular tumors. Their expression
has not been previously thoroughly examined in testicular germ cell tumors. The
distribution, percentage, and intensity of positivity were assessed. CDX2 was
positive in all yolk sac tumors, 25% of choriocarcinomas, 9% of seminomas, and 4%
of embryonal carcinomas (sensitivity for yolk sac tumor, 100%; specificity, 89%
[teratomas excluded]). CDX2 also stained glandular components within teratomas
and identified inconspicuous yolk sac tumor components in 3 cases previously
diagnosed as pure embryonal carcinoma. GATA3 was positive in all choriocarcinomas
(sensitivity, 100%). Weak GATA3 immunostaining was also seen in 12% of yolk sac
tumors and 2 of 2 primitive neuroectodermal tumors. DOG1 was negative in all
tumors, but stained spermatocytes and spermatids and the luminal borders of the
epididymis and rete testis of nonneoplastic testis. We conclude that CDX2 is a
sensitive and relatively specific marker for yolk sac tumor among the
nonteratomatous germ cell tumors. It may serve to screen for yolk sac tumor
components often overlooked on hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides. GATA3 is
helpful in the recognition of trophoblastic cells, especially of intermediate
type. DOG1 is a sensitive marker for spermatocytes and needs to be further
studied for its significance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26772394  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2016 Mar 15;120(6):592-8. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00874.2015. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Paracrine and endocrine modes of myostatin action.

Lee YS(1), Huynh TV(1), Lee SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
sjlee@jhmi.edu.

Myostatin (MSTN) is a secreted signaling molecule that normally acts to limit
muscle mass. In adult animals, MSTN is made almost exclusively by skeletal muscle
and circulates in the blood. A critical question is whether this circulating MSTN
protein can enter the active pool to regulate muscle growth or whether all of the
activity of MSTN results from locally produced protein. Here, we addressed this
question in mice by using a Cdx2-Cre transgene in conjunction with a conditional 
Mstn-flox allele to generate mice in which Mstn was targeted in a regionally
restricted manner. Specifically, we generated mosaic mice in which MSTN
production was eliminated in posteriorly located muscles but not in anteriorly
located muscles, resulting in mice in which circulating levels of MSTN were
reduced roughly by half. Analysis of posteriorly located vs. anteriorly located
muscles of these mice revealed clear differential effects indicative of an
important paracrine role for MSTN in regulating muscle mass. Significant, albeit 
more subtle, effects consistent with an endocrine mode of MSTN action were also
seen in these mice. These findings have important implications not only for the
understanding of the physiological control of muscle mass but also for
therapeutic strategies to target MSTN to treat patients with muscle loss.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4796182
PMID: 26769954  [PubMed - in process]


45. Growth Factors. 2015 Oct;33(5-6):393-400. doi: 10.3109/08977194.2015.1102138.

Expression profile of FGF receptors in preimplantation ovine embryos and the
effect of FGF2 and PD173074.

Moradi M(1,)(2), Riasi A(2), Ostadhosseini S(1), Hajian M(1), Hosseini M(1),
Hosseinnia P(1), Nasr-Esfahani MH(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Reproductive Biotechnology , Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology , ACECR , Isfahan , Iran . (2)b
Department of Animal Science , College of Agriculture, Isfahan University of
Technology , Isfahan , Iran , and. (3)c Department of Embryology , Reproductive
Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine , ACECR
, Tehran , Iran.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors (FGFRs) are increasingly
recognized as important regulators of embryo development in mammals. This study
investigated the importance of FGF signaling during in vitro development of ovine
embryo. The mRNAs of four FGFR subtypes were detected throughout preimplantation 
development of in vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos, peaked in abundance at the
morula stage, and decreased significantly at the blastocyst stage. To gain
insight into the role of these mRNAs in embryo development, IVF embryos were
cultured in the presence of FGF2 (100 or 500<U+2009>ng/ml: beginning from days 1 or 4 to
7) or PD173074 (1<U+2009>µM: beginning from days 1 to 7) as usual treatments for
activation or inhibition of FGFRs, respectively. FGF2-supplementation did not
affect the percentage of embryos that developed to the blastocyst, blastocyst
cell count and the proportion of cells allocated in inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm (TE) compared to control (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Also, increasing the dosage or
duration of FGF2 treatment did not significantly alter blastocyst yield or
differential cell count (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). PD173074-mediated inhibition of FGFRs did not
significantly affect blastocyst yield (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Assessment of expression
profiles of lineage-associated markers revealed that FGF2 (500<U+2009>ng/ml)
supplementation: (i) significantly increased expression of putative hypoblast
marker (GATA4), (ii) significantly decreased expression of putative epiblast
(EPI) marker (NANOG) and (iii) did not change TE markers (CDX2 and IFNT) and
pluripotency makers (OCT4, SOX2 and REX1). In summary, FGF2-mediated activation
of FGFRs may promote a switch in transcriptional profile of ovine ICM from EPI-
to hypoblast-associated gene expression.

PMID: 26768755  [PubMed - in process]


46. Pathol Int. 2016 Feb;66(2):108-13. doi: 10.1111/pin.12375. Epub 2016 Jan 13.

Adenocarcinoma arising in urinary bladder endocervicosis.

Nakaguro M(1,)(2), Tsuzuki T(3), Shimada S(1,)(2), Taki T(1), Tsuchiyama M(1),
Kitamura A(1), Suzuki Y(1), Nakano Y(4), Ono K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tosei General Hospital, Seto, Japan. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Japanese Red Cross Nagoya Daini Hospital, Nagoya,
Japan. (4)Department of Urology, Tosei General Hospital, Seto, Japan.

Endocervicosis is a rare benign condition characterized by the presence of
endocervical-type mucinous glands. Urinary bladder endocervicosis forms an
elevated lesion in the posterior wall of the urinary bladder and is sometimes
misdiagnosed as a malignant tumor clinically and pathologically. Herein we
describe the first case of adenocarcinoma arising in urinary bladder
endocervicosis. The patient, a 58-year-old woman, presented with asymptomatic
hematuria. Cystoscopy revealed a nodular mass measuring 4<U+2009>cm in diameter in the
posterior wall, and total cystectomy was performed. Histology revealed that the
elevated lesion of the bladder wall was composed of haphazard proliferation of
cystic glands lined by benign endocervical-type epithelium. An adenocarcinoma
arose at the center of this endocervicosis. Mucin histochemistry revealed the
presence of sulfomucin in both the endocervicosis and adenocarcinoma components. 
Immunohistochemically, the endocervicosis was positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7,
AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, HBME1, CA19-9, and estrogen receptor (ER), and negative for
CK20, CDX2, progesterone receptor (PR), MUC5AC, and ß-catenin. The adenocarcinoma
showed similar immunohistochemical results, except for loss of ER expression and 
a slight increase in the ratio of Ki-67-positive cells. This case indicates that 
endocervicosis, known as a benign lesion, harbors the possibility of malignant
transformation.

© 2016 The Authors. Pathology International published by Japanese Society of
Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 26762595  [PubMed - in process]


47. Int J Surg Pathol. 2016 Jan 13. pii: 1066896915625110. [Epub ahead of print]

Tubular Pyloric Gland Adenoma of the Left and Right Hepatic Ducts: Report of a
Unique Case With Immunohistochemical and Molecular Studies.

Hatzibougias DI(1), Fouzas I(2), Bobos M(3), Papanikolaou V(2), Daoudaki M(2),
Kotoula V(2), Hytiroglou P(2), Albores-Saavedra J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microdiagnostics Ltd, Thessaloniki, Greece Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece pathology@microdiagnostics.gr. (2)Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. (3)Microdiagnostics Ltd,
Thessaloniki, Greece Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. 
(4)Medica Sur Clinic and Foundation, Mexico City, Mexico.

Pyloric gland adenomas (PGAs) of the extrahepatic biliary system are rare
lesions. We report a case of a tubular PGA that led to biliary obstruction. The
tumor was located at the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts,
extending to the left hepatic duct. The tumor cells expressed MUC6 and MUC5AC.
MUC1 and CD10 were focally positive. MUC2, p53, and CDX2 were not expressed. The 
Ki67 positivity was estimated at <15%. None of the KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, EGFR coding 
regions resulted in clinically relevant amino acid substitutions. SNP rs1050171
(EGFR p.Q787Q, silent mutation) corresponding to c.2361G>A transition in exon 20 
was noticed. Awareness of this rare lesion is important for pathologists and
clinicians alike, because it may cause significant morphologic and clinical
difficulties, especially when presenting as an obstructive mass. Because of the
possible risk of evolving malignancy, surgical resection is recommended whenever 
possible.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26762143  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 1;76(5):1135-45. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2272. Epub
2016 Jan 12.

Cdx2 Expression and Intestinal Metaplasia Induced by H. pylori Infection of
Gastric Cells Is Regulated by NOD1-Mediated Innate Immune Responses.

Asano N(1), Imatani A(2), Watanabe T(3), Fushiya J(2), Kondo Y(2), Jin X(2), Ara 
N(2), Uno K(2), Iijima K(2), Koike T(2), Strober W(4), Shimosegawa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland.
asanon@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. (3)Mucosal Immunity Section, 
Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland. Center for Innovation in Immunoregulative
Technology and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland.

Chronic infection with the bacterial Helicobacter pylori is a major cause of
gastric and duodenal ulcer disease, gastric mucosal atrophy, and cancer. H.
pylori-induced expression of the intestinal epithelial-specific transcription
factor caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2) contributes to intestinal metaplasia, a
precursor event to gastric cancer. Given a role for the bacterial pattern
recognition molecule nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 1 (NOD1) in the
innate immune response to bacterial infection, we investigated mechanisms used by
NOD1 to regulate H. pylori infection and its propensity towards the development
of intestinal metaplasia. We found that Cdx2 was induced by H. pylori infection
in both normal and neoplastic gastric epithelial cells in a manner that was
inversely related to NOD1 signaling. Mechanistic investigations revealed that
Cdx2 induction relied upon activation of NF-<U+03BA>B but was suppressed by
NOD1-mediated activation of TRAF3, a negative regulator of NF-<U+03BA>B. In vivo,
prolonged infection of NOD1-deficient mice with H. pylori led to increased Cdx2
expression and intestinal metaplasia. Furthermore, gastric epithelial cells from 
these mice exhibited increased nuclear expression of the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit and
decreased expression of TRAF3. Overall, our findings illuminated a role for NOD1 
signaling in attenuating H. pylori-induced Cdx2 expression in gastric epithelial 
cells, suggesting a rationale to augment NOD1 signaling in H. pylori-infected
patients to limit their risks of accumulating precancerous gastric lesions.
Cancer Res; 76(5); 1135-45. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4799656 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26759244  [PubMed - in process]


49. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Mar 3;18(3):341-53. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.11.019. Epub
2015 Dec 31.

Stepwise Clearance of Repressive Roadblocks Drives Cardiac Induction in Human
ESCs.

Rao J(1), Pfeiffer MJ(1), Frank S(1), Adachi K(2), Piccini I(3), Quaranta R(1),
Araúzo-Bravo M(4), Schwarz J(5), Schade D(6), Leidel S(5), Schöler HR(2), Seebohm
G(3), Greber B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Pluripotency Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany; Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max Planck
Society, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany. 
(3)Institute of Genetics of Heart Diseases (IfGH), Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany. (4)Group of
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, 20014 San Sebastián, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
48009 Bilbao, Spain. (5)Max Planck Research Group for RNA Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany; Cells-in-Motion
Cluster of Excellence, Faculty of Medicine, University of Münster, 48149 Münster,
Germany. (6)Technical University of Dortmund, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. (7)Human
Stem Cell Pluripotency Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany; Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max Planck
Society, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. Electronic address:
boris.greber@mpi-muenster.mpg.de.

Cardiac induction requires stepwise integration of BMP and WNT pathway activity. 
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are developmentally and clinically relevant
for studying the poorly understood molecular mechanisms downstream of these
cascades. We show that BMP and WNT signaling drive cardiac specification by
removing sequential roadblocks that otherwise redirect hESC differentiation
toward competing fates, rather than activating a cardiac program per se. First,
BMP and WNT signals pattern mesendoderm through cooperative repression of SOX2, a
potent mesoderm antagonist. BMP signaling promotes miRNA-877 maturation to induce
SOX2 mRNA degradation, while WNT-driven EOMES induction transcriptionally
represses SOX2. Following mesoderm formation, cardiac differentiation requires
inhibition of WNT activity. We found that WNT inhibition serves to restrict
expression of anti-cardiac regulators MSX1 and CDX2/1. Conversely, their
simultaneous disruption partially abrogates the requirement for WNT inactivation.
These results suggest that human cardiac induction depends on multi-stage
repression of alternate lineages, with implications for deriving expandable
cardiac stem cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26748419  [PubMed - in process]


50. Mod Pathol. 2016 Feb;29(2):194-208. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.150. Epub 2016
Jan 8.

Inactivation of NKX6.3 in the stomach leads to abnormal expression of CDX2 and
SOX2 required for gastric-to-intestinal transdifferentiation.

Yoon JH(1), Choi SS(2), Kim O(1), Choi WS(1), Park YK(3), Nam SW(1), Lee JY(1),
Park WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea. (2)College of Pharmacy, Sahmyook University, Seoul,
South Korea. (3)Department of Biostatistics, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

Intestinal metaplasia in gastric mucosa is considered a preneoplastic lesion that
progresses to gastric cancer. However, the molecular networks underlying this
lesion formation are largely unknown. NKX6.3 is known to be an important
regulator in gastric mucosal epithelial differentiation. In this study, we
characterized the effects of NKX6.3 that may contribute to gastric intestinal
metaplasia. NKX6.3 expression was significantly reduced in gastric mucosae with
intestinal metaplasia. The mRNA expression levels of both NKX6.3 and CDX2
predicted the intestinal metaplasia risk, with an area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve value of 0.9414 and 0.9971, respectively. Notably,
the NKX6.3 expression level was positively and inversely correlated with SOX2 and
CDX2, respectively. In stable AGS(NKX6.3) and MKN1(NKX6.3) cells, NKX6.3
regulated the expression of CDX2 and SOX2 by directly binding to the promoter
regions of both genes. Nuclear NKX6.3 expression was detected only in gastric
epithelial cells without intestinal metaplasia. Furthermore, NKX6.3-induced TWSG1
bound to BMP4 and inhibited BMP4-binding activity to BMPR-II. These data suggest 
that NKX6.3 might function as a master regulator of gastric differentiation by
affecting SOX2 and CDX2 expression and the NKX6.3 inactivation may result in
intestinal metaplasia in gastric epithelial cells.

PMID: 26743476  [PubMed - in process]


51. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):13546-51. eCollection 2015.

Ileocecal adenocarcinoma with overexpression of P53 protein metastasized to the
thenar muscle: report of a rare case and review of literature.

Yi C(1), Liu Z(2), Chu Y(1), Li S(1), Liu L(1), Li J(1), Yu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Cancer Center, Qilu Hospital of Shandong
University Jinan 250012, PR China. (2)Department of Pathology and
Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Shandong University Jinan 250012, PR China.

Metastatic malignancies of the hand are rare and metastases to the skeletal
muscle from the gastrointestinal system are even much rare. Here we present a
case of metastatic ileocecal adenocarcinoma to the thenar muscle, which is the
first report of thenar muscle metastasis from ileocecal adenocarcinoma with P53
mutation. To date, only two other cases of thenar muscle metastasis have been
documented, one is from squamous cell carcinoma of the lung and the other is from
rectal carcinoma. The present 67-year-old Chinese man of poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma of the ileocecal region developed metastatic carcinoma in the
right thenar eminence, which presented with swelling and pain. Magnetic resonance
imaging of the right hand revealed a well-defined enhanced mass in the right
thenar muscle. It was proved to be metastatic adenocarcinoma using core needle
biopsy, which was supported to be gastrointestinal origination by positive
immunoreaction with CDX2. Positive immunoreaction with P53 protein indicated the 
poor prognosis of the patient. Further systemic evaluation including computerized
tomography scans revealed extensive metastases to liver, right kidney, right
abdominal wall, left axillary and right subclavicular lymph nodes, and skin of
the right thigh. Treatment was given with palliative systemic chemotherapy. After
8 cycles of chemotherapy, the swelling and pain of the right thenar were
ameliorated, and the patient regained full use of his right hand and his quality 
of life was improved. The patient died of liver metastasis 9 months after the
diagnosis of the right thenar metastasis. In conclusion, here we display a case
of thenar skeletal muscle metastasis from P53 mutated ileocecal adenocarcinoma,
who survived 9 months after diagnosis of the rare metastasis. If an oncological
patient presents an intramuscular mass, muscle metastasis must be included in the
differential diagnosis. Metastatic hand tumors generally indicate systemic
spread, so the treatment is usually palliative and the prognosis is poor. The
primary objective of treatment is improvement of the patient's quality of life.

PMCID: PMC4680516
PMID: 26722571  [PubMed - in process]


52. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug 11;95(30):2447-50.

[CK7, CK20, SOX10 and CDX2: expressions and diagnostic values in primary
adenocarcinoma of the sinonasal tract].

[Article in Chinese]

Yue C(1), Piao Y, Bai Y, Liu H, Zhang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100730, China. (2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Nasal Diseases, Beijing Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, Beijing
100730, China, Email: dr.luozhang@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expressions of the cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 20 
(CK20), SOX10 and cadual type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) in primary
adenocarcinoma of the sinonasal tract, and evaluate their diagnostic values.
METHODS: A total of 41 paraffin-embeded specimens of primary adenocarcinoma of
the sinonasal tract treated in Beijing Tongren Hospital of Capital Medical
University were selected from May 2002 to January 2015. All cases were confirmed 
by histology and clinical data, including 12 cases of non-intestinal sinonasal
adenocarcinomas (non-ITACs), 10 cases of intestinal sinonasal adenocarcinomas
(ITACs) and 19 cases of salivary gland-type adenocarcinomas (including 12 cases
of adenoid cystic carcinomas, 3 cases of polymorphous low grade adenocarcinomas, 
2 cases of mucinous adenocarcinomas and 2 cases of acinar cell carcinomas).
Expressions of CK7, CK20, SOX10 and CDX2 were assessed by immunohistochemistry
staining method.
RESULTS: Nuclear staining for CDX2 was identified in all the ITACs,including
diffuse nuclear staining in 8 cases and partial nuclear staining in 2 cases.
Cytoplasmic staining for CK20 was identified in 9 cases of ITACs, and partial
cytoplasmic staining was found in 1 case of non-ITACs, while CK20 was negative in
all other adenocarcinomas.Seven cases of ITACs were negative for CK7, while CK7
was positive in all other adenocarcinomas. CK7, but not CDX2 and CK20, was
expressed in normal sinonasal epithelium. SOX10 was negative in 10 cases of ITACs
and 2 cases of non-ITACs, and positive in all other adenocarcinomas. The
sensitivity of CK7-, CK20+, SOX10- and CDX2+ in primary ITACs of the sinonasal
tract were 70.0%, 90.0%, 100%, 100%, respectively, and the specificity were 100%,
96.8%, 93.5%, 100%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Expressions of CK7-, CK20+, SOX10- and CDX2+ have high sensitivity
and specificity in ITACs and can be used as a reliable diagnostic marker for
primary intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the sinonasal tract. Additionally,
diagnostic value of CDX2 in primary intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the
sinonasal tract is superior to CK20, CK7 and SOX10.

PMID: 26711206  [PubMed - in process]


53. Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 1;410(1):36-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.014. Epub 2015
Dec 19.

Cdx2 represses Oct4 function via inducing its proteasome-dependent degradation in
early porcine embryos.

Bou G(1), Liu S(1), Guo J(1), Zhao Y(1), Sun M(1), Xue B(1), Wang J(1), Wei Y(1),
Kong Q(1), Liu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030,
China. (2)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin
150030, China. Electronic address: liu086@yahoo.com.

Reciprocal repression of inner cell mass specific factor OCT4 and trophectoderm
specific factor CDX2 promotes mouse first lineage segregation. Studies in mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells revealed that they bind to each other's regulatory
regions to reciprocally suppress transcription, additionally they form protein
complex for mutual antagonism. However, so far the molecular interaction of Oct4 
and Cdx2 in other mammal's early embryo is not yet investigated. Here,
over-expression of Cdx2 in early porcine embryo showed CDX2 represses Oct4
through neither the transcriptional repression nor forming repressive complex,
but promoting OCT4 nuclear export and proteasomal degradation. The results showed
novel molecular regulation of CDX2 on Oct4, and provided important clues for
clarifying the mechanism of interaction between CDX2 and Oct4 in embryo of
mammals other than mouse.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708097  [PubMed - in process]


54. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Dec 17. [Epub ahead of print]

A Detailed Immunohistochemical Analysis of a Large Series of Cervical and Vaginal
Gastric-type Adenocarcinomas.

Carleton C(1), Hoang L, Sah S, Kiyokawa T, Karamurzin YS, Talia KL, Park KJ,
McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast
Department of Pathology, UHCW NHS Trust, Coventry, UK Department of Pathology, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY §Department of Pathology,
Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan <U+2225>Department of Pathology, North
Western State Medical University, St. Petersburg, Russia ¶Department of
Pathology, Box Hill Hospital, Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

Adenocarcinomas exhibiting gastric differentiation represent a recently described
and uncommon subtype of non-human papillomavirus (HPV)-related cervical
adenocarcinoma. They comprise a spectrum from a well-differentiated variant
(adenoma malignum/mucinous variant of minimal deviation adenocarcinoma) to a more
poorly differentiated overtly malignant form, generally referred to as
gastric-type adenocarcinoma. Rarely, such tumors have also been described as
primary vaginal neoplasms. Gastric-type adenocarcinomas exhibit considerable
morphologic overlap with adenocarcinomas originating outside the female genital
tract, especially mucinous adenocarcinomas arising in the pancreas and biliary
tract. Moreover, they often metastasize to unusual sites, such as the ovary and
peritoneum/omentum, where they can be mistaken for metastatic adenocarcinomas
from other, nongynecologic sites. There is little information regarding the
immunophenotype of gastric-type adenocarcinomas, and knowledge of this is
important to aid in the distinction from other adenocarcinomas. In this study, we
undertook a detailed immunohistochemical analysis of a large series of cervical
(n=45) and vaginal (n=2) gastric-type adenocarcinomas. Markers included were
cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, CDX2, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA125, CA19.9, p16,
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, MUC6, PAX8, PAX2, p53, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 beta, carbonic anhydrase IX, human epidermal receptor 2 (HER2), 
and mismatch repair (MMR) proteins. All markers were classified as negative,
focal (<50% of tumor cells positive), or diffuse (=50% tumor cells positive)
except for p53 (classified as "wild-type" or "mutation-type"), HER2 (scored using
the College of American Pathologists guidelines for gastric carcinomas), and MMR 
proteins (categorized as retained or lost). There was positive staining with CK7 
(47/47-45 diffuse, 2 focal), MUC6 (17/21-6 diffuse, 11 focal), carcinoembryonic
antigen (25/31-12 diffuse, 13 focal), carbonic anhydrase IX (20/24-8 diffuse, 12 
focal), PAX8 (32/47-20 diffuse, 12 focal), CA125 (36/45-5 diffuse, 31 focal),
CA19.9 (11/11-8 diffuse, 3 focal), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (13/14-12
diffuse, 1 focal), CDX2 (24/47-4 diffuse, 20 focal), CK20 (23/47-6 diffuse, 17
focal), and p16 (18/47-4 diffuse, 14 focal). Most cases were negative with
estrogen receptor (29/31), progesterone receptor (10/11), PAX2 (18/19), and HER2 
(25/26). p53 showed "wild-type" and "mutation-type" staining in 27 of 46 and 19
of 46 cases, respectively. MMR protein expression was retained in 19 of 20 cases 
with loss of MSH6 staining in 1 patient with Lynch syndrome. Molecular studies
for HPV were undertaken in 2 tumors, which exhibited diffuse "block-type"
immunoreactivity with p16, and both were negative. This is the first detailed
immunohistochemical study of a large series of gastric-type adenocarcinomas of
the lower female genital tract. Our results indicate immunophenotypic overlap
with pancreaticobiliary adenocarcinomas but suggest that PAX8 immunoreactivity
may be especially useful in distinguishing gastric-type adenocarcinomas from
pancreaticobiliary and other nongynecologic adenocarcinomas, which are usually
negative. Diffuse "block-type" p16 immunoreactivity in a cervical adenocarcinoma 
is not necessarily indicative of a high-risk HPV-associated tumor.

PMID: 26685087  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


55. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 18;15:49. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0096-3.

Transcriptome profiling of bovine inner cell mass and trophectoderm derived from 
in vivo generated blastocysts.

Hosseini SM(1,)(2), Dufort I(3), Caballero J(4), Moulavi F(5), Ghanaei HR(6),
Sirard MA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (2)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (3)Centre de Recherche en
Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de
l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université
Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Isabelle.dufort@fsaa.ulaval.ca. (4)Centre de 
Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture
et de l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF,
Université Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Julieta.caballero.1@ulaval.ca.
(5)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
f_moulavi@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive
Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan,
Iran. hamidghanai@yahoo.co.uk. (7)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. Marc-Andre.Sirard@fsaa.ulaval.ca.

BACKGROUND: This study describes the generation and analysis of the
transcriptional profile of bovine inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE),
obtained from in vivo developed embryos by using a bovine-embryo specific array
(EmbryoGENE) containing 37,238 probes.
RESULTS: A total of 4,689 probes were differentially expressed between ICM and
TE, among these, 2,380 and 2,309 probes were upregulated in ICM and TE tissues,
respectively (P = 0.01, FC = 2.0, FDR: 2.0). Ontological classification of the
genes predominantly expressed in ICM emerged a range of functional categories
with a preponderance of genes involved in basal and developmental signaling
pathways including P53, TGFß, IL8, mTOR, integrin, ILK, and ELF2 signalings.
Cross-referencing of microarray data with two available in vitro studies
indicated a marked reduction in ICM vs. TE transcriptional difference following
in vitro culture of bovine embryos. Moreover, a great majority of genes that were
found to be misregulated following in vitro culture of bovine embryos were known 
genes involved in epigenetic regulation of pluripotency and cell differentiation 
including DNMT1, GADD45, CARM1, ELF5 HDAC8, CCNB1, KDM6A, PRDM9, CDX2, ARID3A,
IL6, GADD45A, FGFR2, PPP2R2B, and SMARCA2. Cross-species referencing of
microarray data revealed substantial divergence between bovine and mouse and
human in signaling pathways involved in early lineage specification.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional changes occur during ICM and TE lineages
specification in bovine is greater than previously understood. Therefore, this
array data establishes a standard to evaluate the in vitro imprint on the
transcriptome and to hypothesize the cross-species differences that allow in
vitro acquisition of pluripotent ICM in human and mice but hinder that process in
bovine.

PMCID: PMC4683974
PMID: 26681441  [PubMed - in process]


56. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Dec 16;7:129. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0162-5. eCollection 
2015.

MicroRNA profiling of primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma in members from
the same family reveals some similarities to pancreatic adenocarcinoma-a step
towards personalized therapy.

Garajová I(1), Funel N(2), Fiorentino M(3), Agostini V(3), Ferracin M(4), Negrini
M(4), Frassineti GL(5), Gavelli G(6), Frampton AE(7), Biasco G(8), Giovannetti
E(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Cancer Center
Amsterdam, CCA room 1.52, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands ;
Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Speciality Medicine,
Sant'Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Via Massarenti 9, 40138
Bologna, Italy. (2)Division of General and Transplant Surgery, Pisa University
Hospital, Via Paradisa 2, 56124 Pisa, Italy ; Cancer Pharmacology Lab, AIRC
Start-Up Unit, University of Pisa, Lungarno Pacinotti 43, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(3)Department of Pathology, F. Addari Institute, S.Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
University of Bologna, Viale Ercolani 4/2, 40138 Bologna, Italy. (4)Department of
Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of Ferrara, Via Borsari
46, 44121 Ferrara, Italy ; Laboratory for Technologies of Advanced Therapies
(LTTA), University of Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara 70, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e
la Cura dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, via Piero Maroncelli 40, 47014 Meldola, Italy.
(6)Department of Radiology, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e la
Cura dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, via Piero Maroncelli 40, 47014 Meldola, Italy.
(7)HPB Surgical Unit, Department of Surgery & Cancer, Hammersmith Hospital
Campus, Imperial College, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0HS UK. (8)Department of
Experimental, Diagnostic and Speciality Medicine, Sant'Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, 
University of Bologna, Via Massarenti 9, 40138 Bologna, Italy. (9)Department of
Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Cancer Center Amsterdam, CCA room
1.52, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands ; Cancer Pharmacology
Lab, AIRC Start-Up Unit, University of Pisa, Lungarno Pacinotti 43, 56126 Pisa,
Italy ; Cancer Pharmacology Lab, Start-Up Unit, University of Pisa, via Paradisa 
2, 56124 Pisa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma (PEAC) is defined as a
pulmonary adenocarcinoma with a predominant component of intestinal
differentiation and tumor cells positive for at least one intestinal marker. The 
aim of the present study was the molecular and histological characterization of a
PEAC from a patient with two other family members affected by similar lung
tumors, which has never been reported before.
FINDINGS: We evaluated the molecular characteristics of the proband's PEAC by
using a previously validated 47-microRNA (miRNA) cancer-specific array and a
predictive method to estimate tissue-of-origin probabilities. Immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining for thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1), napsin A, caudal-related
homeobox 2 (CDX2), cytokeratins, and mucins, as well as mutational analyses for
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene
homolog (KRAS), and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) were performed on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. The occurrence of PEAC in two
family members was associated with similar clinicopathological features (age at
diagnosis, smoking habit, tumor localization, multiple colonic polyps),
histologic findings (TTF-1 negativity and CDX2 positivity), and genetic findings 
(KRAS (Gly12Asp) mutation, but no EGFR/ALK aberrations). miRNA profiling revealed
similarities with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC; 75.98 %) and some overlap
with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC; 23.34 %), but not with colorectal
cancer (CRC; less than 0.5 %). Notably, these PEACs share key PDAC-associated
miRNAs associated with tumor aggressiveness (miR-31*/-126*/-506/-508-3p/-514).
CONCLUSIONS: We describe for the first time PEAC in members from the same family,
associated with similar clinical and genetic features. miRNA profiling of the
PEAC resembled a NSCLC signature, with partial overlap to a PDAC pattern. This
could explain its aggressive behavior and therefore help to guide future
tailored-therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4681170
PMID: 26677401  [PubMed]


57. Cancer Cytopathol. 2015 Dec;123(12):706-13. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21644.

Young investigator challenge: Cadherin-17 and SATB2 in cytology specimens: Do
these new immunostains help in differentiating metastatic colorectal
adenocarcinoma from adenocarcinomas of other origins?

Brandler TC(1), Jelloul FZ(1), Soto D(1), Das K(1), Rosen L(2), Bhuiya TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hofstra North Shore-Long Island Jewish School of
Medicine, Lake Success, New York. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Hofstra North
Shore-Long Island Jewish School of Medicine, Lake Success, New York.

BACKGROUND: Cadherin-17 (intestinal peptide-associated transporter) and SATB2
(SATB homeobox 2) immunoexpression has recently been described in surgical
pathology to have value in establishing the colorectal origin of metastatic
adenocarcinoma. However, to the authors' knowledge, the role of these markers in 
metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma (MCA) in cytology has not been addressed to 
date. In the current study, the authors evaluated the contribution of cadherin-17
and SATB2 to the diagnosis of MCA in cytology specimens and compared these two
novel markers with the standard gastrointestinal immunohistochemistry panel in an
attempt to identify the optimal panel.
METHODS: A total of 43 MCA cytology cases and 68 metastatic noncolorectal
adenocarcinoma (non-MCA) cytology controls were stained for SATB2; cadherin-17;
and the standard panel of cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, and Caudal-Type Homeobox
Transcription Factor 2 (CDX2). Staining intensity and percentage of positive
cells were recorded. Sensitivity and specificity values for immunostains
individually and in combination were computed and compared.
RESULTS: Despite specificities of 83.8% and 91.2%, respectively, for cadherin-17 
and SATB2, when critically examining the new immunostains together with the
standard panel, there was no significant difference noted with regard to
prediction of MCA (vs non-MCA) compared with the standard panel alone (P<U+2009><<U+2009>.6).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the current study reinforce that the standard
gastrointestinal immunohistochemistry panel remains the gold standard for
distinguishing MCA from non-MCA in cytology. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol)
2015;123:706-12. © 2015 American Cancer Society.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26671737  [PubMed - in process]


58. Int J Pharm. 2016 Jan 30;497(1-2):287-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.11.044.
Epub 2015 Nov 28.

Ethambutol plasma and intracellular pharmacokinetics: A pharmacogenetic study.

Fatiguso G(1), Allegra S(2), Calcagno A(1), Baietto L(1), Motta I(1), Favata
F(1), Cusato J(1), Bonora S(1), Perri GD(1), D'Avolio A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Unit of Infectious Diseases, University of
Turin, Amedeo di Savoia Hospital, 10149 Turin, Italy. (2)Department of Medical
Sciences, Unit of Infectious Diseases, University of Turin, Amedeo di Savoia
Hospital, 10149 Turin, Italy. Electronic address: sarah.allegra@gmail.com.

We evaluated ethambutol plasma and intracellular pharmacokinetic according to
single nucleotide polymorphisms in ABCB1, OATP1B1, PXR, VDR, CYP24A1 and CYP27B1 
genes. Mycobacterium tubercolosis infected patients were enrolled. Standard
weight-adjusted antitubercular treatment was administered intravenously for 2
weeks and then orally. Allelic discrimination was performed by real-time PCR.
Ethambutol plasma and intracellular concentrations were measured by UPLC-MS/MS
methods. Twenty-four patients were included. Considering weeks 2 and 4, median
plasma Ctrough were 73ng/mL and 247ng/mL, intracellular Ctrough were 16,863ng/mL 
and 13,535ng/mL, plasma Cmax were 5627ng/mL and 2229ng/mL, intracellular Cmax
were 133,830ng/mL and 78,544ng/mL. At week 2, ABCB1 3435 CT/TT (p=0.023) and
CYP24A1 8620 AG/GG (p=0.030) genotypes for plasma Ctrough, BsmI AA (p=0.036) for 
intracellular Ctrough and BsmI AA (p<0.001) and ApaI AA (p=0.048) for
intracellular Cmax, remained in linear regression analysis as predictive factors.
Concerning week 4 only ABCB1 3435 CT/TT (p=0.035) and Cdx2 AG/GG (p=0.004)
genotypes for plasma Ctrough and BsmI AA (p=0.028) for plasma Cmax were retained 
in final regression model. We reveal, for the first time, the possible role of
single nucleotide polymorphisms on ethambutol plasma and intracellular
concentrations; this may further the potential use of pharmacogenetic for
tailoring antitubercular treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26642947  [PubMed - in process]


59. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 3;5:17568. doi: 10.1038/srep17568.

TET-catalyzed 5-hydroxymethylcytosine regulates gene expression in
differentiating colonocytes and colon cancer.

Chapman CG(1), Mariani CJ(2,)(3), Wu F(1), Meckel K(1), Butun F(1), Chuang A(1), 
Madzo J(2), Bissonette MB(1), Kwon JH(1,)(3), Godley LA(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (2)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (3)Committee on
Molecular Pathogenesis and Molecular Medicine, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (4)Committee on Cancer Biology, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The formation of differentiated cell types from pluripotent progenitors involves 
epigenetic regulation of gene expression. DNA hydroxymethylation results from the
enzymatic oxidation of 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC)
by the ten-eleven translocation (TET) 5-mC dioxygenase enzymes. Previous work has
mapped changes in 5-mC during differentiation of intestinal stem cells. However, 
whether or not 5-hmC regulates colonocyte differentiation is unknown. Here we
show that 5-hmC regulates gene expression during colonocyte differentiation and
controls gene expression in human colon cancers. Genome-wide profiling of 5-hmC
during in vitro colonic differentiation demonstrated that 5-hmC is gained at
highly expressed and induced genes and is associated with intestinal
transcription factor binding sites, including those for HNF4A and CDX2. TET1
induction occurred during differentiation, and TET1 knockdown altered gene
expression and inhibited barrier formation of colonocytes. We find that the 5-hmC
distribution in primary human colonocytes parallels the distribution found in
differentiated cells in vitro, and that gene-specific 5-hmC changes in human
colon cancers are directly correlated with changes in gene expression. Our
results support a model in which 5-hmC regulates differentiation of adult human
intestine and 5-hmC alterations contribute to the disrupted gene expression in
colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4668370
PMID: 26631571  [PubMed - in process]


60. Pol J Pathol. 2015 Sep;66(3):246-53.

Relationship among mismatch repair deficiency, CDX2 loss, p53 and E-cadherin in
colon carcinoma and suitability of using a double panel of mismatch repair
proteins by immunohistochemistry.

Sayar I(1), Akbas EM, Isik A, Gokce A, Peker K, Demirtas L, Gürbüzel M.

Author information: 
(1)Ilyas Sayar, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Erzincan
University, Erzincan Turkey, e-mail: drilyassayar@hotmail.com.

Biomarkers such as mismatch repair proteins, CDX2, p53, and E-cadherin are blamed
for colon cancers, but the relationships of these biomarkers with each other and 
with pathological risk factors in colon carcinoma are still not clear. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the association of these biomarkers with each other by
using immunohistochemical staining and to compare their expression with
pathological risk factors for colonic adenocarcinoma. We also aimed to study the 
usability of a double panel of mismatch repair proteins. One hundred and eleven
cases with colonic adenocarcinoma were examined. There was a statistically
significant relationship between tumor histological differentiation and
perineural invasion, vascular invasion, mismatch repair deficiency, p53, CDX2,
and E-cadherin (p < 0.05). PMS2 and MSH6 loss covered 100% of cases with mismatch
repair deficiency. Mismatch repair deficiency was correlated with CDX2 loss and
E-cadherin expression (p < 0.05). It was also observed that cases with PMS2 loss 
covered all the cases with CDX2 loss. In conclusion, this double panel may be
used instead of a quadruple panel for detecting mismatch repair deficiency.
Association of CDX2 and PMS2 in the present study is necessary to conduct further
genetic and pathological studies focusing on these two markers together.

PMID: 26619103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 30;5:17297. doi: 10.1038/srep17297.

A cost-effective system for differentiation of intestinal epithelium from human
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ogaki S(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Morooka M(1), Otera K(1), Kume S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (2)Research Fellow of Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science. (3)Department of Biological Information,
Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
4259-B-25 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, 226-8503, Japan.
(4)Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, Department of Clinical
Research and Trials, Office of Regulatory Science and Clinical Research Support. 
(5)Division of Pharmacology, National Institute of Health Sciences.

The human intestinal epithelium is a useful model for pharmacological studies of 
absorption, metabolism, drug interactions, and toxicology, as well as for studies
of developmental biology. We established a rapid and cost effective system for
differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells into definitive
endoderm (DE) cells. In the presence of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a low
concentration of Activin at 6.25<U+2009>ng/ml is sufficient to give a similar
differentiation efficiency with that using Activin at 100<U+2009>ng/ml at the presence
of Wnt activator. In the presence of DMSO, Activin at low concentration triggered
hiPS cells to undergo differentiation through G1 arrest, reduce apoptosis, and
potentiate activation of downstream targets, such as SMAD2 phosphorylation and
SOX17 expression. This increased differentiation into CDX2<U+2009>+<U+2009>SOX17<U+2009>+<U+2009>DE cells.
The present differentiation procedure therefore permits rapid and efficient
derivation of DE cells, capable of differentiating into intestinal epithelium
upon BIO and DAPT treatment and of giving rise to functional cells, such as
enterocytes.

PMCID: PMC4663490
PMID: 26616277  [PubMed - in process]


62. Mol Reprod Dev. 2016 Feb;83(2):108-23. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22597. Epub 2016 Jan 23.

Expression analysis of Cdx2 and Pou5f1 in a marsupial, the stripe-faced dunnart, 
during early development.

Familari M(1), Au PC(1), de Iongh RU(2), Cruz Y(3), Selwood L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of Biology, Oberlin College,
Oberlin, Ohio.

The first lineage allocation during mouse development forms the trophectoderm and
inner cell mass, in which Cdx2 and Pou5f1 display reciprocal expression. Yet Cdx2
is not required for trophectoderm specification in other mammals, such as the
human, cow, pig, or in two marsupials, the tammar and opossum. The role of Cdx2
and Pou5f1 in the first lineage allocation of Sminthopsis macroura, the
stripe-faced dunnart, is unknown. In this study, expression of Cdx2 and Pou5f1
during oogenesis, development from cleavage to blastocyst stages, and in the
allocation of the first three lineages was analyzed for this dunnart. Cdx2 mRNA
was present in late antral-stage oocytes, but not present again until Day 5.5.
Pou5f1 mRNA was present from primary follicles to zygotes, and then expression
resumed starting at the early unilaminar blastocyst stage. All cleavage stages
and the pluriblast and trophoblast cells co-expressed CDX2 and POU5F1 proteins,
which persisted until early stages of hypoblast formation. Hypoblast cells also
show co-localisation of POU5F1 and CDX2 once they were allocated, and this
persisted during their division and migration. Our studies suggest that CDX2, and
possibly POU5F1, are maternal proteins, and that the first lineage to
differentiate is the trophoblast, which differentiates to trophectoderm after
shell loss one day before implantation. In the stripe-faced dunnart, cleavage
cells, as well as trophoblast and pluriblast cells, are polarized, suggesting the
continued presence of CDX2 in both lineages until late blastocyst stages may play
a role in the formation and maintenance of polarity. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 83:
108-123, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26613191  [PubMed - in process]


63. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2016 Jan;35(1):78-81. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000266.

Seromucinous Tumors of the Ovary. What's in a Name?

Kurman RJ(1), Shih IeM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Gynecology/Obstetrics, and Oncology, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore,
Maryland.

The recent 2014 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Tumours of the 
Female Reproductive Organs introduced a new category of ovarian neoplasm
designated "seromucinous tumours". The recognition of this distinctive group of
tumors is an important addition to the classification but the term "seromucinous"
has serious flaws that obscures the nature of these neoplasms. Morphologically,
seromucinous tumors in addition to serous and endocervical-type mucinous
epithelium, contain endometrioid, indifferent and squamous type epithelium. Their
immunoprofile is characterized by frequent expression of ER, PR, infrequent
expression of WT1 and lack of expression of CK20 and CDX2, an immunostaining
pattern consistent with a "müllerian" immunophenotype. Unlike serous and
intestinal type mucinous tumors, seromucinous tumors are frequently associated
with endometriosis making them more analogous to endometrioid and clear cell
neoplasms. Indeed, recent studies have shown that a high proportion of
seromucinous tumors lost expression of ARID1A, a tumor suppressor gene, that is
mutated in approximately 50% of endometrioid and clear cell tumors, in sharp
contrast to serous and intestinal-type mucinous tumors which do not contain
ARID1A mutations or lose its expression. Therefore, based on their
clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical and molecular genetic features we believe 
a more appropriate designation for this group of tumors is "mixed müllerian
tumors" which can be subcategorized as "mixed müllerian cystadenomas", "mixed
müllerian atypical proliferative (borderline) tumors" and "mixed müllerian
carcinomas".

PMID: 26598986  [PubMed - in process]


64. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Nov 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary Endometrial Yolk Sac Tumor With Endodermal-Intestinal Differentiation
Masquerading as Metastatic Colorectal Adenocarcinoma.

Damato S(1), Haldar K, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Pathology (S.D.), John Radcliffe Hospital
Gynaecological Oncology Unit (K.H.), Churchill Hospital, Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford Department of Pathology (W.G.M.), Belfast Health and 
Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK.

Yolk sac tumors (YSTs) with a somatic glandular pattern can be difficult to
recognize histologically because they reproduce developing intestinal, hepatic,
or lung tissue and can express markers such as CDX2 and TTF1. We report an
unusual case of a primary endometrial YST showing florid endodermal-intestinal
differentiation in a 63-yr-old woman with a history of colorectal adenocarcinoma.
Histologically, the tumor exhibited a glandular and papillary architecture and
showed widespread immunoreactivity for CDX2 and focal staining for CK20 and CEA, 
mimicking metastatic colorectal carcinoma on biopsy. The presence of subnuclear
cytoplasmic clearing and positive staining for germ cell markers, however,
pointed toward a diagnosis of primary endometrial YST, and this was supported by 
the radiologic and the subsequent pathologic finding of a primary
endometrial-based lesion. YSTs in this age group usually arise in association
with somatic tumors and in this case a small focus of coexistent endometrioid
adenocarcinoma was identified within the uterus. Despite surgery and adjuvant
chemotherapy, the patient showed disease progression with liver and lung
metastases 6 mo postoperatively.

PMID: 26598980  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


65. Genes Dev. 2015 Dec 1;29(23):2435-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.268821.115. Epub 2015 Nov 
19.

Elf5-centered transcription factor hub controls trophoblast stem cell
self-renewal and differentiation through stoichiometry-sensitive shifts in target
gene networks.

Latos PA(1), Sienerth AR(1), Murray A(1), Senner CE(1), Muto M(2), Ikawa M(2),
Oxley D(3), Burge S(4), Cox BJ(5), Hemberger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United
Kingdom; Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
3EG, United Kingdom; (2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Animal
Resource Center for Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; (3)Proteomics Group,
The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom; (4)Epigenetics
Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom;
(5)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1E2, Canada.

Elf5 is a transcription factor with pivotal roles in the trophoblast compartment,
where it reinforces a trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific transcriptional
circuit. However, Elf5 is also present in differentiating trophoblast cells that 
have ceased to express other TSC genes such as Cdx2 and Eomes. In the present
study, we aimed to elucidate the context-dependent role of Elf5 at the interface 
between TSC self-renewal and the onset of differentiation. We demonstrate that
precise levels of Elf5 are critical for normal expansion of the TSC compartment
and embryonic survival, as Elf5 overexpression triggers precocious trophoblast
differentiation. Through integration of protein interactome, transcriptome, and
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation data, we reveal that this
abundance-dependent function is mediated through a shift in preferred
Elf5-binding partners; in TSCs, Elf5 interaction with Eomes recruits Tfap2c to
triply occupied sites at TSC-specific genes, driving their expression. In
contrast, the Elf5 and Tfap2c interaction becomes predominant as their protein
levels increase. This triggers binding to double- and single-occupancy sites that
harbor the cognate Tfap2c motif, causing activation of the associated
differentiation-promoting genes. These data place Elf5 at the center of a
stoichiometry-sensitive transcriptional network, where it acts as a molecular
switch governing the balance between TSC proliferation and differentiation.

© 2015 Latos et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4691948
PMID: 26584622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Pathol Int. 2016 Jan;66(1):29-33. doi: 10.1111/pin.12361. Epub 2015 Nov 18.

Mucinous cystic tumor with CK20 and CDX2 expression of the thymus: Is this a
benign counterpart of adenocarcinoma of the thymus, enteric type?

Akiba J(1), Harada H(2), Yokoyama S(1,)(3), Hashiguchi T(1,)(3), Kawahara A(4),
Mitsuoka M(3), Takamori S(3), Yano H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. 
(2)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Seichokai Fuchu Hospital, Izumi, Japan.
(3)Department of Surgery, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kurume University Hospital, Kurume, Japan.

Primary thymic adenocarcinoma is extremely rare. Moreover, thymic pure epithelial
benign neoplasms are extremely rare. We encountered a cystic tumor almost purely 
composed of goblet cell-like mucus-producing cells of the thymus. A mass lesion
of the mediastinum was detected in a 54-year-old man. The gross specimen
presented a unilocular cystic lesion containing abundant mucin, measuring 8 × 5.5
× 4.5<U+2009>cm. Microscopic examination revealed a cystic tumor consisting of bland
mucus-producing cells resembling goblet cells and forming tiny daughter cysts
within the dense fibrous capsule. No destructive growth or infiltration into
surrounding thymic tissue was observed. Papillary growth was found in a small
focus. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin 20 and
caudal type homobox 2, which are representative markers of enteric
differentiation. The patient has been well without any recurrence for
approximately ten years after the operation. Thus, the tumor should be regarded
as a mucinous cystic tumor in the thymus. Very recently, thymic adenocarcinoma
with enteric differentiation was proposed as a novel subtype of thymic carcinoma.
This case could be regarded as a benign counterpart of adenocarcinoma of the
thymus, enteric type. A further follow-up study is required to confirm the exact 
biological behavior of this tumor.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26581569  [PubMed - in process]


67. Lab Invest. 2016 Mar;96(3):325-37. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.137. Epub 2015 Nov
16.

Bile acids induce Delta-like 1 expression via Cdx2-dependent pathway in the
development of Barrett's esophagus.

Tamagawa Y(1,)(2), Ishimura N(1), Uno G(1), Aimi M(1), Oshima N(1), Yuki T(3),
Sato S(3), Ishihara S(1), Kinoshita Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine,
Izumo, Shimane, Japan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (3)Division of
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, Shimane University Hospital, Izumo, Shimane, Japan.

Crosstalk between the Notch signaling pathway and Caudal-related homeobox 2
(Cdx2) has important roles in the development of Barrett's esophagus (BE). We
investigated the expression and function of the Notch signaling ligand Delta-like
1 (Dll1) during the development of BE. We determined the expression levels of
Dll1 and intracellular signaling molecules related to Notch signaling ((Notch1,
Hairy/enhancer of split 1 (Hes1), and Atonal homolog 1 (ATOH1)) in human
esophageal squamous and Barrett's epithelium samples. Next, those expression
levels in esophageal squamous cells (Het-1A) and Barrett's esophageal cells (CP-A
and BAR-T) following stimulation with either bile acids or gamma-secretase
inhibitor were investigated. Finally, changes in those expression levels
following transfection of a Cdx2 or Dll1 expression vector into Het-1A cells were
examined. In addition, changes in those expression levels following knockdown of 
Cdx2 or Dll1 in CP-A cells were also examined. Dll1 was found to be upregulated
and localized in the cell membrane and cytoplasm in BE. Bile acids enhanced
cytoplasmic expression of Dll1 in CP-A cells, while cleaved Notch1 expression did
not change, suggesting lack of a Dll1 agonistic effect on Notch signaling. Cells 
transfected with Cdx2 revealed significantly enhanced Dll1, while forced
expression of Dll1 enhanced ATOH1, Cdx2, and MUC2 expression levels.
Nevertheless, enhanced Dll1 did not induce Hes1 expression, suggesting that Dll1 
may primarily function as an intracellular signaling molecule and not a Notch
agonistic ligand in the canonical pathway. In addition, knockdown of Cdx2
completely abrogated any increase in Dll1 expression upon treatment with bile
acids. Our results revealed a novel function of Dll1: facilitation of intestinal 
metaplasia in conjunction with Cdx2 expression. Furthermore, they suggest that
intracellular induction of Dll1 expression in esophageal epithelial cells due to 
Cdx2 induction in response to bile acids has important roles in BE development.

PMID: 26568294  [PubMed - in process]


68. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2015;19(4):261-4. doi: 10.5114/wo.2015.54385. Epub 2015 Jul
8.

The role of Reg IV in colorectal cancer, as a potential therapeutic target.

Hu Y(1), Pan C(1), Hu J(2), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention, China 
National Ministry of Education), School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, PR China. (2)Medical Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School
of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China.

Regenerating islet-derived family, member 4 (Reg IV), a member of the Reg gene
family, has been reported to be overexpressed in gastrointestinal tract cancers. 
Reg IV overexpression in tumor cells has been associated with carcinogenesis,
tissue regeneration, proliferation and resistance to apoptosis. Reg IV activates 
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway in colon cancer and
increases expression of B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) and B-cell lymphoma-extra large
(Bcl-xl), which are associated with the inhibition of apoptosis, results in
mitogenic signaling in colon cancer cells, increase cell proliferation,
metastasis and decreased apoptosis. Reg IV treatment inhibits 5-fluorouracil
induced apoptosis, at least two mechanisms are involved in inhibition of
apoptosis by Reg IV, including Bcl-2 and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD).
These studies may lead to novel therapeutic strategies for cancers expressing Reg
IV. Recently, one proteoglycan was confirmed to disrupt this signaling pathway to
perform antitumor effect. This review summaries current knowledge of the
expression and roles of Reg IV in human colorectal cancer, describes the possible
signaling pathway which Reg IV activates, and discusses the relevance of Reg IV
as a potential therapeutic target for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4631303
PMID: 26557771  [PubMed]


69. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142442.
eCollection 2015.

The Efficient Derivation of Trophoblast Cells from Porcine In Vitro Fertilized
and Parthenogenetic Blastocysts and Culture with ROCK Inhibitor Y-27632.

Hou D(1), Su M(1), Li X(1), Li Z(1), Yun T(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang M(2,)(3), Zhao
L(2,)(3), Li R(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, P. 
R. China. (2)State Key Laboratories of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Xenotransplantation,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Trophoblasts (TR) are specialized cells of the placenta and play an important
role in embryo implantation. The in vitro culture of trophoblasts provided an
important tool to investigate the mechanisms of implantation. In the present
study, porcine trophoblast cells were derived from pig in vitro fertilized (IVF) 
and parthenogenetically activated (PA) blastocysts via culturing in medium
supplemented with KnockOut serum replacement (KOSR) and basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) on STO feeder layers, and the effect of ROCK (Rho-associated
coiled-coil protein kinases) inhibiter Y-27632 on the cell lines culture was
tested. 5 PA blastocyst derived cell lines and 2 IVF blastocyst derived cell
lines have been cultured more than 20 passages; one PA cell lines reached 110
passages without obvious morphological alteration. The derived trophoblast cells 
exhibited epithelium-like morphology, rich in lipid droplets, and had obvious
defined boundaries with the feeder cells. The cells were histochemically stained 
positive for alkaline phosphatase. The expression of TR lineage markers, such as 
CDX2, KRT7, KRT18, TEAD4, ELF5 and HAND1, imprinted genes such as IGF2, PEG1 and 
PEG10, and telomerase activity related genes TERC and TERF2 were detected by
immunofluorescence staining, reverse transcription PCR and quantitative real-time
PCR analyses. Both PA and IVF blastocysts derived trophoblast cells possessed the
ability to differentiate into mature trophoblast cells in vitro. The addition of 
Y-27632 improved the growth of both PA and IVF blastocyst derived cell lines and 
increased the expression of trophoblast genes. This study has provided an
alternative highly efficient method to establish trophoblast for research focused
on peri-implantation and placenta development in IVF and PA embryos.

PMCID: PMC4640852
PMID: 26555939  [PubMed - in process]


70. Hum Pathol. 2016 Jan;47(1):132-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.014. Epub 2015
Sep 30.

Primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the female urethra: a contemporary
clinicopathologic analysis.

Harari SE(1), Cheng L(2), Osunkoya AO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
30322. (2)Department of Pathology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202. (3)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30322; Department of Urology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30322; Emory Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, 30322;
Department of Pathology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Atlanta, GA, 30033.
Electronic address: adeboye.osunkoya@emory.edu.

Primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the female urethra is very rare and may lead
to both diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Although primary mucinous
adenocarcinoma of the prostate and prostatic urethra has been well characterized 
in men, this is the largest clinicopathologic study to date of primary mucinous
adenocarcinoma of the female urethra. A search was made through the files of 2
major academic institutions for cases of confirmed primary mucinous
adenocarcinoma arising from the female urethra. Tumors arising from adjacent
organs were excluded both clinically and pathologically in all cases. Five cases 
were identified. The mean patient age was 67 years (range, 54-74 years). All
patients presented with a polypoid/papillary mass arising from the urethra.
Pathologic stages were as follows: pT4 3 (60%) of 5 cases; pT3 1 (20%) of 5
cases, and pT2 1 (20%) of 5 cases. Immunohistochemical stains for GATA3, p63,
CK7, CK20, CDX2, ER, PAX8, and ß-catenin were performed on all cases.
Immunohistochemical stains were positive in the tumor cells for CDX2 in 4/5 (80%)
cases; focally positive for CK20 in 4/5 (80%) cases; focally positive for CK7 in 
4/5 cases (80%); and negative for p63, GATA3, ER, PAX8 and ß-catenin in all
cases. In the 4 patients with available follow-up data, mean follow-up was 25
months (range, 4-54 months). It is critical for pathologists to be aware of this 
entity in light of potential diagnostic pitfalls and therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26552875  [PubMed - in process]


71. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar;40(3):419-32. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000553.

SATB2 Expression Distinguishes Ovarian Metastases of Colorectal and Appendiceal
Origin From Primary Ovarian Tumors of Mucinous or Endometrioid Type.

Moh M(1), Krings G, Ates D, Aysal A, Kim GE, Rabban JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA.

The primary origin of some ovarian mucinous tumors may be challenging to
determine, because some metastases of extraovarian origin may exhibit gross,
microscopic, and immunohistochemical features that are shared by some primary
ovarian mucinous tumors. Metastases of primary colorectal, appendiceal, gastric, 
pancreatic, and endocervical adenocarcinomas may simulate primary ovarian
mucinous cystadenoma, mucinous borderline tumor, or mucinous adenocarcinoma.
Recently, immunohistochemical expression of SATB2, a transcriptional regulator
involved in osteoblastic and neuronal differentiation, has been shown to be a
highly sensitive marker of normal colorectal epithelium and of colorectal
adenocarcinoma. SATB2 expression has not been reported in normal epithelium of
the female reproductive tract. Therefore, we hypothesized that SATB2 may be of
value in distinguishing ovarian metastases of colorectal adenocarcinoma from
primary ovarian mucinous tumors and from primary ovarian endometrioid tumors.
Among primary ovarian tumors, SATB2 staining was observed in 0/22 mucinous
cystadenomas that lacked a component of mature teratoma, 4/12 mucinous
cystadenomas with mature teratoma, 1/60 mucinous borderline tumors, 0/17 mucinous
adenocarcinomas, 0/3 endometrioid borderline tumors, and 0/72 endometrioid
adenocarcinomas. Among ovarian metastases, SATB2 staining was observed in 24/32
(75%) colorectal adenocarcinomas; 8/10 (80%) low-grade appendiceal mucinous
neoplasms; and 4/4 (100%) high-grade appendiceal adenocarcinomas. No SATB2
staining was observed in any ovarian metastasis of pancreatic, gastric,
gallbladder, or endocervical origin. Evaluation of primary extraovarian tumors
showed the highest incidences of SATB2 staining among primary colorectal
adenocarcinomas (71%), primary appendiceal low-grade mucinous neoplasms (100%),
and primary appendiceal high-grade adenocarcinomas (100%). Similar to their
metastatic counterparts, none of the primary pancreatic or gastric
adenocarcinomas showed any SATB2 staining. In a subset of tumors for which CK7,
CK20, and CDX2 were available, SATB2 was never positive in any tumor of any
origin that was CK7CK20CDX2. Among tumors that coexpressed all 3 markers
(CK7CK20CDX2), 6/7 SATB2 tumors were of colorectal or appendiceal origin, and 1/7
was a primary ovarian borderline tumor. We conclude that ovarian tumors with
mucinous or endometrioid features that express SATB2 are unlikely to be of
primary ovarian origin unless there is a component of mature teratoma in the
ovary; instead, attention should be directed to a colorectal or appendiceal
origin. SATB2 may be of particular value in ovarian mucinous tumors that are
positive for all 3 markers (CK7CK20CDX2), as SATB2 staining strongly implicates a
colorectal or appendiceal origin.

PMID: 26551622  [PubMed - in process]


72. Exp Mol Pathol. 2016 Feb;100(1):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.11.009. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

CDX2 downregulation is associated with poor differentiation and MMR deficiency in
colon cancer.

Olsen J(1), Eiholm S(2), Kirkeby LT(3), Espersen ML(4), Jess P(5), Gögenür I(6), 
Olsen J(7), Troelsen JT(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde University,
Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark; Department of Surgery,
Koege-Roskilde University Hospital, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: josn@ruc.dk. (2)Department of Pathology, Roskilde University 
Hospital, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark. Electronic address:
seh@regionsjaelland.dk. (3)Department of Surgery, Koege-Roskilde University
Hospital, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark. Electronic address:
lenk@regionsjaelland.dk. (4)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde
University, Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark; The Molecular Unit,
Department of Pathology, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, DK-2730, 
Herlev, Denmark. Electronic address: mlme@ruc.dk. (5)Department of Surgery,
Koege-Roskilde University Hospital, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: pjss@regionsjaelland.dk. (6)Department of Surgery,
Koege-Roskilde University Hospital, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark;
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 
DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: igo@regionsjaelland.dk.
(7)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 
3, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: jolsen@sund.ku.dk.
(8)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde University,
Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark. Electronic address:
troelsen@ruc.dk.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox genes are often deregulated in cancer and can have both
oncogenic and tumor-suppressing potential. The Caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is an intestine-specific transcription factor. CDX2
has been implicated in differentiation, proliferation, cell adhesion, and
migration. In this study, we investigated CDX2 mRNA and protein expression in
relation to the clinicopathological characteristics of colon cancer, including
mismatch repair status and recurrence risk.
METHODS: Tumor samples were obtained from colon cancer patients. Biopsies from
tumor tissue and normal adjacent tissue were fixed in liquid nitrogen for RNA
extraction or in formalin and paraffin embedded (FFPE) for immunohistochemical
staining. CDX2 mRNA expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR. FFPE sections were
stained for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, and CDX2.
RESULTS: A total of 191 patient samples were included in the study and analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. Of these samples, 97 were further evaluated by RT-qPCR. 
There was no significant difference in CDX2 mRNA expression between tumor and
normal tissues. CDX2 mRNA expression was significantly lower in right-sided
tumors (p<0.05), poorly differentiated tumors (p<0.05), and MMR-deficient tumors 
(p<0.05). Similarly, CDX2 protein expression was more often low or absent in
right-sided tumors (p<0.01), poorly differentiated tumors (p<0.001), and
MMR-deficient tumors (p<0.001). Low CDX2 protein or mRNA expression was not
associated with recurrence risk.
CONCLUSION: We found that CDX2 downregulation is associated with MMR deficiency, 
right-sided tumors, and poor differentiation at both the mRNA and protein level. 
Whether CDX2 plays an active role in tumor progression in MSI/MMR-deficient
tumors remains to be elucidated.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26551082  [PubMed - in process]


73. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Nov 6. doi: 10.1111/dote.12442. [Epub ahead of print]

Esophageal submucosal gland duct adenoma: a clinicopathological and
immunohistochemical study with a review of the literature.

Nie L(1), Wu HY(1), Shen YH(2), Fan XS(1), Sun Q(1), Huang Q(3), Chen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Gastroenterology,
The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing,
Jiangsu Province, China. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Esophageal submucosal gland duct adenoma (ESGDA) is a rare tumor. The
clinicopathological features of the ESGDA and its precursor lesion have not been 
comprehensively evaluated. In this study, we aimed at delineating the
clinicopathological features of the ESGDA and cyst formation of the esophageal
submucosal gland duct (ESGD), as well as their correlations and clinical
implications. We identified three cases of ESGDA and 16 cases of cyst formation
of the ESGD among 786 endoscopic mucosal resection specimens over a 7-year
period. The median patient age was 58 years with a male predominance. These
lesions were small submucosal bulges locating at the lower esophagus with a size 
no more than 1<U+2009>cm. The main microscopic changes of these lesions included content
retention, multilayered epithelium or papillary folds of the ESGD and
inflammatory cell infiltration, acidophilic degeneration, hyperplasia or atrophy 
of the acini. The included cases generally showed moderate to severe microscopic 
esophagitis. The ESGDA was mainly consisted by multiple glandular cysts covered
by two layers of cells. Immunohistochemical results showed that the luminal duct 
lining cells and basal cells were positive for CK7 and p63, respectively. Both of
the two layer cells were positive for HMWCK and negative for CK20, p53, CDX2,
MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2 and MUC1. The proliferation index was very low (1%). The
diagnostic criteria of the ESGDA were proposed and, the differential diagnosis
was discussed. Cyst formation of the ESGD is considered to be the precursor
lesion of the ESGDA, because they have overlapping clinicopathological features
with progressive relationship. In addition, the ESGDA have close connection with 
advance of the GERD and, probably, an increased risk of carcinoma.

© 2015 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 26542981  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. Histopathology. 2015 Nov 6. doi: 10.1111/his.12899. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunohistochemical characterization of appendiceal mucinous neoplasms and the
value of SATB2 in their distinction from primary ovarian mucinous tumors.

Strickland S(1), Parra-Herran C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Ottawa; The
Ottawa Hospital and Eastern Ontario Regional Laboratory Association, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto; Sunnybrook Health Science Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.

AIMS: The distinction between primary ovarian mucinous tumors and appendiceal
mucinous neoplasms metastatic to the ovary can be challenging given the overlap
of morphologic features and immunohistochemical expression of traditional
markers. SATB2 has been recently described as a sensitive and specific marker of 
colorectal epithelium. Its expression in appendiceal mucinous tumors and its role
in their distinction from ovarian neoplasms have not been fully characterized.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry was performed in tissue microarrays
from 32 primary appendiceal mucinous tumors (25 low grade appendiceal mucinous
neoplasms and 7 adenocarcinomas) and 40 ovarian mucinous neoplasms (20 borderline
tumors and 20 adenocarcinomas). Stains were interpreted as positive or negative
by scoring intensity and distribution. SATB2 was positive in 93.8% of appendiceal
and only one ovarian tumor; SATB2 was 97.5% specific for appendiceal origin.
CK20, CDX2 and MUC2 were strongly and diffusely positive in appendiceal tumors;
ovarian tumors were also positive, but with a patchy distribution and mild
intensity. CK7 was expressed in 97.5% ovarian and 31.2% of appendiceal tumors.
PAX8 was positive in 70% of ovarian tumors, and negative in all appendiceal
lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: SATB2 is frequently expressed in appendiceal mucinous neoplasms. In 
the context of a mucinous neoplasm involving the ovary, any SATB2 positivity
should raise the possibility of appendiceal origin. Expression of CK20, CDX2 and 
MUC2 supports appendiceal origin only when diffuse and strong. These and other
markers such as CK7 and PAX8 are recommended in the work-up of ovarian mucinous
tumors with any clinical or pathologic features suspicious for secondary origin. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26542609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Nov 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunohistochemistry in the Diagnosis of Mucinous Neoplasms Involving the Ovary: 
The Added Value of SATB2 and Biomarker Discovery Through Protein Expression
Database Mining.

Strickland S(1), Wasserman JK, Giassi A, Djordjevic B, Parra-Herran C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (S.C., J.K.W., A.G., B.D.,
C.P.H.), University of Ottawa The Ottawa Hospital and Eastern Ontario Regional
Laboratory Association (S.C., J.K.W., B.D., C.P.H.), Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Immunohistochemistry is frequently used to identify ovarian mucinous neoplasms as
primary or metastatic; however, there is significant overlap in expression
patterns. We compared traditional markers (CK7, CK20, CDX2, PAX8, estrogen
receptor, ß-catenin, MUC1, MUC2, and MUC5AC) to 2 novel proteins identified
through mining of the Human Protein Atlas expression database: SATB2 and POF1B.
The study cohort included 49 primary gastrointestinal (GI) mucinous
adenocarcinomas (19 colorectal, 15 gastric, 15 pancreatobiliary), 60 primary
ovarian mucinous neoplasms (19 cystadenomas, 21 borderline tumors, 20
adenocarcinomas), and 19 metastatic carcinomas to the ovary (14 lower and 5 upper
GI primaries). Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue microarrays, scored
and interpreted as negative (absent or focal/weak) or positive. Metastatic tumors
were frequently unilateral (42.8% of tumors from lower and 40% of tumors from
upper tract) and =10 cm (85.7% of tumors from lower and 80% of tumors from upper 
tract). CK7 was positive in 88.5% upper GI and 88.3% primary ovarian compared
with 24.3% lower GI neoplasms. CK20 and CDX2 were positive in 84.8% and 100% of
lower GI tumors, respectively; however, expression was also common in upper GI
(CK20 42.8%, CDX2 50%) and primary ovarian neoplasms (CK20 65.7%, CDX2 38.3%).
Conversely, SATB2 was more specific for lower GI origin, being positive in 78.8% 
lower GI but only 11.5% upper GI and 1.7% primary ovarian neoplasms. PAX8
expression was common in primary ovarian neoplasms (75% of all neoplasms, 65% of 
carcinomas); only 1 (1.5%) GI tumor was positive. MUC2 and ß-catenin were
frequently positive in lower GI tumors (96.9% and 51.5%, respectively). Estrogen 
receptor expression was only seen in primary ovarian neoplasms (13.3%). Nuclear
premature ovarian failure 1B (POF1B) expression was seen in malignant tumors
regardless of their origin. A panel including CK7, SATB2, and PAX8 separated
primary from secondary GI neoplasms with up to 77.1% sensitivity and 99%
specificity, outperforming tumor laterality and size. Second-line markers such as
CDX2, MUC2, estrogen receptor, MUC1, and ß-catenin increased the sensitivity of
immunohistochemistry in excluding lower GI origin. Biomarker search using
proteomic databases has a value in diagnostic pathology, as shown with SATB2;
however, as seen with POF1B, expression profiles in these databases are not
always reproduced in larger cohorts.

PMID: 26535987  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


76. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2016 Mar;35(2):118-22. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000227.

Pseudomyxoma-type Invasion in Gastrointestinal Adenocarcinomas of Endometrium and
Cervix: A Report of 2 Cases.

Rubio A(1), Schuldt M, Guarch R, Laplaza Y, Giordano G, Nogales FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (A.R.), Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de
Badajoz, Badajoz Hospital Universitario San Cecilio (M.S., F.F.N.), Universidad
de Granada, Granada Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra (R.G., Y.L.), Hospital
Virgen del Camino, Pamplona Università Degli Studi di Parma (G.G.), Parma PR,
Italy.

This paper presents a clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical report of 2
gastrointestinal-type tumors, one in the endometrium and the other in the cervix.
Both showed extensive invasion into the pelvic structures with acellular mucin,
identical to pseudomyxoma but in the absence of appendiceal or ovarian tumors.
Case 1 was an 81-yr-old female with a Stage III endometrial gastrointestinal-type
adenocarcinoma who had had an endometrial polyp with intestinal metaplasia 4
years previously. Case 2 was a 68-yr-old female with Stage IIIB endocervical
gastrointestinal-type adenocarcinoma. Both were associated with a pseudomyxoma
type of invasion, which in the endometrial case was transmural through the
myometrium, and in the cervical case involved parametria, pelvic floor, and lymph
nodes. Immunohistochemically, both tumors had a gastrointestinal phenotype
coexpressing cytokeratins 7 and 20, CDX2, villin, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6 and were
negative for human papillomavirus, analyzed by real-time polymerase chain
reaction. The first case exemplifies intestinal endometrial metaplasia as a
precursor lesion of the rare gastrointestinal type of adenocarcinoma and also
proves its progression into carcinoma. The second case exemplifies the highly
aggressive nature of cervical invasion forming mucin lakes. Extensive
pseudomyxoma in the uterus and cervix was associated with high clinical stages
with marked lymphovascular invasion and lymph node metastases.

PMID: 26535979  [PubMed - in process]


77. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 3;5:15953. doi: 10.1038/srep15953.

Construction and analysis of dynamic transcription factor regulatory networks in 
the progression of glioma.

Li Y(1), Shao T(1), Jiang C(1), Bai J(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang J(1), Zhang L(1), Zhao
Z(1), Xu J(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology and Bio-Pharmaceutical Key
Laboratory of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin Medical University.

The combinatorial cross-regulation of transcription factors (TFs) plays an
important role in cellular identity and function; however, the dynamic regulation
of TFs during glioma progression remains largely unknown. Here, we used the
genome-wide expression of TFs to construct an extensive human TF network
comprising interactions among 513 TFs and to analyse the dynamics of the TF-TF
network during glioma progression. We found that the TF regulatory networks share
a common architecture and that the topological structures are conserved.
Strikingly, despite the conservation of the network architecture, TF regulatory
networks are highly grade specific, and TF circuitry motifs are dynamically
rewired during glioma progression. In addition, the most frequently observed
structure in the grade-specific TF networks was the feedforward loop (FFL). We
described applications that show how investigating the behaviour of FFLs in
glioblastoma can reveal FFLs (such as RARG-NR1I2-CDX2) that are associated with
prognosis. We constructed comprehensive TF-TF networks and systematically
analysed the circuitry, dynamics, and topological principles of the networks
during glioma progression, which will further enhance our understanding of the
functions of TFs in glioma.

PMCID: PMC4630656
PMID: 26526635  [PubMed - in process]


78. Hum Pathol. 2016 Jan;47(1):85-94. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.008. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

Are clinicopathological features of colorectal cancers with methylation in half
of CpG island methylator phenotype panel markers different from those of CpG
island methylator phenotype-high colorectal cancers?

Bae JM(1), Rhee YY(2), Kim KJ(3), Wen X(4), Song YS(5), Cho NY(6), Kim JH(7),
Kang GH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
110-799, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jeongmobae@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
110-799, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: songyyii@naver.com. (3)Department
of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: sonicker@naver.com. (4)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic
of Korea; Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: hyunwoo625@snu.ac.kr. (5)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: suky0215@naver.com. (6)Laboratory of Epigenetics,
Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul
110-744, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: chonamyun@hanmail.net.
(7)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
110-799, Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea; Laboratory of Epigenetics,
Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul
110-744, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: ghkang@snu.ac.kr.

CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)-high (CIMP-H) colorectal cancer (CRC) is
defined when a tumor shows methylation at greater than or equal to 60% of CIMP
panel markers. Although CRCs with methylation at 50% of panel markers are
classified as CIMP-low/CIMP-0 tumors, little is known regarding the
clinicopathological and molecular features of CRCs with methylation at 4/8 panel 
markers (4/8 methylated markers) and whether they are akin to CIMP-H or
CIMP-low/CIMP-0 CRCs in terms of their clinicopathological or molecular features.
A total of 1164 cases of surgically resected CRC were analyzed for their
methylation status in 8 CIMP panel markers, and the frequencies of various
clinicopathological and molecular features were compared between CRCs with 0/8,
1/8 to 3/8, 4/8, and 5/8 to 8/8 methylated markers. CRCs with 4/8 methylated
markers were closer to CRCs with 5/8 to 8/8 methylated markers in terms of sex
distribution, mucin production, serration, nodal metastasis, CK7 expression, CK20
loss, and CDX2 loss frequencies and overall survival rate. CRCs with methylation 
at 4/8 markers were closer to CRCs with 1/8 to 3/8 methylated markers in terms of
less frequent right colon location and poor differentiation. CRCs with 4/8
methylated markers showed the shortest overall survival time compared with CRCs
with 0/8, 1/8 to 3/8, 4/8, or 5/8 to 8/8 methylated markers. In terms of
clinicopathological and molecular features, CRCs with 4/8 methylated markers
appeared to be closer to CIMP-H than to CIMP-low/CIMP-0 and would thus be better 
classified as CIMP-H if the CRCs require classification into either CIMP-H or
CIMP-low/CIMP-0.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26520418  [PubMed - in process]


79. Biol Reprod. 2015 Dec;93(6):132. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.134254. Epub 2015
Oct 28.

Signal Inhibition Reveals JAK/STAT3 Pathway as Critical for Bovine Inner Cell
Mass Development.

Meng F(1), Forrester-Gauntlett B(1), Turner P(1), Henderson H(1), Oback B(2).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ltd., Ruakura Research Centre, Reproductive Technologies, Hamilton,
New Zealand. (2)AgResearch Ltd., Ruakura Research Centre, Reproductive
Technologies, Hamilton, New Zealand bjorn.oback@agresearch.co.nz.

The inner cell mass (ICM) of mammalian blastocysts consists of pluripotent
epiblast and hypoblast lineages, which develop into embryonic and extraembryonic 
tissues, respectively. We conducted a chemical screen for regulators of epiblast 
identity in bovine Day 8 blastocysts. From the morula stage onward, in vitro
fertilized embryos were cultured in the presence of cell-permeable small
molecules targeting nine principal signaling pathway components, including
TGFbeta1, BMP, EGF, VEGF, PDGF, FGF, cAMP, PI3K, and JAK signals. Using 1)
blastocyst quality (by morphological grading), 2) cell numbers (by differential
stain), and 3) epiblast (FGF4, NANOG) and hypoblast (PDGFRa, SOX17) marker gene
expression (by quantitative PCR), we identified positive and negative regulators 
of ICM development and pluripotency. TGFbeta1, BMP, and cAMP and combined
VEGF/PDGF/FGF signals did not affect blastocyst development while PI3K was
important for ICM growth but did not alter lineage-specific gene expression.
Stimulating cAMP specifically increased NANOG expression, while combined
VEGF/PDGF/FGF inhibition up-regulated epiblast and hypoblast markers. The
strongest effects were observed by suppressing JAK1/2 signaling with AZD1480.
This treatment interfered with ICM formation, but trophectoderm cell numbers and 
markers (CDX2, KTR8) were not altered. JAK inhibition repressed both epiblast and
hypoblast transcripts as well as naive pluripotency-related genes (KLF4, TFCP2L1)
and the JAK substrate STAT3. We found that tyrosine (Y) 705-phosphorylated STAT3 
(pSTAT3(Y705)) was restricted to ICM nuclei, where it colocalized with SOX2 and
NANOG. JAK inhibition abolished this ICM-exclusive pSTAT3(Y705) signal and
strongly reduced the number of SOX2-positive nuclei. In conclusion, JAK/STAT3
activation is required for bovine ICM formation and acquisition of naive
pluripotency markers.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26510863  [PubMed - in process]


80. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Oct 23. pii: jclinpath-2015-203337. doi:
10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203337. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunophenotyping of ampullary carcinomata allows for stratification of treatment
specific subgroups.

Leo JM(1), Kalloger SE(2), Peixoto RD(3), Gale NS(4), Webber DL(5), Owen DA(5),
Renouf D(6), Schaeffer DF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. (2)The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada Pancreas Centre BC, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (3)Division of
Medical Oncology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Anatomical Pathology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada Pancreas Centre BC, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (6)The University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada Pancreas Centre BC,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada Division of Medical Oncology, BC Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Ampullary carcinomata (AC) can be separated into intestinal (IT) or
pancreatobiliary (PB) subtypes. Although morphological, immunohistochemical and
molecular differentiation of IT and PB have been well documented; the prognostic 
significance of histological subtype and whether patients with either subtype
benefit from differential chemotherapeutic regimens remains unclear.
METHODS: As part of a larger cohort study, patients who underwent resection for
AC or pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) were retrospectively identified.
Clinicopathological covariates and outcome were obtained and MUC1, MUC2, CDX2 and
CK20 were assessed with immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Of 99 ACs, the resultant immunophenotypes indicated 48% and 22% were IT 
and PB, respectively. Thirty (30%) cases were quadruple negative (QN). Within the
PDAC cohort (N=257), the most prevalent immunophenotype was QN (53%).
Subsequently, all QN ACs were classified as PB immunohistochemically yielding
47.5% and 52.5% classified as IT and PB, respectively. Involved regional lymph
nodes and elevated T-stage were significantly associated with PB compared with IT
AC (p=0.0032 and 0.0396, respectively). Progression-free survival revealed
inferior survival for PB versus IT AC (p=0.0156).
CONCLUSIONS: AC can be classified into prognostic groups with unique
clinicopathological characteristics using immunohistochemistry.
Immunophenotypical similarity of PB and PDAC suggests that treatment regimens
similar to those used in PDAC should be explored.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26500334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Nov 10;5(5):673-81. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.09.006.
Epub 2015 Oct 17.

Distinct Processes and Transcriptional Targets Underlie CDX2 Requirements in
Intestinal Stem Cells and Differentiated Villus Cells.

San Roman AK(1), Tovaglieri A(2), Breault DT(3), Shivdasani RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Program in Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (2)Division
of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Division 
of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department
of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)Department of
Medical Oncology and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu.

Lgr5-expressing intestinal stem cells (ISCs) renew the adult gut epithelium by
producing mature villus cells (VCs); the transcriptional basis for ISC functions 
remains unclear. RNA sequencing analysis identified transcripts modulated during 
differentiation of Lgr5(+) ISCs into VCs, with high expression of the
intestine-restricted transcription factor (TF) gene Cdx2 in both populations.
Cdx2-deleted mouse ISCs showed impaired proliferation and long-term inability to 
produce mature lineages, revealing essential ISC functions. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis of CDX2 in Lgr5(+) ISCs, coupled with
mRNA profiling of control and Cdx2(-/-) ISCs, identified features of CDX2
regulation distinct from VCs. Most CDX2 binding in ISCs occurs in anticipation of
future gene expression, but whereas CDX2 primarily activates VC genes, direct ISC
targets are activated and repressed. Diverse CDX2 requirements in stem and
differentiated cells may reflect the versatility of TFs that specify a tissue in 
development and control the same tissue in adults.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4649135
PMID: 26489894  [PubMed - in process]


82. Development. 2015 Dec 1;142(23):4010-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.122846. Epub 2015 Oct
19.

Human stem cells from single blastomeres reveal pathways of embryonic or
trophoblast fate specification.

Zdravkovic T(1), Nazor KL(2), Larocque N(1), Gormley M(1), Donne M(3),
Hunkapillar N(1), Giritharan G(4), Bernstein HS(5), Wei G(6), Hebrok M(7), Zeng
X(8), Genbacev O(1), Mattis A(9), McMaster MT(10), Krtolica A(4), Valbuena D(11),
Simón C(11), Laurent LC(12), Loring JF(2), Fisher SJ(13).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Obstetrics, 
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Human Embryonic Stem Cell Program, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Center for
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Center for Reproductive Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Division of 
Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department
of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(4)StemLifeLine, San Carlos, CA 94070, USA. (5)The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for 
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Pediatrics, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (6)The Eli & Edythe Broad
Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Diabetes Center, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(7)Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (8)Buck Institute for Research on Aging,
Novato, CA 94945, USA. (9)The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (10)The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Human Embryonic Stem Cell Program, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Cell and
Tissue Biology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA. (11)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (IVI), Parc Científic
Universitat de València, 46980, Valencia, Spain. (12)Center for Regenerative
Medicine, Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (13)Center for Reproductive
Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Human
Embryonic Stem Cell Program, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Anatomy, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA sfisher@cgl.ucsf.edu.

Mechanisms of initial cell fate decisions differ among species. To gain insights 
into lineage allocation in humans, we derived ten human embryonic stem cell lines
(designated UCSFB1-10) from single blastomeres of four 8-cell embryos and one
12-cell embryo from a single couple. Compared with numerous conventional lines
from blastocysts, they had unique gene expression and DNA methylation patterns
that were, in part, indicative of trophoblast competence. At a transcriptional
level, UCSFB lines from different embryos were often more closely related than
those from the same embryo. As predicted by the transcriptomic data,
immunolocalization of EOMES, T brachyury, GDF15 and active ß-catenin revealed
differential expression among blastomeres of 8- to 10-cell human embryos. The
UCSFB lines formed derivatives of the three germ layers and CDX2-positive
progeny, from which we derived the first human trophoblast stem cell line. Our
data suggest heterogeneity among early-stage blastomeres and that the UCSFB lines
have unique properties, indicative of a more immature state than conventional
lines.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712832
PMID: 26483210  [PubMed - in process]


83. Chemistry. 2015 Nov 16;21(47):16848-58. doi: 10.1002/chem.201502477. Epub 2015
Oct 20.

The HgF2 Ionic Switch: A Triumph of Electrostatics against Relativistic Odds.

Donald KJ(1), Kretz WJ(2), Omorodion O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Gottwald Center for the Sciences, University of
Richmond, Richmond, Virginia 23173 (USA). kdonald@richmond.edu. (2)Department of 
Chemistry, Gottwald Center for the Sciences, University of Richmond, Richmond,
Virginia 23173 (USA).

A remarkable transition in the chemical bonding in (HgF2)n clusters as a function
of n is identified and characterized. HgF2 is a fascinating material. Certain
significant consequences of relativistic effects on the structure of the HgF2
molecule, dimer, and trimer disappear in the extended solid. Relativistic effects
in Hg ensure that HgX2 molecules (X=F, Cl, Br, and I) are linear, rigid, and form
weakly bound dimers and trimers held together by weak electrostatic and van der
Waals-type forces (unlike ZnX2 and CdX2 systems in which the intermonomer
contacts are strong polar covalent bonds). For HgF2, the location and nature of
an apparent transition from weak interactions in the smallest (HgF2)n clusters to
ionic bonding in the (fluorite) HgF2 extended solid has remained a mystery.
Computational evidence obtained at the M06-2X, B97D3, and MP2 levels of theory
and reported herein indicate that polar covalent bonding in (HgF2)n begins as
early as n=5. For n=2 through to n=13, the transition or switch from weak
(primarily dipole-dipole-type) intermonomer interactions to a preference for
polar covalent bonding occurs within the range 5<n=9. Thermodynamic evidence for 
this transition is provided. Our results demonstrate a significant risk
associated with crystal structure prediction from the ground up (i.e., based on
bonding patterns in small clusters). The path from monomers through to extended
solids may be punctuated at one or several points (as n increases) with
transitions in structure and bonding that are not anticipated or betrayed by the 
bonding in small clusters.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26481313  [PubMed]


84. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Dec;1849(12):1411-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.10.011. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Identification of GATA-4 as a novel transcriptional regulatory component of
regenerating islet-derived family members.

Lepage D(1), Bruneau J(1), Brouillard G(1), Jones C(1), Lussier CR(1), Rémillard 
A(1), Lemieux É(1), Asselin C(1), Boudreau F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, J1E 4K8, Canada. (2)Département d'anatomie et
biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Pavillon de
recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, J1E 
4K8, Canada. Electronic address: francois.boudreau@usherbrooke.ca.

Intestinal epithelial cells are exposed to luminal bacterial threat and require
adequate defense mechanisms to ensure host protection and epithelium regeneration
against possible deleterious damage. Differentiated intestinal epithelial cells
produce antimicrobial and regenerative components that protect against such
challenges. Few intestinal specific transcription factors have been identified to
control the switching from repression to activation of this class of gene.
Herein, we show that gene transcription of some regenerating islet-derived (REG) 
family members is dependent on the transcription factor GATA-4. Silencing of
GATA-4 expression in cultured intestinal epithelial cells identified Reg3ß as a
target gene using an unbiased approach of gene expression profiling.
Co-transfection and RNA interference assays identified complex GATA-4-interactive
transcriptional components required for the activation or repression of Reg3ß
gene activity. Conditional deletion of Gata4 in the mouse intestinal epithelium
supported its regulatory role for Reg1, Reg3a, Reg3ß and Reg3<U+03B3> genes. Reg1
dramatic down-modulation of expression in Gata4 conditional null mice was
associated with a significant decrease in intestinal epithelial cell migration.
Altogether, these results identify a novel and complex role for GATA-4 in the
regulation of REG family members gene expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26477491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Jan;40(1):44-50. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000528.

Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms Often Contain Epithelium From Multiple
Subtypes and/or Are Unclassifiable.

Schaberg KB(1), DiMaio MA, Longacre TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.

Pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are subclassified
into gastric, intestinal, pancreatobiliary, and oncocytic subtypes based on
histologic features. The WHO classification scheme suggests use of
immunohistochemical stains to help subtype IPMNs with ambiguous histology.
Seventy-two pancreatic IPMN resections between 2008 and 2014 were retrospectively
evaluated. Immunohistochemistry for CDX2, MUC2, and MUC5AC was performed on cases
where the histologic subtype could not be determined on routine hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) sections. There were 41 gastric (57%), 8 intestinal (11%), 4
pancreatobiliary (6%), and 1 oncocytic (1%) IPMNs. Eighteen (25%) IPMNs were
either unclassifiable due ambiguous morphology or contained distinct epithelium
from >1 subtype (i.e., "mixed"). Two IPMNs initially unclassifiable strictly by
H&E morphology were definitively classified as intestinal after positive
immunohistochemical staining with CDX2, MUC2, and MUC5AC. Immunohistochemistry
for another 7 IPMNs unclassifiable by H&E did not indicate a clear subtype and
often contained discordant results (e.g., discordant CDX2 and MUC2 staining). In 
our experience, a considerable number of IPMNs are either unclassifiable or
contain epithelium from >1 subtype. Furthermore, among those IPMNs initially
unclassifiable by H&E morphology, application of immunohistochemical stains to
aid in subtyping allow for definite classification in only a small subset of
cases. These data, when taken in context with the significant ranges in the
reported prevalence of specific histologic subtypes, suggest that accurate IPMN
subtyping is poorly reproducible in up to 25% of cases, and in these problematic 
cases, immunohistochemistry adds little value.

PMID: 26469398  [PubMed - in process]


86. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Apr;69(4):307-12. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203144. Epub
2015 Oct 13.

Differential diagnosis of bladder versus colorectal adenocarcinoma: keratin 7 and
GATA3 positivity in nuclear ß-catenin-negative glandular tumours defines
adenocarcinoma of the bladder.

Broede A(1), Oll M(1), Maurer A(1), Siegert S(2), Stoerkel S(3), Golz R(3),
Schwamborn K(4), Veeck J(1), Knuechel R(1), Gaisa NT(1); German study group of
bladder cancers.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Institute 
of Pathology, Munich-North, Munich, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, HELIOS
Clinic Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology, Technical
University Munich, Munich, Germany.

AIMS: This study evaluates immunohistochemical markers for the differential
diagnosis of primary bladder adenocarcinoma (BAC) from secondarily involving
colorectal adenocarcinoma (CAC). Additional staining of putative precursor
lesions (cystitis cystica et glandularis (CC) and intestinal metaplasia (IM))
supports insights into metaplastic cell development and aberrant differentiation 
in tumours.
METHODS: Tissue microarray sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues 
from clinically verified 11 BAC, 11 CAC, 18 invasive urothelial carcinomas (UCs),
22 normal urothelium samples, 25 CC and 15 IM were stained for keratin 7, 5/6,
5/14 and 20, ß-catenin, e-cadherin, cadherin 17, cdx2, uroplakin II and III,
CD10, androgen receptor (AR), S100P, MUC2, MUC5AC and GATA3 expression. Data were
analysed using Kruskal-Wallis/Dunn's multiple comparison test and Fisher's exact 
test.
RESULTS: Significant difference (p<0.05) between all three tumour groups was
observed for keratin 7 only. Further significant difference between BAC and CAC
was found for GATA3 and nuclear ß-catenin staining. BAC-positive/CAC-negative
markers without significance were: p63, keratin 5/6, 5/14, uroplakins II/III and 
AR. CC showed a urothelial phenotype (p63+, GATA3+, S100P+, uroplakin+ in single 
cells) with initial signs of intestinal differentiation (single cells cdx2+ or
cadherin 17+). IM displayed a full intestinal phenotype (p63-, all urothelial
markers-, cdx2/MUC2/MUC5AC+, cadherin17+).
CONCLUSIONS: Differential diagnosis of BAC and CAC remains difficult, but
positive staining for keratin 7 in nuclear ß-catenin-negative tumours argues for 
BAC. Additional markers like GATA3 and p63 may be added, as positivity in some
cases may be helpful. However, for reliable histological diagnosis, knowledge of 
comprehensive clinical data is still essential.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26463756  [PubMed - in process]


87. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32980-3005. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5431.

Immature myeloid progenitors promote disease progression in a mouse model of
Barrett's-like metaplasia.

Kong J(1), Sai H(1), Crissey MA(1), Jhala N(2), Falk GW(1), Ginsberg GG(1),
Abrams JA(3), Nakagawa H(1), Wang K(4), Rustgi AK(1), Wang TC(3), Lynch JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA. (4)Division of Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA.

Cdx2, an intestine specific transcription factor, is expressed in Barrett's
esophagus (BE). We sought to determine if esophageal Cdx2 expression would
accelerate the onset of metaplasia in the L2-IL-1ß transgenic mouse model for
Barrett's-like metaplasia. The K14-Cdx2::L2-IL-1ß double transgenic mice had half
as many metaplastic nodules as control L2-IL-1ß mice. This effect was not due to 
a reduction in esophageal IL-1ß mRNA levels nor diminished systemic inflammation.
The diminished metaplasia was due to an increase in apoptosis in the
K14-Cdx2::L2-IL-1ß mice. Fluorescence activated cell sorting of immune cells
infiltrating the metaplasia identified a population of CD11b+Gr-1+ cells that are
significantly reduced in K14-Cdx2::L2-IL-1ß mice. These cells have features of
immature granulocytes and have immune-suppressing capacity. We demonstrate that
the apoptosis in K14-Cdx2::L2-IL-1ß mice is CD8+ T cell dependent, which
CD11b+Gr-1+ cells are known to inhibit. Lastly, we show that key regulators of
CD11b+Gr-1+ cell development, IL-17 and S100A9, are significantly diminished in
the esophagus of K14-Cdx2::L2-IL-1ß double transgenic mice. We conclude that
metaplasia development in this mouse model for Barrett's-like metaplasia requires
suppression of CD8+ cell dependent apoptosis, likely mediated by
immune-suppressing CD11b+Gr-1+ immature myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC4741744
PMID: 26460825  [PubMed - in process]


88. Indian J Med Res. 2015 Sep;142(3):276-85. doi: 10.4103/0971-5916.166587.

Association of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms with polycystic ovary
syndrome among Indian women.

Dasgupta S, Dutta J, Annamaneni S, Kudugunti N, Battini MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Anthropology Group, Biological Anthropology Unit, Indian Statistical
Institute, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: The Vitamin-D receptor (VDR) regulates vitamin D levels 
and calcium metabolism in the body and these are known to be associated with
endocrine dysfunctions, insulin resistance and type-2 diabetes in polycystic
ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Studies on VDR polymorphisms among PCOS women are
sparse. We undertook this study to investigate the association pattern of VDR
polymorphisms (Cdx2, Fok1, Apa1 and Taq1) with PCOS among Indian women.
METHODS: For the present study, 250 women with PCOS and 250 normal healthy
control women were selected from Hyderabad city, Telangana, India. The four VDR
polymorphisms were genotyped and analysed using ASM-PCR (allele specific multiple
PCR) and PCR-RFLP (restriction fragment length polymorphism).
RESULTS: The genotype and allele frequency distributions of only Cdx2 showed
significant difference between the PCOS cases and control women, indicating
protective role of this SNP against PCOS phenotype. However, significant
association was observed between VDR genotypes and some of the PCOS specific
clinical/biochemical traits. For example, Fok1 showed a significant genotypic
difference for the presence of infertility and Cdx2 genotpes showed association
with testosterone levels. Further, the two haplotypes, ACCA and ACTA, were found 
to be significantly associated with PCOS indicating haplotype specific risk.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: Although VDR polymorphisms have not shown
significant association with PCOS, in view of functional significance of the SNPs
considered, one cannot yet rule out the possibility of their association with
PCOS. Further, specifically designed studies on large cohorts are required to
conclusively establish the role of VDR polymorphisms in PCOS, particularly
including data on vitamin D levels.

PMCID: PMC4669862
PMID: 26458343  [PubMed - in process]


89. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Oct;57(8):544-56. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12235. Epub 2015 Oct
9.

Par-aPKC-dependent and -independent mechanisms cooperatively control cell
polarity, Hippo signaling, and cell positioning in 16-cell stage mouse embryos.

Hirate Y(1), Hirahara S(2), Inoue K(3), Kiyonari H(3,)(4), Niwa H(5,)(6), Sasaki 
H(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Control, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan. (3)Animal
Resource Development Unit, Division of Bio-function Dynamics Imaging, RIKEN
Center for Life Science Technologies, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku,
Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan. (4)Genetic Engineering Team, Division of
Bio-function Dynamics Imaging, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 2-2-3 
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan. (5)Laboratory for 
Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan. (6)Department of
Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan. (7)Laboratory for
Embryogenesis, Graduate School of Frontier BioSciences, Osaka University, 1-3
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

In preimplantation mouse embryos, the Hippo signaling pathway plays a central
role in regulating the fates of the trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass
(ICM). In early blastocysts with more than 32 cells, the Par-aPKC system controls
polarization of the outer cells along the apicobasal axis, and cell polarity
suppresses Hippo signaling. Inactivation of Hippo signaling promotes nuclear
accumulation of a coactivator protein, Yap, leading to induction of TE-specific
genes. However, whether similar mechanisms operate at earlier stages is not
known. Here, we show that slightly different mechanisms operate in 16-cell stage 
embryos. Similar to 32-cell stage embryos, disruption of the Par-aPKC system
activated Hippo signaling and suppressed nuclear Yap and Cdx2 expression in the
outer cells. However, unlike 32-cell stage embryos, 16-cell stage embryos with a 
disrupted Par-aPKC system maintained apical localization of phosphorylated
Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin (p-ERM), and the effects on Yap and Cdx2 were weak.
Furthermore, normal 16-cell stage embryos often contained apolar cells in the
outer position. In these cells, the Hippo pathway was strongly activated and Yap 
was excluded from the nuclei, thus resembling inner cells. Dissociated
blastomeres of 8-cell stage embryos form polar-apolar couplets, which exhibit
different levels of nuclear Yap, and the polar cell engulfed the apolar cell.
These results suggest that cell polarization at the 16-cell stage is regulated by
both Par-aPKC-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Asymmetric cell division is 
involved in cell polarity control, and cell polarity regulates cell positioning
and most likely controls Hippo signaling.

© The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation published by Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd on behalf of Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 26450797  [PubMed - in process]


90. Virchows Arch. 2015 Dec;467(6):675-686. Epub 2015 Oct 8.

Pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinomas: architectural patterns in correlation with
genetic changes, prognosis and survival.

Geles A(1,)(2), Gruber-Moesenbacher U(3), Quehenberger F(4), Manzl C(5), Al Effah
M(6), Grygar E(6), Juettner-Smolle F(1), Popper HH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic and Hyperbaric Surgery, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria. (2)Department of Surgery, University of
Zuerich, Zuerich, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Pathology Teaching Hospital
Feldkirch, Feldkirch, Austria. (4)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics
and Documentation Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. (5)Institute of
Pathology Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (6)Institute of
Pathology, Research Unit Molecular Lung and Pleura Pathology, Medical University 
of Graz, Graz, Austria. (7)Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Molecular Lung
and Pleura Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
helmut.popper@medunigraz.at.

Of pulmonary adenocarcinomas, about 25-30 % of cases is of a mucinous type.
Mucinous adenocarcinomas are regarded as more aggressive compared to their
non-mucinous counterparts. Invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma, colloid, and enteric
adenocarcinomas are variants within adenocarcinomas. We investigated 76 invasive 
mucinous adenocarcinomas, including colloid variants, for predominant and
secondary patterns, their different form of mucin storage and release, expression
of cytokeratin 7 and 20, TTF1 and CDX2, MUC1, 2, and 5AC proteins, p14 and p16
proteins, possible rearrangements for EML4ALK and ROS1, as well as KRAS
mutational status, and correlated this with survival. For comparison, 259
non-mucinous adenocarcinomas were selected. Overall survival for invasive
mucinous adenocarcinomas corrected for T and N stage was not different from their
non-mucinous counterpart. Most were of an acinar pattern. Neither pattern, nor
type of mucin storage and release, such as luminal, extracellular, or goblet cell
type had any influence on survival. Of adenocarcinomas expressing CK20, all but
one expressed TTF1 either strongly or at least focally, and 8 co-expressed CDX2
focally. Most mucinous adenocarcinomas expressed either MUC1 or MUC5AC proteins, 
but rarely MUC2, while a few cases co-expressed both or all three. Loss of p16
expression correlated with worse outcome. KRAS mutation was found in 56 % of
mucinous adenocarcinomas. Mutational status was neither correlated with
architectural pattern nor survival. Codon 12 mutations were most frequent, and
one case presented with KRAS mutations in codon 12 and 61. Goblet cell variants
of mucinous adenocarcinomas presented predominantly with codon 12 mutations,
while all colloid variants had KRAS mutation. Two cases had EML4 and ALK1
rearranged; ROS1 rearrangement was not found. Mucinous adenocarcinomas behave
similar to non-mucinous variants. TNM stage is the most important factor followed
by p16 loss predicting overall survival.

PMID: 26450556  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. Cesk Patol. 2015;51(3):137-43.

Pyloric gland adenoma: a histologic, immunohistochemical and molecular genetic
study of 23 cases.

Chlumská A, Waloschek T, Mukennabl P, Martínek P, Kapírková J, Zámecník M.

Pyloric gland adenoma is a rare neoplasm with a gastric epithelial
differentiation. We report 23 cases of pyloric gland adenoma in older persons,
with a mean age of 74 years (range 52 - 87 years). They occurred in the esophagus
(3 cases), corporal gastric mucosa (7 cases), duodenum (10 cases), gallbladder (2
cases), and choledochus (one case). Histologically, they were characterized by
closely packed pyloric gland-type tubules with a monolayer of cuboidal to low
columnar epithelial cells containing basally located round nuclei, and a
superficial layer of tall, columnar, foveolar-type epithelium.
Immunohistochemically, most tumor glands expressed pyloric gland mucin MUC6,
whereas MUC5AC was positive in superficial gastric foveolar epithelium, and in a 
minority of glands. In addition, scattered neuroendocrine cells positive for
chromogranin A and/or synaptophysin were seen in all cases. In 3 cases (two cases
in the gallbladder and one case in the esophagus), areas of intestinal metaplasia
with CK20, CDX2, and MUC2 positivity were found. Focal low-grade dysplasia was
found in five cases (21.7%), and diffuse high-grade dysplasia was seen in one
adenoma (4.4%), i.e., 6 of 23 PGAs (26.1%) showed dysplastic features. In one
esophageal case, an invasive adenocarcinoma was diagnosed. Scattered p53 positive
cells were found in all cases. Their number was higher in lesions with low-grade 
dysplasia and it was substantially increased in adenoma with high-grade dysplasia
and in adenocarcinoma. Our molecular genetic results indicate that pyloric gland 
adenomas neoplastic nature is associated with p53 accumulation, mutations in
oncogenes GNAS, KRAS, CTTNB1 and tumor suppressor genes SMAD4, and TP53. Pyloric 
gland adenoma can evolve into dysplasia and adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 26421956  [PubMed - in process]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;35(24):4158-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00546-15. Epub 2015 Sep 
28.

BRG1 Governs Nanog Transcription in Early Mouse Embryos and Embryonic Stem Cells 
via Antagonism of Histone H3 Lysine 9/14 Acetylation.

Carey TS(1), Cao Z(2), Choi I(2), Ganguly A(3), Wilson CA(2), Paul S(3), Knott
JG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA. (4)Developmental
Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA knottj@msu.edu.

During mouse preimplantation development, the generation of the inner cell mass
(ICM) and trophoblast lineages comprises upregulation of Nanog expression in the 
ICM and its silencing in the trophoblast. However, the underlying epigenetic
mechanisms that differentially regulate Nanog in the first cell lineages are
poorly understood. Here, we report that BRG1 (Brahma-related gene 1) cooperates
with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to regulate Nanog expression. BRG1 depletion
in preimplantation embryos and Cdx2-inducible embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
revealed that BRG1 is necessary for Nanog silencing in the trophoblast lineage.
Conversely, in undifferentiated ESCs, loss of BRG1 augmented Nanog expression.
Analysis of histone H3 within the Nanog proximal enhancer revealed that H3 lysine
9/14 (H3K9/14) acetylation increased in BRG1-depleted embryos and ESCs.
Biochemical studies demonstrated that HDAC1 was present in BRG1-BAF155 complexes 
and BRG1-HDAC1 interactions were enriched in the trophoblast lineage. HDAC1
inhibition triggered an increase in H3K9/14 acetylation and a corresponding rise 
in Nanog mRNA and protein, phenocopying BRG1 knockdown embryos and ESCs. Lastly, 
nucleosome-mapping experiments revealed that BRG1 is indispensable for nucleosome
remodeling at the Nanog enhancer during trophoblast development. In summary, our 
data suggest that BRG1 governs Nanog expression via a dual mechanism involving
histone deacetylation and nucleosome remodeling.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648823 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26416882  [PubMed - in process]


93. Theriogenology. 2015 Dec;84(9):1603-10. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.08.012. Epub 2015 Aug 29.

Phytohemagglutinin facilitates the aggregation of blastomere pairs from Day 5
donor embryos with Day 4 host embryos for chimeric bovine embryo multiplication.

Simmet K(1), Reichenbach M(2), Reichenbach HD(3), Wolf E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. (2)Department of Animal Health,
Bayern-Genetik GmbH, Poing, Germany. (3)Bavarian State Research Center for
Agriculture, Institute of Animal Breeding, Poing, Germany. (4)Department of
Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: ewolf@lmb.uni-muenchen.de.

Multiplication of bovine embryos by the production of aggregation chimeras is
based on the concept that few blastomeres of a donor embryo form the inner cell
mass (ICM) and thus the embryo proper, whereas cells of a host embryo
preferentially contribute to the trophectoderm (TE), the progenitor cells of the 
embryonic part of the placenta. We aggregated two fluorescent blastomeres from
enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) transgenic Day 5 morulae with two Day 4
embryos that did not complete their first cleavage until 27 hours after IVF and
tested the effect of phytohemagglutinin-L (PHA) on chimeric embryo formation. The
resulting blastocysts were characterized by differential staining of cell
lineages using the TE-specific factor CDX2 and confocal laser scanning microscopy
to facilitate the precise localization of eGFP-positive cells. The proportions of
blastocyst development of sandwich aggregates with (n = 99) and without PHA
(n = 46) were 85.9% and 54.3% (P < 0.05), respectively. Epifluorescence
microscopy showed that the proportion of blastocysts with eGFP-positive cells in 
the ICM was higher in the PHA group than in the no-PHA group (40% vs. 16%;
P < 0.05). Confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed that the total cell
numbers of blastocysts from the PHA group of aggregation chimeras (n = 17;
207.8 ± 67.3 [mean ± standard deviation]) were higher (P < 0.05) than those of
embryos without ZP and exposed to PHA (n = 30; 159.6 ± 42.2) and of handling
control embryos (n = 19; 176.9 ± 53.3). The same was true for ICM cell counts
(56.5 ± 22.0 vs. 37.7 ± 14.2 and 38.7 ± 12.4) and TE cell counts (151.2 ± 58.0
vs. 121.9 ± 37.4 and 138.3 ± 53.0), whereas the ICM/total cell number ratio was
not different between the groups. Of the 17 chimeric blastocysts analyzed by
confocal laser scanning microscopy, nine had eGFP-positive cells (three of them
in the ICM, three in the TE, and three in both lineages). When integration in the
ICM occurred, the number of eGFP-positive cells in this compartment was 8.3 ± 2.3
(mean ± standard error of the mean). We conclude that PHA is advantageous for the
formation of aggregation chimeras, but the approach tested in the present study
with only two donor blastomeres and two host embryos did not result in
multiplication of genetically valuable donor embryos.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26409823  [PubMed - in process]


94. Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3468-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.123950. Epub 2015 Sep 
22.

Dynamic transcriptional symmetry-breaking in pre-implantation mammalian embryo
development revealed by single-cell RNA-seq.

Shi J(1), Chen Q(2), Li X(3), Zheng X(3), Zhang Y(3), Qiao J(4), Tang F(4), Tao
Y(5), Zhou Q(5), Duan E(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Key Laboratory of 
Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049
Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology,
Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China Department of Physiology and
Cell Biology, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV 89557, USA
cqi@medicine.nevada.edu yitao@ioz.ac.cn qzhou@ioz.ac.cn duane@ioz.ac.cn. (3)State
Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Key Laboratory of Animal
Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China. (4)Biodynamic Optical Imaging Center and Center 
for Reproductive Medicine, College of Life Sciences, Third Hospital, Peking
University, 100871 Beijing, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and
Reproductive Biology, Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China
cqi@medicine.nevada.edu yitao@ioz.ac.cn qzhou@ioz.ac.cn duane@ioz.ac.cn.

During mammalian pre-implantation embryo development, when the first asymmetry
emerges and how it develops to direct distinct cell fates remain longstanding
questions. Here, by analyzing single-blastomere transcriptome data from mouse and
human pre-implantation embryos, we revealed that the initial
blastomere-to-blastomere biases emerge as early as the first embryonic cleavage
division, following a binomial distribution pattern. The subsequent zygotic
transcriptional activation further elevated overall blastomere-to-blastomere
biases during the two- to 16-cell embryo stages. The trends of transcriptional
asymmetry fell into two distinct patterns: for some genes, the extent of
asymmetry was minimized between blastomeres (monostable pattern), whereas other
genes, including those known to be lineage specifiers, showed ever-increasing
asymmetry between blastomeres (bistable pattern), supposedly controlled by
negative or positive feedbacks. Moreover, our analysis supports a scenario in
which opposing lineage specifiers within an early blastomere constantly compete
with each other based on their relative ratio, forming an inclined 'lineage
strength' that pushes the blastomere onto a predisposed, yet flexible, lineage
track before morphological distinction.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26395495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Acta Histochem Cytochem. 2015 Aug 27;48(4):115-24. doi: 10.1267/ahc.15014. Epub
2015 Aug 20.

Reactivation of CDX2 in Gastric Cancer as Mark for Gene Silencing Memory.

Kameoka Y(1), Kitazawa R(2), Ariasu K(1), Tachibana R(1), Mizuno Y(3), Haraguchi 
R(1), Kitazawa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Ehime University Graduate School of
Medicine. (2)Department of Molecular Pathology, Ehime University Graduate School 
of Medicine ; Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Ehime University Hospital ,
Shitsukawa, Toon City, Ehime 562-0295, Japan. (3)Department of Diagnostic
Pathology, Ehime University Hospital , Shitsukawa, Toon City, Ehime 562-0295,
Japan.

To explore the epigenetic mechanism that reactivates CDX2 (a homeobox
transcription factor that serves as a tumor-suppressor gene) in intestinal-type
gastric cancer during cancer progression, we examined the methylation status of
the CDX2 gene promoter and the expression pattern of methyl-CpG binding protein-2
(MeCP2). From archives of the pathology records of surgically excised advanced
stomach cancer cases in the Department of Molecular Pathology, Ehime University
in a past decate (n=265), 10 cases of intestinal-type tubular adenocarcinoma,
well-differentiated type (wel) with minor poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma
(por) components were selected. The expression pattern of CDX2, MUC2 and MeCP2 in
these 10 cases was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. The cancerous and
non-cancerous areas were selectively obtained by microdissection, and the
methylation status of the CDX2 promoter of each area was assessed by
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). In all 10 cases, CDX2
expression was clearly observed in the nucleus of the non-cancerous background of
the intestinal metaplasic area, where the unmethylation pattern of the CDX2 gene 
promoter prevailed with reduced MeCP2 expression. In this metaplastic area, CDX2 
expression was co-localized with its target gene, MUC2. CDX2 expression then
disappeared from the deep invasive wel area. Reflecting the reduced CDX2
expression, microdissected samples from all the wel areas showed hypermethylation
of the CDX2 gene promoter by MSP, with prominent MeCP2 expression. Interestingly,
while hypermethylation of the CDX2 gene promoter was maintained in the por area
in 8 of the 10 cases, CDX2 expression was restored in por areas where MeCP2
expression was markedly and selectively reduced. The other two cases, however,
showed a constant MeCP2 expression level comparable to the surrounding deep
invasive wel area with negative CDX2 expression. Therefore, gene silencing by
hypermethylation may be overcome by the reduction of methyl-CpG binding proteins,
resulting in apparent but non-functional reactivation of CDX2 as a mere molecular
mark for gene silencing memory.

PMCID: PMC4564377
PMID: 26379313  [PubMed]


96. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 15;10(9):e0138168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138168.
eCollection 2015.

Roles of Klf5 Acetylation in the Self-Renewal and the Differentiation of Mouse
Embryonic Stem Cells.

Zhao T(1), Liu C(1), Chen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Biotherapy, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for
Medical Epigenetics and College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Biotherapy, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin
for Medical Epigenetics and College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin,
China; State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital,
CAMS, Beijing, China.

Transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 5 (Klf5) plays important roles in the
formation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and the trophectoderm during
embryogenesis, as well as the self-renewal and the differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Acetylation of KLF5 has been shown to reverse the
transcriptional activity of KLF5 in human epidermal cells and prostate cancer
cells. Whether Klf5 acetylation contributes to the lineage specification in the
blastocyst and pluripotency maintenance in ESCs remains unexplored. Here, we
showed the ubiquitous expression of acetylated Klf5 in the ICM and the
trophectoderm, ruling out the possibility that differential acetylation status of
Klf5 leads to the lineage specification in the blastocyst. We found that K358Q
mutation, mimicking acetylation, enhances the transcriptional activity of Klf5
for pluripotency genes in ESCs, and that K358Q Klf5 is more potent in
pluripotency maintenance and in somatic cell reprogramming, compared to K358R
Klf5. In ESCs, Klf5 acetylation, stimulated by TGF-ß signaling, is involved in
enhancing Sox2 expression. Moreover, upon ESC differentiation, acetylation of
Klf5 facilitates the suppression of many differentiation genes, except for that
K358Q Klf5 activates Cdx2, promoting trophectodermal differentiation. In summary,
our results revealed the regulatory functions of Klf5 acetylation in ESC
self-renewal and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4570665
PMID: 26372456  [PubMed - in process]


97. Clin Drug Investig. 2015 Oct;35(10):665-73. doi: 10.1007/s40261-015-0329-z.

Effect of Rebamipide on the Premalignant Progression of Chronic Gastritis: A
Randomized Controlled Study.

Han X(1,)(2), Jiang K(3), Wang B(4), Zhou L(1), Chen X(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of Tianjin Medical
University, No. 154 Anshan Road, Tianjin, 300052, China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Shengli Oil Field Central Hospital, No. 31 Jinan road,
Dongying, 257034, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of
Tianjin Medical University, No. 154 Anshan Road, Tianjin, 300052, China.
jiangkuiBM052615@163.com. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of 
Tianjin Medical University, No. 154 Anshan Road, Tianjin, 300052, China.
gi.tmuh@sohu.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Chronic gastritis frequently progresses into
precancerous intestinal metaplasia and intraepithelial neoplasia lesions.
Rebamipide is a free radical scavenger and we assessed its efficacy on clinical
symptoms, gastric mucosal lesions, pathologic grade, and immunohistochemistry in 
chronic gastritis patients.
METHODS: 178 eligible patients were randomized into treatment and control groups.
Both groups followed an optimized lifestyle for 26 weeks, but the treatment group
was additionally medicated with rebamipide 0.1 g three times per day. Upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed in all patients to evaluate the severity
of gastritis by the Modified Lanza Scoring (MLS) and histological changes were
evaluated by the Updated Sydney System Score (USSS). Gastric mucosa
immunohistochemistry in the treatment group was performed using the intestinal
metaplasia markers caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) and trefoil
factor 3 (TFF3) detection.
RESULTS: There were significant outcome differences between the treatment and
control groups regarding the clinical symptom scores (2.62 ± 1.86 vs. 1.55 ±
1.61, P = 0.0001), gastric mucosal lesion scores (0.57 ± 1.05 vs. 0.16 ± 0.90, P 
= 0.002), and inflammation (P < 0.05). Only in the treated patients were the
rates of intestinal metaplasia (P = 0.017 vs. P = 0.123) and low-grade
intraepithelial neoplasia (P = 0.005 vs. P = 0.226) significantly reduced after
26 weeks. The percentages of CDX2 (31.5 vs. 15.7%, P = 0.021) and TFF3 (44.9 vs. 
25.8%, P = 0.012) expressing gastric mucosa cells were significantly lower after 
rebamipide medication than pre-treatment values.
CONCLUSIONS: Rebamipide improved the clinical symptoms, gastric mucosal lesions, 
and pathological grades of chronic gastritis patients and decreased the
expression rates of CDX2 and TFF3 in gastric cells.

PMID: 26369655  [PubMed - in process]


98. J Gastroenterol. 2015 Sep 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Mouse model of proximal colon-specific tumorigenesis driven by microsatellite
instability-induced Cre-mediated inactivation of Apc and activation of Kras.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Hinoi T(2), Saito Y(1), Adachi T(1), Miguchi M(1), Niitsu H(1),
Sasada T(1), Shimomura M(1), Egi H(1), Oka S(3), Tanaka S(3), Chayama K(4),
Sentani K(5), Oue N(5), Yasui W(5), Ohdan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological and Transplant Surgery, Applied Life
Sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University,
1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 7348551, Japan. (2)Department of
Gastroenterological and Transplant Surgery, Applied Life Sciences, Institute of
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-ku,
Hiroshima, 7348551, Japan. thinoi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Endoscopy
and Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. (4)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism,
Applied life sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 7348551, Japan. (5)Department of
Molecular Pathology, Applied life sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 7348551,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: KRAS gene mutations are found in 40-50 % of colorectal cancer cases, 
but their functional contribution is not fully understood. To address this issue,
we generated genetically engineered mice with colon tumors expressing an
oncogenic Kras (G12D) allele in the context of the Adenomatous polyposis coli
(Apc) deficiency to compare them to tumors harboring Apc deficiency alone.
METHODS: CDX2P9.5-G22Cre (referred to as G22Cre) mice showing inducible Cre
recombinase transgene expression in the proximal colon controlled under the CDX2 
gene promoter were intercrossed with Apc (flox/flox) mice and LSL-Kras (G12D)
mice carrying loxP-flanked Apc and Lox-Stop-Lox oncogenic Kras (G12D) alleles,
respectively, to generate G22Cre;Apc (flox/flox) ;Kras (G12D) and G22Cre;Apc
(flox/flox) ;KrasWT mice. Gene expression profiles of the tumors were analyzed
using high-density oligonucleotide arrays.
RESULTS: Morphologically, minimal difference in proximal colon tumor was observed
between the two mouse models. Consistent with previous findings in vitro, Glut1
transcript and protein expression was up-regulated in the tumors of G22Cre;Apc
(flox/flox) ;Kras (G12D) mice. Immunohistochemical staining analysis revealed
that GLUT1 protein expression correlated with KRAS mutations in human colorectal 
cancer. Microarray analysis identified 11 candidate genes upregulated more than
fivefold and quantitative PCR analysis confirmed that Aqp8, Ttr, Qpct, and
Slc26a3 genes were upregulated 3.7- to 30.2-fold in tumors with mutant Kras.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated the validity of the G22Cre;Apc
(flox/flox) ;Kras (G12D) mice as a new mouse model with oncogenic Kras
activation. We believe that this model can facilitate efforts to define novel
factors that contribute to the pathogenesis of human colorectal cancer with KRAS 
mutations.

PMID: 26361962  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


99. Br J Nutr. 2015 Nov 14;114(9):1375-84. doi: 10.1017/S0007114515003049. Epub 2015 
Sep 8.

Vitamin D receptor Cdx-2-dependent response of central obesity to vitamin D
intake in the subjects with type 2 diabetes: a randomised clinical trial.

Shab-Bidar S(1), Neyestani TR(2), Djazayery A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Community Nutrition,School of Nutritional Sciences and
Dietetics,Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS),Tehran,Iran.
(2)2Laboratory of Nutrition Research, National Nutrition and Food Technology
Research Institute (NNFTRI) and Faculty of Nutrition and Food Science;Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences (SBUM),1981619573 Tehran,Iran.

This study aimed to investigate the effects of daily intake of vitamin
D-fortified yogurt drink (doogh) on central obesity indicators in subjects with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) and the possible modulation of this effect by vitamin D
receptor (VDR) Cdx-2 genotypes. A total of sixty T2D subjects were randomly
allocated to two groups to receive either plain doogh (PD; n 29, containing 170
mg Ca and no vitamin D/250 ml) or vitamin D3-fortified doogh (FD; n 31,
containing 170 mg Ca and 12·5 µg/250 ml) twice a day for 12 weeks.
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D), glycaemic as well as adiposity indicators were
evaluated before and after the intervention. VDR-Cdx-2 genotypes in extended
number of T2D subjects in the FD group (n 60) were determined as AA, GA and GG.
After 12 weeks, in FD compared with PD, serum 25(OH)D increased (+35·4 v. -4·8
nmol/l; P<0·001) and mean changes of waist circumference (WC; -1·3 v. +1·6 cm;
P=0·02), body fat mass (FM; -1·9 v. +0·60 %; P=0·008), truncal fat (TF; -1·1 v.
0·13 %; P=0·003) and visceral adipose tissue (-0·80 v. +0·37 AU; P<0·001)
decreased significantly. Circulating 25(OH)D was raised only in the AA group
(34·8 nmo/l in AA group v. -6·4 nmol/l in AG and -1·6 nmol/l in GG groups;
P<0·001), which was accompanied by a significant decrease in changes of WC
(P=0·004), FM% (P=0·01) and TF% (P<0·001) in the AA genotype. Daily intake of
vitamin D-FD for 12 weeks improved the central obesity indices in T2D subjects,
and the improvement was more pronounced in the carriers of the AA genotype of
VDR-Cdx-2.

PMID: 26346470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Jul 27;14(3):8306-13. doi: 10.4238/2015.July.27.19.

Human chorionic gonadotropin promotes expression of protein absorption factors in
the intestine of goldfish (Carassius auratus).

Zhou Y(1), Hao G(1), Zhong H(2), Wu Q(1), Lu SQ(1), Zhao Q(1), Liu Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Science, Changsha University,
Changsha, Hunan, China. (2)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Aquatic Genetic Breeding and
Healthy Aquaculture, Guangxi Academy of Fisheries Science, Nanning, Guangxi,
China. (3)Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Science, Changsha
University, Changsha, Hunan, China 25300085@qq.com.

Protein use is crucial for the ovulation and spawning of fish. Currently, limited
information is available regarding the expression of protein absorption factors
during the breeding seasons of teleosts and thus how various proteins involved in
this process is not well-understood. The expression of CDX2, CREB, gluatamate
dehydrogenase, LAT2, aminopeptidase N, PepT1, and SP1 were significantly elevated
from the non-breeding season to the breeding season in female goldfish, and all
proteins except PepT1 and SP1 were elevated in male goldfish. Injection of human 
chorionic gonadotropin upregulated the expression of all proteins except for
aminopeptidase N in female goldfish and SP1 in male goldfish, suggesting a
luteinizing hormone-inductive effect on protein absorption factors. Protein use
in the intestine is increased during the breeding seasons as a result of
increased luteinizing hormone.

PMID: 26345757  [PubMed - in process]


101. Genes Dev. 2015 Sep 1;29(17):1850-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.267393.115.

Foxa2 and Cdx2 cooperate with Nkx2-1 to inhibit lung adenocarcinoma metastasis.

Li CM(1), Gocheva V(1), Oudin MJ(1), Bhutkar A(1), Wang SY(1), Date SR(1), Ng
SR(1), Whittaker CA(1), Bronson RT(2), Snyder EL(3), Gertler FB(1), Jacks T(4).

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA; (2)Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine and
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, Massachusetts 01536, USA; (3)Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA; Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA; 
(4)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Despite the fact that the majority of lung cancer deaths are due to metastasis,
the molecular mechanisms driving metastatic progression are poorly understood.
Here, we present evidence that loss of Foxa2 and Cdx2 synergizes with loss of
Nkx2-1 to fully activate the metastatic program. These three lineage-specific
transcription factors are consistently down-regulated in metastatic cells
compared with nonmetastatic cells. Knockdown of these three factors acts
synergistically and is sufficient to promote the metastatic potential of
nonmetastatic cells to that of naturally arising metastatic cells in vivo.
Furthermore, silencing of these three transcription factors is sufficient to
account for a significant fraction of the gene expression differences between the
nonmetastatic and metastatic states in lung adenocarcinoma, including
up-regulated expression of the invadopodia component Tks5long, the embryonal
proto-oncogene Hmga2, and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal mediator Snail. Finally, 
analyses of tumors from a genetically engineered mouse model and patients show
that low expression of Nkx2-1, Foxa2, and Cdx2 strongly correlates with more
advanced tumors and worse survival. Our findings reveal that a large part of the 
complex transcriptional network in metastasis can be controlled by a small number
of regulatory nodes that function redundantly, and loss of multiple nodes is
required to fully activate the metastatic program.

© 2015 Li et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4573857
PMID: 26341558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Oct;17(5):393-403. doi: 10.1089/cell.2015.0027. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

Handmade Cloned Buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) Embryos Produced from Somatic Cells
Isolated from Milk and Ear Skin Differ in Their Developmental Competence,
Epigenetic Status, and Gene Expression.

Jyotsana B(1), Sahare AA(2), Raja AK(2), Singh KP(2), Singla SK(2), Chauhan
MS(2), Manik RS(2), Palta P(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Animal Biotechnology Section, Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute ,
Avikanagar-304501 (Rajasthan), India . (2)2 Animal Biotechnology Centre, National
Dairy Research Institute , Karnal-132001 (Haryana), India .

We compared the cloning efficiency of buffalo embryos produced by handmade
cloning (HMC) using ear skin- and milk-derived donor cells. The blastocyst rate
was lower (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) for milk-derived than that for skin-derived embryos, whereas
the total cell number and apoptotic index were similar. The global level of
H3K9ac was higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in skin- than in milk-derived cells, whereas the
level of H3K27me3 was similar in the two groups. The global level of H3K9ac was
similar between milk-derived and in vitro-fertilized (IVF) blastocysts, which was
higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) than that in skin-derived blastocysts. The level of H3K27me3
was similar among the three groups. The expression level of IGF-1R and G6PD was
higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in skin- than in milk-derived cells, whereas DNMT1, DNMT3a, and
HDAC1 expression level was similar. In the blastocysts, the expression level of
DNMT1, HDAC1, OCT4, and CDX2 was higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in skin-derived than that in
IVF blastocysts. The expression level of DNMT3a and IGF-1R, was in the order
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) skin-derived and IVF<U+2009>><U+2009>milk-derived blastocysts and that of NANOG was 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) IVF-> milk-derived<U+2009>><U+2009>skin-derived blastocysts. The expression level of
all these genes, except NANOG, was lower (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in milk- than in skin-derived
or IVF blastocysts. In conclusion, milk-derived cells can be used for producing
HMC embryos of quality similar to that of skin-derived embryos, although with a
lower blastocyst rate.

PMID: 26332294  [PubMed - in process]


103. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):468-73. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.08.014. Epub
2015 Aug 29.

Mutational analysis by next generation sequencing of gastric type dysplasia
occurring in hyperplastic polyps of the stomach: Mutations in gastric
hyperplastic polyps.

Salomao M(1), Luna AM(2), Sepulveda JL(2), Sepulveda AR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY, United States. Electronic address: mas2300@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY, United States.

Gastric hyperplastic polyps (GHP) are the most common type of polyps occurring in
the stomach. Although GHP are broadly interpreted as benign lesions, they may
progress to dysplasia and adenocarcinoma.OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to
identify genomic mutations that characterize and may drive malignant
transformation in GHP by using next-generation sequencing. Eight GHP (2 with
dysplasia, 1 indefinite for dysplasia and 5 without dysplasia) were studied. Only
large polyps (>1cm) with gastric differentiation were included in this study,
while adenomatous polyps (intestinal-type) were excluded. Immunohistochemistry
for MUC2, MUC5A, MUC6, CDX2, p53, and Ki67 was performed. DNA was extracted from 
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections and sequenced for the detection of
somatic mutations. Multiplex sequencing was done with the TrueSeq Amplicon Cancer
Panel in the MiSeq platform. Variant annotation and visualization were performed 
using NextGENe (SoftGenetics) software. No pathogenic mutations were detected in 
GHP without dysplasia. TP53 gene mutations were the most common alteration in
dysplastic GHP (2 of 2 dysplastic cases). PIK3CA mutation was identified in a GHP
with pyloric-type dysplasia, whereas foveolar-type dysplasia carried TP53
mutations. In conclusion, TP53 gene mutations are a common alteration in the
early dysplastic stage during malignant transformation of GHP. GHP with dysplasia
may show dual differentiation. In our study, pyloric-type dysplasia was
associated with a PIK3CA alteration whereas foveolar dysplasia carried TP53
mutations. The identification of carcinoma-associated mutations in large GHP
provides additional evidence of their neoplastic potential and emphasizes the
need for their complete resection and follow-up.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26325218  [PubMed - in process]


104. Oncol Rep. 2015 Nov;34(5):2674-82. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4207. Epub 2015 Aug 19.

Farnesoid X receptor signal is involved in deoxycholic acid-induced intestinal
metaplasia of normal human gastric epithelial cells.

Li S(1), Chen X(1), Zhou L(1), Wang BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tianjin General Hospital,
Tianjin Medical University, Heping, Tianjin 300052, P.R. China.

The farnesoid X receptor (FXR) signaling pathway is known to be involved in the
metabolism of bile acid, glucose and lipid. In the present study, we demonstrated
that 400 µmol/l deoxycholic acid (DCA) stimulation promotes the proliferation of 
normal human gastric epithelial cells (GES-1). In addition, DCA activated FXR and
increased the expression of intestinal metaplasia genes, including caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor 2 (Cdx2) and mucin 2 (MUC2). The treatment of FXR
agonist GW4064/antagonist guggulsterone (Gug.) significantly increased/decreased 
the expression levels of FXR, Cdx2 and MUC2 protein in DCA-induced GES-1 cells.
GW4064/Gug. also enhanced/reduced the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activity and
binding of the Cdx2 promoter region and NF-<U+03BA>B, the most common subunit p50
protein. Taken together, the results indicated that DCA is capable of modulating 
the expression of Cdx2 and the downstream MUC2 via the nuclear receptor FXR-NF-<U+03BA>B
activity in normal gastric epithelial cells. FXR signaling pathway may therefore 
be involved in the intestinal metaplasia of human gastric mucosa.

PMID: 26324224  [PubMed - in process]


105. Int J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb;24(1):24-8. doi: 10.1177/1066896915603121. Epub 2015 
Aug 27.

Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 Expression in Adenocarcinomas of the Bile Duct.

Lino-Silva LS(1), Salcedo-Hernández RA(2), García-Gómez MA(2), Ruiz-García EB(2),
Aguilar-Romero JM(3), Domínguez-Rodríguez JA(3), Herrera-Gómez Á(2),
Maldonado-Martínez HA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, Mexico City, Mexico
saul.lino.sil@gmail.com. (2)Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, Mexico City,
Mexico. (3)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: The immunoreactivity of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a
very specific marker for lung and thyroid neoplasms; the expression of TTF-1 has 
also been demonstrated in extrapulmonary carcinomas. We examined the expression
of TTF-1 in 15 intestinal-type adenocarcinomas of the extrahepatic bile duct. We 
then compared the expression to TTF-1 staining with other immunohistochemical
markers including cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, caudal-type homeobox transcription
factor 2 (CDX2), Napsin A, and MUC2. We additionally compared the
clinicopathological prognostic factors with the TTF-1 expression status.
RESULTS: Nuclear TTF-1 staining was detected in 2 cases (13.3%), and Napsin A was
positive in the same 2 cases (13.3%). All cases were positive for CK20, CDX2, and
MUC2; 5 cases were positive for CK7. There was no correlation between TTF-1
expression and the clinicopathological characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: To avoid potential pitfalls, TTF-1 should be interpreted in
conjunction with the clinical setting, histology, and the results of markers such
as CK7, CK20, Napsin A, and CDX2. This report is the first of TTF-1 positivity in
adenocarcinomas from the extrahepatic biliary tract.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26316052  [PubMed - in process]


106. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28425-39. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4952.

NKX6.3 controls gastric differentiation and tumorigenesis.

Yoon JH(1), Choi WS(1), Kim O(1), Choi SS(2), Lee EK(3), Nam SW(1,)(4), Lee
JY(1,)(4), Park WS(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea. (2)College of Pharmacy, Sahmyook University,
Hwarangro, Nowon-gu, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Biochemistry, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Functional RNomics Reasearch Center, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea.

NKX6.3 transcription factor is known to be an important regulator in gastric
mucosal epithelial differentiation. The present study aimed to investigate
whether NKX6.3 acts as an essential tumor suppressor in gastric carcinogenesis.
Absent or reduced protein expression and decreased DNA copy number and mRNA
transcript of the NKX6.3 gene were frequently observed in gastric cancers.
Overexpression of NKX6.3 in AGSNKX6.3 and MKN1NKX6.3 cells markedly arrested cell
proliferation by inhibiting cell cycle progression and induced apoptosis through 
both death receptor- and mitochondrial-pathways. In addition, stable NKX6.3
transfectants increased the expression of gastric differentiation markers,
including SOX2 and Muc5ac, and decreased the expression of intestinal
differentiation markers, CDX2 and Muc2. In ChIP-cloning and sequencing analyses, 
NKX6.3 coordinated a repertoire of target genes, some of which are clearly
associated with cell cycle, differentiation and death. In particular, NKX6.3
transcriptional factor was found to bind specifically to the upstream sequences
of GKN1, a gastric-specific tumor suppressor, and dramatically increase
expression of the latter. Furthermore, there was a positive correlation between
NKX6.3 and GKN1 expression in non-cancerous gastric mucosae. Thus, these data
suggest that NKX6.3 may control the fate of gastric mucosal cells and function as
a gastric tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC4695069
PMID: 26314965  [PubMed - in process]


107. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):30993-1006. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5206.

Achaete scute-like 2 suppresses CDX2 expression and inhibits intestinal
neoplastic epithelial cell differentiation.

Shang Y(1), Pan Q(1), Chen L(1), Ye J(1), Zhong X(1), Li X(1), Meng L(1), Guo
J(1), Tian Y(1), He Y(1), Chen W(1), Peng Z(1), Wang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, P. R. China.

The role of Achaete scute-like 2 (Ascl2) in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell
differentiation is unknown. LS174T, HT-29 and Caco-2 cells have high Ascl2
expression, while Lovo and SW480 cells have low Ascl2 expression. LS174T and
HT-29 cells with Ascl2 knockdown were transfected with caudal type homeobox 2
(CDX2) promoter constructs and used for luciferase assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Ascl2 knockdown promoted differentiation of
CRC cells into a goblet cell phenotype, as determined by increased expression of 
MUC2, TFF3, and CDX2. Ascl2 knockdown activated CDX2 expression through a
transcriptional mechanism via direct binding of Ascl2 to the proximal E-box of
the CDX2 promoter. Ascl2 over-expression in Lovo and SW480 cells inhibited a
goblet cell phenotype, as determined by reduced CDX2 and MUC2 expression. Inverse
correlations between Ascl2 and CDX2, and Ascl2 and MUC2 mRNA levels, as well as
Ascl2 and CDX2 protein levels were observed in CRC cancerous samples. This study 
demonstrates CDX2 repression by Ascl2 and highlights a role for Ascl2 in CRC cell
differentiation. These findings suggest that the Ascl2/CDX2 axis may serve as a
potential therapeutic target in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741583
PMID: 26307678  [PubMed - in process]


108. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 Nov;43(11):937-40. doi: 10.1002/dc.23329. Epub 2015 Aug
25.

Fine-needle aspiration cytology in a rare case of recurrent mucinous carcinoma of
skin, displaying psammoma bodies on smears.

Rekhi B(1), Deodhar KK(1), Laskar SG(2), D'Cruz A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra,
India. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India. (3)Department of Surgical Oncology (Head and Neck), Tata
Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Primary mucinous carcinoma of skin is an uncommonly documented tumor, especially 
on fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) smears. A 58-year-old gentleman
presented with a recurrent swelling over his right zygoma. Earlier, he had
undergone surgical resection at the same site, on two occasions, 4 years back.
FNAC smears from the recurrent nodule displayed clusters and singly scattered
relatively monomorphic, polygonal to plasmacytoid cells with mild nuclear atypia 
and moderate to abundant cytoplasm, including focal intracytoplasmic vacuoles. At
places, tumor cells were arranged around psammoma bodies against a background of 
mucinous material. Histopathological sections from the subsequent tumor resection
revealed tumor cells arranged in the form of islands, nests, cribriform, and
papillary arrangements amidst mucinous stroma, along with focal psammomatous
calcification, consistent with a recurrent mucinous adenocarcinoma. On
immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were diffusely positive for CK 7, estrogen
receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR), while negative for CDX2, CK20, and
TTF1. Diagnosis of a recurrent mucinous carcinoma of skin was offered. Patient
underwent adjuvant radiotherapy for achieving better loco regional clearance and 
is disease-free, 4 months after. FNAC is a useful diagnostic tool for timely
identification of mucinous carcinoma of skin, including recurrent lesions.
Psammomatous calcification can be identified within this uncommon tumor, in
recurrent lesions. While surgical resection remains the treatment mainstay,
immunohistochemical expression of ER and PR in this tumor perhaps could have
therapeutic impact, especially in recurrent cases.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26302739  [PubMed - in process]


109. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Oct;211(10):801-4. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.04.013. Epub
2015 May 21.

Signet ring cell carcinoma of the non-ampullary duodenum: A case report.

Mochizuki K(1), Kondo T(2), Tahara I(2), Inoue T(2), Kasai K(2), Oishi N(2),
Nakazawa T(2), Katoh R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan. Electronic
address: kuniom@yamanashi.ac.jp. (2)Department of Pathology, University of
Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.

We describe a case of signet ring cell carcinoma of the non-ampullary duodenum in
an 86-year-old woman. Endoscopic examination revealed a fungating lesion
(Borrmann classification; type 2) on the anterior wall of the descending duodenum
(second part). Pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy and lymphadenectomy
were performed. The tumor (pT3 and pN0) was predominantly composed of signet ring
cells, characterized by a central, optically clear, globoid droplet of
cytoplasmic mucin with an eccentrically placed nucleus. The cells were positive
for periodic acid Schiff with diastase and Alcian blue pH 2.5. On
immunohistochemical examination, MUC-5AC, MUC-2 and CDX2 were diffusely positive,
and MUC-6 was negative in the tumor cells, which consisted of mixed gastric
foveolar and intestinal phenotypes. Cytokeratin 7 was focally positive, but
cytokeratin 20 was negative. Nuclear staining of p53 was diffusely and weakly
positive. Signet ring cell carcinoma occurring in the non-ampullary duodenum
might derive from duodenal goblet cells with MUC-5AC expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26298633  [PubMed - in process]


110. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2015 Jul-Sep;58(3):274-8. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.162830.

Matrix metalloproteinase 7 expression in ampullary carcinoma.

Kumari N(1), Singh RK, Krishnani N, Shukla P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7) has largely been studied in
pancreatic cancer which is the most common component of periampullary cancer in
the western population. In India, the ampullary carcinoma is seen as the most
common periampullary cancer in resected pancreaticoduodenectomies. We aimed to
study the expression of MMP7 and its correlation with clinicopathological
features in ampullary cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Consecutive cases of all ampullary cancer in a 3-year
period were reviewed for histological differentiation (intestinal and
pancreatobiliary) by morphology and immunohistochemistry (CDX2, MUC2, cytokeratin
20 [CK20], MUC1, cytokeratin 7 [CK7], and cytokeratin 17 [CK17]). All cases were 
stained for MMP7 and expression was correlated with histological variables,
differentiation, and overall survival.
RESULTS: There were a total of 91 ampullary carcinomas (36 intestinal, 44
pancreatobiliary and 6 other types). Ampullary carcinoma showed MMP7 expression
in 63.7% cases. Two-third of intestinal type and half of the pancreatobiliary
type cancers showed MMP7 expression. MMP7 expression was significantly higher in 
low pathological T-stage of total ampullary carcinomas; however, it was seen more
commonly in higher overall stage of the pancreatobiliary type compared to
intestinal type of ampullary carcinoma. Overall survival in patients with MMP7
expression was lower compared to MMP7 negative patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study on MMP7 expression in ampullary cancer. MMP7
expression was seen in nearly 64 % of ampullary cancer and showed a significant
correlation with low pathological (T-) stage and high overall stage with a
shorter survival. MMP7 can be explored as a target for MMP inhibitor therapy in
the future.

PMID: 26275245  [PubMed - in process]


111. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug 14. [Epub ahead of print]

CDX2 inhibits pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell proliferation via promoting tumor
suppressor miR-615-5p.

Jiang Y(1), Zhang Y, Li F, Du X, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Zhengzhou Central Hospital Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.

CDX2 has recently been identified as a prognostic marker for pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. However, the role and mechanism of CDX2 in progression of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma are still elusive. In this study, we observed that CDX2
expression was much lower in mouse pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues and
pancreatic cancer cells. A network integrated by ChIPBase platform hinted that
miR-615-5p, a most newly discovered tumor suppressor, was probably bound by CDX2 
in the promoter region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR assay showed
that CDX2 exhibited a high capacity of binding to miR-615-5p promoter region
compared to the negative control. Real-time PCR and western blotting analyses
revealed that CDX2 overexpression caused inflation of miR-615-5p and depression
of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2), a direct target of miR-615-5p.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) and EdU
approaches showed that CDX2 overexpression markedly suppressed pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell proliferation. CDX2 small interfering RNA (siRNA)
transfection showed an opposite effect on gene expression and cell proliferation 
to that of CDX2 overexpression. Collectively, CDX2 inhibited pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell proliferation via promoting tumor suppressor miR-615-5p. Our 
findings suggested a potential molecular target for pancreatic adenocarcinoma
therapy.

PMID: 26269116  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


112. J Invest Surg. 2015;28(4):202-7.

Schlafen 3 Mediates the Differentiating Effects of Cdx2 in Rat IEC-Cdx2L1
Enterocytes.

Walsh MF(1), Hermann R, Lee JH, Chaturvedi L, Basson MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

AIM: Mature, differentiated enterocytes are essential for normal gut function and
critical to recovery from pathological conditions. Little is known about the
factors that regulate intestinal epithelial cell differentiation in the adult
intestine. The transcription factor, Cdx2, involved in enterocytic
differentiation, remains expressed in the adult. Since we have implicated Slfn3
in differentiation in vivo and in vitro, we examined whether it also mediated
differentiation in the IEC-Cdx2-L1 cell model of differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: IEC-Cdx2-L1 cells, permanently transfected with Cdx2 under
the control of isopropyl-ß-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG), were stimulated to
differentiate by 16-day exposure to IPTG. Transcript levels of Cdx2, Slfn 3, and 
villin were determined by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction of mRNA isolated from IPTG-treated and control cells. Slfn3 expression
was lowered with specific siRNA to investigate the role of Slfn3 in Cdx2-driven
villin expression in IPTG-differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Slfn3 and villin expression were significantly greater in IPTG-treated
cells. Slfn3 siRNA lowered Slfn3 expression and abolished the IPTG-induced rise
in villin expression (p < .05 by ANOVA); Cdx2 expression was unaffected by Slfn3 
siRNA.
DISCUSSION: The data indicate that the presence of Slfn3 is required for Cdx2 to 
induce villin expression, and thus differentiation. However, Slfn3 must also
promote differentiation of Cdx2 independently since IEC-6 cells that do not
normally express Cdx2 can be differentiated by a variety of Slfn3-dependent
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4771065
PMID: 26268420  [PubMed - in process]


113. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 11;10(8):e0134567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134567.
eCollection 2015.

Scriptaid Treatment Decreases DNA Methyltransferase 1 Expression by Induction of 
MicroRNA-152 Expression in Porcine Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer Embryos.

Liang S(1), Zhao MH(1), Choi JW(1), Kim NH(1), Cui XS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, 361-763, Republic of Korea; Brain Korea 21 center for Bio-Resource
Development, Cheongju, Chungbuk, 361-763, Republic of Korea.

Abnormal epigenetic reprogramming of donor nuclei after somatic cell nuclear
transfer (SCNT) is thought to be the main cause of low cloning efficiencies. A
growing body of evidence has demonstrated a positive role of Scriptaid, a histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) that belongs to an existing class of hydroxamic
acid-containing HDACis, on the development competence of cloned embryos in many
species. The present study investigated the effects of Scriptaid on the
development of porcine SCNT embryos in vitro and its mechanism. Treatment with
300 or 500 nM Scriptaid for 20 h after activation significantly increased the
percentage of SCNT embryos that developed to the blastocyst stage and the total
number of cells per blastocyst and significantly decreased the percentage of
apoptotic cells in blastocysts. Scriptaid treatment significantly increased the
level of histone H3 acetylated at K9 and the conversion of 5-methylcytosine into 
5-hydroxymethylcytosine and significantly decreased the level of histone H3
trimethylated at K9 at the pronuclear stage. As a potential mechanism for the DNA
methylation changes, our results showed that the expression of DNA
methyltransferase 1 was frequently down-regulated in Scriptaid-treated embryos in
comparison with untreated embryos and was inversely correlated to endogenous
microRNA-152 (miR-152). Taken together, these findings illustrated a crucial
functional crosstalk between miR-152 and DNMT1. Meanwhile, mRNA and protein
levels of POU5F1 and CDX2 were increased in Scriptaid-treated embryos. mRNA
levels of Caspase3, and Bax were significantly decreased and that of Bcl-xL was
significantly increased in Scriptaid-treated embryos. In conclusion, these
observations would contribute to uncover the nuclear reprogramming mechanisms
underlying the effects of Scriptaid on the improvement of porcine SCNT embryos.

PMCID: PMC4532471
PMID: 26261994  [PubMed - in process]


114. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Dec;23(8):662-6. doi: 10.1177/1066896915599060. Epub 2015
Aug 10.

Low-Grade, Nonintestinal Nonsalivary Sinonasal Adenocarcinoma Associated With an 
Exophytic Schneiderian Papilloma: A Case Report.

Blumberg JM(1), Escobar-Stein J(2), Vining EM(3), Prasad ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
jeff.blumberg@gmail.com. (2)Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia. (3)Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Sinonasal adenocarcinoma is a rare tumor of the head and neck accounting for 10% 
to 20% of all primary malignancies of the nose and paranasal sinuses. There
tumors are classified as salivary, intestinal and nonintestinal, nonsalivary.
Low-grade nonintestinal nonsalivary are rare tumors whose diagnosis is
essentially that of exclusion. Here we present the first case of one such tumor
associated with an exophyic Schneiderian papilloma. A 71-year-old retired
aerospace engineer presented with a 1-year history of severe nasal obstruction.
Endoscopy and compted tomography imaging demonstrated a polypoid lesion occupying
his entire right nasal cavity extending into and filling the nasopharynx. Biopsy 
suggested adenocarcinoma, at least in situ and the patient subsequently underwent
complete resection. Pathologic evaluation demonstrated polypoid tumor consistent 
with a low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma with micropapillary architecture
associated with a small amount of residual exophytic Schneiderian papilloma.
Immunohistochemistry revealed diffuse expression of CK7, CK 5/6, and S100 protein
in tumor cells. Expression of p63 was seen in basal cells only. Tumor cells did
not show expression of CK20, CDX2 (intestinal markers), mammaglobin, GATA3
(salivary markers), PAX8, WT1, nor estrogen, progesterone, or androgen receptors 
confirming its nonintestinal nonsalivary differentiation.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26261100  [PubMed - in process]


115. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5231-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4114. Epub 2015 Jul 22.

Nuclear transcription factor CDX2 inhibits gastric cancer-cell growth and
reverses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in vitro and in vivo.

Zhang JF(1), Qu LS(2), Qian XF(2), Xia BL(2), Mao ZB(2), Chen WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu
226001, P.R. China.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been noted as a critical event
in the early step of cancer metastasis. Recent studies showed that nuclear
transcription factor caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is a
prognostic factor, which acts as a marker of good outcome in gastric cancer (GC) 
patients. However, the association between CDX2 expression and EMT has remained
to be fully elucidated. The present study reported that forced overexpression of 
CDX2 in MKN45/CDX2 cells inhibited GC-cell growth and proliferation, and
attenuated migration and invasion in vitro. Furthermore, MKN45/CDX2 cells
exhibited a significant upregulation of E-cadherin protein and a significant
downregulation of vimentin protein expression. These results were further
supported by in vivo tumorigenicity assays, which showed that CDX2 suppressed
gastric tumor xenograft growth and inhibited EMT in nude mice. These results
indicated that CDX2 is capable of inhibiting GC-cell growth and invasion. CDX2
may participate in the process of EMT of GC cells by regulating the expression of
the epithelial and mesenchymal proteins E-cadherin and vimentin.

PMID: 26238762  [PubMed - in process]


116. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0134551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134551.
eCollection 2015.

Intestinal Commitment and Maturation of Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Is
Independent of Exogenous FGF4 and R-spondin1.

Tamminen K(1), Balboa D(1), Toivonen S(1), Pakarinen MP(2), Wiener Z(3), Alitalo 
K(3), Otonkoski T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology and Biomedicum Stem Cell Centre,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Children's Hospital, University of 
Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Translational Cancer Biology Program and Wihuri Research Institute, Biomedicum
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology and
Biomedicum Stem Cell Centre, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;
Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays a central role in guiding the differentiation of
the posterior parts of the primitive gut tube into intestinal structures in vivo 
and some studies suggest that FGF4 is another crucial factor for intestinal
development. The aim of this study was to define the effects of Wnt and FGF4 on
intestinal commitment in vitro by establishing conditions for differentiation of 
human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) into posterior endoderm (hindgut) and further
to self-renewing intestinal-like organoids. The most prominent induction of the
well-established intestinal marker gene CDX2 was achieved when hPSC-derived
definitive endoderm cells were treated with Wnt agonist molecule CHIR99021 during
differentiation to hindgut. FGF4 was found to be dispensable during intestinal
commitment, but it had an early role in repressing development towards the
hepatic lineage. When hindgut stage cells were further cultured in 3D, they
formed self-renewing organoid structures containing all major intestinal cell
types even without exogenous R-spondin1 (RSPO1), a crucial factor for the culture
of epithelial organoids derived from adult intestine. This may be explained by
the presence of a mesenchymal compartment in the hPSC-derived organoids. Addition
of WNT3A increased the expression of the Paneth cell marker Lysozyme in
hPSC-derived organoid cultures, whereas FGF4 inhibited both the formation and
maturation of intestinal-like organoids. Similar hindgut and organoid cultures
were established from human induced pluripotent stem cells, implying that this
approach can be used to create patient-specific intestinal tissue models for
disease modeling in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4521699
PMID: 26230325  [PubMed - in process]


117. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Jul 28;21(28):8569-79. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i28.8569.

Association of hepatocyte-derived growth factor receptor/caudal type homeobox 2
co-expression with mucosal regeneration in active ulcerative colitis.

Sipos F(1), Constantinovits M(1), Valcz G(1), Tulassay Z(1), Muzes G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ferenc Sipos, Miklós Constantinovits, Györgyi Muzes, 2 Department of Internal 
Medicine, Semmelweis University, 1088 Budapest, Hungary.

AIM: To characterize the regeneration-associated stem cell-related phenotype of
hepatocyte-derived growth factor receptor (HGFR)-expressing cells in active
ulcerative colitis (UC).
METHODS: On the whole 38 peripheral blood samples and 38 colonic biopsy samples
from 18 patients with histologically proven active UC and 20 healthy control
subjects were collected. After preparing tissue microarrays and blood smears
HGFR, caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), prominin-1 (CD133) and Musashi-1
conventional and double fluorescent immunolabelings were performed. Immunostained
samples were digitalized using high-resolution Mirax Desk instrument, and
analyzed with the Mirax TMA Module software. For semiquantitative counting of
immunopositive lamina propria (LP) cells 5 fields of view were counted at
magnification × 200 in each sample core, then mean ± SD were determined. In case 
of peripheral blood smears, 30 fields of view with 100 µm diameter were evaluated
in every sample and the number of immunopositive cells (mean ± SD) was
determined. Using 337 nm UVA Laser MicroDissection system at least 5000
subepithelial cells from the lamina propria were collected. Gene expression
analysis of HGFR, CDX2, CD133, leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein coupled
receptor 5 (Lgr5), Musashi-1 and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) were performed in both
laser-microdisscted samples and blood samples by using real time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: By performing conventional and double fluorescent immunolabelings
confirmed by RT-PCR, higher number of HGFR (blood: 6.7 ± 1.22 vs 38.5 ± 3.18; LP:
2.25 ± 0.85 vs 9.22 ± 0.65; P < 0.05), CDX2 (blood: 0 vs 0.94 ± 0.64; LP: 0.75 ± 
0.55 vs 2.11 ± 0.75; P < 0.05), CD133 (blood: 1.1 ± 0.72 vs 8.3 ± 1.08; LP: 11.1 
± 0.85 vs 26.28 ± 1.71; P < 0.05) and Musashi-1 (blood and LP: 0 vs scattered)
positive cells were detected in blood and lamina propria of UC samples as
compared to controls. HGFR/CDX2 (blood: 0 vs 1 ± 0.59; LP: 0.8 ± 0.69 vs 2.06 ±
0.72, P < 0.05) and Musashi-1/CDX2 (blood and LP: 0 vs scattered) co-expressions 
were found in blood and lamina propria of UC samples. HGFR/CD133 and CD133/CDX2
co-expressions appeared only in UC lamina propria samples. CDX2, Lgr5 and
Musashi-1 expressions in UC blood samples were not accompanied by CK20 mRNA
expression.
CONCLUSION: In active UC, a portion of circulating HGFR-expressing cells are
committed to the epithelial lineage, and may participate in mucosal regeneration 
by undergoing mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

PMCID: PMC4515838
PMID: 26229399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hum Cell. 2016 Jan;29(1):10-21. doi: 10.1007/s13577-015-0121-7. Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Up-regulation of lymphocyte antigen 6 complex expression in side-population cells
derived from a human trophoblast cell line HTR-8/SVneo.

Inagaki T(1), Kusunoki S(1), Tabu K(2), Okabe H(1), Yamada I(1), Taga T(2),
Matsumoto A(1), Makino S(1), Takeda S(1), Kato K(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Juntendo
University, Hongo 2-1-1, Bunkyo, 113-8431, Japan. (2)Department of Stem Cell
Regulation, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Yushima 1-5-45, Bunkyo, 113-8510, Japan. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Juntendo University, Hongo 2-1-1, Bunkyo,
113-8431, Japan. kkato@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Maidashi
3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. kkato@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

The continual proliferation and differentiation of trophoblasts are critical for 
the maintenance of pregnancy. It is well known that the tissue stem cells are
associated with the development of tissues and pathologies. It has been
demonstrated that side-population (SP) cells identified by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) are enriched with stem cells. The SP cells in HTR-8/SVneo
cells derived from human primary trophoblast cells were isolated by FACS.
HTR-8/SVneo-SP cell cultures generated both SP and non-SP (NSP) subpopulations.
In contrast, NSP cell cultures produced NSP cells and failed to produce SP cells.
These SP cells showed self-renewal capability by serial colony-forming assay.
Microarray expression analysis using a set of HTR-8/SVneo-SP and -NSP cells
revealed that SP cells overexpressed several stemness genes including caudal type
homeobox2 (CDX2) and bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs), and lymphocyte antigen 6
complex locus D (LY6D) gene was the most highly up-regulated in HTR-8/SVneo-SP
cells. LY6D gene reduced its expression in the course of a 7-day cultivation in
differentiation medium. SP cells tended to reduce its fraction by treatment of
LY6D siRNA indicating that LY6D had potential to maintain cell proliferation of
HTR-8/SVneo-SP cells. On ontology analysis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) pathway was involved in the up-regulated genes on microarray analysis.
HTR-SVneo-SP cells showed enhanced migration. This is the first report that LY6D 
was important for the maintenance of HTR-8/SVneo-SP cells. EMT was associated
with the phenotype of these SP cells.

PMID: 26223706  [PubMed - in process]


119. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Jan;31(1):143-51. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2600. Epub 2015 Aug
20.

Compensatory Changes in Calcium Metabolism Accompany the Loss of Vitamin D
Receptor (VDR) From the Distal Intestine and Kidney of Mice.

Reyes-Fernandez PC(1), Fleet JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

1,25 Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2 D) increases intestinal Ca absorption when
dietary Ca intake is low by inducing gene expression through the vitamin D
receptor (VDR). 1,25(OH)2 D-regulated Ca absorption has been studied extensively 
in the small intestine, but VDR is also present in the large intestine. Our goal 
was to determine the impact of large intestinal VDR deletion on Ca and bone
metabolism. We used transgenic mice expressing Cre-recombinase driven by the
9.5-kb human caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) promoter to delete floxed VDR alleles 
from the caudal region of the mouse (CDX2-KO). Weanling CDX2-KO mice and control 
littermates were fed low (0.25%) or normal (0.5%) Ca diets for 7 weeks. Serum and
urinary Ca, vitamin D metabolites, bone parameters, and gene expression were
analyzed. Loss of the VDR in CDX2-KO was confirmed in colon and kidney.
Unexpectedly, CDX2-KO had lower serum PTH (-65% of controls, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) but
normal serum 1,25(OH)2 D and Ca levels. Despite elevated urinary Ca loss
(eightfold higher in CDX2-KO) and reduced colonic target genes TRPV6 (-90%) and
CaBPD9k (-80%) mRNA levels, CDX2-KO mice had only modestly lower femoral bone
density. Interestingly, duodenal TRPV6 and CaBPD9k mRNA expression was fourfold
and threefold higher, respectively, and there was a trend toward increased
duodenal Ca absorption (+19%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.076) in the CDX2-KO mice. The major finding
of this study is that large intestine VDR significantly contributes to whole-body
Ca metabolism but that duodenal compensation may prevent the consequences of VDR 
deletion from large intestine and kidney in growing mice. © 2015 American Society
for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 26211511  [PubMed - in process]


120. J Med Assoc Thai. 2015 Mar;98 Suppl 2:S162-8.

Primary perianal Paget's disease with focal adenocarcinoma, signet-ring cell
differentiation and unusual immunohistochemical expression: a case report.

Suthiwartnarueput W.

Perianal Paget's disease is an uncommon intraepidermal carcinoma characterized by
the presence ofPaget cells. It usually affects older patients and commonly
presents as chronic perianal pruritus with scaly plaques. The disease is
categorized into primary perianal Paget's disease ofcutaneous origin and
secondaryperianal Paget's disease, which is due to extension of a visceral
malignancy such as that of the anorectum or colon. Cytokeratin 7 (CK7),
cytokeratin 20 (CK20), and gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP15)
expression are useful for differentiation between these two types. A tumor
immunohistochemical profile of CK7+/CK20-/GCDFP15+ suggests the primary type,
whereas CK7+/CK20+/GCDFP15- suggests the secondary type. The expression of caudal
homeobox 2 (CDX2) suggests the secondary type from anorectal or colonic
adenocarcinoma. However, approximately one- third of patients without visceral
malignancy have a tumor that is CK7+/CK20+/GCDFP15-. Two percents of primary
perianal Paget ' disease can express CDX2. The author reports a case ofan
86-year-old man who presented with chronic perianalpruritus and a scaly plaque. A
skin biopsy showed intraepidermal Paget cells with immunohistochemical profile of
CK7+/CK20+/GCDFPJ5-/CDX2+. Initially, secondary perianal Paget's disease from
colorectal adenocarcinoma was suspected. However, extensive investiga- tions
found no visceral malignancy. The patient underwent wide excision of the perianal
skin. Pathological examination showed diffuse intraepidermal Paget cells
withfocal dermal invasion by intestinal-type adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell 
differentiation. In conclusion, thefinal diagnosis was primary perianal Paget's
disease withfocal adenocarcinona and signet- ring cell differentiation. The
disease was consistent with primary perianal Paget's disease, because no visceral
malignancy was found.

PMID: 26211119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Neuropathology. 2016 Feb;36(1):17-26. doi: 10.1111/neup.12231. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Atypical teratoid/ rhabdoid tumor, an immunohistochemical study of potential
diagnostic and prognostic markers.

Al-Hussaini M(1), Dissi N(1), Souki C(1), Amayiri N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC), Amman, Jordan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC), Amman,
Jordan.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is a rare tumor of the CNS mostly seen
in infants and is often associated with a dismal outcome. Despite the
heterogeneous morphology and/or immunoprofile, its diagnosis nowadays relies on
the negative INI-1/BAF47 nuclear immunostain in tumor cells. We aim to
investigate a number of immunohistochemical antibodies as potential diagnostic
and prognostic markers. All AT/RT cases in patients younger than 18 years of age 
were included. Demographics, clinical features and outcome were collected.
Immunostains tested included SALL-4, OCT3/4, CD99, FLI-1, cyclin-D1, ß-catenin,
P53, P16, CDX2 and WT-1. Nineteen cases (10 males) were identified at our center 
between 2004-2013 with a median age of 24 months. Ten (52.6%) cases were
supratentorial. Six (42.9%) cases showed metastasis at time of presentation.
Chemotherapy was administered to 10 (62.5%) and radiotherapy to seven (43.8%).
The median overall survival was 11 months. A single long-term survival of 104
months was identified. Pathologically, most cases showed an admixture of rhabdoid
cells and/or small cells and/or pale cells in variable proportions. Of all tested
antibodies, only positivity for FLI-1 was associated with improved survival (P = 
0.0012), while positivity for cyclin-D1 showed a trend toward improved survival
(P = 0.0547). CDX2 was positive only in the single long-term survival.
Interestingly, two cases showed co-expression of CD99 and FLI-1, and some were
positive for SALL-4. In conclusion, FLI-1 and cyclin-D1 are potential prognostic 
markers associated with better outcome. Occasional AT/RT cases might co-express
CD99 and FLI-1 as well as SALL-4, a potential diagnostic pitfall with Ewing
sarcoma/ primitive neuroectodermal tumors and germ cell tumors, respectively.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 26207291  [PubMed - in process]


122. Hum Pathol. 2015 Sep;46(9):1398-404. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.05.018. Epub
2015 Jun 5.

Glandular differentiation in dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma: molecular evidence 
of a rare phenomenon.

Jour G(1), Liu Y(2), Ricciotti R(3), Pritchard C(4), Hoch BL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
10065. Electronic address: jourg@mskcc.org. (2)Cytogenetics and Genomics
Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of Washington Medical Center,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, 98105. (3)Department of
Anatomic Pathology, University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA, 98105. 
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington Medical Center,
Seattle, WA, 98105; Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, 98105.

Epithelial glandular differentiation in dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma has not
been described. Our patient was a 64-year-old man with a history of prostate
cancer status post-radiation and hormonal therapy. On screening bone scan, he was
found to have increased uptake in his right femoral shaft. Biopsy revealed
intermediate-grade conventional chondrosarcoma. Subsequent femoral resection was 
remarkable for an intermediate-grade chondrosarcomatous component juxtaposed to
an area composed of anastomosing nests and cords of malignant epithelial cells
showing nuclear atypia and increased mitotic activity. A fibroblastic-appearing
spindle cell population was intimately associated with the epithelial cells. The 
epithelial cells labeled with 34bE12, AE1/AE3, EMA, and Vimentin (both spindled
and epithelial components) while being negative for prostate-specific antigen,
prostate specific acid phosphatase, cytokeratin 20, thyroid transcription
factor-1, and CDX2. The patient developed local recurrence 9 months after the
initial resection but has had no metastatic disease and consistently undetectable
prostate-specific antigen levels. Deep parallel sequencing of the
dedifferentiated component showed a nonsynonymous mutation at exon 4 of IDH1 gene
at codon R132 leading to a substitution of arginine, with serine confirming
glandular differentiation in dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26198745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 21;10(7):e0133587. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133587.
eCollection 2015.

Influence of Sex on Basal and Dickkopf-1 Regulated Gene Expression in the Bovine 
Morula.

Denicol AC(1), Leão BC(2), Dobbs KB(1), Mingoti GZ(2), Hansen PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, D.H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology 
Research Program, and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America. (2)Laboratory of Physiology of Reproduction,
School of Veterinary Medicine, Universidade Estadual Paulista-UNESP, Araçatuba,
SP, Brazil.

Sex affects function of the developing mammalian embryo as early as the
preimplantation period. There were two goals of the current objective. The first 
was to determine the degree and nature of differences in gene expression between 
female and male embryos in the cow at the morula stage of development. The second
objective was to determine whether DKK1, a molecule known to alter
differentiation of the blastocyst, would affect gene expression differently for
female and male morulae. In Experiment 1, female and male embryos were treated
with DKK1 at Day 5 after insemination. Morulae were harvested 24 h after
treatment, pooled in groups of 20 for microarray analysis and RNA subjected to
analysis of gene expression by microarray hybridization. There were 662
differentially expressed genes between females and males and 128 of these genes
had a fold change = 1.5 between the two sexes. Of the genes upregulated in
females, 49.5% were located in the X chromosome. Functional analysis predicted
that cell survival was greater in female embryos. Experiment 2 involved a similar
design except that transcripts for 12 genes previously reported to be affected by
sex, DKK1 or the interaction were quantified by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. Expression of all genes tested that were affected by sex in experiment 
1 was affected in a similar manner in Experiment 2. In contrast, effects of DKK1 
on gene expression were largely not repeatable in Experiment 2. The exception was
for the Hippo signaling gene AMOT, which was inhibited by DKK1. In Experiment 3, 
embryos produced by fertilization with unsorted sperm were treated with DKK1 at
Day 5 and abundance of transcripts for CDX2, GATA6, and NANOG determined at Days 
5, 6 and 7 after insemination. There was no effect of DKK1 on expression of any
of the three genes. In conclusion, female and male bovine embryos have a
different pattern of gene expression as early as the morula stage, and this is
due to a large extent to expression of genes in the X chromosomes in females.
Differential gene expression between female and male embryos is likely the basis 
for increased resistance to cell death signals in female embryos and disparity in
responses of female and male embryos to changes in the maternal environment.

PMCID: PMC4510475
PMID: 26196299  [PubMed - in process]


124. Reprod Biomed Online. 2015 Sep;31(3):372-83. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2015.06.008.
Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Contrasting effects of G1.2/G2.2 and SOF1/SOF2 embryo culture media on pre- and
post-implantation development of non-transgenic and transgenic cloned goat
embryos.

Hosseini SM(1), Hajian M(1), Ostadhosseini S(1), Forouzanfar M(1), Abedi P(1),
Jafarpour F(1), Gourabi H(2), Shahverdi AH(3), Vosough A(4), Ghanaie HR(1),
Nasr-Esfahani MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction and Development, Royan Institute for Biotechnology,
ACECR, Isfahan, Iran. (2)Department of Embryology at Reproductive Biomedicine
Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Medicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. 
(3)Department of Genetics at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, P.O. Box: 19395-4644, Tehran,
Iran. (4)Department of Reproductive Imaging at Reproductive Biomedicine Research 
Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Reproduction and Development, Royan Institute for Biotechnology,
ACECR, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address: mh.nasr-esfahani@royaninstitute.org.

This study compared the efficiency of two embryo culture media (SOF1/SOF2 and
G1.2/G2.2) for pre- and post-implantation development of somatic cell nuclear
transfer goat embryos derived from non-transgenic and transgenic (for htPA and
hrcfIX genes) fibroblasts. Despite similar cleavage rates, G1.2/G2.2 supported
significantly higher blastocyst development than SOF1/SOF2 (30-35% versus 21%; P 
< 0.05), irrespective of cell transgenesis. However, following embryo transfer,
pregnancy outcomes (establishment, full-term development and live birth) were all
significantly higher (P < 0.05) for embryos developed in SOF1/SOF2 versus
G1.2/G2.2. Gene expression profiling of 17 developmentally important genes
revealed that: (i) SOX2, FOXD3, IFNT, FZD, FGFR4, ERK1, GCN5, PCAF, BMPR1, SMAD5,
ALK4, CDC25 and LIFR were significantly induced in blastocysts developed in
SOF1/SOF2 but not G1.2/G2.2; (ii) OCT4, CTNNB and CDX2 were similarly expressed
in both groups; and (iii) AKT was significantly higher in G1.2/G2.2 than
SOF1/SOF2 (P < 0.05). Following IVF, although blastocyst development in G1.2/G2.2
was significantly higher than SOF1/SOF2 counterparts, the majority of assessed
genes were similarly expressed in blastocysts developed in both groups. It was
concluded that the long-term programming effects of embryo culture medium and/or 
embryo production method may irreversibly affect post-implantation development of
cloned embryos through defined molecular pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26194883  [PubMed - in process]


125. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):5902-7. eCollection 2015.

Rectal mucosal endometriosis primarily misinterpreted as adenocarcinoma: a case
report and review of literature.

Chen H(1), Luo Q(1), Liu S(1), Xiong H(1), Jiang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical
University Guangzhou 510150, China.

Endometriosis involving intestinal mucosa is relatively uncommon. It poses a
diagnostic challenge for clinicians and pathologists. We herein report a case of 
colonoscopic specimen revealing rectal mucosal endometriosis. A 39-year-old woman
complained of red rectal bleeding and intermittent abdominal pain. Colonoscopic
examination showed a rectal mass with ulceration and circum wall involvement.
Biopsy was processed in the suspicious of carcinoma. Morphologically, irregular
glands replaced residual colorectal ones, displayed mucin depletion, nuclear
stratification and subtile subnuclear vacuoles. The stroma was full of spindle
cells with abundant pink cytoplasm and unclear boundary. Due to subjectively
interpreting as dysplastic glands in desmoplastic setting, primary rectal
adenocarcinoma was firstly raised. Immunohistochemically, CK7, ER and CD10
identified the essence of ectopic endometrium. CK20 and CDX2 highlighted residual
glands. In case of misdiagnosis, any pathologists should be aware of intestinal
endometriosis for each female's colorectal biopsy, especially for that morphology
not typical for primary adenocarcinoma or endometriosis. Reading slides carefully
combined with a panel of immunomarkers would solve the pitfall.

PMCID: PMC4503187
PMID: 26191316  [PubMed - in process]


126. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2015;13:91-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2015.06.019. Epub 2015
Jun 27.

Duodenal metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma: A rare cause of melena.

AlSaeed EF(1), Tunio MA(2), AlSayari K(3), AlDandan S(4), Riaz K(5).

Author information: 
(1)King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
ealsaeed@yahoo.ca. (2)King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic
address: mkhairuddin@kfmc.med.sa. (3)King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. Electronic address: kalsayari@kfmc.med.sa. (4)King Fahad Medical City,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Comprehensive Cancer Center, King Fahad Medical City,
Riyadh 59046, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: saldandan@kfmc.med.sa. (5)King
Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Comprehensive Cancer Center, King Fahad
Medical City, Riyadh 59046, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
kalsayari@kfmc.med.sa.

INTRODUCTION: We report a rare case of duodenal metastasis from primary lung
adenocarcinoma presented with history of melena and weight loss.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 52-year-old smoker man presented with six months history 
of epigastric pain, melena and weight loss. Esophago-gastroduodenoscopy revealed 
a 10mm ulcerative lesion in the fourth part of duodenum. Histopathology of
resected lesion showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Tumor cells showed
immunopositivity for cytokeratin-7 (CK7), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1),
and immunonegativity for CK20, Villin, CDX2 and thyroglobulin, supporting the
diagnosis of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the lung origin. Computed tomography
(CT) of chest revealed left hilar mass encasing the main pulmonary artery
associated with ipsilateral hilar and contralateral mediastinal lymphadenopathy. 
Bronchoscopy assisted biopsy of lung mass confirmed the diagnosis of primary
adenocarcinoma. Patient was staged as T4N3M1. After the resection of duodenal
metastasis followed by three cycles of cisplatinum based chemotherapy with
Bevacizumab, melena resolved completely.
DISCUSSION: Duodenal metastases from lung adenocarcinoma are extremely uncommon, 
and rarely produce symptoms. Most of cases require duodenectomy or
pancreatico-duodenectomy for symptomatic relief. For smaller duodenal metastatic 
lesions (=1cm) endoscopic resection is a feasible therapeutic option.
CONCLUSION: Although rare, duodenal metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma should
also be included in the differential diagnosis of melena. Smaller lesions (=1cm) 
can safely be managed with endoscopic resection.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4529650
PMID: 26177377  [PubMed]


127. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:354193. doi: 10.1155/2015/354193. Epub 2015 Jun 16.

Role of Bone Marrow-Derived Stem Cells in Polyps Development in Mice with
Apc(Min/+) Mutation.

Barone M(1), Scavo MP(2), Licinio R(1), Piombino M(3), De Tullio N(1), Mallamaci 
R(4), Di Leo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation,
University of Bari, Piazza G. Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy. (2)Gastroenterology
Unit, Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari,
Piazza G. Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy ; Methodist Research Institute, 6670
Bertner Avenue, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Radiotherapy Unit, Diagnostic Imaging 
Department, Polyclinic Hospital, Piazza G. Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(4)Department of Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biopharmaceutics, University of
Bari, Via E. Orabona 4, 70124 Bari, Italy.

We explored the hypothesis that an altered microenvironment (intestinal
adenomatous polyp) could modify the differentiation program of bone
marrow-derived stem cells (BMSCs), involving them in colon carcinogenesis.
Sublethally irradiated 8-week-old female Apc(Min/+) mice were transplanted with
bone marrow (BM) cells obtained from either male age-matched Apc(Min/+)
(Apc-Tx-Apc) or wild type (WT) (WT-Tx-Apc) mice. At 4 and 7 weeks after
transplantation, BM-derived colonocytes were recognized by colocalization of
Y-chromosome and Cdx2 protein (specific colonocyte marker). Polyp number, volume,
and grade of dysplasia were not influenced by irradiation/transplantation
procedures since they were similar in both untreated female Apc(Min/+) and
Apc-Tx-Apc mice. At 4 and 7 weeks after transplantation, a progressive
significant reduction of polyp number and volume was observed in WT-Tx-Apc mice. 
Moreover, the number of WT-Tx-Apc mice with a high-grade dysplastic polyps
significantly decreased as compared to Apc-Tx-Apc mice. Finally, at 4 and 7 weeks
after transplantation, WT-Tx-Apc mice showed a progressive significant increase
of Y+/Cdx2+ cells in "normal" mucosa, whereas, in the adenomatous tissue,
Y+/Cdx2+ cells remained substantially unvaried. Our findings demonstrate that WT 
BMSCs do not participate in polyp development but rather inhibit their growth.
The substitution of genotypically altered colonocytes with Y+/Cdx2+ cells
probably contributes to this process.

PMCID: PMC4488009
PMID: 26167184  [PubMed]


128. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(8):1241-51. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1056411. Epub
2015 Jul 6.

UHRF1 promotes proliferation of gastric cancer via mediating tumor suppressor
gene hypermethylation.

Zhou L(1), Shang Y, Jin Z, Zhang W, Lv C, Zhao X, Liu Y, Li N, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Affairs ; The 88th Hospital of PLA ; Tai'an , China.

Epigenetic changes play significant roles in cancer development. UHRF1, an
epigenetic regulator, has been shown to be overexpressed and to coordinate tumor 
suppressor gene (TSG) silencing in several cancers. In a previous study, we found
that UHRF1 promoted gastric cancer (GC) invasion and metastasis. However, the
role and underlying mechanism of UHRF1 in GC carcinogenesis remain largely
unknown. In the present study, we investigated UHRF1 expression and function in
GC proliferation and explored its downstream regulatory mechanism. The results
demonstrated that UHRF1 overexpression was an independent and significant
predictor of GC prognosis. Downregulation of UHRF1 suppressed GC proliferation
and growth in vitro and in vivo, and UHRF1 upregulation showed opposite effects. 
Furthermore, downregulation of UHRF1 reactivated 7 TSGs, including CDX2, CDKN2A, 
RUNX3, FOXO4, PPARG, BRCA1 and PML, via promoter demethylation. These results
provide insight into the GC proliferation process, and suggest that targeting
UHRF1 represents a new therapeutic approach to block GC development.

PMCID: PMC4622020 [Available on 2016-07-06]
PMID: 26147747  [PubMed - in process]


129. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):1066-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.06.014. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

MicroRNA-196b is transcribed from an autonomous promoter and is directly
regulated by Cdx2 and by posterior Hox proteins during embryogenesis.

Fantini S(1), Salsi V(1), Vitobello A(2), Rijli FM(2), Zappavigna V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41125, Italy. (2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Life
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G. Campi 213/d, Modena
41125, Italy. Electronic address: zappavigna.vincenzo@unimore.it.

The miR-196 miRNA gene family located within the Hox gene clusters has been shown
to function during embryogenesis and to be aberrantly expressed in various
malignancies, including leukaemia, melanoma, and colorectal cancer. Despite its
involvement in numerous biological processes, the control of miR-196 expression
is still poorly defined. We identified the miR-196b promoter and found that the
mature miR-196b originates from a large, non-coding primary transcript, which
starts within an autonomous TATA box promoter and is not in physical continuity
with either the Hoxa10 or Hoxa9 main primary transcripts. A ~680bp genomic
fragment, spanning the pri-miR-196b transcription start site, is sufficient to
recapitulate the neural tube expression pattern of miR-196 during embryogenesis. 
This region contains potential binding sites for Cdx and 5'Hox transcription
factors. Two of these sites revealed to be necessary for neural tube expression
and were bound in vivo by Cdx2 and Hoxd13. We show that Cdx2 is required for
miR-196 expression and that both Cdx2 and 5'Hox, but not 3'Hox, are able to
activate the miR-196b promoter. The possible role of Cdx2- and 5'Hox-mediated
regulation of miR-196 expression in vertebrate anterior-posterior (AP) axis
formation during embryogenesis is discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26141604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biol Reprod. 2015 Aug;93(2):46. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.128652. Epub 2015 Jul
1.

The Role of Endometrial Selectins and Their Ligands on Bovine Conceptus
Attachment to the Uterine Epithelium During Peri-Implantation Period.

Bai R(1), Kusama K(1), Sakurai T(1), Bai H(1), Wang C(1), Zhang J(1), Kuse M(2), 
Ideta A(3), Aoyagi Y(3), Okuda K(2), Imakawa K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Science, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive
Physiology, Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama
University, Okayama, Japan. (3)Zennoh Embryo Transfer Center, Hokkaido, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Science, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan akaz@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

A successful pregnancy depends on the blastocyst's implantation to the maternal
endometrium; however, the initial interaction between blastocyst and uterine
epithelium has not been well characterized. The objectives of this study were to 
determine if selectins and their ligands were expressed in the bovine conceptus
and/or uterus during the periattachment period and to study whether selectins
were associated with conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium. Through the 
RNA-sequence analysis of bovine conceptuses on Days 17, 20, and 22 (Day 0 = day
of estrus), only the SELL ligand, podocalyxin (PODXL), and P-selectin (SELP)
ligand, SELPLG, were found. Quantitative PCR analysis confirmed the presence of
PODXL and SELPLG in these conceptuses and revealed that SELL, mRNA and protein,
detected in the uterine epithelium but not in conceptuses increased during the
periattachment period. In the cultured endometrial epithelial cells (EECs), SELL 
transcript was up-regulated when uterine flushings from Day 20 pregnant animals
were placed onto these cells. SELL was also up-regulated when cultured EECs were 
treated with progesterone, EGF, or bFGF, but not with IFNT. In the coculture
system with EECs and bovine trophoblast CT-1 cells, SELL expression in EECs was
effectively reduced by its small interfering RNA; however, IFNT, a marker for
CT-1 cell attachment to EECs, was not reduced, nor was a transcription factor of 
IFNT, CDX2. These observations suggest that the conceptus could attach to the
uterine epithelium through the use of endometrial SELL and embryonic selectin
ligands, possibly initiating the conceptus attachment process in the bovine
species.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26134867  [PubMed - in process]


131. Anim Reprod Sci. 2015 Aug;159:172-83. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.06.015.
Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Effect of peroxiredoxin II on the quality and mitochondrial activity of
pre-implantation bovine embryos.

Fakruzzaman M(1), Ghanem N(2), Bang JI(3), Ha AN(3), Lee KL(3), Sohn SH(4), Wang 
Z(5), Lee DS(6), Kong IK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21Plus),
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of
Korea; Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Faculty of Animal Science and 
Veterinary Medicine, Patuakhali Science and Technology University, Barisal 8210, 
Bangladesh. (2)Animal Production Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo
University, Giza, Egypt. (3)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied
Life Science (BK21Plus), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Animal Science and
Biotechnology, College of Science and Natural Resource, Gyeongnam National
University of Science and Technology, Jinju 660-758, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic
of Korea. (5)Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State
University, Logan, UT 84322-4700, USA. (6)School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 
702-701, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied 
Life Science (BK21Plus), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea; Institute of Agriculture and Life Science,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: ikong7900@gmail.com.

Endogenous peroxiredoxin II (PRDX II) protein plays a vital role in early
embryonic development. This study assessed the beneficial effects of exogenous
PRDX II on bovine embryo development at the cellular and molecular levels. To
this end, in vitro maturation (IVM) medium was supplemented with various
concentrations of PRDX II (0, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100µg/mL). Of these,
12.5µg/mL PRDX II was the most effective and significantly promoted embryonic
development. Therefore, this concentration of PRDX II was used in subsequent
experiments. The percentage of embryos that developed into Day 8 blastocysts and 
the total number of cells per blastocyst (38.2% and 150.6±5.1) was higher in the 
PRDX II-treated group than in the control (26.4% and 128.9±3.9, respectively).
Moreover, the percent of TUNEL positive cells was higher (P<0.05) in the control 
than in the PRDX II-treated. Furthermore, PRDX II added to the IVM media
increased mitochondria content in blastocysts and decreased the intracellular ROS
levels in oocytes and blastocysts compared with the control (P<0.05). The
expression of genes associated with blastocyst quality (CDX2 and IFNt),
antioxidant activity (SOD2), and mitochondrial activity (TFAM) was higher,
whereas the expression of a gene involved in the apoptotic pathway (c-FOS) was
lower, in the PRDX II-treated than in the control group. In conclusion,
supplementation of IVM medium with PRDX II promotes development to the blastocyst
stage and improves blastocyst quality through reducing ROS, enhancing embryonic
mitochondrial activity, and modulating development- related target genes
expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26130600  [PubMed - in process]


132. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Oct 15;24(20):2437-54. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0053. Epub 2015
Aug 18.

WNT/ß-catenin signaling affects cell lineage and pluripotency-specific gene
expression in bovine blastocysts: prospects for bovine embryonic stem cell
derivation.

Madeja ZE(1), Hryniewicz K(1), Orsztynowicz M(1), Pawlak P(1), Perkowska A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Poznan University of Life Sciences
, Poznan, Poland .

Despite many attempts, true bovine embryonic stem cells (bESC) still remain
elusive. The WNT pathway has been associated with stem cell control in
vertebrates and its role in pluripotency maintenance has been proven for several 
mammalian species, including rodents and primates. Thus, we have aimed to
investigate the effect of WNT activation on pluripotency marker gene expression
in the inner cell mass (ICM) and the trophectoderm (TE) and to study the
derivation potential of primary bESC lines from blastocysts obtained in the
presence of the glycogen synthase kinase 3 inhibitor (GSK3i). WNT activity
clearly exerted a positive effect on pluripotency gene expression in developing
bovine embryos, manifested by upregulation of OCT4, NANOG, REX1, SOX2, c-MYC, and
KLF4 in the ICM and downregulation of CDX2 in the TE. However, the prolonged
exposition of preimplantation embryos to the GSK3i resulted in reduced potential 
to form primary ESC-like colonies. The results of bESC derivation experiments
allowed us to speculate that the derived cell lines may share features of both
naïve and primed ESCs. Similar to mouse epiblast stem cells and human ESCs, the
derived lines grew as flat monolayer colonies intolerant to passaging as single
cells. JAK/STAT signaling was indispensable for proper colony formation and
proliferation, yet LIF alone was inefficient to support self-renewal. Concomitant
with the naïve state of mouse ESCs, WNT activity supported by LIF had beneficial 
effects on cell culture propagation, survival after passage, morphology, and
pluripotency-related marker gene expression. Moreover, colonies derived in the
presence of LIF and GSK3i maintained KLF4 transcription over several passages,
whereas EpiSCs virtually do not express KLF4.

PMID: 26119137  [PubMed - in process]


133. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Sep;21(9):711-22. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav036. Epub 2015 Jun 
24.

WNT3 and membrane-associated ß-catenin regulate trophectoderm lineage
differentiation in human blastocysts.

Krivega M(1), Essahib W(2), Van de Velde H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Reproduction and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium
krivega@gmail.com mkrivega@vub.ac.be. (2)Research Group of Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium. (3)Research Group of Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium Centre for Reproductive Medicine (CRG), 
UZ Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101, Brussels 1090, Belgium.

WNT/ß-catenin signaling has been described as a crucial regulator of embryonic
stem cells and embryogenesis. However, little is known on its role during human
preimplantation embryo development, besides the RNA expression of its multiple
players. In this study, we performed ß-catenin loss- and gain-of-function studies
on human preimplantation embryos by adding either Cardamonin or GSK3 inhibitor,
1-Azakenpaullone, to the embryo culture medium from the cleavage until blastocyst
stages (Days 3-5/6). ß-Catenin was displayed in the cortical region underneath
the membrane during all stages, but it only showed nuclear localization at
cleavage stages after stabilization with 1-Azakenpaullone. We did not observe any
effects on the inner cell mass markers NANOG, POU5F1, SOX2 and SALL4 in these
functional experiments. However, both ß-catenin degradation and stabilization
caused inhibition of the trophectoderm (TE) fate, illustrated by KRT18 and GATA3 
RNA, and CDX2 protein expression. Based on the TE-specific WNT3 protein
expression in blastocysts, we postulated that this protein may be an upstream
regulator for the observed membrane ß-catenin function. The addition of either
WNT3 or 1-Azakenpaullone to the culture medium promoted EOMES expression specific
for trophoblast development. In both studies, the canonical WNT pathway target
gene, TCF1, was not affected. Therefore, we conclude that WNT3 and
membrane-associated ß-catenin promote progenitor trophoblast development in human
blastocysts. These results have important implications in assisted reproduction
and stem cell biology.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26108805  [PubMed - in process]


134. Development. 2015 Jul 1;142(13):2375-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.120493. Epub 2015 Jun
19.

CHD1 acts via the Hmgpi pathway to regulate mouse early embryogenesis.

Suzuki S(1), Nozawa Y(1), Tsukamoto S(2), Kaneko T(3), Manabe I(4), Imai H(1),
Minami N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Animal and Genome Sciences
Section, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba 263-8555, Japan.
(3)Institute of Laboratory Animals, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan oog1nao@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

The protein CHD1 is a member of the family of ATPase-dependent chromatin
remodeling factors. CHD1, which recognizes trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4, has
been implicated in transcriptional activation in organisms ranging from yeast to 
humans. It is required for pre-mRNA maturation, maintenance of mouse embryonic
stem cell pluripotency and rapid growth of the mouse epiblast. However, the
function(s) of CHD1 in mouse preimplantation embryos has not yet been examined.
Here, we show that loss of CHD1 function led to embryonic lethality after
implantation. In mouse embryos in which Chd1 was targeted by siRNA
microinjection, the expression of the key regulators of cell fate specification
Pou5f1 (also known as Oct4), Nanog and Cdx2 was dramatically decreased, starting 
at mid-preimplantation gene activation (MGA). Moreover, expression of Hmgpi and
Klf5, which regulate Pou5f1, Nanog and Cdx2, was also significantly suppressed at
zygotic gene activation (ZGA). Suppression of Hmgpi expression in Chd1-knockdown 
embryos continued until the blastocyst stage, whereas suppression of Klf5
expression was relieved by the morula stage. Next, we rescued HMGPI expression
via Hmgpi mRNA microinjection in Chd1-knockdown embryos. Consequently, Pou5f1,
Nanog and Cdx2 expression was restored at MGA and live offspring were recovered. 
These findings indicate that CHD1 plays important roles in mouse early
embryogenesis via activation of Hmgpi at ZGA.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26092847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Early Hum Dev. 2015 Aug;91(8):483-9. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2015.05.008. Epub 
2015 Jun 11.

Selected vitamin D metabolic gene variants and risk for autism spectrum disorder 
in the CHARGE Study.

Schmidt RJ(1), Hansen RL(2), Hartiala J(3), Allayee H(4), Sconberg JL(5), Schmidt
LC(6), Volk HE(7), Tassone F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California Davis School of
Medicine, Davis, CA, USA; Medical Investigation of Neurodevelopmental Disorders
(M.I.N.D.) Institute, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
Electronic address: rjschmidt@ucdavis.edu. (2)Medical Investigation of
Neurodevelopmental Disorders (M.I.N.D.) Institute, University of California
Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California
Davis School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address:
rlhansen@ucdavis.edu. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. Electronic address: hartiala@usc.edu. (4)Department of Preventive
Medicine, Institute for Genetic Medicine, University of Southern California Keck 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: hallayee@usc.edu.
(5)Graduate Group in Epidemiology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA,
USA. Electronic address: jlsconberg@ucdavis.edu. (6)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Medicine, University of California Davis School of Medicine, Davis,
CA, USA. Electronic address: SchmidtLC@aol.com. (7)Departments of Preventive
Medicine and Pediatrics, Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: hvolk@usc.edu. (8)Medical Investigation of
Neurodevelopmental Disorders (M.I.N.D.) Institute, University of California
Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Davis, CA, USA. Electronic
address: ftassone@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D is essential for proper neurodevelopment and cognitive and 
behavioral function. We examined associations between autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) and common, functional polymorphisms in vitamin D pathways.
METHODS: Children aged 24-60 months enrolled from 2003 to 2009 in the
population-based CHARGE case-control study were evaluated clinically and
confirmed to have ASD (n=474) or typical development (TD, n=281). Maternal,
paternal, and child DNA samples for 384 (81%) families of children with ASD and
234 (83%) families of TD children were genotyped for: TaqI, BsmI, FokI, and Cdx2 
in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, and CYP27B1 rs4646536, GC rs4588, and
CYP2R1 rs10741657. Case-control logistic regression, family-based log-linear, and
hybrid log-linear analyses were conducted to produce risk estimates and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) for each allelic variant.
RESULTS: Paternal VDR TaqI homozygous variant genotype was significantly
associated with ASD in case-control analysis (odds ratio [OR] [CI]: 6.3
[1.9-20.7]) and there was a trend towards increased risk associated with VDR BsmI
(OR [CI]: 4.7 [1.6-13.4]). Log-linear triad analyses detected parental
imprinting, with greater effects of paternally-derived VDR alleles. Child GC
AA-genotype/A-allele was associated with ASD in log-linear and ETDT analyses. A
significant association between decreased ASD risk and child CYP2R1 AA-genotype
was found in hybrid log-linear analysis. There were limitations of low
statistical power for less common alleles due to missing paternal genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides preliminary evidence that paternal and child
vitamin D metabolism could play a role in the etiology of ASD; further research
in larger study populations is warranted.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26073892  [PubMed - in process]


136. Virchows Arch. 2015 Sep;467(3):285-94. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1793-9. Epub 2015 
Jun 13.

Olfactomedin-related proteins 4 (OLFM4) expression is involved in early gastric
carcinogenesis and of prognostic significance in advanced gastric cancer.

Jang BG(1), Lee BL, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jeju National University Hospital, Ara-1-dong, Jeju, 
690-767, Korea.

Olfactomedin 4 (OLFM4) has been demonstrated to be upregulated in various cancers
and involved in many cellular processes such as cell adhesion, apoptosis, and
cell proliferation. In gastric cancer, clinicopathological relevance of OLFM4
expression has been reported. However, there are few studies showing how
expression of OLFM4 evolves during multistep gastric carcinogenesis. In this
study, we investigated OLFM4 expression during gastric carcinogenesis using RNA
in situ hybridization (ISH). We found that OLFM4 expression is absent in normal
gastric mucosa, begins to appear at the isthmus region in gastric glands in
chronic gastritis, and is remarkably increased in intestinal metaplasia (IM).
Interestingly, gastric-type glands around IM frequently expressed OLFM4 before
CDX2 was expressed, suggesting that OLFM4 might be involved in regulating CDX2
expression. However, overexpression of OLFM4 failed to induce CDX2 transcription.
All gastric adenomas were strongly positive for OLFM4. OLFM4 expression was
higher in intestinal type, well to moderately differentiated and early-stage
adenocarcinomas, and decreased in poorly differentiated and advanced-stage
gastric cancer (GC). Although OLFM4 expression had no prognostic value for GC
overall (P = 0.441), it was associated with poor survival of GC in stage II, III,
and IV (P = 0.018), suggesting that OLFM4 expression has prognostic significance 
for late-stage GC. Our findings suggest that OLFM4 is not only involved in early 
stages of gastric carcinogenesis but also a useful prognostic marker for advanced
GC, which is encouraging for further studies exploring OLFM4 as a potential
target for therapy of GC.

PMID: 26070873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biol Reprod. 2015 Aug;93(2):31. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.126474. Epub 2015 Jun
10.

Reduced Gene Dosage of Tfap2c Impairs Trophoblast Lineage Differentiation and
Alters Maternal Blood Spaces in the Mouse Placenta.

Kaiser S(1), Koch Y(1), Kühnel E(1), Sharma N(2), Gellhaus A(1), Kuckenberg P(2),
Schorle H(2), Winterhager E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Department of Developmental Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany elke.winterhager@uk-essen.de.

Tfap2c is required for placental development and trophoblast stem cell
maintenance. Deletion of Tfap2c results in early embryonic loss because of
failure in placental development. We evaluated the effect of reduced Tfap2c
expression on fetal outcome and placental development. Sixty percent of the
heterozygous mice were lost directly after birth. Labyrinthine differentiation
was impaired, as indicated by enhanced proliferation and inclusions of
cobblestone-shaped cell clusters characterized by expression of Tfap2c and
glycogen stores. Moreover, expression of marker genes such as Cdx2, Eomes, Gata3,
and Ascl2 are decreased in the spongiotrophoblast and indicate a lowered stem
cell potential. On Day 18.5 postcoitum, the labyrinth layer of Tfap2c(+/-)
placentas exhibited massive hemorrhages in the maternal blood spaces; these
hemorrhages might have contributed to the significantly reduced number of
live-born pups. These morphological alterations were accompanied by a shift
toward sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells as the cell subpopulation lining the
maternal sinusoids and toward reduction in expression of the prolactin gene
family member Prl2c2, a finding characteristic of the spiral arteries lining
trophoblast cells. The trophoblast stem cells heterozygous for Tfap2c exhibited a
reduction in the expression level of stem cell markers and in their proliferation
and differentiation capacity but did not exhibit changes in marker genes of the
trophoblast giant cell lineage. Taken together, these findings indicate that a
reduction in the gene dosage of placental Tfap2c leads to morphological changes
in the labyrinth at midgestation and in the maternal blood spaces during late
pregnancy.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26063869  [PubMed - in process]


138. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Aug;19(4):249-52. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.05.004. 
Epub 2015 May 21.

The value of SATB2 in the differential diagnosis of intestinal-type mucinous
tumors of the ovary: primary vs metastatic.

Perez Montiel D(1), Arispe Angulo K(1), Cantú-de León D(2), Bornstein Quevedo
L(3), Chanona Vilchis J(1), Herrera Montalvo L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto Nacional de Cancerologia, Mexico City,
Mexico. (2)Dirección de Investigación, Instituto Nacional de Cancerologia, Mexico
City, Mexico. Electronic address: dcantude@gmail.com. (3)Department of Pathology,
Hospital San Angel Inn, Universidad, Mexico City, Mexico. (4)Unidad de
Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, INCan and Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

Primary mucinous adenocarcinomas of the ovary are a diagnostic challenge because 
their histologic and immunohistochemical features usually overlap with metastatic
tumors. SATB2 is a recently identified protein with restricted expression in the 
glandular cells lining the lower gastrointestinal tract. The aim of this study is
to examine the differential expression of SATB2 in primary and metastatic tumors 
of the ovary. Mucinous ovarian tumors of intestinal type were retrieved from the 
pathology files of the Instituto Nacional de Cancerología de México. A double
reading of the hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides was performed to confirm the 
diagnosis, and a detailed review of the clinical chart was performed to define
the primary origin of the tumor (ovarian vs metastatic). Immunohistochemical
staining for CK20, CDX2, and SATB2 was performed and evaluated by 2
gynecopathologists. A total of 106 mucinous tumors were identified, 26 of which
were considered to be metastatic, and 80 of which were primary ovarian tumors.
All of the primary tumors that were not associated with cystic teratomas were
negative for SATB2, and the 4 that were associated with a teratoma were positive 
for SATB2. All 20 of the metastatic tumors of the colon and appendix were
positive for CK20, and 4 were positive for CK7. In addition, all 20 of these
tumors were positive for SATB2, and 19 were positive for CDX2. SATB2 appears to
be a useful marker for the diagnosis of primary vs metastatic mucinous
intestinal-type neoplasms and is highly sensitive in detecting lower
gastrointestinal tract metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26059401  [PubMed - in process]


139. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2015;12:108-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2015.05.031. Epub 2015 
May 29.

Signet ring cell carcinoma of the ampulla of vater: Report of a case and a review
of the literature.

Wakasugi M(1), Tanemura M(2), Furukawa K(2), Murata M(3), Miyazaki M(3), Oshita
M(3), Yoshida K(4), Yasuoka H(4), Akamatsu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka Police Hospital, Osaka, Japan. Electronic
address: wakasugi@oph.gr.jp. (2)Department of Surgery, Osaka Police Hospital,
Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka Police Hospital, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, Osaka Police Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) of the ampulla of vater is a very
rare tumor that is reported infrequently in the literature.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 59-year-old woman visited our hospital for evaluation of 
elevated transaminase levels. On laboratory examination of tumor marker levels,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 levels were
normal, and DUPAN-2 was elevated. Computed tomography (CT) confirmed a 2cm,
enhanced mass in the periampullary region, with marked common bile duct
dilatation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a
swollen papilla of vater, with a reddish, erosive mucosa. Histological
examination of biopsy samples from the ampulla of vater showed signet ring cell
carcinoma (SRCC). The patient underwent radical pancreatoduodenectomy.
Pathological examination showed that the SRCC had infiltrated into the duodenal
muscularis propria and pancreatic parenchyma, and lymph node metastases were
identified around the abdominal aorta and common hepatic artery. Based on the
immunohistochemical staining patterns of the positive results for CDX2 and MUC2, 
the tumor cells in the present case appeared to have an intestinal type origin.
The ampullary cancer was diagnosed as T3bN1M1, Stage IV according to the
International Union Against Cancer TNM classification (UICC). After undergoing
adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin-gemcitabine chemotherapy for 6 months, the
patient has remained disease-free in the 7 months since surgery.
DISCUSSION: SRCC of intestinal-type origin is associated with a favorable
outcome.
CONCLUSION: Investigation to confirm the histological origin of SRCC by
immunohistochemical staining might inform the treatment strategy and identify
patients with ampullary SRCC who may have a good prognosis.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4486405
PMID: 26057354  [PubMed]


140. Cancer Sci. 2015 Aug;106(8):951-8. doi: 10.1111/cas.12706. Epub 2015 Jul 7.

Clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics of gastric cancer showing gastric
and intestinal mucin phenotype.

Oue N(1), Sentani K(1), Sakamoto N(1), Yasui W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Gastric cancer (GC), one of the most common human cancers, can be classified into
gastric or intestinal phenotype according to mucin expression. TP53 mutation,
allelic deletion of the APC gene and nuclear staining of ß-catenin are frequently
detected in the intestinal phenotype of GC, whereas CDH1 gene mutation,
microsatellite instability and DNA hypermethylation of MLH1 are common events in 
the gastric phenotype of GC. Our Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) and
Escherichia coli ampicillin secretion trap (CAST) analyses revealed that CDH17,
REG4, OLFM4, HOXA10, DSC2, TSPAN8 and TM9SF3 are upregulated in GC and that
CLDN18 is downregulated in GC. Expression of CDH17, REG4, HOXA10 and DSC2 and
downregulation of CLDN18 are observed in the intestinal phenotype of GC. In
contrast, OLFM4 is expressed in the gastric phenotype of GC. Expression of
TSPAN8, TM9SF3 and HER2 are not associated with either gastric or intestinal
phenotypes. Ectopic CDX2 expression plays a key function in the GC intestinal
phenotype. MUC2, CDH17, REG4, DSC2 and ABCB1 are direct targets of CDX2.
Importantly, these genes encode transmembrane/secretory proteins, indicating that
the microenvironment as well as cancer cells are also different between gastric
and intestinal phenotypes of GC.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4556382
PMID: 26033320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Tsitol Genet. 2015 Mar-Apr;49(2):42-7.

[Role of transcription factors in transdifferentiation of the gastric mucosa].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Vernygorodskyi SV, Degtiariova LV, Iatsyna OI, Blume YB, Yemets AI.

The analysis of intestinal differentiation transcription factor CDX2 in the
gastric mucosa biopsies has been carried out. It was established that CDX2 by
itself promoter activation pathway can obtain intestinal phenotype for gastric
mucosa cells. The loss of CDX2 expression in the nuclei of metaplastic epithelium
may serve as a predictor of gastric mucosa malignization.

PMID: 26030973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Jun;139(6):791-5. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0249-OA.

HepPar-1 and Arginase-1 Immunohistochemistry in Adenocarcinoma of the Small
Intestine and Ampullary Region.

Lagana S(1), Hsiao S, Bao F, Sepulveda A, Moreira R, Lefkowitch J, Remotti H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, New York Presbyterian
Hospital-Columbia University, New York (Drs Lagana, Hsiao, Sepulveda, Lefkowitch,
and Remotti); the Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Dr Hsaio); the Department of Pathology, Scripps
Clinic, San Diego, California (Dr Bao); and the Department of Pathology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (Dr Moreira).

CONTEXT :HepPar-1 and Arginase-1 are urea cycle enzymes used to distinguish
hepatocellular carcinoma from other carcinomas. HepPar-1, but not Arginase-1, is 
known to be immunoreactive with normal human small intestine.OBJECTIVES: To
better define and compare the immunohistochemical staining patterns of HepPar-1
and Arginase-1 in adenocarcinomas arising in the small intestine, including the
ampullary region.
DESIGN: Staining for HepPar-1 and Arginase-1 was performed on 20 nonampullary
small intestinal adenocarcinomas and 32 adenocarcinomas from the ampullary
region. Ampullary adenocarcinomas were divided into intestinal morphology (15),
pancreatobiliary morphology (14), and unclassifiable (3). Nonneoplastic small
intestinal mucosa and colorectal adenocarcinomas were used as control groups.
RESULTS: HepPar-1 stained 12 of 20 nonampullary small intestinal adenocarcinomas,
with a median of 63% of cells staining in positive cases. It also stained 11 of
15 ampullary carcinomas with intestinal morphology, with a median of 75% of cells
staining in positive cases. Two of 14 ampullary carcinomas with pancreatobiliary 
morphology were positive for HepPar-1. Arginase-1 showed positivity in 2
ampullary region carcinomas and diffuse positivity in 1 duodenal adenocarcinoma. 
Two of 22 colorectal carcinomas stained for HepPar-1 with none positive for
Arginase-1.
CONCLUSIONS: HepPar-1, but not Arginase-1, usually shows positivity in small
intestinal adenocarcinomas and ampullary adenocarcinomas with intestinal
morphology, but only rarely shows positivity in ampullary adenocarcinomas with
pancreatobiliary morphology. HepPar-1 positivity in metastatic adenocarcinoma
with intestinal morphology is suggestive of an upper gastrointestinal primary
site.

PMID: 26030248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Hepatol. 2015 Oct;63(4):934-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.05.013. Epub 2015 May 
25.

Gene networks and transcription factor motifs defining the differentiation of
stem cells into hepatocyte-like cells.

Godoy P(1), Schmidt-Heck W(2), Natarajan K(3), Lucendo-Villarin B(4), Szkolnicka 
D(4), Asplund A(5), Björquist P(6), Widera A(7), Stöber R(7), Campos G(7), Hammad
S(7), Sachinidis A(3), Chaudhari U(3), Damm G(8), Weiss TS(9), Nüssler A(10),
Synnergren J(11), Edlund K(7), Küppers-Munther B(12), Hay DC(13), Hengstler
JG(14).

Author information: 
(1)IfADo-Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors at the
Technical University Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany; Department of Physiology,
Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Concepción, Chile. (2)Leibniz
Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology eV-Hans-Knöll
Institute, Jena, Germany. (3)University of Cologne, Institute of Neurophysiology 
and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Robert-Koch-Str. 39, 50931
Cologne, Germany. (4)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, United Kingdom. (5)Takara Bio Europe AB (former
Cellartis AB), Arvid Wallgrens Backe 20, 41346 Gothenburg, Sweden; Systems
Biology Research Center, School of Bioscience, University of Skövde, Sweden.
(6)NovaHep AB, Arvid Wallgrens Backe 20, 41346 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)IfADo-Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors at the
Technical University Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany. (8)Charité University Medicine 
Berlin, Department of General-, Visceral- and Transplantation Surgery, D13353
Berlin, Germany. (9)Center for Liver Cell Research, Department of Pediatrics and 
Juvenile Medicine, University of Regensburg Hospital, Regensburg, Germany.
(10)Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, BG Trauma Center, Siegfried Weller
Institut, D72076 Tübingen, Germany. (11)Systems Biology Research Center, School
of Bioscience, University of Skövde, Sweden. (12)Takara Bio Europe AB (former
Cellartis AB), Arvid Wallgrens Backe 20, 41346 Gothenburg, Sweden. (13)MRC Centre
for Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: davehay@talktalk.net. (14)IfADo-Leibniz Research
Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors at the Technical University
Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany. Electronic address: Hengstler@ifado.de.

Comment in
    Arch Toxicol. 2015 Nov;89(11):2185-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The differentiation of stem cells to hepatocyte-like cells
(HLC) offers the perspective of unlimited supply of human hepatocytes. However,
the degree of differentiation of HLC remains controversial. To obtain an unbiased
characterization, we performed a transcriptomic study with HLC derived from human
embryonic and induced stem cells (ESC, hiPSC) from three different laboratories.
METHODS: Genome-wide gene expression profiles of ESC and HLC were compared to
freshly isolated and up to 14days cultivated primary human hepatocytes. Gene
networks representing successful and failed hepatocyte differentiation, and the
transcription factors involved in their regulation were identified.
RESULTS: Gene regulatory network analysis demonstrated that HLC represent a mixed
cell type with features of liver, intestine, fibroblast and stem cells. The
"unwanted" intestinal features were associated with KLF5 and CDX2 transcriptional
networks. Cluster analysis identified highly correlated groups of genes
associated with mature liver functions (n=1057) and downregulated proliferation
associated genes (n=1562) that approach levels of primary hepatocytes. However,
three further clusters containing 447, 101, and 505 genes failed to reach levels 
of hepatocytes. Key TF of two of these clusters include SOX11, FOXQ1, and YBX3.
The third unsuccessful cluster, controlled by HNF1, CAR, FXR, and PXR, strongly
overlaps with genes repressed in cultivated hepatocytes compared to freshly
isolated hepatocytes, suggesting that current in vitro conditions lack stimuli
required to maintain gene expression in hepatocytes, which consequently also
explains a corresponding deficiency of HLC.
CONCLUSIONS: The present gene regulatory network approach identifies key
transcription factors which require modulation to improve HLC differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4580233
PMID: 26022688  [PubMed - in process]


144. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2015 Jun;44(2):233-47. doi:
10.1016/j.gtc.2015.02.002. Epub 2015 Mar 29.

Molecular pathogenesis of Barrett esophagus: current evidence.

Krishnadath KK(1), Wang KK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
k.k.krishnadath@amc.uva.nl. (2)Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinics, Rochester, MN,
USA.

This article focuses on recent findings on the molecular mechanisms involved in
esophageal columnar metaplasia. Signaling pathways and their downstream targets
activate specific transcription factors leading to the expression of columnar and
the more specific intestinal-type of genes, which gives rise to Barrett
metaplasia. Several animal models have been generated to validate and study these
distinct molecular pathways but also to identify the Barrett progenitor cell.
Currently, the many aspects involved in the development of esophageal metaplasia 
that have been elucidated can serve to develop novel molecular therapies to
improve treatment or prevent metaplasia. Nevertheless, several key events are
still poorly understood and require further investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26021192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 May;35(5):728-32.

[Expressions of CDX2 and ß-catenin and their correlation in acute myeloid
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang W(1), Meng C, Liu J, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology, Guangdong Medical University, Zhanjiang 524000,
China.E-mail: 532723336@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of CDX2 and ß-catenin and their
correlation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
METHODS: Real-time PCR was used to examine the expressions of CDX2 and ß-catenin 
mRNA in 92 de novo AML and 30 non-malignant patients (control), and Western blot 
was employed to detect CDX2 and ß-catenin protein expressions in 26 de novo AML
and 8 non-malignant patients.
RESULTS: The positivity rates of CDX2 mRNA and protein expressions in AML group
were 84.78% and 76.92%, respectively, but no CDX2 mRNA or protein expression were
detected in control group (P<0.01). The expressions of ß-catenin mRNA and protein
were detected in all the patients in both groups but its expressions in AML group
were significantly higher (P<0.01). The expressions of CDX2 and ß-catenin mRNA
were significantly correlated with WBC counts and LDH levels (P<0.01). The
expression of CDX2 mRNA was not detected and the expression of ß-catenin mRNA was
decreased to normal level in AML patients with complete remission, while the
expressions of CDX2 and ß-catenin mRNA were increased again in those with disease
relapse. There were significantly positive correlations between CDX2 and
ß-catenin expressions at both mRNA and protein levels (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of CDX2 gene and activation of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway
co-exist in AML patients and the expressions of CDX2 and ß-catenin are positively
correlated.

PMID: 26018272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 10;290(28):17293-305. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.632109. Epub
2015 May 26.

Structure-Function Analysis of the Drosophila melanogaster Caudal Transcription
Factor Provides Insights into Core Promoter-preferential Activation.

Shir-Shapira H(1), Sharabany J(1), Filderman M(1), Ideses D(1), Ovadia-Shochat
A(1), Mannervik M(2), Juven-Gershon T(3).

Author information: 
(1)From The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel and. (2)The Wenner-Gren Institute,
Developmental Biology, Stockholm University, Arrhenius Laboratories E3, SE-106 91
Stockholm, Sweden. (3)From The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences,
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel and tamar.gershon@biu.ac.il.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 21;290(34):20747.

Regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription is critical for the proper
development, differentiation, and growth of an organism. The RNA polymerase II
core promoter is the ultimate target of a multitude of transcription factors that
control transcription initiation. Core promoters encompass the RNA start site and
consist of functional elements such as the TATA box, initiator, and downstream
core promoter element (DPE), which confer specific properties to the core
promoter. We have previously discovered that Drosophila Caudal, which is a master
regulator of genes involved in development and differentiation, is a DPE-specific
transcriptional activator. Here, we show that the mouse Caudal-related homeobox
(Cdx) proteins (mCdx1, mCdx2, and mCdx4) are also preferential core promoter
transcriptional activators. To elucidate the mechanism that enables Caudal to
preferentially activate DPE transcription, we performed structure-function
analysis. Using a systematic series of deletion mutants (all containing the
intact DNA-binding homeodomain) we discovered that the C-terminal region of
Caudal contributes to the preferential activation of the fushi tarazu (ftz)
Caudal target gene. Furthermore, the region containing both the homeodomain and
the C terminus of Caudal was sufficient to confer core promoter-preferential
activation to the heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain. Importantly, we
discovered that Drosophila CREB-binding protein (dCBP) is a co-activator for
Caudal-regulated activation of ftz. Strikingly, dCBP conferred the ability to
preferentially activate the DPE-dependent ftz reporter to mini-Caudal proteins
that were unable to preferentially activate ftz transcription themselves. Taken
together, it is the unique combination of dCBP and Caudal that enables the
co-activation of ftz in a core promoter-preferential manner.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4498068 [Available on 2016-07-10]
PMID: 26018075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cytotechnology. 2015 May 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Both BMP4 and serum have significant roles in differentiation of embryonic stem
cells to primitive and definitive endoderm.

Taha MF(1), Javeri A, Majidizadeh T, Valojerdi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Shahrak-e-Pajoohesh, 15th Km, Tehran-Karaj Highway,
P.O. Box 14965-161, Tehran, Iran, mftaha@nigeb.ac.ir.

Differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells is a heterogeneous process which is 
influenced by different parameters, including growth and differentiation factors.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of bone morphogenetic 
protein-4 (BMP4) signaling on differentiation of mouse ES cells to endodermal
lineages. For this purpose, differentiation of the ES cells was induced by
embryoid body (EB) formation through hanging drop method. During the suspension
stage, EBs were treated with BMP4 in a medium containing either fetal bovine
serum (FBS) or knockout serum replacement (KoSR). After plating, EBs showed
differentiation to a heterogeneous population of specialized cell types. Two
weeks after plating, all the experimental groups expressed three germ layer
markers and some primitive and definitive endoderm-specific genes. Quantitative
real-time PCR analysis showed higher expression levels of Sox17, Pdx1, Cdx2 and
Villin mRNAs in the KoSR plus BMP4 condition and higher Gata4 and Afp expression 
levels in the FBS plus BMP4 condition. Formation of visceral endoderm and
derivatives of definitive endoderm was detected in the BMP4 treated EBs. In
conclusion, we demonstrated that both BMP4 signaling and serum composition have
significant roles in differentiation of mouse ES cells towards endodermal
lineages.

PMID: 26008149  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


148. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):3409-15. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3838. Epub 2015 May
25.

Overexpression of caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 inhibits the
growth of transplanted colorectal tumors in nude mice.

Zheng JB(1), Qiao LN(1), Sun XJ(1), Qi J(2), Ren HL(3), Wei GB(1), Zhou PH(1),
Yao JF(1), Zhang L(1), Jia PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (2)Second
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital,
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710068, P.R. China. (3)Department of General Surgery, The Third
Hospital of Chengdu, Chengdu, Sichuan 610031, P.R. China.

Caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is a transcription factor, 
which is specifically expressed in the adult intestine. It is essential for the
development and homeostasis of the intestinal epithelium and its functions as a
tumor suppressor have been demonstrated in the adult colon. The present study
aimed to examine the inhibitory effects of the overexpression of CDX2 on
subcutaneously-transplanted tumors, derived from LoVo colon cancer cells, in nude
mice, and to provide experimental evidence for the biotherapy of colon cancer. A 
pEGFP-C1-CDX2 eukaryotic expression vector was transfected into the LoVo cells
via lipofection, and LoVo cells stably-expressing CDX2 (pEGFP-C1-CDX2 cells) were
obtained using G418 selection. A nude mouse subcutaneously-transplanted tumor
model was established by inoculating the nude mice with the pEGFP-C1-CDX2 cells, 
and the effects of overexpression of CDX2 on transplanted tumor growth in the
LoVo cells were observed. Western blotting results demonstrated that the protein 
expression of CDX2 in the LoVo cells was higher in the pEGFP-C1-CDX2 cell group, 
compared with that in the pEGFP-C1 cell group and the untreated cell group. At 20
days post-inoculation with either pEGFP-C1-CDX2 or pEGFP-C1, the transplanted
tumor masses were significantly lower in the pEGFP-C1-CDX2 group, compared with
those in the pEGFP-C1 and untreated groups. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
the expression levels of CDX2 and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) were
detected in each group, and the protein expression of CDX2 was increased in the
tumor tissues from the nude mice in the pEGFP-C1-CDX2 group. However the
expression of MMP-2 was downregulated in the tumor tissues of the nude mice in
the pEGFP-C1-CDX2 group. Taken together, these data suggested that pEGFP-C1-CDX2 
cells exhibited suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Overexpression of CDX2 was
observed in transplanted tumors in the pEGFP-C1-CDX2 group, and the gene
expression of MMP-2 was reduced. These results indicate that CDX2 inhibited the
growth of colorectal tumor cells, possibly by downregulating the gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4526061
PMID: 26005051  [PubMed - in process]


149. Theriogenology. 2015 Sep 1;84(4):509-23. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.04.008. Epub 2015 Apr 24.

Quality improvement of transgenic cloned bovine embryos using an aggregation
method: Effects on cell number, cell ratio, embryo perimeter, mitochondrial
distribution, and gene expression profile.

Bang JI(1), Jin JI(2), Ghanem N(3), Choi BH(2), Fakruzzaman M(2), Ha AN(2), Lee
KL(2), Uhm SJ(4), Ko DH(4), Koo BC(5), Lee JG(1), Kong IK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agriculture and Life Science, Gyeongsang National University,
Jinju, Republic of Korea; Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life 
Science (BK21 Plus), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 Plus),
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea. (3)Animal Production
Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt. (4)Department 
of Animal Science and Biotechnology, Industrial Education Field, Sangji Youngseo 
College, Wonju, South Korea. (5)Department of Physiology, Catholic University of 
Daegu School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (6)Institute of Agriculture
and Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea;
Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 Plus),
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
ikong7900@gmail.com.

The production of cloned embryos using conventional methods has extremely low
success rates owing to low embryo quality. To improve the quality of cloned
bovine embryos expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), we applied
an aggregation culture method. The EGFP gene was transfected into bovine fetal
fibroblasts using a retroviral vector system. Somatic cell nuclear transfer was
performed using these cells, and the resulting embryos were cultured in
aggregates or individually. Gene expression was analyzed by a microarray, and
differentially expressed genes were validated by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The total number of cells per blastocyst and the ratio
of inner cell mass cells to trophectoderm cells were higher in aggregated
transgenic cloned blastocysts (agBL; 368.7 ± 109.6 and 1:4.8, respectively) than 
in in vitro-fertilized blastocysts (ivfBL; 189.8 ± 65.8 and 1:2.6, respectively) 
and nonaggregated transgenic cloned blastocysts (sBL; 113.1 ± 36.3 and 1:1.5,
respectively; P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively). Moreover, the blastocyst
perimeter was larger in the agBL group than in the ivfBL and sBL groups
(1168.8 ± 200.23 vs. 887.33 ± 187.62 and 678 ± 226.1 µm; P < 0.05). In addition, 
mitochondrial fluorescence intensity was higher in the agBL group than in the
ivfBL and sBL groups (P < 0.05). The number of apoptotic cells per blastocyst was
lower in the ivfBL and agBL groups than in the sBL group (3.7 ± 2.2 and 3.4 ± 2.1
vs. 6.7 ± 6.8; P < 0.05). The genes identified in the microarray belonged to 18
categories. Expression of the Krüppel-like factor 4 gene, which is associated
with cell proliferation, development, and transcription, was 7.2-fold higher in
the agBL group than in the ivfBL group (P < 0.05) but did not differ between the 
sBL and ivfBL groups (P > 0.05). Expression of the heat shock 70-kDa protein 1A
gene, which is associated with apoptosis, was 12-fold higher in the sBL group
than in the ivfBL and agBL groups (P < 0.05). Expression of a stemness-related
gene (octamer-binding transcription factor 4) and trophectoderm-specific genes
(homeobox protein CDX2 and keratin 18) was higher in the agBL group than in the
sBL group (P < 0.05). However, expression of the stemness gene homeobox protein
NANOG did not differ among the groups (P > 0.05). Taken together, these data
suggest that the aggregation method improves the quality of cloned embryos
expressing EGFP and might be helpful in animal cloning.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25998272  [PubMed - in process]


150. PLoS One. 2015 May 21;10(5):e0127300. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127300.
eCollection 2015.

Intestinal Stem Cell Markers in the Intestinal Metaplasia of Stomach and
Barrett's Esophagus.

Jang BG(1), Lee BL(2), Kim WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jeju National University Hospital, Jeju, South Korea.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Gastric intestinal metaplasia (IM) is a highly prevalent preneoplastic lesion;
however, the molecular mechanisms regulating its development remain unclear. We
have previously shown that a population of cells expressing the intestinal stem
cell (ISC) marker LGR5 increases remarkably in IM. In this study, we further
investigated the molecular characteristics of these LGR5+ cells in IM by
examining the expression profile of several ISC markers. Notably, we found that
ISC markers-including OLFM4 and EPHB2-are positively associated with the CDX2
expression in non-tumorous gastric tissues. This finding was confirmed in stomach
lesions with or without metaplasia, which demonstrated that OLFM4 and EPHB2
expression gradually increased with metaplastic progression. Moreover, RNA in
situ hybridization revealed that LGR5+ cells coexpress several ISC markers and
remained confined to the base of metaplastic glands, reminiscent to that of
normal intestinal crypts, whereas those in normal antral glands expressed none of
these markers. Furthermore, a large number of ISC marker-expressing cells were
diffusely distributed in gastric adenomas, suggesting that these markers may
facilitate gastric tumorigenesis. In addition, Barrett's esophagus (BE)-which is 
histologically similar to intestinal metaplasia-exhibited a similar distribution 
of ISC markers, indicating the presence of a stem cell population with intestinal
differentiation potential. In conclusion, we identified that LGR5+ cells in
gastric IM and BE coexpress ISC markers, and exhibit the same expression profile 
as those found in normal intestinal crypts. Taken together, these results
implicate an intestinal-like stem cell population in the pathogenesis of IM, and 
provide an important basis for understanding the development and maintenance of
this disease.

PMCID: PMC4440782
PMID: 25996368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;23(5):388-92. doi: 10.1177/1066896915586254. Epub
2015 May 19.

Ovarian Small Cell Carcinoma of Pulmonary Type Arising in Mature Cystic Teratomas
With Metastases to the Contralateral Ovary.

Rubio A(1), Schuldt M(2), Chamorro C(3), Crespo-Lora V(3), Nogales FF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Badajoz, Badajoz, Spain. (2)Hospital
Jose Carrasco Arteaga del IESS, Cuenca, Republic of Ecuador. (3)San Cecilio
University Hospital, University of Granada, Granada, Spain. (4)San Cecilio
University Hospital, University of Granada, Granada, Spain fnogales@ugr.es.

A bilateral small cell ovarian carcinoma pulmonary-type (SCCOPT), arising in
bilateral mature cystic teratomas (MCTs) presented as stage IIIB in a 37-year-old
woman. Microscopically, tumor nests were related to the dermoid protuberance and 
expressed pancytokeratin, EMA, CD56, chromogranin A, NSE, synaptophysin, and
SOX2. SALL4 was also focally positive. CDX2, TTF1, PAX8, CK7, CK20, and several
neuroendocrine gut hormones were negative. Serum NSE was elevated. This case
represents a SCCOPT arising in an MCT in the right ovary with metastasis to the
left one also containing a synchronous MCT. Surface implants and lymphovascular
invasion suggested metastasis from the right ovarian SCCOPT and excluded a
metastatic origin from usual locations of small cell carcinoma (SCC). SCCOPT is
morphologically identical to SCC elsewhere, even sharing NSE serum elevation.
Although the tumor was closely related to teratomatous mature tissues, a complex 
immunohistochemical panel failed to provide a tissue of origin.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25990936  [PubMed - in process]


152. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jun 30;113(1):64-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.172. Epub 2015 May
19.

Validation of histomolecular classification utilizing histological subtype, MUC1,
and CDX2 for prognostication of resected ampullary adenocarcinoma.

Schueneman A(1), Goggins M(2), Ensor J(3), Saka B(4), Neishaboori N(5), Lee S(5),
Maitra A(5), Varadhachary G(6), Rezaee N(7), Wolfgang C(7), Adsay V(4), Wang
H(5), Overman MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Medicine, Department of Graduate Medical Education, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)1] Department of Pathology, Johns
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA [3] Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. (5)Division of Pathology/Lab Medicine, Department of 
Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (6)Division of Cancer
Medicine, Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Outcomes for ampullary adenocarcinomas are heterogeneous, and
numerous methods of categorisation exist. A histomolecular phenotype based on
histology, caudal-type homeodomain transcription factor 2 (CDX2) staining and
Mucin 1 (MUC1) staining has recently been tested and validated in two cohorts. We
attempt to validate this classification in a large patient population.
METHODS: Tissue samples from 163 patients with resected ampullary adenocarcinoma 
were classified based on histology and immunohistochemical expression of CDX2 and
MUC1. A pancreaticobiliary histomolecular classification (PB) was defined as a
sample with pancreaticobiliary histology, positive MUC1 and negative CDX2
expression.
RESULTS: There were 82 deaths; median follow-up of 32.4 months; and median
overall survival of 87.7 (95% CI 42.9-109.5) months. PB comprised 28.2% of the
cases. Factors associated with overall survival were histological subtype
(P=0.0340); T1/2 vs T3/4 (P=0.001); perineural (P<0.0001) and lymphovascular
(P=0.0203) invasion; and histomolecular intestinal histomolecular phenotype (INT)
vs PB phenotype (106.4 vs 21.2 months, P<0.0001). Neither MUC1 nor CDX2 was
statistically significant, although MUC1 positivity defined as <U+2A7E>10% staining was 
significant (P=0.0023). In multivariate analysis, age (HR 1.03), PB phenotype (HR
2.26) and perineural invasion (PNI; HR 2.26) were associated with poor survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The prognostic ability of histomolecular phenotype has been
validated in an independent cohort of ampullary adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC4647538 [Available on 2016-06-30]
PMID: 25989273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 May 19. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12215. [Epub ahead of print]

Blastomeres aggregation as an efficient alternative for trophoblast culture from 
porcine parthenogenetic embryos.

Saadeldin IM(1,)(2), Kim SJ(1), Lee BC(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and the Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University,
Seoul, 151-742, Korea. (2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 44519, Egypt. (3)Designed Animal and
Transplantation, Institute of Green Bio Science Technology, Seoul National
University, Pyeongchang, 232-916, Korea.

Zona pellucida free (ZPF) oocytes were cultured after electrical activation to
allow blastomeres aggregation and compared to ZP intact (ZPI) oocytes. In
feeder-dependent conditions, the trophoblast attachment and primary outgrowths
were significantly higher in ZPF than in ZPI groups. In feeder-free conditions,
trophoblast attachment and typical morphological trophoblast primary outgrowths
were observed in ZPF group. The primary colonies derived from the ZPF embryos in 
both culture conditions were able to establish secondary and tertiary colonies
and showed mRNA expression of CDX2, TEAD4 and KRT8 as trophoblast markers, while 
outgrowths from the ZPI embryos could not grow beyond primary colonies.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 25988391  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


154. Gut. 2015 May 18. pii: gutjnl-2015-309272. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309272. [Epub
ahead of print]

In oesophageal squamous cells, nitric oxide causes S-nitrosylation of Akt and
blocks SOX2 (sex determining region Y-box 2) expression.

Asanuma K(1), Huo X(2), Agoston A(3), Zhang X(2), Yu C(2), Cheng E(4), Zhang
Q(2), Dunbar KB(2), Pham TH(5), Wang DH(6), Iijima K(7), Shimosegawa T(7), Odze
RD(3), Spechler SJ(6), Souza RF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Esophageal Diseases Center, VA North Texas Health Care System and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Departments
of Medicine, VA North Texas Health Care System and the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Division of Gastroenterology,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(2)Esophageal Diseases Center, VA North Texas Health Care System and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Departments
of Medicine, VA North Texas Health Care System and the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (4)Esophageal Diseases Center, VA North Texas Health Care System and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Medical Center and the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (5)Esophageal Diseases Center, VA North Texas
Health Care System and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA Department of Surgery, VA North Texas Health Care System and
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(6)Esophageal Diseases Center, VA North Texas Health Care System and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Departments
of Medicine, VA North Texas Health Care System and the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA The Harold C. Simmons
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA. (7)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Barrett's metaplasia might develop if GORD causes oesophageal squamous
cells to convert into columnar cells. Acid and bile exposures upregulate columnar
differentiation genes like CDX2 in oesophageal squamous cells, but it is not
known if such exposures downregulate squamous differentiation genes like SOX2. In
addition to acid and bile, patients with GORD also have high oesophageal
concentrations of nitric oxide (NO). This study aims to determine how acid, bile 
salts and NO affect genes that influence oesophageal cell phenotype.
DESIGN: Oesophageal squamous cells from patients with Barrett's oesophagus were
exposed to acidic bile salts or NOC-9 (an NO donor). SOX2, p63 (squamous
transcription factor) and CDX2 mRNAs were measured by quantitative RT-PCR. SOX2
and its regulatory Akt pathway proteins were evaluated by western blotting.
S-nitrosylation by NO was blocked by dithiothreitol. Immunohistochemistry for
SOX2 was performed on the oesophagus of rats with surgically induced GORD which
were fed diets with and without nitrite supplementation.
RESULTS: In oesophageal squamous cells, NO profoundly decreased SOX2 protein and 
caused a significantly greater decrease in SOX2 mRNA than did acidic bile salts. 
NO also decreased p63 and increased CDX2 expression. NO caused S-nitrosylation of
Akt, blocking its phosphorylation. Akt pathway inhibition by LY294002 or Akt
siRNA reduced SOX2 mRNA. Rats fed with nitrite-supplemented diets exhibited
weaker SOX2 oesophageal staining than rats fed with normal diets.
CONCLUSIONS: In oesophageal squamous cells, NO blocks SOX2 expression through Akt
S-nitrosylation. NO also increases CDX2 and decreases p63 expression. By
triggering molecular events preventing squamous differentiation while promoting
intestinal differentiation, NO might contribute to Barrett's pathogenesis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4651671 [Available on 2016-11-18]
PMID: 25986942  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


155. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2015;50(10):1241-52. doi: 10.3109/00365521.2015.1038849.
Epub 2015 May 15.

The guanylate cyclase-C signaling pathway is down-regulated in inflammatory bowel
disease.

Brenna Ø(1), Bruland T, Furnes MW, Granlund Av, Drozdov I, Emgård J, Brønstad G, 
Kidd M, Sandvik AK, Gustafsson BI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim
University Hospital , Trondheim , Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Activation of membrane receptor guanylate cyclase-C (GC-C) is
implicated in gastrointestinal fluid and electrolyte balance, preservation of
intestinal barrier integrity, anti-trophic effects and inhibition of pain
sensation. To evaluate GC-C signaling, we examined the regulation of GC-C
(GUCY2C/Gucy2c) and its endogenous ligands guanylin (GN/GUCA2A/Guca2a) and
uroguanylin (UGN/GUCA2B/Guca2b) in colonic Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative
colitis (UC) and in rats with 2,4,6-Trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid (TNBS)
colitis. Correlation analyses between expression of GUCA2A and GUCY2C and
expression of inflammatory cytokines (IL1A, IL1B, TNFA and IFNG) were conducted. 
Additionally, expression of transcription factors for GUCA2A and GUCY2C, and the 
GC-C signaling pathway, were examined.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Biopsies from active UC/CD, un-inflamed UC/CD and healthy
controls, and inflamed and healthy rat colon were investigated with gene
expression microarray, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization
(ISH).
RESULTS: GUCA2A/Guca2a, GUCA2B, GUCY2C/Gucy2c, transcription factors, as well as 
several cyclic guanosine-3',5'-monophosphate downstream mediators were all
significantly down-regulated in both inflamed colonic inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD) mucosa and TNBS colitis. Expression of GUCA2A and GUCY2C negatively
correlated to expression of inflammatory cytokines. IHC and ISH confirmed
microarray results for GUCA2A/Guca2a and GUCY2C/Gucy2c in inflamed samples. We
identified a highly significant positive correlation between the expression of
the transcription factor caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and the expression of the 
downstream target gene GUCY2C.
CONCLUSIONS: GUCA2A, GUCA2B and GUCY2C as well as several steps of the GC-C
signaling pathway are down-regulated in IBD. This may have implications in IBD
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4673555
PMID: 25979109  [PubMed - in process]


156. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):1384-92. eCollection 2015.

Bile acids but not acidic acids induce Barrett's esophagus.

Sun D(1), Wang X(2), Gai Z(3), Song X(1), Jia X(4), Tian H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong University
Jinan, Peoples R China. (2)Department of Pathology, Qi Lu Hospital, Shandong
University Jinan, Peoples R China. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich Switzerland. (4)Department of Endoscopy,
Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong University Jinan, Peoples R China. (5)Department of
Thoracic Surgery, Qi Lu Hospital, Shandong University Jinan, Peoples R China.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is associated with the development of esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). Bile acids (BAs) refluxing into the esophagus contribute to
esophageal injury, which results in BE and subsequent EAC. We developed two
animal models to test the role of BAs in the pathogenesis of BE. We surgically
generated BA reflux, with or without gastric acid, in rats. In a second
experiment, we fed animals separately with BAs and gastric acid. Pathologic
changes were examined and the expression of Muc2 and Cdx2 in BE tissue was tested
by immunostaining. Inflammatory factors in the plasma, as well as differentiation
genes in BE were examined through highly sensitive ELISA and semi-quantitative
RT-PCR techniques. We found that BAs are sufficient for the induction of
esophagitis and Barrett's-like metaplasia in the esophagus. Overexpression of
inflammatory cells, IL-6, and TNF-a was observed both in animals fed with BAs and
surgically generated BA reflux. Furthermore, elevated levels of Cdx2, Muc2, Bmp4,
Kit19, and Tff2 (differentiation genes in BE) were found in BA-treated rats. In
conclusion, BAs, but not gastric acid, are a major causative factor for BE. We
confirmed that BAs contribute to the development of BE by inducing the
inflammatory response in the esophagus. Inhibiting BAs may be a promising therapy
for BE.

PMCID: PMC4396229
PMID: 25973022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;843:77-128. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2480-6_4.

Molecular biology of the stress response in the early embryo and its stem cells.

Puscheck EE(1), Awonuga AO, Yang Y, Jiang Z, Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ob/Gyn, REI Division, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Stress is normal during early embryogenesis and transient, elevated stress is
commonplace. Stress in the milieu of the peri-implantation embryo is a summation 
of maternal hormones, and other elements of the maternal milieu, that signal
preparedness for development and implantation. Examples discussed here are
leptin, adrenaline, cortisol, and progesterone. These hormones signal maternal
nutritional status and provide energy, but also signal stress that diverts
maternal and embryonic energy from an optimal embryonic developmental trajectory.
These hormones communicate endocrine maternal effects and local embryonic effects
although signaling mechanisms are not well understood. Other in vivo stresses
affect the embryo such as local infection and inflammation, hypoxia,
environmental toxins such as benzopyrene, dioxin, or metals, heat shock, and
hyperosmotic stress due to dehydration or diabetes. In vitro, stresses include
shear during handling, improper culture media and oxygen levels,
cryopreservation, and manipulations of the embryo to introduce sperm or
mitochondria. We define stress as any stimulus that slows stem cell accumulation 
or diminishes the ability of cells to produce normal and sufficient parenchymal
products upon differentiation. Thus stress deflects downwards the normal
trajectories of development, growth and differentiation. Typically stress is
inversely proportional to embryonic developmental and proliferative rates, but
can be proportional to induction of differentiation of stem cells in the
peri-implantation embryo. When modeling stress it is most interesting to produce 
a 'runting model' where stress exposures slow accumulation but do not create
excessive apoptosis or morbidity. Windows of stress sensitivity may occur when
major new embryonic developmental programs require large amounts of energy and
are exacerbated if nutritional flow decreases and removes energy from the normal 
developmental programs and stress responses. These windows correspond to zygotic 
genome activation, the large mRNA program initiated at compaction, ion pumping
required for cavitation, the differentiation of the first lineages, integration
with the uterine environment at implantation, rapid proliferation of stem cells, 
and production of certain lineages which require the highest energy and are most 
sensitive to mitochondrial inhibition. Stress response mechanisms insure that
stem cells for the early embryo and placenta survive at lower stress exposures,
and that the organism survives through compensatory and prioritized stem cell
differentiation, at higher stress exposures. These servomechanisms include a
small set of stress enzymes from the 500 protein kinases in the kinome; the part 
of the genome coding for protein kinases that hierarchically regulate the
activity of other proteins and enzymes. Important protein kinases that mediate
the stress response of embryos and their stem cells are SAPK, p38MAPK, AMPK,
PI3K, Akt, MEK1/2, MEKK4, PKA, IRE1 and PERK. These stress enzymes have cytosolic
function in cell survival at low stress exposures and nuclear function in
modifying transcription factor activity at higher stress exposures. Some of the
transcription factors (TFs) that are most important in the stress response are
JunC, JunB, MAPKAPs, ATF4, XBP1, Oct1, Oct4, HIFs, Nrf2/KEAP, NFKB, MT1, Nfat5,
HSF1/2 and potency-maintaining factors Id2, Cdx2, Eomes, Sox2, Nanog, Rex1, and
Oct4. Clearly the stress enzymes have a large number of cytosolic and nuclear
substrates and the TFs regulate large numbers of genes. The interaction of stress
enzymes and TFs in the early embryo and its stem cells are a continuing central
focus of research. In vitro regulation of TFs by stress enzymes leads to
reprogramming of the stem cell when stress diminishes stem cell accumulation.
Since more differentiated product is produced by fewer cells, the process
compensates for fewer cells. Coupled with stress-induced compensatory
differentiation of stem cells is a tendency to prioritize differentiation by
increasing the first essential lineage and decreasing later lineages. These
mechanisms include stress enzymes that regulate TFs and provide stress-specific, 
shared homeostatic cellular and organismal responses of prioritized
differentiation.

PMID: 25956296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS One. 2015 May 7;10(5):e0125473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125473.
eCollection 2015.

The Effects and Molecular Mechanisms of MiR-106a in Multidrug Resistance Reversal
in Human Glioma U87/DDP and U251/G Cell Lines.

Wang Q(1), Wang Z(2), Chu L(3), Li X(1), Kan P(1), Xin X(1), Zhu Y(1), Yang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Cerebral Vessels and Neural Degeneration, Tianjin 300060, China.
(2)Department of Nursing, School of Pharmaceutical Engineering and Life Science, 
Changzhou University, Changzhou 213164, China; School of Ophthalmology and
Optometry, Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325003, China. (3)The
2nd Department of Orthopedics, the Affiliated Anhui Provincial Hospital of Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei 230001, China.

Chemotherapy resistance is one of the major obstacles to effective glioma
therapy. Currently, the mechanism underlying chemotherapy resistance is unclear. 
A recent study showed that miR-106a is an important molecule involved in
chemotherapy resistance. To explore the effects and mechanisms of miR-106a on
multidrug resistance reversal in human glioma cells, we silenced miR-106a
expression in the cisplatin-resistant U87 (U87/DDP) and the gefitinib-resistant
U251 (U251/G) glioma cell lines and measured the resulting drug sensitivity, cell
apoptosis rate and rhodamine 123 content. In addition, we detected decreased
expression of P-glycoprotein, MDR1, MRP1, GST-p, CDX2, ERCC1, RhoE, Bcl-2,
Survivin and Topo-II, as well as reduced production of IL-6, IL-8 and TGF-ß in
these cell lines. Furthermore, we found decreased expression of p-AKT and
transcriptional activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, Twist, AP-1 and Snail in these cell lines.
These results suggest that miR-106a is a promising therapeutic target for the
treatment of human multidrug resistant glioma.

PMCID: PMC4423781
PMID: 25950430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Jul;36(7):719-29. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv060. Epub 2015 May 
4.

Reducing DNA methylation suppresses colon carcinogenesis by inducing tumor cell
differentiation.

Hatano Y(1), Semi K(2), Hashimoto K(2), Lee MS(3), Hirata A(4), Tomita H(1), Kuno
T(1), Takamatsu M(1), Aoki K(5), Taketo MM(6), Kim YJ(7), Hara A(1), Yamada Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (2)Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application (CiRA), Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), 
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 138-736, Korea. (4)Division of
Animal Experiment, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido,
Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (5)Division of Pharmacology, University of Fukui School of 
Medicine, 23-3 Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji-cho, Yoshida-gun, Fukui 910-1193,
Japan. (6)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan and. (7)Department of Integrated Omics for
Biomedical Sciences, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul
120-749, Korea. (8)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Institute
for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan, y-yamada@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

The forced reduction of global DNA methylation suppresses tumor development in
several cancer models in vivo. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying these
suppressive effects remain unclear. In this report, we describe our findings
showing that a genome-wide reduction in the DNA methylation levels induces
cellular differentiation in association with decreased cell proliferation in Apc 
(Min/+) mouse colon tumor cells in vivo. Colon tumor-specific DNA methylation at 
Cdx1 is reduced in the DNA-hypomethylated tumors accompanied by Cdx1 derepression
and an increased expression of intestinal differentiation-related genes.
Furthermore, a histological analysis revealed that Cdx1 derepression in the
DNA-hypomethylated tumors is correlated with the differentiation of colon tumor
cells. Similarly, the treatment of human colon cancer cell lines with a
hypomethylating agent induces differentiation-related genes, including CDX1. We
herein propose that DNA demethylation exerts a tumor suppressive effect in the
colon by inducing tumor cell differentiation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25939752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2015 May 1;10(5):e0125225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125225.
eCollection 2015.

Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide promotes intestinal barrier homeostasis and
protection against colitis in mice.

Wu X(1), Conlin VS(1), Morampudi V(1), Ryz NR(1), Nasser Y(1), Bhinder G(1),
Bergstrom KS(2), Yu HB(1), Waterhouse CC(3), Buchan AM(4), Popescu OE(5), Gibson 
WT(6), Waschek JA(7), Vallance BA(1), Jacobson K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, BC Children's Hospital
and the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada;
Child and Family Research Institute, BC Children's Hospital and the University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, BC Children's Hospital and the
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Child and
Family Research Institute, BC Children's Hospital and the University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation (OMRF), Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of 
Pathology, BC Children's Hospital and the University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (6)Child and Family Research Institute, BC
Children's Hospital and the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (7)Semel Institute for Neuroscience and
Human Behavior, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, United
States of America.

Inflammatory bowel disease is a chronic gastrointestinal inflammatory disorder
associated with changes in neuropeptide expression and function, including
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). VIP regulates intestinal vasomotor and
secretomotor function and motility; however, VIP's role in development and
maintenance of colonic epithelial barrier homeostasis is unclear. Using VIP
deficient (VIPKO) mice, we investigated VIP's role in epithelial barrier
homeostasis, and susceptibility to colitis. Colonic crypt morphology and
epithelial barrier homeostasis were assessed in wildtype (WT) and VIPKO mice, at 
baseline. Colitic responses were evaluated following dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
(DNBS) or dextran-sodium sulfate (DSS) exposure. Mice were also treated with
exogenous VIP. At baseline, VIPKO mice exhibited distorted colonic crypts,
defects in epithelial cell proliferation and migration, increased apoptosis, and 
altered permeability. VIPKO mice also displayed reduced goblet cell numbers, and 
reduced expression of secreted goblet cell factors mucin 2 and trefoil factor 3. 
These changes were associated with reduced expression of caudal type homeobox 2
(Cdx2), a master regulator of intestinal function and homeostasis. DNBS and
DSS-induced colitis were more severe in VIPKO than WT mice. VIP treatment rescued
the phenotype, protecting VIPKO mice against DSS colitis, with results comparable
to WT mice. In conclusion, VIP plays a crucial role in the development and
maintenance of colonic epithelial barrier integrity under physiological
conditions and promotes epithelial repair and homeostasis during colitis.

PMCID: PMC4416880
PMID: 25932952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Reproduction. 2015 Jul;150(1):21-30. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0019. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Histone methyltransferase Smyd3 regulates early embryonic lineage commitment in
mice.

Suzuki S(1), Nozawa Y(1), Tsukamoto S(1), Kaneko T(1), Imai H(1), Minami N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyGraduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8052, JapanLaboratory of Animal and Genome Sciences
SectionNational Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba 263-8555, JapanGraduate
School of MedicineInstitute of Laboratory Animals, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyGraduate School of
Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8052, JapanLaboratory of Animal and
Genome Sciences SectionNational Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba
263-8555, JapanGraduate School of MedicineInstitute of Laboratory Animals, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan oog1nao@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

SET and MYND domain-containing protein 3 (Smyd3) is a histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) 
di- and tri-methyltransferase that forms a transcriptional complex with RNA
polymerase II and activates the transcription of oncogenes and cell cycle genes
in human cancer cells. However, the study of Smyd3 in mammalian early embryonic
development has not yet been addressed. In the present study, we investigated the
expression pattern of Smyd3 in mouse preimplantation embryos and the effects of
RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated Smyd3 repression on the development of mouse
embryos. We showed that Smyd3 mRNA levels increased after the two-cell stage,
peaked at the four-cell stage, and gradually decreased thereafter. Moreover, in
two-cell to eight-cell embryos, SMYD3 staining was more intense in the nuclei
than it was in the cytoplasm. In Smyd3-knockdown embryos, the percentage of inner
cell mass (ICM)-derived colony formation and trophectoderm (TE)-derived cell
attachment were significantly decreased, which resulted in a reduction in the
number of viable offspring. Furthermore, the expression of Oct4 and Cdx2 during
mid-preimplantation gene activation was significantly decreased in
Smyd3-knockdown embryos. In addition, the transcription levels of ICM and
epiblast markers, such as Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2, the transcription levels of
primitive endoderm markers, such as Gata6, and the transcription levels of TE
markers, such as Cdx2 and Eomes, were significantly decreased in Smyd3-knockdown 
blastocysts. These findings indicate that SMYD3 plays an important role in early 
embryonic lineage commitment and peri-implantation development through the
activation of lineage-specific genes.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25918436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2015 Oct;21(10):1105-15. doi:
10.1089/ten.TEC.2015.0038. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Cell Adhesion Minimization by a Novel Mesh Culture Method Mechanically Directs
Trophoblast Differentiation and Self-Assembly Organization of Human Pluripotent
Stem Cells.

Okeyo KO(1), Kurosawa O(2), Yamazaki S(3), Oana H(1), Kotera H(4), Nakauchi H(3),
Washizu M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan
. (2)2 Department of Bioengineering, School of Engineering, The University of
Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan . (3)3 Center for Stem Cell Therapy, The Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan . (4)4 Department of
Microengineering, Postgraduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University , Kyoto,
Japan .

Mechanical methods for inducing differentiation and directing lineage
specification will be instrumental in the application of pluripotent stem cells. 
Here, we demonstrate that minimization of cell-substrate adhesion can initiate
and direct the differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into
cyst-forming trophoblast lineage cells (TLCs) without stimulation with cytokines 
or small molecules. To precisely control cell-substrate adhesion area, we
developed a novel culture method where cells are cultured on microstructured mesh
sheets suspended in a culture medium such that cells on mesh are completely out
of contact with the culture dish. We used microfabricated mesh sheets that
consisted of open meshes (100~200<U+2009>µm in pitch) with narrow mesh strands (3-5<U+2009>µm
in width) to provide support for initial cell attachment and growth. We
demonstrate that minimization of cell adhesion area achieved by this culture
method can trigger a sequence of morphogenetic transformations that begin with
individual hiPSCs attached on the mesh strands proliferating to form cell sheets 
by self-assembly organization and ultimately differentiating after 10-15 days of 
mesh culture to generate spherical cysts that secreted human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) hormone and expressed caudal-related homeobox 2 factor (CDX2),
a specific marker of trophoblast lineage. Thus, this study demonstrates a simple 
and direct mechanical approach to induce trophoblast differentiation and generate
cysts for application in the study of early human embryogenesis and drug
development and screening.

PMCID: PMC4593890 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25914965  [PubMed - in process]


163. Toxicol Ind Health. 2015 Apr 22. pii: 0748233715579805. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of hexavalent chromium-treated sperm on in vitro fertilization and embryo 
development.

Yoisungnern T(1), Das J(2), Choi YJ(2), Parnpai R(3), Kim JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, College 
of Animal Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea
Embryo Technology and Stem Cell Research Center, School of Biotechnology,
Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand. (2)Department of
Animal Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, College of Animal
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea. (3)Embryo
Technology and Stem Cell Research Center, School of Biotechnology, Suranaree
University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand. (4)Department of Animal
Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, College of Animal Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea jhkim541@konkuk.ac.kr.

Hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is an environmental contaminant that is associated
with reproductive abnormalities in both humans and animals. In the present study,
we evaluated the cytotoxic effect of Cr(VI) on sperm function and subsequent
embryo development after in vitro fertilization (IVF). Sperm obtained from BDF1
male mice were treated with potassium dichromate (0, 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25, or 50
µM) for 3 h. Cr(VI) significantly decreased sperm viability and acrosome reaction
with increasing dose. These Cr(VI)-treated sperms were further used for IVF of
oocytes obtained from BDF1 female mice. Results showed that Cr(VI)-treated sperm 
caused a significant reduction in IVF success, higher developmental arrest at the
two-cell stage of embryos, and delayed blastocyst formation with increasing dose.
In particular, most blastocysts from the Cr(VI)-treated sperm resulted in
hatching failure as well as decreased inner cell mass and trophectoderm (TE).
Furthermore, blastocysts obtained from Cr(VI)-treated sperm showed lower
expression of not only TE-associated genes (eomes, cdx2, and krt8) but also
pluripotent marker genes (sox2, pou5f1, and klf4) that are responsible for
further embryo development of blastocyst embryos. The results of our current
study showed that Cr(VI)-treated sperm had negative effects on oocyte
fertilization and subsequent embryo development.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25903088  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


164. Histopathology. 2015 Dec;67(6):792-8. doi: 10.1111/his.12719. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

The immunophenotypic relationship between the submucosal gland unit, columnar
metaplasia and squamous islands in the columnar-lined oesophagus.

Lörinc E(1), Mellblom L(2), Öberg S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pathology, Blekinge Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden. (3)Department 
of Surgery, Helsingborg Hospital, Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.

AIMS: To characterize the immunophenotypic relationship between the squamous and 
the glandular compartments in the oesophagus of patients with columnar-lined
oesophagus (CLO).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Eight tissue blocks from three oesophageal resection
specimens from patients who underwent oesophagectomy for adenocarcinoma of the
oesophagus were selected for immunohistochemical analysis. The markers of
intestinal differentiation [CK20, CDX2 and MUC2] were all expressed in the
expected pattern, solely in the glandular compartment of the resection specimens.
CK4, CK17 and lysozyme were expressed in both the glandular and the squamous
compartments. In addition, CK17 expression was found on both the squamous and
glandular margins of the squamocolumnar transformation zones and in the
submucosal gland (SMG) intraglandular and excretory ducts.
CONCLUSIONS: There is an immunophenotypic relationship between the squamous and
the glandular compartments of the CLO, with expression of lysozyme, CK4 and CK17 
in both squamous and columnar cells. These overlapping immunophenotypes indicate 
similar differentiation paths, and link the SMG unit with the columnar metaplasia
and the neosquamous islands in CLO. Our findings support the theory of a cellular
origin of CLO and neosquamous islands from the SMG unit.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25898799  [PubMed - in process]


165. Gastric Cancer. 2015 Apr 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical characteristics of gastric
adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation: a study of 29 cases.

Murakami T(1), Yao T, Mitomi H, Morimoto T, Ueyama H, Matsumoto K, Saito T, Osada
T, Nagahara A, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan, t-murakm@juntendo.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Gastric adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation (GAED) has 
been recognized as a variant of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)-producing gastric
carcinoma, although its clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features have
not been fully elucidated.
METHODS: To elucidate the clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features of
GAED, we analyzed 29 cases of GAED, including ten early and 19 advanced lesions, 
and compared these cases with 100 cases of conventional gastric adenocarcinoma
(CGA). Immunohistochemistry for AFP, glypican 3, SALL4, and p53 was performed,
and the phenotypic expression of the tumors was evaluated by immunostaining with 
antibodies against MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2, CD10, and caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2).
RESULTS: Lymphatic and venous invasion was more frequent in GAED (76 and 72 %)
than in CGA (41 and 31 %; P = 0.001). Lymph node metastasis was more frequently
observed in GAED (69 %) than in CGA (38 %; P = 0.005), as were synchronous or
metachronous liver metastases (GAED, 31 %; CGA, 6 %; P = 0.001).
Immunohistochemically, all GAED were positive for at least one of three
enteroblastic linage markers (AFP, glypican 3, and SALL4). Glypican 3 was the
most sensitive marker (83 %) for GAED, followed by SALL4 (72 %) and AFP (45 %),
whereas no CGA was positive. Furthermore, the rate of positive p53 staining was
59 % in GAED. Regarding the mucin phenotype, CD10 and CDX2 were diffusely or
focally expressed in all GAED cases. Invasive areas with hepatoid or
enteroblastic differentiation were negative for CD10 and CDX2.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicopathologic features of GAED differ from those of CGA. GAED
shows aggressive biological behavior, and is characteristically immunoreactive to
AFP, glypican 3, or SALL4.

PMID: 25893262  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


166. BMC Genet. 2015 Feb 11;16:14. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0163-6.

Variants Fok1 and Bsm1 on VDR are associated with the melanoma risk: evidence
from the published epidemiological studies.

Hou W(1), Wan X(2), Fan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, 830054, People's Republic of China.
iamhouwei@163.com. (2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, 830054, People's
Republic of China. xuefeng_wan@126.com. (3)Department of Dermatology and
Venereology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University,
Urumqi, 830054, People's Republic of China. fanjunw1300@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) mediates the major cellular activities
of vitamin D and regulates various signaling pathways implicated in cancer
development and progression. VDR variants have been found associated with the
risk of developing melanoma; however, previous epidemiological studies are
inconsistent. We have systematically reviewed the published epidemiological
literature and conducted a meta-analysis to assess associations between common
VDR variants and melanoma risk.
RESULTS: We identified 10 eligible studies that evaluated six VDR variants (Apa1,
Bsm1, Cdx2, EcoRV, Fok1, and Taq1) in a total of 4,961 melanoma patients and
4,605 controls. The pooled estimates identified two variants-Fok1 and Bsm1-as
significantly associated with melanoma risk, but not for the other four variants 
Apa1, Cdx2, EcorV and Taq1. For Fok1, the pooled OR was 1.18 (95% CI = 1.06-1.30;
I(2)<U+2009>= 22%) for Ff vs. FF and 1.19 (95% CI = 1.01-1.41; I(2)<U+2009>= 0%) for ff vs. FF.
The dominant genetic model suggested the allele f carriers showed an 18% (pooled 
OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.07-1.29; I(2)<U+2009>= 0%) increased risk for melanoma compared to
homozygote FF. In contrast, the Bsm1 was found to be associated with a decreased 
risk for melanoma with the pooled OR was 0.85 (95% CI = 0.76-0.95; I(2)<U+2009>= 0%) for
Bb vs. bb and 0.83 (95% CI = 0.68-1.00; I(2)<U+2009>= 28%) for BB vs. bb. Under the
dominant genetic model, a 15% (pooled OR = 0.85, 95% CI = 0.76-0.94; I(2) = 0%)
decrease of melanoma risk was found for those with BB or Bb genotype compared to 
those of bb genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The VDR variants Fok1 and Bsm1 may influence the susceptibility to
developing melanoma, though further studies are needed to verify these
conclusions.

PMCID: PMC4342192
PMID: 25887475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2015 Apr-Jun;58(2):214-6. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.155318.

Primary Merkel cell carcinoma of the oral mucosa in a young adult male: report of
a rare case.

Roy S, Das I, Nandi A(1), Roy R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a highly aggressive neoplasm of skin with
neuroendocrine differentiation. Primary MCC of the oral mucosa is exceedingly
rare and even more unresponsive to therapy. A 15-year-old male presents with
gradually increasing painless swelling in right side of the floor of mouth for 6 
weeks. Computed tomography of head and neck region showed globular mass (4.6 cm ×
1.7 cm) involving right side of the floor of mouth. Fine-needle aspiration from
the upper deep cervical node suggested small round cell tumor. A trucut biopsy
showed mass composed of trabeculae and nests of tumor cells with high N:C ratio, 
granular speckled chromatin, scanty to moderate amount of clear vacuolated
cytoplasm. Cells were immunoreactive for cytokeratin-20, CD56, c-kit, CD99 and
negative for p63, thyroid-transcription factor-1, CDX2, synaptophysin,
neuron-specific enolase. Patient was started on chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and vincristine. The mass regressed in size and
patient underwent wide local excision with pull-through approach. Patient is
currently under combined chemoradiation regime and doing well.

PMID: 25885137  [PubMed - in process]


168. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2015 Apr-Jun;58(2):158-62. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.155304.

Expression of CDX-2 and Ki-67 in different grades of colorectal adenocarcinomas.

Sen A, Mitra S, Das RN(1), Dasgupta S, Saha K, Chatterjee U, Mukherjee K, Datta
C, Chattopadhyay BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and
Research (IPGMER), Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: CDX2 is a caudal homeobox gene essential for intestinal
differentiation and is specifically expressed in colorectal adenocarcinomas. Its 
role in colorectal carcinogenesis is not fully elucidated.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To study the expression pattern of CDX2 and Ki-67 in
different grades of colorectal adenocarcinomas and to observe the relationship of
their staining patterns in various tumor stages and to look for correlation if
any, between Ki-67 labeling index (Ki-67 LI) and CDX2 expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 74 cases were enrolled. Detailed clinical
profile, peroperative findings, histological grading and staging were noted.
Immunohistochemistry for CDX2 and Ki-67 was done, and Ki-67 LI was calculated.
CDX2 staining was graded semi-quantitatively, and statistical analysis was done.
RESULT: Age of presentation ranged from 20 to 75 years, and the male:female ratio
was 1.83:1. There were 8, 47 and 13 cases of well, moderate and poorly
differentiated adenocarcinomas, respectively. The mean Ki-67 LI of well, moderate
and poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas were 14.25, 31.34 and 43.08
respectively, and their difference was statistically significant, correlation was
also noted with stage. CDX2 expression appeared to be stronger in poorly
differentiated cases, but there was no significant difference in its expression
in the different grades and stages. There was no correlation between Ki-67 LI and
CDX2 immunostaining pattern. The lymph node metastasis showed CDX2 positivity in 
all the cases.
CONCLUSION: Expression of CDX2 does not significantly change with the grade of
colorectal adenocarcinomas. However, it is an important diagnostic marker in
metastatic colonic lesions. The Ki-67 LI, on the other hand, showed a strong
correlation with histopathological grades.

PMID: 25885126  [PubMed - in process]


169. Theriogenology. 2015 Jul 15;84(2):184-92. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.03.011. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

A three-dimensional culture system using alginate hydrogel prolongs hatched
cattle embryo development in vitro.

Zhao S(1), Liu ZX(1), Gao H(1), Wu Y(1), Fang Y(1), Wu SS(1), Li MJ(1), Bai
JH(2), Liu Y(2), Evans A(3), Zeng SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Laboratory of Animal Embryonic
Biotechnology, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China; National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
China; Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China. (2)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary
Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland. (4)National Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Laboratory of Animal
Embryonic Biotechnology, College of Animal Science and Technology, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China; National Engineering Laboratory for
Animal Breeding, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China; Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding, and
Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. Electronic address:
zengshenming@gmail.com.

No successful method exists to maintain the three-dimensional architecture of
hatched embryos in vitro. Alginate, a linear polysaccharide derived from brown
algae, has characteristics that make it an ideal material as a three-dimensional 
(3D) extracellular matrix for in vitro cell, tissue, or embryo culture. In this
study, alginate hydrogel was used for IVC of posthatched bovine embryos to
observe their development under the 3D system. In vitro-fertilized and
parthenogenetically activated posthatched bovine blastocysts were cultured in an 
alginate encapsulation culture system (AECS), an alginate overlay culture system 
(AOCS), or control culture system. After 18 days of culture, the survival rate of
embryos cultured in AECS was higher than that in the control group (P < 0.05),
and the embryos were expanded and elongated in AECS with the maximal length of
1.125 mm. When the AECS shrinking embryos were taken out of the alginate beads on
Day 18 and cultured in the normal culture system, 9.09% of them attached to the
bottoms of the plastic wells and grew rapidly, with the largest area of an
attached embryo being 66.00 mm(2) on Day 32. The embryos cultured in AOCS
developed monovesicular or multivesicular morphologies. Total cell number of the 
embryos cultured in AECS on Day 19 was significantly higher than that of embryos 
on Day 8. Additionally, AECS and AOCS supported differentiation of the embryonic 
cells. Binuclear cells were visible in Day-26 adherent embryos, and the messenger
RNA expression patterns of Cdx2 and Oct4 in AOCS-cultured embryos were similar to
those in vivo embryos, whereas IFNT and ISG15 messenger RNA were still expressed 
in Day-26 and Day-32 prolong-cultured embryos. In conclusion, AECS and AOCS did
support cell proliferation, elongation, and differentiation of hatched bovine
embryos during prolonged IVC. The culture system will be useful to further
investigate the molecular mechanisms controlling ruminant embryo elongation and
implantation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25881989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Apr 20;128(8):1065-71. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.155092.

CDX2 inhibits invasion and migration of gastric cancer cells by phosphatase and
tensin homologue deleted from chromosome 10/Akt signaling pathway.

Liu YQ, Bai ZG, Ma XM, Zhang ZT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100050, China.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most prevalent malignancies in the 
world today, with a high mortality rate. CDX2 is a Drosophila caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor that plays an important role in GC. Phosphatase and
tensin homologue deleted from chromosome 10 (PTEN) is an important tumor
suppressor which is widely expressed in normal human tissues. The aim of the
study was to determine the relationship and mechanism between CDX2 and PTEN in
invasion and migration of GC cells.
METHODS: pcDNA3-CDX2 plasmids were transfected into MGC-803 cells to up-regulate 
CDX2 protein, and small interfering RNA-CDX2 was transfected to down-regulate
CDX2. The influence of CDX2 or PTEN on cell migration and invasion was measured
by invasion, migration and wound healing assays. Western blotting assay and
immunofluorescence were used to detect the expression of CDX2, PTEN,
phosphorylation of Akt, E-cadherin and N-cadherin. Statistical significance was
determined by one-way analysis of variance.
RESULTS: The results showed that CDX2 reduced the migration and invasion of GC
cells (P < 0.05), and inhibited the activity of Akt through down-regulating PTEN 
expression (P < 0.05). CDX2 also restrained epithelial-mesenchymal transition of 
GC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 inhibited invasion and migration of GC cells by PTEN/Akt
signaling pathway, and that may be used for potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 25881601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Jun;39(6):850-7. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000435.

NKX6-1 Is a Novel Immunohistochemical Marker for Pancreatic and Duodenal
Neuroendocrine Tumors.

Tseng IC(1), Yeh MM, Yang CY, Jeng YM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology §Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital
Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan Department of Pathology, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA.

NKX6-1 is a homeobox transcription factor participating in the development and
regulation of endocrine function of pancreatic islets. This study evaluated the
potential use of NKX6-1 as a diagnostic marker for well-differentiated
neuroendocrine tumors (WDNETs). In total, 178 primary and 26 metastatic WDNETs of
different origins were analyzed through immunohistochemistry for NKX6-1, TTF-1,
CDX2, ISL1, and polyclonal PAX8. NKX6-1 was expressed in 36 of the 44 (82%)
primary pancreatic WDNETs, 12 of the 18 (67%) primary duodenal WDNETs, and rarely
in pulmonary, gastric, and appendiceal WDNETs. The specificity of using NKX6-1 as
a marker for pancreatic and duodenal WDNETs is 93%. Of the 26 metastatic WDNETs, 
NKX6-1 was expressed only in the tumors of pancreatic origin (sensitivity: 63%,
specificity: 100%). The combinatorial use of NKX6-1, CDX2, TTF-1, and ISL1
distinguished WDNETs of different origins with high specificity. Our results
indicated that the inclusion of NKX6-1 in an immunohistochemical panel will be
beneficial for identifying the primary sites of WDNETs.

PMID: 25871618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 May 5;112(18):E2337-46. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1504778112. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Heightened potency of human pluripotent stem cell lines created by transient BMP4
exposure.

Yang Y(1), Adachi K(2), Sheridan MA(3), Alexenko AP(1), Schust DJ(2), Schulz
LC(2), Ezashi T(1), Roberts RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, Bond Life Sciences Center and. (2)Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women's Health, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65212. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211;
and. (4)Division of Animal Sciences, Bond Life Sciences Center and Department of 
Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211; and
robertsrm@missouri.edu.

Human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) show epiblast-type pluripotency that is
maintained with ACTIVIN/FGF2 signaling. Here, we report the acquisition of a
unique stem cell phenotype by both human ES cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) in response to transient (24-36 h) exposure to bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) plus inhibitors of ACTIVIN signaling (A83-01) and 
FGF2 (PD173074), followed by trypsin dissociation and recovery of colonies
capable of growing on a gelatin substratum in standard medium for human PSCs at
low but not high FGF2 concentrations. The self-renewing cell lines stain weakly
for CDX2 and strongly for NANOG, can be propagated clonally on either Matrigel or
gelatin, and are morphologically distinct from human PSC progenitors on either
substratum but still meet standard in vitro criteria for pluripotency. They form 
well-differentiated teratomas in immune-compromised mice that secrete human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) into the host mouse and include small areas of
trophoblast-like cells. The cells have a distinct transcriptome profile from the 
human PSCs from which they were derived (including higher expression of NANOG,
LEFTY1, and LEFTY2). In nonconditioned medium lacking FGF2, the colonies
spontaneously differentiated along multiple lineages, including trophoblast. They
responded to PD173074 in the absence of both FGF2 and BMP4 by conversion to
trophoblast, and especially syncytiotrophoblast, whereas an A83-01/PD173074
combination favored increased expression of HLA-G, a marker of extravillous
trophoblast. Together, these data suggest that the cell lines exhibit totipotent 
potential and that BMP4 can prime human PSCs to a self-renewing alternative state
permissive for trophoblast development. The results may have implications for
regulation of lineage decisions in the early embryo.

PMCID: PMC4426460
PMID: 25870291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Lab Invest. 2015 Jul;95(7):718-27. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.52. Epub 2015 Apr 
13.

CDX2 homeoprotein is involved in the regulation of ST6GalNAc-I gene in intestinal
metaplasia.

Pinto R(1), Barros R(2), Pereira-Castro I(3), Mesquita P(4), da Costa LT(5),
Bennett EP(6), Almeida R(7), David L(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal [2] Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University
of Porto, Porto, Portugal [3] Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (2)1] Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal [2] Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (3)Institute of Molecular Pathology and
Immunology, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)Instituto Nacional de
Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, Quinta da Fonte Boa, Vale de Santarém,
Portugal. (5)ICAAM, Universidade de Évora, Évora, Portugal. (6)Copenhagen Center 
for Glycomics, Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (7)1] Instituto de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal [2]
Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal [3] Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal [4]
Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

De novo expression of Sialyl-Tn (STn) antigen is one of the most common features 
of intestinal metaplasia (IM) and gastric carcinomas, and its biosynthesis has
been mostly attributed to ST6GalNAc-I activity. However, the regulation of this
glycosyltransferase expression is not elucidated. In IM lesions and in the
intestine, CDX2 homeobox transcription factor is co-expressed with STn and
ST6GalNAc-I. We therefore hypothesized that CDX2 might induce STn expression by
positive regulation of ST6GalNAc-I. We showed that ST6GalNAc-I transcript levels 
and CDX2 have a coordinated expression upon Caco-2 in vitro differentiation, and 
overexpression of CDX2 in MKN45 gastric cells increases ST6GalNAc-I transcript
levels. Nine putative CDX-binding sites in the ST6GalNAc-I-regulatory sequence
were identified and analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation in Caco-2 cells and
in IM. The results showed that CDX2 protein is recruited to all regions, being
the most proximal sites preferentially occupied in vivo. Luciferase assays
demonstrated that CDX2 is able to transactivate ST6GalNac-I-regulatory region.
The induction was stronger for the regions mapped in the neighbourhood of ATG
start codon and site-directed mutagenesis of these sites confirmed their
importance. In conclusion, we show that CDX2 transcriptionally regulates
ST6GalNAc-I gene expression, specifically in the preneoplastic IM lesion.

PMID: 25867765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1606-15. doi: 10.1242/dev.120238. Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> induces early Cdx2 expression and represses HIPPO
signaling to specify the trophectoderm lineage.

Cao Z(1), Carey TS(1), Ganguly A(2), Wilson CA(1), Paul S(2), Knott JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (3)Developmental
Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA knottj@msu.edu.

Cell fate decisions are fundamental to the development of multicellular
organisms. In mammals the first cell fate decision involves segregation of the
pluripotent inner cell mass and the trophectoderm, a process regulated by cell
polarity proteins, HIPPO signaling and lineage-specific transcription factors
such as CDX2. However, the regulatory mechanisms that operate upstream to specify
the trophectoderm lineage have not been established. Here we report that
transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> (TFAP2C) functions as a novel upstream regulator of
Cdx2 expression and position-dependent HIPPO signaling in mice. Loss- and
gain-of-function studies and promoter analysis revealed that TFAP2C binding to an
intronic enhancer is required for activation of Cdx2 expression during early
development. During the 8-cell to morula transition TFAP2C potentiates cell
polarity to suppress HIPPO signaling in the outside blastomeres. TFAP2C depletion
triggered downregulation of PARD6B, loss of apical cell polarity, disorganization
of F-actin, and activation of HIPPO signaling in the outside blastomeres. Rescue 
experiments using Pard6b mRNA restored cell polarity but only partially corrected
position-dependent HIPPO signaling, suggesting that TFAP2C negatively regulates
HIPPO signaling via multiple pathways. Several genes involved in regulation of
the actin cytoskeleton (including Rock1, Rock2) were downregulated in
TFAP2C-depleted embryos. Inhibition of ROCK1 and ROCK2 activity during the 8-cell
to morula transition phenocopied TFAP2C knockdown, triggering a loss of
position-dependent HIPPO signaling and decrease in Cdx2 expression. Altogether,
these results demonstrate that TFAP2C facilitates trophectoderm lineage
specification by functioning as a key regulator of Cdx2 transcription, cell
polarity and position-dependent HIPPO signaling.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4419278 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25858457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Histopathology. 2015 Dec;67(6):806-16. doi: 10.1111/his.12711. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

High-grade fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung is a tumour with a fetal phenotype
that shows diverse differentiation, including high-grade neuroendocrine
carcinoma: a clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and mutational study of 20 
cases.

Suzuki M(1,)(2), Yazawa T(1), Ota S(2), Morimoto J(3), Yoshino I(3), Yamanaka
S(4), Inayama Y(5), Kawabata Y(6), Shimizu Y(6), Komatsu M(7), Notohara K(8),
Koda K(9), Nakatani Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Chiba University Hospital, 
Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City
University Hospital, Yokohama, Japan. (5)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City
University Medical Centre, Yokohama, Japan. (6)Department of Pathology, Saitama
Cardiovascular and Respiratory Centre, Kumagaya, Saitama, Japan. (7)Department of
Pathology, Yamamoto Kumiai General Hospital, Noshiro, Japan. (8)Department of
Pathology, Kurashiki General Hospital, Kurashiki, Japan. (9)Department of
Pathology, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital, Fujieda, Japan.

AIMS: High-grade fetal adenocarcinoma (H-FLAC) is a rare variant of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma; this study aims to elucidate its clinicopathological features and
genetic abnormalities.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and mutational
analyses were performed on 20 surgically resected lung cancers that showed H-FLAC
histology in various proportions. These tumours predominantly occurred in elderly
males and in 10 patients who were heavy smokers. Four cases were pure H-FLAC, and
16 cases were mixed H-FLAC, which were found to be combined with
conventional-type adenocarcinoma (15 cases), large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma 
(three cases), small-cell carcinoma (one case), enteric adenocarcinoma (two
cases), choriocarcinoma (two cases), and a solid-clear cell pattern (seven
cases). The fetal phenotype and diverse differentiation were supported by the
immunoexpression of a-fetoprotein (95%), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
(50%), neuroendocrine markers (30-45%), proneural markers (50-69%), and CDX2
(40%). Except for TTF-1 expression (pure H-FLACs, 0%; mixed H-FLACs, 63%), there 
were no significant differences in histological or immunohistochemical findings
between pure and mixed H-FLACs. EGFR, KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations were
identified in 20%, 0%, 0% and 7% of the tumours, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Lung adenocarcinomas with H-FLAC features possess the potential for 
multidirectional differentiation, and are not strongly associated with known
major driver gene mutations.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25851923  [PubMed - in process]


176. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Jul;34(4):396-400. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000169.

A Case of Vulval Extramammary Paget Disease With Dermal Invasion Showing Mucinous
Carcinoma.

Asaka S(1), Yoshizawa A, Sano K, Uhara H, Honda T, Ota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine (S.A., A.Y., K.S., T.H.), Shinshu University
Hospital Department of Dermatology (H.U.), Shinshu University School of Medicine 
Department of Biomedical Sciences (H.O.), School of Health Sciences, Shinshu
University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.

We report a case of vulval extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) with dermal invasion
showing mucinous carcinoma (MC). An 80-year-old woman presented with vulvar
itching and pain. A physical examination showed a pigmented vulvar, perianal
erythematous plague, and a subcutaneous nodule in the left major labia. No
internal malignancy, such as colorectal or genitourinary carcinoma, was
identified in any of the clinical examinations. A histological examination of the
resected specimen revealed Pagetoid tumor cells that had spread widely through
the epidermis and invaded the dermis forming a solid nest with mucous lake-like
MC. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the tumor cells in the
epidermis and dermis were positive for CK7, CEA, GCDFP-15, MUC5AC, and MUC2, but 
negative for CK20, MUC6, and CDX2. Only the invasive component showed
overexpression of p53. A diagnosis of primary EMPD with dermal invasion showing
MC of the vulva was made. This is an extremely rare diagnosis, and we suggest
that immunohistochemical evaluations in addition to systemic work-ups are helpful
in distinguishing between these cases and those involving vulvar or perianal skin
invasion of underlying colorectal or genitourinary carcinomas, which are referred
to as secondary EMPD.

PMID: 25851708  [PubMed - in process]


177. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0124894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124894.
eCollection 2015.

Cdx2 polymorphism affects the activities of vitamin D receptor in human breast
cancer cell lines and human breast carcinomas.

Pulito C(1), Terrenato I(2), Di Benedetto A(3), Korita E(1), Goeman F(4), Sacconi
A(4), Biagioni F(4), Blandino G(4), Strano S(1), Muti P(5), Mottolese M(3), Falvo
E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Chemoprevention Unit, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, 
Italy. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute,
Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, 
Rome, Italy. (4)Translational Oncogenomics Unit, Regina Elena National Cancer
Institute, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Oncology, Juravinski Cancer
Center-McMaster University Hamilton, Hamilton, ON L8V 5C2, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Laboratory of Pharmacogenomics (Area Molecular Medicine), Regina Elena
National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

Vitamin D plays a role in cancer development and acts through the vitamin D
receptor (VDR). It regulates the action of hormone responsive genes and is
involved in cell cycle regulation, differentiation and apoptosis. VDR is a
critical component of the vitamin D pathway and different common single
nucleotide polymorphisms have been identified. Cdx2 VDR polymorphism can play an 
important role in breast cancer, modulating the activity of VDR. The objective of
this study is to assess the relationship between the Cdx2 VDR polymorphism and
the activities of VDR in human breast cancer cell lines and carcinomas breast
patients. Cdx2 VDR polymorphism and antiproliferative effects of vitamin D
treatment were investigated in a panel of estrogen receptor-positive (MCF7 and
T-47D) and estrogen receptor-negative (MDA-MB-231, SUM 159PT, SK-BR-3, BT549,
MDA-MB-468, HCC1143, BT20 and HCC1954) human breast cancer cell lines.
Furthermore, the potential relationship among Cdx2 VDR polymorphism and a number 
of biomarkers used in clinical management of breast cancer was assessed in an ad 
hoc set of breast cancer cases. Vitamin D treatment efficacy was found to be
strongly dependent on the Cdx2 VDR status in ER-negative breast cancer cell lines
tested. In our series of breast cancer cases, the results indicated that patients
with variant homozygote AA were associated with bio-pathological characteristics 
typical of more aggressive tumours, such as ER negative, HER2 positive and G3.
Our results may suggest a potential effect of Cdx2 VDR polymorphism on the
efficacy of vitamin D treatment in aggressive breast cancer cells (estrogen
receptor negative). These results suggest that Cdx2 polymorphism may be a
potential biomarker for vitamin D treatment in breast cancer, independently of
the VDR receptor expression.

PMCID: PMC4388514
PMID: 25849303  [PubMed - in process]


178. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):1838-44. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3594. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Recombinant lentivirus with enhanced expression of caudal-related homeobox
protein 2 inhibits human colorectal cancer cell proliferation in vitro.

He S(1), Sun XJ(1), Zheng JB(1), Qi J(2), Chen NZ(1), Wang W(1), Wei GB(1), Liu
D(1), Yu JH(1), Lu SY(1), Wang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (2)Second
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital,
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710068, P.R. China. (3)Department of Anesthesiology, Shaanxi
Provincial People's Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710068, P.R. China.

Caudal-related homeobox protein 2 (CDX2), a tumor suppressor in the adult colon, 
is overexpressed under a non-cancer specific cytomegalovirus promoter in certain 
tumor cells; furthermore, non-specific expression of CDX2 may result in aberrant 
side effects in normal cells. The human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) 
promoter is active in the majority of cancer cells but not in normal cells.
Hypoxia is a key feature of solid tumors, and targeted genes may be significantly
upregulated by five copies of hypoxia-response elements (HREs) under hypoxic
conditions. However, the effect of CDX2 overexpression, as controlled by five
copies of HREs and the hTERT promoter, on human colorectal cancer (CRC) cell
proliferation in vitro remains to be fully elucidated. In the current study, a
recombinant lentivirus containing the CDX2 gene under the control of five HREs
and the hTERT promoter was generated. An immunofluorescence assay was used to
detect CDX2 expression by the 5 HhC lentivirus, whereas an MTT assay was used to 
detect the effects of CoCl2 on the viability of LoVo cells. Western blot analysis
was conducted in order to determine the relative ratios of recombinant CDX2
protein to the internal control ß-actin, following 5 HhC/LoVo cell culture under 
normoxic and hypoxic conditions (100, 200, 300, 400 or 500 µmol/l CoCl2) for 24
h, then for 12, 24 or 36 h with the optimal concentration (300 µmol/l) of CoCl2. 
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis was used to determine
the transcription of recombinant CDX2 mRNA following culture of 5 HhC/LoVo cells 
under normoxic or hypoxic conditions. Finally, a cloning assay was used to detect
the proliferative ability of 5 HhC/LoVo and 5 Hh cells. High CDX2 expression was 
observed in hTERT-positive LoVo cells under hypoxic conditions, an effect which
was mimicked by treatment with CoCl2 to inhibit LoVo cell proliferation in vitro.
High expression of CDX2 therefore provides a promising strategy for the
development of novel targeted treatments and gene therapy for CRC.

PMCID: PMC4464164
PMID: 25847407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Adv Anat Pathol. 2015 May;22(3):149-67. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000069.

Metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary: diagnostic approach using
immunohistochemistry.

Conner JR(1), Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Carcinoma of unknown primary origin (CUP) is one of the 10 most prevalent
malignancies. CUP patients in whom a site of origin can be ascribed have better
outcomes than those in which the primary tumor remains unidentified. Among the
tools available to pathologists in approaching these lesions,
immunohistochemistry is a reliable, inexpensive, and widely available resource.
New markers continue to emerge, which, in combination with other historically
useful antibodies, allow rapid and accurate identification of primary site in an 
increasing number of cases. This review discusses the approach to the diagnosis
of CUP using immunohistochemistry and outlines some of the most useful markers
with a particular focus on the utility of lineage-restricted transcription
factors, including CDX2, NKX3-1, PAX8, SATB2, TTF-1, and SF1.

PMID: 25844674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Apr;23(4):308-12. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182389663.

Primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the epididymis: report of a rare case with
molecular genetic characterization including mutation analysis of the TP53 gene.

Gupta S(1), Yan B, Leow PC, Chin SY, Soong R, Petersson F.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, National University Health System Cancer Science
Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

We report a case of primary epididymal mucinous adenocarcinoma in a 60-year-old
man who presented with a scrotal mass and subsequently developed pulmonary
metastases. On immunohistochemistry the tumor was positive for villin and CK20
and negative for CK7, CDX2, and thyroid transcription factor-1. Molecular genetic
analysis revealed an uncommon mutation; 249: AGG <U+2192>ATG in the TP53 gene, which has
not been previously described in association with a primary epididymal
adenocarcinoma. Mutational analysis showed KRAS, BRAF, and VHL to be wild-type.
No microsatellite instability was found.

PMID: 25839701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Apr;17(2):141-50. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0077.

Buffalo embryos produced by handmade cloning from oocytes selected using
brilliant cresyl blue staining have better developmental competence and quality
and are closer to embryos produced by in vitro fertilization in terms of their
epigenetic status and gene expression pattern.

Mohapatra SK(1), Sandhu A, Neerukattu VS, Singh KP, Selokar NL, Singla SK,
Chauhan MS, Manik RS, Palta P.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Lab, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research
Institute , Karnal-132001, Haryana, India .

We compared handmade cloned (HMC) buffalo blastocysts produced from oocytes
stained with Brilliant Cresyl Blue (BCB) and classified into those with blue
(BCB+) or colorless cytoplasm (BCB-). The blastocyst rate was higher (p<0.001)
for BCB+ than for BCB- oocytes (43.41 ± 2.54 vs. 22.74 ± 1.76%). BCB+ blastocysts
had inner cell mass (ICM) cell number, ICM-to-trophectoderm ratio, global level
of H3K18ac, apoptotic index, and expression level of BCL-XL, but not that of
CASPASE-3, similar to that of blastocysts produced through in vitro fertilization
(IVF), which was higher (p<0.05) than that of BCB- blastocysts. The global level 
of H3K9me2, which was similar in BCB+ and BCB- blastocysts, was higher (p<0.01)
than that in IVF blastocysts. The expression level of OCT4 and SOX2 was higher
(p<0.05) and that of GATA2 was lower (p<0.05) in BCB+ than that in BCB-
blastocysts, whereas that of DNMT1, DNMT3a, NANOG, and CDX2 was not significantly
different between the two groups. The expression level of DNMT1, OCT4, NANOG, and
SOX2 was lower (p<0.05) and that of CDX2 was higher (p<0.05) in BCB+ than in IVF 
blastocysts. In conclusion, because BCB+ blastocysts have better developmental
competence and are closer to IVF blastocysts in terms of quality, epigenetic
status, and gene expression than BCB- blastocysts, BCB staining can be used
effectively for selection of developmentally competent oocytes for HMC.

PMCID: PMC4378879
PMID: 25826727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Apr;17(2):115-23. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0073.

Deficiency of genomic reprogramming in trophoblast stem cells following nuclear
transfer.

Ogawa H(1), Watanabe H, Fukuda A, Kono T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture , Tokyo, 156-8502,
Japan .

To examine the genomic reprogrammability of trophoblast stem (TS) cells using a
nuclear transfer technique, we produced TS cloned embryos using five TS cell
lines from three strains of mice (ICR, B6D2F1, and B6CBF1) as donors and observed
developmental ability during preimplantation development. The developmental rates
of the TS cloned embryos that developed to the two-cell, four- to eight-cell,
morula, and blastocyst stages were 58-83%, 0-38.6%, 0-21.3%, and 0-15.9%,
respectively, indicating that more than 50% of TS cloned embryos arrested at the 
two-cell stage. These TS cloned two-cell embryos were expressed low level of
Dappa3 (also known as PGC7/Stella), indicating that zygotic gene activation (ZGA)
was disrupted in these embryos. However, a small portion of the TS cloned embryos
(0-15.9%) reached the blastocyst stage. In these TS cloned blastocysts, the
numbers of trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) cells were 31.9 ± 4.6 and
12.1 ± 3.0, respectively, which were not significantly different from those in
the fertilized embryos. In addition, the gene expression analysis showed that
Oct3/4, and Cdx2, which are ICM- and TE-specific marker genes, respectively, and 
Dppa3, and Hdac1, which are zygotic gene activation-related genes, were expressed
in TS cloned blastocysts at the same levels as in the fertilized blastocysts.
These results indicate that although TS cloned embryos are able to differentiate 
into ICM cells, the genomic reprogrammability of TS cells is very low following
nuclear transfer.

PMCID: PMC4378359
PMID: 25826724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Reproduction. 2015 Jul;150(1):1-10. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0048. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

Cheetah interspecific SCNT followed by embryo aggregation improves in vitro
development but not pluripotent gene expression.

Moro LN(1), Hiriart MI(1), Buemo C(1), Jarazo J(2), Sestelo A(2), Veraguas D(2), 
Rodriguez-Alvarez L(2), Salamone DF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal BiotechnologyAgriculture Faculty, University of Buenos
Aires, Avenida San Martin 4453 (1417), Buenos Aires, ArgentinaNational Institute 
of Scientific and Technological ResearchAvenida Rivadavia 1917 (C1033AAJ), Buenos
Aires, ArgentinaLaboratory of Reproductive BiotechnologyZoological Garden of
Buenos Aires, República de la India 3000, Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDepartment of
Animal ScienceVeterinary Faculty, University of Concepción, Avenida Vicente
Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile Laboratory of Animal BiotechnologyAgriculture Faculty,
University of Buenos Aires, Avenida San Martin 4453 (1417), Buenos Aires,
ArgentinaNational Institute of Scientific and Technological ResearchAvenida
Rivadavia 1917 (C1033AAJ), Buenos Aires, ArgentinaLaboratory of Reproductive
BiotechnologyZoological Garden of Buenos Aires, República de la India 3000,
Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDepartment of Animal ScienceVeterinary Faculty, University
of Concepción, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile. (2)Laboratory of
Animal BiotechnologyAgriculture Faculty, University of Buenos Aires, Avenida San 
Martin 4453 (1417), Buenos Aires, ArgentinaNational Institute of Scientific and
Technological ResearchAvenida Rivadavia 1917 (C1033AAJ), Buenos Aires,
ArgentinaLaboratory of Reproductive BiotechnologyZoological Garden of Buenos
Aires, República de la India 3000, Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDepartment of Animal
ScienceVeterinary Faculty, University of Concepción, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, 
Chillán, Chile. (3)Laboratory of Animal BiotechnologyAgriculture Faculty,
University of Buenos Aires, Avenida San Martin 4453 (1417), Buenos Aires,
ArgentinaNational Institute of Scientific and Technological ResearchAvenida
Rivadavia 1917 (C1033AAJ), Buenos Aires, ArgentinaLaboratory of Reproductive
BiotechnologyZoological Garden of Buenos Aires, República de la India 3000,
Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDepartment of Animal ScienceVeterinary Faculty, University
of Concepción, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile Laboratory of Animal
BiotechnologyAgriculture Faculty, University of Buenos Aires, Avenida San Martin 
4453 (1417), Buenos Aires, ArgentinaNational Institute of Scientific and
Technological ResearchAvenida Rivadavia 1917 (C1033AAJ), Buenos Aires,
ArgentinaLaboratory of Reproductive BiotechnologyZoological Garden of Buenos
Aires, República de la India 3000, Buenos Aires, ArgentinaDepartment of Animal
ScienceVeterinary Faculty, University of Concepción, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, 
Chillán, Chile salamone@agro.uba.ar.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the capacity of domestic cat (Dc, Felis
silvestris) oocytes to reprogram the nucleus of cheetah (Ch, Acinonyx jubatus)
cells by interspecies SCNT (iSCNT), by using embryo aggregation. Dc oocytes were 
in vitro matured and subjected to zona pellucida free (ZP-free) SCNT or iSCNT,
depending on whether the nucleus donor cell was of Dc or Ch respectively. ZP-free
reconstructed embryos were then cultured in microwells individually (Dc1X and
Ch1X groups) or in couples (Dc2X and Ch2X groups). Embryo aggregation improved in
vitro development obtaining 27.4, 47.7, 16.7 and 28.3% of blastocyst rates in the
Dc1X, Dc2X, Ch1X and Ch2X groups, respectively (P<0.05). Moreover, aggregation
improved the morphological quality of blastocysts from the Dc2X over the Dc1X
group. Gene expression analysis revealed that Ch1X and Ch2X blastocysts had
significantly lower relative expression of OCT4, CDX2 and NANOG than the Dc1X,
Dc2X and IVF control groups. The OCT4, NANOG, SOX2 and CDX2 genes were
overexpressed in Dc1X blastocysts, but the relative expression of these four
genes decreased in the Dc2X, reaching similar relative levels to those of Dc IVF 
blastocysts. In conclusion, Ch blastocysts were produced using Dc oocytes, but
with lower relative expression of pluripotent and trophoblastic genes, indicating
that nuclear reprogramming could be still incomplete. Despite this, embryo
aggregation improved the development of Ch and Dc embryos, and normalized Dc gene
expression, which suggests that this strategy could improve full-term
developmental efficiency of cat and feline iSCNT embryos.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25820926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Surgery. 2015 Jul;158(1):151-61. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2015.02.001. Epub 2015 Mar
26.

Histomorphologic and molecular phenotypes predict gemcitabine response and
overall survival in adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.

Schiergens TS(1), Reu S(2), Neumann J(2), Renz BW(3), Niess H(1), Boeck S(4),
Heinemann V(4), Bruns CJ(5), Jauch KW(1), Kleespies A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General-, Visceral-, Transplantation-, Vascular- and Thoracic
Surgery, University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Pancreatic Cancer Center
Munich(LMU), University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (2)Pancreatic Cancer Center
Munich(LMU), University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Department of Pathology,
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Pancreatic Cancer Center Munich(LMU),
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, 
Irving Cancer Research Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY. 
(4)Pancreatic Cancer Center Munich(LMU), University of Munich, Munich, Germany;
Department of Medical Oncology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Department of General-, Visceral- and Vascular Surgery, University of
Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany. (6)Department of General-, Visceral-,
Transplantation-, Vascular- and Thoracic Surgery, University of Munich, Munich,
Germany; Pancreatic Cancer Center Munich(LMU), University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. Electronic address: axel.kleespies@med.lmu.de.

BACKGROUND: The need for adjuvant chemotherapy after resection of ampullary
cancer (PapCa) remains undefined. Recent data suggest that a different epithelial
origin of PapCa might be associated with different tumor biology. The aim of the 
present study was to assess the clinical value of morphologic and
immunohistochemic subclassification of PapCa into intestinal-type (IT) and
pancreaticobiliary-type (PT) to predict chemotherapy response and overall
survival (OS).
METHODS: Via a prospective database, 112 PapCa were identified, of which 95 could
be included in the present study. Those were compared with 206 matching patients 
with periampullary pancreatic cancer (ie, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma,
PDAC). IT and PT PapCa were classified morphologically, and tissue microarray was
prepared with immunohistochemistry for CK7, CK20, MUC2, CDX2, ß-Catenin, and
Villin. Multivariate survival analysis was performed.
RESULTS: OS of PT patients was less compared with IT patients (25 vs 98 months;
P < .001), whereas it was comparable with patients with PDAC (25 vs 14 months;
P = .123). PT patients receiving adjuvant gemcitabine chemotherapy featured
improved OS (32 vs 13 months; P = .013), whereas gemcitabine tended to be
associated with decreased OS in IT patients (35 vs 112 months; P = .193). Besides
histopathologic classification, expression of CK7 and MUC2 were important
prognostic variables. PT patients with CK7-positivity or MUC2-negativity were
segregated into an even poorer prognostic group.
CONCLUSION: PapCa is not a separate tumor entity. We demonstrate important
differences between IT-PapCa and PT-PapCa not only in long-term survival but also
in response to adjuvant gemcitabine. Tumor biology and clinical course of PT
tumors resemble those of PDAC. PT tumors should therefore be treated like PDAC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25819575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Theriogenology. 2015 Jul 1;84(1):101-8.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.02.018. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Effect of donor cell type on developmental competence, quality, gene expression, 
and epigenetic status of interspecies cloned embryos produced using cells from
wild buffalo and oocytes from domestic buffalo.

Saini M(1), Selokar NL(2), Raja AK(3), Sahare AA(3), Singla SK(3), Chauhan MS(3),
Manik RS(3), Palta P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India;
Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction, Central Institute for Research on
Buffaloes, Hisar, India. (2)Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction,
Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hisar, India. (3)Animal
Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India. (4)Animal
Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India.
Electronic address: prabhatpalta@yahoo.com.

This study compared the cloning efficiency of donor cells of fibroblast and
epithelial origin isolated from ear skin of a wild buffalo (Bubalus arnee) and
used with cytoplasts from domestic buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) in interspecies SCNT
by hand-made cloning. The cleavage (93.0 ± 2.8% vs. 85.6 ± 2.4%) and blastocyst
rates (50.6 ± 4.0% vs. 20.5 ± 2.6%) were higher (P < 0.05) for fibroblasts than
those for epithelial cells, whereas the total cell number (490 ± 42 and 492 ± 95,
respectively) and apoptotic index (2.3 ± 0.3 and 2.5 ± 0.6, respectively) of
blastocysts were similar. The global level of H3K18ac and H3K27me3 was lower (P <
0.05) in fibroblasts than that in epithelial cells. The global level of H3K18ac
was higher (P < 0.05) in fibroblast than that in epithelial cell-derived
blastocysts, whereas that of H3K27me3 was similar between the two groups. The
expression level of HDAC1, DNMT1, DNMT3a, and P53 was higher (P < 0.05) in
fibroblasts than that in epithelial cells; that of CASPASE3 showed an opposite
pattern (P < 0.001), whereas CASPASE7 expression level was similar in the two
groups. In the embryos, the expression level of HDAC1, DNMT3a, and CDX2 was lower
(P < 0.05) in fibroblast than that in epithelial cell-derived blastocysts; that
of NANOG showed an opposite pattern (P < 0.05), whereas that of OCT4 was similar 
between the two groups. In conclusion, donor cells of fibroblast origin are
easier to reprogram than those of epithelial origin in interspecies SCNT, and
cloning efficiency, epigenetic status, and gene expression pattern vary among
cells having different origin although they may be from the same tissue.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25799471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0122657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122657.
eCollection 2015.

Vitamin D receptor Cdx-2 polymorphism and premenopausal breast cancer risk in
southern Pakistani patients.

Iqbal Mu(1), Khan TA(1), Maqbool SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Karachi Institute of Radiotherapy and Nuclear
Medicine, Karachi, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D3 is a secoster oid that exerts its effect by binding to its
nuclear receptor called vitamin D receptor (VDR), inducing apoptosis and thereby 
inhibiting cell proliferation in cancer cells. The VDR receptor, located in the
nucleus, is known to regulate the functions of over 200 genes. Various allelic
forms of hVDR have been discovered that increase susceptibility to various
cancers. The VDR-Cdx2 polymorphism, located in the promoter region of exon 1e in 
the VDR gene, influences the functional activity of the receptor, since the hVDR 
lacks consensus TATA and CAAT boxes. The current investigation examines the
association between VDR-Cdx2 polymorphism and breast cancer in premenopausal
females from Southern Pakistan.
METHODS: We conducted a case control study on 264 subjects (103 cases and 161
controls) who were recruited from a tertiary hospital located in Karachi,
Pakistan. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using a commercial kit 
method, and the VDR-Cdx2 polymorphism was genotyped using tetraprimer
amplification refractory mutation system polymerase chain reaction (T-ARMS-PCR)
method. Pearson chi square test was used to assess the association between
VDR-Cdx2 genotype and breast cancer while genotype distribution in controls was
evaluated by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). Breast cancer risk was calculated 
using odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: The genotype distribution in the control group was in HWE (p > 0.05) for
the VDR-Cdx2 polymorphism. A non-significant association was observed between VDR
cdx2 polymorphism and breast cancer, however the GG genotype was at risk (OR =
1.832, 95% CI = 0.695-4.828) of developing breast cancer.
CONCLUSION: The GG genotype of Cdx2-VDR gene polymorphism may increase the risk
of developing breast cancer in young female patients in South Pakistan. Further
investigations examining additional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in VDR
are required to assess their relationships with breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4370503
PMID: 25799416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jun;19(3):124-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.03.001.
Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Cystadenomas of the liver and extrahepatic bile ducts: Morphologic and
immunohistochemical characterization of the biliary and intestinal variants.

Albores-Saavedra J(1), Córdova-Ramón JC(2), Chablé-Montero F(3), Dorantes-Heredia
R(3), Henson DE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medica Sur Clinic and Foundation, Mexico City,
Mexico; Department of Pathology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición "Salvador Zubirán", Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address:
dralboresjorge@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Medica Sur Clinic and
Foundation, Mexico City, Mexico; Department of Pathology, Instituto Nacional de
Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición "Salvador Zubirán", Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Department of Pathology, Medica Sur Clinic and Foundation, Mexico City,
Mexico. (4)Department of Preventive Medicine, Division of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda,
MD.

Cystadenomas of the liver and extrahepatic bile ducts (EHBD) are uncommon but
distinctive neoplasms whose terminology and epithelial phenotype have been a
source of controversy. We reviewed 20 cases, 16 arising in the liver and 4 in the
EHBD. Eighteen patients were women, with a mean age of 36.5 years. Eighteen
tumors were multiloculated and 2 were unilocular. The tumor size ranged from 4 to
29 cm (average, 11 cm). The cyst fluid in 13 tumors was described as serous, in 2
as clear, in 2 others as hemorrhagic, and in 1 as serous and mucinous. Only in 2 
tumors was the fluid described as mucinous. In 18 cystadenomas, the predominant
epithelial lining consisted of a single layer of cuboidal or low-columnar
nondysplastic cells similar to those of the gallbladder or bile ducts. This
epithelial lining was strongly positive for cytokeratins 7 and 19, and focally
positive for MUC1. Only 2 cystadenomas showed predominant intestinal
differentiation characterized by mature goblet cells and columnar absorptive
cells. These cells expressed CDX2, MUC2, and cytokeratin 20. Admixed with the
goblet and columnar cells, there were serotonin-containing cells and Paneth
cells. These 2 tumors showed extensive areas of high-grade dysplasia and invasive
adenocarcinoma with intestinal phenotype. A subepithelial ovarian-like stroma was
present in all tumors. None of the patients died of the tumors. We believe that
the term mucinous cystic tumor recommended by the World Health Organization for
all cystadenomas of the liver and EHBD is a misnomer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25792461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Sep;23(8):550-7. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000121.

Close relation of large cell carcinoma to adenocarcinoma by hierarchical cluster 
analysis: implications for histologic typing of lung cancer on biopsies.

Hammer SH(1), Prall F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Rostock University, Rostock, Germany.

Determining histologic types of lung cancer on biopsies can be difficult. This
study addresses the role of immunohistochemistry in histologic typing, using a
tissue microarray (TMA) as "model biopsies," and presents a classification
generated by an unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis. A TMA was made from
resection specimens of a consecutive series of 165 lung tumors. In a "tissue-spot
review" with hematoxylin and eosin sections all the large cell carcinomas (N=22) 
were assigned to the noncommittal class of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), as
were an additional 37 tumors of defined histologic types. Adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas included with these NSCLC could be diagnosed by
immunohistochemistry with antibodies against TTF-1, Napsin A, cytokeratin (CK)7, 
p40, p63, and CK5/6 with moderate to good sensitivities and specificities.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was done with these data and additional
high-molecular-weight cytokeratins, CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin
immunohistochemistry. This delineated separate clusters for adenocarcinomas,
large cell carcinomas, neuroendocrine tumors, and squamous cell carcinomas.
Notably, adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma clusters were closely related
and clearly set off from the squamous cell carcinoma cluster. As would be
expected for a clinically well-staged series CDX2, GATA3, estrogen, and
progesterone receptor immunohistochemistry remained negative in the vast majority
of the tumors and, if positive, were restricted to very few cells. These results,
the clustering data in particular, underpin the pragmatic recommendation
canvassed with the IASLC/ATS/ERS classification of lung cancers that
adenocarcinoma-type molecular studies should include NSCLC with a nonsquamous
cell carcinoma immunophenotype.

PMID: 25789531  [PubMed - in process]


189. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jun;46(6):836-42. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.10.032. Epub 2015 
Feb 20.

An update on clinicopathological, immunohistochemical, and molecular profiles of 
colloid carcinoma of the lung.

Zenali MJ(1), Weissferdt A(1), Solis LM(2), Ali S(1), Tang X(2), Mehran RJ(3),
Wistuba II(4), Moran CA(1), Kalhor N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030. (2)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. (3)Department
of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. (4)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030;
Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. (5)Department of Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic
address: nkalhor@mdanderson.org.

Colloid carcinoma is a rare subtype of lung adenocarcinoma characterized by
abundant pools of extracellular mucin and scant malignant epithelium. Because of 
the rarity of these tumors, many of the reported clinicopathological and
immunohistochemical characteristics are contradictory. Moreover, the molecular
alterations that underlie these tumors are unknown. We present the
clinicopathological, immunohistochemical, and molecular features of 13 cases of
colloid carcinoma of the lung. The patients were 9 women and 4 men between the
ages of 48 and 86 years. Surgical resection and staging were performed in all
patients. Seven patients were in stage T1N0M0, 3 in T2N0M0, 2 in T2N1M0, and 1 in
T2N0M1. The tumor was 100% mucinous in 9 patients, whereas in 4 cases, the
lesions consisted of 50% to 90% mucin pools with the remainder being a noncolloid
adenocarcinoma component ranging in morphology from bronchioalveolar to acinar,
papillary, solid, or mixed patterns. Follow-up ranged from 35 to 128 months.
Three patients died, 1 of disease and 2 of unrelated causes. The remaining 10
patients are alive at the time of reporting, 3 with recurrent disease.
Immunohistochemical studies showed CK7, CK20, and CDX2 expression in all tumors, 
whereas TTF-1, surfactant A, and napsin A were not present or were only focally
positive in most cases. Analysis showed KRAS mutations in 2 cases. All tumors
were negative for ALK gene rearrangement and EGFR mutation. Our study highlights 
the clinicopathological, immunohistochemical, and molecular features of lung
colloid adenocarcinoma and attempts to clarify some misconceptions regarding this
rare tumor.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25776025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0120501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120501.
eCollection 2015.

CRISPR/Cas9 as tool for functional study of genes involved in preimplantation
embryo development.

Kwon J(1), Namgoong S(1), Kim NH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Chungbuk National University, Naesudong-ro,
Seowon-gu, Cheongju-si 362-763, Chungcheongbuk-do, Korea.

The CRISPR/Cas9 system has proven to be an efficient gene-editing tool for genome
modification of cells and organisms. However, the applicability and efficiency of
this system in pig embryos have not been studied in depth. Here, we aimed to
remove porcine OCT4 function as a model case using the CRISPR/Cas9 system.
Injection of Cas9 and single-guide RNA (sgRNA) against OCT4 decreased the
percentages of OCT4-positive embryos to 37-50% of total embryos, while ~100% of
control embryos exhibited clear OCT4 immunostaining. We assessed the mutation
status near the guide sequence using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA
sequencing, and a portion of blastocysts (20% in exon 2 and 50% in exon 5) had
insertions/deletions near protospacer-adjacent motifs (PAMs). Different target
sites had frequent deletions, but different concentrations of sgRNA made no
impact. OCT4 mRNA levels dramatically decreased at the 8-cell stage, and they
were barely detectable in blastocysts, while mRNA levels of other genes,
including NANOG, and CDX2 were not affected. In addition, the combination of two 
sgRNAs led to large-scale deletion (about 1.8 kb) in the same chromosome. Next,
we injected an enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) vector targeting the
OCT4 exon with Cas9 and sgRNA to create a knockin. We confirmed eGFP fluorescence
in blastocysts in the inner cell mass, and also checked the mutation status using
PCR and DNA sequencing. A significant portion of blastocysts had eGFP sequence
insertions near PAM sites. The CRISPR/CAS9 system provides a good tool for gene
functional studies by deleting target genes in the pig.

PMCID: PMC4361403
PMID: 25775469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Apr;39(4):479-86. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000401.

Cadherin 17 is a sensitive and specific marker for metanephric adenoma.

Yakirevich E(1), Magi-Galluzzi C, Grada Z, Lu S, Resnick MB, Mangray S.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital and Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, RI Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.

Metanephric adenoma (MA) is a rare benign renal neoplasm that shares morphologic 
and immunophenotypic overlap with epithelial-predominant Wilms tumor (e-WT) and
with the solid variant of papillary renal cell carcinoma (s-PRCC). Cadherin 17
(CDH17) is expressed primarily in the normal intestine and digestive tract tumors
and has not been detected in tumors from other sites including the kidney. We
investigated the diagnostic utility of CDH17 in differentiating between MA, e-WT,
and s-PRCC. Immunohistochemical analysis for CDH17, CD57, AMACR, WT-1, and CDX2
was performed on 17 e-WTs, 15 s-PRCCs, and 21 MAs and assessed on the basis of a 
combined score of extent and intensity. Normal adult kidney parenchyma was
negative for CDH17 staining. CDH17 was expressed in the late stages of fetal
kidney development at the junction of the glomerular space and proximal nephron. 
The majority of MAs (81%) demonstrated membranous CDH17 immunoreactivity in all
components (acinar, tubular, and papillary), whereas all cases of e-WTs and
s-PRCCs were negative (P<0.0001). WT-1 was negative in s-PRCC and was positive in
all cases of e-WT and MA. All MAs were strongly positive for CD57; however, this 
marker was also moderate to strongly positive in 6 (35%) e-WTs and 2 (13%)
s-PRCCs. AMACR was strongly positive in all s-PRCCs, but moderate reactivity was 
seen in 3 (17%) e-WTs and 2 MAs (10%). CDH17 is a sensitive (81%) and highly
specific (100%) marker for MA and should be considered in the
immunohistochemistry panel for distinguishing MA from its mimics.

PMCID: PMC4360917
PMID: 25768256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Case Rep Pathol. 2015;2015:646270. doi: 10.1155/2015/646270. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Inverted lymphoglandular polyp in descending colon.

Zhou S(1), Ma Y(2), Chandrasoma P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA ; Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA ; Department of Pathology,
LAC+USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (2)Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA ; Department of
Pathology, LAC+USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

A 47-year-old male with a history of left colon cancer, status post left colon
resection for 12 years, presented with rectal bleeding. Colonoscopic examination 
revealed an 8<U+2009>mm sessile polyp in the proximal descending colon. Microscopic
examination showed that the surface of this polyp was covered with a layer of
normal colonic mucosa with focal surface erosion. In the submucosal layer, an
intimate admixture of multiple cystically dilated glands and prominent lymphoid
aggregates with germinal centers was seen. The glands were lined by columnar
epithelium. Immunohistochemical staining showed the glands were positive for CK20
and CDX2 and negative for CK7, with a low proliferative index, mostly consistent 
with reactive colonic glands. The patient remained asymptomatic after one-year
follow-up. A review of the literature shows very rare descriptions of similar
lesions, but none fits exactly this pattern. We would designate this inverted
lymphoglandular polyp and present this case to raise the awareness of recognizing
this unusual histological entity.

PMCID: PMC4342070
PMID: 25767731  [PubMed]


193. Front Oncol. 2015 Feb 25;5:46. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00046. eCollection 2015.

Towards a molecular classification of colorectal cancer.

Lugli A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern , Bern
, Switzerland.

PMCID: PMC4340269
PMID: 25763358  [PubMed]


194. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Mar 7;21(9):2770-6. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i9.2770.

CDX2 protein expression compared to alcian blue staining in the evaluation of
esophageal intestinal metaplasia.

Johnson DR(1), Abdelbaqui M(1), Tahmasbi M(1), Mayer Z(1), Lee HW(1), Malafa
MP(1), Coppola D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dennis R Johnson, Maisoun Abdelbaqui, Maryam Tahmasbi, Domenico Coppola,
Department of Anatomic Pathology, Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute,
Tampa, FL 33612, United States.

AIM: To compare the sensitivity and specificity of CDX2 and alcian blue (AB) pH
2.5 staining in identifying esophageal intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS: One hundred and ninty-nine biopsies from 186 patients were
retrospectively reviewed and categorized as Barrett's esophagus (BE) (n = 108);
non-Barrett's esophagus (NBE) (n = 48); columnar blue cells (CB) and esophageal
glands (EG) (n = 43). The biopsies were stained with AB and immunostained for
CDX2 using a mouse monoclonal antibody from Biogenex (clone CDX2-88) and the
Ventana Discovery X automated immunostainer. The positive and negative predictive
value of each group was used to determine the predictive power of CDX2 and AB in 
diagnosing intestinal metaplasia.
RESULTS: All of the 108 BE biopsies (100%) were positive for AB and 102 of them
(94.4%) were positive for CDX2. The six BE patients (5.6%) who failed to stain
with CDX2 were found to have lost the focus of intestinal metaplasia upon deeper 
sectioning for immunostaining. Both AB and CDX2 were negative in 43 out of 48
(89.6%) NBE cases. Five NBE patients (10.4%) were falsely positive for AB due to 
the presence of EG and CB in these biopsies. These cases were all CDX2 negative. 
In addition, 5 AB negative NBE were found to be CDX2 positive. Based on these
results the CDX2 immunostain had similar sensitivity but higher specificity (100%
vs about 91%) than AB in detecting intestinal type metaplasia in these samples.
Our data shows that CDX2 has a better PPV in detecting intestinal metaplasia as
compared to AB (95.6% vs 71.5%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: CDX2 has a better positive predictive value than AB in detecting
intestinal metaplasia. CDX2 may be useful when challenged by gastro-esophageal
biopsies containing mimikers of BE.

PMCID: PMC4351230
PMID: 25759548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb;29(1):3-16. doi:
10.1016/j.bpg.2014.11.001. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Mechanisms of Barrett's oesophagus: intestinal differentiation, stem cells, and
tissue models.

Nakagawa H(1), Whelan K(2), Lynch JP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, 421 Curie Boulevard, 956 Biomedical Research
Building, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. Electronic address:
nakagawh@mail.med.upenn.edu. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, 421 Curie
Boulevard, 956 Biomedical Research Building, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
Electronic address: whelank@mail.med.upenn.edu. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, 
421 Curie Boulevard, 956 Biomedical Research Building, Philadelphia, PA, 19104,
USA. Electronic address: lynchj@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Barrett's oesophagus (BE) is defined as any metaplastic columnar epithelium in
the distal oesophagus which replaces normal squamous epithelium and which
predisposes to cancer development. It is this second requirement, the
predisposition to cancer, which makes this condition both clinically highly
relevant and an important area for ongoing research. While BE has been defined
pathologically since the 1950's (Allison and Johnstone, Thorax 1955), and
identified as a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma since the 1970's (Naef 
A.P., et al J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1975), our understanding of the molecular
events giving rise to this condition remains limited. Herein we will examine what
is known about the intestinal features of BE and how well it recapitulates the
intestinal epithelium, including stem identity and function. Finally, we will
explore laboratory models of this condition presently in use and under
development, to identify new insights they may provide into this important
clinical condition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4352719
PMID: 25743452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2016 Jan;25(1):85-96. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000132.

Meta-analysis on vitamin D receptor and cancer risk: focus on the role of TaqI,
ApaI, and Cdx2 polymorphisms.

Serrano D(1), Gnagnarella P, Raimondi S, Gandini S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of aCancer Prevention and Genetics bEpidemiology and Biostatistics; 
European Institute of Oncology, Milan Italy.

Vitamin D plays a significant role in our health, including cancer incidence and 
mortality. Vitamin D receptor (VDR) single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may
affect its activity, influencing the risk of cancer. Several studies have
investigated VDR SNPs, but the association with the risk of cancer is
controversial. Here, we present a meta-analysis to assess the association of
TaqI, ApaI, and Cdx2 SNPs with the risk of cancer. A systematic literature search
was performed following a predefined protocol and using validated search
strategies. This meta-analysis shows the summary odd ratio (SOR) overall, by
cancer sites and by ethnicity. Up to January 2014, we identified 73 independent
studies with 35<U+2009>525 cases and 38<U+2009>675 controls. The meta-analysis of Cdx2 gg
versus GG showed a significant 12% increased risk for all cancers [SOR=1.12; 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.00-1.25]. The other SNPs analyzed did not show an
overall significant association with the risk of cancer: SOR=0.98 (95% CI:
0.90-1.07) and 1.06 (95% CI: 0.95-1.19) for TaqI tt versus TT and ApaI aa versus 
AA, respectively. TaqI shows a significant 43% increased risk for colorectal
cancer (SOR=1.43; 95% CI: 1.30-1.58 for tt vs. TT). Strong frequency variations
are present among different ethnic groups. This meta-analysis showed an overall
increased risk of cancer associated with Cdx2 SNP and a specific higher risk of
colorectal cancer associated with the TaqI polymorphism. The VDR genotype might
become more relevant when clustered in a specific haplotype, associated with
other SNPs of genes involved in vitamin D metabolism, or for specific tumors
and/or patient characteristics.

PMID: 25738688  [PubMed - in process]


197. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):905-12. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3413. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Overexpression of caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 inhibits the growth
of the MGC-803 human gastric cancer cell line in vivo.

Wei W(1), Li L(2), Wang X(2), Yan L(1), Cao W(1), Zhan Z(1), Zhang X(1), Yu H(1),
Xie Y(3), Xiao Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Surgery,
People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, Guangxi 530021,
P.R. China. (3)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, P.R. China.

Caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is important in intestinal
cell fate specification and multiple lines of evidence have substantiated that
CDX2 is important in carcinogenesis of the digestive tract. The CDX2 regulatory
network is intricate and remains to be fully elucidated in gastric cancer. The
aim of the present study was to examine the effects of CDX2 on the growth of the 
MGC-803 human gastric cancer cell line in vivo, and to elucidate the mechanism
involved. The effects of the overexpression of CDX2 in xenograft tumors of
MGC-803 cells was investigated in nude mice through the injection of CDX2
recombinant lentiviral vectors. The tumor size was measured using vernier
callipers. The expression levels of CDX2, survivin, B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2),
Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax), cyclin D1, s-phase kinase-associated protein 2 
(Skp2) and c-Myc in the tumor cells were analyzed by western blotting and
semi-quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The apoptotic 
rates were determined using a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP-biotin nick end labeling assay. The overexpression of CDX2 was observed in
the group subjected to the injection of CDX2 recombinant lentiviral vectors. CDX2
had an inhibitory effect on the MGC-803 human gastric cancer cell line and
promoted tumor cell apoptosis in vivo. Furthermore, the overexpression of CDX2
upregulated the expression of Bax and downregulated the expression levels of
survivin, Bcl-2, cyclin D1, Skp2 and c-Myc in the tumor tissues. These results
indicated that CDX2 may serve as a tumor suppressor in gastric cancer, and
inhibits gastric cancer cell growth by suppressing the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4438918
PMID: 25738600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2014 Nov;41(12):2080-2.

[A case of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma difficult to distinguish from
metastatic liver cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Kajihara J(1), Tomimaru Y, Eguchi H, Tomokuni A, Asaoka T, Hama N, Wada H,
Kawamoto K, Kobayashi S, Marubashi S, Doki Y, Mori M, Nagano H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University.

A 65-year-old woman presented to our department with a liver tumor. She had
undergone subtotal colectomy and total hysterectomy for hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer and uterine cancer 14 years prior to diagnosis. An abdominal CT
scan revealed a ring-enhancing tumor with portal vein tumor thrombus on the left 
lobe. With a preoperative diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, combined 
hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma, or metastatic liver cancer; we performed
an extended left hepatic lobectomy. The histopathological examination showed
adenocarcinoma of the liver. The histopathological findings of the liver tumor
resembled that of the previous uterine cancer. Immunohistochemical testing was
positive for CK7 and negative for CK20, CDX2, PgR, vimentin, and CA125. However, 
PgR, vimentin, and CA125 were positively stained in the uterine cancer. Based on 
these findings, the final diagnosis of the liver tumor was primary intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 25731429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Jul;39(7):983-92. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000405.

Ovarian seromucinous carcinoma: report of a series of a newly categorized and
uncommon neoplasm.

Taylor J(1), McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast,
Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.

Seromucinous neoplasms are a new category of ovarian epithelial tumor in the
revised World Health Organization Classification of Tumours of the Female
Reproductive Organs. Borderline variants are well described, but there have been 
few reports of seromucinous carcinomas. We report the clinicopathologic features 
in 19 cases of ovarian seromucinous carcinoma in patients aged 16 to 79 years
(mean 47). In 16 cases, the neoplasm was unilateral and in 3 cases bilateral. The
tumors ranged in size from 1.8 to 18 cm (mean 10.5 cm). The tumors were stage I
(n=15), stage II (n=1), and stage III (n=3). The histologic features were highly 
variable both within and between individual tumors. The majority of neoplasms (12
cases) exhibited a predominant papillary architecture with lesser components of
glandular, microglandular, and solid growth. A predominant glandular architecture
was present in 6 cases, whereas 1 had a predominantly solid growth. A
characteristic feature was an admixture of cell types. Most of the tumors (15
cases) were mainly composed of endocervical-like mucinous cells, whereas in 4
cases there was predominant endometrioid differentiation. Other cell types,
present in varying proportions, included hobnail cells, eosinophilic cells,
squamous cells, clear cells, and signet-ring cells. An infiltrate of neutrophil
polymorphs was a prominent feature in most cases. Most cases also exhibited areas
of microglandular architecture with cytoplasmic clearing and intraluminal
polymorphs, the features closely resembling cervical microglandular hyperplasia. 
Areas of stromal hyalinization, adenofibromatous growth, and psammoma bodies were
present in a minority of cases. Endometriosis was identified in the same ovary in
10 cases, and in 10 there was a component of seromucinous borderline tumor.
Thirteen, 5, and 1 tumor were of grades 1, 2, and 3, respectively (using the FIGO
grading system for endometrioid adenocarcinomas of the uterine corpus). A
synchronous uterine endometrioid adenocarcinoma was present in 1 case.
Immunohistochemically, there was positive staining with CK7 (17/17 cases),
estrogen receptor (16/16 cases), progesterone receptor (6/7 cases), CA125 (15/15 
cases), PAX8 (8/8 cases), CEA (8/13 cases), CA19.9 (8/9 cases), and WT1 (2/13
cases). CK20 and CDX2 were negative in all cases tested (16 and 14,
respectively). p53 showed "wild-type" staining in 4/4 cases, and p16 was focally 
positive in 5/5 cases. Follow-up information was available in 8 patients. Seven
were alive with no evidence of disease (follow-up 3 to 74 mo), whereas 1 patient 
who initially presented with a stage IIB tumor died of disease at 192 months.
Given the characteristic admixture of cell types and the overlapping morphologic 
features with low-grade serous, mucinous, and endometrioid neoplasms, the most
appropriate categorization of seromucinous carcinomas is uncertain, but we
believe they are best regarded as a distinct type of ovarian epithelial
malignancy and are most similar to endometrioid adenocarcinomas. We recommend
grading them in an analogous manner to ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 25723110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Hum Pathol. 2015 May;46(5):643-56. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.01.003. Epub 2015 
Jan 15.

Gastric-type expression signature in serrated pathway-associated colorectal
tumors.

Kim JH(1), Kim KJ(2), Rhee YY(2), Bae JM(2), Cho NY(3), Lee HS(4), Kang GH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center, Seoul 156-707,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Epigenetics,
Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul
110-799, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 463-707, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic
of Korea; Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: ghkang@snu.ac.kr.

Accumulating evidence has indicated that serrated pathway-associated colorectal
tumors may be associated with aberrant gastric-type differentiation. Here, we
investigated the immunoexpression profiles of gastric-type markers and
intestinal-type markers in colorectal tumors, focusing on their relation to
serrated pathway-associated tumors. Immunohistochemistry for 7 gastric-type
markers (ANXA10, VSIG1, CLDN18, CTSE, TFF2, MUC5AC, and MUC6) and 2
intestinal-type markers (CDX2 and CK20) was performed in 36 normal
gastric/colorectal mucosa tissues, 163 colorectal polyps, and 175
microsatellite-unstable colorectal carcinomas (MSI-H CRCs). In normal tissues,
all 7 candidate gastric-type markers showed expressional specificity for normal
gastric mucosa. Among the colorectal polyps, sessile serrated adenoma/polyps
demonstrated the highest positive rate of ANXA10, CLDN18, MUC5AC, and MUC6
expression (87%, 35%, 61%, and 52%, respectively). Microvesicular hyperplastic
polyps showed the highest frequencies of ANXA10, VSIG1, and TFF2 positivity (87%,
87%, and 67%, respectively). ANXA10 and MUC6 expression was not detected in all
conventional adenomas. In MSI-H CRCs, the expression of ANXA10, TFF2, and MUC5AC 
was significantly associated with sporadic tumors (P < .001, P = .01, and P <
.001, respectively). Moreover, all of the 7 gastric-type markers were
significantly related to preferential expression in proximal colon carcinomas
among MSI-H CRCs. CDX2 and CK20 expression was retained in all colorectal polyps,
whereas there were significantly high frequencies of CDX2 loss (28%) and CK20
loss (29%) in sporadic tumors among MSI-H CRCs. In conclusion, the early gain of 
gastric differentiation and late loss of intestinal differentiation are
immunophenotypic features in the serrated pathway to colorectal carcinoma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25704805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Intest Res. 2015 Jan;13(1):39-49. doi: 10.5217/ir.2015.13.1.39. Epub 2015 Jan 29.

Comparative analysis of gastrointestinal microbiota between normal and
caudal-related homeobox 2 (cdx2) transgenic mice.

Sakamoto H(1), Asahara T(2), Chonan O(2), Yuki N(2), Mutoh H(1), Hayashi S(3),
Yamamoto H(1), Sugano K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Japan. (2)Yakult Honsha Co., Ltd., Yakult Central
Institute, Kunitachi, Japan. (3)Department of Microbiology, Kitasato University
School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2) is expressed in the human
intestinal metaplastic mucosa and induces intestinal metaplastic mucosa in the
Cdx2 transgenic mouse stomach. Atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia
commonly lead to gastric achlorhydria, which predisposes the stomach to bacterial
overgrowth. In the present study, we determined the differences in gut microbiota
between normal and Cdx2 transgenic mice, using quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
METHODS: Twelve normal (control) and 12 Cdx2 transgenic mice were sacrificed, and
the gastric, jejunal, ileac, cecal and colonic mucosa, and feces were collected. 
To quantitate bacterial microbiota, we used real-time qRTPCR with 16S rRNA
gene-targeted, species-specific primers.
RESULTS: The total numbers of bacteria in the gastric, jejunal, ileac, cecal, and
colonic mucosa of the Cdx2 transgenic mice were significantly higher than those
of the normal mice. The Bacteroides fragilis group and also Prevotella were not
detected in the stomach of the normal mice, although they were detected in the
Cdx2 transgenic mice. Moreover, the Clostridium coccoides group, Clostridium
leptum subgroup, Bacteroides fragilis group, and Prevotella were not detected in 
the jejunum or ileum of the normal mice, although they were detected in the Cdx2 
transgenic mice. The fecal microbiota of the normal mice was similar to that of
the Cdx2 transgenic mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed the differences in composition of gut microbiota 
between normal and Cdx2 transgenic mice, which may be caused by the development
of gastric achlorhydria and intestinal metaplasia in Cdx2 transgenic mice.

PMCID: PMC4316220
PMID: 25691842  [PubMed]


202. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 Dec;9(4):436-46. doi: 10.1007/s12105-015-0615-3. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

A Subset of Sinonasal Non-Intestinal Type Adenocarcinomas are Truly Seromucinous 
Adenocarcinomas: A Morphologic and Immunophenotypic Assessment and Description of
a Novel Pitfall.

Purgina B(1), Bastaki JM(2), Duvvuri U(3,)(4), Seethala RR(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L6, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology,
Presbyterian-Shadyside Hospital, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology,
Presbyterian-Shadyside Hospital, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA. (4)Section of Otolaryngology, VA Pittsburgh Health
System, Pittsburgh, PA, 15240, USA. (5)Department of Pathology,
Presbyterian-Shadyside Hospital, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA. seethalarr@upmc.edu. (6)Department of Otolaryngology,
Presbyterian-Shadyside Hospital, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15232, USA. seethalarr@upmc.edu. (7)A614.X Presbyterian
University Hospital, 200 Lothrop St, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
seethalarr@upmc.edu.

While sinonasal intestinal type adenocarcinoma (ITAC) is defined by an intestinal
phenotype, non-intestinal type adenocarcinoma (non-ITAC) is traditionally viewed 
as a diagnosis of exclusion, despite previous implication of a seromucinous
phenotype and similarity to sinonasal seromucinous hamartomas (SSH). We performed
a comparison of clinicopathologic and immunophenotypic features of ITAC, non-ITAC
and SSH using traditional discriminatory markers and new markers of seromucinous 
differentiation. Twenty-three non-ITAC, 17 ITAC, and 5 SSH were retrieved
(1987-2014). As expected, ITAC occurred predominantly in the nasal cavity in
elderly patients (mean age 65 years) with a striking male predilection (15:2).
Regardless of grade/subtype, all ITAC were invariably CK20 and CDX2 positive, and
many (11/15) showed some CK7 positivity. Non-ITAC occurred in younger individuals
(mean age 51 years) with a slight female predilection (male to female ratio:
10:13) and showed diverse morphologic patterns and grades, some with morphologic 
similarity to SSH. SSH occurred in younger individuals (mean age 33 years).
Non-ITAC and SSH were invariably CK7 positive and CK20 negative, however, 4/22
non-ITAC and 2/5 SSH showed squamoid morular metaplasia that aberrantly expressed
CDX2 and co-expressed nuclear ß-catenin. Markers of seromucinous differentiation 
(S100, DOG1, and SOX10) were essentially absent in ITAC, but present to varying
degrees in the majority of non-ITAC and all SSH. Thus, the term 'seromucinous
adenocarcinoma' is the more appropriate designation for non-ITAC. Squamoid
morules in non-ITAC and SSH may be an immunophenotypic pitfall given the aberrant
CDX2 expression.

PMCID: PMC4651926
PMID: 25690258  [PubMed - in process]


203. Virchows Arch. 2015 Apr;466(4):383-91. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1724-9. Epub 2015 
Feb 11.

Hierarchical clustering identifies a subgroup of colonic adenocarcinomas
expressing crypt-like differentiation markers, associated with MSS status and
better prognosis.

Droy-Dupré L(1), Bossard C, Volteau C, Bezieau S, Laboisse CL, Mosnier JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Nantes, France.

The aim of this study was to identify in the group of colonic adenocarcinomas,
not otherwise specified (NOS), subgroups of oncogenetic and prognostic
significance based on the expression of immunohistochemical markers of epithelial
cell differentiation of the gastrointestinal tract. Hierarchical clustering
analysis of 122 adenocarcinomas (NOS) identified four clusters based on how
closely their profile of immunohistochemical expression of differentiation
markers was related: (i) a major cluster of 83 adenocarcinomas (68%) called
crypt-like carcinoma (CLA) with a immunohistochemically expressing colonic crypt 
differentiation markers (cytokeratin 20+, CDX2+, MUC2+ or MUC2-) and (ii) three
minor clusters, characterized by the loss of colonic crypt differentiation
markers and/or the acquisition of expression of markers of metaplastic foveolar
gastric differentiation (MUC5AC+) and/or aberrant cytokeratin 7 expression. CLAs 
were invariably MSS (<U+03C7> (2) test: p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). The sole parameters associated with
worse overall survival of the 122 patients with adenocarcinoma (NOS) were pT
stage, pN+ stage, and advanced clinical stage. Interestingly, CLA lineage of
differentiation was an independent prognostic parameter for better overall
survival among the 40 patients with an adenocarcinoma (NOS) stage III. In
conclusion, hierarchical clustering led to the identification of a main cluster
of adenocarcinoma (NOS) with crypt-like differentiation, associated with MSS
status and better prognosis. Its value as a biomarker of response to conventional
chemotherapeutic agents deserves to be examined in randomized therapy trials.

PMID: 25665656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb 7;21(5):1457-67. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i5.1457.

Loss of CDX2 expression is associated with poor prognosis in colorectal cancer
patients.

Bae JM(1), Lee TH(1), Cho NY(1), Kim TY(1), Kang GH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jeong Mo Bae, Tae Hun Lee, Nam-Yun Cho, Gyeong Hoon Kang, Laboratory of
Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, South Korea.

AIM: To investigate the clinicopathologic characteristics and prognostic
implications associated with loss of CDX2 expression in colorectal cancers
(CRCs).
METHODS: We immunohistochemically evaluated CDX2 expression in 713 CRCs and
paired our findings to clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics of each
individual. Endpoints included cytokeratin 7 and CK20 expression, microsatellite 
instability, CpG island methylator phenotype, and KRAS and BRAF mutation
statuses. Univariate and multivariate survival analysis was performed to reveal
the prognostic value of CDX2 downregulation.
RESULTS: CDX2 expression was lost in 42 (5.9%) patients. Moreover, loss of CDX2
expression was associated with proximal location, infiltrative growth, advanced
T, N, M and overall stage. On microscopic examination, loss of CDX2 expression
was associated with poor differentiation, increased number of tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes, luminal serration and mucin production. Loss of CDX2 expression was 
also associated with increased CK7 expression, decreased CK20 expression, CpG
island methylator phenotype, microsatellite instability and BRAF mutation. In a
univariate survival analysis, patients with loss of CDX2 expression showed worse 
overall survival (P < 0.001) and progression-free survival (P < 0.001). In a
multivariate survival analysis, loss of CDX2 expression was an independent poor
prognostic factor of overall survival [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.72, 95%CI:
1.04-2.85, P = 0.034] and progression-free survival (HR = 1.94, 95%CI: 1.22-3.07,
P = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: Loss of CDX2 expression is associated with aggressive clinical
behavior and can be used as a prognostic marker in CRCs.

PMCID: PMC4316088
PMID: 25663765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb 7;21(5):1436-43. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i5.1436.

Extending the functions of the homeotic transcription factor Cdx2 in the
digestive system through nontranscriptional activities.

Freund JN(1), Duluc I(1), Reimund JM(1), Gross I(1), Domon-Dell C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jean-Noël Freund, Isabelle Duluc, Jean-Marie Reimund, Isabelle Gross, Claire
Domon-Dell, INSERM UMR_S1113, Université de Strasbourg, FMTS, 67200 Strasbourg,
France.

The homeoprotein encoded by the intestinal-specific Cdx2 gene is a major
regulator of gut development and homeostasis, also involved in colon cancer as
well as in intestinal-type metaplasias when it is abnormally expressed outside
the gut. At the molecular level, structure/function studies have demonstrated
that the Cdx2 protein is a transcription factor containing a conserved homeotic
DNA-binding domain made of three alpha helixes arranged in a helix-turn-helix
motif, preceded by a transcriptional domain and followed by a regulatory domain. 
The protein interacts with several thousand sites on the chromatin and widely
regulates intestinal functions in stem/progenitor cells as well as in mature
differentiated cells. Yet, this transcription factor also acts trough original
nontranscriptional mechanisms. Indeed, the identification of novel protein
partners of Cdx2 and also of a splicing variant revealed unexpected functions in 
the control of signaling pathways like the Wnt and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways, in
double-strand break DNA repair and in premessenger RNA splicing. These novel
functions of Cdx2 must be considered to fully understand the complexity of the
role of Cdx2 in the healthy intestine and in diseases.

PMCID: PMC4316086
PMID: 25663763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Anim Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;154:128-41. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.01.012.
Epub 2015 Jan 31.

Isolation and characterization of trophoblast-derived stem-like cells from
peri-implantation porcine embryos.

Suasnavas EA(1), Heywood S(1), Ward A(1), Cox L(1), O'Grady M(1), Zhao Y(1),
Gilbert L(1), Isom SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Dairy & Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
Logan, UT, USA. (2)Department of Animal Dairy & Veterinary Sciences, Utah State
University, Logan, UT, USA. Electronic address: clay.isom@usu.edu.

In mammals, the trophoblast lineage of the embryo is specified before
attachment/implantation to become the fetal portion of the placenta.
Trophoblast-derived cells were isolated and cultured from day 10 and day 13
porcine embryos and were grown in vitro in a defined, serum-free culture medium
for over 2 years without showing any signs of senescence. However,
trophoblast-derived cells placed into serum-containing medium rapidly senesce and
fail to proliferate. Semiquantitative and quantitative gene expression analyses
of cells in culture from 0 to 30 days confirmed the presence (and relative
abundance) of mRNA transcripts from genes involved in trophoblast function (CDX2,
TEAD4, CYP17A1, HSD17B1, FGFR2, PLET, HAND1) as well as some genes known to
mediate pluripotency (POU5F1, KLF4, CMYC). Protein immunolocalization
demonstrated expression of both trophoblast and mesenchymal cell markers. DNA
methylation patterns in promoters of three critical developmental genes (HAND1,
KLF4, TEAD4) did not change appreciably over 4 months of culture in vitro. It was
demonstrated that these trophoblast-derived cells are easily stably transfected
with an exogenous transgene (eGFP) by a variety of methods, and show the ability 
to survive and to be passaged repeatedly after transfection. In summary, early
embryonic porcine trophoblast-derived cells have demonstrated unique
characteristics, which means they could be used as valuable tools for laboratory 
work. Anticipated applications include the study of trophoblast physiology as
well as possible solutions for improving efficiency of transgenesis by somatic
cell nuclear transfer and for pluripotency reprogramming of cells.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25660622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 13;458(3):470-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.122. Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Physical interaction between MPP8 and PRC1 complex and its implication for
regulation of spermatogenesis.

Murata K(1), Sato S(2), Haruta M(1), Goshima T(1), Chiba Y(1), Takahashi S(2),
Sharif J(3), Koseki H(3), Nakanishi M(4), Shimada M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City
University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan.
(2)Experimental Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Nagoya City University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601,
Japan. (3)Development Genetics Group, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences (IMS), 1-7-22 Suehiuro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045,
Japan. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya
City University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan.
Electronic address: mkt-naka@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp. (5)Department of Cell Biology, 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 1 Kawasumi,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan. Electronic address:
midorism@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

Epigenetic modifications such as DNA methylation and histone H3 lysine 27
methylation (H3K27me) are repressive marks that silence gene expression. The M
phase phosphoprotein (MPP8) associates with proteins involved in both DNA
methylation and histone modifications, and therefore, is a potential candidate to
mediate crosstalk between repressive epigenetic pathways. Here, by performing
immunohistochemical analyses we demonstrate that MPP8 is expressed in the rodent 
testis, especially in spermatocytes, suggesting a role in spermatogenesis.
Interestingly, we found that MPP8 physically interacts with PRC1 (Polycomb
Repressive Complex 1) components which are known to possess essential function in
testis development by modulating monoubiquitination of Histone H2A (uH2A) and
trimethylation of Histone H3 Lysine 27 (H3K27me3) residues. Knockdown analysis of
MPP8 in HeLa cells resulted in derepression of a set of genes that are normally
expressed in spermatogonia, spermatids and mature sperm, thereby indicating a
role for this molecule in silencing testis-related genes in somatic cells. In
addition, depletion of MPP8 in murine ES cells specifically induced expression of
genes involved in mesoderm differentiation, such as Cdx2 and Brachyury even in
the presence of LIF, which implicated that MPP8 might be required to repress
differentiation associated genes during early development. Taken together, our
results indicate that MPP8 could have a role for silencing genes that are
associated with differentiation of the testis and the mesoderm by interacting
with epigenetic repressors modules such as the PRC1 complex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25660450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Mar;12(3):125-6. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2015.22. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Developmental biology. Regional identity of gut stem cells--one gene to rule them
all.

Wells JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45229-3039, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Commun. 2014;5:5728.

The stem cells in the stomach and intestine are regulated by different signalling
pathways and give rise to entirely different specialized lineages. A study by
Simmini and colleagues suggests that the organ-specific identity of
gastrointestinal stem cells is regulated by one transcription factor, Cdx2.

PMID: 25645971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):2724-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv032. Epub 2015 Jan
28.

CHD6 regulates the topological arrangement of the CFTR locus.

Sancho A(1), Li S(2), Paul T(3), Zhang F(4), Aguilo F(1), Vashisht A(5),
Balasubramaniyan N(6), Leleiko NS(7), Suchy FJ(6), Wohlschlegel JA(5), Zhang
W(4), Walsh MJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Structural and Chemical Biology. (2)Departments of 
Pediatrics. (3)Department of Paediatrics, St. George's Hospital, University of
London, London SW17 0QT, UK. (4)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Division of
Nephrology, Department of Medicine. (5)Department of Biological Chemistry and the
Institute of Genomics and Proteomics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (6)Children's Hospital Research Institute of Colorado,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA and.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hasbro Children's
Hospital, Brown University School of Medicine, Providence, NY, USA.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics, Structural and Chemical Biology, Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029, USA, martin.walsh@mssm.edu.

The control of transcription is regulated through the well-coordinated spatial
and temporal interactions between distal genomic regulatory elements required for
specialized cell-type and developmental gene expression programs. With recent
findings CFTR has served as a model to understand the principles that govern
genome-wide and topological organization of distal intra-chromosomal contacts as 
it relates to transcriptional control. This is due to the extensive
characterization of the DNase hypersensitivity sites, modification of chromatin, 
transcription factor binding sites and the arrangement of these sites in CFTR
consistent with the restrictive expression in epithelial cell types. Here, we
identified CHD6 from a screen among several chromatin-remodeling proteins as a
putative epigenetic modulator of CFTR expression. Moreover, our findings of CTCF 
interactions with CHD6 are consistent with the role described previously for CTCF
in CFTR regulation. Our results now reveal that the CHD6 protein lies within the 
infrastructure of multiple transcriptional complexes, such as the FACT, PBAF,
PAF1C, Mediator, SMC/Cohesion and MLL complexes. This model underlies the
fundamental role CHD6 facilitates by tethering cis-acting regulatory elements of 
CFTR in proximity to these multi-subunit transcriptional protein complexes.
Finally, we indicate that CHD6 structurally coordinates a three-dimensional
stricture between intragenic elements of CFTR bound by several cell-type specific
transcription factors, such as CDX2, SOX18, HNF4a and HNF1a. Therefore, our
results reveal new insights into the epigenetic regulation of CFTR expression,
whereas the manipulation of CFTR gene topology could be considered for treating
specific indications of cystic fibrosis and/or pancreatitis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4406289 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25631877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;5(1):321-32. eCollection 2015.

Overexpression of CDX2 in gastric cancer cells promotes the development of
multidrug resistance.

Yan LH(1), Wei WY(2), Cao WL(2), Zhang XS(2), Xie YB(3), Xiao Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.
(2)Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China. (3)Department
of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University
Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.

Modulator of multidrug resistance (MDR) gene is a direct transcriptional target
of CDX2. However, we still speculate whether CDX2 affects MDR through other ways.
In this study, a cisplatin-resistant (SGC7901/DDP) and a 5-fluoro-2,
4(1h,3h)pyrimidinedione-resistant (BGC823/5-FU) gastric cancer cell line with
stable overexpression of CDX2 were established. The influence of overexpression
of CDX2 on MDR was assessed by measuring IC50 of SGC7901/DDP and BGC823/5-FU
cells to cisplatin, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil, rate of doxorubicin efflux, 
apoptosis, and cell cycle progression detected by flow cytometry. In addition, we
determined the in vivo effects of CDX2-overexpression lentiviral vector
(LV-CDX2-GFP) on tumor size, and apoptotic cells in tumor tissues were detected
by deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling and
hematoxylin and eosin staining. Results showed that LV-CDX2-GFP led to
up-regulation of CDX2 mRNA and protein expression. It significantly inhibited the
sensitivity of SGC7901/DDP and BGC823/5-FU cells to cisplatin, doxorubicin, and
5-fluorouracil. Flow cytometry confirmed that the percentage of apoptotic cells
decreased after CDX2 up-regulation. This notion was further supported by the
observation that up-regulation of CDX2 blocked entry into the M-phase of the cell
cycle. Furthermore, up-regulation of CDX2 significantly decreased intracellular
accumulation of doxorubicin. In molecular studies, quantitative
reverse-transcriptase real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting
revealed that CDX2 up-regulation could suppress expression of Caspase-3,
Caspase-9 and PTEN, and increased the expression of MDR1, MRP, mTOR, HIF-1a.

PMCID: PMC4300718
PMID: 25628941  [PubMed]


211. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jun 1;24(11):1352-65. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0395. Epub 2015 
Mar 10.

Cdx2 efficiently induces trophoblast stem-like cells in naïve, but not primed,
pluripotent stem cells.

Blij S(1), Parenti A(2), Tabatabai-Yazdi N(1), Ralston A(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California. (2)2Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.

Diverse pluripotent stem cell lines have been derived from the mouse, including
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), embryonal
carcinoma cells (ECCs), and epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs). While all are
pluripotent, these cell lines differ in terms of developmental origins,
morphology, gene expression, and signaling, indicating that multiple pluripotent 
states exist. Whether and how the pluripotent state influences the cell line's
developmental potential or the competence to respond to differentiation cues
could help optimize directed differentiation protocols. To determine whether
pluripotent stem cell lines differ in developmental potential, we compared the
capacity of mouse ESCs, iPSCs, ECCs, and EpiSCs to form trophoblast. ESCs do not 
readily differentiate into trophoblast, but overexpression of the
trophoblast-expressed transcription factor, CDX2, leads to efficient
differentiation to trophoblast and to formation of trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) 
in the presence of fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF4) and Heparin. Interestingly, 
we found that iPSCs and ECCs could both give rise to TSC-like cells following
Cdx2 overexpression, suggesting that these cell lines are equivalent in
developmental potential. By contrast, EpiSCs did not give rise to TSCs following 
Cdx2 overexpression, indicating that EpiSCs are no longer competent to respond to
CDX2 by differentiating to trophoblast. In addition, we noted that culturing ESCs
in conditions that promote naïve pluripotency improved the efficiency with which 
TSC-like cells could be derived. This work demonstrates that CDX2 efficiently
induces trophoblast in more naïve than in primed pluripotent stem cells and that 
the pluripotent state can influence the developmental potential of stem cell
lines.

PMCID: PMC4440987 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25625326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jan;94(3):e405. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000405.

Simplified classification of capillary pattern in Barrett esophagus using
magnifying endoscopy with narrow band imaging: implications for malignant
potential and interobserver agreement.

Uno G(1), Ishimura N, Tada Y, Tamagawa Y, Yuki T, Matsushita T, Ishihara S, Amano
Y, Maruyama R, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology (GU, NI, Y. Tada, Y.
Tamagawa, SI, YK), Shimane University School of Medicine; Division of Endoscopy
(TY), Shimane University Hospital; Department of Pathology (TM, RM), Shimane
University School of Medicine, Izumo; Division of Endoscopy (YA), Kaken Hospital,
International University of Health and Welfare, Ichikawa, Japan; and Department
of Internal Medicine (Y. Tamagawa), University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX.

The classification of Barrett esophagus (BE) using magnifying endoscopy with
narrow band imaging (ME-NBI) is not widely used in clinical settings because of
its complexity. To establish a new simplified available classification using
ME-NBI.We conducted a cross-sectional study in a single-referral center. One
hundred eight consecutive patients with BE using ME-NBI and crystal violet (CV)
chromoendoscopy, and histological findings were enrolled. BE areas observed by
ME-NBI were classified as type I or II on the basis of capillary pattern (CP),
and as closed or open type on the basis of a mucosal pit pattern using CV
chromoendoscopy; then, biopsy samples were obtained. We evaluated the relation
between CP and pit pattern, expression of the factors with malignant potential,
percentage of microvascular density, and interobserver agreement.One hundred
thirty lesions from 91 patients were analyzed. Type II CP had more open type pit 
pattern areas and significantly greater microvascular density than type I. The
presence of dysplasia, specialized intestinal metaplasia, expressions of COX-2,
CDX2, and CD34, and PCNA index were significantly higher in type II, whereas the 
multivariate analysis showed that type II was the best predictor for the presence
of dysplasia (OR 11.14), CD34 expression (OR 3.60), and PCNA (OR 3.29).
Interobserver agreement for this classification was substantial (<U+03BA><U+200A>=<U+200A>0.66).A
simplified CP classification based on observation with ME-NBI is presented. Our
results indicate that the classification may be useful for surveillance of BE
with high malignant potential.

PMCID: PMC4602634
PMID: 25621687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Dyn. 2015 Apr;244(4):619-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24248. Epub 2015 Jan 24.

Sox2 is the faithful marker for pluripotency in pig: evidence from embryonic
studies.

Liu S(1), Bou G, Sun R, Guo S, Xue B, Wei R, Cooney AJ, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of life science, Northeast Agricultural University of China, Harbin,
China.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian first lineage segregation generates trophectoderm (TE) and 
pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM), which provides an ideal model for studying the
mechanisms of maintenance and loss of pluripotency. In mouse, the transcription
factor OCT4 restricts to ICM and plays a key role in TE/ICM specification and
pluripotent regulatory networks. However, in pig, OCT4 does not restrict to ICM
cells, suggesting a different molecular basis in TE/ICM specification and
pluripotent regulatory networks.
RESULTS: To explore molecular basis of porcine TE/ICM specification and
pluripotent regulatory networks, we examined expression pattern of pluripotency
factors, including SOX2, REX1, SALL4, ESG1, NANOG, TBX3, LIN28, KLF2, and KLF5,
in porcine blastocysts. We found that SOX2 is a faithful pluripotent marker that 
anchored to the pluripotent cells including embryonic part cells, ICM cells and
newly EPI cells along with developmental progress, whereas OCT4 expressed in
almost all the cells at the same time. Consistently, analysis of spatiotemporal
distribution of SOX2 and the TE marker CDX2 revealed an exclusive expression
pattern in D6 blastocysts, whereas no correlation was observed between OCT4 and
CDX2 at the same stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide a molecular basis in porcine embryonic
patterning and a clue for further studying porcine pluripotent regulatory
networks.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25619399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 May;360(2):273-85. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-2091-6. Epub
2015 Jan 24.

Asymmetric morphology of the cells comprising the inner and outer bending sides
of the murine duodenojejunal flexure.

Onouchi S(1), Ichii O, Otsuka-Kanazawa S, Kon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School of
Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita 18, Nishi 9, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
060-0818, Japan.

The asymmetric shape of component cells determines the asymmetric features of
developing organs. Here, we focused on the murine duodenojejunal flexure (DJF),
which bends without affecting the mesentery, and analyzed the morphological
asymmetries of the mucosal epithelium and gut wall cells between the inner and
outer bending sides at embryonic days 10.75-11.75. In the mucosal epithelium, the
cell shape and the expression of epithelial markers (Cdx2, E-cadherin) showed no 
differences between the two DJF sides. In contrast, the gut wall cells comprising
the inner and outer sides of the DJF were elongated along the inner-outer axis
and perpendicular to this axis, respectively. Furthermore, the gut wall cells in 
the outer side possessed cytoplasmic processes connecting cells via adherens
junctions, but those in the inner side were attached via adherens junctions of
juxtaposed cell bodies and were relatively more crowded. In immunohistochemistry 
experiments, there was no remarkable difference in the positive reactions of
markers for mesenchyme (vimentin), smooth muscle cells (aSMA), endothelial cells 
(LYVE-1, CD34), and undifferentiated neurons (Sox10) between the DJF sides.
Interestingly, Tuj1-positive cells, indicating differentiated neurons, were
observed in the middle layer of the gut wall, and these cells were significantly 
more abundant and tended to be larger in the inner side than in the outer side of
the DJF. In conclusion, we clarified the asymmetries of gut wall cell morphology 
and neural differentiation between the inner and outer sides of the DJF. These
characteristics of the developing murine DJF indicate its asymmetric formation.

PMID: 25616556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Apr;50(2):214-20. doi: 10.1111/rda.12472. Epub 2015 Jan 
21.

Early cleavage of handmade cloned buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) embryos is an
indicator of their developmental competence and quality.

Kaith S(1), Saini M, Raja AK, Sahare AA, Jyotsana B, Madheshiya P, Palta P,
Chauhan MS, Manik RS, Singla SK.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy
Research Institute, Karnal, India.

Following IVF, embryos which cleave early have been shown to have higher
developmental competence and quality than those that cleave relatively later
across many species. We investigated the effect of time of cleavage on the
developmental competence, quality, epigenetic status and gene expression in
buffalo embryos produced by handmade cloning (HMC). Following classification of
embryos as early cleaving (EC) or late cleaving (LC) based on whether they had
cleaved or not at 24 h post in vitro culture, 54% (164/303) were found to be EC
and the rest to be LC. The blastocyst rate (58.1 ± 3.4 vs 36.9 ± 1.6%, p < 0.01) 
and the total cell number (285.5 ± 41.9 vs 141.4 ± 36.1, p < 0.05) were higher,
whereas the apoptotic index (3.6 ± 0.6 vs 12.2 ± 1.7, p < 0.01) and the global
level of H3K9ac and H3K27me3 were lower (p < 0.05) in the blastocysts produced
from EC than in those produced from LC embryos. The relative transcript level of 
CASPASE3, CASPASE7, DNMT1, DNMT3a and CDX2 was higher (p < 0.05) and that of SOX2
was lower (p < 0.05) in blastocysts produced from LC than in those produced from 
EC embryos, whereas the expression level of CASPASE6, P53, P21, HDAC1, OCT4 and
NANOG was not significantly different between the two groups. These results show 
that (i) following HMC, blastocysts produced from embryos that cleave early
differ from those produced from late cleaving embryos in terms of epigenetic
status and expression level of many important apoptosis-, pluripotency-,
trophectoderm- and epigenetics-related genes, and (ii) EC embryos are superior to
LC embryos in view of their higher developmental competence and quality.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25604613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Stem Cell Res. 2015 Jan;14(1):105-13. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.12.002. Epub 2014
Dec 27.

Cryosectioning the intestinal crypt-villus axis: an ex vivo method to study the
dynamics of epigenetic modifications from stem cells to differentiated cells.

Vincent A(1), Kazmierczak C(2), Duchêne B(3), Jonckheere N(3), Leteurtre E(2),
Van Seuningen I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR837, Jean Pierre Aubert Research Center (JPARC), Team 5 "Mucins,
Epithelial Differentiation and Carcinogenesis," rue Polonovski, Lille, France;
Université Lille 2 Droit et Santé, Lille, France; Centre Hospitalier Régional et 
Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France. Electronic address:
audrey.vincent@inserm.fr. (2)Inserm, UMR837, Jean Pierre Aubert Research Center
(JPARC), Team 5 "Mucins, Epithelial Differentiation and Carcinogenesis," rue
Polonovski, Lille, France; Université Lille 2 Droit et Santé, Lille, France;
Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France; Centre de
Biologie Pathologie, CHRU Lille, Lille, France. (3)Inserm, UMR837, Jean Pierre
Aubert Research Center (JPARC), Team 5 "Mucins, Epithelial Differentiation and
Carcinogenesis," rue Polonovski, Lille, France; Université Lille 2 Droit et
Santé, Lille, France; Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire de Lille,
Lille, France.

The intestinal epithelium is a particularly attractive biological adult model to 
study epigenetic mechanisms driving adult stem cell renewal and cell
differentiation. Since epigenetic modifications are dynamic, we have developed an
original ex vivo approach to study the expression and epigenetic profiles of key 
genes associated with either intestinal cell pluripotency or differentiation by
isolating cryosections of the intestinal crypt-villus axis. Gene expression, DNA 
methylation and histone modifications were studied by qRT-PCR,
methylation-specific PCR and micro-chromatin immunoprecipitation, respectively.
Using this approach, it was possible to identify segment-specific methylation and
chromatin profiles. We show that (i) expression of intestinal stem cell markers
(Lgr5, Ascl2) exclusively in the crypt is associated with active histone marks,
(ii) promoters of all pluripotency genes studied and transcription factors
involved in intestinal cell fate (Cdx2) harbour a bivalent chromatin pattern in
the crypts and (iii) expression of differentiation markers (Muc2, Sox9) along the
crypt-villus axis is associated with DNA methylation. Hence, using an original
model of cryosectioning along the crypt-villus axis that allows in situ detection
of dynamic epigenetic modifications, we demonstrate that regulation of
pluripotency and differentiation markers in healthy intestinal mucosa involves
different and specific epigenetic mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25590428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):600-10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10431. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Lineage specific expression of Polycomb Group Proteins in human embryonic stem
cells in vitro.

Pethe P(1), Pursani V, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health (NIRRH), Jehangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai, 400012, India.

Human embryonic (hES) stem cells are an excellent model to study lineage
specification and differentiation into various cell types. Differentiation
necessitates repression of specific genes not required for a particular lineage. 
Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are key histone modifiers, whose primary function
is gene repression. PcG proteins form complexes called Polycomb Repressive
Complexes (PRCs), which catalyze histone modifications such as H2AK119ub1,
H3K27me3, and H3K9me3. PcG proteins play a crucial role during differentiation of
stem cells. The expression of PcG transcripts during differentiation of hES cells
into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineage is yet to be shown. In-house
derived hES cell line KIND1 was differentiated into endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm lineages; followed by characterization using RT-PCR for HNF4A, CDX2,
MEF2C, TBX5, SOX1, and MAP2. qRT-PCR and western blotting was performed to
compare expression of PcG transcripts and proteins across all the three lineages.
We observed that cells differentiated into endoderm showed upregulation of
RING1B, BMI1, EZH2, and EED transcripts. Mesoderm differentiation was
characterized by significant downregulation of all PcG transcripts during later
stages. BMI1 and RING1B were upregulated while EZH2, SUZ12, and EED remained low 
during ectoderm differentiation. Western blotting also showed distinct expression
of BMI1 and EZH2 during differentiation into three germ layers. Our study shows
that hES cells differentiating into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineages
show distinct PcG expression profile at transcript and protein level.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25572667  [PubMed - in process]


218. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb;8(1):18-21. doi: 10.1007/s12328-014-0543-x. Epub
2015 Jan 8.

A case of Helicobacter pylori-negative intramucosal well-differentiated gastric
adenocarcinoma with intestinal phenotype.

Ozaki Y(1), Suto H, Nosaka T, Saito Y, Naito T, Takahashi K, Ofuji K, Matsuda H, 
Ohtani M, Hiramatsu K, Nemoto T, Imamura Y, Nakamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
University of Fukui, 23-3 Matsuokashimoaizuki, Eiheiji-cho, Yoshida-gun, Fukui,
910-1193, Japan.

A woman in her 30s visited our hospital with stool abnormality.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a depressed lesion on the greater curvature
of the gastric antrum. The tumor was diagnosed as a well-differentiated tubular
adenocarcinoma based on the analysis of the biopsy specimen. The rapid urease
test, histological examination, and serum anti-Helicobacter pylori antibody
indicated that the patient was Helicobacter pylori negative. Gastric mucosal
atrophy was not evident on esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Complete cure en bloc
resection was successfully performed. The tumor was confined to the mucosa
(pT1a-M). Immunohistochemistry showed positive CD10, MUC2, and CDX2 expression
and negative MUC5AC and MUC6 expression. Thus, the phenotype was diagnosed as the
intestinal phenotype. Helicobacter pylori-negative, well-differentiated early
gastric cancer with intestinal phenotype has not been previously reported. Here, 
we report a rare and valuable case of Helicobacter pylori-negative early gastric 
cancer with intestinal phenotype treated by endoscopic submucosal dissection.

PMID: 25566739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 30;5(24):12675-93.

A role for BMP-induced homeobox gene MIXL1 in acute myelogenous leukemia and
identification of type I BMP receptor as a potential target for therapy.

Raymond A(1), Liu B(2), Liang H(3), Wei C(4), Guindani M(4), Lu Y(5), Liang S(6),
St John LS(7), Molldrem J(7), Nagarajan L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Graduate Program in Genes and Development, the University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of
Genetics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Center for Cancer Genetics and Genomics, the University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Genetics, the University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Biostatistics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (5)Dept. of Leukemia, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Dept. of Molecular Carcinogenesis, the University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Dept. of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, the University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)Section of Transplantation Immunology, 
Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, the University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Department of
Genetics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Graduate Program in Genes and Development, the University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Center for Cancer Genetics and
Genomics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Dept. of Leukemia, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Graduate Program in Human Molecular Genetics, the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Center for
Stem cell and Developmental biology, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mesoderm Inducer in Xenopus Like1 (MIXL1), a paired-type homeobox transcription
factor induced by TGF-ß family of ligands is required for early embryonic
specification of mesoderm and endoderm. Retrovirally transduced Mixl1 is reported
to induce acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) with a high penetrance. But the
mechanistic underpinnings of MIXL1 mediated leukemogenesis are unknown. Here, we 
establish the protooncogene c-REL to be a transcriptional target of MIXL1 by
genome wide chromatin immune precipitation. Accordingly, expression of c-REL and 
its downstream targets BCL2L1 and BCL2A2 are elevated in MIXL1 expressing cells. 
Notably, MIXL1 regulates c-REL through a zinc finger binding motif, potentially
by a MIXL1-Zinc finger protein transcriptional complex. Furthermore, MIXL1
expression is detected in the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) AML samples in a pattern
mutually exclusive from that of HOXA9, CDX2 and HLX suggesting the existence of a
core, yet distinct HOX transcriptional program. Finally, we demonstrate MIXL1 to 
be induced by BMP4 and not TGF-ß in primary human hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells. Consequently, MIXL1 expressing AML cells are preferentially
sensitive to the BMPR1 kinase inhibitor LDN-193189. These findings support the
existence of a novel MIXL1-c REL mediated survival axis in AML that can be
targeted by BMPR1 inhibitors. (MIXL1- human gene, Mixl1- mouse ortholog, MIXL1-
protein).

PMCID: PMC4350356
PMID: 25544748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2015;6C:175-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2014.07.021. Epub 2014
Dec 11.

Metachronous adenocarcinoma of the anal canal after anterior resection for
sporadic primary rectal adenocarcinoma: A rare case report.

Gaertner WB(1), De Rienzo B(2), Decanini C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, American British 
Medical Center, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: gaert015@umn.edu.
(2)Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, American British 
Medical Center, Mexico City, Mexico.

INTRODUCTION: Anal canal adenocarcinoma is an extremely rare malignancy with
poorly defined diagnostic and treatment criteria.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 42-year-old women was diagnosed with primary anal canal
adenocarcinoma 11 months after undergoing anterior resection for primary sporadic
rectal adeocarcinoma. Transanal excision was performed and additional adjuvant
chemotherapy was given. Immunohistology showed positivity for cytokeratin (CK) 20
and CDX2, and negative CK7, which is compatible with colorectal subtype anal
adenocarcinoma. At 6 months follow-up the patient has no evidence of recurrent or
metastatic disease.
DISCUSSION: Diagnosis of primary anal adenocarcinoma is typically delayed because
of its rarity, and vague clinical presentation. Exact histologic criteria remain 
poorly defined but the use of immunohistology has improved the overall diagnostic
accuracy of anal adenocarcinoma and it also helps define its correct origin.
Reports on the management and outcomes of this cancer consist mainly of
retrospective studies with no consistent treatment strategy and limited
comparison data. Most authors currently recommend neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy
and radical resection. Despite aggressive therapy, rates of local failure and
distant recurrence remain high.
CONCLUSION: Diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the anal canal is difficult but
specific immunohistolgic patterns help to correctly identify its correct origin
and subtype. Defining the correct subtype of anal adenocarcinoma may impact
treatment strategies of this rare cancer.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4334489
PMID: 25544486  [PubMed]


221. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2014 Dec;69(10):660-5. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2014(10)02.

The role of intratumoral lymphovascular density in distinguishing primary from
secondary mucinous ovarian tumors.

Almeida BG(1), Bacchi CE(2), Carvalho JP(3), Ferreira CR(1), Carvalho FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Botucatu - Consultoria em Patologia, Laboratório
Bacchi, Botucatu, SP, Brazil. (3)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculdade de Medicina
da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: Ovarian mucinous metastases commonly present as the first sign of the 
disease and are capable of simulating primary tumors. Our aim was to investigate 
the role of intratumoral lymphatic vascular density together with other
surgical-pathological features in distinguishing primary from secondary mucinous 
ovarian tumors.
METHODS: A total of 124 cases of mucinous tumors in the ovary (63 primary and 61 
metastatic) were compared according to their clinicopathological features and
immunohistochemical profiles. The intratumoral lymphatic vascular density was
quantified by counting the number of vessels stained by the D2-40 antibody.
RESULTS: Metastases occurred in older patients and were associated with a higher 
proportion of tumors smaller than 10.0 cm; bilaterality; extensive necrosis;
extraovarian extension; increased expression of cytokeratin 20, CDX2, CA19.9 and 
MUC2; and decreased expression of cytokeratin 7, CA125 and MUC5AC. The lymphatic 
vascular density was increased among primary tumors. However, after multivariate 
analysis, the best predictors of a secondary tumor were a size of 10.0 cm or
less, bilaterality and cytokeratin 7 negativity. Lack of MUC2 expression was an
important factor excluding metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: The higher intratumoral lymphatic vascular density in primary tumors
when compared with secondary lesions suggests differences in the
microenvironment. However, considering the differential diagnosis, the best
discriminator of a secondary tumor is the combination of tumor size, laterality
and the pattern of expression of cytokeratin 7 and MUC2.

PMCID: PMC4221329
PMID: 25518016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Apr;39(4):541-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000359.

Adenocarcinoma of the thymus, enteric type: report of 2 cases, and proposal for a
novel subtype of thymic carcinoma.

Moser B(1), Schiefer AI, Janik S, Marx A, Prosch H, Pohl W, Neudert B, Scharrer
A, Klepetko W, Müllauer L.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Thoracic Surgery, Division of Surgery Departments of Pathology
§Radiology, Medical University Vienna <U+2225>Department of Pulmology and Karl
Landsteiner Institute of Clinical and Experimental Pneumology, Hietzing Hospital,
Vienna, Austria Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Mannheim,
University of Heidelberg, Germany.

We report 2 cases of primary thymic adenocarcinoma with enteric differentiation. 
One carcinoma occurred in a 41-year-old man as a 7-cm-diameter cystic tumor and
the other one in a 39-year-old woman as a 6-cm-diameter solid mass. Both tumors
were located in the anterior mediastinum. Clinical staging did not reveal any
extrathymic tumor. Histologically, the tumors were classified as adenocarcinoma, 
not otherwise specified, and a mucinous (colloid) carcinoma, respectively.
Immunohistochemically, both tumors were positive for cytokeratin 20 (CK20), CDX2,
and carcinoembryonic antigen, reflecting enteric differentiation. A review of the
literature on 43 other cases of primary thymic adenocarcinomas suggested 11
further cases with enteric differentiation, as assessed by CK20 and/or CDX2
expression. We propose that thymic adenocarcinoma with enteric differentiation
represents a novel subtype of thymic carcinoma. It is mostly of mucinous
morphology and frequently associated with thymic cysts. The clinical outcome is
variable. Recognition of primary thymic adenocarcinoma with enteric
differentiation is helpful for the differentiation from metastatic disease,
mainly from the gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 25517960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):147-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.004. Epub 2014 
Dec 13.

Maternal-zygotic knockout reveals a critical role of Cdx2 in the morula to
blastocyst transition.

Jedrusik A(1), Cox A(1), Wicher KB(1), Glover DM(2), Zernicka-Goetz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Downing Site, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK. (2)Department of Genetics,
University of Cambridge, Downing Site, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK.

The first lineage segregation in the mouse embryo generates the inner cell mass
(ICM), which gives rise to the pluripotent epiblast and therefore the future
embryo, and the trophectoderm (TE), which will build the placenta. The TE lineage
depends on the transcription factor Cdx2. However, when Cdx2 first starts to act 
remains unclear. Embryos with zygotic deletion of Cdx2 develop normally until the
late blastocyst stage leading to the conclusion that Cdx2 is important for the
maintenance but not specification of the TE. In contrast, down-regulation of Cdx2
transcripts from the early embryo stage results in defects in TE specification
before the blastocyst stage. Here, to unambiguously address at which
developmental stage Cdx2 becomes first required, we genetically deleted Cdx2 from
the oocyte stage using a Zp3-Cre/loxP strategy. Careful assessment of a large
cohort of Cdx2 maternal-zygotic null embryos, all individually filmed, examined
and genotyped, reveals an earlier lethal phenotype than observed in Cdx2 zygotic 
null embryos that develop until the late blastocyst stage. The developmental
failure of Cdx2 maternal-zygotic null embryos is associated with cell death and
failure of TE specification, starting at the morula stage. These results indicate
that Cdx2 is important for the correct specification of TE from the morula stage 
onwards and that both maternal and zygotic pools of Cdx2 are required for correct
pre-implantation embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4319684
PMID: 25512302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 11;5:5728. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6728.

Transformation of intestinal stem cells into gastric stem cells on loss of
transcription factor Cdx2.

Simmini S(1), Bialecka M(1), Huch M(1), Kester L(1), van de Wetering M(1), Sato
T(1), Beck F(2), van Oudenaarden A(1), Clevers H(1), Deschamps J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute and UMC Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8 3584 CT Utrecht, the
Netherlands. (2)University of Leicester, Department of Biochemistry, Leicester
LE1 7RH, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Mar;12(3):125-6.

The endodermal lining of the adult gastro-intestinal tract harbours stem cells
that are responsible for the day-to-day regeneration of the epithelium. Stem
cells residing in the pyloric glands of the stomach and in the small intestinal
crypts differ in their differentiation programme and in the gene repertoire that 
they express. Both types of stem cells have been shown to grow from single cells 
into 3D structures (organoids) in vitro. We show that single adult Lgr5-positive 
stem cells, isolated from small intestinal organoids, require Cdx2 to maintain
their intestinal identity and are converted cell-autonomously into pyloric stem
cells in the absence of this transcription factor. Clonal descendants of
Cdx2(null) small intestinal stem cells enter the gastric differentiation program 
instead of producing intestinal derivatives. We show that the intestinal genetic 
programme is critically dependent on the single transcription factor encoding
gene Cdx2.

PMCID: PMC4284662
PMID: 25500896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Zygote. 2016 Feb;24(1):18-30. doi: 10.1017/S0967199414000677. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Splitting of IVP bovine blastocyst affects morphology and gene expression of
resulting demi-embryos during in vitro culture and in vivo elongation.

Velasquez AE(1), Castro FO(1), Veraguas D(1), Cox JF(1), Lara E(1), Briones M(1),
Rodriguez-Alvarez L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science,Faculty of Veterinary Sciences,Universidad de
Concepcion,Chillan,Chile. (2)Department of Animal Science,Faculty of Veterinary
Sciences,Universidad de Concepcion.Avenida Vicente Mendez 595,Chillan,Chile.

Embryo splitting might be used to increase offspring yield and for molecular
analysis of embryo competence. How splitting affects developmental potential of
embryos is unknown. This research aimed to study the effect of bovine blastocyst 
splitting on morphological and gene expression homogeneity of demi-embryos and on
embryo competence during elongation. Grade I bovine blastocyst produced in vitro 
were split into halves and distributed in nine groups (3 × 3 setting according to
age and stage before splitting; age: days 7-9; stage: early, expanded and hatched
blastocysts). Homogeneity and survival rate in vitro after splitting (12 h, days 
10 and 13) and the effect of splitting on embryo development at elongation after 
embryo transfer (day 17) were assessed morphologically and by RT-qPCR. The genes 
analysed were OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, CDX2, TP1, TKDP1, EOMES, and BAX. Approximately 
90% of split embryos had a well conserved defined inner cell mass (ICM), 70% of
the halves had similar size with no differences in gene expression 12 h after
splitting. Split embryos cultured further conserved normal and comparable
morphology at day 10 of development; this situation changes at day 13 when embryo
morphology and gene expression differed markedly among demi-embryos. Split and
non-split blastocysts were transferred to recipient cows and were recovered at
day 17. Fifty per cent of non-split embryos were larger than 100 mm (33% for
split embryos). OCT4, SOX2, TP1 and EOMES levels were down-regulated in elongated
embryos derived from split blastocysts. In conclusion, splitting day-8
blastocysts yields homogenous demi-embryos in terms of developmental capability
and gene expression, but the initiation of the filamentous stage seems to be
affected by the splitting.

PMID: 25496989  [PubMed - in process]


226. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Feb;50(1):84-90. doi: 10.1111/rda.12452. Epub 2014 Dec
13.

Effects of FGF10 on bovine oocyte meiosis progression, apoptosis, embryo
development and relative abundance of developmentally important genes in vitro.

Pomini Pinto RF(1), Fontes PK, Loureiro B, Sousa Castilho AC, Sousa Ticianelli J,
Montanari Razza E, Satrapa RA, Buratini J, Moraes Barros C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biosciences, São Paulo State
University (UNESP), Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF10) acts at the cumulus oocyte complex, increasing
the expression of cumulus cell expansion-related genes and oocyte competency
genes. We tested the hypothesis that addition of FGF10 to the maturation medium
improves oocyte maturation, decreases the percentage of apoptotic oocytes and
increases development to the blastocyst stage while increasing the relative
abundance of developmentally important genes (COX2, CDX2 and PLAC8). In all
experiments, oocytes were matured for 22 h in TCM-199 supplemented with 0, 2.5,
10 or 50 ng/ml FGF10. In Experiment 1, after maturation, oocytes were stained
with Hoechst to evaluate meiosis progression (metaphase I, intermediary phases
and extrusion of the first polar body) and submitted to the TUNEL assay to
evaluate apoptosis. In Experiment 2, oocytes were fertilized and cultured to the 
blastocyst stage. Blastocysts were frozen for analysis of COX2, CDX2 and PLAC8
relative abundance. In Experiment 1, 2.5 ng/ml FGF10 increased (p < 0.05) the
percentage of oocytes with extrusion of the first polar body (35%) compared to 0,
10 and 50 ng/ml FGF10 (21, 14 and 12%, respectively) and FGF10 decreased the
percentage of oocytes that were TUNEL positive in all doses studied. In
Experiment 2, there was no difference in the percentage of oocytes becoming
blastocysts between treatments and control. Real-time RT-PCR showed a tendency of
50 ng/ml FGF10 to increase the relative abundance of COX2 and PLAC8 and of 10
ng/ml FGF10 to increase CDX2. In conclusion, the addition of FGF10 to the oocyte 
maturation medium improves oocyte maturation in vitro, decreases the percentage
of apoptotic oocytes and tends to increase the relative abundance of
developmentally important genes.

© 2014 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25495767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1850-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620211. Epub 2014 
Dec 8.

Transcription factors GATA4 and HNF4A control distinct aspects of intestinal
homeostasis in conjunction with transcription factor CDX2.

San Roman AK(1), Aronson BE(2), Krasinski SD(3), Shivdasani RA(4), Verzi MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Oncology and Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, the
Graduate Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115. (2)the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115. (4)From the Department of Medical Oncology and Center for
Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, the Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and
ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu. (5)From the Department of Medical Oncology
and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, the Department of Genetics, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854 verzi@biology.rutgers.edu.

Distinct groups of transcription factors (TFs) assemble at tissue-specific
cis-regulatory sites, implying that different TF combinations may control
different genes and cellular functions. Within such combinations, TFs that
specify or maintain a lineage and are therefore considered master regulators may 
play a key role. Gene enhancers often attract these tissue-restricted TFs, as
well as TFs that are expressed more broadly. However, the contributions of the
individual TFs to combinatorial regulatory activity have not been examined
critically in many cases in vivo. We address this question using a genetic
approach in mice to inactivate the intestine-specifying and intestine-restricted 
factor CDX2 alone or in combination with its more broadly expressed partner
factors, GATA4 and HNF4A. Compared with single mutants, each combination produced
significantly greater defects and rapid lethality through distinct anomalies.
Intestines lacking Gata4 and Cdx2 were deficient in crypt cell replication,
whereas combined loss of Hnf4a and Cdx2 specifically impaired viability and
maturation of villus enterocytes. Integrated analysis of TF binding and of
transcripts affected in Hnf4a;Cdx2 compound-mutant intestines indicated that this
TF pair controls genes required to construct the apical brush border and absorb
nutrients, including dietary lipids. This study thus defines combinatorial TF
activities, their specific requirements during tissue homeostasis, and modules of
transcriptional targets in intestinal epithelial cells in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4340426
PMID: 25488664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2014;5(12):979-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2014.10.034. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

A case of clear cell adenocarcinoma arising from endometriosis of the rectum
treated by laparoscopic surgery.

Okazawa Y(1), Takahashi R(2), Mizukoshi K(2), Takehara K(2), Ishiyama S(2),
Sugimoto K(2), Takahashi M(2), Kojima Y(2), Goto M(2), Okuzawa A(2), Tomiki Y(2),
Yao T(3), Sakamoto K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Coloproctological Surgery, Juntendo University, Faculty of
Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. Electronic address:
yokazawa@juntendo.ac.jp. (2)Department of Coloproctological Surgery, Juntendo
University, Faculty of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(3)Department of Human Pathology, Juntendo University, Faculty of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Malignant transformation of intestinal endometriosis occurring in
the extraovarian sites is extremely rare. We report a very rare case of clear
cell adenocarcinoma arising from endometriosis of the rectum.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: An 83-year-old woman was admitted with the complaint of
hematochezia. Colonoscopy revealed a tumor around about half of the rectal
circumference. Biopsy of the tumor revealed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Low anterior resection was undergone laparoscopically under the diagnosis of
rectal carcinoma. Histopathological examination revealed clear cell
adenocarcinoma, invading the sub-serosa of the rectum, but no metastasis of the
lymph nodes. Immunohistochemical staining showed strong positivity for
cytokeratin 7, but no staining for cytokeratin 20 and CDX2. The tumor existed
adjacent to the endometrial glands, which were stained positive for Estrogen
receptor. Ultimately, the patient was diagnosed with clear cell adenocarcinoma
arising from endometriosis. Eighteen months after surgery, there are no signs of 
tumor recurrence.
DISCUSSION: Clear cell adenocarcinoma arising from intestinal endometriosis has
been reported in 7 cases, including our case. Careful observation is required
because the prognosis of endometriosis after malignant transformation remains
poor.
CONCLUSION: We report a very rare case of clear cell adenocarcinoma arising from 
endometriosis of the rectum treated by laparoscopic surgery.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4276269
PMID: 25460452  [PubMed]


229. Placenta. 2014 Dec;35(12):1079-88. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.09.008. Epub 2014
Sep 23.

Developmental differences in the expression of FGF receptors between human and
mouse embryos.

Kunath T(1), Yamanaka Y(2), Detmar J(3), MacPhee D(4), Caniggia I(3), Rossant
J(5), Jurisicova A(6).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, UK.
Electronic address: tilo.kunath@ed.ac.uk. (2)Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer
Research Centre, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, 1160 Pine
Avenue West, Montréal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Toronto, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, 25 Orde Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 3H7, Canada. (4)Western
College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4, Canada. (5)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Toronto, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, 25 Orde Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 3H7, Canada; Program in
Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. (6)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Toronto, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount 
Sinai Hospital, 25 Orde Street, Toronto, Ontario M5T 3H7, Canada. Electronic
address: jurisicova@lunenfeld.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling is essential for early
trophoblast expansion and maintenance in the mouse, but is not required for
trophectoderm specification during blastocyst formation. This signaling pathway
is stably activated to expand the trophoblast stem cell compartment in vivo,
while in vitro, FGFs are used for the derivation of trophoblast stem (TS) cells
from blastocysts and early post-implantation mouse embryos. However, the function
of FGFs during human trophoblast development is not known.
METHODS: We sought to derive TS cells from human blastocysts in a number of
culture conditions, including in the presence of FGFs and stem cell factor (SCF).
We also investigated the expression of FGF receptors (FGFRs) in blastocysts, and 
the expression of FGFR2 and activated ERK1/2 in first trimester human placentae.
RESULTS: We found that SCF, but not FGF2/4, improved the quality of blastocyst
outgrowths, but we were unable to establish stable human TS cell lines. We
observed CDX2 expression in the trophectoderm of fully blastocysts, but rarely
observed transcription of FGFRs. FGFR2 protein was not detected in human
blastocysts, but was strongly expressed in mouse blastocysts. However, we found
robust FGFR2 expression and activated ERK1/2 in the cytotrophoblast layer of
early human placenta.
DISCUSSION: Our data suggests that initiation of FGF-dependent trophoblast
expansion may occur later in human development, and is unlikely to drive
maintenance of a TS cell compartment during the peri-implantation period. These
findings suggest that cytotrophoblast preparations from early placentae may be a 
potential source of FGF-dependent human TS cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25443433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Dec;16(6):428-38. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0036.

Development and gene expression of porcine cloned embryos derived from bone
marrow stem cells with overexpressing Oct4 and Sox2.

Lee JH(1), Lee WJ, Jeon RH, Lee YM, Jang SJ, Lee SL, Jeon BG, Ock SA, King WA,
Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)1 Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University , Jinju, 660-701, Republic of Korea.

The present study compared the potential of porcine bone marrow mesenchymal stem 
cells (pBMSCs) at different passages as nuclear transfer (NT) donors and the
developmental efficiency of NT embryos from donor cells transfected with/without 
Oct4 and Sox2. Early-passage pBMSCs showed higher proliferation and expression of
Oct4 and Sox2 and differentiation potential into mesenchymal lineages than
middle- and late-passage pBMSCs. Cleavage rate did not differ among pBMSCs at
different passages, but NT embryos with early-passage pBMSCs and middle-passage
pBMSCs transfected with Oct4 (Oct4-pBMSCs) had significantly (p<0.05) higher
blastocyst development than those with middle-passage pBMSCs. The incidence of
apoptotic bodies in NT blastocysts from late-passage pBMSCs and Sox2-transfected 
middle-passage pBMSCs (Sox2-pBMSCs) was significantly (p<0.05) higher than
others. The transcriptional levels of Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, Cdx2, Dnmt3a, and Igf2r 
genes were significantly (p<0.05) higher in Oct4- and Sox2-pBMSCs NT embryos.
Middle-passage pBMSCs NT embryos revealed lower transcriptional levels of Bcl2
than others, except Sox2-pBMSCs NT embryos. The transcriptional level of Bax
increased gradually in NT embryos derived from pBMSCs following extended passages
and was significantly (p<0.05) higher in Sox2-pBMSCs NT embryos. Our results
demonstrated that early-passage pBMSCs are more potent in expressing
transcription factors and displayed higher differentiation ability, and
middle-passage pBMSCs transfected with Oct4 improved the developmental efficiency
of NT embryos, suggesting that high Oct4 expression cells are more efficient as
NT donors.

PMCID: PMC4245852
PMID: 25437870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Virchows Arch. 2015 Feb;466(2):161-8. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1696-1. Epub 2014
Nov 28.

Intestinal metaplasia of the sinonasal mucosa adjacent to intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma. A morphologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular study.

Franchi A(1), Palomba A, Miligi L, Ranucci V, Innocenti DR, Simoni A, Pepi M,
Santucci M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery and Translational
Medicine, University of Florence, Largo Brambilla 3, 50134, Florence, Italy,
franchi@unifi.it.

It has been hypothesized that the development of sinonasal intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma (ITAC) occurs through intestinal metaplasia (IM) of the
respiratory and/or glandular epithelium. The aim of this study was to
characterize the histological, immunohistochemical, and molecular features of
sinonasal IM. Histologic slides from 29 consecutive surgical specimens of ITAC
were retrieved. Sections were stained for CDX2, cytokeratin 20 (CK20), MUC2, and 
p53. The status of TP53 gene exons 4-9 was assessed separately in areas of IM and
in ITAC. Foci of IM were detected in eight cases (27.5%). They were all positive 
for CK20 and CDX2, while MUC2 was detected in six cases (75%). In six cases
(75%), the metaplastic foci showed signs of dysplasia, including nuclear
enlargement with increased nucleus to cytoplasm ratio, nuclear hyperchromasia,
loss of nuclear polarity, and presence of prominent nucleoli. P53 nuclear
immunoreactivity was observed in four cases. TP53 gene sequencing was
successfully performed in six cases and revealed the same mutation in both IM and
ITAC in two cases (c.832C<U+2009>><U+2009>T and c.215G<U+2009>><U+2009>C), while another ITAC showed a
mutation that was not present in the adjacent IM (c.536A<U+2009>><U+2009>G). In conclusion, our
study suggests a possible clonal relationship between areas of sinonasal IM and
ITAC, indicating that IM may represent a precursor lesion of ITAC. Improving the 
knowledge on the morphological and molecular features of IM is a key step to
identify reliable biomarkers to determine the risk of sinonasal ITAC development.

PMID: 25431194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Digestion. 2014;90(3):208-17. doi: 10.1159/000365750. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Guggulsterone, a plant-derived inhibitor of NF-TB, suppresses CDX2 and COX-2
expression and reduces the viability of esophageal adenocarcinoma cells.

Yamada T(1), Osawa S, Ikuma M, Kajimura M, Sugimoto M, Furuta T, Iwaizumi M,
Sugimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Iwata City Hospital, Iwata, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Induction by bile acid of caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression via nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation is a
critical event in the development of Barrett's esophagus (BE) and esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). Guggulsterone (GS) is a plant sterol that inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B
activity. Here, we evaluated whether GS has either or both chemopreventive or
therapeutic effects against EAC.
METHODS: Two EAC cells lines were treated with deoxycholic acid (DCA) in the
presence of GS or vehicle. The levels of transcription and translation of I<U+03BA>Ba,
CDX2, and COX-2 were determined. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels, cell viability, 
and cell cycle distribution were assessed as well.
RESULTS: GS inhibited DCA-induced I<U+03BA>Ba phosphorylation. GS and the NF-<U+03BA>B
inhibitor BAY11-7085 suppressed DCA-induced CDX2 and COX-2 expression in EAC
cells. GS also suppressed basal transcription levels of CDX2 and COX-2 and
reduced constitutive synthesis of COX-2 and PGE2. Further, GS reduced the
viability of EAC cells, increased their numbers in the apoptotic sub-G1 fraction.
CONCLUSION: GS suppressed DCA-induced and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent activation of CDX2 and 
COX-2 expression. Further, GS also reduced the viability of EAC cells. GS may
serve as candidate for preventing and treating EAC and BE.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25427631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 26;5:5538. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6538.

Epigenetic memory of the first cell fate decision prevents complete ES cell
reprogramming into trophoblast.

Cambuli F(1), Murray A(1), Dean W(2), Dudzinska D(1), Krueger F(3), Andrews S(3),
Senner CE(1), Cook SJ(4), Hemberger M(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK [2]
Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (3)Bioinformatics Group, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (4)Signalling Programme, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (5)1] Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK [2] Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK [3] Wellcome Trust-Medical
Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 
1QR, UK.

Embryonic (ES) and trophoblast (TS) stem cells reflect the first, irrevocable
cell fate decision in development that is reinforced by distinct epigenetic
lineage barriers. Nonetheless, ES cells can seemingly acquire TS-like
characteristics upon manipulation of lineage-determining transcription factors or
activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2) pathway.
Here we have interrogated the progression of reprogramming in ES cell models with
regulatable Oct4 and Cdx2 transgenes or conditional Erk1/2 activation. Although
trans-differentiation into TS-like cells is initiated, lineage conversion remains
incomplete in all models, underpinned by the failure to demethylate a small group
of TS cell genes. Forced expression of these non-reprogrammed genes improves
trans-differentiation efficiency, but still fails to confer a stable TS cell
phenotype. Thus, even ES cells in ground-state pluripotency cannot fully overcome
the boundaries that separate the first cell lineages but retain an epigenetic
memory of their ES cell origin.

PMCID: PMC4263130
PMID: 25423963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 25;9(11):e113071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113071.
eCollection 2014.

Predictive gene signatures: molecular markers distinguishing colon adenomatous
polyp and carcinoma.

Drew JE(1), Farquharson AJ(1), Mayer CD(2), Vase HF(1), Coates PJ(3), Steele
RJ(3), Carey FA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Health, Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB21 9SB, Scotland. (2)Biomathematics and Statistics
Scotland, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB21 9SB, Scotland. (3)Ninewells
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SU, Scotland.

Cancers exhibit abnormal molecular signatures associated with disease initiation 
and progression. Molecular signatures could improve cancer screening, detection, 
drug development and selection of appropriate drug therapies for individual
patients. Typically only very small amounts of tissue are available from patients
for analysis and biopsy samples exhibit broad heterogeneity that cannot be
captured using a single marker. This report details application of an in-house
custom designed GenomeLab System multiplex gene expression assay, the
hCellMarkerPlex, to assess predictive gene signatures of normal, adenomatous
polyp and carcinoma colon tissue using archived tissue bank material. The
hCellMarkerPlex incorporates twenty-one gene markers: epithelial (EZR, KRT18,
NOX1, SLC9A2), proliferation (PCNA, CCND1, MS4A12), differentiation (B4GANLT2,
CDX1, CDX2), apoptotic (CASP3, NOX1, NTN1), fibroblast (FSP1, COL1A1), structural
(ACTG2, CNN1, DES), gene transcription (HDAC1), stem cell (LGR5), endothelial
(VWF) and mucin production (MUC2). Gene signatures distinguished normal,
adenomatous polyp and carcinoma. Individual gene targets significantly
contributing to molecular tissue types, classifier genes, were further
characterised using real-time PCR, in-situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry
revealing aberrant epithelial expression of MS4A12, LGR5 CDX2, NOX1 and SLC9A2
prior to development of carcinoma. Identified gene signatures identify aberrant
epithelial expression of genes prior to cancer development using in-house custom 
designed gene expression multiplex assays. This approach may be used to assist in
objective classification of disease initiation, staging, progression and
therapeutic responses using biopsy material.

PMCID: PMC4244109
PMID: 25423035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mod Pathol. 2015 May;28(5):654-61. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.157. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Expression of SOX9 and CDX2 in nongoblet columnar-lined esophagus predicts the
detection of Barrett's esophagus during follow-up.

Zhang X(1), Westerhoff M(2), Hart J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

The diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus in the United States requires both
endoscopically evident columnar-lined esophagus and the presence of goblet cells 
by histology. Currently, there is no consensus on how patients with nongoblet
columnar-lined esophagus should be followed. In this study, we investigated
whether biomarkers can be used to predict the detection of goblet cells in
follow-up biopsies. Patients with nongoblet columnar-lined esophagus were
identified. In 13 of these cases, goblet cells were detected in subsequent
follow-up endoscopic biopsies (Barrett's group). Additionally, 26 cases that
remained negative for goblet cells in follow-up biopsies served as controls.
Immunohistochemistry for CDX2, SOX9, BMP4, SHH, and MUC2 was performed on the
initial biopsies and graded independently by at least two pathologists in a
masked manner. CDX2 was positive in the nongoblet columnar epithelium of 7/13
cases in the Barrett's group and in 4/26 controls (sensitivity 54%, specificity
of 85%, odds ratio (OR) 6.4). Strong and diffuse immunoreactivity for SOX9 was
detected in 10/13 cases in the Barrett's group and in 1/26 controls (sensitivity 
77%, specificity 96%, OR 83.3). Combining CDX2 and SOX9 as a panel increased
sensitivity to 85%, although the specificity decreased to 85% (OR 30.3). SHH,
BMP4, and MUC2 expression showed no significant difference between the Barrett's 
and control groups. In patients with nongoblet columnar-lined esophagus, SOX9 and
CDX2 may be useful in identifying a subset of patients who have a higher risk of 
being diagnosed for Barrett's esophagus (developing goblet cells) and need closer
follow-up.

PMID: 25412842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cell Regen (Lond). 2014 Apr 29;3(1):7. doi: 10.1186/2045-9769-3-7. eCollection
2014.

Role of Oct4 in the early embryo development.

Wu G(1), Schöler HR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany. (2)Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany ; Medical Faculty,
University of Münster, Domagkstr. 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Oct4 is a key component of the pluripotency regulatory network, and its
reciprocal interaction with Cdx2 has been shown to be a determinant of either the
self-renewal of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) or their differentiation into
trophoblast. Oct4 of maternal origin is postulated to play critical role in
defining totipotency and inducing pluripotency during embryonic development.
However, the genetic elimination of maternal Oct4 using a Cre-lox approach in
mouse revealed that the establishment of totipotency in maternal Oct4-depleted
embryos was not affected, and that these embryos could complete full-term
development without any obvious defect. These results indicate that Oct4 is not
essential for the initiation of pluripotency, in contrast to its critical role in
maintaining pluripotency. This conclusion is further supported by the formation
of Oct4-GFP- and Nanog- expressing inner cell masses (ICMs) in embryos with
complete inactivation of both maternal and zygotic Oct4 expression and the
reprogramming of fibroblasts into fully pluripotent cells by Oct4-deficient
oocytes.

PMCID: PMC4230828
PMID: 25408886  [PubMed]


237. Case Rep Pathol. 2014;2014:781318. doi: 10.1155/2014/781318. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Metastatic carcinoma occurring in a gastric hyperplastic polyp mimicking primary 
gastric cancer: the first reported case.

Groisman GM(1), Depsames R(2), Ovadia B(2), Meir A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, 38100 Hadera, Israel.
(2)Institute of Gastroenterology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, 38100 Hadera,
Israel.

Hyperplastic polyps of the stomach are regarded as benign. However, in rare cases
they may contain incipient primary carcinomas. To our knowledge, breast carcinoma
metastatic to a gastric hyperplastic polyp has not yet been reported. We describe
the case of a 69-year-old woman to whom a gastric polyp was endoscopically
excised. The patient had previously undergone a right mastectomy for mixed,
invasive ductal and lobular carcinoma 5 years earlier. Histological sections from
the gastric lesion showed typical features of hyperplastic polyp with foci of
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma including signet ring cells infiltrating the
lamina propria. The histologic findings were consistent with a primary gastric
cancer. However, the carcinoma cells were immunopositive for estrogen and
progesterone receptors and GATA3 and negative for CDX2, Hep Par 1, and MUC5AC.
E-cadherin showed membranous reactivity in some of the carcinoma cells while in
others it was negative. Accordingly, metastatic mixed, lobular and ductal breast 
carcinoma was diagnosed. We conclude that metastatic adenocarcinoma mimicking
primary gastric cancer can be rarely encountered in hyperplastic gastric polyps.

PMCID: PMC4221967
PMID: 25400965  [PubMed]


238. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Nov 14;20(42):15715-26. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i42.15715.

Esophageal Helicobacter pylori colonization aggravates esophageal injury caused
by reflux.

Chu YX(1), Wang WH(1), Dai Y(1), Teng GG(1), Wang SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yun-Xiang Chu, Wei-Hong Wang, Yun Dai, Gui-Gen Teng, Shu-Jun Wang, Department 
of Gastroenterology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, China.

AIM: To investigate esophageal Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) colonization on
esophageal injury caused by reflux and the related mechanisms.
METHODS: An esophagitis model, with acid and bile reflux, was surgically produced
in male rats. The rats were randomly divided into either: (1) an
esophagogastroduodenal anastomosis (EGDA) group; (2) an EGDA with H. pylori
infection group; (3) a pseudo-operation with H. pylori infection group; or (4) a 
pseudo-operation group. All rats were kept for 36 wk. Based on the location of H.
pylori colonization, the EGDA rats with H. pylori infection were subdivided into 
those with concomitant esophageal H. pylori colonization or those with only
gastric H. pylori colonization. The esophageal injuries were evaluated grossly
and microscopically. The expressions of CDX2 and MUC2 were determined by
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry. Ki-67
antigen expression was determined by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA levels of
cyclin D1, c-Myc, Bax and Bcl-2 were determined by RT-PCR. Cell apoptosis was
evaluated using the TdT-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling method.
RESULTS: Esophagitis, Barrett's esophagus (BE), and esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EAC) developed in rats that underwent EGDA. When comparing rats with EGDA and
concomitant esophageal H. pylori colonization to EGDA-only rats, the severity of 
injury (87.9 ± 5.2 vs 77.2 ± 8.6, macroscopically, 92.5 ± 8.0 vs 83.8 ± 5.5,
microscopically, both P < 0.05) and the incidences of BE (80.0% vs 33.3%, P =
0.055) and EAC (60.0% vs 11.1%, P < 0.05) were increased. These increases were
associated with upregulation of CDX2 and MUC2 mRNA (10.1 ± 5.4 vs 3.0 ± 2.9, 8.4 
± 4.6 vs 2.0 ± 3.2, respectively, Ps < 0.01) and protein (8.1 ± 2.3 vs 3.3 ± 3.1,
7.3 ± 4.0 vs 1.8 ± 2.7, respectively, all P < 0.05). The expression of Ki-67 (8.9
± 0.7 vs 6.0 ± 1.7, P < 0.01) and the presence of apoptotic cells (8.3 ± 1.1 vs
5.3 ± 1.7, P < 0.01) were also increased significantly in rats with EGDA and
concomitant esophageal H. pylori colonization compared with rats with EGDA only. 
The mRNA levels of cyclin D1 (5.8 ± 1.9 vs 3.4 ± 1.3, P < 0.01), c-Myc (6.4 ± 1.7
vs 3.7 ± 1.2, P < 0.01), and Bax (8.6 ± 1.6 vs 5.1 ± 1.3, P < 0.01) were
significantly increased, whereas the mRNA level of Bcl-2 (0.6 ± 0.3 vs 0.8 ± 0.3,
P < 0.01) was significantly reduced in rats with EGDA and concomitant esophageal 
H. pylori colonization compared with rats with EGDA only.
CONCLUSION: Esophageal H. pylori colonization increases esophagitis severity, and
facilitates the development of BE and EAC with the augmentation of cell
proliferation and apoptosis in esophageal mucosa.

PMCID: PMC4229536
PMID: 25400455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Apr 1;24(7):904-15. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0323. Epub 2014
Dec 22.

Rbm46 regulates trophectoderm differentiation by stabilizing Cdx2 mRNA in early
mouse embryos.

Wang C(1), Chen Y, Deng H, Gao S, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences , Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China .

Blastocyst formation represents the first lineage specification by segregation of
the trophectoderm from the inner cell mass in early embryonic development.
Transcriptional regulation of Cdx2, which is selectively expressed in and
essential for the specification of trophectoderm, has been extensively studied.
However, post-transcriptional regulation of Cdx2 remains largely unknown. In this
study, we report that RNA-binding protein motif 46 (Rbm46), an RNA-binding motif 
protein with unknown function, directly binds to and stabilizes Cdx2 mRNA in
early mouse embryos. In addition, knockdown of Rbm46 using RNA interference
downregulated the majority of trophectoderm markers in mouse embryonic stem cells
and blocked the allocation of blastomere cells to the trophectoderm in mouse
embryos. Our study revealed a novel mechanism by which Rbm46 regulates
trophectoderm specification through stabilizing Cdx2 mRNA in early mouse embryos.

PMID: 25397698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Nov-Dec;22(10):728-34. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000109.

LEF-1 is frequently expressed in colorectal carcinoma and not in other
gastrointestinal tract adenocarcinomas: an immunohistochemical survey of 602
gastrointestinal tract neoplasms.

Kermanshahi TR(1), Jayachandran P, Chang DT, Pai R.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Presbyterian Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA.

LEF-1 is a DNA-binding protein that interacts with ß-catenin and activates
Wnt-responsive target genes. We analyzed the immunohistochemical expression of
LEF-1 in 602 gastrointestinal and pancreatobiliary neoplasms in an attempt to (1)
investigate the utility of LEF-1 immunohistochemistry as an ancillary marker in
gastrointestinal/pancreatobiliary neoplasia, and (2) to perform a
clinicopathologic and survival analysis of colorectal carcinoma stratified by
LEF-1 expression. LEF-1 nuclear positivity was frequently identified in
colorectal carcinoma (89/241, 37%) and only infrequently identified in other
neoplasms: 11% esophagus/esophagogastric adenocarcinomas, 7% gastric
adenocarcinomas, 1% pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, 4% pancreatic intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms, and in no cases of appendiceal mucinous neoplasms
or pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms. LEF-1 expression was identified in 35%
of colorectal carcinomas that lacked CK20 and CDX2 expression. In colorectal
carcinomas, LEF-1-positive tumors more frequently harbored KRAS mutations
compared with LEF-1-negative tumors (39% vs. 16%, P=0.005). Patients with
moderate/strong LEF-1-positive colorectal carcinoma had a trend of worse overall 
survival compared with patients with colorectal carcinomas with weak/negative
LEF-1 expression (5 y overall survival, 31% vs. 47%, P=0.15). In conclusion,
LEF-1 is most commonly expressed in colorectal carcinoma and infrequently
observed in the upper gastrointestinal tract and pancreatic adenocarcinoma. LEF-1
Immunohistochemistry may be especially useful as an ancillary diagnostic marker
in colorectal carcinomas, which lack the expression of both CK20 and CDX2. LEF-1 
expression is associated with the presence of KRAS mutations and may have
prognostic value as a trend of worse overall survival is seen in patients with
LEF-1-positive colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 25394300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Mar;21(3):271-80. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau104. Epub 2014 Nov 
11.

Human embryonic stem cells carrying an unbalanced translocation demonstrate
impaired differentiation into trophoblasts: an in vitro model of human
implantation failure.

Shpiz A(1), Kalma Y(2), Frumkin T(2), Telias M(2), Carmon A(2), Amit A(2),
Ben-Yosef D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfe PGD Stem Cell Lab, Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel-Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Wolfe PGD Stem Cell Lab, Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel-Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. (3)Wolfe PGD Stem Cell Lab, Racine IVF
Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel 
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel dalitb@tlvmc.gov.il.

Carriers of the balanced translocation t(11;22), the most common reciprocal
translocation in humans, are at high risk of creating gametes with unbalanced
translocation, leading to repeated miscarriages. Current research models for
studying translocated embryos and the biological basis for their implantation
failure are limited. The aim of this study was to elucidate whether human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) carrying the unbalanced chromosomal translocation
t(11;22) can provide an explanation for repeated miscarriages of unbalanced
translocated embryos. Fluorescent in situ hybridization and karyotype analysis
were performed to analyze the t(11;22) in embryos during PGD and in the derived
hESC line. The hESC line was characterized by RT-PCR and FACS analysis for
pluripotent markers. Directed differentiation to trophoblasts was carried out by 
bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4). Trophoblast development was analyzed by
measuring ß-hCG secretion, by ß-hCG immunostaining and by gene expression of
trophoblastic markers. We derived the first hESC line carrying unbalanced
t(11;22), which showed the typical morphological and molecular characteristics of
a hESC line. Control hESCs differentiated into trophoblasts secreted increasing
levels of ß-hCG and concomitantly expressed the trophoblast genes, CDX2, TP63,
KRT7, ERVW1, CGA, GCM1, KLF4 and PPARG. In contrast, differentiated translocated 
hESCs displayed reduced and delayed secretion of ß-hCG concomitant with impaired 
expression of the trophoblastic genes. The reduced activation of trophoblastic
genes may be responsible for the impaired trophoblastic differentiation in
t(11;22)-hESCs, associated with implantation failure in unbalanced t(11;22)
embryos. Our t(11;22) hESCs are presented as a valuable human model for studying 
the mechanisms underlying implantation failure.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25391299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Jul;23(6):430-2. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000102.

Allantoic, vitelline, and "hybrid" embryonic vestiges of the umbilical cord: an
immunohistochemical study.

Hirzel AC(1), Alexis J.

Author information: 
(1)Mt. Sinai Medical Center of Miami, Miami, FL.

The embryonic origin of umbilical cord vestiges is well documented; however,
their immunophenotype is unknown. This study was conducted to determine whether
vitelline and allantoic remnants can be differentiated using immunohistochemical 
markers. All allantoic remnants were stained with p63 and were negative for CDX2,
whereas the vitelline remnants stained with CDX2 and were negative for p63. An
unexpected finding was a small number of morphologically ambiguous cases that
stained with both markers in a complimentary manner. The term "hybrid" remnant is
proposed for these remnants.

PMID: 25390355  [PubMed - in process]


243. Histopathology. 2015 Jun;66(7):1010-21. doi: 10.1111/his.12610. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Expression of cadherin 17 in well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours.

Snow AN(1,)(2), Mangray S(1), Lu S(1), Clubwala R(1), Li J(1), Resnick MB(1),
Yakirevich E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital and Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of 
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA.

AIMS: Cadherin 17 (CDH17) is expressed primarily in normal intestinal epithelium 
and digestive tract tumours, and has limited expression in other neoplasms. The
aims of this study were to examine CDH17 expression in well-differentiated
neuroendocrine tumours (WDNETs) from various primary sites, representing the
foregut, midgut, and hindgut, and tumours metastasizing to the liver, and to
correlate the differences between the expression of CDH17, CDX2, and thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF1).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated CDH17 immunohistochemical expression in 150 
primary WDNETs from eight anatomical sites, including 68 from the foregut, 70
from the midgut, and 12 from the hindgut, and 15 metastases. CDH17
immunoreactivity increased significantly from foregut to hindgut WDNETs (P <
0.0001). Pancreatic WDNETs expressed CDH17 at a significantly higher frequency
than other foregut tumours. Within the midgut, appendiceal and small-intestinal
WDNETs were more frequently positive for CDH17 than for CDX2. All hindgut WDNETs 
expressed CDH17, in contrast to CDX2 (positive in one rectal case). CDH17
expression in liver metastases was similar to that of the primary tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to comprehensively examine CDH17 expression 
in WDNETs from different sites. CDH17 is a sensitive marker for midgut WDNETs,
and the CDH17+/CDX2-/TTF1- phenotype was found to be sensitive (92%) and specific
(91%) for hindgut WDNETs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25388236  [PubMed - in process]


244. Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 1;75(1):216-29. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3686. Epub
2014 Nov 7.

B-Raf inhibitors induce epithelial differentiation in BRAF-mutant colorectal
cancer cells.

Herr R(1), Köhler M(2), Andrlová H(3), Weinberg F(1), Möller Y(4), Halbach S(2), 
Lutz L(5), Mastroianni J(6), Klose M(7), Bittermann N(5), Kowar S(7), Zeiser
R(8), Olayioye MA(4), Lassmann S(9), Busch H(10), Boerries M(10), Brummer T(11).

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction in Tumour Development and Drug Resistance Group, Institute
of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research (IMMZ), Albert-Ludwigs-University (ALU), 
Freiburg, Germany. Faculty of Biology, ALU, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Signal
Transduction in Tumour Development and Drug Resistance Group, Institute of
Molecular Medicine and Cell Research (IMMZ), Albert-Ludwigs-University (ALU),
Freiburg, Germany. Faculty of Biology, ALU, Freiburg, Germany. Spemann Graduate
School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM), ALU, Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center, ALU, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Cell Biology and Immunology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 
Germany. (5)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, ALU, Freiburg,
Germany. (6)Faculty of Biology, ALU, Freiburg, Germany. Department of Hematology 
and Oncology, University Medical Center, ALU, Freiburg, Germany. (7)Systems
Biology of the Cellular Microenvironment Group, IMMZ, ALU, Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center, ALU,
Freiburg, Germany. Centre for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS, ALU Freiburg. 
(9)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, ALU, Freiburg, Germany.
Centre for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS, ALU Freiburg. German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK), Freiburg, Germany. German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (10)Systems Biology of the Cellular Microenvironment Group, 
IMMZ, ALU, Freiburg, Germany. German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Freiburg, Germany.
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Signal
Transduction in Tumour Development and Drug Resistance Group, Institute of
Molecular Medicine and Cell Research (IMMZ), Albert-Ludwigs-University (ALU),
Freiburg, Germany. Centre for Biological Signalling Studies BIOSS, ALU Freiburg. 
tilman.brummer@zbsa.de.

BRAF mutations are associated with aggressive, less-differentiated and
therapy-resistant colorectal carcinoma. However, the underlying mechanisms for
these correlations remain unknown. To understand how oncogenic B-Raf contributes 
to carcinogenesis, in particular to aspects other than cellular proliferation and
survival, we generated three isogenic human colorectal carcinoma cell line models
in which we can dynamically modulate the expression of the B-Raf(V600E)
oncoprotein. Doxycyclin-inducible knockdown of endogenous B-Raf(V600E) decreases 
cellular motility and invasion in conventional and three-dimensional (3D)
culture, whereas it promotes cell-cell contacts and induces various hallmarks of 
differentiated epithelia. Importantly, all these effects are recapitulated by
B-Raf (PLX4720, vemurafenib, and dabrafenib) or MEK inhibitors (trametinib).
Surprisingly, loss of B-Raf(V600E) in HT29 xenografts does not only stall tumor
growth, but also induces glandular structures with marked expression of CDX2, a
tumor-suppressor and master transcription factor of intestinal differentiation.
By performing the first transcriptome profiles of PLX4720-treated 3D cultures of 
HT29 and Colo-205 cells, we identify several upregulated genes linked to
epithelial differentiation and effector functions, such as claudin-1, a Cdx-2
target gene encoding a critical tight junction component. Thereby, we provide a
mechanism for the clinically observed correlation between mutant BRAF and the
loss of Cdx-2 and claudin-1. PLX4720 also suppressed several
metastasis-associated transcripts that have not been implicated as targets,
effectors or potential biomarkers of oncogenic B-Raf signaling so far. Together, 
we identify a novel facet of clinically applied B-Raf or MEK inhibitors by
showing that they promote cellular adhesion and differentiation of colorectal
carcinoma cells.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25381152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Neuropathology. 2015 Apr;35(2):158-64. doi: 10.1111/neup.12155. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Malignant meningioma with adenocarcinoma-like metaplasia: demonstration of
intestinal phenotype.

Takayama Y(1), Nobusawa S, Ochiai I, Watanabe H, Ishigame H, Ikota H, Hirato J,
Nakayama J, Yokoo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan; Department of Pathology, Gunma University Hospital, Maebashi,
Japan.

Meningiomas show a diverse histopathologic appearance, often referred to as
metaplastic changes; however, adenocarcinoma-like metaplasia is an extremely rare
condition. Here, we present a novel case. A dura-based bulky mass located in the 
right frontotemporal region was identified radiologically in an 83-year-old
woman. The tumor, yellow to ash-gray in color, was subtotally removed.
Histopathological examination revealed robust adenocarcinoma-like structures
within a conventional meningothelial neoplasm. Meningioma elements showed a WHO
grade I to III histology. Morphological and immunophenotypic transition between
meningothelial and columnar epithelial cells was confirmed on detailed
observation. It was of note that the adenocarcinomatous components shared an
immunophenotype with intestinal epithelium, expressing CDX2, MUC2 and cytokeratin
20. The present case could be differentiated from secretory meningioma based on
distinct cellular atypia, lack of intracytoplasmic lumina and pseudosammoma
bodies, and the intact status of the KLF4 gene. In addition, the morphological
and immunophenotypic transition excluded the possibility of metastatic carcinoma 
within meningioma. This is the first reported case of meningioma with
adenocarcinoma-like metaplasia harboring an intestinal immunophenotype.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 25377638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Jan 1;308(1):G56-62. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00168.2014. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide-mediated signaling pathways enhance 
apical PepT1 expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

Coon SD(1), Rajendran VM(2), Schwartz JH(3), Singh SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts; Department of Medicine, Boston Veterans Affairs Healthcare System,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Medicine, Boston University Clinical &
Translational Science Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; and scoon@bu.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West Virginia University
School of Medicine, Morgantown, West Virginia. (3)Department of Medicine, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; (4)Department of Medicine, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of
Medicine, Boston Veterans Affairs Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts;

We have shown recently that glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP),
but not glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) augments H(+) peptide cotransporter
(PepT1)-mediated peptide absorption in murine jejunum. While we observed that
inhibiting cAMP production decreased this augmentation of PepT1 activity by GIP, 
it was unclear whether PKA and/or other regulators of cAMP signaling pathway(s)
were involved. This study utilized tritiated glycyl-sarcosine
[(3)H-glycyl-sarcosine (Gly-Sar), a relatively nonhydrolyzable dipeptide] uptake 
to measure PepT1 activity in CDX2-transfected IEC-6 (IEC-6/CDX2) cells, an
absorptive intestinal epithelial cell model. Similar to our earlier observations 
with mouse jejunum, GIP but not GLP-1 augmented Gly-Sar uptake (control vs. +GIP:
154 ± 22 vs. 454 ± 39 pmol/mg protein; P < 0.001) in IEC-6/CDX2 cells. Rp-cAMP (a
PKA inhibitor) and wortmannin [phosophoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor]
pretreatment completely blocked, whereas neither calphostin C (a potent PKC
inhibitor) nor BAPTA (an intracellular Ca(2+) chelator) pretreatment affected the
GIP-augmented Gly-Sar uptake in IEC-6/CDX2 cells. The downstream metabolites Epac
(control vs. Epac agonist: 287 ± 22 vs. 711 ± 80 pmol/mg protein) and AKT
(control vs. AKT inhibitor: 720 ± 50 vs. 75 ± 19 pmol/mg protein) were shown to
be involved in GIP-augmented PepT1 activity as well. Western blot analyses
revealed that both GIP and Epac agonist pretreatment enhance the PepT1 expression
on the apical membranes, which is completely blocked by wortmannin in IEC-6/CDX2 
cells. These observations demonstrate that both cAMP and PI3K signaling pathways 
augment GIP-induced peptide uptake through Epac and AKT-mediated pathways in
intestinal epithelial cells, respectively. In addition, these observations also
indicate that both Epac and AKT-mediated signaling pathways increase apical
membrane expression of PepT1 in intestinal absorptive epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4281688
PMID: 25377315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e111408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111408.
eCollection 2014.

Shigella dysenteriae modulates BMP pathway to induce mucin gene expression in
vivo and in vitro.

Gopal A(1), Iyer SC(1), Gopal U(2), Devaraj N(3), Halagowder D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Biochemistry, Department of Zoology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Madras, Guindy Campus, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India. (2)Department of 
Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States 
of America. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Madras, Guindy Campus,
Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.

Mucosal epithelial cells in the intestine act as the first line of host defense
against pathogens by increasing mucin production for clearance. Despite this
fact, the underlying molecular mechanisms by which Shigella dysenteriae transduce
mucin gene expression remain poorly defined. The goal of this study was to
determine the role of Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway in mucin gene
expression during S. dysenteriae infection. In this study we demonstrate that S. 
dysenteriae activates BMP signaling to induce MUC2 and MUC5AC gene expression in 
rat ileal loop model and in vitro. We also observed that BMP pathway regulates
CDX2 expression which plays a critical role in induction of MUC2 gene during S.
dysenteriae infection. In SMAD4 silenced cells S. dysenteriae infection did not
abrogate MUC2 and MUC5AC gene expression whereas in CDX2 silenced cells it
induces differential expression of MUC5AC gene. These results suggest that
SMAD4-CDX2 induces MUC2 gene expression whereas SMAD4 directly influences
differential expression of MUC5AC gene. Altogether, our results show that during 
S. dysenteriae infection the BMP pathway modulates inflammatory transcription
factors CDX2 and SMAD4 to induce MUC2 and MUC5AC gene expression which plays a
key role in the regulation of host mucosal defense thereby paving a cue for
therapeutic application.

PMCID: PMC4218725
PMID: 25365201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 23;10(10):e1004618. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004618.
eCollection 2014.

HIPPO pathway members restrict SOX2 to the inner cell mass where it promotes ICM 
fates in the mouse blastocyst.

Wicklow E(1), Blij S(1), Frum T(1), Hirate Y(2), Lang RA(3), Sasaki H(2), Ralston
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of California Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, United States of America. (2)Institute of Molecular
Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Pluripotent epiblast (EPI) cells, present in the inner cell mass (ICM) of the
mouse blastocyst, are progenitors of both embryonic stem (ES) cells and the
fetus. Discovering how pluripotency genes regulate cell fate decisions in the
blastocyst provides a valuable way to understand how pluripotency is normally
established. EPI cells are specified by two consecutive cell fate decisions. The 
first decision segregates ICM from trophectoderm (TE), an extraembryonic cell
type. The second decision subdivides ICM into EPI and primitive endoderm (PE),
another extraembryonic cell type. Here, we investigate the roles and regulation
of the pluripotency gene Sox2 during blastocyst formation. First, we investigate 
the regulation of Sox2 patterning and show that SOX2 is restricted to ICM
progenitors prior to blastocyst formation by members of the HIPPO pathway,
independent of CDX2, the TE transcription factor that restricts Oct4 and Nanog to
the ICM. Second, we investigate the requirement for Sox2 in cell fate
specification during blastocyst formation. We show that neither maternal (M) nor 
zygotic (Z) Sox2 is required for blastocyst formation, nor for initial expression
of the pluripotency genes Oct4 or Nanog in the ICM. Rather, Z Sox2 initially
promotes development of the primitive endoderm (PE) non cell-autonomously via
FGF4, and then later maintains expression of pluripotency genes in the ICM. The
significance of these observations is that 1) ICM and TE genes are spatially
patterned in parallel prior to blastocyst formation and 2) both the roles and
regulation of Sox2 in the blastocyst are unique compared to other pluripotency
factors such as Oct4 or Nanog.

PMCID: PMC4207610
PMID: 25340657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2014;55(3):973-6.

A rare tumor revealed by abdominal trauma: case presentation.

Diaconu CC(1), Arsene D, Balaceanu AL, Bartos D.

Author information: 
(1)"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Clinic of Internal
Medicine, Clinical Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania; camiluciemi@yahoo.com.

Pseudomyxoma peritonei is a rare and poorly understood form of disease
characterized by mucin deposits in the peritoneum. The term includes a broad
range of neoplasms with different patterns of evolution, from benign to
borderline or even to malignant lesions. The disease may be asymptomatic until
advanced stages. We present the case of a 65-year-old patient who presented for
pain in the right hemiabdomen, after a trauma by falling from small height.
Abdominal imaging studies oriented the diagnosis to a traumatic disease. At
laparotomy, a mucinous tumor attached to the right colon was discovered. The main
particularity of the case is that the origin of the pseudomyxoma could not be
identified.

PMID: 25329130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;289(48):33343-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.583823. Epub
2014 Oct 15.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 function as tumor suppressors.

Hryniuk A(1), Grainger S(1), Savory JG(1), Lohnes D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada. (2)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada
dlohnes@uottawa.ca.

In humans, colorectal cancer is often initiated through APC loss of function,
which leads to crypt hyperplasia and polyposis driven by unrestricted canonical
Wnt signaling. Such polyps typically arise in the colorectal region and are at
risk of transforming to invasive adenocarcinomas. Although colorectal cancer is
the third most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide, the processes
impacting initiation, transformation, and invasion are incompletely understood.
Murine APC(Min/+) mutants are often used to model colorectal cancers; however,
they develop nonmetastatic tumors confined largely to the small intestine and are
thus not entirely representative of the human disease. APC(Min/+) alleles can
collaborate with mutations impacting other pathways to recapitulate some aspects 
of human colorectal cancer. To this end, we assessed APC(Min/+)-induced polyposis
following somatic loss of the homeodomain transcription factor Cdx2, alone or
with a Cdx1 null allele, in the adult gastrointestinal tract. APC(Min/+)-Cdx2
mutants recapitulated several aspects of human colorectal cancer, including an
invasive phenotype. Notably, the concomitant loss of Cdx1 led to a significant
increase in the incidence of tumors in the distal colon, relative to
APC(Min/+)-Cdx2 offspring, demonstrating a previously unrecognized role for this 
transcription factor in colorectal tumorigenesis. These findings underscore
previously unrecognized roles for Cdx members in intestinal tumorigenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4246091
PMID: 25320087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Genes Dev. 2014 Oct 15;28(20):2219-32. doi: 10.1101/gad.247163.114.

Arid3a is essential to execution of the first cell fate decision via direct
embryonic and extraembryonic transcriptional regulation.

Rhee C(1), Lee BK(1), Beck S(1), Anjum A(2), Cook KR(2), Popowski M(1), Tucker
HO(3), Kim J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences. (3)Department of Molecular
Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
jonghwankim@mail.utexas.edu haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu. (4)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712, USA jonghwankim@mail.utexas.edu haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2015 Sep 1;29(17):1890.

Despite their origin from the inner cell mass, embryonic stem (ES) cells undergo 
differentiation to the trophectoderm (TE) lineage by repression of the ES cell
master regulator Oct4 or activation of the TE master regulator Caudal-type
homeobox 2 (Cdx2). In contrast to the in-depth studies of ES cell self-renewal
and pluripotency, few TE-specific regulators have been identified, thereby
limiting our understanding of mechanisms underlying the first cell fate decision.
Here we show that up-regulation and nuclear entry of AT-rich interactive domain
3a (Arid3a) drives TE-like transcriptional programs in ES cells, maintains
trophoblast stem (TS) cell self-renewal, and promotes further trophoblastic
differentiation both upstream and independent of Cdx2. Accordingly, Arid3a(-/-)
mouse post-implantation placental development is severely impaired, resulting in 
early embryonic death. We provide evidence that Arid3a directly activates
TE-specific and trophoblast lineage-specific genes while directly repressing
pluripotency genes via differential regulation of epigenetic acetylation or
deacetylation. Our results identify Arid3a as a critical regulator of TE and
placental development through execution of the commitment and differentiation
phases of the first cell fate decision.

© 2014 Rhee et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4201284
PMID: 25319825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Histopathology. 2015 Jan;66(2):225-33. doi: 10.1111/his.12535. Epub 2014 Oct 28.

Cadherin 17 is frequently expressed by 'sclerosing variant' pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumour.

Johnson A(1), Wright JP, Zhao Z, Komaya T, Parikh A, Merchant N, Shi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

AIMS: Recently, we described a series of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours
(PanNETs) featuring prominent stromal fibrosis, which we called sclerosing
PanNETs. The aim of this study was to examine the pathological, immunophenotypic 
and clinical differences between sclerosing and non-sclerosing PanNETs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: One hundred and six PanNETs were identified, of which 15
(14%) were sclerosing NETs. Tissue microarrays containing 44 non-sclerosing and
five sclerosing PanNETs, as well as sections from 10 additional sclerosing
tumours, were immunohistochemically labelled for serotonin, CDX2, CDH17, and
islet 1. Sclerosing PanNETs were smaller (P = 0.045) and more likely to show an
infiltrative growth pattern (P < 0.001) than non-sclerosing PanNETs. They were
frequently associated with a large pancreatic duct, causing duct stenosis.
Additionally, we found significantly increased expression of the small intestinal
NET markers serotonin, CDX2 and CDH17 in sclerosing PanNETs (P < 0.001) as
compared with non-sclerosing PanNETs. No difference in clinical outcome was
found; however, more sclerosing PanNETs were stage IIB or above (P = 0.035), with
lymph node metastasis being seen in three of nine sclerosing PanNETs with a
tumour size of <20 mm.
CONCLUSIONS: Sclerosing PanNETs have distinct pathological features and biomarker
expression profiles. In addition, lymph node metastasis can be present even with 
small sclerosing PanNETs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302003
PMID: 25307987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. BMC Cancer. 2014 Oct 9;14:753. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-753.

Immunohistochemical molecular phenotypes of gastric cancer based on SOX2 and CDX2
predict patient outcome.

Camilo V, Barros R, Celestino R, Castro P, Vieira J, Teixeira MR, Carneiro F,
Pinto-de-Sousa J, David L, Almeida R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Rua Dr, Roberto Frias s/n, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal.
ralmeida@ipatimup.pt.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer remains a serious health concern worldwide. Patients
would greatly benefit from the discovery of new biomarkers that predict outcome
more accurately and allow better treatment and follow-up decisions. Here, we used
a retrospective, observational study to assess the expression and prognostic
value of the transcription factors SOX2 and CDX2 in gastric cancer.
METHODS: SOX2, CDX2, MUC5AC and MUC2 expression were assessed in 201 gastric
tumors by immunohistochemistry. SOX2 and CDX2 expression were crossed with
clinicopathological and follow-up data to determine their impact on tumor
behavior and outcome. Moreover, SOX2 locus copy number status was assessed by
FISH (N = 21) and Copy Number Variation Assay (N = 62).
RESULTS: SOX2 was expressed in 52% of the gastric tumors and was significantly
associated with male gender, T stage and N stage. Moreover, SOX2 expression
predicted poorer patient survival, and the combination with CDX2 defined two
molecular phenotypes, SOX2+CDX2- versus SOX2-CDX2+, that predict the worst and
the best long-term patients' outcome. These profiles combined with
clinicopathological parameters stratify the prognosis of patients with intestinal
and expanding tumors and in those without signs of venous invasion. Finally, SOX2
locus copy number gains were found in 93% of the samples reaching the
amplification threshold in 14% and significantly associating with protein
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed, for the first time, that SOX2 combined with CDX2
expression profile in gastric cancer segregate patients into different prognostic
groups, complementing the clinicopathological information. We further demonstrate
a molecular mechanism for SOX2 expression in a subset of gastric cancer cases.

PMCID: PMC4210532
PMID: 25300947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1222:175-80. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1594-1_13.

Assessment of cell lineages and cell death in blastocysts by immunostaining.

Chauveau S(1), Chazaud C.

Author information: 
(1)GReD , INSERM 1103, UMR CNRS 6293, Clermont Université, BP 38, 28 Place
Henri-Dunant, Clermont-Ferrand, 63001, France, claire.chazaud@udamail.fr.

During the last decade it has been shown that most mammalian blastocysts
consisted of three cell lineages. Immunofluorescence with multiple antibodies
enables to identify each cell type allowing an easy detection of eventual
defects. It is complementary to RT-PCR experiments as this technique allows to
look at cell position and to analyze and count the proportions between the
different cell types. Thus after any kind of embryo manipulation such as nuclear 
transfer (NT), the analysis of the three cell lineages by immunofluorescence will
provide criteria for good or poor development.

PMID: 25287346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2014 Oct;111(10):1983-9.

[Disappearance of a gastric lesion following modified FOLFOX6 chemotherapy in a
patient with metastatic colorectal cancer: a case report and literature review].

[Article in Japanese]

Iino C(1), Mikami T, Sawaya M, Yoshida K, Aihara T, Yamagata R, Sakamoto J, Tono 
H, Tanaka M, Fukuda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hirosaki City Hospital.

A 48-year-old man with colorectal cancer and right inguinal lymph node metastasis
had previously undergone radiotherapy and chemotherapy
(uracil/tegafur/leucovorin) after a colostomy in another hospital before being
referred to us. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed the presence of a
gastric metastatic lesion. After three courses of treatment with a modified
regimen of leucovorin plus 5-fluorouracil plus oxaliplatin-6 (mFOLFOX6), EGD
revealed that the gastric lesion had disappeared; computed tomography revealed
that the size of the primary tumor and inguinal lymph node metastasis were
markedly reduced. Subsequently, he underwent rectal resection of the primary
tumor and continued treatment with mFOLFOX6 in combination with bevacizumab. We
reviewed 29 similar cases from the literature, and determined that surgical
resection of the tumor and appropriate chemotherapy can lead to long-term
survival for patients with gastric metastases from colorectal cancer.
Furthermore, positive CK20 and CDX2 expression and negative CK7 expression were
useful adjuncts in the immunohistochemical diagnosis of gastric metastases from
colorectal adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 25283227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Oct;81(10):962-70. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22415. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Functional characterization of CDX2 during bovine preimplantation development in 
vitro.

Goissis MD(1), Cibelli JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan; Capes Foundation, Ministry of Education, Brasília, Brazil.

Placental defects are common in bovine embryos produced using assisted
reproductive techniques. A proper understanding of the events leading to inner
cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE) specification could help identify the
origins of such developmental failures. We focused on caudal-type homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2) since it has a specific role during TE
differentiation in mouse embryos. Of all the preimplantation stages analyzed,
CDX2 protein was present only at the blastocyst stage. To further understand the 
roles of CDX2 during bovine development, we depleted CDX2 mRNA; despite a
significant loss of detectable protein, embryos were able to form blastocysts at 
the same rate as controls. Embryos lacking CDX2 did not show abnormalities in the
number of TE, ICM, or total cells in the blastocyst. Expression of the
developmentally important genes SOX2, POU5F1, and NANOG, or TE markers such as
IFN-T and KRT18 were not affected by the reduction in CDX2 levels, nor was the
localization of SOX2 and POU5F1 protein. Using a functional barrier assay, we
observed that the TE epithelial layer of embryos lacking CDX2 had lost its
integrity. Our results thus indicate that CDX2 is not required for TE formation
during bovine development; nevertheless, it is necessary for maintaining TE
integrity.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25251051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biol Open. 2014 Sep 19;3(10):958-65. doi: 10.1242/bio.20149514.

Stat3 signaling regulates embryonic stem cell fate in a dose-dependent manner.

Tai CI(1), Schulze EN(2), Ying QL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research
at USC, Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA Present
address: Animal Biotechnology Interdisciplinary Group, Center for Veterinary
Medicine, United States Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish Place,
Rockville, MD 20855, USA. (2)Present address: Animal Biotechnology
Interdisciplinary Group, Center for Veterinary Medicine, United States Food and
Drug Administration, 7500 Standish Place, Rockville, MD 20855, USA. (3)Eli and
Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research at USC,
Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA Present
address: Animal Biotechnology Interdisciplinary Group, Center for Veterinary
Medicine, United States Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish Place,
Rockville, MD 20855, USA. qying@med.usc.edu.

Stat3 is essential for mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) self-renewal mediated by 
LIF/gp130 receptor signaling. Current understanding of Stat3-mediated ESC
self-renewal mechanisms is very limited, and has heretofore been dominated by the
view that Stat3 signaling functions in a binary "on/off" manner. Here, in
contrast to this binary viewpoint, we demonstrate a contextual, rheostat-like
mechanism for Stat3's function in mESCs. Activation and expression levels
determine whether Stat3 functions in a self-renewal or a differentiation role in 
mESCs. We also show that Stat3 induces rapid differentiation of mESCs toward the 
trophectoderm (TE) lineage when its activation level exceeds certain thresholds. 
Stat3 induces this differentiation phenotype via induction of Tfap2c and its
downstream target Cdx2. Our findings provide a novel concept in the realm of
Stat3, self-renewal signaling, and pluripotent stem cell biology. Ultimately,
this finding may facilitate the development of conditions for the establishment
of authentic non-rodent ESCs.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197444
PMID: 25238758  [PubMed]


258. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 17;9(9):e107905. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107905.
eCollection 2014.

Epigenetic mechanisms underlying the dynamic expression of cancer-testis genes,
PAGE2, -2B and SPANX-B, during mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

Yilmaz-Ozcan S(1), Sade A(2), Kucukkaraduman B(1), Kaygusuz Y(1), Senses KM(1),
Banerjee S(2), Gure AO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara,
Turkey. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University,
Ankara, Turkey.

Cancer-testis (CT) genes are expressed in various cancers but not in normal
tissues other than in cells of the germline. Although DNA demethylation of
promoter-proximal CpGs of CT genes is linked to their expression in cancer, the
mechanisms leading to demethylation are unknown. To elucidate such mechanisms we 
chose to study the Caco-2 colorectal cancer cell line during the course of its
spontaneous differentiation in vitro, as we found CT genes, in particular PAGE2, 
-2B and SPANX-B, to be up-regulated during this process. Differentiation of these
cells resulted in a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) as evidenced by
the gain of epithelial markers CDX2, Claudin-4 and E-cadherin, and a concomitant 
loss of mesenchymal markers Vimentin, Fibronectin-1 and Transgelin. PAGE2 and
SPAN-X up-regulation was accompanied by an increase in Ten-eleven translocation-2
(TET2) expression and cytosine 5-hydroxymethylation as well as the disassociation
of heterochromatin protein 1 and the polycomb repressive complex 2 protein EZH2
from promoter-proximal regions of these genes. Reversal of differentiation
resulted in down-regulation of PAGE2, -2B and SPANX-B, and induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers, demonstrating the dynamic
nature of CT gene regulation in this model.

PMCID: PMC4168264
PMID: 25229454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Gut Liver. 2014 Sep;8(5):508-18. doi: 10.5009/gnl13237. Epub 2014 Apr 23.

Cyclooxygenase 2 in gastric carcinoma is expressed in doublecortin- and CaM
kinase-like-1-positive tuft cells.

Mutoh H(1), Sashikawa M(1), Sakamoto H(1), Tateno T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Doublecortin and CaM kinase-like-1 (DCAMKL1) is a marker of stem
cells expressed predominantly in the crypt base in the intestine. However,
DCAMKL1-positive cells have been shown to be differentiated tuft cells rather
than quiescent progenitors. Tuft cells are the only epithelial cells that express
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) in the normal intestinal epithelium. We previously
generated Cdx2-transgenic mice as model mice for intestinal metaplasia and
gastric carcinoma. In the current study, we investigated the association between 
COX-2 and DCAMKL1 in gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: We examined the association between COX-2 and DCAMKL1 expression in
gastric carcinomas in clinical samples (early gastric well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma) and Cdx2-transgenic mice; and the DCAMKL1-transgenic mouse
stomach using immunohistochemistry and quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: The COX-2-expressing cells were scattered, not diffusely expressed, in
gastric carcinomas from humans and Cdx2-transgenic mice. DCAMKL1-positive cells
were also scattered in the gastric carcinomas, indicating that tuft cells could
still be present in gastric carcinoma. COX-2 was expressed in DCAMKL1-positive
tuft cells in Cdx2- and DCAMKL1-transgenic mouse stomachs, whereas the Sox9
transcription factor was ubiquitously expressed in gastric carcinomas, including 
COX-2-positive cells.
CONCLUSIONS: COX-2 is expressed in DCAMKL1-expressing quiescent tuft cells in
gastric carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4164254
PMID: 25228975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 15;9(9):e107814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107814.
eCollection 2014.

Type I collagen as an extracellular matrix for the in vitro growth of human small
intestinal epithelium.

Jabaji Z(1), Brinkley GJ(1), Khalil HA(1), Sears CM(1), Lei NY(2), Lewis M(3),
Stelzner M(4), Martín MG(5), Dunn JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 
United States of America. (2)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric
Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Department of
Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (3)Department of
Pathology, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (4)Department of Surgery, Division of
Pediatric Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America;
Department of Surgery, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (5)Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Mattel Children's Hospital and the
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported in vitro maintenance and proliferation of
human small intestinal epithelium using Matrigel, a proprietary basement membrane
product. There are concerns over the applicability of Matrigel-based methods for 
future human therapies. We investigated type I collagen as an alternative for the
culture of human intestinal epithelial cells.
METHODS: Human small intestine was procured from fresh surgical pathology
specimens. Small intestinal crypts were isolated using EDTA chelation. Intestinal
subepithelial myofibroblasts were isolated from a pediatric sample and expanded
in vitro. After suspension in Matrigel or type I collagen gel, crypts were
co-cultured above a confluent layer of myofibroblasts. Crypts were also grown in 
monoculture with exposure to myofibroblast conditioned media; these were
subsequently sub-cultured in vitro and expanded with a 1:2 split ratio. Cultures 
were assessed with light microscopy, RT-PCR, histology, and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Collagen supported viable human epithelium in vitro for at least one
month in primary culture. Sub-cultured epithelium expanded through 12 passages
over 60 days. Histologic sections revealed polarized columnar cells, with apical 
brush borders and basolaterally located nuclei. Collagen-based cultures gave rise
to monolayer epithelial sheets at the gel-liquid interface, which were not
observed with Matrigel. Immunohistochemical staining identified markers of
differentiated intestinal epithelium and myofibroblasts. RT-PCR demonstrated
expression of a-smooth muscle actin and vimentin in myofibroblasts and
E-Cadherin, CDX2, villin 1, intestinal alkaline phosphatase, chromogranin A,
lysozyme, and Lgr5 in epithelial cells. These markers were maintained through
several passages.
CONCLUSION: Type I collagen gel supports long-term in vitro maintenance and
expansion of fully elaborated human intestinal epithelium. Collagen-based methods
yield familiar enteroid structures as well as a new pattern of sheet-like growth,
and they eliminate the need for Matrigel for in vitro human intestinal epithelial
growth. Future research is required to further develop this cell culture system
for tissue engineering applications.

PMCID: PMC4164635
PMID: 25222024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Acta Histochem Cytochem. 2014 May 1;47(2):45-57. doi: 10.1267/ahc.13027. Epub
2014 Apr 25.

Reappraisal of the Immunophenotype of Pancreatic Intraductal Papillary Mucinous
Neoplasms (IPMNs)-Gastric Pyloric and Small Intestinal Immunophenotype Expression
in Gastric and Intestinal Type IPMNs-.

Kobayashi M(1), Fujinaga Y(2), Ota H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Graduate School of
Medicine , 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan. (2)Department of
Radiology, Shinshu University School of Medicine , 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano
390-8621, Japan. (3)Department of Health and Medical Sciences, Shinshu University
Graduate School of Medicine , 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.

Pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are mucin-producing
neoplasms of the main and/or branch pancreatic ducts. To assess differences
between various IPMN subtypes, immunohistochemical markers of gastric surface
mucous cells (MUC5AC), gastric gland mucous cells (MUC6 and GlcNAca1<U+2192>4Galß<U+2192>R),
gastric pyloric and duodenal epithelial cells (PDX1), intestinal cells (MUC2 and 
CDX2), small intestinal cells (CPS1) and large intestinal cells (SATB2) were
evaluated in 33 surgically treated IPMNs. MUC2 expression classified IPMNs into
gastric (n=17), intestinal (n=8) and mixed gastric and intestinal type
(collision=7, composite=1). No differences in age or sex were observed among
these types. MUC5AC and PDX1 were expressed in all IPMNs. MUC6 expression was
higher in gastric and mixed types than in intestinal type. GlcNAca1<U+2192>4Galß<U+2192>R was
detected in gastric and mixed type, but not in intestinal type. MUC2 and CDX2
expression were higher in intestinal type than gastric and mixed type. CPS1
expression was higher in intestinal type than gastric type. SATB2 was not
observed in any IPMNs. Frequent abrupt transition between the two IPMN types in
mixed-type IPMNs was observed. Gastric pyloric and small intestinal
differentiation are characteristic of gastric and intestinal type IPMN,
respectively, and these two IPMN types may have distinct pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4138401
PMID: 25221363  [PubMed]


262. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;810:69-105.

Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms and cancer.

Gandini S, Gnagnarella P, Serrano D, Pasquali E, Raimondi S.

It was suggested that vitamin D levels influence cancer development. The vitamin 
D receptor (VDR) is a crucial mediator for the cellular effects of vitamin D. In 
fact It has been hypothesized that polymorphisms in the VDR gene affect cancer
risk and the relevance of VDR gene restriction fragment length polymorphisms for 
various types of cancer has been investigated by a great number of studies.
However, results from previous studies on the association of VDR polymorphisms
with different cancer types are somewhat contradictory, and the role of VDR in
the etiology of cancer is still equivocal. We have performed a systematic review 
of the literature to analyze the relevance of more VDR polymorphisms (Fok1, Bsm1,
Taq1, Apa1, and Cdx2) for individual malignancies, including cancer of the skin
(melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer), ovarian cancer, renal cell carcinoma,
bladder cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, leukemia, thyroid carcinoma, esophageal
adenocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, sarcoma, head and neck and oral
squamous cell carcinoma. Up to June 2012, we identified 79 independent studies
for a total of 52427 cases and 62225 controls. Significant associations with VDR 
polymorphisms have been reported for prostate (Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1), breast (Fok1,
Bsm1, Apa1), colon-rectum (Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1) and skin cancer (Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1). 
Very few studies reported risk estimates for the other cancer sites. Conflicting 
data have been reported for most malignancies and at present it is still not
possible to make any definitive statements about the importance of the VDR
genotype for cancer risk. It seems probable that interactions with other factors 
such as calcium and vitamin D intake, 25(OH)D plasma levels and UV radiation
exposure play a decisive role in cancer risk. To conclude, there is some
indication that VDR polymorphisms may modulate the risk of some cancer sites and 
in future studies VDR genetic variation should be integrated also with
prediagnostic indicator of vitamin D status.

PMID: 25207361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107308. eCollection
2014.

Establishment of trophoblast stem cells under defined culture conditions in mice.

Ohinata Y(1), Tsukiyama T(2).

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan; Life
Science Experimental Facility, Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Yamanashi, Japan;
Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology,
RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent
Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe
Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0121167.

The inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast cell lineages duet early embryonic
development in mammals. After implantation, the ICM forms the embryo proper as
well as some extraembryonic tissues, whereas the trophoectoderm (TE) exclusively 
forms the fetal portion of the placenta and the trophoblast giant cells. Although
embryonic stem (ES) cells can be derived from ICM in cultures of mouse
blastocysts in the presence of LIF and/or combinations of small-molecule chemical
compounds, and the undifferentiated pluripotent state can be stably maintained
without use of serum and feeder cells, defined culture conditions for derivation 
and maintenance of undifferentiated trophoblast stem (TS) cells have not been
established. Here, we report that addition of FGF2, activin A, XAV939, and Y27632
are necessary and sufficient for derivation of TS cells from both of E3.5
blastocysts and E6.5 early postimplantation extraembryonic ectoderm. Moreover,
the undifferentiated TS cell state can be stably maintained in chemically defined
culture conditions. Cells derived in this manner expressed TS cell marker genes, 
including Eomes, Elf5, Cdx2, Klf5, Cdh1, Esrrb, Sox2, and Tcfap2c; differentiated
into all trophoblast subtypes (trophoblast giant cells, spongiotrophoblast, and
labyrinthine trophoblast) in vitro; and exclusively contributed to trophoblast
lineages in chimeric animals. This delineation of minimal requirements for
derivation and self-renewal provides a defined platform for precise description
and dissection of the molecular state of TS cells.

PMCID: PMC4159327
PMID: 25203285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Histopathology. 2015 Feb;66(3):343-50. doi: 10.1111/his.12544. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Differentiation reprogramming in gastric intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia:
role of SOX2 and CDX2.

Camilo V(1), Garrido M, Valente P, Ricardo S, Amaral AL, Barros R, Chaves P,
Carneiro F, David L, Almeida R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.

AIMS: Intestinal metaplasia (IM), which results from de-novo expression of CDX2, 
and dysplasia are precursor lesions of gastric cancer that are associated with an
increased risk for cancer development. There is much evidence suggesting a role
for the transcription factor SOX2 in gastric differentiation. The aim of this
study was to attempt to establish the relationship of SOX2 with CDX2 and with the
differentiation reprogramming that characterizes gastric carcinogenesis, to
assess their involvement in IM and dysplasia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Characterization of gastric (SOX2, MUC5AC, and MUC6) and
intestinal (CDX2 and MUC2) markers in normal gastric mucosa, in 55 foci of IM and
in 26 foci of dysplasia, was performed by immunohistochemistry. SOX2 was
expressed in the normal gastric mucosa, in the presumptive stem cell compartment,
and was maintained in 7% of the complete (MUC5AC-negative) and 85% of the
incomplete (MUC5AC-positive) IM subtypes. Twelve per cent of the dysplastic
lesions expressed SOX2, and the association with MUC5AC was lost. CDX2 was
present in all IMs and dysplastic lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: SOX2 is associated with gastric differentiation in incomplete IM and
is lost in the progression to dysplasia, whereas CDX2 is acquired de novo in IM
and maintained in dysplasia. This suggests that the balance between gastric and
intestinal differentiation programmes impacts on the gastric carcinogenesis
cascade progression.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25196071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cesk Patol. 2014 Jul;50(3):141-8.

Intestinal metaplasia of the stomach and esophagus: an immunohistochemical study 
of 60 cases including comparison with normal and inflamed intestinal mucosa.

Chlumská A, Mukennabl P, Marecek P, Zámecník M.

Recently, a new classification of intestinal metaplasia (IM) using
immunohistochemical mucin markers was proposed. Two following types of IM were
defined: (1) a mixed gastric and intestinal type also called incomplete IM; (2) a
purely intestinal type, also called complete IM. We present a series of 30 cases 
of gastric IM and 30 cases of IM of the esophagus, using this new classification.
In all gastric cases, IM developed in the mucus-neck region in the form of
incomplete IM. Toward the mucosa surface, it matured gradually into complete IM. 
This maturation showed a gradual reduction of both foveolar mucin MUC5AC and
pyloric gland mucin MUC6. In two of 30 cases, IM was of the incomplete
hyperproliferative type. In one case, focal high-grade adenomatous dysplasia was 
found in the incomplete IM. In the esophageal cases, IM was found in inflamed
cardiac-type mucosa, and it was usually of the incomplete type, with almost
diffuse positivity for MUC5AC and with rare positivity of MUC6. The goblet cells 
and some cylindrical cells expressed intestinal mucin MUC2. The proliferation was
higher than in the complete IM, and in one case, focal low grade adenomatous
dysplasia was found. In addition, we examined the expression of mucins in normal 
and inflamed intestinal mucosa. These cases included 50 duodenal biopsies, 50
biopsies from the ileum, and 50 biopsies from the colon. The inflamed cases
included celiac disease, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis. Some goblet
cells of the normal intestinal mucosa expressed both MUC2 and MUC5AC. More
numerous MUC5AC+ goblet cells were found in the inflamed intestinal mucosa. In
the duodenal and small intestinal mucosa, even the MUC6 positivity of a few
goblet or cylindrical cells was found. In sum, our results indicate that
incomplete IM is an initial step of the metaplastic process. It can mature into
complete IM, or alternatively, it can develop dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. In
addition, we found that gastric-type mucins are also present in normal or
inflamed intestinal mucosa, and that the expression of these mucins is even
enhanced in some inflammatory conditions. The expression of MUC5AC in complete IM
and in normal or inflamed mucosa suggests that MUC5AC cannot be regarded as a
marker of immaturity. In Barrett esophagus, our results were similar to those of 
previous studies, except for CDX2 of which reactivity was seen also in incomplete
type of IM.

PMID: 25186595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Sep;13(2):300-15. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.08.001. Epub 2014
Aug 10.

Nanog induces hyperplasia without initiating tumors.

Fischedick G(1), Wu G(2), Adachi K(2), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(3), Greber B(2), Radstaak 
M(2), Köhler G(4), Tapia N(2), Iacone R(5), Anastassiadis K(6), Schöler HR(7),
Zaehres H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany; University of
Münster, Faculty of Medicine, Domagstrasse 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany. (3)Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany; Biodonostia Health
Research Institute, 20014 San Sebastián, and IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for
Science, 48011 Bilbao, Spain. (4)University of Münster, Gerhard-Domagk-Institut
for Pathology, Domagkstraße 17, 48149 Münster, Germany. (5)Center for
Regenerative Therapies, Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 47-51, 01307
Dresden, Germany; F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Pharma Research and Early Development
Discovery Technologies, 4070 Basel, Switzerland. (6)Center for Regenerative
Therapies, Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 47-51, 01307 Dresden,
Germany. (7)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute
for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany; University 
of Münster, Faculty of Medicine, Domagstrasse 3, 48149 Münster, Germany.
Electronic address: office@mpi-muenster.mpg.de.

Though expression of the homeobox transcription factor Nanog is generally
restricted to pluripotent cells and early germ cells, many contradictory reports 
about Nanog's involvement in tumorigenesis exist. To address this, a modified
Tet-On system was utilized to generate Nanog-inducible mice. Following prolonged 
Nanog expression, phenotypic alterations were found to be restricted to the
intestinal tract, leaving other major organs unaffected. Intestinal and colonic
epithelium hyperplasia was observed-intestinal villi had doubled in length and
hyperplastic epithelium outgrowths were seen after 7days. Increased proliferation
of crypt cells and downregulation of the tumor suppressors Cdx2 and Klf4 was
detected. ChIP analysis showed physical interaction of Nanog with the Cdx2 and
Klf4 promoters, indicating a regulatory conservation from embryonic development. 
Despite downregulation of tumor suppressors and increased proliferation, ectopic 
Nanog expression did not lead to tumor formation. We conclude that unlike other
pluripotency-related transcription factors, Nanog cannot be considered an
oncogene.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(3):628-36. doi: 10.1159/000363028. Epub 2014 Aug
12.

CDX2 enhances HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cell invasion by altering the expression of
matrix metalloproteinases.

Jia RZ(1), Ding GC, Gu CM, Huang T, Rui C, Wang YX, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The invasion of trophoblast cells into the maternal uterine
decidua is critical for normal placentation, establishment of pregnancy and
maintenance of fetal growth in humans. Several growth factors and cytokines have 
been implicated in trophoblast invasion, but the underlying regulatory mechanisms
of invasion are not fully understood. Our earlier studies have found that
caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is hypomethylated in human 
pre-eclampsia placental tissues. However, whether CDX2 is involved in trophoblast
invasion was unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we investigated CDX2 function using a human
HTR-8/SVneo cell line that overexpressed CDX2. Cell invasion assays demonstrated 
that CDX2 enhanced trophoblast cell invasiveness. Meanwhile, MTT assays revealed 
that CDX2 did not affect cell proliferation. Western blot analysis and
quantitative real-time PCR demonstrated that the expression level of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) was significantly increased, whereas the expression
of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) was markedly suppressed in
the CDX2-overexpressing trophoblast cells. The phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway is involved in proliferation, migration, metastasis 
and invasion. Our study showed that inhibition of PI3K/Akt signaling led to
decreased expression of CDX2.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that CDX2 is likely regulated by the PI3K/Akt signaling 
pathway during trophoblast cell invasion. Our findings may reveal new insights
into the regulatory mechanisms of trophoblast cell invasion and may be an
important contributor to the pathogenesis of pregnancy-related diseases.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25171776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Gastric Cancer. 2015 Oct;18(4):720-8. doi: 10.1007/s10120-014-0416-5. Epub 2014
Aug 22.

Epithelial dysplasia of the stomach with gastric immunophenotype shows features
of biological aggressiveness.

Valente P(1), Garrido M(2), Gullo I(2,)(3), Baldaia H(4), Marques M(4),
Baldaque-Silva F(4,)(5), Lopes J(4), Carneiro F(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
pedrofmvalente@gmail.com. (2)Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Genova,
Genova, Italy. (4)Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal. (5)Department
of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden. (6)Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
fcarneiro@ipatimup.pt. (7)Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.
fcarneiro@ipatimup.pt. (8)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology,
University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Rua Dr. Roberto Frias S/N, 4200-465, Porto,
Portugal. fcarneiro@ipatimup.pt.

BACKGROUND: Gastric dysplasia is classified as adenomatous/type I (intestinal
phenotype) and foveolar or pyloric/type II (gastric phenotype) according to
morphological (architectural and cytological) features. The immunophenotypic
classification of dysplasia, based on the expression of the mucins, CD10 and
CDX2, recognizes the following immunophenotypes: intestinal (MUC2, CD10, and
CDX2); gastric (MUC5AC and/or MUC6, absence of CD10, and absent or low expression
of CDX2); hybrid (gastric and intestinal markers); and null.
METHODS: Sixty-six cases of nonpolypoid epithelial dysplasia of the stomach were 
classified according to morphological features (histotype and grade) and
immunophenotype. Immunohistochemical staining was performed with antibodies
against MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CD10, CDX2, chromogranin, synaptophysin, Ki-67, and
TP53. HER2 alterations were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and silver-enhanced 
in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: By conventional histology, dysplasia was classified as
adenomatous/intestinal (n = 42; 64 %) and foveolar or pyloric/gastric (n = 24; 36
%) and graded as low grade (n = 37; 56 %) or high grade (n = 29; 44 %).
Immunophenotypic classification showed intestinal (n = 22; 33.3 %), gastric (n = 
25; 37.9 %), hybrid (n = 17; 25.8 %), or null (n = 2; 3.0 %) phenotypes. In 20
cases a coexistent intramucosal carcinoma was identified. The intestinal
immunophenotype was shown to be significantly associated with low-grade dysplasia
(p = 0.001), high expression of CDX2 (p = 0.015), TP53 (p = 0.034), synaptophysin
(p = 0.003), and chromogranin (p < 0.0001); the gastric immunophenotype was
significantly associated with high-grade dysplasia (p = 0.001), high Ki-67
proliferative index (p = 0.05), and coexistence of intramucosal carcinoma (p =
0.013). HER2 amplification was observed in 3 cases, typed as gastric or hybrid.
CONCLUSIONS: Epithelial nonpolypoid dysplasia of the stomach with gastric
immunophenotype shows features of biological aggressiveness and may represent the
putative precursor lesion in a pathway of gastric carcinogenesis originated de
novo from the native gastric mucosa, leading to gastric-type adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 25146833  [PubMed - in process]


269. Pathol Int. 2014 Aug;64(8):397-401. doi: 10.1111/pin.12181.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma arising in cervical inlet patch with synchronous
Barrett's esophagus-related dysplasia.

Tanaka M(1), Ushiku T, Ikemura M, Shibahara J, Seto Y, Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Esophageal adenocarcinomas usually develop in Barrett's esophagus, typically
through the metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, but adenocarcinomas can
occur from heterotopic gastric mucosa in cervical esophagus (inlet patch). This
report describes the first case of synchronous presentation of adenocarcinoma
arising from cervical inlet patch and Barrett's esophagus-related dysplasia in a 
76-year-old man. Surveillance CT detected a 3-cm polypoid mass in the cervical
esophagus. Endoscopic biopsies confirmed a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the
cervical esophagus. Barrett's esophagus was present also in the lower esophagus. 
Histologic examination of the surgically resected specimen revealed the polypoid 
mass as composed of tubular adenocarcinoma, and was associated with
non-neoplastic columnar mucosa representing pre-existing inlet patch. Another
isolated cervical inlet patch with intestinal metaplasia was also recognized. In 
the lower esophagus, high-grade dysplasia was noted within the Barrett's
esophagus. Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinoma associated with inlet patch 
had intestinal immunophenotype (CDX2-, CD10- and MUC2-positive), whereas the
Barrett's esophagus-related high-grade dysplasia showed mixed immunophenotype
(MUC5AC- and MUC6-positive, with scattered MUC2-positive goblet cells). Previous 
studies and our findings suggest that intestinal metaplasia might predispose to
the development of adenocarcinoma in the inlet patch. Therefore, endoscopists and
pathologists should be aware of rare malignant transformation of inlet patches,
especially those with intestinal metaplasia.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25143128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 10;289(41):28421-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571513. Epub
2014 Aug 19.

Transcriptional regulation of the intestinal nuclear bile acid farnesoid X
receptor (FXR) by the caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2).

Modica S(1), Cariello M(2), Morgano A(3), Gross I(4), Vegliante MC(2), Murzilli
S(3), Salvatore L(3), Freund JN(4), Sabbà C(5), Moschetta A(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine, "Aldo Moro," University of 
Bari, Bari 70124, Italy, the National Cancer Research Center, IRCCS Oncologico
Giovanni Paolo II, 70124 Bari, Italy. (2)the National Cancer Research Center,
IRCCS Oncologico Giovanni Paolo II, 70124 Bari, Italy. (3)the Laboratory of Lipid
Metabolism and Cancer, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, Santa Maria Imbaro (Chieti),
66030 Italy. (4)INSERM UMR S1113, 67200 Strasbourg, France, and the Université de
Strasbourg, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle, Strasbourg 67081, France.
(5)From the Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine, "Aldo Moro," University of 
Bari, Bari 70124, Italy. (6)From the Department of Interdisciplinary Medicine,
"Aldo Moro," University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy, the National Cancer Research 
Center, IRCCS Oncologico Giovanni Paolo II, 70124 Bari, Italy,
antonio.moschetta@uniba.it.

Farnesoid X receptor (FXR, NR1H4) is a bile acid-activated transcription factor
that belongs to the nuclear receptor superfamily. It is highly expressed in the
enterohepatic system, where it senses bile acid levels to consequently reduce
their synthesis while inducing their detoxification. Bile acids are intestinal
tumor promoters and their concentrations have to be tightly regulated. Indeed,
reduced expression of FXR in the intestine increases colorectal cancer
susceptibility in mice, whereas its activation can promote apoptosis in
genetically modified cells. Notably, despite the broad knowledge of the FXR
enterohepatic transcriptional activity, the molecular mechanisms regulating FXR
expression in the intestine are still unknown. Herein, by combining both gain and
loss of function approaches and FXR promoter activity studies, we identified
caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2) transcription factor as a positive regulator of 
FXR expression in the enterocytes. Our results provide a putative novel tool for 
modulating FXR expression against bile acid-related colorectal cancer
progression.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4192494
PMID: 25138215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 21;8(4):983-90. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.020. Epub 2014
Aug 14.

A polymorphic enhancer near GREM1 influences bowel cancer risk through
differential CDX2 and TCF7L2 binding.

Lewis A(1), Freeman-Mills L(1), de la Calle-Mustienes E(2), Giráldez-Pérez RM(2),
Davis H(1), Jaeger E(1), Becker M(3), Hubner NC(4), Nguyen LN(4), Zeron-Medina
J(5), Bond G(5), Stunnenberg HG(4), Carvajal JJ(2), Gomez-Skarmeta JL(2), Leedham
S(1), Tomlinson I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (2)Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC-Universidad Pablo de Olavide-Junta de
Andalucía, Carretera de Utrera Km1, 41013 Sevilla, Spain. (3)Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Science,
Geert Grooteplein 26/28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (5)Ludwig Institute
for Cancer Research, Ltd., Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University
of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ,
UK. (6)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
Electronic address: iant@well.ox.ac.uk.

A rare germline duplication upstream of the bone morphogenetic protein antagonist
GREM1 causes a Mendelian-dominant predisposition to colorectal cancer (CRC). The 
underlying disease mechanism is strong, ectopic GREM1 overexpression in the
intestinal epithelium. Here, we confirm that a common GREM1 polymorphism,
rs16969681, is also associated with CRC susceptibility, conferring ~20%
differential risk in the general population. We hypothesized the underlying cause
to be moderate differences in GREM1 expression. We showed that rs16969681 lies in
a region of active chromatin with allele- and tissue-specific enhancer activity. 
The CRC high-risk allele was associated with stronger gene expression, and higher
Grem1 mRNA levels increased the intestinal tumor burden in Apc(Min) mice. The
intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 and Wnt effector TCF7L2 bound near
rs16969681, with significantly higher affinity for the risk allele, and CDX2
overexpression in CDX2/GREM1-negative cells caused re-expression of GREM1.
rs16969681 influences CRC risk through effects on Wnt-driven GREM1 expression in 
colorectal tumors.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4471812
PMID: 25131200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Cell. 2014 Aug 25;30(4):410-22. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.06.019. Epub 2014 
Aug 7.

Notch and hippo converge on Cdx2 to specify the trophectoderm lineage in the
mouse blastocyst.

Rayon T(1), Menchero S(1), Nieto A(2), Xenopoulos P(3), Crespo M(1), Cockburn
K(4), Cañon S(1), Sasaki H(5), Hadjantonakis AK(3), de la Pompa JL(6), Rossant
J(4), Manzanares M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Program, Department of Cardiovascular Development and
Repair, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor
Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. (2)Program in Developmental and Stem
Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada. (3)Developmental Biology Program,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Program in Developmental
and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8,
Canada. (5)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Department of Cell
Fate Control, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
(6)Cardiovascular Developmental Biology Program, Department of Cardiovascular
Development and Repair, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares
(CNIC), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. (7)Stem Cell Biology
Program, Department of Cardiovascular Development and Repair, Centro Nacional de 
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: mmanzanares@cnic.es.

The first lineage choice in mammalian embryogenesis is that between the
trophectoderm, which gives rise to the trophoblast of the placenta, and the inner
cell mass, from which is derived the embryo proper and the yolk sac. The
establishment of these lineages is preceded by the inside-versus-outside
positioning of cells in the early embryo and stochastic expression of key
transcription factors, which is then resolved into lineage-restricted expression.
The regulatory inputs that drive this restriction and how they relate to cell
position are largely unknown. Here, we show an unsuspected role of Notch
signaling in regulating trophectoderm-specific expression of Cdx2 in cooperation 
with TEAD4. Notch activity is restricted to outer cells and is able to influence 
positional allocation of blastomeres, mediating preferential localization to the 
trophectoderm. Our results show that multiple signaling inputs at preimplantation
stages specify the first embryonic lineages.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4146744
PMID: 25127056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Surg Oncol. 2014 Sep;23(3):167-76. doi: 10.1016/j.suronc.2014.07.003. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

The clinical perspectives of CDX2 expression in colorectal cancer: a qualitative 
systematic review.

Olsen J(1), Espersen ML(2), Jess P(3), Kirkeby LT(4), Troelsen JT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde University,
Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark; Department of Surgery, Roskilde
University Hospital, Roskilde Sygehus, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: josn@ruc.dk. (2)Department of Science, Systems and Models,
Roskilde University, Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark; The Molecular 
Unit, Department of Pathology, Herlev University Hospital, DK-2730 Herlev,
Denmark. Electronic address: mlme@ruc.dk. (3)Department of Surgery, Roskilde
University Hospital, Roskilde Sygehus, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: pjss@regionsjaelland.dk. (4)Department of Surgery, Roskilde
University Hospital, Roskilde Sygehus, Køgevej 7-13, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: lenk@regionsjaelland.dk. (5)Department of Science, Systems
and Models, Roskilde University, Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.
Electronic address: troelsen@ruc.dk.

INTRODUCTION: Homeobox genes are often deregulated in cancer. They can have both 
oncogenic and tumor-suppressing potential. The Caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is an intestine-specific transcription factor. It
is implicated in differentiation, proliferation, cell-adhesion, and migration.
CDX2 has been proposed as a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer but its role is
still controversial. This systematic review were undertaken in order to clarify
CDX2s role in colorectal cancer.
METHODS: A literature search was performed in the MEDLINE database from 1966 to
February 2014. Only studies in which all or a part of the experimental design
were performed on human colorectal cancer tissue were included. Thus, studies
solely performed in cell-lines or animal models were excluded.
RESULTS: Fifty-two articles of relevance were identified. CDX2 expression was
rarely lost in colorectal cancers, however the expression pattern may often be
heterogeneous within the tumor and can be selectively down regulated at the
invasive front and in tumor buddings. Loss of CDX2 expression is probably
correlated to tumor grade, stage, right-sided tumor location, MMR-deficiency,
CIMP, and BRAF mutations. The CDX2 gene is rarely mutated but the locus harboring
the gene is often amplified and may suggest CDX2 as a linage-survival oncogene.
CDX2 might be implicated in cell proliferation and migration through cross-talk
with the Wnt-signaling pathway, tumor-stroma proteins, and inflammatory
cytokines.
CONCLUSION: A clear role for CDX2 expression in colorectal cancer remains to be
elucidated, and it might differ in relation to the underlying molecular pathways 
leading to the cancer formation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25126956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cell. 2014 Aug 14;158(4):889-902. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.021.

Dissecting engineered cell types and enhancing cell fate conversion via CellNet.

Morris SA(1), Cahan P(1), Li H(2), Zhao AM(1), San Roman AK(3), Shivdasani RA(4),
Collins JJ(5), Daley GQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA 02115, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (2)Center for Individualized Medicine, Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (3)Department of Medical Oncology Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Departments of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA; Departments of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Biomedical Engineering and Center for BioDynamics, Boston
University; Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard
University, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (6)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division
of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard
Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address:
george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(21):3313-4.

Engineering clinically relevant cells in vitro holds promise for regenerative
medicine, but most protocols fail to faithfully recapitulate target cell
properties. To address this, we developed CellNet, a network biology platform
that determines whether engineered cells are equivalent to their target tissues, 
diagnoses aberrant gene regulatory networks, and prioritizes candidate
transcriptional regulators to enhance engineered conversions. Using CellNet, we
improved B cell to macrophage conversion, transcriptionally and functionally, by 
knocking down predicted B cell regulators. Analyzing conversion of fibroblasts to
induced hepatocytes (iHeps), CellNet revealed an unexpected intestinal program
regulated by the master regulator Cdx2. We observed long-term functional
engraftment of mouse colon by iHeps, thereby establishing their broader potential
as endoderm progenitors and demonstrating direct conversion of fibroblasts into
intestinal epithelium. Our studies illustrate how CellNet can be employed to
improve direct conversion and to uncover unappreciated properties of engineered
cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4291075
PMID: 25126792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Hum Pathol. 2014 Oct;45(10):2107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.06.016. Epub
2014 Jul 2.

Choledochal cysts: a clinicopathologic study of 36 cases with emphasis on the
morphologic and the immunohistochemical features of premalignant and malignant
alterations.

Katabi N(1), Pillarisetty VG(2), DeMatteo R(3), Klimstra DS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065. Electronic address: katabin@mskcc.org. (2)Department of Surgery,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109-1023.
(3)Hepatobiliary Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY 10065. (4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065.

Choledochal cysts (CDCs) are believed to represent a risk factor for the
development of neoplasia. However, the frequency and morphology of neoplastic
changes have not been systematically studied, especially in North America. Our
aims were to study the frequency and morphology of preneoplastic/neoplastic
changes of CDCs. Thirty-six cysts were subjected to clinicopathological analyses.
Metaplasia was found in 14 of 35, of which 9 had biliary intraepithelial
neoplasia (BilIN). Of the 14 with metaplasia, 13 showed pyloric gland; 5,
intestinal; and 2, squamous. BilINs included 6 BilIN-1, 2 BilIN-2, and 2 BilIN-3.
Carcinoma was identified in 5 cases of which 3 were associated with metaplasia
and BilIN. Only 1 of 18 cases without metaplasia had BilIN, and none had
carcinoma (P = .0008). There was a trend toward more BilIN and carcinoma with
intestinal rather than with pyloric gland metaplasia. All cases with metaplasia
or/and BilIN were negative for MUC1. All cases with intestinal metaplasia were
positive for CK20, CDX2, and MUC2, whereas cases with pyloric gland were positive
for MUC6. MUC1, CEA, and B72.3 were positive only in carcinoma. There was a trend
toward increasing p53 and Ki-67 from metaplasia to BilIN to carcinoma. Four of 5 
patients with carcinoma died, and one was alive with disease. All others were
free of disease except for one who developed new cysts. CDCs are associated with 
a high rate of BilIN (28.5%) and carcinoma (14.3%). CDCs show a sequence of tumor
progression from metaplasia to BilIN and carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25123074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Theriogenology. 2014 Oct 15;82(7):942-50. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.07.003. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Insulin-like growth factor 2: a modulator of anti-apoptosis related genes (HSP70,
BCL2-L1) in bovine preimplantation embryos.

Valleh MV(1), Hyttel P(2), Rasmussen MA(2), Strøbech L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Zabol,
Zabol, Iran. Electronic address: mehdi.valleh@uoz.ac.ir. (2)Department of Basic
Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)EmbryoTrans Biotech ApS, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Intrinsic defects within the embryos, reflected by elevated cell death and low
proliferative ability, are considered the most critical factors associated with
bovine infertility. The identification of embryonic factors, which are
responsible for successful embryo development, is thus critical in designing
strategies for infertility intervention. In this experiment, the possible
mechanisms involved in both blastomere proliferation and regulation of cell death
were studied by analysis of relative expression patterns of IGF-II, BCL2-L1,
BAK1, and HSP70 in 3 classes of morphological quality groups (e.g., excellent,
good, and poor) of bovine blastocysts produced by IVF. Variation in total
blastocyst cell numbers as well as their allocation to inner cell mass and
trophectoderm lineages were also determined by differential CDX2 staining.
Results showed that transcript levels for IGF-II, BCL2-L1, and the BCL2-L1/BAK1
ratio were higher in excellent- and good-quality blastocysts compared with
low-quality blastocysts (P<0.01), whereas mRNA levels for HSP70 were higher in
low-quality blastocyst compared with excellent-quality bovine blastocysts
(P<0.05). In addition, excellent-quality blastocysts displayed not only greater
total cell number but also greater mean inner cell mass/total cell number
proportion than that of poor-quality blastocysts (P<0.01). The expression levels 
of IGF-II showed negative correlation with the levels of HSP70 (r=-0.70; P<0.05);
however, the correlation of expression levels of IGF-II with both of BCL2-L1
(r=0.91; P<0.01) and the ratio of BCL2-L1/BAK1 (r=0.78; P<0.05) were highly
positive. There was no correlation between the expression levels of IGF-II and
BAK1 genes. In conclusion, these observations suggested that levels of endogenous
IGF-II transcripts might be associated with the quality of IVF embryos by
regulating either apoptosis-related genes or mitogenic actions in bovine
preimplantation embryos.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25110065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Virchows Arch. 2014 Oct;465(4):395-400. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1638-y. Epub 2014
Aug 10.

Aberrant SOX2 expression in colorectal cancers does not correlate with mucinous
differentiation and gastric mucin MUC5AC expression.

Raghoebir L(1), Biermann K, Kempen MB, Dubbink HJ, Dinjens WN, Hersmus R,
Looijenga LH, Bruno MJ, Tibboel D, Rottier RJ, Smits R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) can be divided into non-mucinous and mucinous subtypes,
of which the latter portends to have a worse clinical prognosis. A previous study
suggested a putative link between SOX2 expression observed selectively in
mucinous CRC and the induction of the gastric mucin MUC5AC. In this study, we
re-evaluated the expression behavior of SOX2, MUC5AC, and CDX2 in both types of
CRC. We performed immunohistochemical analysis on 90 cases of non-mucinous CRCs, 
57 cases of mucinous CRCs, and 15 case-matched normal intestinal mucosa. In
contrast to the previously suggested link between SOX2 and mucinous CRC, we
observe aberrant expression of SOX2 at equal levels in both subtypes.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis shows that expression is not
attributed to genomic amplification. While SOX2 and CDX2 are normally expressed
in a reciprocal manner, SOX2-positive tumor cells co-express CDX2. Furthermore,
we show that MUC5AC is expressed independently of SOX2. In conclusion, we show
that aberrant SOX2 expression is specifically linked neither to mucinous CRCs nor
to the induction of MUC5AC, in contrast to previous suggestions.

PMID: 25108707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 7;9(8):e104293. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104293. eCollection
2014.

A novel CDX2 isoform regulates alternative splicing.

Witek ME(1), Snook AE(2), Lin JE(2), Blomain ES(2), Xiang B(2), Magee MS, Waldman
SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Kimmel Cancer Center & Jefferson Medical
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
of America. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e112164. Magee, Michael [corrected to Magee, Michael S].

Gene expression is a dynamic and coordinated process coupling transcription with 
pre-mRNA processing. This regulation enables tissue-specific transcription
factors to induce expression of specific transcripts that are subsequently
amplified by alternative splicing allowing for increased proteome complexity and 
functional diversity. The intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 regulates 
development and maintenance of the intestinal epithelium by inducing expression
of genes characteristic of the mature enterocyte phenotype. Here, sequence
analysis of CDX2 mRNA from colonic mucosa-derived tissues revealed an
alternatively spliced transcript (CDX2/AS) that encodes a protein with a
truncated homeodomain and a novel carboxy-terminal domain enriched in serine and 
arginine residues (RS domain). CDX2 and CDX2/AS exhibited distinct nuclear
expression patterns with minimal areas of co-localization. CDX2/AS did not
activate the CDX2-dependent promoter of guanylyl cyclase C nor inhibit
transcriptional activity of CDX2. Unlike CDX2, CDX2/AS co-localized with the
putative splicing factors ASF/SF2 and SC35. CDX2/AS altered splicing patterns of 
CD44v5 and Tra2-ß1 minigenes in Lovo colon cancer cells independent of CDX2
expression. These data demonstrate unique dual functions of the CDX2 gene
enabling it to regulate gene expression through both transcription (CDX2) and
pre-mRNA processing (CDX2/AS).

PMCID: PMC4125279
PMID: 25101906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mod Pathol. 2015 Feb;28(2):268-78. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.96. Epub 2014 Aug 
1.

Aberrant expression of annexin A10 is closely related to gastric phenotype in
serrated pathway to colorectal carcinoma.

Tsai JH(1), Lin YL(2), Cheng YC(3), Chen CC(3), Lin LI(4), Tseng LH(5), Cheng
ML(6), Liau JY(1), Jeng YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan [2] Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)1] Department of Oncology, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)1]
Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan [2] Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, 
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Annexin A10 (ANXA10) is a member of the ANX family that is normally expressed in 
gastric mucosa. ANXA10 was recently observed to be upregulated in sessile
serrated adenoma, a precursor to microsatellite-unstable colorectal cancer. We
investigated the use of ANXA10 in diagnosing colorectal carcinoma. In an
immunohistochemical analysis, the intensity and quantity of ANXA10, MUC5AC, MUC6 
and CDX2 in 123 colorectal carcinomas were graded. We determined the molecular
status of BRAF and KRAS mutations, as well as the microsatellite instability
status and the CpG island methylator phenotype in all colorectal carcinomas, and 
subcategorized into four molecular subgroups according to the molecular
derangements. Nuclear ANXA10 staining was present in 36 colorectal carcinomas,
exhibiting a strong significant association with the BRAF mutation status
(P<0.0001) and positive CpG island methylator phenotype (P<0.0001), and a
borderline significant association with high levels of microsatellite instability
(P=0.072). The ANXA10-positive colorectal carcinomas were frequently positive for
MUC5AC and MUC6, and were associated with absent or reduced CDX2 expression (all 
P<0.0001). According to a classification and regression tree analysis, ANXA10 is 
a superior marker for the molecular subtyping of colorectal carcinomas and
represents a specific marker for colorectal cancers of the serrated pathway. Our 
results indicated that ANXA10 expression is implicated in gastric programming in 
serrated-pathway-associated colorectal carcinoma. ANXA10-positive colorectal
carcinoma is highly associated with the molecular features of the serrated
neoplasia pathway.

PMID: 25081749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Hum Pathol. 2014 Sep;45(9):1910-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.05.013. Epub 2014 
Jun 12.

Comparison between the location and the histomorphological/immunohistochemical
characteristics of noninvasive neoplasms of the ampulla of Vater.

Yamamoto Y(1), Nemoto T(2), Okubo Y(3), Nihonyanagi Y(3), Ishiwatari T(3), Takuma
K(4), Tochigi N(3), Okano N(4), Wakayama M(3), Igarashi Y(4), Shibuya K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Toho University School of Medicine, Ota-ku, 
Tokyo 143-8541, Japan; Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Toho University Omori Medical Center, Ota-ku, Tokyo 143-8541, 
Japan. (2)Department of Surgical Pathology, Toho University School of Medicine,
Ota-ku, Tokyo 143-8541, Japan. Electronic address:
tetsuo.nemoto@med.toho-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Surgical Pathology, Toho
University School of Medicine, Ota-ku, Tokyo 143-8541, Japan. (4)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University
Omori Medical Center, Ota-ku, Tokyo 143-8541, Japan.

To determine useful factors when selecting an appropriate procedure for
noninvasive ampullary neoplasia, we investigated the relationship between the
location and the histomorphological/immunohistochemical characteristics of 56
noninvasive ampullary neoplasms obtained by endoscopic papillectomy (EP). All
subjects were classified according to histomorphology and location of neoplasms, 
and we evaluated the characteristics of each classified group using complementary
immunohistochemical procedures. The CK20-positive rates of each location type
were also evaluated. Subjects presented with 52 intestinal-type adenomas
(low/high grade, 32:20) and 4 noninvasive pancreatobiliary papillary neoplasms
(low/high grade, 1:3). Twenty-seven periampullary (peri-AMP)-type tumors and 23
extended-type tumors comprised the intestinal type, and the intra-ampullary
(intra-AMP) type was composed of 4 pancreatobiliary and 2 intestinal
histomorphological types. The CK20-positive rates of these 3 location types
differed significantly (peri-AMP type, 50.6% ± 21.0%; extended type, 35.4% ±
18.6%; intra-AMP type, 6.9% ± 6.3%). The CK20-positive rate for intestinal-type
tumors of the intra-AMP location type was lower than that of the peri-AMP
location type. Intestinal-type tumors without CDX2 expression included extended
and intra-AMP types, which are tumors that may show positive vertical margins
when EP is performed. In this study, we found that an understanding of
pancreatobiliary-type histology is an important aspect for the investigation of
tumors involving the common channel of the ampulla. Furthermore, immunostaining
of CDX2 and CK20 provides beneficial information if considering whether to
perform an EP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25081540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Acta Crystallogr B Struct Sci Cryst Eng Mater. 2014 Aug;70(Pt 4):705-13. doi:
10.1107/S2052520614006210. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

3-(4-pyridyl)-acetylacetone--a fully featured substituted pyridine and a flexible
linker for complex materials.

Merkens C(1), Truong KN(1), Englert U(1).

Author information: 
(1)RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Landoltweg 1, 52074 
Aachen, Germany.

3-(4-Pyridyl)-acetylacetone (HacacPy) acts as a pyridine-type ligand towards CdX2
(X = Cl, Br, I). Chain polymers with six-coordinated metal cations are obtained
from CdCl2 and with alternating five- and six-coordinated Cd centers from CdBr2. 
In either case, the formation of these compounds does not depend on the precise
stoichiometry. In contrast, two different reaction products form with the heavier
congener CdI2, namely a ligand-rich molecular complex CdI2(HacacPy)2 and a
ligand-deficient one-dimensional polymer [CdI2(HacacPy)](1)(8). Interconversion
between these two iodo derivatives is possible via thermal degradation and
mechanochemical synthesis. The acetylacetone moiety in HacacPy may be
deprotonated and chelated to Fe(III), and the resulting complex Fe(acacPy)3
reacts analogously to a bridging polypyridine ligand towards the same Cd halides 
as the molecule HacacPy itself. With CdCl2 and CdBr2, isomorphous chain polymers 
are obtained in which the Cd cations adopt distorted octahedral coordination and 
one of the peripheric pyridyl groups remains uncoordinated. With CdI2, the iron
complex acts as a mu3Fe(acacPy)3 bridge between tetrahedral Cd centers and gives 
rise to a ladder structure.

PMID: 25080249  [PubMed]


282. Cytojournal. 2014 Jun 12;11:16. doi: 10.4103/1742-6413.134438. eCollection 2014.

Microcystic variant malignant mesothelioma presenting as a localized paraspinal
mass.

Ko HM(1), Kamil ZS(1), Geddie WR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Address: Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada ; Department of Laboratory Medicine Program,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

A 58-year-old man presented with productive cough and fever. Computed tomography 
(CT) scan of the chest showed an upper right paraspinal mass. CT-guided
fine-needle aspiration biopsy showed lobules of vacuolated cells against a
background of myxoid material. The cells demonstrated moderate to severe nuclear 
atypia and occasional mitoses. Immunohistochemistry revealed tumor cells to be
immunoreactive for calretinin, WT-1, D2-40, cytokeratin (CK) 7, AE1/AE3, high
molecular weight keratin, vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen, and negative 
for thyroid transcription factor-1, Ber-EP4, carcinoembryonic antigen, S100
protein, CK20, and CDX2. The combined morphologic and immunohistochemical
findings confirmed the diagnosis of microcystic variant of localized malignant
mesothelioma. The subsequent lung resection showed a pleural-based mass in the
right upper lobe and confirmed the diagnosis. Awareness of the existence of
unusual morphologic variants and localized forms of mesothelioma are necessary to
avoid misdiagnosis of fine needle biopsy samples. Recognition of characteristic
cytomorphologic features along with optimal use of panel of immunohistochemistry 
studies is crucial for making a specific diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4104538
PMID: 25071858  [PubMed]


283. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Oct;16(5):392-406. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0012. Epub 2014
Jul 28.

Psammaplin a improves development and quality of somatic cell nuclear transfer
mouse embryos.

Mallol A(1), Santaló J, Ibáñez E.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel·lular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Facultat de
Biociències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona , 08193, Bellaterra, Spain .

Faulty reprogramming of the donor somatic nucleus to a totipotent embryonic state
by the recipient oocyte is a major obstacle for cloning success. Accordingly,
treatment of cloned embryos with epigenetic modifiers, such as histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), enhances cloning efficiency. The purpose of our
study was to further explore the potential effect of valproic acid (VPA), used in
previous studies, and to investigate the effect of psammaplin A (PsA), a novel
HDACi, on the development and quality of cloned mouse embryos. To this aim,
cloned embryos were treated with 5, 10, and 20 µM PsA or 2 and 4 mM VPA for 8-9 h
(before and during activation) or 16 h or 24 h (during and after activation), and
their in vitro developmental potential and blastocyst quality were evaluated.
Treatments with 10 µM PsA and 2 mM VPA for 16 h were selected as the most
optimal, showing higher blastocyst rates and quality. These treatments had no
significant effects on the expression of Nanog, Oct4, and Cdx2 or on global
histone and DNA methylation levels at the blastocyst stage, but both increased
global levels of histone acetylation at early developmental stages. This was
correlated with a two-fold (for VPA) and four-fold (for PsA) increase in
full-term development, and a 11.5-fold increase when PsA was combined with the
use of latrunculin A instead of cytochalasin B. In conclusion, PsA improves mouse
cloning efficiency to a higher extent than VPA.

PMCID: PMC4172391
PMID: 25068567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Histopathology. 2014 Dec;65(6):926-32. doi: 10.1111/his.12515. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Multifocal synchronous mucinous adenocarcinomas arising in congenital pulmonary
airway malformation: a case report with molecular study.

Kim MY(1), Kang CH, Park SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea.

AIMS: Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) is a rare developmental
anomaly of the lung. Here, we report a case of mucinous adenocarcinoma arising in
CPAM. A 23-month-old boy underwent a thoracoscopic lobectomy of the left upper
lobe of the lung based on a presumptive diagnosis of asymptomatic CPAM, found in 
antenatal sonogram.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Histologically, the lesion was consistent with CPAM, Stocker
type I. In addition, multiple foci ranging from mucinous epithelial hyperplasia
to mucinous adenocarcinoma were detected. All lesions shared the same
immunoprofile with the expression of cytokeratin (CK) 20, MUC5AC, and human
epidermal growth factor receptor2 (HER2), but were negative for CK7,
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), MUC1, CDX2, BRAF (VE1) and anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (ALK). K-RAS point mutation (G12V) was also detected in all
micro-dissected mucinous lesions but EGFR mutation was not found. All lesions
were consistent with mucinous adenocarcinoma. The patient's clinical course has
been uneventful during the 12-months follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: This interesting case demonstrated that multiple foci in CPAM can
synchronously transform into malignancies.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25066006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Virchows Arch. 2014 Nov;465(5):559-65. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1636-0. Epub 2014 
Jul 25.

Immunohistochemical profile of ductal adenocarcinoma of the prostate.

Seipel AH(1), Samaratunga H, Delahunt B, Wiklund F, Wiklund P, Lindberg J,
Grönberg H, Egevad L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Radiumhemmet P1:02,
Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.

Ductal adenocarcinoma of the prostate (DAC) is considered to be an aggressive
subtype of prostate cancer with greater risk of progression than acinar
adenocarcinoma (AC). It has been debated whether DAC is a distinct subtype or a
morphological variant of AC. Our aim was to examine the protein expression of DAC
and to compare the results with AC. A tissue microarray was constructed from 60
DAC and 46 AC matched by Gleason score. The slides were stained for 28
immunomarkers (estrogen, progesterone and androgen receptor, prolactin, PSA,
prostein, PSMA, PSAP, CDX2, lysozyme, villin, monoclonal CEA, CK7, CK20, HMWCK,
p63, p504s, c-myc, EGFR, Ki-67, p16, p21, p27, p53, PTEN, ERG, PAX-2, and PAX-8).
HMWCK was positive in 8.5 % of DAC, but negative in all cases of AC (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045). 
p16 was positive in 53.3 % of DAC and in 26.1 % of AC (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). p53 was
positive in 42.4 % of DAC and 26.7 % of AC (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.031). A distinct patchy
positivity of CK20 was seen in 23.7 % of DAC, and this pattern was also seen in
9.1 % of AC (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047). Villin was positive in 3.4 % of DAC while expression was
negative in AC. Ki-67 labeling index was significantly higher in DAC than in AC
(mean 9.2 % [95 % CI 6.4-12.0] and 2.6 % [1.9-3.4], p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). While there is
some overlap in the immunohistochemical expression of DAC and AC, the differences
between these two morphotypes of prostatic carcinoma are consistent with DAC
having a more aggressive phenotype than AC.

PMID: 25059847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Sep 4;15(3):310-25. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.06.006. Epub
2014 Jul 18.

NANOG and CDX2 pattern distinct subtypes of human mesoderm during exit from
pluripotency.

Mendjan S(1), Mascetti VL(2), Ortmann D(2), Ortiz M(2), Karjosukarso DW(2), Ng
Y(2), Moreau T(2), Pedersen RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Wellcome Trust-Medical 
Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK; Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
CB2 0SZ, UK. Electronic address: sm687@cam.ac.uk. (2)The Anne McLaren Laboratory 
for Regenerative Medicine, Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem
Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK; Department of
Surgery, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK. (3)The Anne McLaren
Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council
Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK;
Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK. Electronic
address: ralp2@cam.ac.uk.

Mesoderm is induced at the primitive streak (PS) and patterns subsequently into
mesodermal subtypes and organ precursors. It is unclear whether mesoderm
induction generates a multipotent PS progenitor or several distinct ones with
restricted subtype potentials. We induced mesoderm in human pluripotent stem
cells with ACTIVIN and BMP or with GSK3-ß inhibition. Both approaches induced
BRACHYURY(+) mesoderm of distinct PS-like identities, which had differing
patterning potential. ACTIVIN and BMP-induced mesoderm patterned into cardiac but
not somitic subtypes. Conversely, PS precursors induced by GSK3-ß inhibition did 
not generate lateral plate and cardiac mesoderm and favored instead somitic
differentiation. The mechanism of these cell fate decisions involved mutual
repression of NANOG and CDX2. Although NANOG was required for cardiac
specification but blocked somitic subtypes, CDX2 was required for somitic
mesoderm but blocked cardiac differentiation. In sum, rather than forming a
common PS progenitor, separate induction mechanisms distinguish human mesoderm
subtypes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25042702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Histopathology. 2015 Jan;66(2):201-14. doi: 10.1111/his.12486. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Intestinal metaplasia in Barrett's oesophagus may be an epiphenomenon rather than
a preneoplastic condition, and CDX2-positive cardiac-type epithelium is
associated with minute Barrett's tumour.

Watanabe G(1), Ajioka Y, Takeuchi M, Annenkov A, Kato T, Watanabe K, Tani Y,
Ikegami K, Yokota Y, Fukuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Diagnostic Pathology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

AIMS: Although intestinal-type epithelium in Barrett's oesophagus has been
traditionally recognized as having a distinct malignant potential, whether this
also holds true for cardiac-type epithelium remains controversial. The aim of
this study was to identify a type of epithelium that is highly associated with
Barrett's tumour.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analysed tumours and the corresponding background mucosa 
with special regard to tumour size in 40 cases of superficial Barrett's tumour by
using immunohistochemical staining for CDX2, CD10, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6.
Intestinal metaplasia in tumour-adjacent mucosa was not associated with tumour
size, but was significantly correlated with the extent of Barrett's oesophagus (P
< 0.001). The majority (69.2%, 9/13) of small tumours (=10 mm) had no intestinal 
metaplasia in adjacent non-neoplastic mucosae. Minute (=5 mm) tumours were
significantly associated with a gastric immunophenotype (P < 0.001). Purely
gastric-immunophenotype tumour cells expressed CDX2, and cardiac-type epithelium 
adjacent to small tumours also showed low-level CDX2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that intestinal metaplasia in Barrett's oesophagus 
is an epiphenomenon rather than a preneoplastic condition, and that CDX2-positive
cardiac-type epithelium is highly associated with minute Barrett's tumour.
Further prospective studies are needed to evaluate the risk of malignancy of
cardiac-type epithelium with regard to sub-morphological intestinalization.

© 2014 The Authors. Histopathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25040564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Clin Exp Med. 2015 Aug;15(3):343-50. doi: 10.1007/s10238-014-0301-x. Epub 2014
Jul 18.

Chemoprevention of esophageal adenocarcinoma in a rat model by ursodeoxycholic
acid.

Ojima E(1), Fujimura T, Oyama K, Tsukada T, Kinoshita J, Miyashita T, Tajima H,
Fushida S, Harada S, Mukaisho K, Hattori T, Ohta T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterologic Surgery, Kanazawa University, 13-1,
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-8641, Japan.

Reflux of bile acid into the esophagus induces esophagitis,
inflammation-stimulated hyperplasia, metaplasia such as Barrett's esophagus (BE),
and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Caudal-type homeobox 2 (Cdx2) via nuclear
factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B induced by bile acid is an important factor in the development of 
BE and EAC. In colorectal cancer, experimental data suggest a chemopreventive
effect of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). We hypothesized that UDCA may protect
against the esophageal inflammation-metaplasia-carcinoma sequence by decreasing
the overall proportion of the toxic bile acids. Wistar male rats that underwent a
duodenoesophageal reflux procedure were divided into two groups. One group was
given commercial chow (control group), and the other was given experimental chow 
containing UDCA (UDCA group). The animals were killed at 40 weeks after surgery, 
and their bile and esophagus were examined. In the UDCA group, the esophagitis
was milder and the incidence of BE was significantly lower (p < 0.05) than in the
control group, and EAC was not observed (p < 0.05). In analysis of the
compartment of bile acid, UDCA was markedly increased in the UDCA group compared 
with the control group (32.7 ± 11.4 vs. 0.82 ± 0.33 mmol/L, p < 0.05) and cholic 
acid was decreased (32.7 ± 4.05 vs. 60.9 ± 8.26 mmol/L, p < 0.05). Expression
intensity of Cdx2 and NF-<U+03BA>B was greater in the control group than in the UDCA
group (p < 0.05). UDCA may be a chemopreventive agent against EAC by varying the 
bile acid composition.

PMID: 25034655  [PubMed - in process]


289. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2014 Jul 15;12:67. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-12-67.

Temporal regulation of mRNAs for select bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP), BMP
receptors and their associated SMAD proteins during bovine early embryonic
development: effects of exogenous BMP2 on embryo developmental progression.

Lee KB, Folger JK, Rajput SK, Smith GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and Genomics,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. smithge7@msu.edu.

BACKGROUND: We previously demonstrated embryotrophic actions of maternal
(oocyte-derived) follistatin during bovine early embryogenesis. Classical actions
of follistatin are attributed to inhibition of activity of growth factors
including activins and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP). However, temporal
changes in BMP mRNA in early bovine embryos and the effects of exogenous BMP on
embryo developmental progression are not understood. The objectives of present
studies were to characterize mRNA abundance for select BMP, BMP receptors and BMP
receptor associated SMADs during bovine oocyte maturation and early embryogenesis
and determine effects of addition of exogenous BMP protein on early development.
METHODS: Relative abundance of mRNA for BMP2, BMP3, BMP7, BMP10, SMAD1, SMAD5,
ALK3, ALK6, ALK2, BMPR2, ACVR2A and ACVR2B was determined by RT-qPCR analysis of 
germinal vesicle (GV) and in vitro matured metaphase II (MII) oocytes and in
vitro produced embryos collected at pronuclear, 2-cell (C), 4C, 8C, 16C, morula
and blastocyst stages. Effects of addition of recombinant human BMP2 (0, 1, 10
and 100 ng/ml) during initial 72 h of embryo culture on early cleavage (within 30
h post insemination), total cleavage, development to 8C-16C and blastocyst stages
and blastocyst mRNA abundance for markers of inner cell mass (NANOG) and
trophectoderm (CDX2) were also determined.
RESULTS: Abundance of mRNA for BMP2, BMP10, SMAD1, SMAD5, ALK3, ALK2, BMPR2 and
ACVR2B was elevated in MII oocytes and/or pronuclear stage embryos (relative to
GV) and remained elevated through the 8C -16C stages, whereas BMP3, BMP7 and ALK2
mRNAs were transiently elevated. Culture of embryos to the 8C stage in the
presence of a-amanitin resulted in increased abundance for all of above
transcripts examined relative to untreated 8C embryos. Effects of addition of
exogenous BMP2 on early cleavage rates and rates of development to 8C-16C and
blastocyst stages were not observed, but BMP2 treatment increased blastocyst mRNA
for CDX2 and NANOG.
CONCLUSIONS: Abundance of maternally derived mRNAs for above BMP system
components are dynamically regulated during oocyte maturation and early
embryogenesis. Exogenous BMP2 treatment does not influence progression to various
developmental endpoints, but impacts characteristics of resulting blastocysts.
Results support a potential role for BMPs in bovine early embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4110370
PMID: 25027287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Dev Biol. 2014 Oct 1;394(1):142-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.023. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

Inhibition of RHO-ROCK signaling enhances ICM and suppresses TE characteristics
through activation of Hippo signaling in the mouse blastocyst.

Kono K(1), Tamashiro DA(1), Alarcon VB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry and
Physiology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 
96813, USA. (2)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department of Anatomy,
Biochemistry and Physiology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of
Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA. Electronic address: vernadet@hawaii.edu.

Specification of the trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages in the
mouse blastocyst correlates with cell position, as TE derives from outer cells
whereas ICM from inner cells. Differences in position are reflected by cell
polarization and Hippo signaling. Only in outer cells, the apical-basal cell
polarity is established, and Hippo signaling is inhibited in such a manner that
LATS1 and 2 (LATS1/2) kinases are prevented from phosphorylating YAP, a key
transcriptional co-activator of the TE-specifying gene Cdx2. However, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate these events are not fully understood. Here,
we showed that inhibition of RHO-ROCK signaling enhances ICM and suppresses TE
characteristics through activation of Hippo signaling and disruption of
apical-basal polarity. Embryos treated with ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 exhibited
elevated expression of ICM marker NANOG and reduced expression of CDX2 at the
blastocyst stage. Y-27632-treated embryos failed to accumulate YAP in the
nucleus, although it was rescued by concomitant inhibition of LATS1/2.
Segregation between apical and basal polarity regulators, namely PARD6B, PRKCZ,
SCRIB, and LLGL1, was dampened by Y-27632 treatment, whereas some of the
polarization events at the late 8-cell stage such as compaction and apical
localization of p-ERM and tyrosinated tubulin occurred normally. Similar
abnormalities of Hippo signaling and apical-basal polarization were also observed
in embryos that were treated with RHO GTPases inhibitor. These results suggest
that RHO-ROCK signaling plays an essential role in regulating Hippo signaling and
cell polarization to enable proper specification of the ICM and TE lineages.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4404313
PMID: 24997360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2014 May-Jun;20(3):188-94. doi: 10.4103/1319-3767.133025.

Expression of hippo pathway in colorectal cancer.

Liang K, Zhou G, Zhang Q, Li J, Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hippo pathway plays a crucial role in cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. This study aimed to investigate the expression of
Hippo pathway components in the progression and metastasis of colorectal cancer
(CRC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
was used to examine the mRNA expression levels of MST1, LATS2, YAP, TAZ, TEAD1,
CDX2, and OCT4, and western blot (WB) was used to examine the protein expression 
levels of MST1, YAP, TEAD1, and CDX2 in 30 specimens of human colorectal
adenomas, 50 pairs of human CRC tissues, and adjacent nontumorous tissues from
CRC patients. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as the
housekeeping gene in qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression levels of MST1 and LATS2 showed an increasing
tendency from CRC to adjacent nontumorous tissues (P < 0.001). Conversely, the
mRNA expression levels of YAP, TAZ, TEAD, and OCT4 showed a decreasing tendency
from CRC to adjacent nontumorous tissues (P < 0.001). MST1 protein was
downregulated and YAP and TEAD1 proteins were upregulated in CRC (all P < 0.001).
The mRNA and protein expression levels of CDX2 in CRC were significantly lower
than those in colorectal adenomas and adjacent nontumorous tissues (P < 0.001),
but there was no significant difference between the latter two groups (qRT-PCR, P
= 0.113; WB, P = 0.151). Furthermore, statistical analysis showed that the
expression levels of Hippo signal pathway components were associated with tumor
differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and TNM stage.
CONCLUSION: Hippo pathway is suppressed in the progression from colorectal
adenomas to CRC and is associated with CRC progression and metastasis. This study
suggests the components of Hippo pathway might be prognostic indicators for CRC
patients.

PMCID: PMC4067916
PMID: 24976283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Br J Biomed Sci. 2014;71(2):86-92.

Immunohistochemistry for CDX2 expression in non-goblet-cell Barrett's oesophagus.

Behan M, Gledhill A, Hayes S.

Interest has increased in CDX2 gene expression in oesophageal non-goblet-cell
columnar metaplasia as recent investigations indicate such metaplasia possesses
neoplastic potential. This study aims to assess expression of the transcription
factor CDX2 specifically in non-goblet-cell cardia and fundic oesophageal
metaplastic tissue, and to compare the location of CDX2 expression in
non-goblet-cell specimens to that in goblet-cell specimens. A total of 43 patient
specimens (20 fundic-type metaplasia, 42 cardia-type metaplasia and 18 intestinal
metaplasia goblet cell-positive) were examined in this study. These were selected
over six months from a patient database using the systematised nomenclature of
human and veterinary medicine coding system (SNOMED). CDX2 was detected in
patient specimens with an anti-CDX2 mouse monoclonal antibody. The types of
mucosa in each specimen were confirmed by haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. 
Fundic specimens were consistently CDX2-negative (0%). CDX2 expression was
distinct in 55% of cardia and 100% of intestinal cases. Nearly all
cardia-positive cases displayed focal expression (95.5%) and all intestinal cases
displayed diffuse distribution of expression. Almost all cardia- and
intestinal-positive specimens demonstrated epithelial expression (95.5% and 100%,
respectively). The percentage of cardia-positive specimens with deep tissue
expression was lower than in intestinal specimens (31.8% vs. 94.4%,
respectively). This study confirms CDX2 as an early marker for Barrett's
oesophagus in the absence of goblet cells as expression was noted in cardia
metaplasia. CDX2 appears to induce the transformation of the normal oesophageal
mucosa to cardia type, which then differentiates to an intestinal type under the 
influence of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.

PMID: 24974686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Pathologe. 2014 Jul;35(4):327-35. doi: 10.1007/s00292-014-1912-4.

[Mucinous ovarian neoplasms. Prognostically mostly excellent, infrequently a wolf
in sheep's clothing].

[Article in German]

Lax S(1), Staebler A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, LKH Graz West, Göstingerstr. 22, 8020, Graz,
Österreich, sigurd.lax@lkh-grazwest.at.

Mucinous ovarian neoplasms represent the second largest group of epithelial
ovarian tumors after serous neoplasms, of which benign cystadenomas constitute
more than 80<U+2009>%. Mucinous cystadenomas and carcinomas cannot be distinguished by
the clinical features or the mean age of onset of the disease. They typically
occur unilaterally, are confined to the adnexae (FIGO stage I) and clinically
present with non-specific abdominal symptoms or are diagnosed by chance. The mean
age of disease onset is around 50 years old. The prognosis is excellent.
Implants, peritoneal metastases and bilateral occurrence of ovarian mucinous
neoplasms should lead to the suspicion of metastasis particularly from a
gastrointestinal tumor. Neither microinvasion defined as a maximum extent of
invasion of 5 mm, nor intraepithelial carcinoma characterized by high grade
atypia without invasion, affect the prognosis of mucinous borderline tumors.
Mucinous carcinomas typically show confluent glandular, expansile growth that
leads to a labyrinth-like pattern. A destructive infiltrative or nodular growth
pattern, however, should lead to the consideration of metastasis. Mural nodules
that may reveal a spindle cell sarcomatous or anaplastic carcinomatous pattern
occur infrequently in mucinous and do not affect the prognosis. Pax8 positivity
is indicative of a primary ovarian neoplasm. In this case, however, mucinous
tumors associated with teratomas may show the colonic immunoreaction pattern
(CK7-/CK20+/CDX2+). The rare mucinous tumors with endocervical differentiation
are now designated as seromucinous tumors and consist of two or more distinct
cell types, are frequently associated with endometriosis and seem to show a
molecular genetic relationship to endometrioid neoplasms.

PMID: 24962632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cancer Control. 2014 Jul;21(3):247-50.

Histopathological and immunophenotypical features of intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder and its precursors.

You Y, Bui K, Bui MM, Malafa M, Coppola D.

BACKGROUND: Intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder is an unusual
malignancy associated with low- and high-grade intraepithelial neoplasms. The
literature on the clinicopathologic characteristics of the precursor lesions of
gallbladder cancer is limited, due in part to the variability in its definition
and terminology.
METHODS: Here we report one case of intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the
gallbladder with distinctive morphology and associated precursor lesions. All of 
the hematoxylin and eosin stained slides were reviewed. Immunostains were
performed using the avidin-biotin complex method for CK20, CK7, CDX2, MUC1, MUC2,
and MUC-5AC. We also reviewed the literature discussing the current terminology
from the World Health Organization for these lesions.
RESULTS: A 70-year-old man presented with epigastric abdominal pain and bloating.
Computed tomography demonstrated a large heterogeneous gallbladder mass.
Macroscopically, the gallbladder was 7.5 x 5.5 x 4.5 cm with smooth serosa. The
lumen was occupied by a 5.0 x 4.5 x 3.0 cm irregular friable exophytic mass. The 
remaining mucosa had a tan brown to pink color with granular/papillary
excrescences of up to 0.7 cm in thickness. Histologically, the tubulopapillary
adenoma was lined by pseudostratified columnar epithelium with low and extensive 
high-grade dysplasia. Goblet cell and cystic dilatation were present in some
glands. Immunohistochemistry showed that the intestinal type was positive for
CK20, CK7, and CDX2, focally positive for MUC1/2, and negative for MUC-5AC.
CONCLUSION: This case showed the complete spectrum of the progression of
intestinal-type intracholecystic papillary-tubular neoplasms of the gallbladder.

PMID: 24955710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1839(9):785-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.06.009.
Epub 2014 Jun 19.

CDX2 can be regulated through the signalling pathways activated by IL-6 in
gastric cells.

Cobler L(1), Pera M(1), Garrido M(1), Iglesias M(1), de Bolós C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroesophageal Cancer Research Group, Programa de Recerca en Càncer,
Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Dr. Aiguader, 88,
08003 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Gastroesophageal Cancer Research Group, Programa de
Recerca en Càncer, Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM),
Dr. Aiguader, 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: cbolos@imim.es.

The inflammatory infiltrate of the gastric mucosa associated with Helicobacter
pylori infection increases the presence of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6
that activates both the SHP-2/ERK/MAPK and the JAK/STAT signalling pathways.
Furthermore, the ectopic expression of CDX2 is detected in pre-neoplasic lesions 
associated with decreased levels of SOX2, and we found that in gastric
adenocarcinomas their expression is inversely correlated. To determine the role
of IL-6 in the regulation of CDX2, MKN45 that constitutively expresses p-STAT3,
and NUGC-4 gastric cancer cell lines were treated with IL-6, which induced the
CDX2 up-regulation and SOX2 down-regulation. ChIP assays determined that in
IL-6-treated cells, c-JUN and p-STAT3 bound to CDX2 promoter in MKN45 cells
whereas in NUGC-4 cells, p-STAT3 binds to and c-JUN releases from the CDX2
promoter. Specific inhibition of STAT3 and ERK1/2 phosphorylation through AG490
and U0126, respectively, and STAT3 down-regulation using shRNA verified that the 
SHP-2/ERK/MAPK pathway regulates the expression of CDX2 in basal conditions, and 
the CDX2 up-regulation by IL-6 is through the JAK/STAT pathway in NUGC-4 cells
whereas in MKN45 cells both pathways contribute to the CDX2 up-regulation. In
conclusion, the signalling pathways activated by IL-6 have a crucial role in the 
regulation of CDX2 that is a key factor in the process of gastric carcinogenesis,
suggesting that the inflammatory infiltrate in the gastric mucosa is relevant in 
this process and a potential target for new therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24953186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Biochimie. 2014 Sep;104:36-49. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.05.005. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

DNMT3L interacts with transcription factors to target DNMT3L/DNMT3B to specific
DNA sequences: role of the DNMT3L/DNMT3B/p65-NF<U+03BA>B complex in the (de-)methylation
of TRAF1.

Pacaud R(1), Sery Q(1), Oliver L(1), Vallette FM(2), Tost J(3), Cartron PF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe
Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021, 44007 Nantes, France; 
Université de Nantes, Faculté de Médecine, Département de Recherche en
Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000 Nantes, France. (2)Centre de Recherche en
Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe Apoptose et Progression
Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021, 44007 Nantes, France; Université de Nantes,
Faculté de Médecine, Département de Recherche en Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000
Nantes, France; Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest - LaBCT, René Gauducheau,
Boulevard J. Monod, F-44805 St Herblain, France. (3)Laboratory for Epigenetics
and Environnement, Centre National de Génotypage, CEA - Institut de Génomique,
F-91000 Evry, France. (4)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers,
INSERM, U892, Equipe Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP7021,
44007 Nantes, France; Université de Nantes, Faculté de Médecine, Département de
Recherche en Cancérologie, IFR26, F-44000 Nantes, France; Institut de
Cancérologie de l'Ouest - LaBCT, René Gauducheau, Boulevard J. Monod, F-44805 St 
Herblain, France; Membre du réseau Epigénétique du Cancéropole Grand Ouest,
France. Electronic address: pierre-francois.cartron@univ-nantes.fr.

DNMT3L i.e. DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 3-like protein, is devoid of
cytosine methyltransferase activity, despite clear homology to DNMT3A and DNMT3B,
due to the mutation of key catalytic residues. However, DNMT3L participates in de
novo methylation reactions through its direct interaction with DNMT3A and DNMT3B.
In the present study, we investigated if DNMT3L interacts also directly with
transcription factors (TFs). Using TF arrays, we identified 73 TFs that
interacted with DNMT3L, 13 of which (ASH2L, ATF1, ATF3, BLZF1, CDX2, CERM, E2F3, 
E2F4, GCNF, GTF2I, GTF3C5, NFkB-p65 and RXRa) interacted only with DNMT3L, but
not with DNMT3A/B. By focusing on the interaction with NFkB-p65, we demonstrate
that DNMT3L forms a complex with DNMT3B and NFkB-p65 and that this complex is
required for the control of DNA methylation at the TRAF1 promoter in the T98G
glioma cell line. In addition, our experiments describe the DNA methylation at
TRAF1 as being dynamic with a demethylation phase involving TET3. Thus, our data 
suggests that DNMT3L can address DNMT3A/B to specific sites by directly
interacting with TFs that do not directly interact with DNMT3A/B. In summary, our
data provide a new avenue for the direction of site-specific de novo DNA
methylation catalyzed by DNMT3A/B.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24952347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Sep;81(9):820-32. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22351. Epub 2014 Aug 18.

Exogenous expression of OCT4 facilitates oocyte-mediated reprogramming in cloned 
porcine embryos.

Ji Q(1), Cong P, Zhao H, Song Z, Zhao G, Gao J, Nie Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, P. R.
China.

OCT4 is a well-established regulator of pluripotency and nuclear reprogramming.
To determine if improving OCT4 abundance can facilitate oocyte-mediated
reprogramming in cloned porcine embryos, we artificially increased OCT4 levels by
co-incubating donor cells with 50<U+2009>ng/µl OCT4 plasmid. We observed higher rates of
blastocyst formation (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and lower levels of blastocyst apoptosis in
nuclear-transfer-derived embryos carrying OCT4-incubated donor nuclei
(OCT4-SCNT). The beneficial effect caused by exogenous expression of OCT4
involves epigenetic changes, wherein increased histone acetylation (AcH3K9)
appeared in OCT4-SCNT embryos at the one-cell and blastocyst stages and reduced
histone methylation (H3K9me2) was observed at the one-cell stage (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
There was a transient increase in exogenous OCT4 and an up-regulation of
endogenous OCT4 level in OCT4-SCNT embryos (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), while the expression
pattern of epigenetic enzymes was changed. These modifications were accompanied
by an up-regulation of CDX2, whose interaction with OCT4 is instrumental for
implantation, and a down-regulation of XIST, a negative indicator of
reprogramming (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Taken together, our results support a role for
exogenous expression of OCT4 in improving the efficiency of nuclear reprogramming
while establishing a convenient and timesaving method to improve nuclear-transfer
outcomes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24945968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2014 May 15;8(2):186-92. doi: 10.1159/000363177.
eCollection 2014.

Perianal Paget's Disease Co-Associated with Anorectal Adenocarcinoma: Primary or 
Secondary Disease?

Liao X(1), Mao W(1), Lin A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Colorectal Surgery, The 3rd People's Hospital of Hangzhou,
Hangzhou, China. (2)Departments of Pathology, The 3rd People's Hospital of
Hangzhou, Hangzhou, China.

Perianal Paget's disease (PPD) represents a skin neoplasm which can be either
primary or secondary to carcinoma from an adjacent internal organ. PPD with
underlying colorectal adenocarcinoma is usually looked upon as a secondary
disease. We report a rare case of co-associated PPD and anorectal adenocarcinoma.
The PPD was found to be located near the anorectal adenocarcinoma with normal
tissues between them. Immunohistochemical stains demonstrated that the Paget's
cells were CK7+/GCDFP-15-/CK20-/MUC2-/CDX2-, whereas the anorectal adenocarcinoma
was shown to be CK7+/GCDFP-15-/CK20+/MUC2+/CDX2+. This immunological phenotypic
profile supported the notion that PPD and anorectal adenocarcinoma were of
different origins, but could not define the exact origins of PPD. In our
determination, this case was a primary PPD with anorectal adenocarcinoma. PPD
remains a heterogeneous and complex pathology, and additional studies are
required to differentiate between the various possible origins.

PMCID: PMC4049023
PMID: 24932167  [PubMed]


299. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e99449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099449. eCollection
2014.

Modified-chitosan/siRNA nanoparticles downregulate cellular CDX2 expression and
cross the gastric mucus barrier.

Sadio A(1), Gustafsson JK(2), Pereira B(3), Gomes CP(4), Hansson GC(2), David
L(5), Pêgo AP(6), Almeida R(5).

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP- Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal; INEB - Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal; Gastroenterology Department, Unidade Local Saúde da
Guarda, Guarda, Portugal; Gulbenkian Programme for Advanced Medical Education,
Lisboa, Portugal; Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden. (3)IPATIMUP- Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)INEB - Instituto de Engenharia
Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculdade de Engenharia da
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (5)IPATIMUP- Instituto de Patologia e
Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (6)INEB - Instituto de
Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculdade de
Engenharia da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; ICBAS - Instituto de
Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Development of effective non-viral vectors is of crucial importance in the
implementation of RNA interference in clinical routine. The localized delivery of
siRNAs to the gastrointestinal mucosa is highly desired but faces specific
problems such as the stability in gastric acidity conditions and the presence of 
the mucus barrier. CDX2 is a transcription factor critical for intestinal
differentiation being involved in the initiation and maintenance of
gastrointestinal diseases. Specifically, it is the trigger of gastric intestinal 
metaplasia which is a precursor lesion of gastric cancer. Its expression is also 
altered in colorectal cancer, where it may constitute a lineage-survival
oncogene. Our main objective was to develop a nanoparticle-delivery system of
siRNA targeting CDX2 using modified chitosan as a vector. CDX2 expression was
assessed in gastric carcinoma cell lines and nanoparticles behaviour in
gastrointestinal mucus was tested in mouse explants. We show that
imidazole-modified chitosan and trimethylchitosan/siRNA nanoparticles are able to
downregulate CDX2 expression and overpass the gastric mucus layer but not colonic
mucus. This system might constitute a potential therapeutic approach to treat
CDX2-dependent gastric lesions.

PMCID: PMC4055692
PMID: 24925340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Oct;38(10):1396-409. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000262.

"Somatic-type" malignancies arising from testicular germ cell tumors: a
clinicopathologic study of 124 cases with emphasis on glandular tumors supporting
frequent yolk sac tumor origin.

Magers MJ(1), Kao CS, Cole CD, Rice KR, Foster RS, Einhorn LH, Ulbright TM.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 
Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Urology §Medicine, Indiana
University School of Medicine and Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, IN.

Somatic-type malignancies (SMs) in patients with testicular germ cell tumors
(GCT) are rare and mostly attributed to "transformation" of teratoma, although
yolk sac tumor (YST) origin has also been proposed. We studied 124 cases of "SM" 
of testicular GCT origin from 106 patients to evaluate their morphology,
immunohistochemical features (especially the utility of SALL4), and relationship 
to YST. Primitive neuroectodermal and nephroblastomatous tumors were excluded
because of prior studies. Patients ranged in age from 15 to 68 years (mean, 33
y). The tumors ranged from 0.7 to 30 cm (mean, 7.6 cm) and involved the
retroperitoneum (64%), abdomen/pelvis (10%), lung (10%), mediastinum (6%),
supraclavicular region/neck (4%), testis (4%), and thigh (1%). Most initial
diagnoses were sarcomas (n=68) or carcinomas (n=51). On review and
immunohistochemical analysis, 7 of 45 adenocarcinomas were reclassified as
glandular YSTs (GYST) on the basis of glypican-3 (GPC3) and/or a-fetoprotein
positivity and scant/absent reactivity for EMA and CK7. These occasionally (29%) 
had subnuclear and sometimes supranuclear vacuoles (endometrioid-like), whereas
adenocarcinomas were more frequently mucinous (17%) or enteric-type (11%) than
endometrioid-like (9%). Both expressed CDX2 frequently (83% and 63%,
respectively). MUC protein 2, 4, 5, and 6 expression was more common in
adenocarcinomas (7% to 36%) than in GYSTs (0% to 20%) but was infrequent. Both
were often positive for SALL4, BerEP4, and MOC31; all were negative for TTF-1. On
follow-up (GYST: range, 23 to 169 mo; mean, 81mo; adenocarcinoma: range, 1 to 170
mo; mean, 55 mo), 50% and 33% of patients with GYST and adenocarcinoma,
respectively, died of disease. We reclassified 26 of 76 sarcomatoid tumors as
sarcomatoid YSTs (SYST) on the basis of positive reactivity for both AE1/3 and
GPC3. These tumors often had spindled and epithelioid cells in a fibromyxoid
stroma. SYSTs were often (60%) SALL4 positive, whereas sarcomas were all
negative. On follow-up (SYST: range, 1 to 259 mo; mean, 62 mo; sarcoma: range, 1 
to 327 mo; mean, 70 mo), 50% and 29% of patients with SYST and sarcoma,
respectively, died of disease, with most mortality occurring in those with
high-grade tumors. We conclude that, on the basis of a panel of
immunoreactivities, a significant number of "SMs" in testicular GCT patients are 
more accurately classified as either GYSTs or SYSTs. Ambiguous glandular tumors
should be evaluated for GPC3, a-fetoprotein, CK7, and EMA reactivity and
sarcomatoid ones for GPC3, AE1/3, and SALL4 reactivity.

PMID: 24921638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;43(4):231-5.

[Metastases to the breast from non-mammary malignancies: a clinicopathologic
study of 28 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou S(1), Yu B(2), Cheng Y(1), Xu X(1), Shui R(1), Bi R(1), Lu H(1), Tu X(1),
Yang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center; Department
of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. 
(2)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center; Department
of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. 
E-mail: yubh@shca.org.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinicopathologic characteristics and differential 
diagnosis of the metastases to the breast from non-mammary malignancies.
METHODS: Twenty-eight cases were collected from 2004 to 2012;microscopic
pathologic examinations and immunohistochemistry (EnVision method) were
performed.
RESULTS: (1) All except one patients were female, ranging from 16 to 77 years old
(average 45.8 years). Twenty-six (92.9%) patients initially presented with the
primary site lesions; while the other two (7.1%) patients initially presented
with breast lesions. The mean interval from primary diagnosis to detection of
metastatic breast lesions was 32 months (0-228 months). Fifteen patients (53.6%) 
had other metastases detected simultaneously or preceded the breast lesions. (2) 
Macroscopically, all the tumors were relatively circumscribed, with a mean
diameter of 4.0 cm (0.6-12.0 cm). The histological types of the corresponding
primary tumors were as follows: eight (28.6%) cases from lung adenocarcinoma,
five (17.8%) from high-grade ovarian serous carcinoma, three (10.7%) from gastric
adenocarcinoma, two (7.1%) from rectal adenocarcinoma, one (3.6%) from pancreatic
neuroendocrine carcinoma, one (3.6%) from prostatic carcinoma, four (14.3%) from 
melanoma, and four (14.3%) from mesenchymal malignant tumors (three
rhabdomyosarcomas and one epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor,
MPNST). (3) Histologically, the metastatic tumors showed the morphologic
characteristics of the primary tumors. Lymph-vascular invasion was observed in 19
cases. Immunohistochemical features of metastatic tumors were consistent with the
primary tumors. Molecular markers for breast such as GCDFP15 and mammaglobin were
negative. Metastatic tumors from lung adenocarcinoma expressed TTF-1 (8/8).
Ovarian serous carcinoma metastases were positive for PAX8 (5/5) and WT1 (4/5).
Gastric adenocarcinoma metastases were positive for CDX2 (3/3) and villin (1/3). 
Rectal adenocarcinoma metastases were positive for CDX2 (2/2). Pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor metastasis was positive for Syn and CgA (both 1/1). Prostate
carcinoma metastasis was positive for AR, PSA and P504S (all 1/1). Melanoma
metastases were positive for HMB45 (2/3) and S-100 protein (3/3).
Rhabdomyosarcoma metastases were positive for vimentin, desmin and myoD1 (all
3/3). MPNST metastasis was positive for S-100 protein (1/1). (4) Follow-up data
was available in 17 patients, with median follow-up time 54 months. The median
survival from diagnosis to breast metastasis was 24 months.Seven of 17 patients
died.
CONCLUSIONS: Metastases to the breast from non-mammary malignancies are rare and 
show pathologic features of primary tumors. It is usually presumed to be a
primary breast carcinoma. Histopathologic features and clinical history in
conjunction with the immunohistochemical results should be considered in
differentiating a secondary mass from a primary breast carcinoma.

PMID: 24915812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Hum Pathol. 2014 Aug;45(8):1704-12. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.04.008. Epub 2014
Apr 24.

BRAF-mutated microsatellite stable colorectal carcinoma: an aggressive
adenocarcinoma with reduced CDX2 and increased cytokeratin 7 immunohistochemical 
expression.

Landau MS(1), Kuan SF(1), Chiosea S(1), Pai RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA. Electronic address: pair@upmc.edu.

Reduced CDX2 and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) expression in colorectal carcinoma with
BRAF mutation and high-level microsatellite instability (MSI-H) has been well
documented. The immunophenotype of BRAF-mutated microsatellite stable (MSS)
colorectal carcinoma has not been reported. We analyzed 205 colorectal carcinomas
including 28 BRAF-mutated MSS, 53 BRAF-mutated MSI-H, and 124 BRAF wild-type MSS 
tumors for CDX2, cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and CK20 immunohistochemical expression.
CDX2 was scored semiquantitatively for both staining intensity and percent of
tumor cells staining and a modified CDX2 H-score was calculated. Patients with
BRAF-mutated MSS colorectal carcinomas were more frequently stage IV at
presentation compared to patients with BRAF-mutated MSI-H colorectal carcinomas
and BRAF wild-type MSS colorectal carcinomas (32% versus 8% versus 15%, P <
.001). BRAF-mutated MSS colorectal carcinoma displayed reduced CDX2 expression
compared to BRAF wild-type MSS colorectal carcinoma (75% versus 94%; mean CDX2
H-score 98 versus 150, P < .001). CK7 expression was more often identified in
BRAF-mutated MSS colorectal carcinoma compared to both BRAF-mutated MSI-H
colorectal carcinoma and BRAF wild-type MSS colorectal carcinoma (39% versus 6%
versus 6%, P = .0001). BRAF-mutated MSI-H colorectal carcinomas were less often
CK20 positive compared to BRAF-mutated MSS and BRAF wild-type MSS tumors (70%
versus 93% versus 90%, P = 0.001). In summary, BRAF-mutated MSS colorectal
carcinoma often displays reduced CDX2 and increased CK7 expression. Knowledge of 
this altered immunophenotype is important as patients with BRAF-mutated MSS
colorectal carcinoma often present with metastatic disease and the altered tumor 
immunophenotype may lead to the erroneous assumption that origin from the
colon/rectum is unlikely.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24908142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Histopathology. 2015 Feb;66(3):333-42. doi: 10.1111/his.12469. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Do serrated neoplasms of the small intestine represent a distinct entity?
Pathological findings and molecular alterations in a series of 13 cases.

Rosty C(1), Campbell C, Clendenning M, Bettington M, Buchanan DD, Brown IS.

Author information: 
(1)Envoi Pathology, Brisbane, Qld, Australia; School of Medicine, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Qld, Australia; Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Department
of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Carlton, Vic., Australia.

AIMS: To characterize pathological, immunohistochemical and molecular features of
small intestinal serrated neoplasms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report 13 serrated neoplasms located predominantly in the
duodenum (median age, 71 years; male to female ratio, 7:6). The serrated adenomas
demonstrated prominent serration, ectopic crypt formations and cytological
features reminiscent of colorectal traditional serrated adenomas. Almost half the
serrated adenomas demonstrated high-grade dysplasia or were associated with an
adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical and molecular analysis showed an intestinal
(CDX2-positive) phenotype in all tumours, abnormal ß-catenin staining in three
cases (23%), abnormal p53 expression in four cases (31%), focal loss of MGMT
expression in one case (8%), KRAS mutation in five cases (38%) and CpG island
methylator phenotype in six cases (50%). A diffuse pattern of Ki67 expression was
present in eight adenomas (62%) and was associated with high-grade dysplasia (P =
0.02). No BRAF(V600E) mutation or loss of MLH1 expression was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first series reporting serrated
adenoma in the small intestine, a rare subtype of adenomas resembling traditional
serrated adenoma with aggressive morphological features. The absence of the
BRAF(V600E) mutation does not support a role for the serrated neoplasia pathway
in the development of these lesions, as in colorectal serrated polyps.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24894811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. BMC Surg. 2014 May 21;14:31. doi: 10.1186/1471-2482-14-31.

Urethral metastasis from a sigmoid colon carcinoma: a quite rare case report and 
review of the literature.

Kazama S(1), Kitayama J, Sunami E, Niimi A, Nomiya A, Homma Y, Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
kaz-tky@umin.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Urethral metastatic adenocarcinoma is extremely rare. Moreover, only 
9 previous cases with metastases from colorectal cancer have been reported to
date, and not much information on urethral metastases from colorectum is
available so far.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report our experience in the diagnosis and the management
of the case with urethral metastasis from a sigmoid colon cancer. A 68-year-old
man, who underwent laparoscopic sigmoidectomy for sigmoid colon carcinoma four
years ago, presented gross hematuria with pain. Urethroscopy identified a
papillo-nodular tumor 7 mm in diameter in the bulbar urethra. CT-scan imaging
revealed the small mass of bulbous portion of urethra and solitary lung
metastasis. Histological examination of the tumor obtained by transurethral
resection showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, which was diagnosed as
a metastasis of a sigmoid colon carcinoma pathologically by morphological
examination. Immunohistochemical analysis of the urethral tumor revealed the
positive for cytokertin 20 and CDX2, whereas negative for cytokertin 7. These
features were consistent with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon
cancer. As the management of this case with urethral and lung metastasis, 6-cycle
of chemotherapy with fluorouracil with leucovorin plus oxaliplatin was
administered to the patient, and these metastases were disappeared with no
recurrence of disease for 34 months.
CONCLUSION: Urethral metastasis from colorectal cancer is a very rare occurrence.
However, in the presence of urinary symptoms, the possibility of the urethral
metastasis should be considered.

PMCID: PMC4037280
PMID: 24884559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):344-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.012. Epub 2014 
May 22.

Elf5 counteracts precocious trophoblast differentiation by maintaining Sox2 and 3
and inhibiting Hand1 expression.

Pearton DJ(1), Smith CS(2), Redgate E(3), van Leeuwen J(4), Donnison M(5),
Pfeffer PL(6).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. Electronic
address: dpearton@gmail.com. (2)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton
3214, New Zealand. Electronic address: craig.smith@nd.edu.au. (3)AgResearch
Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. Electronic address:
redgate.emma@gmail.com. (4)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New
Zealand; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Waikato, Hamilton 3214,
New Zealand. (5)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand.
(6)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand; School of
Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington
6140, New Zealand. Electronic address: drplpepper@gmail.com.

In mice the transcription factor Elf5 is necessary for correct trophoblast
development. Upon knockdown of Elf5, TS cells display neither a decrease in
proliferation nor an increase in cell death but rather an increased propensity to
differentiate. Such cells rapidly lose Sox2 and 3 expression, while transiently
upregulating the giant cell differentiation determinant gene Hand1. Other genes
affected within 24h of Elf5 knock-down, many of which have not previously been
implicated in trophoblast development, exhibited in vivo expression domains and
in vitro expression responses consistent with Elf5 having a role in counteracting
trophoblast differentiation. In an ES to TS differentiation assay using Cdx2
overexpression with Elf5 loss of function cell lines, it was shown that Elf5 is
necessary to prevent terminal trophoblast differentiation. This data thus suggest
that Elf5 is a gatekeeper for the TS to differentiated trophoblast transition
thereby preventing the precocious differentiation of the undifferentiated
extraembryonic ectoderm.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):133-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.009. Epub 2014 
May 20.

The basal position of nuclei is one pre-requisite for asymmetric cell divisions
in the early mouse embryo.

Ajduk A(1), Biswas Shivhare S(2), Zernicka-Goetz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK; Department of Embryology,
Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK; Institute of Reproductive
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX4 2HW, UK. (3)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer 
Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK; Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience,
University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK. Electronic
address: mz205@cam.ac.uk.

The early mouse embryo undertakes two types of cell division: symmetric that
gives rise to the trophectoderm and then placenta or asymmetric that gives rise
to inner cells that generate the embryo proper. Although cell division
orientation is important, the mechanism regulating it has remained unclear. Here,
we identify the relationship between the plane of cell division and the position 
of the nucleus and go towards identifying the mechanism behind it. We first find 
that as the 8-cell embryo progresses through the cell cycle, the nuclei of most -
but not all - cells move from apical to more basal positions, in a microtubule-
and kinesin-dependent manner. We then find that all asymmetric divisions happen
when nuclei are located basally and, in contrast, all cells, in which nuclei
remain apical, divide symmetrically. To understand the potential mechanism behind
this, we determine the effects of modulating expression of Cdx2, a transcription 
factor key for trophectoderm formation and cell polarity. We find that increased 
expression of Cdx2 leads to an increase in a number of apical nuclei, whereas
down-regulation of Cdx2 leads to more nuclei moving basally, which explains a
previously identified relationship between Cdx2 and cell division orientation.
Finally, we show that down-regulation of aPKC, involved in cell polarity,
decreases the number of apical nuclei and doubles the number of asymmetric
divisions. These results suggest a model in which the mutual interdependence of
Cdx2 and cell polarity affects the cytoskeleton-dependent positioning of nuclei
and, in consequence, the plane of cell division in the early mouse embryo.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4111899
PMID: 24855000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Aug;41(8):5375-84. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3409-x. Epub 2014
May 22.

RSPO fusion transcripts in colorectal cancer in Japanese population.

Shinmura K(1), Kahyo T, Kato H, Igarashi H, Matsuura S, Nakamura S, Kurachi K,
Nakamura T, Ogawa H, Funai K, Tanahashi M, Niwa H, Sugimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1
Handayama, Higashi Ward, Hamamatsu, 431-3192, Japan, kzshinmu@hama-med.ac.jp.

R-spondin (RSPO) gene fusions have recently been discovered in a subset of human 
colorectal cancer (CRC) in the U.S. population; however, whether the fusion is
recurrent in CRC arising in patients from the other demographic areas and whether
it is specific for CRC remain uncertain. In this study, we examined 75 primary
CRCs and 121 primary lung cancers in the Japanese population for EIF3E-RSPO2 and 
PTPRK-RSPO3 fusion transcripts using RT-PCR and subsequent sequencing analyses.
Although the expression of EIF3E-RSPO2 and PTPRK-RSPO3 was not detected in any of
the lung carcinomas, RSPO fusions were detected in three (4%) of the 75 CRCs. Two
CRCs contained EIF3E-RSPO2 fusion transcripts, and another CRC contained
PTPRK-RSPO3 fusion transcripts. Interestingly, in one of the two EIF3E-RSPO2
fusion-positive CRCs, a novel fusion variant form of EIF3E-RSPO2 was identified: 
exon 1 of EIF3E was connected to exon 2 of RSPO2 by a 351-bp insertion. A
quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that RSPO mRNA expression was upregulated
in the three CRCs containing RSPO fusion transcripts, while it was downregulated 
in nearly all of the other CRCs. An immunohistochemical analysis and a mutational
analysis revealed that the RSPO fusion-containing CRC had a CDX2 cell lineage,
was positive for mismatch repair protein expression, and had the wild-type APC
allele. Finally, the forced expression of RSPO fusion proteins were shown to
endow colorectal cells with an increased growth ability. These results suggest
that the expression of RSPO fusion transcripts is related to a subset of CRCs
arising in the Japanese population.

PMID: 24847761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Mar;43(3):163-8.

[Clinicopathologic characteristics and histogenesis of mucinous tumor of
peritoneum].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang H(1), Sun Y(2), Huang X, Jia L, Bai Y, Cao D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education); Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing 100142, China. (2)E-mail: sunyu_bch@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinicopathologic characteristics, prognosis and
histologic origin of the mucinous tumor of the peritoneum.
METHODS: According to 2010 WHO classification of tumours of the digestive system,
34 cases diagnosed as "pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) " were reevaluated and
divided into low grade and high grade. Immunohistochemistry was applied to
investigate the expression of SATB2 and the histologic origin of the mucinous
tumor of the peritoneum, using antibodies against SATB2, CK7, CK20 and CDX-2. The
relationship between clinicopathologic characteristics and prognosis of the low
grade and high grade tumors were analyzed.
RESULTS: Twenty five patients had low grade mucinous tumors (two of them were no 
cell type), nine patients had high grade mucinous tumors. There was no
significant difference between low grade and high grade mucinous tumors in age,
sex, recurrence and organs involvement (P>0.05). Thirty patients were followed
up, the overall survival rates of patients with low grade and high grade mucinous
tumors were 13/21 (61.9%) and 3/9, respectively. The median survival time was 74 
and 24 months in low and high grade patients, and the difference was
statistically significant (P=0.002).Immunohistochemistry showed the expression
rates of CDX-2, CK20, and CK7 in totally 32 cases (excluding 2 cases of no cell
type) were 30/32(93.8%), 31/32 (96.9%), and 3/16, respectively; the expression
rates of CDX-2, CK20, and CK7 in 16 cases with distinct primary site were 15, 16,
and 1, respectively; fifteen of 16 cases of tumors of unknown primary site were
positive for CDX-2 and CK20, two of the them were positive for CK7. There was no 
difference in the expression of CDX-2, CK20 and CK7 between tumors with distinct 
primary site and tumors with unknown primary site (P>0.05). The expression rate
of SATB2 in the cases was 56.3% (18/32), excluding 2 cases of no cell type. There
was no significant difference between low grade and high grade tumors in the
expression of SATB2 [15/23(65.2%) vs 3/9, P=0.102], also SATB2 was not related to
the prognosis of the tumor (P=0.786).
CONCLUSION: The prognosis of the mucinous tumor of the peritoneum was
significantly different between low grade and high grade according to WHO 2010
classification, and most mucinous tumor of the peritoneum originated from the
appendix.

PMID: 24842014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Egypt Natl Canc Inst. 2014 Jun;26(2):55-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnci.2013.12.002.
Epub 2014 Jan 27.

CDX2 gene expression in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Arnaoaut HH(1), Mokhtar DA(1), Samy RM(2), Khames SA(3), Omar SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology & Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(2)Clinical Pathology & Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
Electronic address: Rania_sami1976@yahoo.com. (3)Oncology Unit of National Cancer
Institute, Cairo University, Egypt.

CDX genes are classically known as regulators of axial elongation during early
embryogenesis. An unsuspected role for CDX genes has been revealed during
hematopoietic development. The CDX gene family member CDX2 belongs to the most
frequent aberrantly expressed proto-oncogenes in human acute leukemias and is
highly leukemogenic in experimental models. We used reversed transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to determine the expression level of CDX2 gene
in 30 pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) at diagnosis and
30 healthy volunteers. ALL patients were followed up to detect minimal residual
disease (MRD) on days 15 and 42 of induction. We found that CDX2 gene was
expressed in 50% of patients and not expressed in controls. Associations between 
gene expression and different clinical and laboratory data of patients revealed
no impact on different findings. With follow up, we could not confirm that CDX2
expression had a prognostic significance.

Copyright © 2014. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24841154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Oct;38(10):1371-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000230.

The utility of immunohistochemistry in subtyping adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of
vater.

Ang DC(1), Shia J, Tang LH, Katabi N, Klimstra DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Histologic classification of ampullary carcinomas into intestinal,
pancreatobiliary, or other subtypes is easily achievable in some cases but
difficult in others. Immunohistochemical (IHC) stains may allow distinction
between the subtypes; however, their added value to routine hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) evaluation has not been systematically evaluated. Inconsistent histologic
subtyping has hampered current clinical research and therapeutic trials. In this 
study, a consecutive series of 105 ampullary carcinomas was subtyped first by H&E
evaluation and then by the evaluation of an IHC panel composed of CK7, CK20,
CDX2, MUC1, and MUC2, and the added value of IHC was analyzed. By H&E, a
consensus diagnosis, defined as concordant subtyping among at least 3 of the 4
independent study pathologists, was achieved in 81 of the 105 (77%) cases. There 
was excellent agreement for poorly differentiated and mucinous subtypes (<U+03BA>=0.72
and 0.89, respectively) but only good agreement for intestinal and
pancreatobiliary subtypes (<U+03BA>=0.57 and 0.48, respectively) and poor agreement for 
mixed subtype (<U+03BA>=0.09). By IHC, CK7 showed no informative value (being positive
in =70% of the cases in both intestinal and pancreatobiliary subtypes), whereas a
subtyping schema incorporating the combination staining patterns of CK20, CDX2,
MUC1, and MUC2 did. By this schema, "intestinal subtype" was defined as having
(1) positive staining for CK20 or CDX2 or MUC2 and negative staining for MUC1, or
(2) positive staining for CK20, CDX2, and MUC2, irrespective of the MUC1 result; 
and "pancreatobiliary subtype" was defined as having positive staining for MUC1
and negative staining for CDX2 and MUC2, irrespective of CK20 results. Cases not 
fitting one of these 3 categories were regarded as "ambiguous"
immunohistochemically. By combining this schema with H&E evaluation, 97 of the
105 cases (92%) could be classified into either intestinal or pancreatobiliary
subtype. In particular, immunophenotyping allowed categorization of 75% of poorly
differentiated adenocarcinomas and 69% of cases with mixed histologic features as
either intestinal or pancreatobiliary subtype. Most mucinous adenocarcinomas
(88%) were clearly intestinal subtype by IHC. Thus, our IHC schema enhanced the
subtyping of ampullary carcinoma and, in combination with H&E evaluation, allowed
a dichotomous classification in 92% of the cases. Should further independent
studies reaffirm our findings, this schema may serve as a valuable tool in both
diagnostic and research settings.

PMID: 24832159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Dan Med J. 2014 Mar;61(3):B4820.

The role of CDX2 in inflammatory bowel disease.

Coskun M(1).

Author information: 
(1): Department of Gastroenterology, Medical Section 54O3, Herlev Hospital,
Herlev Ringvej 75, 2730 Herlev, Denmark. mehmet.coskun@regionh.dk.

BACKGROUND: High levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines are present in the gut of
patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and have a crucial role in the
dysfunction of mucosal homeostasis. Caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 
2 (CDX2) is an essential regulator of intestinal epithelium homeostasis. When
expressed, CDX2 modulates a diverse set of processes, including cell
proliferation and differentiation, and cell adhesion and migration. In addition
to these critical cellular processes, there is increasing indications (such as
involvement in pro-inflammatory pathways and regulation of genes of importance
for intestinal homeostasis) linking CDX2 to intestinal inflammation.
AIM: The overall objective of this PhD thesis was to explore the role of CDX2 in 
the colonic epithelium of patients with IBD and to investigate the impact of
pro-inflammatory pathways on the expression of CDX2 and its target genes.
METHODS: Initially, a literature research was conducted to review the importance 
of CDX2 in epithelial homeostasis and its potential role in mucosal inflammation.
Expression of CDX2 was measured in colonic biopsies of patients with IBD, and the
effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines and anti-TNF-a treatment (infliximab) were 
examined in Caco-2 cells. The role of CDX2 in the transcriptional regulation of
MEP1A and the ß-catenin degradation complex genes APC, AXIN2, and GSK3ß were
investigated in Caco-2 cells. Finally, the intracellular signalling pathways
involved in the TNF-a-mediated down-regulation of CDX2 were investigated.
RESULTS: The expression of CDX2 was decreased in the epithelium of patients with 
ulcerative colitis (UC), and the expression was inversely correlated with the
level of TNF-a. The endogenous expression of CDX2 in Caco-2 cells was decreased
by TNF-a through NF-<U+03BA>B and p38 MAPK pathways. High levels of TNF-a affected the
expression of CDX2 target genes and reduced the binding of CDX2 to gene
regulatory regions of these targets in Caco-2 cells. Finally, TNF-a increased the
expression of well-known Wnt target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the CDX2 expression is decreased in UC,
and moreover, the studies in Caco-2 cells have shed light on some of the
molecular pathways of importance in the inhibitory effect of TNF-a. In addition, 
these studies have provided novel insight into the CDX2-mediated regulation of
genes involved in the ß-catenin degradation complex and in response to the
pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF-a. In particular, these findings indicate that
CDX2 is involved in the crosstalk between TNF-a and the Wnt signalling pathway,
which might be of importance in understanding the link between intestinal
inflammation and tumourigenesis.

PMID: 24814920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Adv Med Sci. 2014 Mar;59(1):142-6. doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2014.03.002. Epub 2014
Mar 28.

Gastric cancer patients less than 50 years of age exhibit significant
downregulation of E-cadherin and CDX2 compared to older reference populations.

Schildberg CW(1), Abba M(2), Merkel S(3), Agaimy A(4), Dimmler A(5),
Schlabrakowski A(6), Croner R(7), Leupold JH(2), Hohenberger W(7), Allgayer H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. Electronic
address: claus@schildberg.de. (2)Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular
Oncology of Solid Tumors, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg and
DKFZ Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Cancer Registry, Department of Surgery, 
University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology, University
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (5)Department of Pathology, St. Vincentius Hospital,
Karlsruhe, Germany. (6)Department of Pathology, Klinikum Nord, Nürnberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Surgery, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

PURPOSE: There is an increasing need to identify molecular markers, which can be 
used to prognosticate patient populations in gastric cancer. Whereas a
significant number have been identified, very few have been characterized in the 
context of their ability to discriminate between young and old age groups in
which a survival difference clearly exists.
MATERIAL/METHODS: In this study, using immunohistochemistry, we evaluated three
markers with proven involvement in gastric cancer. The p53 tumor suppressor, the 
cell adhesion glycoprotein epithelial cadherin (CDH1) and the caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor (CDX2) all of these have important roles in the
aetiopathogenesis and/or progression of gastric cancer.
RESULTS: After adjustments for TNM stage, tumor grade, histopathological
characteristics (Lauren classification), we found significant differences in the 
expression of these proteins, particularly E-cadherin and CDX2 between young and 
elderly patients. However, these differences did not amount to a significant
difference in survival.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the protein expression of p53, CDH1 and
CDX2 significantly discriminates young patients with gastric cancer who have a
better prognostic outlook from older patients, but this difference in expression 
does not contribute to a survival benefit.

Copyright © 2014 Medical University of Bialystok. Published by Elsevier Urban &
Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24797991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cell Rep. 2014 May 22;7(4):1197-210. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.074. Epub 2014
May 1.

A pSMAD/CDX2 complex is essential for the intestinalization of epithelial
metaplasia.

Mari L(1), Milano F(2), Parikh K(1), Straub D(1), Everts V(3), Hoeben KK(3),
Fockens P(4), Buttar NS(5), Krishnadath KK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Experimental & Molecular Medicine, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ
Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Academic
Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Centre for 
Experimental & Molecular Medicine, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the
Netherlands; Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Academic Medical
Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Section of Hematology 
and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal and Experimental Medicine,
Ospedale S. Maria della Misericordia, University of Perugia, 06156 Perugia,
Italy. (3)Core facility Cellular Imaging/LCAM-AMC, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology,
Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55902,
USA. (6)Centre for Experimental & Molecular Medicine, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ
Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Academic
Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: k.k.krishnadath@amc.uva.nl.

The molecular mechanisms leading to epithelial metaplasias are poorly understood.
Barrett's esophagus is a premalignant metaplastic change of the esophageal
epithelium into columnar epithelium, occurring in patients suffering from
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Mechanisms behind the development of the
intestinal subtype, which is associated with the highest cancer risk, are
unclear. In humans, it has been suggested that a nonspecialized columnar
metaplasia precedes the development of intestinal metaplasia. Here, we propose
that a complex made up of at least two factors needs to be activated
simultaneously to drive the expression of intestinal type of genes. Using unique 
animal models and robust in vitro assays, we show that the nonspecialized
columnar metaplasia is a precursor of intestinal metaplasia and that pSMAD/CDX2
interaction is essential for the switch toward an intestinal phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24794431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Control Release. 2014 Jul 10;185:88-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.04.029.
Epub 2014 Apr 26.

Safety, efficacy, and molecular mechanism of claudin-1-specific peptides to
enhance blood-nerve-barrier permeability.

Sauer RS(1), Krug SM(2), Hackel D(3), Staat C(4), Konasin N(1), Yang S(1),
Niedermirtl B(1), Bosten J(1), Günther R(4), Dabrowski S(4), Doppler K(5), Sommer
C(5), Blasig IE(4), Brack A(1), Rittner HL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Anesthesiology, University Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Clinical Physiology, Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin,
Germany. (3)Dept. Anesthesiology, University Hospital of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
Germany; Dept. Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Charité Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany. (4)Leibniz Institute for Molecular Pharmacology,
Berlin-Buch, Germany. (5)Dept. Neurology, University Hospital of Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany. (6)Dept. Anesthesiology, University Hospital of Wuerzburg,
Wuerzburg, Germany. Electronic address: rittner_h@ukw.de.

The blood-nerve barrier consists of the perineurium and endoneurial vessels. The 
perineurial barrier is composed of a basal membrane and a layer of perineurial
cells sealed by tight junction proteins preventing e.g. application of analgesics
for selective regional pain control. One of the barrier-sealing proteins in the
blood-nerve barrier is claudin-1. Therefore, the claudin-1-peptidomimetics
(C1C2), derived from the first extracellular loop (ECL1) on claudin-1 was
developed. In this study, we further evaluated the expression of tight junction
proteins in the perineurium in Wistar rats and characterized the specificity, in 
vivo applicability, mechanism of action as well as the biocompatibility of C1C2. 
In the perineurium, claudin-19, tricellulin and ZO-1, but no claudin-2, 3, 8 and 
-11 were expressed. C1C2 specifically bound to the ECL1 of claudin-1 and
fluorescent 5,6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine-C1C2 was rapidly internalized.
Opening the perineurium with C1C2 reduced the mRNA and protein expression of
claudin-1 and increased small and macromolecule permeability into the peripheral 
nerve. Application of C1C2 facilitated regional analgesia using µ-opioid receptor
agonists like DAMGO or morphine without motor impairment in naïve rats as well as
rats with hind paw inflammation. In contrast the control peptide C2C2 derived
from ECL1 on claudin-2 did neither open the barrier nor facilitated
opioid-mediated regional analgesia. C1C2 delivery was well tolerated and caused
no morphological and functional nerve damage. C1C2 effects could be reversed by
interference with the wnt-signal-transduction pathway, specifically the homeobox 
transcription factor cdx2, using a glycogen-synthase-kinase-3 inhibitor. In
summary, we describe the composition of and a pathway to open the perineurial
barrier employing a peptide to deliver hydrophilic substances to the peripheral
nerve.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Histopathology. 2015 Jan;66(2):182-91. doi: 10.1111/his.12447. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

'Neuroendocrine' middle ear adenomas: consistent expression of the transcription 
factor ISL1 further supports their neuroendocrine derivation.

Agaimy A(1), Lell M, Schaller T, Märkl B, Hornung J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany.

AIMS: Neuroendocrine middle ear adenoma (MEA) is a rare epithelial neoplasm of
uncertain histogenesis that frequently shows neuroendocrine features. To date,
<120 cases have been reported. The aims of the current study were to describe our
experience with neuroendocrine MEA, to assess the frequency of specific
neuroendocrine differentiation, and to test these lesions for transcription
factors known to be expressed in a variety of other neuroendocrine tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated six cases of neuroendocrine MEA, and stained
them, for the first time, for the transcription factors CDX2, TTF1, PAX8, and
ISL1 (islet-1). The patients were four men and two women (mean age, 39 years;
range, 27-53 years). Two of four patients with extended follow-up (4.5-22 years) 
experienced recurrence at 92 months, and at 9 and 22 years, respectively. One
case extending into the external ear coexisted with cholesteatoma. Histological
examination showed trabecular, solid, acinar, glandular, cribriform, organoid,
nested, diffuse non-cohesive plasmacytoid and pseudoalveolar patterns in varying 
combinations. Immunohistochemistry showed consistent expression of vimentin
(4/4), pancytokeratin (6/6), synaptophysin (6/6), CD56 (4/4), and ISL1 (6/6). A
CK7 antibody stained scattered cells in two of five cases. The myoepithelial
markers and transcription factors TTF1, CDX2 or PAX8 were not expressed in any of
the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Middle ear adenoma is an indolent, locally recurring, but generally 
non-metastasizing neoplasm with uniform expression of synaptophysin and ISL1,
indicating true neuroendocrine differentiation. Because of its highly varied
cellular and architectural appearance, MEA should be distinguished from tympanic 
paraganglioma and a variety of rare benign and malignant lesions at this site.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24766278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Oncol Lett. 2014 May;7(5):1459-1463. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Malignant transformation of hyperplastic gastric polyps: An immunohistochemical
and pathological study of the changes of neoplastic phenotype.

Imura J(1), Hayashi S(1), Ichikawa K(2), Miwa S(1), Nakajima T(1), Nomoto K(1),
Tsuneyama K(1), Nogami T(3), Saitoh H(3), Fujimori T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular and Surgical Pathology, Dokkyo Medical University
School of Medicine, Mibu, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan. (3)Department of Pathology,
Ibaraki Prefectural Central Hospital, Kasama, Ibaraki 309-1793, Japan.

In spite of the evidence that the malignant transformation of gastric
hyperplastic polyps (HPs) is a rare event, it must always be taken into account
during diagnosis. The aim of the current study was to clarify the mechanism of
the malignant transformation of gastric hyperplasia polyps, with focus on
phenotypic expression, cell proliferation and p53 overexpression.
Immunohistochemistry for mucin phenotypic markers, including MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, 
MUC6, tight junction factors (claudin-3, -4 and -18), an intestinal phenotypic
marker [caudal type homeobox 2 (Cdx2)], Ki-67 proliferative index and p53
overexpression, was performed on archival specimens of gastric polyps excised
from six patients. Histologically, the intermingled components of several lesions
were present in these polyps. Furthermore, the cancer components were
predominantly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemically, all
hyperplastic components expressed MUC5AC, but did not exhibit positivity for
MUC2. Additionally, the majority of hyperplastic components were immunonegative
for claudin-3, while claudin-3 positivity was observed in the majority of areas
of dysplasia and carcinoma. Expression of claudin-4 was also observed in the
majority of cases and claudin-18 was preserved in the hyperplastic, dysplastic
and adenocarcinomatous lesions of all cases. Nuclear accumulation of Cdx2 was
detected in almost all the samples with dysplasia and carcinoma, while nuclear
p53 was detected in 24-80% of the dysplastic areas and >85% of the cancer
components. The Ki-67 labeling index appeared to correlate with neoplastic
progression. The observations provided evidence that the mechanism underlying
malignant transformation of gastric HPs may occur by multistep carcinogenesis,
such as the hyperplasia-adenoma (dysplasia)-adenocarcinoma sequence, and these
neoplastic cells may acquire various phenotypes during this process.

PMCID: PMC3997677
PMID: 24765156  [PubMed]


317. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 21;20(15):4230-43. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i15.4230.

Molecular and prognostic heterogeneity of microsatellite-unstable colorectal
cancer.

Kim JH(1), Kang GH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jung Ho Kim, Department of Pathology, SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center, Seoul
156-707, South Korea.

Colorectal cancers (CRCs) with a high level of microsatellite instability (MSI-H)
are clinicopathologically distinct tumors characterized by predominance in
females, proximal colonic localization, poor differentiation, mucinous histology,
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, a Crohn's-like lymphoid reaction and a favorable 
prognosis. In terms of their molecular features, MSI-H CRCs are heterogeneous
tumors associated with various genetic and epigenetic alterations, including DNA 
mismatch repair deficiency, target microsatellite mutations, BRAF mutations, a
CpG island methylator phenotype-high (CIMP-H) status, and a low level of genomic 
hypomethylation. The molecular heterogeneity of MSI-H CRCs also depends on ethnic
differences; for example, in Eastern Asian countries, relatively low frequencies 
of CIMP-H and BRAF mutations have been observed in MSI-H CRCs compared to Western
countries. Although the prognostic features of MSI-H CRCs include a favorable
survival of patients and low benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy, there may be
prognostic differences based on the molecular heterogeneity of MSI-H CRCs. Here, 
we have reviewed and discussed the molecular and prognostic features of MSI-H
CRCs, as well as several putative prognostic or predictive molecular markers,
including HSP110 expression, beta2-microglobulin mutations, myosin 1a expression,
CDX2/CK20 expression, SMAD4 expression, CIMP status and LINE-1 methylation
levels.

PMCID: PMC3989959
PMID: 24764661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2014 May;40(5):1235-42. doi: 10.1111/jog.12362.

Polymorphism in the epidermal growth factor gene is associated with pre-eclampsia
and low birthweight.

Chenthuran T(1), Galhenagey GH, Jayasekara RW, Dissanayake VH.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri 
Lanka.

AIM: We have previously reported that polymorphism in the epidermal growth factor
(EGF) gene is associated with pre-eclampsia and birthweight based on case-control
association studies involving two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP). We
extended that work to investigate other SNP in the EGF gene for their association
with pre-eclampsia and the weight of babies at birth.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A population-based DNA collection was genotyped to
determine whether the selected SNP were polymorphic in the study population. In
total, 175 women with pre-eclampsia and 171 matched normotensive controls were
genotyped for the polymorphic SNP using polymerase chain reaction/restriction
fragment length polymorphism and MassARRAY Sequenom iPLEX methodology.
RESULTS: The rs3756261A, rs4444903G, rs2237051G haplotype was associated with the
highest increased risk of pre-eclampsia (odds ratio: 3.70, 95% confidence
interval: 1.38-9.94; P = 0.016). The rs3756261A allele was the one that
contributed to this high degree of significance. The same allele was present in
the haplotype rs3756261A, rs11568943G, rs2237051G, rs11569017A, rs4698803T
(likelihood ratio statistic = 20.4671, d.f. = 3, P-value = 0.0001), which was
associated with the lower birthweight.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we found further evidence for the association of
polymorphism in the EGF gene with pre-eclampsia and the weight of babies at birth
and identified rs3756261A>G as the SNP that makes the most significant
contribution to this association. Bioinformatic analysis showed that this effect 
may be mediated by caudal type homeohox-2, a transcriptional repressor expressed 
in the trophoblast, for which a binding site is created at this polymorphic site 
when the rs3756261A allele is present.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research © 2014 Japan
Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

PMID: 24754849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 14;20(14):3960-6. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i14.3960.

New insights into the functions and localization of the homeotic gene CDX2 in
gastric cancer.

Yan LH(1), Wei WY(1), Xie YB(1), Xiao Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lin-Hai Yan, Wei-Yuan Wei, Qiang Xiao, Department of Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region, China.

Gastric cancer is one of the most frequent cancers, and it ranks the third most
common cancer in China. The most recently caudal-related homeobox transcription
factor 2 (CDX2) is expressed in a large number of human gastrointestinal cancers.
In addition, gastric epithelial cell mutations in CDX2 result in tumor promotion,
which is characterized by cellular drug resistance and a high proclivity for
developing cancer. A series of publications over the past years suggests a
mechanism by which CDX2 overexpression results in multidrug resistance. CDX2
appears to forward control regenerating IV and the multidrug resistance 1
expression signaling pathway for regulation of cell drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC3983451
PMID: 24744585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Jul;357(1):83-90. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1858-0. Epub 2014
Apr 18.

Temporal and spatial expression of caudal-type homeobox gene-2 during hindgut
development in rat embryos with ethylenethiourea-induced anorectal malformations.

Tang XB(1), Zhang T, Wang WL, Yuan ZW, Bai YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
36 Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, 110004, People's Republic of China.

The main aim of this study was to determine Cdx2 expression patterns during
anorectal development in normal and anorectal malformation (ARM) embryos with a
view to establishing the possible role of Cdx2 in ARM pathogenesis. ARM was
induced with ethylenethiourea on the 10th gestational day (GD10) in rat embryos, 
and Cesarean deliveries were performed to harvest the embryos. The temporal and
spatial expression of Cdx2 was evaluated in normal rat embryos (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>303) and ARM 
embryos (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>321) from GD13 to GD16. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that, 
in normal embryos, Cdx2 was mainly expressed on the epithelium of the urorectal
septum (URS) and the hindgut on GD13. On GD14, Cdx2-immunopositive cells were
extensively detected on the URS, hindgut, and cloacal membrane. On GD15,
increased immunopositive tissue staining on the anal membrane was evident. In ARM
embryos, the epithelium of the cloaca, URS, and anorectum were negative or
faintly immunostaining for Cdx2. Analyses by Western blot and real-time reverse
transcription plus the polymerase chain reaction revealed that, in the normal
group, Cdx2 protein and mRNA expression showed time-dependent changes in the
developing hindgut from GD13 to GD16. Upon the URS division of the cloaca into
the primitive rectum and urogenital sinus (UGS) on GD15, Cdx2 expression began to
decrease. Moreover, the Cdx2 expression level in the ARM group from GD13 to GD14 
was significantly lower than that in the normal group (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In ARM embryos,
an imbalance in the spatiotemporal expression of Cdx2 was noted during anorectal 
morphogenesis from GD13 to GD16. Downregulation of Cdx2 at the time of cloacal
separation into the primitive rectum and UGS might thus be related to the
development of ARM.

PMID: 24744267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2015 Jan;34(1):56-64. doi: 10.1177/0960327114530741. Epub 2014
Apr 16.

Silibinin modulates caudal-type homeobox transcription factor (CDX2), an
intestine specific tumor suppressor to abrogate colon cancer in experimental
rats.

Sangeetha N(1), Nalini N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Annamalai University,
Annamalainagar, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu, India School of Chemical and
Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Thirumalaisamudram, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu,
India. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Annamalai University,
Annamalainagar, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu, India nalininam@yahoo.com.

To authenticate the colon cancer preventive potential of silibinin, the efficacy 
of silibinin needs to be tested by evaluating an organ-specific biomarker. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of silibinin on the colonic
expression of the caudal-type homeobox transcription factor (CDX2) an intestine
specific tumor suppressor gene and its downstream targets in the colon of rats
challenged with 1,2 dimethyl hydrazine (DMH). Rats of groups 1 and 2 were treated
as control and silibinin control. Rats under groups 3 and 4 were given DMH (20
mg/kg body weight (b.w.) subcutaneously) once a week for 15 consecutive weeks
from the 4th week of the experimental period. In addition, group 4 rats alone
were treated with silibinin (50 mg/kg b.w. per os) everyday throughout the study 
period of 32 weeks. Histological investigation and messenger RNA and protein
expression studies were performed in the colonic tissues of experimental rats.
Findings of the study revealed that DMH administration significantly decreased
the expression of CDX2 and Guanylyl cyclase C (GCC) in the colon of experimental 
rats. Further the decreased levels of CDX2 protein, colonic mucin content, and
increased number of mast cells in the colon of DMH alone-administered rats
reflects the onset of carcinogenesis. The pathological changes caused due to CDX2
suppression were attenuated by silibinin supplementation.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24740923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2014 Jan-Mar;57(1):150-1. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.130932.

Isolated adrenal metastasis: a case report.

Bhandare S, Shrikhande S, Bakshi G, Deodhar KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

PMID: 24739860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Dig Dis. 2014;32(3):249-64. doi: 10.1159/000357858. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Helicobacter pylori and gastric cancer.

Bornschein J(1), Malfertheiner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Otto von
Guericke University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.

Infection with Helicobacter pylori is established as the major risk factor for
gastric cancer development. Damage of the mucosal barrier due to H.
pylori-induced inflammation enhances the carcinogenic effect of other risk
factors such as salt intake or tobacco smoking. The genetic disposition of both
the bacterial strain and the host can increase the potential towards gastric
cancer formation. Genetic variance of the bacterial proteins CagA and VacA is
associated with a higher gastric cancer risk, as are polymorphisms and epigenetic
changes in host gene coding for interleukins (IL1ß, IL8), transcription factors
(CDX2, RUNX3) and DNA repair enzymes. Application of high-throughput assays for
genome-wide assessment of either genetic structural variance or gene expression
patterns may lead to a better understanding of the pathobiological background of 
these processes, including the underlying signaling pathways. Understanding of
the stepwise alterations that take place in the transition from chronic atrophic 
gastritis, via metaplastic changes, to invasive neoplasia is vital to define the 
'point of no return' before which eradication of H. pylori has the potential to
prevent gastric cancer. Currently, eradication as preventive strategy is only
recommended for high-incidence regions in Asia; large population studies with an 
adequate follow-up are required to demonstrate the effectiveness of such an
approach in Western populations.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24732191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Sep 1;23(17):2067-79. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0583. Epub 2014 
May 27.

Glucosamine-induced OGT activation mediates glucose production through cleaved
Notch1 and FoxO1, which coordinately contributed to the regulation of maintenance
of self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Jeon JH(1), Suh HN, Kim MO, Ryu JM, Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University , Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

We aimed to study the relationship between glucosamine and FoxO1/Notch in
gluconeogenesis and maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) self-renewal.
Glucosamine (GlcN) increased glucose production and gluconeogenic enzyme (G6Pase 
and PEPCK) expression. GlcN also increased the percentage of cells in S phase,
number of cells, and the protein expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins
that were blocked by 3-mercaptopicolinic acid (gluconeogenesis inhibitor) or
glucose transporter (GLUT) 1 neutralizing antibody. GlcN increased the O-GlcNAc
transferase (OGT)-dependent protein O-GlcNAc level. Moreover, inhibition of OGT
(by ST045849) decreased glucose production. GlcN enhanced the expression of
OGT-dependent O-GlcNAcylated Notch1 and then increased the translocation of
cleaved Notch1 to the nucleus. Moreover, GlcN stimulated the translocation of
O-GlcNAcylated FoxO1 to the nucleus. GlcN increased the binding between cleaved
Notch1 and FoxO1 with CSL, a transcription factor, which was blocked by L-685,458
(<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor) or ST045849, respectively. Simultaneous blockage of
cleaved Notch1 and FoxO1 also decreased the expression of G6Pase and PEPCK more
significantly than that by inhibition of cleaved Notch1 alone or FoxO1 alone. In 
addition, GlcN maintained the undifferentiation status while depletion of Notch1 
and FoxO1 for 3 days decreased Oct4 and SSEA-1 expression and alkaline
phosphatase activity or increased the mRNA expression of GATA4, Tbx5, Cdx2, and
Fgf5. In conclusion, GlcN-induced OGT activation mediated glucose production
through cleaved Notch1 and FoxO1, which contributed to the regulation of
maintenance of self-renewal in mESCs.

PMCID: PMC4142796
PMID: 24730386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2014;2014:948908. doi: 10.1155/2014/948908. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Primary malignant mixed müllerian mesodermal tumor mimicking a rectosigmoid
carcinoma: a case report and review of the literature.

Kapur S(1), Miles L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Overlook Medical Center, 99 Beauvoir Avenue, 
Summit, NJ 07902, USA. (2)Division of Pathology, Overlook Medical Center, 99
Beauvoir Avenue, Summit, NJ 07902, USA.

We report a case of a 53-year-old female who presented with chronic constipation 
and abdominal discomfort for six months. Her past surgical history was
significant for a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral
salpingooophorectomy, performed eight years ago, for uterine fibroids and
endometriosis. Workup revealed a mass measuring 5 × 4.5 × 2<U+2009>cm in the
rectosigmoid colon. Patient underwent a low anterior resection and a fungating,
centrally ulcerated rectosigmoid mass with a positive mesorectal margin was
removed. Histopathology revealed a heterologous mixed mesodermal tumor (chondroid
and osteoid elements). The epithelial component was compatible with a grade 2
endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical stains were supportive, with
positive expression for CK7 and ER, negative for CK20, and only very focally and 
weakly positive for both CDX2 and p63. Chromogranin, synaptophysin, and TTF-1
were negative. Following surgery, she was treated with five cycles of carboplatin
(AUC 6) and paclitaxel (175<U+2009>mg/m(2)), followed by irradiation. Twenty-six months 
later, patient continues to be asymptomatic and disease-free. Mixed müllerian
mesodermal tumors mimicking colorectal cancer have been reported in the past. Our
case highlights the rarity and the challenges encountered in diagnosing and
treating these rare tumors.

PMCID: PMC3970259
PMID: 24716055  [PubMed]


326. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2014;2014:905478. doi: 10.1155/2014/905478. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the colon: a case report and review of the
literature.

Barrera-Maldonado CD(1), Wiener I(2), Sim S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Graduate Medical Education, Memorial Hermann Memorial City, 921 
N Gessner Road, Houston, TX 77024, USA. (2)General and Vascular Surgery, 902
Frostwood Suite 205, Prof. Building 1, Houston, TX 77024, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology, Memorial Hermann Memorial City, 921 N Gessner Road, Houston, TX 77024,
USA.

Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the colon has been described scarcely in the
literature. It affects elderly men more commonly than women and usually appears
in the left side of the colon. A Hispanic 41-year-old female came to the
emergency room with abdominal pain, vomiting, and distension. Physical exam
revealed generalized tenderness without peritoneal signs. Laboratory data was
unremarkable. A CT scan showed an apple-core lesion in the distal colon. A
flexible sigmoidoscopy revealed an obstructive mass that made further evaluation 
impossible. Exploratory surgery revealed a hard mass obstructing the descending
colon, which was resected. Histopathology analysis with immunohistochemistry
staining was positive for cytokeratin 20, cytokeratin 10, CDX2, and villin, while
it was negative for cytokeratin 7, RCC, vimentin, and CD31. These results
confirmed the clear cell variant of the adenocarcinoma. Clear cell
adenocarcinomas usually arise from the kidneys and Müllerian organs.
Immunohistochemistry is crucial for establishing the origin of these neoplastic
cells. A cytokeratin 20+/7- with positive CDX2 is highly specific and sensitive
for intestinal neoplastic origin. The main treatment has been surgery alone with 
moderately good results. More research and information about this malignancy is
needed, especially in regard to prognosis and in order to provide the best
treatment option.

PMCID: PMC3970243
PMID: 24716050  [PubMed]


327. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Feb 15;7(3):1266-74. eCollection 2014.

Pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma: a study of the clinicopathologic and molecular 
status of nine cases.

Wang CX(1), Liu B(1), Wang YF(1), Zhang RS(1), Yu B(1), Lu ZF(1), Shi QL(1), Zhou
XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clinical School of Medical College of Nanjing
University, Nanjing Jingling Hospital Nanjing, China.

Pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma (PEAC), a extremely rare variant of primary
invasive adenocarcinoma of the lung, was recognized by the international
multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma which was proposed by the
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC), the American
Thoracic Society (ATS), and the European Respiratory Society (ERS) published in
early 2011. Histologically, PEAC is considered to be mainly composed of tall
columnar cells arranged in an irregular glandular cavity or cribriform pattern
with extensive central necrosis which show high resemblance to that of intestinal
epithelia and colorectal carcinomas. Immunohistochemically, PEAC can not only
expresses typical proteins common to lung primaries but is positive for at least 
one intestinal markers, such as CDX2, cytokeratin (CK) 20, MUC2, therefore, the
differentiation of primary PEACs from metastatic colorectal cancers can be
challenging. In this study, we report 9 cases of PEAC and a panel of
immunohistochemical protein markers of CK7, CK20, thyroid transcription factor 1 
(TTF-1), Napsin A, MUC2 and villin was analyzed with the comparison of 20
metastatic colorectal carcinomas (MCRs), and 20 typical primary adenocarcinomas
(tPACs). As was expected, CK7 expression was documented in all 9 PEACs and 20
tPCAs while CK20 was significantly more prevalent in adenocarcinoma that
originated from colorectal. Additionally, we evaluate the classical mutations of 
EGFR, KRAS in the 9 cases of PEACs, it turned out that all tumors were EGFR-wild 
and KRAS-wild types, which confirmed that PEAC has a separate phenotype from
usual pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3971340
PMID: 24696747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Feb 15;7(3):1241-5. eCollection 2014.

Morules in fundic gland polyposis: a case report.

Petris GD(1), Chen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic in Arizona 13400 E Shea Blvd, Scottsdale 
AZ, 85259, USA.

Morular metaplasia has been exceptionally described in the stomach. We report the
formation of morules in a case of sporadic fundic gland polyposis with low grade 
dysplasia in a 47 year old woman that underwent total gastrectomy. The
immunophenotype of the morules was CD10, CDX2, Beta-catenin nuclear positive;
p63, Ki67, chromogranin, synaptophysin, Ck20 negative. The presence of morules in
a neoplasm know to be associated with the disruption of wnt/ß-catenin pathway is 
discussed. The report provides the first description of the immunophenotype of
morules in the stomach and hypothesizes the biological similitude of fundic gland
polyposis to other tumors characterized by morules formation and wnt/ß-catenin
pathway dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3971335
PMID: 24695818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Mar 27;10(3):e1003501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003501. 
eCollection 2014.

An integrated model of multiple-condition ChIP-Seq data reveals predeterminants
of Cdx2 binding.

Mahony S(1), Edwards MD(2), Mazzoni EO(3), Sherwood RI(4), Kakumanu A(1),
Morrison CA(5), Wichterle H(5), Gifford DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular 
Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (2)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (3)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York,
United States of America. (4)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America. (5)Departments of Pathology and Cell Biology,
Neurology, and Neuroscience, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease,
Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America.

Regulatory proteins can bind to different sets of genomic targets in various cell
types or conditions. To reliably characterize such condition-specific regulatory 
binding we introduce MultiGPS, an integrated machine learning approach for the
analysis of multiple related ChIP-seq experiments. MultiGPS is based on a
generalized Expectation Maximization framework that shares information across
multiple experiments for binding event discovery. We demonstrate that our
framework enables the simultaneous modeling of sparse condition-specific binding 
changes, sequence dependence, and replicate-specific noise sources. MultiGPS
encourages consistency in reported binding event locations across
multiple-condition ChIP-seq datasets and provides accurate estimation of ChIP
enrichment levels at each event. MultiGPS's multi-experiment modeling approach
thus provides a reliable platform for detecting differential binding enrichment
across experimental conditions. We demonstrate the advantages of MultiGPS with an
analysis of Cdx2 binding in three distinct developmental contexts. By accurately 
characterizing condition-specific Cdx2 binding, MultiGPS enables novel insight
into the mechanistic basis of Cdx2 site selectivity. Specifically, the
condition-specific Cdx2 sites characterized by MultiGPS are highly associated
with pre-existing genomic context, suggesting that such sites are pre-determined 
by cell-specific regulatory architecture. However, MultiGPS-defined
condition-independent sites are not predicted by pre-existing regulatory signals,
suggesting that Cdx2 can bind to a subset of locations regardless of genomic
environment. A summary of this paper appears in the proceedings of the RECOMB
2014 conference, April 2-5.

PMCID: PMC3967921
PMID: 24675637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2014 Aug;66(5-6):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2014.02.003. Epub
2014 Mar 23.

Characterization of azoxymethane-induced colon tumor metastasis to lung in a
mouse model relevant to human sporadic colorectal cancer and evaluation of grape 
seed extract efficacy.

Derry MM(1), Raina K(1), Agarwal R(2), Agarwal C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States. (2)Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States; University of Colorado Cancer
Center, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United
States. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, United States;
University of Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO, United States. Electronic address:
Chapla.Agarwal@UCDenver.edu.

The second leading cause of cancer-related deaths (both genders combined) in the 
United States is colorectal cancer (CRC). This emphasizes the need to develop
both effective therapies for CRC patients and pre-clinical models mimicking human
disease that carry translational potential in drug-development. Notably, at
present there are no in situ models of CRC metastasis to lung. In our
azoxymethane-induced colon tumorigenesis study in A/J mice assessing grape seed
extract (GSE) efficacy, during necropsy we also found multiple lung nodules
suggestive of colon tumor metastasis to lung that were significantly inhibited in
GSE fed group. Both histopathological and molecular studies were performed to
characterize and establish the origin of these lesions in lung. Histologically
these nodules were determined as adenocarcinoma of mucin origin. Molecular
analyses by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and RT-PCR revealed strong protein and
transcript levels of colon specific markers CDX2 and CK20 in these lung nodules
compared to uninvolved control lung tissue. Vis-à-vis, these nodules also showed 
minimally expressed lung specific biomarkers, specifically surfactant D and
TTF-1, in IHC analysis. Additionally, 0.25% GSE supplementation in diet (w/w)
decreased the incidence of these lung nodules by 53% and their total number by
66%. Together, the characterization of this unique in situ mouse model of CRC
metastasis to lung provides translational opportunities in developing effective
therapies to clinically manage and treat CRC at the advanced stage. Moreover, GSE
efficacy in inhibiting CRC metastasis to lung in this model further supports its 
translational potential in controlling CRC growth, progression and metastasis in 
patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4029844
PMID: 24670932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2014 Jun;18(3):129-35. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2014.02.003. 
Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Antral atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, and preneoplastic markers in Mexican
children with Helicobacter pylori-positive and Helicobacter pylori-negative
gastritis.

Villarreal-Calderon R(1), Luévano-González A(2), Aragón-Flores M(3), Zhu H(4),
Yuan Y(4), Xiang Q(5), Yan B(2), Stoll KA(2), Cross JV(6), Iczkowski KA(2),
Mackinnon AC Jr(7).

Author information: 
(1)Davidson Honors College, University of Montana, Missoula, MT 59812.
(2)Department of Pathology, Clinical and Translational Research Core Lab, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226. (3)Pathology Department, Hospital
Central Militar, Mexico City, Mexico. (4)Department of Biostatistics, University 
of North Carolina Gillings School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
(5)Institute for Health and Society, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
53226. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, VA, 22908. (7)Department of Pathology, Clinical and
Translational Research Core Lab, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI
53226. Electronic address: amackinnon@mcw.edu.

Chronic inflammation and infection are major risk factors for gastric
carcinogenesis in adults. As chronic gastritis is common in Mexican children,
diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori and other causes of gastritis are critical for
the identification of children who would benefit from closer surveillance. Antral
biopsies from 82 Mexican children (mean age, 8.3 ± 4.8 years) with chronic
gastritis (36 H pylori+, 46 H pylori-) were examined for gastritis activity,
atrophy, intestinal metaplasia (IM), and immunohistochemical expression of
gastric carcinogenesis biomarkers caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), ephrin type-B
receptor 4 (EphB4), matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3), macrophage migration
inhibitory factor (MIF), p53, ß-catenin, and E-cadherin. Atrophy was diagnosed in
7 (9%) of 82, and IM, in 5 (6%) of 82 by routine histology, whereas 6 additional 
children (7%) (3 H pylori+) exhibited aberrant CDX2 expression without IM.
Significant positive correlations were seen between EphB4, MMP3, and MIF
(P<.0001). Atrophy and follicular pathology were more frequent in H pylori+
biopsies (P<.0001), whereas IM and CDX2 expression showed no significant
correlation with H pylori status. Antral biopsies demonstrating atrophy, IM,
and/or aberrant CDX2 expression were seen in 21.95% (18/82) of the children,
potentially identifying those who would benefit from closer surveillance and
preventive dietary strategies. Biomarkers CDX2, EphB4, MMP3, and MIF may be
useful in the workup of pediatric gastritis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4516036
PMID: 24656654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Protein Cell. 2014 May;5(5):382-93. doi: 10.1007/s13238-014-0034-3. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

Epigenetic reprogramming, gene expression and in vitro development of porcine
SCNT embryos are significantly improved by a histone deacetylase
inhibitor--m-carboxycinnamic acid bishydroxamide (CBHA).

Song Y(1), Hai T, Wang Y, Guo R, Li W, Wang L, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China.

Insufficient epigenetic reprogramming of donor nuclei is believed to be one of
the most important causes of low development efficiency of mammalian somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT). Previous studies have shown that both the in vitro and
in vivo development of mouse SCNT embryos could be increased significantly by
treatment with various histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), including
Trichostatin A, Scriptaid, and m-carboxycinnamic acid bishydroxamide (CBHA), in
which only the effect of CBHA has not yet been tested in other species. In this
paper we examine the effect of CBHA treatment on the development of porcine SCNT 
embryos. We have discovered the optimum dosage and time for CBHA treatment:
incubating SCNT embryos with 2 µmol/L CBHA for 24 h after activation could
increase the blastocyst rate from 12.7% to 26.5%. Immunofluorescence results
showed that the level of acetylation at histone 3 lysine 9 (AcH3K9), acetylation 
at histone 3 lysine 18 (AcH3K18), and acetylation at histone 4 lysine 16
(AcH4K16) was raised after CBHA treatment. Meanwhile, CBHA treatment improved the
expression of development relating genes such as pou5f1, cdx2, and the imprinted 
genes like igf2. Despite these promising in vitro results and histone
reprogramming, the full term development was not significantly increased after
treatment. In conclusion, CBHA improves the in vitro development of pig SCNT
embryos, increases the global histone acetylation and corrects the expression of 
some developmentally important genes at early stages. As in mouse SCNT, we have
shown that nuclear epigenetic reprogramming in pig early SCNT embryos can be
modified by CBHA treatment.

PMCID: PMC3996156
PMID: 24627095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Apr;38(4):526-33. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000123.

Adenocarcinoma of the minor duodenal papilla and its precursor lesions: a
clinical and pathologic study.

Shia J(1), Agaram NP, Olgac S, Cobanov B, Adsay V, Klimstra DS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
Department of Pathology, Emory University Hospital, Atlanta, GA.

The minor duodenal papilla drains the accessory pancreatic duct of Santorini and 
lies proximal to the ampulla of Vater. Adenocarcinoma and its precursor lesions
arising in the minor papilla are rare. Literature data thus far are limited to a 
few individual case reports, and the condition is consequently poorly defined.
Our study cases were composed of carcinomas fulfilling all of the following
criteria: location at 1.5 to 2.5 cm proximal to the major papilla; presence of
associated submucosal pancreatobiliary-type ducts with periductal glands or
acinar tissue; a predominant submucosal location of the tumor; and lack of an
intestinal-type adenoma in the adjacent duodenal mucosa. Tumors were studied
morphologically, immunohistochemically, and clinically. Nine cases fulfilling the
inclusion criteria were identified. There were 5 men and 4 women with an age
range of 50 to 76 years (median, 72 y). The tumor size ranged from 1.2 to 4.4 cm 
(median, 3 cm). The carcinomas were of colloid type (3 tumors), pancreatobiliary 
type (4), or nonmucinous intestinal type (2). Five cases were associated with an 
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN)-like precursor lesion within the
residual structures of the minor papilla in the duodenal submucosa.
Immunohistochemically, the intestinal-type and mucinous-type tumors tended to be 
positive for CK20, CDX2, MUC2, and B72.3, and pancreatobiliary-type tumors tended
to be positive for CK7, MUC1, B72.3, and CA125. Loss of DPC4 (Smad4) expression
was found in the pancreatobiliary-type carcinomas only. Two tumors showed loss of
DNA mismatch-repair protein expression, one losing MLH1 and PMS2 and the other
losing MSH6. Both patients were older than 60 years, and neither had germline
mutation testing. Follow-up information was available for 6 patients (median
follow-up time, 67.5 mo): 3 of the 6 patients died of disease at 60, 75, and 85
months after surgery, respectively, and all 3 patients had an intestinal-type
carcinoma (1 colloid and 2 nonmucinous). The patient whose tumor was MSH6
deficient was alive without evidence of disease 51 months after surgery. In
conclusion, adenocarcinomas of the minor papilla are rare tumors occurring
predominantly in the sixth to seventh decade. Some of them arise from IPMN-like
precursors in the residual submucosal minor papilla tissue. Morphologically,
immunohistochemically, and clinically they are similar to ampullary or
IPMN-associated pancreatic carcinomas and can exhibit either an intestinal,
colloid, or pancreaticobiliary phenotype. DNA mismatch-repair deficiency may
occur. A careful gross and histologic examination is essential to accurately
recognize the site of origin of minor papilla carcinomas.

PMID: 24625417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. JOP. 2014 Mar 10;15(2):213-5. doi: 10.6092/1590-8577/2421.

Periampullary carcinoma: some important news in histopathology.

Uomo G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Unit 3, Cardarelli Hospital. Naples, Italy.
gene.uomo@gmail.com.

PMID: 24618452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Electrophoresis. 2014 May;35(10):1504-8. doi: 10.1002/elps.201400001. Epub 2014
Mar 25.

Highly sensitive detection of cancer cells based on the DNA barcode assay and
microcapillary electrophoretic analysis.

Chung S(1), Cho M, Hwan Jung J, Seok Seo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21 Program), Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Considering rarity of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in human blood, the
development of highly sensitive detection techniques for cancer cells is crucial 
for prediction, diagnosis, and prognosis of cancers. In this study, we propose an
advanced cellular detection method by combining a biobarcode assay and
microcapillary electrophoresis (µCE) technology. While the DNA biobarcode assay
can provide ultrasensitive and multiplex detection platforms, the µCE chip can
analyze barcode DNAs with high speed and accuracy according to the DNA size. We
designed the barcode DNA size as 20 bp for indicating the expression of
epithelial cell adhesion molecules (EpCAM) biomarkers and 30 bp for assigning
CDX2 expression which is specific for colorectal cancer cells with addition to
two bracket ladders (15 and 45 bp). Using MCF-7 (breast cancer) and SW620
(colorectal cancer) as models, we conducted a biobarcode assay and analyzed the
resultant biobarcode DNA on the µCE chip. We could detect the 20 bp CE peak in
the electropherogram even with ten MCF-7 and SW620 cells in a volume of 200 µL,
thereby demonstrating the highly sensitive detection of cancer cells. We
furthermore identified the type of colorectal cancer by observing two positive
peaks (20 bp for EpCAM and 30 bp for CDX2) in the µCE analysis.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24615960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mod Pathol. 2014 Oct;27(10):1364-74. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.36. Epub 2014
Mar 7.

Prognostic significance of CDX2 and mucin expression in small intestinal
adenocarcinoma.

Jun SY(1), Eom DW(2), Park H(3), Bae YK(4), Jang KT(5), Yu E(3), Hong SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Incheon St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University 
of Korea, Incheon, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Gangneung Asan 
Hospital, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Gangneung, Republic of Korea. 
(3)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Yeungnam
University College of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The clinicopathological and prognostic significance of CDX2 and mucin expression 
have not been comprehensively evaluated in small intestinal adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical microarray analyses of CDX2, MUC1, MUC5AC, and MUC6 protein
expressions in 189 surgically resected small intestinal adenocarcinoma cases were
examined and compared with various clinicopathologic variables, including
survival. CDX2, MUC1, MUC5AC, and MUC6 expressions were observed in 43.4% (82
patients), 37.6% (71), 31.7% (60), and 21.7% (41) of patients, respectively.
Whereas CDX2 expression was found to be associated with low-grade tumors
(P=0.034), fewer nodal metastases (P=0.019), and less perineural invasion
(P=0.049) in small intestinal adenocarcinoma patients, patients expressing MUC1
tended to demonstrate high-grade (P=0.021) and nodular or infiltrative (P=0.020) 
tumors. On the basis of the combined CDX2, MUC1, MUC5AC, and MUC6 expression
patterns, small intestinal adenocarcinoma patients were further classified as
intestinal (CDX2+/MUC1-; 29.6%), pancreatobiliary (CDX2-/MUC1+; 23.8%), mixed
(CDX2+/MUC1+; 13.8%), gastric (CDX2-/MUC1-/MUC5AC+ or MUC6+; 13.8%), or null
(CDX2-/MUC1-/MUC5AC-/MUC6-; 19.0%). Among these immunophenotypes, intestinal-type
patients demonstrated more frequent distal (jejunal or ileal; P=0.033), tubular
(P=0.039), and low-grade tumors (P=0.004) and significantly better survival
according to univariate (P<0.0001) and multivariate (P=0.001) analyses. In
summary, intestinal immunophenotype adenocarcinomas are associated with distal
(jejunal or ileal), tubular, and low-grade tumors and better survival outcomes.
Hence, CDX2 and mucin immunohistochemical staining may provide better estimations
of survival after surgical resection and intestinal immunophenotype could
therefore be used as a better prognostic indicator of small intestinal
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 24603585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Dalton Trans. 2014 Apr 21;43(15):5806-14. doi: 10.1039/c3dt53020e. Epub 2014 Feb 
27.

New hybrid Cd(II) compounds: synthesis and structural characterization.

Jia HL(1), Shi Z, Yang QF, Yu JH, Xu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and
Preparative Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130023, China.
jhyu@jlu.edu.cn xjq@mail.jlu.edu.cn.

In an acidic solution, the room-temperature reactions of CdX2 (X(-) = Cl(-),
Br(-) or CH3COO(-)) and organic N-heterocyclic molecules with or without
SCN(-)/SeCN(-)/dca(-) (dca(-) = dicyanamide) created the five new hybrid Cd(ii)
compounds [H2(4,4'-dtdpy)]2[CdBr4]SO4·2.5H2O (dtdpy = dithiodipyridine) 1,
[H(2,2'-dtdpy)]2[CdBr4] 2, [(Hbim)2CdCl2(SCN)2] (bim = 2,2'-biimidazole) 3,
[H2(pip)][Cd(SCN)4] (pip = piperazine) 4 and [CdL2] (L = HNC(OH)N(-)CN) 5. X-ray 
single-crystal diffraction analysis revealed that: (i) compound 1 is a double
salt of [H2(4,4'-dtdpy)]SO4 and [H2(4,4'-dtdpy)][CdBr4], [H2(4,4'-dtdpy)]SO4
shows a two-dimensional (2D) supramolecular layer structure and
[H2(4,4'-dtdpy)][CdBr4] is distributed in the space between the supramolecular
layers; (ii) compounds 2 and 3 are mononuclear molecular entities. Of those,
2,2'-dtdpy and bim were only in situ monoprotonated; (iii) compound 4 contains a 
2D supramolecular layered structure which is based on [Cd(SCN)4](2-) chains
H2(pip)(2+)via NSCNNpip interactions; (iv) the three-dimensional (3D) compound 5 
exhibits a rutile-related (4·6(2))2(4(2)·6(10)·8(3))-topology. The ligand L
originates from the in situ nucleophilic addition of H2O with one -CN group of
dca(-). Upon excitation, the solid-state compounds 3 and 4 emit blue light, and
the solid-state compound 5 emits violet light.

PMID: 24572719  [PubMed]


339. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(2):847-53.

Association between VDR polymorphisms and breast cancer: an updated and
comparative meta-analysis of crude and adjusted odd ratios.

Huang QQ(1), Liao YY, Ye XH, Fu JJ, Chen SD.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Molecular Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou, China E-mail :
chensidong1@126.com.

There is a lot of debate on the relationship between vitamin D receptor
polymorphisms and risk of breast cancer. Herein, we quantitatively analyzed the
published case-control studies on this relationship by meta- analysis, performing
a bibliographic search from Pubmed and CNKI up to July 31, 2013. The included
case- control studies for Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1, Apa1, Cdx2 and Poly-A were 16, 19,
20, 10, 4, 6, respectively. Crude and adjusted odd ratios and 95% confidence
intervals were calculated to present and compare the strength of any
associations. The results of combined analyses indicated that Fok1, Bsm1, Apa1,
Cdx2 and Poly-A were not significantly associated with the risk of breast cancer.
In contrast, the tt genotype of Taq1 was a modest risk factor for breast cancer
development (tt vs. TT: OR = 1.21, 95% CI: 1.01-1.44). To further confirm the
above results, adjusted effects for the six polymorphisms were pooled based on
adjusted ORs reported in the original studies. Adjusted ORs of Fok1, Apa1, Cdx2
and Poly-A were similar to the crude ORs. However, Bsm1 and Taq1 showed
inconsistent results. For Bsm1, OR for BB vs. bb was 0.85, 95% CI: 0.74-0.98; for
Taq1, OR for tt vs. TT was 1.03, 95% CI: 0.92-1.15, and not associated with risk.
Subgroup analyses for crude ORs showed some association between Bsm1, Taq1 and
breast cancer in Caucasians only, but for adjusted ORs, no associations were
found. This meta-analysis suggests that the roles that Fok1, Apa1, Cdx2 and
Poly-A polymorphisms play in breast cancer risk are negligible, with Bsm1 and
Taq1 as possible exceptions. To be conservative, we still assumed that they may
play a modest role in determining breast cancer risk. Further studies are needed 
to validate our findings.

PMID: 24568506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jun;35(6):5501-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1724-4. Epub 2014 Feb
25.

OCT-1 overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in patients with
well-differentiated gastric cancer.

Jeong SH(1), Lee YJ, Cho BI, Ha WS, Choi SK, Jung EJ, Ju YT, Jeong CY, Ko GH, Yoo
J, Hong SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery/Gyeongnam Regional Cancer Center, College of Natural
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University, 79 Gangnam-ro, Jinju, Gyeongsang South 
Province, 660-702, South Korea.

Octamer transcription factor-1 (OCT-1) is a well-known transcription factor that 
is reportedly overexpressed in intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinoma in the
intestine. In this study, we investigated OCT-1 overexpression as a prognostic
factor for gastric cancer. The association between OCT-1 overexpression (detected
using immunohistochemistry) and clinicopathological features including survival
was evaluated. In vitro gain-of-function approaches were utilized to assess the
function of OCT-1 in malignancy. Analysis of OCT-1 expression in patients with
gastric cancer with well-differentiated carcinoma as per the World Health
Organization classification showed that OCT-1 overexpression was correlated with 
advanced tumor invasion (58.8 % of patients with advanced tumor invasion vs. 21.2
% of patients with early tumor invasion; p<0.01), lymph node metastasis (63.9 %
of patients with metastasis vs. 24.1 % of those without; p=0.015), and cancer
recurrence (83.3 % of patients with recurrence vs. 25.4 % of those without;
p<0.01), as well as a lower survival rate (62.8 vs. 87.9 Mo; p<0.01). However,
there were no significant differences in the levels of OCT-1 expression in
gastric cancer patients with other carcinoma types (p>0.05). Furthermore, we
found that the proliferation rate of OCT-1-overexpressing MKN-45 cells was higher
than that of the control cells. OCT-1 overexpression may be a marker for poor
prognosis in patients with well-differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 24566898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Adv Anat Pathol. 2014 Mar;21(2):138-43. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0000000000000010.

Uveal melanoma: A pathologist's perspective and review of translational
developments.

Schoenfield L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wexner Medical Center, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH.

The eye and periorbital soft tissue are derived from the neuroectodermal neural
crest, leading to a wide range of tumor types that arise at this site. The uveal 
tract (iris, ciliary body, and choroid) normally contains melanocytes, and thus
both benign nevi and malignant melanoma can arise there, the choroid being the
most frequent site. Uveal melanoma (UM) in adults and retinoblastoma (in young
children) are the 2 most common primary intraocular malignancies. Retinoblastoma 
is the most common eye cancer worldwide, but the most common ocular cancer in the
United States and Europe is UM. This review will focus on UM and will include the
epidemiology, pathologic findings, prognosis and treatment, and review of ongoing
molecular discoveries aimed at elucidating the pathways that could lead to
adjuvant therapy. These tumors are not uncommon to dedicated ocular pathologists 
and may occasionally be encountered by general pathologists as well. First, a
short word about metastases to the uveal tract is in order, because of its
importance in the differential diagnosis. Although the most common primary
malignancy in the adult eye is UM, the most frequent adult intraocular malignancy
identified in autopsy studies is metastatic carcinoma to the uveal tract.
Metastases usually occur late, and the eye is thus rarely enucleated in this
setting. However it is important to be aware of this as sometimes, the
ophthalmologist cannot determine clinically if an amelanotic tumor represents
melanoma or metastasis, possibly from an unknown primary. Shields and colleagues 
reported on their experience and found that the most common primary sites for
uveal metastasis are breast, followed by lung, and then the gastrointestinal
tract. Immunohistochemical stains for cytokeratin or more specific markers such
as CK7, CK20, TTF-1, BRST-2, CDX2, and PSA may be helpful if there is no known
primary. Metastases to the eye also occur in the orbit, eyelid, and rarely to the
retina.

PMID: 24508696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Carcinogenesis. 2014 May;35(5):1185-92. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu037. Epub 2014 Feb
5.

Involvement of CDX2 in the cross talk between TNF-a and Wnt signaling pathway in 
the colon cancer cell line Caco-2.

Coskun M(1), Olsen AK, Bzorek M, Holck S, Engel UH, Nielsen OH, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Medical Section, Herlev Hospital, DK-2730
Herlev, Denmark.

Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) is highly upregulated in inflammation and reduces
the expression of the intestinal transcription factor, Caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2). Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is critical for intestinal
cell proliferation, but a decreased CDX2 expression has influence on the Wnt
signaling-related genes and progression of colorectal cancer. Although several
inflammatory signaling pathways, including TNF-a, have been reported to promote
Wnt/ß-catenin activity and development of cancer, the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain unclear. The aim was to investigate the signaling pathways
involved in the TNF-a-mediated downregulation of CDX2, and its influence on
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling components in colon cancer cells. The expression of TNF-a
and CDX2 at the invasive front were evaluated by immunohistochemical staining and
showed reduced CDX2-positive cells in tumor buddings in areas with TNF-a
expression in the surrounding inflammatory cells. In vitro studies revealed that 
TNF-a treatment showed a dose-dependent decrease of CDX2 messenger RNA (mRNA) and
protein expression in Caco-2 cells. Inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB or p38
pathways showed that these are involved in the TNF-a-dependent downregulation of 
CDX2. Furthermore, TNF-a-mediated downregulation of CDX2 was found to
significantly decrease the mRNA levels of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), axis 
inhibition protein 2 (AXIN2) and glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3ß), whereas
the mRNA levels of Wnt targets were significantly elevated in TNF-a-treated
Caco-2 cells. These findings were associated with reduced binding of CDX2 to
promoter or enhancer regions of APC, AXIN2 and GSK3ß. In conclusion, it was found
that TNF-a induces the expression of Wnt signaling components through a
downregulation of the CDX2 expression that might have a tumor-promoting effect on
colon cancer cells.

PMID: 24501326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):e86853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086853. eCollection
2014.

Utilization of CDX2 expression in diagnosing pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and
predicting prognosis.

Xiao W(1), Hong H(1), Awadallah A(2), Zhou L(1), Xin W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, 
Ohio, United States of America ; Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, United
States of America.

CDX2, a master transcriptional regulator of intestinal cell differentiation and
survival, has been used as a marker to indicate colorectal lineage in
adenocarcinomas of unknown origin. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one
of the most common causes for adenocarcinomas of unknown origin, but CDX2
expression in pancreatic disease remains unclear. In this study, we systemically 
and extensively investigated the expression and role of CDX2 in PDAC. We reported
that CDX2 expression is weak and heterogeneous is all normal pancreas and chronic
pancreatitis. It is largely expressed in epithelial-lining cells of pancreatic
ducts including main ducts, inter-lobular ducts, intra-lobular ducts,
intercalated ducts and centroacinar cells, but not in acinar cells or islet
cells. CDX2 expression is down regulated during the transformation process from
PanIN to PDAC. Only one third of PDACs retain some degree of CDX2 expression, and
this group of PDACs have reduced median survival time compared to that of CDX2
negative group (308 days vs. 586 days, p = 0.0065). Metastatic PDACs remain
similar expression pattern to that of the primary sites. Our study clearly
demonstrates CDX2 expression in pancreatic diseases including PDAC, which is
practically important when CDX2 is used to establish the primary sites of
adenocarcinomas of unknown origin. In addition, our study also provides CDX2 as a
prognostic marker for PDAC and implicates an important role of CDX2 in the
development of normal pancreas and PDAC.

PMCID: PMC3906088
PMID: 24489794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):195-206. doi: 10.1111/his.12383. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Napsin A is a useful marker for metastatic adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin.

Kim MY(1), Go H, Koh J, Lee K, Min HS, Kim MA, Jeon YK, Lee HS, Moon KC, Park SY,
Kim WH, Chung DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea.

AIMS: To address whether napsin A is useful for identifying metastatic
adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fifty-four cases of adenocarcinoma that metastasized from
the lungs to various sites and 1762 cases of carcinoma from various organs were
immunostained for napsin A, TTF-1, CK7, CK20 and CDX2 using tissue microarray.
The expression patterns of napsin A and TTF-1 in metastatic pulmonary
adenocarcinomas were compared with matched primary lung tumours. Napsin A and
TTF-1 were expressed in 87.0% and 81.5% of the metastatic pulmonary
adenocarcinomas, respectively. Although there was no significant difference in
the positivity of napsin A and TTF-1 as a single marker in metastatic pulmonary
adenocarcinomas, the expression scores for napsin A were much higher than those
for TTF-1 (P < 0.001). Moreover, the positivity and expression scores of napsin A
in primary pulmonary adenocarcinomas were maintained in metastatic
adenocarcinomas better than TTF-1. Most non-pulmonary adenocarcinomas were
negative for napsin A, except for renal cell carcinomas (13.4%), ovarian
adenocarcinomas (7.1%) and uterine endometrial adenocarcinomas (14.5%). In
particular, clear cell adenocarcinomas of ovary (68.8%) and uterus (66.7%)
frequently expressed napsin A.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that napsin A may be a useful marker for
identifying metastatic adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin in combination with
TTF-1.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24479710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):15-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.008. Epub 2014
Jan 18.

Paracrine effects of embryo-derived FGF4 and BMP4 during pig trophoblast
elongation.

Valdez Magaña G(1), Rodríguez A(1), Zhang H(1), Webb R(1), Alberio R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, 
College Rd, LE12 5RD, Loughborough, UK. (2)Division of Animal Sciences, School of
Biosciences, University of Nottingham, College Rd, LE12 5RD, Loughborough, UK.
Electronic address: ramiro.alberio@nottingham.ac.uk.

The crosstalk between the epiblast and the trophoblast is critical in supporting 
the early stages of conceptus development. FGF4 and BMP4 are inductive signals
that participate in the communication between the epiblast and the extraembryonic
ectoderm (ExE) of the developing mouse embryo. Importantly, however, it is
unknown whether a similar crosstalk operates in species that lack a discernible
ExE and develop a mammotypical embryonic disc (ED). Here we investigated the
crosstalk between the epiblast and the trophectoderm (TE) during pig embryo
elongation. FGF4 ligand and FGFR2 were detected primarily on the plasma membrane 
of TE cells of peri-elongation embryos. The binding of this growth factor to its 
receptor triggered a signal transduction response evidenced by an increase in
phosphorylated MAPK/ERK. Particular enrichment was detected in the periphery of
the ED in early ovoid embryos, indicating that active FGF signalling was
operating during this stage. Gene expression analysis shows that CDX2 and ELF5,
two genes expressed in the mouse ExE, are only co-expressed in the Rauber's
layer, but not in the pig mural TE. Interestingly, these genes were detected in
the nascent mesoderm of early gastrulating embryos. Analysis of BMP4 expression
by in situ hybridisation shows that this growth factor is produced by nascent
mesoderm cells. A functional test in differentiating epiblast shows that CDX2 and
ELF5 are activated in response to BMP4. Furthermore, the effects of BMP4 were
also demonstrated in the neighbouring TE cells, as demonstrated by an increase in
phosphorylated SMAD1/5/8. These results show that BMP4 produced in the
extraembryonic mesoderm is directly influencing the SMAD response in the TE of
elongating embryos. These results demonstrate that paracrine signals from the
embryo, represented by FGF4 and BMP4, induce a response in the TE prior to the
extensive elongation. The study also confirms that expression of CDX2 and ELF5 is
not conserved in the mural TE, indicating that although the signals that
coordinate conceptus growth are similar between rodents and pigs, the gene
regulatory network of the trophoblast lineage is not conserved in these species.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24445281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Histopathology. 2014 Jul;65(1):51-9. doi: 10.1111/his.12373. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

A diagnostic immunohistochemical panel for yolk sac (primitive endodermal)
tumours based on an immunohistochemical comparison with the human yolk sac.

Nogales FF(1), Quiñonez E, López-Marín L, Dulcey I, Preda O.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain.

AIMS: To establish a diagnostic immunohistochemical panel for various histotypes 
of yolk sac (primitive endodermal) tumours (YSTs) by comparison with the human
yolk sac (HYS) immunophenotype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twenty-five YSTs showing either classical patterns (CPs) of 
histology (microcystic/reticular, n = 14; polyvesicular, n = 1; and hepatoid, n =
1) or somatic glandular patterns (SGPs; n = 9) were analysed for expression of
a-fetoprotein (AFP), glypican-3 (GPC3), villin, hepatocyte paraffin-1 (HepPar-1),
CDX2, SALL4 and LIN28. AFP expression was constantly heterogeneous in CPs but
tended to be focal/absent in SGPs. GPC3 was diffuse in CPs but heterogeneous
(seven cases) or focal/absent (two cases) in SGPs. HepPar-1 expression was focal 
in all but three cases (diffuse in one CP-hepatoid and two SGPs). CDX2 positivity
was focal in CPs but heterogeneous (seven cases) or diffuse (two cases) in SGPs. 
Villin, SALL4 and LIN28 were diffusely positive in nearly all cases.
CONCLUSIONS: CPs reproduce the immunophenotype of HYS and early endoderm with
variable expression of both AFP and markers of early gut or hepatic
differentiation. SGPs with intestinal differentiation often have incomplete
immunophenotypes. A differential diagnosis panel, including both markers of
pluripotentiality (SALL4 and/or LIN28) and endoderm (AFP, GPC3 and villin), is
proposed. It identifies overlapping multidifferentiation of primitive and somatic
immunophenotypes, supporting the recently proposed term of primitive endodermal
tumours.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24444105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diagn Pathol. 2014 Jan 20;9:11. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-9-11.

Case report: Intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas with unique
clear cell phenotype.

Ahls MG, Niedergethmann M, Dinter D, Sauer C, Lüttges J, Post S, Marx A, Gaiser
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Mannheim,
Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. timo.gaiser@umm.de.

Intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasms of the pancreas are very rare tumors
characterized by intraductal tubulopapillary growth, ductal differentiation,
scant intracellular mucin production and cellular dysplasia. Here, we report the 
first case of an intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas with clear 
cell morphology. The tumor was detected during the diagnostic work-up of acute
pancreatitis in a 43- year old female. Histological examination revealed a tumor 
with the typical architecture of an intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm of the
pancreas with tumor cells showing abundant clear cytoplasm and Di-PAS negativity.
Immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for Pan-CK, CK7, CK8/18, MUC1, MUC6,
carbonic anhydrase IX, CD10, EMA, ß-catenin and e-cadherin. Sanger sequencing did
not detect mutations for ß-catenin, BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA and GNAS. Altogether,
histology, immunohistochemical expression profile (MUC1+, MUC6+, MUC2-, MUC5AC-, 
thrypsin-, chymotrypsin-, CDX2-) and sequencing results led to the diagnosis of
intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm. However, the neoplasm consisted of cells
showing abundant clear cytoplasm, a morphological pattern not being described so 
far in the current classification of pancreatic intraductal neoplasms. Potential 
differential diagnosis and the molecular basis of clear cell morphology are
discussed. In conclusion, we consider this tumor as intraductal tubulopapillary
neoplasm of the pancreas with unique clear cell phenotype. After surgery and
without adjuvant therapy, the patient's clinical course has been uneventful for
over two years now.VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be
found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1051828790117127.

PMCID: PMC3937101
PMID: 24443801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):557-65. doi: 10.4161/epi.27696. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Chromatin remodeling mediated by the FOXA1/A2 transcription factors activates
CFTR expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

Kerschner JL(1), Gosalia N(1), Leir SH(1), Harris A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program; Lurie Children's Research Center; Chicago,
IL USA; Department of Pediatrics; Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine; Chicago, IL USA.

The forkhead box A transcription factors, FOXA1 and FOXA2, function as pioneer
factors to open condensed chromatin and facilitate binding of other proteins. We 
showed previously that these factors are key components of a transcriptional
network that drives enhancer function at the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) locus in intestinal epithelial cells. The CFTR
promoter apparently lacks tissue-specific regulatory elements and expression of
the gene is controlled by multiple cis-acting elements, which coordinate gene
expression in different cell types. Here we show that concurrent depletion of
FOXA1 and FOXA2 represses CFTR expression and alters the three-dimensional
architecture of the active locus by diminishing interactions between the promoter
and intronic cis-acting elements. Reduction of FOXA1/A2 also modifies the
enrichment profile of the active enhancer marks H3K27ac and H3K4me2 across the
CFTR locus and alters chromatin accessibility at individual cis-elements.
Moreover, loss of FOXA1/A2 suppresses the recruitment of other members of the
transcriptional network including HNF1 and CDX2, to multiple cis-elements. These 
data reveal a complex molecular mechanism underlying the role of FOXA1/A2 in
achieving high levels of CFTR expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4121366
PMID: 24440874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 Aug;138(8):1015-26. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0452-OA.
Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Cadherin-17 and SATB2 are sensitive and specific immunomarkers for medullary
carcinoma of the large intestine.

Lin F(1), Shi J, Zhu S, Chen Z, Li A, Chen T, Wang HL, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Laboratory Medicine, Geisinger Medical Center,
Danville, Pennsylvania (Drs. Lin, Shi, Zhu, Z. Chen, and Liu); the Division of In
Vitro Diagnostics, Epitomics, Inc, an Abcam Company, Burlingame, California (Drs 
Li and T. Chen); and the Department of Pathology, University of California, Los
Angeles (Dr Wang).

CONTEXT: Distinction of medullary carcinoma of the large intestine from other
cytokeratin (CK) 7<U+207B>/CK20<U+207B> carcinomas can be challenging when working on a tumor
of unknown primary because the majority of medullary carcinomas are negative for 
CK7, CK20, and CDX2.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of cadherin-17 and SATB-2 and other
markers in medullary carcinomas of the large intestine and cadherin-17 and SATB2 
in a large number of carcinomas and normal tissues from various organs to further
test their diagnostic specificity.
DESIGN: This study evaluated cadherin-17 and SATB2 expression in 18 medullary
carcinoma cases and 1941 tumors and 358 normal tissues from various organs. Other
immunomarkers, including MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6, CDX2, CK7, CK20, TFF3, MUC4,
calretinin, p504S, villin, and synaptophysin, were also tested on the 18
medullary carcinoma cases.
RESULTS: The results demonstrated (1) loss of MLH1 and PMS2 in more than 80% of
medullary carcinomas; (2) expression of cadherin-17 and SATB2 in 89% of medullary
carcinomas; (3) focal expression of TFF3, MUC4, calretinin, CDX2, CK20, and
synaptophysin in 72%, 72%, 67%, 67%, 28%, and 17% of 18 medullary carcinoma
cases, respectively; and (4) expression of SATB2 and cadherin-17 in 97% and 98%
of the colorectal adenocarcinomas, respectively, whereas their expression was
seen in 3.6% and 3.3% of nongastrointestinal tumors, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that SATB2 and cadherin-17 were highly sensitive and
specific markers for colorectal carcinomas and propose including MLH1,
cadherin-17, and SATB2 in a routine immunostaining panel when working on a tumor 
of unknown primary, especially in an elderly patient with a CK7<U+207B>/CK20<U+207B> carcinoma.

PMID: 24437456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. BMC Gastroenterol. 2014 Jan 14;14:14. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-14-14.

Duodenal mucosal damage is associated with proliferative activity of Brunner's
gland hamartoma: a case report.

Akaki M(1), Taniguchi S, Hatakeyama K, Kushima R, Kataoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, University of Miyazaki Hospital, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake,
Miyazaki, Miyazaki, 889-1692, Japan. mayumi_akaki@med.miyazaki-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Brunner's gland hamartoma is a rare tumor, predominantly found in the
fifth to sixth decades of life. Generally, it is a single pedunculated polyp,
rarely larger than 5 cm. Asymptomatic cases are found incidentally, but cases
with a large polyp tend to have gastrointestinal bleeding and/or obstructive
symptoms. Polyp size increases in a time-dependent manner, however, the growth
mechanism is unknown. We report a Japanese male case in his mid-twenties with an 
over 6 cm sized polyp.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 26-year-old man presented black stools and anemia.
Endoscopic examination revealed a large pedunculated polyp at gastroduodenal
junction. The polyp, subsequently resected by distal gastrectomy, was lobulated
with random surface erosions and sized 6.4 × 3 cm. Histological examination
revealed that the polyp arose from duodenal mucosa and was composed of
hyperplastic Brunner's glands in lobules separated by fibromuscular septa,
associated with lymphocytic infiltrate and lymphoid follicles. No evidence of
malignancy was found. Thus, the lesion was diagnosed as Brunner's gland
hamartoma. Further immunohistochemical studies indicated that gastric foveolar
metaplasia is associated with surface epithelium covering upper two thirds of the
polyp, showing immunohistochemical positivity for mucin 5 AC (MUC5AC). Below the 
metaplastic surface epithelium, Brunner's glands had high proliferative activity 
(MIB-1 labeling index: 7.9%). The similar staining pattern was observed at
surface erosive sites (MIB-1 labeling index in Brunner's glands: 9%). On the
other hand, surface epithelium in the lower side of the polyp still preserved
intestinal nature, containing CDX2-positive nuclei and MUC2-positive goblet
cells. Brunner's glands below the surface epithelium with intestinal
characteristics showed low proliferative activity (MIB-1 labeling index: 0.77%).
CONCLUSION: Proliferative activity of Brunner's glands was high at the sites with
surface erosion and also below the epithelium showing gastric foveolar
metaplasia. As gastric foveolar metaplasia occurs along with a mucosal repair
process in the duodenum, mucosal damages underlay the hamartomatous proliferation
of Brunner's glands and eventually resulted in a formation of large polypoid mass
in this case.

PMCID: PMC3898372
PMID: 24422755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Biol Rep. 2014;41(4):1937-43. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3040-x. Epub 2014 Jan
12.

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients and their skeletal status: possible role
of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism.

Kostik MM(1), Smirnov AM, Demin GS, Scheplyagina LA, Larionova VI.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Pediatric Department, Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical
University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, kost-mikhail@yandex.ru.

We evaluated bone mineralization and metabolism changes related to vitamin D
receptor (VDR) polymorphic genotypes in children with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis. One hundred and ninety eight children (82 boys and 116 girls) were
included in our study. Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by lumbar spine
DXA. Osteocalcin, CTX, parathyroid hormone, total and ionized calcium, inorganic 
phosphate, total alkaline phosphatase activity was utilized for assessment of
bone metabolism. Molecular testing: TaqI (rs731236) and Cdx2 (rs11568820)
polymorphisms of VDR were detected by RFLP. No differences in TaqI and Cdx2
haplotypes, genotypes and alleles distribution related with normal and low BMD
(Zscore <-2SD) were found. Children with low linear growth (<10th percentile) had
more allele T-contained genotypes of TagI VDR (p = 0.037), compare with medium or
high linear growth children. Children with high linear growth (>90th percentile) 
had the highest frequency of allele A-contained genotypes (GA+AA) of Cdx2 VDR (p 
= 0.009). Girls with TT TaqI VDR, who never been treated by glucocorticoides had 
lower BMD-Zscore than C allele carriers (TT = -0.94SD [IQR: -2.1;-0.5], TC+CC =
-0.62SD [IQR: -1.26;0.39], p = 0.03). Girls with Tanner I with TT had higher
total and ionized Ca level than carriers of C allele (Ca: TT = 2.43 ± 0.15
mmol/l, TC+CC = 2.28 ± 0.2 mmol/l, p = 0.024; Ca(2+): TT = 1.15 ± 0.08 mmol/l,
TC+CC = 1.06 ± 0.13 mmol/l, p = 0.026). Presence of TT genotype negatively
correlated with BMD-Zscore (r = -0.28, p = 0.04), and positively with frequency
of LBMD (r = 0.3, p = 0.037). Boy with GG Cdx2 genotype had lower total Ca (GG = 
2.3 ± 0.17 mmol/l, GA+AA = 2.43 ± 0.17 mmol/l, p = 0.004) compare with carriers
of A allele. Pubertal boys (Tanner IV-V) with GG had higher CTX (GG = 1.75 ± 0.11
ng/ml, GA+AA = 1.06 ± 0.07 ng/ml, p = 0.04. TT genotype of TaqI and GG genotype
of Cdx2 VDR is a negative factor impact bone mineralization metabolism and linear
growth.

PMID: 24415299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Peptides. 2014 Feb;52:149-56. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2013.12.017. Epub 2014 Jan 
6.

Characterization and dietary regulation of oligopeptide transporter (PepT1) in
different ploidy fishes.

Liu Z(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu S(2), Zhao Q(3), Feng J(3), Lu S(3), Xiong G(3), Xie
D(3), Zhang J(3), Liu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of State
Education Ministry of China, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University,
Changsha 410081, China; Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Science,
Changsha University, Changsha 410003, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Protein
Chemistry and Developmental Biology of State Education Ministry of China, College
of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China. Electronic
address: lsj@hunnu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Biotechnology and Environmental
Science, Changsha University, Changsha 410003, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of State Education Ministry of China,
College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China.

The oligopeptide transporter (PepT1) is located on the brush-border membrane of
the intestinal epithelium which has been regarded as a mediator of protein
absorption. Here, we cloned and characterized PepT1 genes from diploid (red
crucian carp), triploid and tetraploid fish. Then, the PepT1 expression pattern
in different tissues and embryogenesis were assayed. Meanwhile, using real-time
PCR and western blotting, we showed the expression profiles of diets with
different protein levels, protein sources and additives (sodium butyrate) in
triploids. The cDNAs of the three different ploidy fishes have a high sequence
similarity of PepT1 among vertebrates. PepT1 mRNA expression was also
developmentally regulated and showed the strongest expression around the 2-cell
and 4-cell stage in all three kinds of fishes. The maternal transcripts were
first detected in eggs and dropped from blastula stage to muscle contraction
stage. Tissue expression studies showed higher expression of PepT1 genes in the
intestines of fishes compared with other tissues. In adults, triploids showed
significantly higher expression levels of PepT1 in the intestines of the three
kinds of ploidy fishes during breeding season and non-breeding season. In
addition, high or low protein level diets both promote PepT1 expression in the
intestine. We also confirmed that fish meal showed a significant increase in
PepT1 expression than soybean meal in triploid intestines. Furthermore, sodium
butyrate additives induce PepT1 expression that may be mediated by CDX2 and CREB.
This research provides a new insight into protein absorption and its regulation
in triploid fish.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24406900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 27;8(11):e80427. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080427.
eCollection 2013.

Transcriptional regulation of two conceptus interferon tau genes expressed in
Japanese black cattle during peri-implantation period.

Sakurai T(1), Nakagawa S(2), Kim MS(1), Bai H(1), Bai R(1), Li J(3), Min KS(4),
Ideta A(5), Aoyagi Y(5), Imakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Life 
Science, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Animal Resource
Center, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Animal Biotechnology, Hankyong National University,
Kyonggi-do, Korea. (5)Zen-Noh ET Center, Hokkaido, Japan.

Interferon tau (IFNT), produced by the mononuclear trophectoderm, signals the
process of maternal recognition of pregnancy in ruminants. However, its
expression in vivo and its transcriptional regulation are not yet well
characterized. Objectives of this study were to determine conceptus IFNT gene
isoforms expressed in the bovine uterus and to identify differences in promoter
sequences of IFNT genes that differ in their expression. RNA-seq data analysis of
bovine conceptuses on days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0 <U+200A>=<U+200A> day of estrus) detected the 
expression of two IFNT transcripts, IFNT1 and IFNTc1, which were indeed
classified into the IFNT gene clade. RNA-seq and quantitative RT-PCR analyses
also revealed that the expression levels of both IFNT mRNAs were highest on day
17, and then decreased on days 20 and 22. Bovine ear-derived fibroblast (EF)
cells, a model system commonly used for bovine IFNT gene transcription study in
this laboratory, were cotransfected with luciferase reporter constructs carrying 
upstream (positions -637 to +51) regions of IFNT1 or IFNTc1 gene and various
transcription factor expression plasmids including CDX2, AP-1 (Jun) and ETS2.
CDX2, either alone or with the other transcription factors, markedly increased
luciferase activity. The upstream regions of IFNT1 and IFNTc1 loci were then
serially deleted or point-mutated at potential CDX-, AP-1-, and ETS-binding
sites. Compared to the wild-type constructs, deletion or mutation at CDX2 or ETS2
binding sites similarly reduced the luciferase activities of IFNT1- or
IFNTc1-promoter constructs. However, with the AP-1 site mutated construct, IFNT1-
and IFNTc1-reporters behaved differently. These results suggest that two forms of
bovine conceptus IFNT genes are expressed in utero and their transcriptional
regulations differ.

PMCID: PMC3857836
PMID: 24348910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Feb;132(2):328-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.12.011. Epub
2013 Dec 14.

Prior appendectomy does not protect against subsequent development of malignant
or borderline mucinous ovarian neoplasms.

Elias KM(1), Labidi-Galy SI(2), Vitonis AF(3), Hornick JL(4), Doyle LA(4), Hirsch
MS(5), Cramer DW(6), Drapkin R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA;
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Division of Gynecologic Oncology,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Obstetrics and Gynecology Epidemiology Center, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA. (4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Pathology, Boston, MA, USA;
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology,
Boston, MA, USA. (6)Obstetrics and Gynecology Epidemiology Center, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Department of Pathology, Boston, MA, USA; Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
ronny_drapkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Due to concern that mucinous malignant or borderline ovarian
neoplasms (MON) may represent metastatic deposits from appendiceal primaries,
gynecologic oncologists routinely perform appendectomy in these cases. However, a
multidisciplinary critique of this practice is lacking.
METHODS: The New England Case-Control study database was utilized to compare the 
effect of prior appendectomy against known risk factors for MON. Pathology and
operative reports of local cases of MON were reviewed to estimate the frequency
of microscopic mucinous lesions in the appendix. Protein expression patterns
among mucinous ovarian, colorectal, and appendiceal cancers were compared by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: From the New England Case-Control study, 287 cases of MON were compared 
against 2339 age-matched controls. Prior appendectomy did not reduce the risk of 
MON (OR 1.28, 95% CI 0.83-1.92, p = 0.23), while prior tubal ligation, parity,
and breastfeeding were each protective against MON. Active smoking (OR 2.04, 95% 
CI 1.48-2.80, p < 0.001) was associated with an increased risk of MON. Among 196 
mucinous adnexal tumors, appendectomy did not reclassify any MON as appendiceal
in origin. By immunohistochemistry, mucinous ovarian carcinomas tended to be
CK7+/CK20-/MUC2-/CDX2-, whereas mucinous colorectal and appendiceal
adenocarcinomas were typically CK7-/CK20+/MUC2+/CDX2+, although with some overlap
in immunophenotype. Additionally, PAX8 was positive in a subset of MOC and
negative in all appendiceal carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: Prior appendectomy is not protective against development of malignant
or borderline MON. Routine appendectomy during surgery for MON seldom reveals an 
unsuspected GI primary in early stage tumors but may aid in final diagnosis in
advanced stage cases.
FUNDING: National Cancer Institute grants P50-CA105009 and R21 CA-156021; The
Honorable Tina Brozman 'Tina's Wish' Foundation; the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G.
Adelson Medical Research Foundation (AMRF); Dana-Farber Cancer Institute - Susan 
Smith Center for Women's Cancers; Robert and Deborah First Fund; The Gamel Family
Fund; Mary Kay Foundation; Sandy Rollman Ovarian Cancer Foundation; Arthur
Sachs/Fulbright/Harvard; La Fondation Philippe; La Fondation de France.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3929430
PMID: 24342438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 Mar;9(1):114-8. doi: 10.1007/s12105-013-0515-3. Epub 2013 
Dec 13.

Adenosquamous carcinoma of hypopharynx with intestinal-phenotype.

Magalhaes MA(1), Irish JC, Weinreb I, Perez-Ordonez B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto General Hospital, 
200 Elizabeth Street, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4, Canada.

Adenosquamous carcinomas of the head and neck (ADSCs) are rare locally aggressive
malignancies characterized by the presence of two distinctive components, a
squamous cell carcinoma and an adenocarcinoma. The immunophenotype of the
glandular component of ADSCs has only been rarely studied but has been reported
as being positive for keratin 7 (CK7) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and
negative for keratin 20 (CK20). Herein, we report a case of an ADSCs of the
hypopharynx composed of a superficial squamous cell carcinoma and an
adenocarcinoma with an intestinal phenotype. The patient was a 62 year-old male
with a T2 N0 M0 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of uvula and palate and a T1 N0 M0 
of right hypopharynx. The ADSCs of the hypopharynx was composed of a minimally
invasive SCC and an adenocarcinoma with tubulo-glandular and cribriform
architecture. The neoplastic glands were positive for CK7, CK20, CDX2, CEA and
Villin. The patient underwent radiotherapy to both tumors and remains well with
no evidence of recurrent disease 19 months after treatment. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of an ADSCs of the head and neck with an
intestinal phenotype in its glandular component.

PMCID: PMC4382486
PMID: 24338588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Hum Pathol. 2014 Feb;45(2):359-67. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.09.014. Epub 2013 
Oct 3.

Crohn enteritis-associated small bowel adenocarcinomas exhibit gastric
differentiation.

Whitcomb E(1), Liu X(2), Xiao SY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Hospitals, Chicago, IL 60637.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Hospitals, Chicago, IL 60637.
Electronic address: syxiao@uchicago.edu.

Primary small bowel adenocarcinoma is rare. Although generally similar to colonic
adenocarcinoma, some small bowel adenocarcinomas exhibit unique morphologic
features, particularly those arising in association with Crohn disease. In this
study, 15 sporadic small bowel adenocarcinomas and 11 Crohn enteritis-associated 
small bowel adenocarcinomas were examined for histology and immunohistochemical
profile including cytokeratins (CK) 7 and 20, intestinal markers CDX2 and MUC2,
and gastric epithelial markers MUC5AC and MUC6. We found that Crohn
enteritis-associated small bowel adenocarcinomas frequently resemble gastric
tubular adenocarcinoma histologically. In addition, when compared to sporadic
small bowel adenocarcinoma, the former expressed MUC5AC and MUC6 with much higher
frequency (82% vs. 7% and 73% vs. 0%, respectively). Ten of 11 Crohn
enteritis-associated small bowel adenocarcinomas (91%) were positive for at least
one gastric-type marker (MUC5AC or MUC6). Expression of CK7 was also more
frequent in Crohn enteritis-associated small bowel adenocarcinoma (73% versus
27%) while expression of CK20 was less frequent (64% vs. 100%). There was no
difference between sporadic and Crohn enteritis-associated small bowel
adenocarcinoma in expression of CDX2 (100% vs. 91%) and MUC2 (93% vs. 73%). These
observations suggest that there is a difference in the morphologic and
immunohistochemical characteristics of sporadic versus Crohn enteritis-associated
small bowel adenocarcinoma, particularly in their expression of gastric-type
mucin. The findings also suggest that gastric differentiation in Crohn
enteritis-associated small bowel adenocarcinoma is related to gastric metaplasia,
a common phenomenon in Crohn disease.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24331840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Pancreas. 2014 Jan;43(1):145-6. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31829f9d3d.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 associated with a new mutation in the menin
gene and a midgut neuroendocrine tumor.

Agarwal R(1), Szalkiewicz ER, Warner RR, Roayaie S, Hechtman JF, Zhu H, Kim MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Carcinoid and Neuroendocrine Tumors in the Department of
Gastroenterology Mount Sinai School of Medicine New York, NY Mount Sinai Liver
Cancer Program Mount Sinai School of Medicine New York, NY Department of
Pathology Mount Sinai School of Medicine New York, NY Center for Carcinoid and
Neuroendocrine Tumors in the Department of Gastroenterology Mount Sinai School of
Medicine New York, NY Michelle.kim@mssm.edu.

PMID: 24326372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Aug 22;1(3):209-17. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.07.003.
eCollection 2013.

Robust self-renewal of rat embryonic stem cells requires fine-tuning of glycogen 
synthase kinase-3 inhibition.

Chen Y(1), Blair K, Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Germline-competent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have been derived from mice and
rats using culture conditions that include an inhibitor of glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK3). However, rat ESCs remain susceptible to sporadic
differentiation. Here, we show that unsolicited differentiation is attributable
to overinhibition of GSK3. The self-renewal effect of inhibiting GSK3 is mediated
via ß-catenin, which abrogates the repressive action of TCF3 on core pluripotency
genes. In rat ESCs, however, GSK3 inhibition also leads to activation of
differentiation-associated genes, notably lineage specification factors Cdx2 and 
T. Lowered GSK3 inhibition reduces differentiation and enhances clonogenicity and
self-renewal. The differential sensitivity of rat ESCs to GSK3 inhibition is
linked to elevated expression of the canonical Wnt pathway effector LEF1. These
findings reveal that optimal GSK3 inhibition for ESC propagation is influenced by
the balance of TCF/LEF factors and can vary between species.

PMCID: PMC3849254
PMID: 24319657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Oncogene. 2014 Dec 4;33(49):5637-48. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.517. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

An integrative analysis reveals functional targets of GATA6 transcriptional
regulation in gastric cancer.

Sulahian R(1), Casey F(2), Shen J(2), Qian ZR(3), Shin H(4), Ogino S(3), Weir
BA(5), Vazquez F(5), Liu XS(4), Hahn WC(6), Bass AJ(6), Chan V(2), Shivdasani
RA(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, CA, USA. (3)1]
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Brigham & Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (6)1] Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2] Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [3] Department of Medicine,
Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Lineage-restricted transcription factors (TFs) are frequently mutated or
overexpressed in cancer and contribute toward malignant behaviors; however, the
molecular bases of their oncogenic properties are largely unknown. As TF
activities are difficult to inhibit directly with small molecules, the genes and 
pathways they regulate might represent more tractable targets for drug therapy.
We studied GATA6, a TF gene that is frequently amplified or overexpressed in
gastric, esophageal and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. GATA6-overexpressing gastric 
cancer cell lines cluster in gene expression space, separate from
non-overexpressing lines. This expression clustering signifies a shared
pathogenic group of genes that GATA6 may regulate through direct cis-element
binding. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq) to
identify GATA6-bound genes and considered TF occupancy in relation to genes that 
respond to GATA6 depletion in cell lines and track with GATA6 mRNA (synexpression
groups) in primary gastric cancers. Among other cellular functions,
GATA6-occupied genes control apoptosis and govern the M-phase of the cell cycle. 
Depletion of GATA6 reduced the levels of the latter transcripts and arrested
cells in G2 and M phases of the cell cycle. Synexpression in human tumor samples 
identified likely direct transcriptional targets substantially better than
consideration only of transcripts that respond to GATA6 loss in cultured cells.
Candidate target genes responded to the loss of GATA6 or its homolog GATA4 and
even more to the depletion of both proteins. Many GATA6-dependent genes lacked
nearby binding sites but several strongly dependent, synexpressed and GATA6-bound
genes encode TFs such as MYC, HES1, RARB and CDX2. Thus, many downstream effects 
occur indirectly through other TFs and GATA6 activity in gastric cancer is
partially redundant with GATA4. This integrative analysis of locus occupancy,
gene dependency and synexpression provides a functional signature of
GATA6-overexpressing gastric cancers, revealing both limits and new therapeutic
directions for a challenging and frequently fatal disease.

PMCID: PMC4050037
PMID: 24317510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Jan;106(1):djt356. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt356. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

Wnt signaling pathway in non-small cell lung cancer.

Stewart DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Affiliation of author: Division of Medical Oncology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Aug;106(8). pii: dju188. doi: 10.1093/jnci/dju188.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Aug;106(8). pii: dju190. doi: 10.1093/jnci/dju190.

Wnt/ß-catenin alterations are prominent in human malignancies. In non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC), ß-catenin and APC mutations are uncommon, but Wnt signaling 
is important in NSCLC cell lines, and Wnt inhibition reduces proliferation.
Overexpression of Wnt-1, -2, -3, and -5a and of Wnt-pathway components
Frizzled-8, Dishevelled, Porcupine, and TCF-4 is common in resected NSCLC and is 
associated with poor prognosis. Conversely, noncanonical Wnt-7a suppresses NSCLC 
development and is often downregulated. Although ß-catenin is often expressed in 
NSCLCs, it was paradoxically associated with improved prognosis in some series,
possibly because of E-cadherin interactions. Downregulation of Wnt inhibitors
(eg, by hypermethylation) is common in NSCLC tumor cell lines and resected
samples; may be associated with high stage, dedifferentiation, and poor
prognosis; and has been reported for AXIN, sFRPs 1-5, WIF-1, Dkk-1, Dkk-3, HDPR1,
RUNX3, APC, CDX2, DACT2, TMEM88, Chibby, NKD1, EMX2, ING4, and miR-487b. AXIN is 
also destabilized by tankyrases, and GSK3ß may be inactivated through
phosphorylation by EGFR. Preclinically, restoration of Wnt inhibitor function is 
associated with reduced Wnt signaling, decreased cell proliferation, and
increased apoptosis. Wnt signaling may also augment resistance to cisplatin,
docetaxel, and radiotherapy, and Wnt inhibitors may restore sensitivity. Overall,
available data indicate that Wnt signaling substantially impacts NSCLC
tumorigenesis, prognosis, and resistance to therapy, with loss of Wnt signaling
inhibitors by promoter hypermethylation or other mechanisms appearing to be
particularly important. Wnt pathway antagonists warrant exploration clinically in
NSCLC. Agents blocking selected specific ß-catenin interactions and approaches to
increase expression of downregulated Wnt inhibitors may be of particular
interest.

PMID: 24309006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell Immunol. 2013 Nov-Dec;286(1-2):22-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2013.10.008.
Epub 2013 Nov 9.

H. pylori-encoded CagA disrupts tight junctions and induces invasiveness of AGS
gastric carcinoma cells via Cdx2-dependent targeting of Claudin-2.

Song X(1), Chen HX(1), Wang XY(2), Deng XY(3), Xi YX(1), He Q(1), Peng TL(1),
Chen J(1), Chen W(1), Wong BC(4), Chen MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, PR China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Third
Affiliated Hospital, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South of University,
Changsha, PR China. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary
Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PR China. (5)Department of
Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, PR China. Electronic address: chenminhu@vip.163.com.

Helicobacter pylori encoded CagA is presently the only known virulence factor
that is injected into gastric epithelial cells where it destroys apical
junctional complexes and induces dedifferentiation of gastric epithelial cells,
leading to H. pylori-related gastric carcinogensis. However, little is known
about the molecular mechanisms by which CagA mediates these changes.
Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2) is an intestine-specific transcription factor
highly expressed in multistage tissues of dysplasia and cancer. One specific
target of Cdx2, Claudin-2, is involved in the regulation of tight junction (TJ)
permeability. In this study, our findings showed that the activity of Cdx2
binding to Cdx binding sites of CdxA (GTTTATG) and CdxB (TTTTAGG) of probes
corresponding to claudin-2 flanking region increased in AGS cells, infected with 
CagA positive wild-type strain of H. pylori, compared to CagA negative isogenic
mutant-type strain. Moreover, Cdx2 upregulated claudin-2 expression at
transcriptional level and translational level. In the meantime, we found that TJs
of AGS cells, infected with CagA positive wild-type strain of H. pylori, compared
to CagA negative isogenic mutant-type strain, were more severely destroyed,
leading to wider cell gap, interference of contact, scattering and highly
elevated migration of cells. Herein, this study is firstly demonstrated that H.
pylori-encoded CagA disrupts TJs and induces invasiveness of AGS gastric
carcinoma cells via Cdx2-dependent targeting of Claudin-2. This provides a new
mechanism whereby CagA induced dedifferentiation of AGS cells, leading to
malignant behavior of biology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24287273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Transl Med. 2013 Nov 28;11:297. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-297.

The chromatin remodelling component SMARCB1/INI1 influences the metastatic
behavior of colorectal cancer through a gene signature mapping to chromosome 22.

Pancione M(1), Remo A, Zanella C, Sabatino L, Di Blasi A, Laudanna C, Astati L,
Rocco M, Bifano D, Piacentini P, Pavan L, Purgato A, Greco F, Talamini A, Bonetti
A, Ceccarelli M, Vendraminelli R, Manfrin E, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences and Technologies, University of Sannio, Via Port'Arsa, 
11 82100 Benevento, Italy. massimo.pancione@unisannio.it.

BACKGROUND: INI1 (Integrase interactor 1), also known as SMARCB1, is the most
studied subunit of chromatin remodelling complexes. Its role in colorectal
tumorigenesis is not known.
METHODS: We examined SMARCB1/INI1 protein expression in 134 cases of colorectal
cancer (CRC) and 60 matched normal mucosa by using tissue microarrays and western
blot and categorized the results according to mismatch repair status (MMR), CpG
island methylator phenotype, biomarkers of tumor differentiation CDX2, CK20,
vimentin and p53. We validated results in two independent data sets and in
cultured CRC cell lines.
RESULTS: Herein, we show that negative SMARCB1/INI1 expression (11% of CRCs)
associates with loss of CDX2, poor differentiation, liver metastasis and shorter 
patients' survival regardless of the MMR status or tumor stage. Unexpectedly,
even CRCs displaying diffuse nuclear INI1 staining (33%) show an adverse
prognosis and vimentin over-expression, in comparison with the low expressing
group (56%). The negative association of SMARCB1/INI1-lack of expression with a
metastatic behavior is enhanced by the TP53 status. By interrogating global gene 
expression from two independent cohorts of 226 and 146 patients, we confirm the
prognostic results and identify a gene signature characterized by SMARCB1/INI1
deregulation. Notably, the top genes of the signature (BCR, COMT, MIF) map on the
long arm of chromosome 22 and are closely associated with SMARCB1/INI1.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that SMARCB1/INI1-dysregulation and genetic
hot-spots on the long arm of chromosome 22 might play an important role in the
CRC metastatic behavior and be clinically relevant as novel biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC4220786
PMID: 24286138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):148-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.101550. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

ß-catenin regulates Pax3 and Cdx2 for caudal neural tube closure and elongation.

Zhao T(1), Gan Q, Stokes A, Lassiter RN, Wang Y, Chan J, Han JX, Pleasure DE,
Epstein JA, Zhou CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine at Shriners Hospitals for
Children-Northern California, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling plays a primary role in
the convergent extension that drives neural tube closure and body axis
elongation. PCP signaling gene mutations cause severe neural tube defects (NTDs).
However, the role of canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in neural tube closure and
NTDs remains poorly understood. This study shows that conditional gene targeting 
of ß-catenin in the dorsal neural folds of mouse embryos represses the expression
of the homeobox-containing genes Pax3 and Cdx2 at the dorsal posterior neuropore 
(PNP), and subsequently diminishes the expression of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling 
target genes T, Tbx6 and Fgf8 at the tail bud, leading to spina bifida aperta,
caudal axis bending and tail truncation. We demonstrate that Pax3 and Cdx2 are
novel downstream targets of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Transgenic activation of
Pax3 cDNA can rescue the closure defect in the ß-catenin mutants, suggesting that
Pax3 is a key downstream effector of ß-catenin signaling in the PNP closure
process. Cdx2 is known to be crucial in posterior axis elongation and in neural
tube closure. We found that Cdx2 expression is also repressed in the dorsal PNPs 
of Pax3-null embryos. However, the ectopically activated Pax3 in the ß-catenin
mutants cannot restore Cdx2 mRNA in the dorsal PNP, suggesting that the presence 
of both ß-catenin and Pax3 is required for regional Cdx2 expression. Thus,
ß-catenin signaling is required for caudal neural tube closure and elongation,
acting through the transcriptional regulation of key target genes in the PNP.

PMCID: PMC3865756
PMID: 24284205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Epigenomics. 2013 Dec;5(6):729-41. doi: 10.2217/epi.13.57.

Epigenetic effects of green tea polyphenols in cancer.

Henning SM(1), Wang P, Carpenter CL, Heber D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Nutrition, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California Los Angeles, 900 Veteran Avenue, Warren Hall 14-166, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA.

Epigenetics describes heritable alterations of gene expression and chromatin
organization without changes in DNA sequence. Both hypermethylation and
hypomethylation of DNA can affect gene expression and the multistep process of
carcinogenesis. Epigenetic changes are reversible and may be targeted by dietary 
interventions. Bioactive compounds from green tea (GT) such as
(-)-epigallocatechin gallate have been shown to alter DNA methyltransferase
activity in studies of esophageal, oral, skin, Tregs, lung, breast and prostate
cancer cells, which may contribute to the chemopreventive effect of GT. Three out
of four mouse model studies have confirmed the inhibitory effect of
(-)-epigallocatechin gallate on DNA methylation. A human study demonstrated that 
decreased methylation of CDX2 and BMP-2 in gastric carcinoma was associated with 
higher GT consumption. It is the goal of this review to summarize our current
knowledge of the potential of GT to alter epigenetic processes, which may be
useful in chemoprevention.

PMCID: PMC3970408
PMID: 24283885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Feb;9(2):535-40. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1828. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Analysis of transcription factor Stk40 expression and function during mouse
pre-implantation embryonic development.

Zhang J(1), Zhang J(2), Zhao C(2), Shen R(2), Guo X(2), Li C(3), Ling X(2), Liu
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular and Medical Biotechnology, College of
Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210046, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Reproduction, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, 
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210004, P.R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of Model Animals for Disease Study 
of Ministry of Education, Model Animal Research Centre, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093, P.R. China.

Determining the molecular mechanisms in the regulation of early embryonic
development is crucial for assisted reproductive technology clinical
applications. Serine/threonine protein kinase 40 (Stk40) is a member of the
serine/threonine kinase family. It is essential in diverse signaling pathways
associated with a wide range of cellular activities, including proliferation,
differentiation, survival and apoptosis. However, its involvement and molecular
mechanisms in pre-implantation embryonic development have not been well-defined. 
In the present study, it was demonstrated that Stk40 was involved in the
development of mouse pre-implantation embryos. Immunofluorescence and confocal
microscopy analyses showed that Stk40 was equally expressed in the nuclei and
cytoplasm during all stages of pre-implantation mouse embryos of imprinting
control region mice. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed a
significantly higher transcription rate of Stk40 mRNA in the two-cell stage. The 
results demonstrated that Stk40 downregulation by microinjection of small
interfering RNA into the mouse zygote markedly decreased the blastulation
compared with that in the control (Stk40i-1 vs. control: 65.2% and 77.0%, P<0.05 
and Stk40i-2 vs. control: 49.8% and 70.1%, respectively, P<0.05). In addition,
silencing of Stk40 significantly increased the transcription rate of
reticulocalbin-2, whereas that of the homeobox protein, Cdx2, was decreased. In
conclusion, the results suggested that Stk40 may be critical in the development
of pre-implantation embryos.

PMID: 24276375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Histopathology. 2014 Mar;64(4):547-56. doi: 10.1111/his.12278. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

BAI3, CDX2 and VIL1: a panel of three antibodies to distinguish small cell from
large cell neuroendocrine lung carcinomas.

Bari MF(1), Brown H, Nicholson AG, Kerr KM, Gosney JR, Wallace WA, Soomro I,
Muller S, Peat D, Moore JD, Ward LA, Freidin MB, Lim E, Vatish M, Snead DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dow International Medical College, Karachi, Pakistan;
Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire NHS
Trust, Coventry, UK; Divisions of Reproduction and Metabolic and Vascular Health,
Warwick Medical School, Coventry, UK.

AIMS: Discriminating small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) from large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) rests on morphological criteria, and
reproducibility has been shown to be poor. We aimed to identify
immunohistochemical markers to assist this diagnosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Gene expression profiling on laser captured frozen tumour
samples from eight SCLC and eight LCNEC tumours identified a total of 888
differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 23 of which were validated by qRT-PCR.
Antibodies to four selected gene products were then evaluated as
immunohistochemical markers on a cohort of 173 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) SCLC/LCNEC tumour samples, including 26 indeterminate tumours without a
consensus diagnosis. Three markers, CDX2, VIL1 and BAI3, gave significantly
different results in the two tumour types (P < 0.0001): CDX2 and VIL1 in
combination (either marker positive) showed sensitivity and specificity of 81%
for LCNEC while BAI3 showed 89% sensitivity and 75% specificity for SCLC. Of the 
26 indeterminate tumours 15 (58%) showed an immunophenotype suggesting either
SCLC or LCNEC, eight (31%) showed staining of both tumour types, and three (11%) 
were negative for all markers.
CONCLUSION: A panel of three markers, BAI3, CDX2 and VIL1, is a useful adjunct in
the diagnosis of these tumour types.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24266897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 3;289(1):251-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.497594. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Cited2, a transcriptional modulator protein, regulates metabolism in murine
embryonic stem cells.

Li Q(1), Hakimi P, Liu X, Yu WM, Ye F, Fujioka H, Raza S, Shankar E, Tang F,
Dunwoodie SL, Danielpour D, Hoppel CL, Ramírez-Bergeron DL, Qu CK, Hanson RW,
Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry.

CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300 interacting transactivator with glutamic acid
(Glu) and aspartic acid (Asp)-tail 2 (Cited2) was recently shown to be essential 
for gluconeogenesis in the adult mouse. The metabolic function of Cited2 in mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs) remains elusive. In the current study, the
metabolism of glucose was investigated in mESCs, which contained a deletion in
the gene for Cited2 (Cited2(<U+0394>/-)). Compared with its parental wild type
counterpart, Cited2(<U+0394>/-) ESCs have enhanced glycolysis, alternations in
mitochondria morphology, reduced glucose oxidation, and decreased ATP content.
Cited2 is recruited to the hexokinase 1 (HK1) gene promoter to regulate
transcription of HK1, which coordinates glucose metabolism in wild type ESCs.
Reduced glucose oxidation and enhanced glycolytic activity in Cited2(<U+0394>/-) ESCs
correlates with defective differentiation during hypoxia, which is reflected in
an increased expression of pluripotency marker (Oct4) and epiblast marker (Fgf5) 
and decreased expression of lineage specification markers (T, Gata-6, and Cdx2). 
Knockdown of hypoxia inducible factor-1a in Cited2(<U+0394>/-) ESCs re-initiates the
expression of differentiation markers T and Gata-6. Taken together, a deletion of
Cited2 in mESCs results in abnormal mitochondrial morphology and impaired glucose
metabolism, which correlates with a defective cell fate decision.

PMCID: PMC3879548
PMID: 24265312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Feb 15;87(4):660-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.11.001. Epub 
2013 Nov 14.

Epigenetic regulation of the tissue-specific expression of human
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A10.

Oda S(1), Fukami T(1), Yokoi T(1), Nakajima M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. (2)Drug Metabolism and
Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University,
Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. Electronic address:
nmiki@p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A10 is not expressed in the liver;
however, UGT1A10 is highly expressed in the intestine, contributing to
presystemic first-pass metabolism. Earlier studies revealed that hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 1a and Sp1, as well as an intestine-specific transcription
factor, caudal type homeobox (Cdx) 2, are involved in the constitutive expression
of UGT1A10. However, why UGT1A10 is not expressed in the liver, where HNF1a and
Sp1 are abundantly expressed, is unknown. In this study, we sought to elucidate
the mechanism, focusing on epigenetic regulation. Bisulfite sequence analysis
revealed that the CpG-rich region (-264 to +117) around the UGT1A10 promoter was 
hypermethylated (89%) in hepatocytes, whereas the UGT1A10 promoter was
hypomethylated (11%) in the epithelium of the small intestine. A luciferase assay
revealed that the methylation of the UGT1A10 promoter by SssI methylase abrogated
transactivity even with overexpressed Cdx2 and HNF1a. The UGT1A10 promoter was
highly methylated (86%) in liver-derived HuH-7 cells, where UGT1A10 is not
expressed. In contrast, the UGT1A10 promoter was hardly methylated (19%) in
colon-derived LS180 cells, where UGT1A10 is expressed. Treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycitidine (5-Aza-dC), an inhibitor of DNA methylation, resulted in
an increase in UGT1A10 expression only in HuH-7 cells. Moreover, overexpression
of HNF1a and Cdx2 further increased UGT1A10 expression only in the presence of
5-Aza-dC. Collectively, we found that DNA hypermethylation would interfere with
the binding of HNF1a and Cdx2, resulting in the defective expression of UGT1A10
in human liver. Thus, epigenetic regulation is one of the mechanisms that
determine the tissue-specific expression of UGT1A10.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Oct 15;6(11):2476-86. eCollection 2013.

Diagnostic and therapeutic implications of a novel immunohistochemical panel
detecting duodenal mucosal invasion by pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Sopha SC(1), Gopal P, Merchant NB, Revetta FL, Gold DV, Washington K, Shi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center Nashville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: We investigated a series of pancreaticoduodenectomy and duodenal
biopsies with a panel of immunohistochemical markers to identify duodenal mucosal
invasion by pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), including markers of poor
prognosis and targets of promising novel immunotherapies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighteen consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens
with duodenal mucosal invasion by PDAC were examined for expression of MUC1,
MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC6, mesothelin, MUC2, CDX2, and DPC4 on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded sections of duodenal-ampullary-pancreatic junctions. Expression
of all but MUC6 was also assessed in duodenal biopsies from 12 patients with
duodenal mucosal invasion by PDAC.
RESULTS: The duodenal mucosa expressed MUC1 (crypts), MUC2 (goblet cells), MUC6
(Brunner glands), CDX2, and DPC4. PDACs in the duodenal mucosa from the resection
(n=16-18) and biopsy (n=12) specimens were marked as follows: MUC1 100% (30/30), 
MUC4 83% (24/29), MUC5AC 83% (25/30), mesothelin 82% (23/28), MUC2 7% (2/30), and
CDX2 36% (10/28). Loss of DPC4 expression was seen in 16 of 29 (55%) cases.
Reactive mucosa adjacent to PDAC expressed MUC4, MUC5AC and mesothelin in 65%
(17/26), 19% (5/27), and 19% (5/26) of cases, respectively. While MUC5AC and
mesothelin had high diagnostic accuracy for detection of PDAC, MUC2, CDX2 and
DPC4 expression demonstrated negative correlation with PDAC, with absent
expression being highly specific for PDAC.
CONCLUSION: Immunohistochemical labeling for PDAC biomarkers may aid the
diagnosis of PDAC in duodenal biopsy, especially in situations where diagnosis of
a pancreatic mass is challenging.

PMCID: PMC3816817
PMID: 24228110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2013;2013:380193. doi: 10.1155/2013/380193. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Significance of glutathione peroxidase 1 and caudal-related homeodomain
transcription factor in human gastric adenocarcinoma.

Han JJ(1), Xie de R, Wang LL, Liu YQ, Wu GF, Sun Q, Chen YX, Wei Y, Huang ZQ, Li 
HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zengcheng People's Hospital, Zengcheng City 511300,
China ; Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Key Laboratory of
Malignant Tumor Gene Regulation and Target Therapy of Guangdong Higher Education 
Institutes, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.

Aim. To investigate the expressions of glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) and
caudal-related homeodomain transcription factor (CDX2) in GAC and their
correlation with clinicopathological features and tumor cell proliferation.
Methods. The expressions of GPX1, CDX2, and Ki67 were immunohistochemically
evaluated in 172 GAC specimens. The association of GPX1 and CDX2 with patient's
clinicopathological features and Ki67 positive rate was analyzed statistically.
Results. In 172 cases of GAC, the expression of GPX1 was weaker than that in
adjacent normal mucosa, and the expression of CDX2 was higher than that in
adjacent normal mucosa. High expression GPX1 strong-expression was associated
with differentiation, Lauren type, WHO type and extensive lymph node metastasis
of GAC. High expression of CDX2 was associated with differentiation, Lauren type,
WHO type, extensive lymph node metastasis, and TNM of GAC. Survival curves showed
that expressions of GPX1 and CDX2 were factors of good outcome (P = .03 and .02, 
resp.). According to multivariate analysis, only lymph node metastasis, TNM
stage, and CDX2 expression were independently associated with survival. In
addition, a strong association of GPX1 expression was noted with Ki67 and CDX2.
Conclusions. The expression of GPX1 and CDX2 may play a role in the
carcinogenesis, differentiation, and progression of GAC, and CDX2 may be an
independent prognostic factor.

PMCID: PMC3818848
PMID: 24228025  [PubMed]


371. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2014 Feb;29(2):217-23. doi: 10.1007/s00384-013-1791-9. Epub
2013 Nov 9.

Colonoscopy as a tool for evaluating colorectal tumor development in a mouse
model.

Adachi T(1), Hinoi T, Sasaki Y, Niitsu H, Saito Y, Miguchi M, Shimomura M, Ohdan 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Frontier Medical Sciences, Programs for
Biomedical Research, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

PURPOSE: A sporadic colon cancer mouse model with conditional mutations in
adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) is biologically relevant for human colorectal
cancer (CRC). This study aimed to determine the utility and limitations of
colonoscopy for evaluating colon tumors in this mouse model.
METHODS: We compared the estimates of location, size, and miss rate of tumors
detected during colonoscopy with those determined by necropsy. Sixty-six CPC-Apc 
mice originating from Apc (F/wt) mice harbor a Cdx2-Cre transgene in which
colorectal tumorigenesis was driven by Apc allelic loss. The sensitivity and
specificity of colonoscopy for detecting tumors in a mouse CRC model were
investigated.
RESULTS: A strong positive correlation was found between tumor location as
measured by colonoscopy and the location determined by necropsy (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). A
total of 120 tumors were graded during colonoscopy (grades 1-5: 0, 8, 20, 27, and
65 lesions, respectively), and a strong positive correlation was found between
the tumor grade determined by colonoscopy and size measured by necropsy (grades
2-5: 2.08, 2.98, 4.02, and 5.09 mm, respectively; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005). Although the miss
rate was 47.1 %, most of the missed tumors (96 %) were in close proximity (within
5 mm) of another tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: A colonoscopic method for the reliable measurement of colorectal
tumors in vivo has been established. The application of this technique to mouse
models of colon carcinogenesis will provide a better understanding of the
dynamics of tumor growth.

PMID: 24212401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Biol Reprod. 2013 Dec 19;89(6):141. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113183. Print
2013 Dec.

Regulation of pluripotency of inner cell mass and growth and differentiation of
trophectoderm of the bovine embryo by colony stimulating factor 2.

Dobbs KB(1), Khan FA, Sakatani M, Moss JI, Ozawa M, Ealy AD, Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, D.H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology 
Research Program, and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):103.

Colony-stimulating factor 2 (CSF2) enhances competence of the bovine embryo to
establish and maintain pregnancy after the embryo is transferred into a
recipient. Mechanisms involved could include regulation of lineage commitment,
growth, or differentiation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE).
Experiments were conducted to evaluate regulation by CSF2 of pluripotency of the 
ICM and differentiation and growth of the TE. Embryos were cultured with 10 ng/ml
recombinant bovine CSF2 or a vehicle control from Days 5 to 7 or 6 to 8
postinsemination. CSF2 increased the number of putative zygotes that developed to
blastocysts when the percent of embryos becoming blastocysts in the control group
was low but decreased blastocyst yield when blastocyst development in controls
was high. ICM isolated from blastocysts by lysing the trophectoderm using
antibody and complement via immunosurgery were more likely to survive passage
when cultured on mitomycin C-treated fetal fibroblasts if derived from
blastocysts treated with CSF2 than if from control blastocysts. There was little 
effect of CSF2 on characteristics of TE outgrowths from blastocysts. The
exception was a decrease in outgrowth size for embryos treated with CSF2 from
Days 5 to 7 and an increase in expression of CDX2 when treatment was from Days 6 
to 8. Expression of the receptor subunit gene CSF2RA increased from the zygote
stage to the 9-16 cell stage before decreasing to the blastocyst stage. In
contrast, CSF2RB was undetectable at all stages. In conclusion, CSF2 improves
competence of the ICM to survive in a pluripotent state and alters TE outgrowths.
Actions of CSF2 occur through a signaling pathway that is likely to be
independent of CSF2RB.

PMID: 24198123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(9):5199-205.

Effects of the hippo signaling pathway in human gastric cancer.

Zhou GX(1), Li XY, Zhang Q, Zhao K, Zhang CP, Xue CH, Yang K, Tian ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University 
Medical College, Qingdao, China E-mail : rose201001@126.com.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The Hippo signaling pathway is a newly discovered and conserved
signaling cascade, which regulates organ size control by governing cell
proliferation and apoptosis. This study aimed to investigate its effects in human
gastric cancer.
METHODS: Tumor tissues (n=60), adjacent non-tumor tissues (n=60) and normal
tissues (n=60) were obtained from the same patients with primary gastric cancer
(GC). In addition, 70 samples of chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG) tissues were
obtained from patients with intestinal metaplasia (IM) by endoscopic biopsy.
Hippo signaling molecules, including Mst1, Lats1, YAP1, TAZ, TEAD1, Oct4 and
CDX2, were determined by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Protein
expression of Mst1, Lats1, YAP1, TEAD1 and CDX2 was assessed by
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Mst1, Lats1 and Oct4 mRNA expression showed an increasing tendency from 
GC tissues to normal gastric tissues, while the mRNA expression of YAP1, TAZ and 
TEAD1 was up-regulated (all P<0.01). Mst1 and Lats1 protein expression presented 
a similar trend with their mRNA expression. In addition, YAP1 and TEAD1 protein
expression in GC was significantly higher than in the other groups (all P<0.01). 
CDX2 mRNA and protein expression in the CAG group were higher than in the other
groups (all P<0.01). In GC, mRNA expression of Mst1, Lats1, Oct4, YAP1, TAZ,
TEAD1 and CDX2 had a close correlation with lymphatic metastasis and tumor TNM
stage (all P<0.01). Furthermore, protein expression of Mst1, Lats1 ,YAP1, TAZ,
TEAD1 and CDX2 had a close correlation between each other (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Hippo signaling pathway is involved in the development,
progression and metastasis of human gastric cancer. Therefore, manipulation of
Hippo signaling molecules may be a potential therapeutic strategy for gastric
cancer.

PMID: 24175801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Int J Cancer. 2014 May 15;134(10):2342-51. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28564. Epub 2013 Nov 
13.

Possible role of Cdx2 in the serrated pathway of colorectal cancer characterized 
by BRAF mutation, high-level CpG Island methylator phenotype and mismatch
repair-deficiency.

Dawson H(1), Galván JA, Helbling M, Muller DE, Karamitopoulou E, Koelzer VH,
Economou M, Hammer C, Lugli A, Zlobec I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland; Translational Research Unit, Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease at the histomorphological, clinical 
and molecular level. Approximately 20% of cases may progress through the
"serrated" pathway characterized by BRAF mutation and high-level CpG Island
Methylator Phenotype (CIMP). A large subgroup are additionally microsatellite
instable (MSI) and demonstrate significant loss of tumor suppressor Cdx2. The aim
of this study is to determine the specificity of Cdx2 protein expression and CpG 
promoter hypermethylation for BRAF(V600E) and high-level CIMP in colorectal
cancer. Cdx2, Mlh1, Msh2, Msh6, and Pms2 were analyzed by immunohistochemistry
using a multi-punch tissue microarray (TMA; n = 220 patients). KRAS and
BRAF(V600E) mutation analysis, CDX2 methylation and CIMP were investigated. Loss 
of Cdx2 was correlated with larger tumor size (P = 0.0154), right-sided location 
(P = 0.0014), higher tumor grade (P < 0.0001), more advanced pT (P = 0.0234) and 
lymphatic invasion (P = 0.0351). Specificity was 100% for mismatch repair
(MMR)-deficiency (P < 0.0001), 92.2% (P < 0.0001) for BRAF(V600E) and 91.8% for
CIMP-high. Combined analysis of BRAF(V600E)/CIMP identified Cdx2 loss as
sensitive (80%) and specific (91.5%) for mutation/high status. These results were
validated on eight well-established colorectal cancer cell lines. CDX2
methylation correlated with BRAF(V600E) (P = 0.0184) and with Cdx2 protein loss
(P = 0.0028). These results seem to indicate that Cdx2 may play a role in the
serrated pathway to colorectal cancer as underlined by strong relationships with 
BRAF(V600E), CIMP-high and MMR-deficiency. Whether this protein can only be used 
as a "surrogate" marker, or is functionally involved in the progression of these 
tumors remains to be elucidated.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24166180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Sep 15;6(10):2121-8. eCollection 2013.

Cytologic changes of ovarian epithelial cancer induced by neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

Wang Y(1), Wang Y, Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Henan Province People's Hospital
Zhengzhou, China ; Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of
Arizona Tucson, AZ, USA ; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of
Medicine, University of Arizona Tucson, AZ, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) followed by cytoreduction has now
become a part of standard care for patients with advanced ovarian cancer.
Cytologic changes of the cancer cells induced by NACT, however, sometimes may
cause confusion in terms of pathologic diagnosis and therefore inappropriate
management. The objective of this study was to characterize the histologic or
cytologic features of the ovarian cancers from those patients who received NACT
in order to improve the diagnostic accuracy and reduce unnecessary clinical
workup.
METHODS: Specimens from 120 patients with advanced ovarian cancer who received
NACT were studied. All 120 cases had either cytologic samples from ascites
(n=108) or fine needle aspiration (n=12) and the diagnosis of consistent with
cancers of ovarian origin was made prior to NACT. There were 70 (58.3%) patients 
received subsequent tumor debulking surgery after NACT. The time frame between
NACT and debulking surgery ranged from 28 to 65 with an average of 45 days. Among
the 70 cases with cytoreductive surgery, 48 cases containing both pre-NACT
cytology/histology and subsequent debulking specimens were suitable for the
study. All 48 post-NACT ovarian cancers were reviewed and the characteristic
pathologic features in gross were summarized. Microscopic evaluation and
immunohistochemical stainings with antibodies against ER, PR, p53, WT1, PAX8,
CK7, CK20, and CDX2 were performed to confirm the primary site and histologic
type of the cancers.
RESULTS: Grossly, tumor size within the ovaries from those debulking specimens
ranged from 2.3 to 6.5 cm in greatest dimension. The cancers were mainly solid
(average of 65%) and cystic areas had more or less hemorrhagic appearance.
Extensive tumor necrosis and some with fibrosis were present. Microscopically,
the non-necrotic cancer cells were arranged in cords, islands and sometimes as
scattered single large cells with large amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm with
vacuoles. The viable cancer cells contained more or less vacuolated cytoplasm in 
almost all post chemotherapy cases. Multinucleated tumor giant cells were noted
in close to half of the cases. The cancer cells commonly had large hyperchromatic
bizarre nuclei with coarse chromatin clumping and sometimes prominent nucleoli.
Due to the unusual cytologic changes after NACT, there was a concern of
non-ovarian origin or the different histologic type of the cancers. Therefore,
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with the antibodies against ER, PR, PAX8, WT1,
CK7, CK20, and CDX2 was performed in all 48 pairs of the cases. The 48 paired
samples showed identical immunophenotype in pre- and post-NACT cancers,
confirming there was no metastatic or new primary cancer involved in the study.
CONCLUSIONS: NACT can apparently induce significant cytologic/histologic changes 
in ovarian cancer. Aware of such NACT induced changes will be useful to make
correct diagnosis for those patients who have received NACT. IHC with appropriate
panels of the antibodies will be helpful to aid the diagnosis, particularly when 
nuclear change is dramatic and the clinical history of ovarian cancer is not
available.

PMCID: PMC3796234
PMID: 24133590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Front Oncol. 2013 Oct 11;3:265. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00265. eCollection 2013.

Loss of Cdx2 Expression in Primary Tumors and Lymph Node Metastases is Specific
for Mismatch Repair-Deficiency in Colorectal Cancer.

Dawson H(1), Koelzer VH, Lukesch AC, Mallaev M, Inderbitzin D, Lugli A, Zlobec I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern ,
Bern , Switzerland ; Translational Research Unit, Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern , Bern , Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 20% of all colorectal cancers are hypothesized to arise
from the "serrated pathway" characterized by mutation in BRAF, high-level CpG
Island Methylator Phenotype, and microsatellite instability/mismatch repair
(MMR)-deficiency. MMR-deficient cancers show frequent losses of Cdx2, a
homeodomain transcription factor. Here, we determine the predictive value of Cdx2
expression for MMR-deficiency and investigate changes in expression between
primary cancers and matched lymph node metastases.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry for Cdx2, Mlh1, Msh2, Msh6, and Pms2 was performed 
on whole tissue sections from 201 patients with primary colorectal cancer and 59 
cases of matched lymph node metastases. Receiver operating characteristic curve
analysis and Area under the Curve (AUC) were investigated; association of Cdx2
with clinicopathological features and patient survival was carried out.
RESULTS: Loss of Cdx2 expression was associated with higher tumor grade
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002), advanced pT (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0166), and perineural invasion (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0228).
Cdx2 loss was an unfavorable prognostic factor in univariate (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0145) and
multivariate [p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0427; HR (95% CI): 0.58 (0.34-0.98)] analysis. The accuracy
(AUC) for discriminating MMR-proficient and - deficient cancers was 87% [OR (95% 
CI): 0.96 (0.95-0.98); p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001]. Specificity and negative predictive value for
MMR-deficiency was 99.1 and 96.3%. One hundred and seventy-four patients had
MMR-proficient cancers, of which 60 (34.5%) showed Cdx2 loss. Cdx2 loss in
metastases was related to MMR-deficiency (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). There was no difference in
expression between primary tumors and matched metastases.
CONCLUSION: Loss of Cdx2 is a sensitive and specific predictor of MMR-deficiency,
but is not limited to these tumors, suggesting that events "upstream" of the
development of microsatellite instability may impact Cdx2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3795344
PMID: 24130965  [PubMed]


377. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013 Oct;1300:296-314. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12252.

Barrett's esophagus: cancer and molecular biology.

Gibson MK(1), Dhaliwal AS, Clemons NJ, Phillips WA, Dvorak K, Tong D, Law S,
Pirchi ED, Räsänen J, Krasna MJ, Parikh K, Krishnadath KK, Chen Y, Griffiths L,
Colleypriest BJ, Farrant JM, Tosh D, Das KM, Bajpai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

The following paper on the molecular biology of Barrett's esophagus (BE) includes
commentaries on signaling pathways central to the development of BE including Hh,
NF-<U+03BA>B, and IL-6/STAT3; surgical approaches for esophagectomy and classification
of lesions by appropriate therapy; the debate over the merits of minimally
invasive esophagectomy versus open surgery; outcomes for patients with
pharyngolaryngoesophagectomy; the applications of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
chemoradiotherapy; animal models examining the surgical models of BE and
esophageal adenocarcinoma; the roles of various morphogens and Cdx2 in BE; and
the use of in vitro BE models for chemoprevention studies.

© 2013 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 24117650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013 Oct;1300:144-65. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12241.

The esophageal mucosa and submucosa: immunohistology in GERD and Barrett's
esophagus.

Appelman HD(1), Streutker C, Vieth M, Neumann H, Neurath MF, Upton MP, Sagaert X,
Wang HH, El-Zimaity H, Abraham SC, Bellizzi AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

This paper presents commentaries on the microscopic morphology of esophageal
squamous epithelium; the frequency of duplication of the muscularis mucosae (MM) 
in Barrett's esophagus (BE); the significance of multilayered epithelium; whether
cells in the lamina propria reflect those in the epithelium; how stem cells are
identified in the squamous esophagus; dilated intercellular spaces; the
metastasizing potential of early carcinoma-dependent, molecular or
immunohistochemical tests that improve diagnosis; the role of
immunohistochemistry IHC in grading of neoplasia in Barrett's esophagus and
defining the risk of progression to adenocarcinoma; the roles of CDX1 and CDX2 in
squamous and cardiac mucosa; and the role of desmosomal cadherins and lectins in 
squamous and cardiac mucosa.

© 2013 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 24117640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Histopathology. 2014 Mar;64(4):536-46. doi: 10.1111/his.12296. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Reduced expression of aGlcNAc in Barrett's oesophagus adjacent to Barrett's
adenocarcinoma--a possible biomarker to predict the malignant potential of
Barrett's oesophagus.

Iwaya Y(1), Hasebe O, Koide N, Kitahara K, Suga T, Shinji A, Muraki T, Yokosawa
S, Yamada S, Arakura N, Tanaka E, Nakayama J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan; Department of Gastroenterology, Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.

AIMS: Gastric gland mucin contains O-glycans exhibiting terminal a1,4-linked
N-acetylglucosamine residues (aGlcNAc). Recently we demonstrated that mice
deficient in aGlcNAc in gastric gland mucin develop gastric adenocarcinoma
spontaneously, indicating that aGlcNAc is a tumour suppressor for gastric cancer.
However, the role of aGlcNAc in Barrett's oesophagus (BO) remains unknown. In
this study, we investigated whether reduced aGlcNAc expression in BO is
associated with development of Barrett's adenocarcinoma (BAC).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirty-five BO lesions adjacent to BAC were examined by
immunohistochemistry for aGlcNAc, MUC6 and CDX2. As controls, 35 BO lesions
without BAC obtained from patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma were 
also analysed. Expression of aGlcNAc relative to its scaffold MUC6 in BO adjacent
to BAC was reduced significantly compared to control BO. Decreased aGlcNAc
expression in BO adjacent to BAC was particularly significant in patients with
smaller tumour size (<20 mm) and minimal invasion of tumour cells to the
superficial muscularis mucosae. There was also a significant inverse correlation 
between aGlcNAc and CDX2 expression in BO adjacent to BAC.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased expression of aGlcNAc compared with MUC6 in BO is a
possible hallmark in predicting BAC development.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24117499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 1;440(4):635-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.116. Epub 2013 Oct 5.

Thyroid hormone negatively regulates CDX2 and SOAT2 mRNA expression via induction
of miRNA-181d in hepatic cells.

Yap CS(1), Sinha RA, Ota S, Katsuki M, Yen PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disorders, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 8,
College Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore.

Thyroid hormones (THs) regulate transcription of many metabolic genes in the
liver through its nuclear receptors (TRs). Although the molecular mechanisms for 
positive regulation of hepatic genes by TH are well understood, much less is
known about TH-mediated negative regulation. Recently, several nuclear hormone
receptors were shown to downregulate gene expression via miRNAs. To further
examine the potential role of miRNAs in TH-mediated negative regulation, we used 
a miRNA microarray to identify miRNAs that were directly regulated by TH in a
human hepatic cell line. In our screen, we discovered that miRNA-181d is a novel 
hepatic miRNA that was regulated by TH in hepatic cell culture and in vivo.
Furthermore, we identified and characterized two novel TH-regulated target genes 
that were downstream of miR-181d signaling: caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and
sterol O-acyltransferase 2 (SOAT2 or ACAT2). CDX2, a known positive regulator of 
hepatocyte differentiation, was regulated by miR-181d and directly activated
SOAT2 gene expression. Since SOAT2 is an enzyme that generates cholesteryl esters
that are packaged into lipoproteins, our results suggest miR-181d plays a
significant role in the negative regulation of key metabolic genes by TH in the
liver.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24103759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;29(10):1015-9.

[MicroRNA-10a accelerates endodermal lineage differentiation of mesenchymal stem 
cells from human placenta].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen D(1), Ma H, Liu S, Wang L, Li Y, Wei J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Stem Cell, General Hospital, Key Laboratory of Fertility
Preservation and Maintenance, Ministry of Education, Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan 750004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the potential of endodermal differentiation of human
placenta-derived mesenchymal stem cells (PMSCs) by microRNA-10a
(miR-10a)-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of its mRNA targets.
METHODS: Lentiviral vectors were used to stably and specifically over-express
miR-10a and inhibited the miR-10a function by its antagomir. In addition, the
relationship between miR-10a and Hoxa1 expression was analyzed. Real-time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunofluorescent cytochemical staining were
utilized to test the mRNA and protein expression variation and assess the ability
of PMSCs to differentiate into endodermal cells. Results Over-expression of
miR-10a led to the suppression of endogenous Hoxa1 expression, and inhibition of 
miR-10a relieved the repression of Hoxa1. Over-expression of miR-10a in PMSCs
resulted in the up-regulation of endoderm-specific genes (FoxA2, Sox-17, Pdx-1
and Cdx2) and the increased proportions of FOXA2, SOX-17 and PDX-1 positive
events as compared with the control treated cells.
CONCLUSION: miR-10a was up-regulated during endodermal differentiation of PMSCs
and involved in its differentiation partially via the suppression of the Hoxa1
gene. Furthermore, the miR-10a accelerates endodermal differentiation, likely
mediated by the up-reguation of endoderm-specific down-stream genes.

PMID: 24103260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Apr;68(3):463-73. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9749-7.

Molecular insight in gastric cancer induction: an overview of cancer stemness
genes.

Akhavan-Niaki H(1), Samadani AA.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran.

Gastric cancer is one of the most outgoing human cancers in the world. Two main
functional types were described: Intestinal adenocarcinoma and diffuse one. The
most important purpose of this review is to analyze and investigate the main
genetic factors involved in tumorogenesis of stomach and the molecular mechanism 
of their expression regulation alongside with the importance of cancer stem cells
and their relationship with gastric cancer. It is evident that proper diagnosis
of molecular case of cancer may lead to absolute treatment and at least reduction
in the disease severity. However, stemness factors such as Sox2, Oct3/4, and
Nanog were related with induced pluripotent stem cells, proposing a correlation
between these stemness factors and cancer stem cells. Moreover, aberrant
induction by Helicobacter pylori of the intestinal-specific homeobox
transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, also plays an important role in this
modification. There are some genes which are directly activated by CDX1 in
gastric cancer and distinguished stemness-related reprogramming factors like
SALL4 and KLF5. Correspondingly, we also aimed to present the main important
epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation, histone modification, and chromatin
modeling of stemness genes in disease development. Remarkably, a better
understanding of molecular bases of cancer may lead to novel diagnostic,
therapeutic, and preventive approaches by some genetic and epigenetic changes
such as gene amplifications, gene silencing by DNA methylation, losses of
imprinting, LOH, and mutations. Consequently, genome-wide searches of gene
expression are widely important for surveying the proper mechanisms of cancer
emergence and development. Conspicuously, this review explains an outline of the 
molecular mechanism and new approaches in gastric cancer.

PMID: 24078401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Dec;37(6):905-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.09.007. Epub
2013 Sep 27.

Vitamin D receptor polymorphism and colorectal cancer-specific and all-cause
mortality.

Perna L(1), Hoffmeister M, Schöttker B, Arndt V, Haug U, Holleczek B, Burwinkel
B, Ordóñez-Mena JM, Brenner H.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) - Division of Clinical Epidemiology and
Aging Research, Im Neuenheimer Feld, 581-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic
address: l.perna@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene is present in colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells and its genetic variants have been associated with an increased risk 
of CRC. The association with colorectal cancer prognosis remains widely
unexplored.
METHODS: 1397 colorectal cancer patients participating in two cancer cohorts
(ESTHER II and VERDI) and in a population-based case-control study (DACHS) were
followed for 5 years. Unadjusted and adjusted hazard ratios for all-cause
mortality (469 events) and CRC-specific mortality (336 events) were estimated for
VDR variants rs731236 (TaqI), rs2228570 (FokI), rs11568820 (Cdx2), and rs1989969 
(VDR-5132).
RESULTS: No association was found between VDR polymorphism and CRC specific and
all-cause mortality. Adjusted hazard ratios ranged from 0.79 (95% CI 0.57-1.12)
to 1.14 (95% CI 0.89-1.46) for CRC-specific mortality and from 0.89 (95% CI
0.67-1.18) to 1.22 (95% CI 0.99-1.50) for all-cause mortality. All 95% confidence
intervals included the null value.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings do not support the hypothesis that the common VDR gene 
variants investigated in this study are of clinical relevance with respect to CRC
prognosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24075799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):9789-802. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.084. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

BMP10 as a potent inducer of trophoblast differentiation in human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lichtner B(1), Knaus P, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Department of Biology, Chemistry
and Pharmacy, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to induce diverse differentiation
fates in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In the present study, we compared
the potency at which BMP5, BMP10 and BMP13, which are members of distinct BMP
subgroups due to differences in sequential and structural homology, induce
differentiation in hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We
observed, in agreement with previous BMP4 model studies, that all ligands induced
differentiation to the trophoblast lineage in the absence of bFGF. However,
distinct BMPs exerted differences in the kinetics of induced differentiation,
with BMP10 being the most potent. hiPSCs and hESCs shared comparable expression
patterns of BMP type-I and -II receptor subtypes, which might explain conserved
properties with respect to ligand potency and activation of SMAD-dependent (via
SMAD1/5/8) and -independent (via MAPK p38) signal transduction pathways. The
tested BMPs had distinct and also conserved target genes such as CDX2, DLX3,
DLX5, GATA2, GATA3, HAND1, ID2, MSX2 and TFAP2A, known to be associated with the 
emergence of trophoblast cells. hESCs induced expression of the BMP antagonist
NOGGIN as a protection mechanism to constrict extensive BMP action. Unlike BMP4, 
BMP10 has been shown to be resistant to NOGGIN-induced inhibition which in part
might explain its potency. BMPs, in particular BMP4, are commonly used cytokines 
in differentiation protocols to generate diverse mesoderm- and endoderm-derivates
from human pluripotent stem cells. Our study has identified BMP10, a
cardiac-specific protein, as a superior alternative to BMP4 for inducing
trophoblast differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. JAMA Surg. 2013 Nov;148(11):1037-42. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2013.3731.

Glucagonlike peptide 2 analogue teduglutide: stimulation of proliferation but
reduction of differentiation in human Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells.

Chaturvedi LS(1), Basson MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University,
East Lansing2Research Service, John D. Dingell Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Detroit, Michigan3Department of Anesthesiology, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
Michigan.

IMPORTANCE: Short bowel syndrome occurs when a shortened intestine cannot absorb 
sufficient nutrients or fluids. Teduglutide is a recombinant analogue of human
glucagonlike peptide 2 that reduces dependence on parenteral nutrition in
patients with short bowel syndrome by promoting enterocytic proliferation,
increasing the absorptive surface area. However, enterocyte function depends not 
only on the number of cells that are present but also on differentiated features 
that facilitate nutrient absorption and digestion.
OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that teduglutide impairs human intestinal
epithelial differentiation.
DESIGN AND SETTING: We investigated the effects of teduglutide in the modulation 
of proliferation and differentiation in human Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells 
at a basic science laboratory. This was an in vitro study using Caco-2 cells, a
human-derived intestinal epithelial cell line commonly used to model enterocytic 
biology.
EXPOSURE: Cells were exposed to teduglutide or vehicle control.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We analyzed the cell cycle by bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation or propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry and measured cell
proliferation by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetr
azolium (MTS) assay. We used quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction to assay the expression of the enterocytic differentiation markers
villin, sucrase-isomaltase, glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2), and dipeptidyl
peptidase 4 (DPP-4), as well as that of the putative differentiation signals
schlafen 12 (SLFN12) and caudal-related homeobox intestine-specific transcription
factor (Cdx2). Villin promoter activity was measured by a luciferase-based assay.
RESULTS: The MTS assay demonstrated that teduglutide increased cell numbers by a 
mean (SD) of 10% (2%) over untreated controls at a maximal 500 nM (n = 6, P <
.05). Teduglutide increased bromodeoxyuridine-positive cells vs untreated
controls by a mean (SD) of 19.4% (2.3%) vs 12.0% (0.8%) (n = 6, P < .05) and
increased the S-phase fraction by flow cytometric analysis. Teduglutide reduced
the mean (SD) expression of villin by 29% (6%), Cdx2 by 31% (10%), DPP-4 by 15%
(6%), GLUT2 by 40% (11%), SLFN12 by 61% (14%), and sucrase-isomaltase by 28% (8%)
(n = 6, P < .05 for all).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Teduglutide increased Caco-2 proliferation but tended 
to inhibit intestinal epithelial differentiation. The effects of mitogenic
stimulation with teduglutide in patients with short bowel syndrome might be
greater if the more numerous teduglutide-treated cells could be stimulated toward
a more fully differentiated phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4574866
PMID: 24068167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Dec;37(12):1862-70. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182986bb5.

GNAS Is frequently mutated in a specific subgroup of intraductal papillary
neoplasms of the bile duct.

Tsai JH(1), Yuan RH, Chen YL, Liau JY, Jeng YM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital
Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct (IPN-Bs) share clinicopathologic
features with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) of the pancreas.
Approximately two thirds of IPMNs have activating point mutations of GNAS at
codon 201. The role of GNAS mutation is unclear in IPN-B. In this study, we
evaluated 41 patients diagnosed with IPN-B for clinicopathologic characteristics 
and follow-up information. Mutation analyses of GNAS and KRAS were performed.
Twenty-three cases (56.1%) of IPN-B were categorized as the intestinal subtype,
and 18 (43.9%) were considered the gastric/pancreatobiliary subtype. IPN-Bs
showing intestinal differentiation demonstrated high immunohistochemical
expressions of CK20, CDX2, and MUC2, as well as a significant association with
macroscopic and microscopic mucin hypersecretions and villous architecture. GNAS 
and KRAS mutations were detected in 29% and 32% of IPN-Bs, respectively. All
IPN-Bs with GNAS mutation showed intestinal differentiation. GNAS-mutated IPN-B
was highly significantly associated with certain pathologic characteristics,
including macroscopic and microscopic mucin hypersecretion and villous
architecture. IPN-B with GNAS mutation tended to more frequently harbor KRAS
mutation than those without GNAS mutation. IPN-Bs with intestinal
differentiation, villous architecture, and mucin hypersecretion constitute a
distinct subgroup of IPN-B, which frequently has GNAS mutation. This subtype
shares common genetic alterations with IPMN of the pancreas.

PMID: 24061513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):219-29. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0328. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Transcriptional reprogramming and chromatin remodeling accompanies Oct4 and Nanog
silencing in mouse trophoblast lineage.

Carey TS(1), Choi I, Wilson CA, Floer M, Knott JG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University , East Lansing, Michigan.

In mouse blastocysts, CDX2 plays a key role in silencing Oct4 and Nanog
expression in the trophectoderm (TE) lineage. However, the underlying
transcriptional and chromatin-based changes that are associated with
CDX2-mediated repression are poorly understood. To address this, a Cdx2-inducible
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell line was utilized as a model system. Induction of 
Cdx2 expression resulted in a decrease in Oct4/Nanog expression, an increase in
TE markers, and differentiation into trophoblast-like stem (TS-like) cells within
48 to 120<U+2009>h. Consistent with the down-regulation of Oct4 and Nanog transcripts, a
time-dependent increase in CDX2 binding and a decrease in RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) and OCT4 binding was observed within 48 h (P<0.05). To test whether
transcriptionally active epigenetic marks were erased during differentiation,
histone H3K9/14 acetylation and two of its epigenetic modifiers were evaluated.
Accordingly, a significant decrease in histone H3K9/14 acetylation and loss of
p300 and HDAC1 binding at the Oct4 and Nanog regulatory elements was observed by 
48 h. Accompanying these changes, there was a significant increase in total
histone H3 and a loss of chromatin accessibility at both the Oct4 and Nanog
regulatory elements (P<0.05), indicative of chromatin remodeling. Lastly, DNA
methylation analysis revealed that methylation did not occur at Oct4 and Nanog
until 96 to 120 h after induction of CDX2. In conclusion, our results show that
silencing of Oct4 and Nanog is facilitated by sequential changes in transcription
factor binding, histone acetylation, chromatin remodeling, and DNA methylation at
core regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3904517
PMID: 24059348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Dermatol Sci. 2014 Jan;73(1):63-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.08.014. Epub
2013 Sep 7.

The association of polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor gene with psoriasis in
the Han population of northeastern China.

Zhou X(1), Xu LD(2), Li YZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, China. (2)Laboratory of Medical
Genetics, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, China. Electronic address:
zhouxinghyd123@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a master regulator of epidermal
barrier function, inflammation, stem-cell proliferation, and microbial defense.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between the VDR and psoriasis in the
northeastern Chinese Han population.
METHODS: In this case-control study, 342 patients with psoriasis and 341 controls
were genotyped for five common VDR gene polymorphisms (ApaI, TaqI, BsmI, FokI,
and Cdx2) by the Multiplex SNapSHOT method.
RESULTS: The frequency of ApaI (rs7975232) allele A was significantly increased
in psoriasis relative to the control group (27.8% vs. 22.1%, p=0.018); the allele
A of the ApaI polymorphism showed a 1.35-fold increased risk of developing
psoriasis. Haplotype analyses showed the BsmI/ApaI/TaqI/Cdx2/FokI GATGC to be
significantly over-represented in psoriasis patients compared with controls
(p=0.012). The BsmI/ApaI/TaqI haplotype GCT was presented to a lesser extent in
psoriasis patients in comparison with control patients (72.2% vs. 77.9%,
p=0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that VDR polymorphisms are associated with
psoriasis in Northeastern Han Chinese population.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. BMC Cancer. 2013 Sep 22;13:428. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-428.

Intestinal-type of differentiation predicts favourable overall survival:
confirmatory clinicopathological analysis of 198 periampullary adenocarcinomas of
pancreatic, biliary, ampullary and duodenal origin.

Bronsert P(1), Kohler I, Werner M, Makowiec F, Kuesters S, Hoeppner J, Hopt UT,
Keck T, Bausch D, Wellner UF.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for General and Visceral Surgery, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter
Str, 55, Freiburg 79106, Germany. dr.ulrich.wellner@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Periampullary adenocarcinomas comprise pancreatic, distal bile duct, 
ampullary and duodenal adenocarcinoma. The epithelia of these anatomical
structures share a common embryologic origin from the foregut. With steadily
increasing numbers of pancreatoduodenectomies over the last decades,
pathologists, surgeons and oncologists are more often confronted with the
diagnosis of "other than pancreatic" periampullary cancers. The intestinal
subtype of ampullary cancer has been shown to correlate with better prognosis.
METHODS: Histological subtype and immunohistochemical staining pattern for CK7,
CK20 and CDX2 were assessed for n<U+2009>=<U+2009>198 cases of pancreatic ductal, distal bile
duct, ampullary and duodenal adenocarcinoma with clinical follow-up. Routine
pathological parameters were included in survival analysis performed with SPSS
20.
RESULTS: In univariate analysis, intestinal subtype was associated with better
survival in ampullary, pancreatic ductal and duodenal adenocarcinoma. The
intestinal type of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma was not associated with
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm and could not be reliably diagnosed by
immunohistochemical staining pattern alone. Intestinal differentiation and lymph 
node ratio, but not tumor location were independent predictors of survival when
all significant predictor variables from univariate analysis (grade, TNM stage,
presence of precursor lesions, surgical margin status, perineural, vascular and
lymphatic vessel invasion, CK7 and CDX2 staining pattern) were included in a Cox 
proportional hazards model.
CONCLUSIONS: Intestinal type differentiation and lymph node ratio but not tumor
location are independent prognostic factors in pooled analysis of periampullary
adenocarcinomas. We conclude that differentiation is more important than tumor
location for prognostic stratification in periampullary adenocarcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3849372
PMID: 24053229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):16-8. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2861-0.

Are caudal-type homeobox genes causal for gastro-esophageal reflux disease and
Barrett's esophagus?

Laßmann S(1), Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany,
silke.lassmann@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Comment on
    Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):57-63.

PMID: 24052194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e74556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074556. eCollection 
2013.

Chromatin changes in dicer-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells in response to
retinoic acid induced differentiation.

Tennakoon JB(1), Wang H, Coarfa C, Cooney AJ, Gunaratne PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

Loss of Dicer, an enzyme critical for microRNA biogenesis, results in lethality
due to a block in mouse embryonic stem cell (mES) differentiation. Using ChIP-Seq
we found increased H3K9me2 at over 900 CpG islands in the Dicer(-/-)ES epigenome.
Gene ontology analysis revealed that promoters of chromatin regulators to be
among the most impacted by increased CpG island H3K9me2 in ES (Dicer(-/-)). We
therefore, extended the study to include H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks for selected 
genes. We found that the ES (Dicer(-/-)) mutant epigenome was characterized by a 
shift in the overall balance between transcriptionally favorable (H3K4me3) and
unfavorable (H3K27me3) marks at key genes regulating ES cell differentiation.
Pluripotency genes Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were not impacted in relation to patterns
of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 and showed no changes in the rates of transcript
down-regulation in response to RA. The most striking changes were observed in
regards to genes regulating differentiation and the transition from self-renewal 
to differentiation. An increase in H3K4me3 at the promoter of Lin28b was
associated with the down-regulation of this gene at a lower rate in Dicer(-/-)ES 
as compared to wild type ES. An increase in H3K27me3 in the promoters of
differentiation genes Hoxa1 and Cdx2 in Dicer(-/-)ES cells was coincident with an
inability to up-regulate these genes at the same rate as ES upon retinoic acid
(RA)-induced differentiation. We found that siRNAs Ezh2 and post-transcriptional 
silencing of Ezh2 by let-7 g rescued this effect suggesting that Ezh2
up-regulation is in part responsible for increased H3K27me3 and decreased rates
of up-regulation of differentiation genes in Dicer(-/-)ES.

PMCID: PMC3767645
PMID: 24040281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Endocr Pathol. 2013 Dec;24(4):184-90. doi: 10.1007/s12022-013-9264-9.

The immunohistochemical expression of islet 1 and PAX8 by rectal neuroendocrine
tumors should be taken into account in the differential diagnosis of metastatic
neuroendocrine tumors of unknown primary origin.

Koo J(1), Zhou X, Moschiano E, De Peralta-Venturina M, Mertens RB, Dhall D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA, jakoo@mednet.ucla.edu.

Rectal neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) can be classified by histologic pattern and
secretory products. Recently, rectal NETs have been noted to exhibit
immunohistochemical (IHC) positivity for Islet 1 and PAX8, which are generally
considered markers for NETs of pancreatic origin. In this study, we sought to
characterize the IHC staining profile of rectal NETs and determine whether there 
was any correlation between the histologic pattern of rectal NETs and their IHC
profile. Fifty-six primary rectal NETs were histologically reviewed and stained
with antibodies against Islet 1, PAX8, CDX2, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin.
In a subset of 31 cases, immunoreactivity for serotonin, pancreatic polypeptide
(PP), and prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) was also studied. By morphology, the
tumors studied included 55 % trabecular, 27 % solid nested, 4 % acinar, and 14 % 
mixed patterns. Islet 1 was positive in 89 % and PAX8 in 79 % of cases. CDX2 was 
negative in all 56 cases. Cytoplasmic staining was observed for chromogranin A in
30 % of cases and for synaptophysin in all 56 cases. Cytoplasmic staining for
serotonin, PP, and PAP was present in 16, 61, and 97 % of cases, respectively.
There was no correlation between histologic pattern and IHC staining pattern with
any of the antibodies studied. We have demonstrated that Islet 1 and PAX8 are not
entirely specific for NETs of pancreatic origin, as they are expressed in a
majority of rectal NETs. Since rectal NETs may show an IHC staining profile which
mirrors that of pancreatic NETs (Islet 1 and PAX8-positive, CDX2-negative), a
metastatic rectal NET should be considered in the differential diagnosis and
ruled out clinically in the work-up of a metastatic NET of unknown primary origin
which exhibits this staining profile.

PMID: 24037217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cell Cycle. 2013 Oct 15;12(20):3336-44. doi: 10.4161/cc.26327. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Laser microbeam-induced DNA damage inhibits cell division in fertilized eggs and 
early embryos.

Wang ZW(1), Ma XS, Ma JY, Luo YB, Lin F, Wang ZB, Fan HY, Schatten H, Sun QY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology; Institute of Zoology; Chinese
Academy of Sciences; Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Oct 15;12(20):3247-8.

DNA double-strand breaks are caused by both intracellular physiological processes
and environmental stress. In this study, we used laser microbeam cut (abbreviated
microcut or cut), which allows specific DNA damage in the pronucleus of a
fertilized egg and in individual blastomere(s) of an early embryo, to investigate
the response of early embryos to DNA double-strand breaks. Line type <U+03B3>H2AX foci
were detected in the cut region, while Chk2 phosphorylation staining was observed
in the whole nuclear region of the cut pronuclei or blastomeres. Zygotes with cut
male or female pronucleus showed poor developmental capability: the percentage of
cleavage embryos was significantly decreased, and the embryos failed to complete 
further development to blastocysts. The cut blastomeres in 2-cell, 4-cell, and
8-cell embryos ceased cleavage, and they failed to incorporate into compacted
morulae, but instead underwent apoptosis and cell death at the blastocyst stage; 
the uncut part of embryos could develop to blastocysts, with a reduced percentage
or decreased cell number. When both blastomeres of the 2-cell embryos were cut by
laser microbeam, cell death occurred 24 h earlier, suggesting important functions
of the uncut blastomere in delaying cell death of the cut blastomere. Taken
together, we conclude that microbeam-induced DNA damage in early embryos causes
compromised development, and that embryos may have their own mechanisms to
exclude DNA-damaged blastomeres from participating in further development.

PMCID: PMC3885644
PMID: 24036543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Hum Pathol. 2013 Nov;44(11):2536-41. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.06.014. Epub
2013 Sep 9.

CDX2 may be a useful marker to distinguish primary ovarian carcinoid from
gastrointestinal metastatic carcinoids to the ovary.

Desouki MM(1), Lioyd J, Xu H, Cao D, Barner R, Zhao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Magee-Womens Hospital of University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Primary ovarian carcinoids and metastatic tumors share similar morphologic
features. Metastatic carcinoids must be excluded from primary ones for prognostic
and therapeutic reasons. Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine (carcinoid) tumors are
much more common with the majority arising from small intestine and appendix. The
aim of this study is to evaluate the role of immunohistochemistry for CDX2 in
differentiating primary ovarian from metastatic carcinoids of primary
gastrointestinal origin. Thirty primary pure ovarian carcinoids, 16 primary
ovarian carcinoids arising in association with benign teratomas, 10 ovarian
carcinoids metastatic from primary gastrointestinal tract and 70 gastrointestinal
neuroendocrine tumors were studied for the expression of CDX2 by
immunohistochemistry. CDX2 expression revealed that 40 (57.1%) of 70 cases of
gastrointestinal carcinoids and 9 (90%) of 10 ovarian metastatic carcinoids
showed positive nuclear staining (diffuse or focal). On the other hand, 3 (18.8%)
of 16 primary carcinoids with teratomatous elements showed weak positivity. Among
the 70 gastrointestinal carcinoids, CDX2 was positive in 38 (90.5%) of 42 cases
in the duodenum, small intestine, appendix, and only in 2 (11.8%) of 17 cases of 
colorectal carcinoids and none of the 11 cases in the stomach. It is concluded
that CDX2 may be a useful marker to distinguish primary ovarian carcinoid from
metastasis from small intestinal and appendiceal neuroendocrine tumors.

© 2013.

PMID: 24029704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Oct;37(10):1532-41. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31829ab1c1.

Loss of CDX2/CK20 expression is associated with poorly differentiated carcinoma, 
the CpG island methylator phenotype, and adverse prognosis in
microsatellite-unstable colorectal cancer.

Kim JH(1), Rhee YY, Bae JM, Cho NY, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine Department of
Pathology, SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Several previous studies have demonstrated that the CDX2-negative (CDX2) and/or
CK20-negative (CK20) phenotypes of colorectal cancers (CRCs) might be associated 
with high levels of microsatellite instability (MSI-H). The aim of this study was
to investigate the clinicopathologic and molecular features of MSI-H CRCs with
different CDX2/CK20 expression statuses. The CDX2 and CK20 expression statuses
were immunohistochemically evaluated in 109 MSI-H CRC tissue samples, and the
correlations of these statuses with clinicopathologic, molecular, and survival
data were statistically analyzed. Of the 109 MSI-H CRCs, 15 were CDX2 (13.8%),
and 19 were CK20 (17.4%). The simultaneous loss of CDX2 and CK20 expression
(CDX2/CK20) was observed in 9 cases (8.3%). CDX2 loss was correlated with lymph
node metastasis, poor differentiation, MLH1 loss, the mutation of BRAF, and CpG
island methylator phenotype-high (CIMP-H) status. Right-sided tumor location,
nodal metastasis, poor differentiation, and CIMP-H status were significant
characteristics of CK20 tumors. The CDX2/CK20 phenotype was associated with older
age (above 56 y), higher stage (stage III or IV), deep invasion (pT3 or pT4),
lymph node metastasis (pN1 or pN2), poor differentiation (nonmedullary/non-signet
ring cell type), the mutation of BRAF, and CIMP-H status among MSI-H CRCs.
Patients with CDX2/CK20 tumors exhibited worse overall and disease-free survival 
compared with the patients with CDX2 and/or CK20 tumors (P<0.001). In the
multivariate analysis for disease-free survival, the CDX2/CK20 phenotype was an
independent prognostic factor for MSI-H CRC (P=0.030, hazard ratio=3.288). The
CDX2/CK20 phenotype defines a distinct subgroup of MSI-H CRCs with poor
differentiation, CIMP-H status, and unfavorable prognosis.

PMID: 24025523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Korean Med Sci. 2013 Sep;28(9):1329-33. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2013.28.9.1329. Epub 
2013 Aug 28.

Association of polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor promoter with idiopathic
short stature.

Choi SK(1), Park MS, Song JK, Yoon KS, Yoon KL, Shim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

The genetic alterations of vitamin D receptor (VDR) are related with the growth
of long bone. There were a lot of reports regarding an association of
polymorphisms in the VDR promoter with many disorders, but not with idiopathic
short stature (ISS). We investigated the association of them with ISS. A total of
50 subjects, including 29 ISS patients and 21 healthy controls with their heights
within the normal range was recruited. We selected two single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from VDR promoter (rs11568820 at the Cdx-2 binding site
upstream of exon 1e and rs4516035 at -1012 upstream of exon 1a) as candidates,
respectively. In genotype analysis, the frequency of A/A genotype at the Cdx-2
binding site locus (rs11568820) upstream of exon 1e of VDR was decreased to 6.9% 
in ISS patients (28.6% in controls) (P = 0.027). The genetic variation at the
Cdx-2 binding site of VDR promoter can be a contributing factor of growth of
height.

PMCID: PMC3763107
PMID: 24015038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Trends Biochem Sci. 2013 Oct;38(10):477-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2013.08.004. Epub 
2013 Aug 30.

MEX-3 proteins: recent insights on novel post-transcriptional regulators.

Pereira B(1), Le Borgne M, Chartier NT, Billaud M, Almeida R.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University
of Porto, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal.

RNA-binding proteins of the evolutionarily-conserved MEX-3 family are mediators
of post-transcriptional regulation in different organisms. Recent studies
highlight their involvement in diverse physiological settings, including the
maintenance of a balance between stem cell self-renewal and differentiation.
Here, we draw attention to their putative role in tissue homeostasis and disease,
particularly cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23999169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Medicina (Kaunas). 2013;49(4):177-84.

Association Between Polymorphisms of VDR, COL1A1, and LCT genes and bone mineral 
density in Belarusian women with severe postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Marozik P(1), Mosse I, Alekna V, Rudenko E, Tamulaitiene M, Ramanau H, Strazdiene
V, Samokhovec V, Ameliyanovich M, Byshnev N, Gonchar A, Kundas L, Zhur K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology NAS Belarus, Belarus.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE. Variation of osteoporosis in the population is the
result of an interaction between the genotype and the environment, and the
genetic causes of osteoporosis are being widely investigated. The aim of this
study was to analyze the association between the polymorphisms of the vitamin D
receptor (VDR), type I collagen (COL1A1), and lactase (LCT) genes and severe
postmenopausal osteoporosis as well as bone mineral density (BMD). MATERIAL AND
METHODS. A total of 54 women with severe postmenopausal osteoporosis and 77
controls (mean age, 58.3 years [SD, 6.2] and 56.7 years [SD, 7.42], respectively)
were included into the study. The subjects were recruited at the City Center for 
Osteoporosis Prevention (Minsk, Belarus). Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry was
used to measure bone mineral density at the lumbar spine and the femoral neck.
Severe osteoporosis was diagnosed in the women with the clinical diagnosis of
postmenopausal osteoporosis and at least 1 fragility fracture. The control group 
included women without osteoporosis. Polymorphic sites in osteoporosis
predisposition genes (ApaI, BsmI, TaqI, and Cdx2 of the VDR gene, G2046T of the
COL1A1 gene, and T-13910C of the LCT gene) were determined using the polymerase
chain reaction on the deoxyribonucleic acid isolated from dried bloodspots.
RESULTS. The data showed that the ApaI and BsmI polymorphisms of the VDR gene and
T- 13910C of the LCT gene were associated with severe postmenopausal osteoporosis
in the analyzed Belarusian women (P<0.01). A statistically significant positive
correlation between the VDR risk genotypes ApaI and TaqI and bone mineral density
was found (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS. The findings of this study suggest that at least
the ApaI and BsmI polymorphisms of the VDR gene and T-13910C of the LCT gene are 
associated with the risk of postmenopausal osteoporosis in our sample of the
Belarusian women.

PMID: 23985982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2530. doi: 10.1038/srep02530.

Identification of FDA-approved drugs targeting breast cancer stem cells along
with biomarkers of sensitivity.

Bhat-Nakshatri P(1), Goswami CP, Badve S, Sledge GW Jr, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Recently developed genomics-based tools are allowing repositioning of Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs as cancer treatments, which were
employed to identify drugs that target cancer stem cells (CSCs) of breast cancer.
Gene expression datasets of CSCs from six studies were subjected to connectivity 
map to identify drugs that may ameliorate gene expression patterns unique to
CSCs. All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) was negatively connected with gene
expression in CSCs. ATRA reduced mammosphere-forming ability of a subset of
breast cancer cells, which correlated with induction of apoptosis, reduced
expression of SOX2 but elevated expression of its antagonist CDX2. SOX2/CDX2
ratio had prognostic relevance in CSC-enriched breast cancers. K-ras mutant
breast cancer cell line enriched for CSCs was resistant to ATRA, which was
reversed by MAP kinase inhibitors. Thus, ATRA alone or in combination can be
tested for efficacy using SOX2, CDX2, and K-ras mutation/MAPK activation status
as biomarkers of response.

PMCID: PMC3965360
PMID: 23982413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2013;34(3):243-7.

Morular endometrial metaplasia: review of the literature and proposal of the
management.

Litta P(1), Codroma A, D'Agostino G, Breda E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinic,
University of Padua, Padua, Italy. pietro.litta@unipd.it

PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATION: Morular endometrial metaplasia is a rare condition that
can be often misdiagnosed and overtreated, because it can be mistaken for a
malignant disease. The aim of this review was to update the current opinion on
the significance of this pathology and its risk for potential malignancies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors report their experience of two cases of
morular metaplasia involving very young women managed conservatively with
hysteroscopic resection of the affected areas.
RESULTS: Hysteroscopic resection of these lesions can be an adequate and
fertility-sparing treatment of morular metaplasia in women of childbearing age.
CONCLUSIONS: Morular metaplasia has indeed a mutational origin but it is a benign
and hormonally inert condition. The risk to develop cancer is closely associated 
with premalignant or malignant endometrioid glandular proliferations that are
often associated with hysthological finding of morules rather than with morules
themselves. Management of this condition requires trained pathologists and
gynecologists and should be adapted to the age of the patient.

PMID: 23967555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Apr;22(4):295-301. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182936d8e.

Expression of REG4 in ovarian mucinous tumors.

Huang Q(1), Chen X, Lu W, Lai M, Lu B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology & Pathophysiology Surgical Pathology Gynecologic
Oncology, The Affiliated Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Zhejiang Province, P.R. China.

Regenerating islet-deprived gene family, number 4 (REG4), is a novel marker for
intestinal differentiation. We performed immunohistochemical studies on REG4,
cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, and caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) in 291 ovarian
mucinous tumors. There were 226 primary tumors and 65 metastatic tumors. The
primary tumors comprised 69/226 mucinous cystadenomas, 79/226 mucinous borderline
tumors (64/79 intestinal-type and 15/79 endocervical-like tumors), and 78/226
mucinous carcinomas. We found that REG4 expression was significantly higher in
mucinous borderline tumors (30/79, 38.0%) and primary mucinous carcinomas (26/78,
33.3%) than in mucinous cystadenomas (4/69, 5.8%; P<0.05). However, REG4
expression was more commonly associated with intestinal-type, borderline,
mucinous tumors rather than the endocervical-like type (30/64 vs. 0/15, P<0.001).
There was a significant correlation between the REG4 and CDX2 expression profiles
in primary ovarian mucinous tumors (r=0.772, P<0.001). REG4, CDX2, and diffuse
CK20 had higher expression frequencies in metastatic lower gastrointestinal
adenocarcinoma than in primary mucinous tumors (P<0.01). The CK7/REG4 coordinate 
expression profile was comparable in diagnostic value to CK7/CK20 or CK7/CDX2
profile. We conclude that REG4 expression is common in mucinous borderline tumors
of the intestinal type as it is absent in the endocervical-like form in this
series. Expression of CK7/REG4 may contribute to the differential diagnosis
between primary and metastatic ovarian mucinous tumors.

PMID: 23958547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2013 Sep;85(1):20-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2013.03.018.

The role of CDX2 in Caco-2 cell differentiation.

Natoli M(1), Christensen J, El-Gebali S, Felsani A, Anderle P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Biologia Cellulare e Neurobiologia, CNR, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: CDX2 plays a key part in the differentiation of Caco-2 cells, a colon
carcinoma derived cell line that undergoes spontaneous differentiation. The
effect of CDX2 expression in Caco-2 cells over time in culture has not been
studied yet on a genome-wide level.
METHODS: The impact of CDX2 expression on the genomic profile of Caco-2 cells was
studied by transducing cells with CDX2 targeting shRNAs. Knockdown efficiency was
assessed on mRNA level and protein level by RTPCR, microarrays, and Western
blots. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed to assess regulation of
specific gene sets.
RESULTS: CDX2 expression had an inhibitory effect on the transcriptional activity
of ß-catenin/TCF at early stages of culturing, while at later stages, its role in
the trans-activation of target genes specific for small intestinal enterocytes
seemed more dominant.
CONCLUSIONS: The unique induction of a small intestinal signature upon
differentiation in Caco-2 cells seems to be at least partially under the control 
of CDX2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23958315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Sep;16(9):1191-8. doi: 10.1038/nn.3490. Epub 2013 Aug 18.

Saltatory remodeling of Hox chromatin in response to rostrocaudal patterning
signals.

Mazzoni EO(1), Mahony S, Peljto M, Patel T, Thornton SR, McCuine S, Reeder C,
Boyer LA, Young RA, Gifford DK, Wichterle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and 
Disease, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York, USA. eom204@nyu.edu

Hox genes controlling motor neuron subtype identity are expressed in rostrocaudal
patterns that are spatially and temporally collinear with their chromosomal
organization. Here we demonstrate that Hox chromatin is subdivided into discrete 
domains that are controlled by rostrocaudal patterning signals that trigger
rapid, domain-wide clearance of repressive histone H3 Lys27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) polycomb modifications. Treatment of differentiating mouse neural
progenitors with retinoic acid leads to activation and binding of retinoic acid
receptors (RARs) to the Hox1-Hox5 chromatin domains, which is followed by a rapid
domain-wide removal of H3K27me3 and acquisition of cervical spinal identity. Wnt 
and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signals induce expression of the Cdx2
transcription factor that binds and clears H3K27me3 from the Hox1-Hox9 chromatin 
domains, leading to specification of brachial or thoracic spinal identity. We
propose that rapid clearance of repressive modifications in response to transient
patterning signals encodes global rostrocaudal neural identity and that
maintenance of these chromatin domains ensures the transmission of positional
identity to postmitotic motor neurons later in development.

PMCID: PMC3799941
PMID: 23955559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 13;13:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-32.

Changes in sub-cellular localisation of trophoblast and inner cell mass specific 
transcription factors during bovine preimplantation development.

Madeja ZE(1), Sosnowski J, Hryniewicz K, Warzych E, Pawlak P, Rozwadowska N,
Plusa B, Lechniak D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Poznan University of Life
Sciences, Wolynska 33, Poznan 60-673, Poland. zofia.madeja@jay.up.poznan.pl

BACKGROUND: Preimplantation bovine development is emerging as an attractive
experimental model, yet little is known about the mechanisms underlying
trophoblast (TE)/inner cell mass (ICM) segregation in cattle. To gain an insight 
into these processes we have studied protein and mRNA distribution during the
crucial stages of bovine development. Protein distribution of lineage specific
markers OCT4, NANOG, CDX2 were analysed in 5-cell, 8-16 cell, morula and
blastocyst stage embryos. ICM/TE mRNA levels were compared in hatched blastocysts
and included: OCT4, NANOG, FN-1, KLF4, c-MYC, REX1, CDX2, KRT-18 and GATA6.
RESULTS: At the mRNA level the observed distribution patterns agree with the
mouse model. CDX2 and OCT4 proteins were first detected in 5-cell stage embryos. 
NANOG appeared at the morula stage and was located in the cytoplasm forming
characteristic rings around the nuclei. Changes in sub-cellular localisation of
OCT4, NANOG and CDX2 were noted from the 8-16 cell onwards. CDX2 initially
co-localised with OCT4, but at the blastocyst stage a clear lineage segregation
could be observed. Interestingly, we have observed in a small proportion of
embryos (2%) that CDX2 immunolabelling overlapped with mitotic chromosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Cell fate specification in cattle become evident earlier than
presently anticipated - around the time of bovine embryonic genome activation.
There is an intriguing possibility that for proper lineage determination certain 
transcription factors (such as CDX2) may need to occupy specific regions of
chromatin prior to its activation in the interphase nucleus. Our observation
suggests a possible role of CDX2 in the process of epigenetic regulation of
embryonic cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3751447
PMID: 23941255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Gastroenterology. 2013 Dec;145(6):1300-11. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.08.008.
Epub 2013 Aug 8.

Bile acids increase levels of microRNAs 221 and 222, leading to degradation of
CDX2 during esophageal carcinogenesis.

Matsuzaki J(1), Suzuki H, Tsugawa H, Watanabe M, Hossain S, Arai E, Saito Y,
Sekine S, Akaike T, Kanai Y, Mukaisho K, Auwerx J, Hibi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Internal
Medicine, Saiseikai Central Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Bile reflux contributes to development of Barrett's esophagus 
(BE) and could be involved in its progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC).
We investigated whether bile acids affect levels or functions of microRNAs (MIRs)
221 and 222, which bind to the 3'-UTR of p27Kip1 messenger RNA to inhibit its
translation. Reduced p27Kip1 increases degradation of the transcription factor
CDX2; levels of CDX2 have been reported to decrease during progression of BE to
EAC.
METHODS: We used quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to 
compare levels of MIRs 221 and 222 and immunohistochemistry to compare levels of 
p27Kip1 and CDX2 proteins in areas of BE and EAC from each of 11 patients. We
examined the effects of bile acid exposure on levels of MIRs 221 and 222 and CDX2
in EAC cells. We investigated the effects of inhibitors of MIRs 221 and 222 on
growth of human EAC xenograft tumors in NOD/SCID/IL-2R<U+03B3>(null) mice.
RESULTS: Levels of MIRs 221 and 222 increased and levels of p27Kip1 and CDX2
decreased in areas of EAC vs BE. Levels of MIRs 221 and 222 increased, along with
activity of nuclear bile acid receptor/farnesoid X receptor (FXR), when cultured 
cells were exposed to bile acids. Incubation of cells with bile acids increased
degradation of CDX2; this process was reduced when cells were also incubated with
proteasome inhibitors. Overexpression of MIRs 221 and 222 reduced levels of
p27Kip1 and CDX2, and knockdown of these MIRs increased levels of these proteins 
in cultured cells. Inhibitors of MIRs 221 and 222 increased levels of p27Kip1 and
CDX2 in EAC cells and reduced growth of xenograft tumors in NOD/SCID/IL-2R<U+03B3>(null)
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed increased levels of MIRs 221 and 222 in human EAC
tissues, compared with areas of BE from the same patient. We found that exposure 
of esophageal cells to bile acids activates FXR and increases levels of MIRs 221 
and 222, reducing levels of p27Kip1 and promoting degradation of CDX2 by the
proteasome. Our work opened the perspective of therapeutically targeting this
pathway either via FXR antagonists or inhibitors of MIRs as a treatment option
for BE and EAC.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):57-63. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2804-9. Epub 2013 Aug 
6.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of caudal type homeobox 1 and 2 are associated
with Barrett's esophagus.

Ren D(1), Zheng G, Bream S, Tevebaugh W, Shaheen NJ, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Julius L. Chambers Biomedical Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, 700 George Street, Durham, NC,
27707, USA, rendrjxau@hotmail.com.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jan;59(1):16-8.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE), the premalignant lesion of esophageal
adenocarcinoma, is believed to develop as a result of chronic gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD). Approximately 10 % of subjects with GERD progress to BE.
Genetic, epigenetic and other risk factors may contribute to this
inter-individual variability. Caudal type homeobox 1 (Cdx1) and Caudal type
homeobox 2 (Cdx2) play important regulatory roles in the development of human BE.
AIMS: To determine associations between Cdx1 and Cdx2 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and BE.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples collected from BE (n = 109)
and GERD (n = 223) patients for genotyping of 5 SNPs each of Cdx1 and Cdx2 using 
TaqMan allelic discrimination assays. Odds ratios and 95 % confidence intervals
of SNPs and haplotypes were calculated with a logistic regression model adjusted 
for factors including age, sex and hiatal hernia. Interactions between genetic
variants and these three risk factors were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Older age (=50 years), male sex and hiatal hernia were significantly
associated with BE (P < 0.001). Five variants of Cdx1 SNPs (rs3776082, rs717746
and rs3776083), one Cdx1 haplotype, and three variants of Cdx2 SNPs (rs4769585
and rs3812863) were associated with BE (P < 0.05). Statistically significant
interactions were detected between most of these SNPs and the three risk factors 
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Certain SNPs of Cdx1 and Cdx2 and their interactions with other risk 
factors are associated with BE, and may contribute to human susceptibility to BE.

PMCID: PMC3947210
PMID: 23918153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Aug 5;2013. pii: bcr2013010383. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-010383.

Malignancy knows no boundaries.

Batra S(1), Vaid AK, Bhargava R, Singh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Medanta, The Medicity, Gurgaon, Haryana,
India. sandeepriya2000@yahoo.com

A 47-year-old woman presented with ascites. There was history of large volume
paracentesis and the drained ascitic fluid was found to be positive for malignant
cells. Clinical examination revealed a soft tissue nodule over the skin of right 
iliac fossa and a small umbilical nodule besides presence of ascites. In
addition, the patient had a breast lump of 2×2 cm in upper quadrant of right
breast. Biopsy from the abdominal wall nodule revealed a malignant tumour with
dense desmoplastic response. The tumour cells were pancytokeratin, CA125, WT1
positive and CDX2, CD10, villin, calretinin negative; thus immunohistochemically 
suggesting a primary tumor arising from ovary. Biopsy from breast lump showed
malignant epithelial cells present in sheets with stromal dysplasia.
Immunohistochemically tumour cells were positive for CK7. CA125, WT1, thus
favouring a metastatic carcinoma to breast with possible primary arising from
ovary.

PMCID: PMC3761663
PMID: 23917363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Lung Cancer. 2013 Oct;82(1):143-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.06.010. Epub 2013 
Jul 31.

The clinicopathological significance of Lgr5 expression in lung adenocarcinoma.

Ryuge S(1), Sato Y, Jiang SX, Wang G, Kobayashi M, Nagashio R, Katono K, Iyoda A,
Satoh Y, Masuda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptor 5
(Lgr5), also known as Gpr49, has been identified as a marker of crypt basal
columnar stem cells along the gastrointestinal tract and of bulge stem cells in
the hair follicle. The aims of this study were to immunohistochemically examine
Lgr5 expression in surgically resected non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC),
and evaluate the relationships between Lgr5 expression and the
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis of patients.
METHODS: Lgr5 expression was immunohistochemically studied in 266 consecutive
resected NSCLCs, and its associations with clinicopathological parameters
including TTF-1 and CDX-2 expressions were evaluated. Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis and Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the effect of 
Lgr5 expression on survival.
RESULTS: Lgr5 was detected only in tumors with adenocarcinoma histology, and 16
cases were judged as positive. Among lung adenocarcinomas, Lgr5 expression was
significantly associated with a larger tumor size (> 5 cm) (P = 0.033), higher
pathological TNM stage of the disease (stage II and III) (P = 0.025),
TTF-1-negative adenocarocinoma (P = 0.042), and poorer prognosis (P = 0.026).
However, Lgr5 expression was not an independent predictor of poorer survival
after controlling for clinicopathological factors.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study reveals that Lgr5 is expressed in a subset of lung
adenocarcinoma, and its expression is related to some clinicopathological
parameters and a poorer prognosis, although further studies are required to
clarify the biological function of Lgr5 in lung adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23915911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Genesis. 2013 Nov;51(11):777-84. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22421. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Characterization of a novel transgenic mouse line expressing Cre recombinase
under the control of the Cdx2 neural specific enhancer.

Coutaud B(1), Pilon N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics of Development Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences and BioMed Research Center, Faculty of Sciences, University of Quebec at
Montreal (UQAM), Canada, H2X 3Y7.

Several genetically modified mouse models have been generated in order to drive
expression of the Cre recombinase in the neuroectoderm. However, none of them
specifically targets the posterior neural plate during neurulation. To fill this 
gap, we have generated a new transgenic mouse line in which Cre expression is
controlled by a neural specific enhancer (NSE) from the Caudal-related homeobox 2
(Cdx2) locus. Analyses of Cre activity via breeding with R26R-YFP reporter mice
have indicated that the Cdx2NSE-Cre mouse line allows for recombination of LoxP
sites in most cells of the posterior neural plate as soon as from the head fold
stage. Detailed examination of double-transgenic embryos has revealed that this
novel Cre-driver line allows targeting the entire posterior neural tube with an
anterior limit in the caudal hindbrain. Of note, the Cdx2NSE regulatory sequences
direct Cre expression along the whole dorso-ventral axis (including pre-migratory
neural crest cells) and, accordingly, YFP fluorescence has been also observed in 
multiple non-cranial neural crest derivatives of double-transgenic embryos.
Therefore, we believe that the Cdx2NSE-Cre mouse line represents an important
novel genetic tool for the study of early events occurring in the caudal
neuroectoderm during the formation of both the central and the peripheral nervous
systems.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23913642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Histopathology. 2013 Oct;63(4):534-44. doi: 10.1111/his.12182. Epub 2013 Jul 26.

Claudin-18 overexpression in intestinal-type mucinous borderline tumour of the
ovary.

Halimi SA(1), Maeda D, Shinozaki-Ushiku A, Koso T, Matsusaka K, Tanaka M, Arimoto
T, Oda K, Kawana K, Yano T, Fujii T, Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.

AIMS: Mucinous borderline tumours of the ovary are subclassified as
intestinal-type (IMBT) and endocervical-like (EMBT), which differ in their
clinicopathological features. In this study, we attempted to elucidate
characteristics of the mucinous epithelium in each subtype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of claudin-18, a marker of gastric
differentiation, MUCs, CDX2, CK7, CK20, oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PgR), CA-125 and vimentin in IMBTs (n = 54), EMBTs (n = 25) and serous 
borderline tumours (SBTs) (n = 22) were compared by immunohistochemistry.
Claudin-18 positivity was identified in 98% of the IMBTs, whereas only 4% of the 
EMBTs were claudin-18-positive. Expression of intestinal markers such as CDX2 and
MUC2 was relatively infrequent in IMBTs (48% and 33%, respectively).
Müllerian-lineage markers such as ER, PgR and vimentin were expressed rarely in
IMBTs, while most EMBTs and SBTs were positive for these markers. Hierarchial
clustering revealed a close association between EMBTs and SBTs, while IMBTs were 
clearly separate.
CONCLUSIONS: Claudin-18 positivity is a specific phenotype that is characteristic
of IMBTs. Frequent and diffuse expression of gastric markers, along with less
frequent and usually focal expression of intestinal markers, suggests that IMBTs 
are essentially composed of gastrointestinal-type mucinous epithelium
(gastric-type epithelium with a variable degree of intestinal differentiation).

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23905715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Aug;137(8):1094-8. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0305-OA.

TTF-1 and napsin A do not differentiate metastatic lung adenocarcinomas from
primary esophageal adenocarcinomas: proposal of a novel staining panel.

Aulakh KS(1), Chisholm CD, Smith DA, Speights VO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Scott & White Healthcare, Temple, Texas, USA.

CONTEXT: When adenocarcinomas arise within the esophagus, particularly when
located away from the gastroesophageal junction, it may be important in some
patients to differentiate between a primary esophageal adenocarcinoma and
metastasis from another site. Lung adenocarcinoma is one tumor that has been
reported to frequently metastasize to the esophagus.
OBJECTIVES: To create a panel of immunohistochemical markers that can reliably
distinguish between an esophageal and pulmonary primary; within the
gastrointestinal pathology literature, including published articles and
textbooks, common lung immunohistochemical markers, such as TTF-1, are assumed to
be negative in esophageal adenocarcinoma, yet, to our knowledge, no study has yet
investigated the veracity of that presumption.
DESIGN: In this study, 24 cases each of pulmonary and esophageal adenocarcinomas 
were stained with TTF-1, napsin A, CDX2, 34ßE12, N-cadherin, and IMP3 in an
attempt to define an optimal panel for differentiation. Esophageal
adenocarcinomas occurring at the gastroesophageal junction were excluded in this 
study because a gastric primary tumor cannot be excluded in those cases.
RESULTS: Surprisingly, TTF-1 and napsin A were positive in similar proportions of
tumors from both sites. Those markers that differentiated statistically between
esophageal and pulmonary adenocarcinoma were IMP3, CDX2, and N-cadherin.
CONCLUSIONS: When differentiating the origin of a tumor as either esophageal or
pulmonary, an immunohistochemical panel consisting of IMP3, CDX2, and N-cadherin 
is superior to either TTF-1 or napsin A.

PMID: 23899066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mod Pathol. 2014 Feb;27(2):262-70. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.146. Epub 2013 Jul
26.

KRAS mutational analysis and immunohistochemical studies can help distinguish
pancreatic metastases from primary lung adenocarcinomas.

Krasinskas AM(1), Chiosea SI(1), Pal T(1), Dacic S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.

Lung metastases from primary pancreatic adenocarcinomas often have mucinous
features, which makes them difficult to distinguish from the primary lung
adenocarcinoma. We explored the potential utility of KRAS mutational status and
immunohistochemical studies in the evaluation of adenocarcinomas in the lungs of 
patients with known pancreatic cancer. Metastatic pancreatic cancer cases had
fewer solitary lung lesions (5 (15%) versus 37 (95%) for lung primaries;
P=0.0001), more tumors with pure (100%) mucinous morphology (16 (50%) versus 9
(23%) for lung primaries; P=0.0037), and more frequent KRAS mutations (24 (75%)
versus 18 (46%) for lung primaries; P=0.0093). Presence of the KRAS G12C mutation
had 96% specificity and positive predictive value for lung adenocarcinoma,
whereas G12R was 99% specific for pancreatic cancer with a positive predictive
value of 86%. Of the 18 KRAS mutated mucinous lung tumors, only 3 (16%) occurred 
in nonsmokers. Conversely, of the 19 KRAS mutated pancreatic cancer metastases,
11 (58%) occurred in nonsmokers. The median overall survival was significantly
shorter for patients with metastatic tumors when compared with patients with
primary mucinous tumors (19 months, 95% confidence interval, 10-28 months versus 
55 months, 95% confidence interval, 39-70 months, P=0.005). CK20 and CDX2
positivity supported metastatic pancreatic cancer, whereas TTF-1 positivity
supported primary lung adenocarcinoma. In summary, KRAS G12C mutations, TTF-1,
and napsin A were associated with primary lung adenocarcinoma, whereas KRAS G12R 
mutations, CK20, and CDX2 favored pancreatic adenocarcinoma. We showed survival
differences for patients whose pancreatic metastases were synchronous versus
metachronous to their primary tumors, and for patients with mucinous pancreatic
cancer metastases versus primary mucinous lung adenocarcinomas. Differences in
KRAS mutations reflect differences in exposure to tobacco smoking and highlight
biological differences between two KRAS oncogene-driven cancers.

PMCID: PMC4091042
PMID: 23887294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Eur Surg Res. 2013;51(1-2):14-20. doi: 10.1159/000353612. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Embryonic transcription factors CDX2 and Oct4 are overexpressed in neuroendocrine
tumors of the ileum: a pilot study.

Heverhagen AE(1), Geis C, Fendrich V, Ramaswamy A, Montalbano R, Di Fazio P,
Bartsch DK, Ocker M, Quint K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Philipp University of
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) of the ileum are rare submucosal tumors 
that are often diagnosed at advanced stages with metastatic spread to the liver
causing a carcinoid syndrome. They present as solitary or multiple tumors. In
NETs, loss of sequences on chromosomes 11, 16, 18 and 22 or gain of sequences on 
chromosomes 17 and 19 has been described. In this study we explored the
expression of two novel candidate genes, CDX2 and Oct4, in NETs of the ileum and 
analyzed whether the molecular expression pattern correlates with the clinical
phenotype (solitary/multiple tumors).
METHODS: Data from all patients who underwent surgery for a NET of the ileum
between 2000 and 2010 were retrieved from a prospective database. For each
patient, frozen normal and tumor tissue was used for the comparison of gene
expression levels of two putative cancer stem cell markers, CDX2 and Oct4, using 
real-time PCR (rtPCR). Serial slides from paraffin blocks were used for
immunohistochemistry. Gene expression was compared between normal and tumor
tissue as well as between solitary and multiple tumors.
RESULTS: 78 patients were identified. In rtPCR, a statistically significant
higher expression of CDX2 in tumor tissue (p < 0.001) compared to normal tissue
was found. The expression of Oct4 was elevated in the tumors, but did not reach
the level of significance (p = 0.155). The expression of both candidate genes was
confirmed immunohistochemically and showed a nuclear expression pattern. There
was no difference in expression between solitary and multiple tumors or between
tumors that had already spread to the liver.
CONCLUSION: CDX2 is overexpressed in ileum NETs, thus playing a role in the
tumorigenesis of these rare tumors. Since expression does not correlate with
clinical stage or phenotype, it might be an early event in tumor development.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23887079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2013 Mar;35(3):164-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2013.03.002.

[Morphological observation of human gastric cancer cell SGC-7901 clones and
identification of gastric cancer stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang HQ(1), Zhou ZH, Zhang YL, Xu M, Xu P, Wu Y, Wang YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang 212001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To dynamically investigate the morphology of human gastric cancer
SGC-7901 cell clones, and then compare the tumorigenic ability of different
clones in order to identify the tumor stem cell clones.
METHODS: Clones derived from gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells were assessed by
morphological observation, and the clone formation rate and proportion of each
clone were calculated. The expression of CD44 and CDX2 in different clones was
detected by immunofluorescence microscopy and Western blot. Furthermore,
different clones were isolated and cultured, and their self-renewal property was 
assayed. Cells of different clones were subcutaneously inoculated into nude mice 
and the tumorigenic ability of each group was determined.
RESULTS: Clones derived from gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells had three types, i.e. 
clones of tight, transitional and loose types. The total clone formation rate was
(9.80 ± 1.07)%, and the proportion of tight, transitional and loose type clones
was 10.2%, 56.0% and 33.8%, respectively. The results of immunofluorescence
microscopic examination showed that the signal of CD44 was significantly stronger
in the tight clones than in the transitional and loose clones, however, the
signal of CDX2 was weakest in the tight colonies. The results of Western blot
were consistent with that of immunofluorescence microscopic observation. SGC-7901
cells of tight clones possessed strong ability of self-renewal and in vivo
tumorigenicity in the nude mice.
CONCLUSION: SGC-7901 cell clones vary in morphology and differentiation, and the 
tight type clones may include rich gastric cancer stem cells.

PMID: 23879994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Int J Dev Biol. 2013;57(5):391-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.120048ah.

The Parahox gene Pdx1 is required to maintain positional identity in the adult
foregut.

Holland AM(1), Garcia S, Naselli G, Macdonald RJ, Harrison LC.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. AMHolland35@gmail.com

The homeobox gene Pdx1 is a key regulator of pancreas and foregut development.
Loss of Pdx1 expression results in pancreas agenesis and impaired development of 
the gastro-duodenal domain including Brunner<U+0092>s glands. We previously demonstrated
a key role for Pdx1 in maintaining the integrity and function of
insulin-secreting beta cells in the adult pancreas. In the present study, we
aimed to determine if expression of Pdx1 is required to maintain the cellular
identity of the gastro-duodenal domain in adult mice. Immunohistological studies 
were performed in a mouse model in which expression of Pdx1 was conditionally
repressed with the doxycycline-responsive tetracycline transactivator system.
Mice in which Pdx1 was chronically repressed developed hamartomas in the
gastro-duodenal domain. These lesions appeared to arise from ectopic foci of
anteriorized cells, consistent with a localised anterior homeotic shift. They
emerge with the intercalation of tissue between the anteriorized and normal
domains and appear strikingly similar to lesions in the colon of mice
heterozygous for another Parahox gene, Cdx2. Continuing expression of Pdx1 into
adult life is required to maintain regional cellular identity in the adult
foregut, specifically at the gastro-duodenal boundary. Loss of Pdx1 expression
leads to anterior transformation and intercalary regeneration of ectopic tissue. 
We propose a model in which the posterior dominance of classical Hox genes is
mirrored by the Parahox genes, providing further evidence of the functional
conservation of the Parahox genes. These findings may have implications for
further understanding the molecular basis of gastro-duodenal metaplasia and
gastro-intestinal transformations such as Barrett<U+0092>s esophagus.

PMID: 23873371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mod Pathol. 2014 Jan;27(1):145-55. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.104. Epub 2013 Jul
19.

Distinct patterns of DNA methylation in conventional adenomas involving the right
and left colon.

Koestler DC(1), Li J(1), Baron JA(1), Tsongalis GJ(2), Butterly LF(3), Goodrich
M(1), Lesseur C(1), Karagas MR(1), Marsit CJ(4), Moore JH(5), Andrew AS(1),
Srivastava A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community and Family Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth College, Lebanon, NH, USA. (2)Department of Pathology,
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA. (4)1]
Department of Community and Family Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth College, Lebanon, NH, USA [2] Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA.
(5)1] Department of Community and Family Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth College, Lebanon, NH, USA [2] Department of Genetics, Geisel School of 
Medicine at Dartmouth College, Lebanon, NH, USA. (6)Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Recent studies have shown two distinct non-CIMP methylation clusters in
colorectal cancer, raising the possibility that DNA methylation, involving
non-CIMP genes, may play a role in the conventional adenoma-carcinoma pathway. A 
total of 135 adenomas (65 left colon and 70 right colon) were profiled for
epigenome-wide DNA methylation using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. A
principal components analysis was performed to examine the association between
variability in DNA methylation and adenoma location. Linear regression and linear
mixed effects models were used to identify locus-specific differential DNA
methylation in adenomas of right and left colon. A significant association was
present between the first principal component and adenoma location (P=0.007),
even after adjustment for subject age and gender (P=0.009). A total of 168 CpG
sites were differentially methylated between right- and left-colon adenomas and
these loci demonstrated enrichment of homeobox genes (P=3.0 × 10(-12)). None of
the 168 probes were associated with CIMP genes. Among CpG loci with the largest
difference in methylation between right- and left-colon adenomas, probes
associated with PRAC (prostate cancer susceptibility candidate) gene showed
hypermethylation in right-colon adenomas whereas those associated with CDX2
(caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2) showed hypermethylation in
left-colon adenomas. A subgroup of left-colon adenomas enriched for current
smokers (OR=6.1, P=0.004) exhibited a methylation profile similar to right-colon 
adenomas. In summary, our results indicate distinct patterns of DNA methylation, 
independent of CIMP genes, in adenomas of the right and left colon.

PMCID: PMC3880603
PMID: 23868178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jul 14;19(26):4155-65. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i26.4155.

Reversal of multidrug resistance in gastric cancer cells by CDX2 downregulation.

Yan LH(1), Wang XT, Yang J, Lian C, Kong FB, Wei WY, Luo W, Xiao Q, Xie YB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.

AIM: To explore the role of CDX2 in the multi-drug resistance (MDR) process of
gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: A cisplatin-resistant gastric cancer cell line with stable
downregulation of CDX2 was established. mRNA and protein expression levels of
CDX2, survivin, cyclin D1, and c-Myc were detected by western blotting and
semi-quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The
influence of downregulation of CDX2 on MDR was assessed by measuring IC50 of
SGC7901/DDP cells to cisplatin, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil, rate of
doxorubicin efflux, apoptosis, and cell cycle progression detected by flow
cytometry. In addition, we determined the in vivo effects of CDX2 small
interfering RNA (siRNA) on tumor size, and apoptotic cells in tumor tissues were 
detected by deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling
and hematoxylin and eosin staining.
RESULTS: CDX2 siRNA led to downregulation of endogenous CDX2 mRNA (0.31 ± 0.05 vs
1.10 ± 0.51, 0.31 ± 0.05 vs 1.05 ± 0.21, P = 0.003) and protein (0.12 ± 0.08 vs
0.51 ± 0.07, 0.12 ± 0.08 vs 0.55 ± 0.16, P = 2.57 × 10(-4)) expression. It
significantly promoted the sensitivity of SGC7901/DDP cells to cisplatin (0.12 ± 
0.05 vs 0.33 ± 0.08, 0.12 ± 0.05 vs 0.39 ± 0.15, P = 0.001), doxorubicin (0.52 ± 
0.13 vs 4.11 ± 1.25, 0.52 ± 0.13 vs 4.05 ± 1.44, P = 2.81 × 10(-4)), and
5-fluorouracil (0.82 ± 0.13 vs 2.81 ± 0.51, 0.82 ± 0.13 vs 3.28 ± 1.03, P = 1.71 
× 10(-4)). Flow cytometry confirmed that the percentage of apoptotic cells
increased after CDX2 downregulation (32.15% ± 2.15% vs 17.63% ± 3.16%, 32.15% ±
2.15% vs 19.3% ± 2.25%, P = 1.73 × 10(-6)). This notion was further supported by 
the observation that downregulation of CDX2 blocked entry into the S-phase of the
cell cycle (31.53% ± 3.78% vs 65.05% ± 7.25%, 31.53% ± 3.78% vs 62.27% ± 5.02%, P
= 7.55 × 10(-7)). Furthermore, downregulation of CDX2 significantly increased
intracellular accumulation of doxorubicin (0.21 ± 0.06 vs 0.41 ± 0.11, 0.21 ±
0.06 vs 0.40 ± 0.08, P = 0.003). In molecular studies, semiquantitative RT-PCR
and western blotting revealed that CDX2 downregulation could inhibit expression
of c-Myc, survivin and cyclin D1.
CONCLUSION: CDX2 may be involved in regulating multiple signaling pathways in
reversing MDR, suggesting that CDX2 may represent a novel target for gastric
cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3710417
PMID: 23864778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pathology. 2013 Aug;45(5):513-6. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e3283635976.

Endometriosis in appendix and adjacent caecum with intestinal gland
differentiation.

Kim J, Russell P, Arendse M, Lim C, Kedziora A.

PMID: 23856844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Stem Cells. 2013 Oct;31(10):2104-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.1466.

Tuning of ß-catenin activity is required to stabilize self-renewal of rat
embryonic stem cells.

Meek S(1), Wei J, Sutherland L, Nilges B, Buehr M, Tomlinson SR, Thomson AJ,
Burdon T.

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and R(D)VS, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush,
Midlothian, United Kingdom.

Stabilization of ß-catenin, through inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase 3
(GSK3) activity, in conjunction with inhibition of mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase 1/2 (MEK) promotes self-renewal of naïve-type mouse embryonic stem 
cells (ESC). In developmentally more advanced, primed-type, epiblast stem cells, 
however, ß-catenin activity induces differentiation. We investigated the response
of rat ESCs to ß-catenin signaling and found that when maintained on
feeder-support cells in the presence of a MEK inhibitor alone (1i culture), the
derivation efficiency, growth, karyotypic stability, transcriptional profile, and
differentiation potential of rat ESC cultures was similar to that of cell lines
established using both MEK and GSK3 inhibitors (2i culture). Equivalent mouse
ESCs, by comparison, differentiated in identical 1i conditions, consistent with
insufficient ß-catenin activity. This interspecies difference in reliance on GSK3
inhibition corresponded with higher overall levels of ß-catenin activity in rat
ESCs. Indeed, rat ESCs displayed widespread expression of the
mesendoderm-associated ß-catenin targets, Brachyury and Cdx2 in 2i medium, and
overt differentiation upon further increases in ß-catenin activity. In contrast, 
mouse ESCs were resistant to differentiation at similarly elevated doses of GSK3 
inhibitor. Interestingly, without feeder support, moderate levels of GSK3
inhibition were necessary to support effective growth of rat ESC, confirming the 
conserved role for ß-catenin in ESC self-renewal. This work identifies ß-catenin 
signaling as a molecular rheostat in rat ESC, regulating self-renewal in a
dose-dependent manner, and highlights the potential importance of controlling
flux in this signaling pathway to achieve effective stabilization of naïve
pluripotency.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23843312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cytotechnology. 2014 May;66(3):525-32. doi: 10.1007/s10616-013-9603-1. Epub 2013 
Jul 10.

The effect of valproic acid on bovine oocyte maturation and early embryonic
development in vitro.

Gao H(1), Bai H, Ao X, Sa R, Wang H, Wang Z, Yue Y, Yu H.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Mammal Reproductive Biology and Biotechnology, Ministry 
of Education, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010021, China.

Our objective is to investigate the effect of valproic acid (VPA), a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, on early embryonic development. We studied the effect of
VPA on the in vitro maturation of bovine oocytes, and on the development of
bovine embryos derived from in vitro fertilization (IVF) or parthenogenesis.
Germinal vesicle stage bovine oocytes were cultured with different concentrations
of VPA for 24 h; low dose VPA treatment (0.03 and 0.3 mM) had no effect on oocyte
maturation, but 3 and 6 mM VPA significantly decreased maturation rate; when used
for IVF or parthenogenesis, VPA-treated oocytes generated significantly lowered
blastocyst rate. Oocytes matured in vitro were fertilized or underwent
parthenogenetic activation; 6 h later, they were exposed to VPA for 48 h, and
then the cleavage rate, blastocyst rate and mRNA expression levels of
transcription factors (Oct4, Nanog, and Cdx2) were assessed. For embryos cultured
in 0.3 mM VPA, there was no remarkable change in cleavage rate or blastocyst
rate, but the expression of Oct4 and Nanog in blastocysts was significantly
increased. For embryos treated with 3.0 mM VPA, the cleavage rate and blastocyst 
rate were significantly decreased. In conclusion, low dose VPA has no effect on
oocyte maturation but affects subsequent embryonic development. Low dose VPA
administration to IVF embryos had no effect on embryonic development, but the
expression of several important transcription factors was increased. Treatment of
IVF embryos with low dose VPA may improve their development potential.

PMCID: PMC3973791
PMID: 23839299  [PubMed]


421. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Oct;80(10):826-39. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22212. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

CDX2 regulates multiple trophoblast genes in bovine trophectoderm CT-1 cells.

Schiffmacher AT(1), Keefer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland.

The bovine trophectoderm (TE) undergoes a dramatic morphogenetic transition prior
to uterine endometrial attachment. Many studies have documented
trophoblast-specific gene expression profiles at various pre-attachment stages,
yet genetic interactions within the transitioning TE gene regulatory network are 
not well characterized. During bovine embryogenesis, transcription factors OCT4
and CDX2 are co-expressed during early trophoblast elongation. In this study, the
bovine trophectoderm-derived CT-1 cell line was utilized as a genetic model to
examine the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within the bovine trophoblast gene regulatory 
network. An RT-PCR screen for TE-lineage transcription factors identified
expression of CDX2, ERRB, ID2, SOX15, ELF5, HAND1, and ASCL2. CT-1 cells also
express a nuclear-localized, 360 amino acid OCT4 ortholog of the
pluripotency-specific human OCT4A. To delineate the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within
the CT-1 gene network, CDX2 and OCT4 levels were manipulated via overexpression
and siRNA-mediated knockdown. An increase in CDX2 negatively regulated OCT4
expression, but increased expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, SOX15, and ELF5. A
reduction of CDX2 levels exhibited a reciprocal effect, resulting in decreased
expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, and SOX15. Both overexpression and knockdown of
CDX2 increased ETS2 transcription. In contrast to CDX2, manipulation of OCT4
levels only revealed a positive autoregulatory mechanism and upregulation of
ASCL2. Together, these results suggest that CDX2 is a core regulator of multiple 
trophoblast genes within CT-1 cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23836438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):2213-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.05.003. Epub 2013
Jul 5.

Intestinal and pancreatobiliary differentiation in periampullary carcinoma: the
role of immunohistochemistry.

Kumari N(1), Prabha K, Singh RK, Baitha DK, Krishnani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow 266014, India. Electronic address: niraj@sgpgi.ac.in.

Periampullary carcinoma (PC) is classified into intestinal and pancreatobiliary
subtypes using morphology and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Different combinations 
of markers have been used in the literature. One hundred eight PCs were
classified using morphology and IHC (CDX2, mucin [MUC] 2, cytokeratin [CK] 20,
CK7, CK17, and MUC1). The expression of these markers was compared with different
histologic subtypes, histopathologic prognostic parameters, and patients'
survival. There were 38 intestinal and 53 pancreatobiliary subtypes classified on
morphology alone. CDX2 showed high sensitivity (89.5%) and specificity (100%) for
intestinal type. CK20 and MUC2 showed low sensitivity (50% and 39.5%) but high
specificity (86.8% and 96.2%) for intestinal type. CK7 and CK17 showed a
sensitivity of 90.5% and 32% and a specificity of 21% and 89.4%, respectively,
for pancreatobiliary subtype. MUC1 was 100% sensitive but 0% specific in
pancreatobiliary subtype. The overall median survival in morphologic and IHC
intestinal type was 45 months versus 20 months in pancreatobiliary type (P =
0.01). Intestinal and pancreatobiliary types of PC were differentiated in 84.2%
of cases by morphology alone and in 87.9% cases with IHC. CDX2-positive tumors
had a median survival of 44 months versus 22 months in CDX2-negative tumors (P = 
.03). IHC helped in reclassifying an additional 4 cases of mixed and other types.
Among the panel used, CDX2 showed a high sensitivity and specificity for
intestinal subtype and was an independent prognostic marker for longer survival. 
Thus, CDX2 may be used routinely with morphology in subtyping of PC, and a panel 
of markers may be used in morphologically difficult cases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23834763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Gastric Cancer. 2014 Apr;17(2):263-72. doi: 10.1007/s10120-013-0281-7. Epub 2013 
Jul 5.

Mucin phenotype expression of gastric neuroendocrine neoplasms: analysis of
histopathology and carcinogenesis.

Domori K(1), Nishikura K, Ajioka Y, Aoyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Diagnostic Pathology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan, doumori-nii@umin.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Gastric neuroendocrine neoplasia has been classified as
neuroendocrine tumor (NET), a less-malignant type, and neuroendocrine carcinoma
(NEC), a more-malignant type. We investigated phenotypic expression profiles to
clarify the differences between NET and NEC in terms of histopathology and
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We assayed 86 cases of gastric neuroendocrine neoplasms (NET G1, n = 25;
NET G2, n = 9; NEC, n = 52), using six exocrine markers (MUC5AC, human gastric
mucin, MUC6, M-GGMC-1, MUC2, and CDX2).
RESULTS: NEC frequently coexisted with adenocarcinomatous components (75 %; 39 of
52) and the majority (71.8 %; 28 of 39) showed intraglandular endocrine cell
hyperplasia, although no cases of NET showed adenocarcinomatous components. Mucin
phenotype significantly differed between NET and NEC; none of NET cases expressed
any exocrine markers other than CDX2, although the majority of NEC (86.5 %; 45 of
52) expressed at least one or more exocrine markers with various positive rates
for each marker (range, 8.2-74.0 %). Each NEC component showed only the phenotype
expressed in the adenocarcinomatous component in the same tumor. Furthermore,
double immunohistochemistry revealed dual expression of CDX2 and chromogranin A
in half the NEC cases (23 of 46).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that gastric NETs (G1 and G2) and NECs have
different processes of carcinogenesis, and gastric NECs may be generated from
preceding adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 23828549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mod Pathol. 2014 Jan;27(1):73-86. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.112. Epub 2013 Jul 
5.

Intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct: stepwise progression to
carcinoma involves common molecular pathways.

Schlitter AM(1), Born D(2), Bettstetter M(3), Specht K(1), Kim-Fuchs C(4), Riener
MO(5), Jeliazkova P(6), Sipos B(7), Siveke JT(6), Terris B(8), Zen Y(9), Schuster
T(10), Höfler H(1), Perren A(2), Klöppel G(1), Esposito I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, München, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. (3)Molecular
Pathology South Bavaria, Trogerstr. 18, München, Germany. (4)Department of
Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland. (5)Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (6)Department of
Internal Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München,
München, Germany. (7)Institute of Pathology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany. (8)Division of Pathological Anatomy, Hôpital Cochin, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France. (9)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital,
London, UK. (10)Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, Technische
Universität München, München, Germany.

Intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct are still poorly characterized
regarding (1) their molecular alterations during the development to invasive
carcinomas, (2) their subtype stratification and (3) their biological behavior.
We performed a multicenter study that analyzed these issues in a large European
cohort. Intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct from 45 patients were
graded and subtyped using mucin markers and CDX2. In addition, tumors were
analyzed for common oncogenic pathways, and the findings were correlated with
subtype and grade. Data were compared with those from 22 extra- and intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas. Intraductal papillary neoplasms showed a development from
preinvasive low- to high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia to invasive carcinoma.
Molecular and immunohistochemical analysis revealed mutated KRAS, overexpression 
of TP53 and loss of p16 in low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia, whereas loss of
SMAD4 was found in late phases of tumor development. Alterations of HER2, EGFR,
ß-catenin and GNAS were rare events. Among the subtypes, pancreato-biliary (36%) 
and intestinal (29%) were the most common, followed by gastric (18%) and
oncocytic (13%) subtypes. Patients with intraductal papillary neoplasm of the
bile duct showed a slightly better overall survival than patients with
cholangiocarcinoma (hazard ratio (cholangiocarcinoma versus intraductal papillary
neoplasm of the bile duct): 1.40; 95% confidence interval: 0.46-4.30; P=0.552).
The development of biliary intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct
follows an adenoma-carcinoma sequence that correlates with the stepwise
activation of common oncogenic pathways. Further large trials are needed to
investigate and verify the finding of a better prognosis of intraductal papillary
neoplasms compared with conventional cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 23828315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2014;29(1):44-51. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells into functional
enterocyte-like cells using a simple method.

Iwao T(1), Toyota M, Miyagawa Y, Okita H, Kiyokawa N, Akutsu H, Umezawa A, Nagata
K, Matsunaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nagoya City University.

  Human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells were differentiated into the
endoderm using activin A and were then treated with fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF2) for differentiation into intestinal stem cell-like cells. These immature
cells were then differentiated into enterocyte-like cells using epidermal growth 
factor (EGF) in 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS). At the early stage of
differentiation, mRNA expression of caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), a major
transcription factor related to intestinal development and differentiation, and
leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptor 5 (LGR5), an intestinal
stem cell marker, was markedly increased by treatment with FGF2. When cells were 
cultured in medium containing EGF and a low concentration of FBS, mRNAs of
specific markers of intestinal epithelial cells, including sucrase-isomaltase,
the intestinal oligopeptide transporter SLC15A1/peptide transporter 1 (PEPT1),
and the major metabolizing enzyme CYP3A4, were expressed. In addition,
sucrase-isomaltase protein expression and uptake of
ß-Ala-Lys-N-7-amino-4-methylcoumarin-3-acetic acid (ß-Ala-Lys-AMCA), a
fluorescence-labeled substrate of the oligopeptide transporter, were detected.
These results demonstrate a simple and direct method for differentiating human
iPS cells into functional enterocyte-like cells.

PMID: 23822979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Tumour Biol. 2013 Dec;34(6):3437-41. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-0919-4. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Association between vitamin D receptor gene Cdx2 polymorphism and breast cancer
susceptibility.

Zhou ZC(1), Wang J, Cai ZH, Zhang QH, Cai ZX, Wu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12 Wulumuqi
Zhong Road, Shanghai, 200040, China.

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms have been reported to influence
susceptibility to breast cancer. However, published findings on the association
between VDR Cdx2 polymorphism and breast cancer susceptibility are conflicting.
To get a precise estimation of the association between VDR Cdx2 polymorphism and 
breast cancer susceptibility, we conducted a meta-analysis of four case-control
studies with a total of 8,880 subjects (3,841 cases and 5,039 controls). The
results showed that VDR Cdx2 polymorphism was not associated with risk of breast 
cancer (A versus G: OR = 0.96, 95% CI 0.84-1.09; AA versus GG: OR = 0.97, 95% CI 
0.64-1.45; AA/GA versus GG: OR = 0.94, 95% CI 0.80-1.10; AA versus GG/GA: OR =
0.99, 95% CI 0.65-1.51). Subgroup analysis in Caucasians also showed that VDR
Cdx2 polymorphism was not associated with risk of breast cancer in Caucasians.
However, there was a significant association in Africans (A versus G: OR = 0.75, 
95% CI 0.60-0.94; AA versus GG: OR = 0.53, 95% CI 0.29-0.99; AA/GA versus GG: OR 
= 0.75, 95% CI 0.57-0.97). Therefore, the association between VDR Cdx2
polymorphism and breast cancer susceptibility is only found in Africans. More
studies are needed to further assess the association in Asians or Africans.

PMID: 23821301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Vet Sci. 2014;15(1):73-80. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

A simplified one-step nuclear transfer procedure alters the gene expression
patterns and developmental potential of cloned porcine embryos.

Park SK(1), Roh S, Park JI.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming and Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University School of Dentistry, Seoul 110-749, Korea.

Various somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) techniques for mammalian species
have been developed to adjust species-specific procedures to oocyte-associated
differences among species. Species-specific SCNT protocols may result in
different expression levels of developmentally important genes that may affect
embryonic development and pregnancy. In the present study, porcine oocytes were
treated with demecolcine that facilitated enucleation with protruding genetic
material. Enucleation and donor cell injection were performed either
simultaneously with a single pipette (simplified one-step SCNT; SONT) or
separately with different pipettes (conventional two-step SCNT; CTNT) as the
control procedure. After blastocysts from both groups were cultured in vitro, the
expression levels of developmentally important genes (OCT4, NANOG, EOMES, CDX2,
GLUT-1, PolyA, and HSP70) were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction. Both the developmental rate according to blastocyst stage as well
as the expression levels CDX2, EOMES, and HSP70 were elevated with SONT compared 
to CTNT. The genes with elevated expression are known to influence trophectoderm 
formation and heat stress-induced arrest. These results showed that our SONT
technique improved the development of SCNT porcine embryos, and increased the
expression of genes that are important for placental formation and stress-induced
arrest.

PMCID: PMC3973768
PMID: 23820223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Int J Clin Oncol. 2014;19(3):479-84. doi: 10.1007/s10147-013-0583-0. Epub 2013
Jun 28.

Carcinoma of unknown primary with gastrointestinal profile: immunohistochemistry 
and survival data for this favorable subset.

Varadhachary GR(1), Karanth S, Qiao W, Carlson HR, Raber MN, Hainsworth JD, Greco
FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 426, Houston, TX,
77030-4009, USA, gvaradha@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Carcinoma of unknown primary with a "gastrointestinal profile" is an 
emerging, favorable entity. Distinguishing this entity is of increasing
significance given the progress in the treatment of colorectal cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 74 carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP) patients with CDX2+
tumors were chosen from the databases at M.D. Anderson and Sarah Cannon Cancer
Centers between 2004 and 2010. Data on clinical and pathological characteristics 
including therapy and survival were recorded.
RESULTS: 20 patients had ascites on presentation; the predominant sites of
metastases included liver (30 %), carcinomatosis (50 %), and nodes (51 %). Based 
on immunohistochemistry, 2 cohorts were created: Cohort 1-"consistent with lower 
GI profile" included 34 patients [CDX-2+, CK20+, CK7-] and Cohort 2-"probable
lower GI profile" included 40 patients [CDX2+, irrespective of CK7/CK20 status]. 
Excluding 6 outliers, Cohorts 1 and 2 had 32 and 36 patients, respectively; their
median survivals were 37 and 21 months, respectively. On multivariate Cox
regression analysis, only liver metastases were found to negatively influence
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our retrospective study provides encouraging indications that CUP
patients with gastrointestinal profiles benefit from site-specific therapy. We
recommend all CUP patients, especially those with abdominal nodes, isolated
carcinomatosis or liver metastases, to undergo optimal immunohistochemistry (IHC)
to check for a gastrointestinal profile of CUP.

PMID: 23813044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mod Pathol. 2013 Dec;26(12):1642-56. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.101. Epub 2013
Jun 28.

Expression of MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC6 mucins in colorectal cancers and
their association with the CpG island methylator phenotype.

Walsh MD(1), Clendenning M, Williamson E, Pearson SA, Walters RJ, Nagler B,
Packenas D, Win AK, Hopper JL, Jenkins MA, Haydon AM, Rosty C, English DR, Giles 
GG, McGuckin MA, Young JP, Buchanan DD.

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer and Population Studies Group, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Herston, QLD, Australia [2] Department of Histopathology, Sullivan
Nicolaides Pathology, Taringa, QLD, Australia.

Mucinous differentiation is associated with both CpG island methylator phenotype 
and microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer. The mucinous phenotype
derives from abundant expression of the colonic goblet cell mucin, MUC2, and de
novo expression of gastric foveolar mucin, MUC5AC. We, therefore, investigated
the protein expression levels of MUC2 and MUC5AC, as well as MUC5B and MUC6, in
molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer. Seven-hundred and twenty-two incident
colorectal carcinomas occurring in 702 participants of the Melbourne
Collaborative Cohort Study were characterized for methylator status, MLH1
methylation, somatic BRAF and KRAS mutations, microsatellite-instability status, 
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 mismatch repair, and p53 protein expression, and their
histopathology was reviewed. Protein expression levels of MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B,
MUC6, and the putative mucin regulator CDX2 were compared with molecular and
clinicopathological features of colorectal cancers using odds ratios and
corresponding 95% confidence intervals. MUC2 overexpression (>25% positive tumor 
cells) was observed in 33% colorectal cancers, MUC5B expression in 53%, and de
novo MUC5AC and MUC6 expression in 50% and 39%, respectively. Co-expression of
two or more of the mucins was commonly observed. Expression of MUC2, MUC5AC and
MUC6 was strongly associated with features associated with tumorigenesis via the 
serrated neoplasia pathway, including methylator positivity, somatic BRAF p.V600E
mutation, and mismatch repair deficiency, as well as proximal location, poor
differentiation, lymphocytic response, and increased T stage (all P<0.001).
Overexpression was observed in tumors with and without mucinous differentiation. 
There were inverse associations between expression of all four mucins and p53
overexpression. CDX2 expression was inversely associated with MUC2, MUC5AC and
MUC6 expression. Our results suggest that, in methylator-positive tumors, mucin
genes on chromosome 11p15.5 region undergo increased expression via mechanisms
other than direct regulation by CDX2.

PMID: 23807779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biotechnol Lett. 2013 Nov;35(11):1799-806. doi: 10.1007/s10529-013-1264-9. Epub
2013 Jun 26.

MiR-424 regulates monocytic differentiation of human leukemia U937 cells by
directly targeting CDX2.

Shen X(1), Tang J, Hu J, Guo L, Xing Y, Xi T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, 210009, People's Republic of China, shenxiaocpu@163.com.

MiR-424 plays an important role via promoting the monocytic differentiation in
many human leukemia cell lines. Here, we report that miR-424 decreased miR-125b
expression to 36 % by directly targeting caudal type homeobox 2. However, miR-424
also decreased expression of Fes, PU.1 and colony-stimulating factor receptor
(MCSFR). As Fes, PU.1 and MCSFR were down-regulated by over-expression of
miR-125b (unpublished work), a similar effect of miR-424 and Fes siRNA on CD64,
Egr-1, Egr-2 and CEBPA indicates that Fes may be an important downstream target
of miR-424. We hypothesize that miR-424 promotes monocytic differentiation by
regulating other critical factors and miR-424 has high affinity for these
factors. For the first time, the molecular mechanism of miR-424 during monocytic 
differentiation of U937 cells has been elucidated in this study.

PMID: 23801117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 14;8(6):e66230. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066230. Print 2013.

Dynamics of DNA methylation during early development of the preimplantation
bovine embryo.

Dobbs KB(1), Rodriguez M, Sudano MJ, Ortega MS, Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, D.H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology 
Research Program, and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America.

There is species divergence in control of DNA methylation during preimplantation 
development. The exact pattern of methylation in the bovine embryo has not been
established nor has its regulation by gender or maternal signals that regulate
development such as colony stimulating factor 2 (CSF2). Using immunofluorescent
labeling with anti-5-methylcytosine and embryos produced with X-chromosome sorted
sperm, it was demonstrated that methylation decreased from the 2-cell stage to
the 6-8 cell stage and then increased thereafter up to the blastocyst stage. In a
second experiment, embryos of specific genders were produced by fertilization
with X- or Y-sorted sperm. The developmental pattern was similar to the first
experiment, but there was stage × gender interaction. Methylation was greater for
females at the 8-cell stage but greater for males at the blastocyst stage.
Treatment with CSF2 had no effect on labeling for DNA methylation in blastocysts.
Methylation was lower for inner cell mass cells (i.e., cells that did not label
with anti-CDX2) than for trophectoderm (CDX2-positive). The possible role for
DNMT3B in developmental changes in methylation was evaluated by determining gene 
expression and degree of methylation. Steady-state mRNA for DNMT3B decreased from
the 2-cell stage to a nadir for D 5 embryos >16 cells and then increased at the
blastocyst stage. High resolution melting analysis was used to assess methylation
of a CpG rich region in an intronic region of DNMT3B. Methylation percent
decreased between the 6-8 cell and the blastocyst stage but there was no
difference in methylation between ICM and TE. Results indicate that DNA
methylation undergoes dynamic changes during the preimplantation period in a
manner that is dependent upon gender and cell lineage. Developmental changes in
expression of DNMT3B are indicative of a possible role in changes in methylation.
Moreover, DNMT3B itself appears to be under epigenetic control by methylation.

PMCID: PMC3683128
PMID: 23799080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Sep;14(9):782-95. doi: 10.4161/cbt.25362. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Signaling pathways in the molecular pathogenesis of adenocarcinomas of the
esophagus and gastroesophageal junction.

Clemons NJ(1), Phillips WA(1), Lord RV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Oncology Research Laboratory; Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre; East
Melbourne, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology; University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; Department of Surgery (St. Vincent's Hospital); 
University of Melbourne; Melbourne, Australia. (2)St. Vincent's Centre for
Applied Medical Research; Sydney, Australia; Notre Dame University School of
Medicine; Sydney, Australia.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma develops in response to severe gastroesophageal reflux 
disease through the precursor lesion Barrett esophagus, in which the normal
squamous epithelium is replaced by a columnar lining. The incidence of esophageal
adenocarcinoma in the United States has increased by over 600% in the past 40
years and the overall survival rate remains less than 20% in the community. This 
review highlights some of the signaling pathways for which there is some evidence
of a role in the development of esophageal adenocarcinoma. An increasingly
detailed understanding of the biology of this cancer has emerged recently,
revealing that in addition to the well-recognized alterations in single genes
such as p53, p16, APC, and telomerase, there are interactions between the
components of the reflux fluid, the homeobox gene Cdx2, and the Wnt, Notch, and
Hedgehog signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3909547
PMID: 23792587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 8;23(13):1195-201. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.044. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

The Hippo pathway member Nf2 is required for inner cell mass specification.

Cockburn K(1), Biechele S, Garner J, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Jul 8;23(13):R559-61.

During mammalian development, the first two lineages to be specified are the
trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM). The Hippo pathway kinases Lats 
1 and 2 (Lats1/2) and the transcriptional coactivator Yap play important roles in
this specification process [1]. In outside cells of the embryo, Yap is nuclear
localized and cooperates with Tead4 to induce the TE-specifying transcription
factor Cdx2. In inside cells, Lats1/2 phosphorylate Yap and prevent its nuclear
localization. The factors acting upstream of Lats1/2 and Yap in this context have
not been identified. Here, we demonstrate that the upstream Hippo pathway member 
Nf2/Merlin is required for Lats1/2-dependent Yap phosphorylation in the
preimplantation embryo. Injection of dominant-negative Nf2 mRNA causes Yap
mislocalization and ectopic Cdx2 expression, effects that can be rescued by
overexpression of Lats2 kinase. Zygotic Nf2 mutant blastocysts have mild defects 
in Yap localization and Cdx2 expression, but these become much more severe upon
removal of both maternal and zygotic Nf2. The inside cells of maternal-zygotic
mutants fail to establish a pluripotent ICM and form excess TE, resulting in
peri-implantation lethality. Together, these data establish a clear role for Nf2 
upstream of Yap in the preimplantation embryo and demonstrate that Hippo
signaling is essential to segregate the ICM from the TE.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Pathol. 2013 Aug;183(2):493-503. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.04.013. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Sox9 induction, ectopic Paneth cells, and mitotic spindle axis defects in mouse
colon adenomatous epithelium arising from conditional biallelic Apc inactivation.

Feng Y(1), Sentani K, Wiese A, Sands E, Green M, Bommer GT, Cho KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

We generated transgenic mice in which human CDX2 gene elements control expression
of a tamoxifen-regulated Cre protein (CDX2P-CreER(T2)) to allow for inducible
gene targeting in intestinal epithelium. After tamoxifen dosing of
CDX2P-CreER(T2) mice, Cre activity was detected in the distal ileal, cecal,
colonic, and rectal epithelium, with selected crypt base, transit amplifying, and
surface cells all capable of activating Cre function. Four weeks after tamoxifen 
dosing of CDX2P-CreER(T2) mice carrying a Cre-activated fluorescent reporter,
single crypts were uniformly fluorescence positive or negative, reflecting Cre
activation in crypt stem cells. Biallelic inactivation of the Apc tumor
suppressor gene via the CDX2P-CreER(T2) transgene in colon epithelium led to
acute alterations in cell proliferation, apoptosis, and morphology, along with
mitotic spindle misorientation, ß-catenin nuclear localization, and induction of 
the intestinal stem cell markers Lgr5 and Musashi-1 and the Sox9 transcription
factor. Normal mouse colon epithelium lacks Paneth cells, a key small intestine
niche cell type, and Paneth cell differentiation is dependent on Sox9 function.
In Apc-deficient colon epithelium, ectopic Paneth-like cells were seen outside
the crypt base, such as new crypt budding sites. Our data indicate Apc
inactivation via CDX2P-CreER(T2) targeting in mouse colon epithelium is
sufficient to induce adenomatous changes and the generation of Paneth-like cells 
from neoplastic progenitors, with potentially significant roles in colon adenoma 
development and progression.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3730784
PMID: 23769888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jun 28;436(2):313-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.05.100. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

The H19 induction triggers trophoblast lineage commitment in mouse ES cells.

Fujimori H(1), Mukai H, Murakami Y, Hemberger M, Hippo Y, Masutani M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Stability Research, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Trophoblast lineage differentiation is properly regulated to support
embryogenesis. Besides normal developmental process, during germ cell tumor
formation or development of other reproductive system diseases, unregulated
trophoblast differentiation is also observed and affects the pathogenesis of the 
diseases. During normal embryogenesis, cell fate of late-stage blastcyst is
regulated by a reciprocal repression of the key transcriptional factors; Oct3/4
dominancy inhibits Cdx2 expression in inner cell mass (ICM) and leads them to
epiblast/primitive ectoderm but Cdx2 dominancy in trophectoderm (TE) leads them
to trophoblast lineage. In contrast during early blastcyst stage, the Cdx2
expression is restricted in TE and not present in ICM, although Oct3/4 signaling 
does not inhibit the Cdx2 expression in ICM, implying that some factors could be 
inactivated leading to the suppressed Cdx2 expression in ICM of early blastcyst. 
ES cells (ESCs), which are derived from ICM, could be a unique model to study
trophoblast differentiation in an ectopic context. We previously showed that
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (Parp-1) deficient ESCs highly expressed non-coding
RNA H19 and could differentiate into trophoblast lineage. The expression of H19
is known to start at pre-blastcyst stage during mouse development, and the gene
shows high expression only in trophoectoderm (TE) at blastcyst stage. However,
its role in trophoblast differentiation has not been clarified yet. Thus, we
hypothesized that the H19 activation may act as a trigger for induction of
trophoblast differentiation cascade in mouse ESCs. To investigate this issue, we 
asked whether a forced H19 expression drives ESCs into trophoblast lineage or
not. We demonstrated that the H19 induction leads to trophoblast lineage
commitment through induction of the Cdx2 expression. We also showed that the
expression of Cdx2 is induced in ESCs by forced H19 expression even under a high 
level of Oct3/4, which could act as a suppressor for Cdx2 expression. It is thus 
suggested that the H19 induction promotes trophoblast lineage commitment against 
the repression pressure by Oct3/4 in differentiating ESCs. Taken together, this
study suggests that the H19 expression is able to function as a cascade activator
of trophoblast lineage commitment possibly by overriding the Oct3/4 action in
ESCs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23743205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065771. Print 2013.

Evidence that transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> is not required for Oct4 repression in
mouse blastocysts.

Choi I(1), Carey TS, Wilson CA, Knott JG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.

In mouse blastocysts segregation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and the
trophectoderm (TE) is regulated by the mutually antagonistic effects of the
transcription factors Oct4 and Cdx2 expressed in the ICM and TE, respectively. In
contrast, in other species such as bovine and human, Oct4 is not restricted to
the ICM and continues to be expressed in the Cdx2-positive TE. A recent
comparative study of the bovine and mouse Oct4 promoters revealed that additional
mechanisms might act in conjunction with Cdx2 to downregulate Oct4 expression in 
the mouse TE lineage. For instance, the mouse Oct4 distal enhancer contains an
AP-2<U+03B3> (Tcfap2c) binding motif that is absent in the bovine and human Oct4 distal 
enhancer. Nonetheless, the functional relevance of Tcfap2c in Oct4 repression
during mouse preimplantation development was not tested. To elucidate the role of
Tcfap2c in Oct4 expression an RNA interference approach was utilized. Depletion
of Tcfap2c triggered a decrease in Oct4 expression at the 8-cell and morula
stage. Remarkably, at the blastocyst stage depletion of Tcfap2c and/or its family
member Tcfap2a had no effect on Oct4 repression. To test whether Tcfap2c
interacts with Oct4 to positively regulate Oct4 expression, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and in situ co-immunoprecipitation analyses were performed.
These experiments revealed Tcfap2c and Oct4 binding were enriched at the Oct4
distal enhancer in embryonic stem (ES) cells, but were rapidly lost during
differentiation into trophoblast-like cells when Oct4 became repressed. Moreover,
Tcfap2c and Oct4 interactions were detected at the morula stage, but were lost
during blastocyst formation. In summary, these data demonstrate that Tcfap2c is
not required for Oct4 silencing in mouse blastocysts, but may be necessary for
the maintenance of Oct4 expression during the 8 cell-to-morula transition. These 
findings support the notion Cdx2 is the predominant negative regulator of Oct4
expression during blastocyst formation in mice.

PMCID: PMC3669238
PMID: 23741512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Dec;7(4):416-20. doi: 10.1007/s12105-013-0450-3. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Delayed metastasis to the mandible of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Lawes KP(1), Danford M, Di Palma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Pathology, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Infirmary Square,
Leicester, LE1 5WW, UK.

Around 1 % of oral cancers are metastases from distant sites. Tumor metastases to
the jaw bones are uncommon and are most likely to arise from primary lung,
breast, prostate or kidney tumors. Jaw bone metastases from a primary esophageal 
adenocarcinoma are especially rare, with only 7 reports published in the
literature. Here, we describe a case of a 69 year-old male patient where 7 years 
elapsed between the diagnosis and successful treatment of a poorly
differentiated, stage pT2N0 primary esophageal adenocarcinoma and re-presentation
with jaw pain due to a metastatic mandibular deposit. The morphological
appearance of the metastasis and immunohistochemical positivity with CK20, CK7
and CDX2 strongly supported an adenocarcinoma of upper gastrointestinal tract
origin. This case is of particular interest as there is an unusually long time
between the detection of the primary esophageal adenocarcinoma and diagnosis of
metastatic disease. The longest period of time we have found for this in the
literature is 9 months, although it is also reported that some oral metastases
may appear more than 10 years following the primary tumor diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3824805
PMID: 23740162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Thyroid. 2013 Nov;23(11):1498-9. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0146. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

CDX2 expression in columnar variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Bongiovanni M(1), Piana S, Frattini M, Giovanella L, Spitale A, Ragazzi M,
Ciarrocchi A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Pathology , Locarno, Switzerland .

PMID: 23734674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. FASEB J. 2013 Sep;27(9):3594-607. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-232280. Epub 2013 May 31.

Stress-inducible phosphoprotein 1 has unique cochaperone activity during
development and regulates cellular response to ischemia via the prion protein.

Beraldo FH(1), Soares IN, Goncalves DF, Fan J, Thomas AA, Santos TG, Mohammad AH,
Roffé M, Calder MD, Nikolova S, Hajj GN, Guimaraes AL, Massensini AR, Welch I,
Betts DH, Gros R, Drangova M, Watson AJ, Bartha R, Prado VF, Martins VR, Prado
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.

Stress-inducible phosphoprotein 1 (STI1) is part of the chaperone machinery, but 
it also functions as an extracellular ligand for the prion protein. However, the 
physiological relevance of these STI1 activities in vivo is unknown. Here, we
show that in the absence of embryonic STI1, several Hsp90 client proteins are
decreased by 50%, although Hsp90 levels are unaffected. Mutant STI1 mice showed
increased caspase-3 activation and 50% impairment in cellular proliferation.
Moreover, placental disruption and lack of cellular viability were linked to
embryonic death by E10.5 in STI1-mutant mice. Rescue of embryonic lethality in
these mutants, by transgenic expression of the STI1 gene, supported a unique role
for STI1 during embryonic development. The response of STI1 haploinsufficient
mice to cellular stress seemed compromised, and mutant mice showed increased
vulnerability to ischemic insult. At the cellular level, ischemia increased the
secretion of STI1 from wild-type astrocytes by 3-fold, whereas STI1
haploinsufficient mice secreted half as much STI1. Interesting, extracellular
STI1 prevented ischemia-mediated neuronal death in a prion protein-dependent way.
Our study reveals essential roles for intracellular and extracellular STI1 in
cellular resilience.

PMID: 23729591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Dev Dyn. 2013 Sep;242(9):1110-20. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23991. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Morphogenetic analysis of peri-implantation development.

Wallingford MC(1), Angelo JR, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Although successful implantation is required for development in
placental mammals, the molecular and morphogenetic events that define
peri-implantation remain largely unexplored.
RESULTS: Here we present detailed morphological and immunohistochemical analysis 
of mouse embryos between embryonic day 3.75 and 5.25 of gestation, during the
implantation process in vivo. We examined expression patterns of key
transcription factors (Sox2, Oct4, Nanog, Cdx2, Gata6, Sox17, and Yy1) during
pre- and postimplantation development. Additionally, we examined morphogenetic
changes through analysis of ZO-1, Laminin, and E-Cadherin localization. The
results presented reveal novel changes in gene expression and morphogenetic
events during peri-implantation in utero. Here we show: (1) molecular and
morphological changes in primitive endoderm cells as they transition from a salt 
and pepper distribution to a sheet covering the inner cell mass; (2)
tissue-specific GATA6 levels; and (3) a striking pattern of SOX17 that is
suggestive of a functional role either directing or permitting implantation at
specific sites in the uterine epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: A growing number of knockout mice display peri-implantation
lethality, and the data presented herein identify key morphogenetic landmarks
that can be used to characterize mutant phenotypes, as well as further our basic 
understanding of peri-implantation development.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23728800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;42(2):129-30. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.02.015.

[Rupture of primary splenic multilocular mucous cyst accompanied by pseudomyxoma 
peritonei: report of a case].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi W, Lin WX, Du N, Wang X, Gu LY, Zhang QX.

PMID: 23710924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Sep;66(9):825-6. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201696. Epub
2013 May 23.

Downregulation of CDX2 in gastrointestinal neoplasia.

Hayes SJ, Wright PK, Ang Y, Carlson GL.

PMID: 23703850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 May 14;19(18):2736-9. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i18.2736.

Relationships of CDXs and apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter in
Barrett's esophagus.

Zhao J(1), Gregersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Mech-Sense, Department of Gastroenterology and Surgery, Aalborg University
Hospital, DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark. jz@rn.dk

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):G123-33.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is characterized by intestinal metaplasia with the
differentiated epithelium replaced by another type of epithelium morphologically 
similar to normal intestinal epithelium. The metaplasia is preceded by bile and
acid reflux into the esophagus. BE is a premalignant condition associated with
increased risk of esophageal cancer, especially esophageal adenocarcinoma. The
Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors Caudal-related homeodomain
transcription factor CDX1 and CDX2 are expressed exclusively in the small and
large intestine, playing important roles in proliferation and differentiation of 
intestinal epithelial cells. Ectopic expression of CDX1 and CDX2 occurs in BE.
The apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) is expressed primarily
in terminal ileum where it is a key factor for intestinal reabsorption of bile
salts. In addition to upregulation of CDX1 and CDX2, ASBT expression is
up-regulated in BE. Furthermore, both CDX1/CDX2 and ASBT expressions are
down-regulated in high-grade esophageal dysplasia. The alteration of the
above-mentioned factors calls for attention: what is the relationship between
CDXs and ASBT aberrant expression in BE? In this commentary, we discuss this
issue on basis of the recent study done by Ma et al.

PMCID: PMC3653147
PMID: 23687410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Zebrafish. 2013 Jun;10(2):218-27. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2012.0784. Epub 2013 May 14.

Transgenic overexpression of cdx1b induces metaplastic changes of gene expression
in zebrafish esophageal squamous epithelium.

Hu B(1), Chen H, Liu X, Zhang C, Cole GJ, Lee JA, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Department of Biology, Julius L. Chambers
Biomedical/Biotechnology Research Institute, North Carolina Central University , 
Durham, NC 27707, USA.

Cdx2 has been suggested to play an important role in Barrett's esophagus or
intestinal metaplasia (IM) in the esophagus. To investigate whether transgenic
overexpression of cdx1b, the functional equivalent of mammalian Cdx2 in
zebrafish, may lead to IM of zebrafish esophageal squamous epithelium, a
transgenic zebrafish system was developed by expressing cdx1b gene under the
control of zebrafish keratin 5 promoter (krt5p). Gene expression in the
esophageal squamous epithelium of wild-type and transgenic zebrafish was analyzed
by Affymetrix microarray and confirmed by in situ hybridization. Morphology,
mucin expression, cell proliferation, and apoptosis were analyzed by hematoxylin 
& eosin (HE) staining, Periodic acid Schiff (PAS) Alcian blue staining,
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunohistochemical staining, and TUNEL
assay as well. cdx1b was found to be overexpressed in the nuclei of esophageal
squamous epithelial cells of the transgenic zebrafish. Ectopic expression of
cdx1b disturbed the development of this epithelium in larval zebrafish and
induced metaplastic changes in gene expression in the esophageal squamous
epithelial cells of adult zebrafish, that is, up-regulation of intestinal
differentiation markers and down-regulation of squamous differentiation markers. 
However, cdx1b failed to induce histological IM, or to modulate cell
proliferation and apoptosis in the squamous epithelium of adult transgenic
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC3673616
PMID: 23672288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(14):2691-705. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00069-13. Epub 2013 May
13.

EED and KDM6B coordinate the first mammalian cell lineage commitment to ensure
embryo implantation.

Saha B(1), Home P, Ray S, Larson M, Paul A, Rajendran G, Behr B, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

The first mammalian cell lineage commitment is the formation of the trophectoderm
(TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM) lineages during preimplantation development.
Proper development of the TE and ICM lineages is dependent upon establishment of 
specific transcriptional programs. However, the epigenetic mechanisms that
functionally contribute to establish TE- and ICM-specific transcriptional
programs are poorly understood. Here, we show that proper development of the TE
and ICM lineages is coordinated via combinatorial regulation of embryonic
ectoderm development (EED) and lysine-specific demethylase 6B (KDM6B). During
blastocyst formation, the relative levels of EED and KDM6B expression determine
altered polycomb repressor 2 (PRC2) complex recruitment and incorporation of the 
repressive histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27Me3) mark at the chromatin
domains of TE-specific master regulators CDX2 and GATA3, leading to their
activation in the TE lineage and repression in the ICM lineage. Furthermore,
ectopic gain of EED along with depletion of KDM6B in preimplantation mouse
embryos abrogates CDX2 and GATA3 expression in the nascent TE lineage. The loss
of CDX2 and GATA3 in the nascent TE lineage results in improper TE development,
leading to failure in embryo implantation to the uterus. Our study delineates a
novel epigenetic mechanism that orchestrates proper development of the first
mammalian cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC3700131
PMID: 23671187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Sep 23;424:53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 
May 10.

Gene methylation in gastric cancer.

Qu Y(1), Dang S, Hou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, People's Republic of China.

Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies and remains the second
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Over 70% of new cases and deaths
occur in developing countries. In the early years of the molecular biology
revolution, cancer research mainly focuses on genetic alterations, including
gastric cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and
maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mammals. Disruption of
epigenetic processes can lead to altered gene function and malignant cellular
transformation. Recent advancements in the rapidly evolving field of cancer
epigenetics have shown extensive reprogramming of every component of the
epigenetic machinery in cancer, including DNA methylation, histone modifications,
nucleosome positioning, noncoding RNAs, and microRNAs. Aberrant DNA methylation
in the promoter regions of gene, which leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor 
and other cancer-related genes in cancer cells, is the most well-defined
epigenetic hallmark in gastric cancer. The advantages of gene methylation as a
target for detection and diagnosis of cancer in biopsy specimens and non-invasive
body fluids such as serum and gastric washes have led to many studies of
application in gastric cancer. This review focuses on the most common and
important phenomenon of epigenetics, DNA methylation, in gastric cancer and
illustrates the impact epigenetics has had on this field.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23669186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2013 Apr;19(2):210-8. doi: 10.5056/jnm.2013.19.2.210.
Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Predictable Marker for Regression of Barrett's Esophagus by Proton Pump Inhibitor
Treatment in Korea.

Jo HJ(1), Lee HS, Kim N, Nam RH, Chang H, Kim MS, Kim SE, Oh JC, Lee DH, Jung HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: There has been no report regarding the regression of Barrett's
esophagus (BE) by continuous treatment of proton pump inhibitor (PPI). The aim of
this study was to determine the regression rate of BE by PPI and predictable
markers related to regression.
METHODS: Thirty-five patients diagnosed as BE were consecutively enrolled and
most of them took continuous PPI. The 25 patients underwent endoscopic
surveillance and received biopsy. If the specialized intestinal metaplasia (SIM) 
was lost at any point of surveillance and did not recur, the case was regarded as
the regression group. The proportion of SIM was graded and the mucin phenotype
was decided using immunohistochemistry for MUC2, MUC5AC and MUC6. To assess the
cell proliferation indexes and the degree of intestinal maturation,
immunohistochemistry for Ki67 and CDX2 were performed.
RESULTS: The regression of BE occurred in the 11 (44%) patients. The clinical and
demographic factors showed no difference between the regression (n = 11) and
persistence group (n = 14). The lower grade of SIM (P < 0.001) and gastric
predominant mucin phenotype (P = 0.018) were more frequent, and the number of
Ki67 positive cell per gland (P = 0.008) and the mean extent of CDX2 (P = 0.022) 
were lower in the regression group than in the persistence group.
CONCLUSIONS: The regression of BE by PPI treatment was frequent in Korea. The
immunohistochemical detection of mucin phenotype, grade of SIM, Ki67 and CDX2
expression in Barrett's mucosa could be useful as a predictable marker for
regression of SIM in BE.

PMCID: PMC3644657
PMID: 23667752  [PubMed]


448. Hum Pathol. 2013 Sep;44(9):1890-4. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.02.017. Epub 2013 
May 7.

Tubular adenoma of the urinary tract: a newly described entity.

Kao CS(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. yutkao@iupui.edu

Tubular adenomas in the urinary tract with the same appearance as those in the
gastrointestinal tract have not yet been described in the literature. We herein
report 4 cases of tubular adenomas in the urinary tract encountered within our
consult practice. This lesion was defined by the presence of a collection of
small round tubular glands with intestinal-type epithelium showing moderate
dysplasia, identical to the histology of tubular adenomas in the intestinal
tract. Patients ranged in age from 37 to 63 years (mean, 45 years), with 3 of the
4 being male (male-to-female ratio, 3:1). The locations were urinary bladder,
prostatic urethra and ureter with hematuria, polyps, and obstructive mass as
their presentations, respectively. One lesion was large measuring 1.4 cm
associated with pseudoinvasion as well as invasive adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemically, the tubular adenomas stained positive for CDX2 and CK20,
while negative for GATA3 and CK7. One case showed positive nuclear ß-catenin
staining. Tubular adenoma of the urinary tract is a rare lesion, and recognition 
of this entity will encourage further reports and help to better understand the
relation of tubular adenoma to concurrent and subsequent urinary tract
malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23664485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 21;288(25):18546-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.446591. Epub
2013 May 6.

Smad2 is essential for maintenance of the human and mouse primed pluripotent stem
cell state.

Sakaki-Yumoto M(1), Liu J, Ramalho-Santos M, Yoshida N, Derynck R.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
Program in Cell Biology, University of California, San Francisco, California
94143, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells and mouse epiblast stem cells represent a primed
pluripotent stem cell state that requires TGF-ß/activin signaling. TGF-ß and/or
activin are commonly thought to regulate transcription through both Smad2 and
Smad3. However, the different contributions of these two Smads to primed
pluripotency and the downstream events that they may regulate remain poorly
understood. We addressed the individual roles of Smad2 and Smad3 in the
maintenance of primed pluripotency. We found that Smad2, but not Smad3, is
required to maintain the undifferentiated pluripotent state. We defined a Smad2
regulatory circuit in human embryonic stem cells and mouse epiblast stem cells,
in which Smad2 acts through binding to regulatory promoter sequences to activate 
Nanog expression while in parallel repressing autocrine bone morphogenetic
protein signaling. Increased autocrine bone morphogenetic protein signaling
caused by Smad2 down-regulation leads to cell differentiation toward the
trophectoderm, mesoderm, and germ cell lineages. Additionally, induction of Cdx2 
expression, as a result of decreased Smad2 expression, leads to repression of
Oct4 expression, which, together with the decreased Nanog expression, accelerates
the loss of pluripotency. These findings reveal that Smad2 is a unique integrator
of transcription and signaling events and is essential for the maintenance of the
mouse and human primed pluripotent stem cell state.

PMCID: PMC3689995
PMID: 23649632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Acta Crystallogr C. 2013 May;69(Pt 5):476-9. doi: 10.1107/S0108270113006471. Epub
2013 Apr 9.

Two one-dimensional coordination polymers generated from a new benzimidazole
bridging ligand and CdX2 (X = Br and I).

Zhang YF(1), Ma JP, Liu QK, Dong YB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Shandong
Normal University, Jinan 250014, People's Republic of China.

The novel asymmetric bridging ligand
1-[(pyridin-3-yl)methyl]-2-[4-(pyridin-3-yl)phenyl]-1H-benzimidazole (L) has been
used to construct the coordination polymers
catena-poly[[[dibromidocadmium(II)]-µ3-1-[(pyridin-3-yl)methyl]-2-[4-(pyridin-3-y
l)phenyl]-1H-benzimidazole] monohydrate], {[CdBr2(C24H18N4)]·H2O}n, (I), and
catena-poly[[diiodidocadmium(II)]-µ3-1-[(pyridin-3-yl)methyl]-2-[4-(pyridin-3-yl)
phenyl]-1H-benzimidazole], [CdI2(C24H18N4)]n, (II). Compounds (I) and (II) are
closely related one-dimensional polymers based on 16- and 20-membered macrocycles
along the chains, but they are not isomorphous. The chains are crosslinked into a
two-dimensional network via hydrogen bonds and p-p interactions in (I), and into 
a three-dimensional framework through p-p interactions in (II). One well-ordered 
solvent water molecule per asymmetric unit is included in (I) and forms O···Br
hydrogen bonds.

PMID: 23629894  [PubMed]


451. J Reprod Dev. 2013;59(4):353-60. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Effects of downregulating oct-4 transcript by RNA interference on early
development of porcine embryos.

Sakurai N(1), Fujii T, Hashizume T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Iwate 020-8550, Japan.

The objective of this study was to investigate the role of the POU family
transcription factor, Oct-4, in the early development of porcine embryos. We
attempted Oct-4 downregulation of porcine early embryos by RNA interference, and 
evaluated Oct-4 suppression of developmental competencies and gene transcripts in
porcine embryos. Injection of specific siRNA resulted in a distinct decrease in
Oct-4 mRNA and protein expression in porcine embryos until at least the morula
stage. Although the porcine embryos injected with Oct-4 siRNA were able to
develop to the morula stage, these embryos failed to form blastocysts. Gene
transcripts of caudal-like transcription factor (Cdx2) and fibroblast growth
factor 4 (Fgf4), which were involved in segregation of the trophectderm and
functionalization of the inner cell mass, were unchanged by Oct-4 siRNA
injection. Our results indicated that Oct-4 is an important factor for porcine
embryos and, in particular, for the regulation of porcine blastocyst formation.

PMCID: PMC3944357
PMID: 23628850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2013 May;26(5):638-45. doi: 10.5713/ajas.2012.12462.

Presence of Transcription Factor OCT4 Limits Interferon-tau Expression during the
Pre-attachment Period in Sheep.

Kim MS(1), Sakurai T(1), Bai H(1), Bai R(1), Sato D(1), Nagaoka K(1), Chang
KT(1), Godkin JD(1), Min KS(1), Imakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-8657, Japan.

Interferon-tau (IFNT) is thought to be the conceptus protein that signals
maternal recognition of pregnancy in ruminants. We and others have observed that 
OCT4 expression persists in the trophectoderm of ruminants; thus, both CDX2 and
OCT4 coexist during the early stages of conceptus development. The aim of this
study was to examine the effect of CDX2 and OCT4 on IFNT gene transcription when 
evaluated with other transcription factors. Human choriocarcinoma JEG-3 cells
were cotransfected with an ovine IFNT (-654-bp)-luciferase reporter
(-654-IFNT-Luc) construct and several transcription factor expression plasmids.
Cotransfection of the reporter construct with Cdx2, Ets2 and Jun increased
transcription of -654-IFNT-Luc by about 12-fold compared with transfection of the
construct alone. When cells were initially transfected with Oct4 (0 h) followed
by transfection with Cdx2, Ets2 and/or Jun 24 h later, the expression of
-654-IFNT-Luc was reduced to control levels. OCT4 also inhibited the stimulatory 
activity of CDX2 alone, but not when CDX2 was combined with JUN and/or ETS2.
Thus, when combined with the other transcription factors, OCT4 exhibited little
inhibitory activity towards CDX2. An inhibitor of the transcriptional coactivator
CREB binding protein (CREBBP), 12S E1A, reduced CDX2/ETS2/JUN stimulated
-654-IFNT-Luc expression by about 40%, indicating that the formation of an
appropriate transcription factor complex is required for maximum expression. In
conclusion, the presence of OCT4 may initially minimize IFNT expression; however,
as elongation proceeds, the increasing expression of CDX2 and formation of the
transcription complex leads to greatly increased IFNT expression, resulting in
pregnancy establishment in ruminants.

PMCID: PMC4093334
PMID: 25049833  [PubMed]


453. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Sep;66(9):819-22. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201448. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

Dysregulation of CDX1, CDX2 and SOX2 in patients with gastric cancer also affects
the non-malignant mucosa.

Bornschein J(1), Tóth K, Selgrad M, Kuester D, Wex T, Molnár B, Tulassay Z,
Malfertheiner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-v.-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany.

The interplay between gastric and intestinal transcription factors has an
important impact on gastric carcinogenesis. We compared the gene expression of
CDX1, CDX2, SOX2 and related downstream genes in tumour and tumour surrounding
gastric tissue of 48 gastric cancer patients with 30 healthy controls. There was 
no difference of gene expression of CDX1 and CDX2 between tumour or
tumour-adjacent and tumour-distant mucosa, but both factors were significantly
higher expressed in cancer patients compared with controls (p<0.01). SOX2 was
downregulated in tumour tissue compared to controls, whereas tumour-adjacent and 
tumour-distant mucosa showed intermediate SOX2 expression. Laurén type and
Helicobacter pylori infection had no significant impact on expression of the
transcription factors. Expression of CDX1 and CDX2 was higher in the presence of 
intestinal metaplasia. The differential regulation of the gene expression of
CDX1, CDX2 and SOX2 in patients with gastric cancer affects not only the tumour
but also the non-neoplastic tumour-distant mucosa.

PMID: 23613102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Evol Dev. 2013 May;15(3):171-85. doi: 10.1111/ede.12031.

Expression patterns of Oct4, Cdx2, Tead4, and Yap1 proteins during blastocyst
formation in embryos of the marsupial, Monodelphis domestica Wagner.

Morrison JT(1), Bantilan NS, Wang VN, Nellett KM, Cruz YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH 44074, USA.

The marsupial blastocyst forms in an entirely different manner from its eutherian
counterpart, involving cell-zona rather than cell-cell adhesion during the 8-
to-16-cell transition. While the eutherian blastocyst consists of a spherical
trophoblast completely enveloping a pluripotent inner cell mass, or pluriblast,
the marsupial blastocyst forms initially as a bowl-shaped monolayer of cells
lining the zona pellucida at the embryonic pole (ep). This monolayer contains a
small patch of centrally positioned pluriblast cells edged with trophoblast cells
that later coalesce at the abembryonic pole. Using immunocytochemistry, we
examined the localization of the proteins Oct4, Cdx2, Tead4, Sox2, and Yap1 in
opossum embryos to determine if their temporal expression pattern differed from
that in the mouse, given the important differences in cell behavior preceding
blastocyst formation in these mammals. Our results indicate that these proteins
are expressed in similar temporal patterns despite the topological differences
between mouse and opossum cleavage-stage embryos and blastocysts. That the
Hippo-pathway protein Yap1 localized specifically around the approximately
128-cell stage to opossum trophoblast nuclei but remained in the cytoplasm of
pluriblast cells suggests that this transcriptional regulator participates in
allocating cells to the trophoblast lineage, as it does in mouse. Interestingly, 
in both mouse and opossum embryos, expression of the pluripotency marker Oct4
persisted after Cdx2, which signals trophoblast specification, began to be
expressed in trophoblast cells. This and the observation that Cdx2 is present in 
opossum embryos well before blastomere-zona adhesion even occurs suggests that
the proteins studied may have other roles in early mammalian embryonic
development.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23607301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cytojournal. 2013 Jan 31;10:1. doi: 10.4103/1742-6413.106684. Print 2013.

Metastatic urachal carcinoma in bronchial brush cytology.

Aly FZ(1), Tabbarah AZ, Voltaggio L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytopathology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.

Urachal carcinoma is rare comprising less than 1% of all bladder carcinomas.
Metastases of urachal carcinoma have been reported to meninges, brain, ovary,
lung, and maxilla. Cytologic features of metastatic urachal carcinoma have not
been previously reported. We present a case of metastatic urachal adenocarcinoma 
in bronchial brushings and review the use of immunohistochemistry in its
diagnosis. A 47-year-old female was seen initially in 2007 with adenocarcinoma of
the bladder dome for which she underwent partial cystectomy. She presented in
2011 with a left lung mass and mediastinal adenopathy. Bronchoscopy showed an
endobronchial lesion from which brushings were obtained. These showed numerous
groups of columnar cells with medium sized nuclei and abundant cytoplasm. The
cells were positive for CK20 and CDX2 and negative for CK7. The cytomorphological
findings were similar to those in the previous resection specimen and concurrent 
biopsy. This is the first case report of bronchial brushings containing
metastatic urachal carcinoma. No specific immunohistochemical profile is
available for its diagnosis. The consideration of a second primary was a distinct
possibility in this case due to the lapse of time from primary resection, absence
of local disease, and lack of regional metastases.

PMCID: PMC3623451
PMID: 23599720  [PubMed]


456. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:243649. doi: 10.1155/2013/243649. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

HTR8/SVneo cells display trophoblast progenitor cell-like characteristics
indicative of self-renewal, repopulation activity, and expression of "stemness-" 
associated transcription factors.

Weber M(1), Knoefler I, Schleussner E, Markert UR, Fitzgerald JS.

Author information: 
(1)Placenta-Lab, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: JEG3 is a choriocarcinoma--and HTR8/SVneo a transformed
extravillous trophoblast--cell line often used to model the physiologically
invasive extravillous trophoblast. Past studies suggest that these cell lines
possess some stem or progenitor cell characteristics. Aim was to study whether
these cells fulfill minimum criteria used to identify stem-like (progenitor)
cells. In summary, we found that the expression profile of HTR8/SVneo (CDX2+,
NOTCH1+, SOX2+, NANOG+, and OCT-) is distinct from JEG3 (CDX2+ and NOTCH1+) as
seen only in human-serum blocked immunocytochemistry. This correlates with
HTR8/SVneo's self-renewal capacities, as made visible via spheroid formation and 
multi-passagability in hanging drops protocols paralleling those used to maintain
embryoid bodies. JEG3 displayed only low propensity to form and reform spheroids.
HTR8/SVneo spheroids migrated to cover and seemingly repopulate human chorionic
villi during confrontation cultures with placental explants in hanging drops. We 
conclude that HTR8/SVneo spheroid cells possess progenitor cell traits that are
probably attained through corruption of "stemness-" associated transcription
factor networks. Furthermore, trophoblastic cells are highly prone to unspecific 
binding, which is resistant to conventional blocking methods, but which can be
alleviated through blockage with human serum.

PMCID: PMC3615586
PMID: 23586024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mod Pathol. 2013 Sep;26(9):1270-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.51. Epub 2013 Apr 
12.

Endometriosis involving the mucosa of the intestinal tract: a clinicopathologic
study of 15 cases.

Jiang W(1), Roma AA, Lai K, Carver P, Xiao SY, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Endometriosis involving the mucosa of the intestines is rare, but may lead to
diagnostic pitfalls. We reviewed 15 cases (seven biopsies and eight resections)
from 14 patients. The patients' mean age is 48 years (31-66 years). Presenting
symptoms included lower gastrointestinal bleeding, pelvic pain, rectal urgency,
abdominal mass, and bowel obstruction. In the majority of cases, the lesion was
located in the rectum (73%) with the remainder in the sigmoid colon (20%) and
ileum (7%). The most common indication for biopsy was a polypoid lesion seen
endoscopically (eight cases). For patients who underwent resections, the most
common clinical impression was colonic carcinoma (75%), due to mass lesions and
stricture as the most common macroscopic findings. Histologically, one case had
stromal endometriosis only, but the remaining 14 cases had both endometrial
glands and stroma. Epithelial metaplasia was present in all cases, mostly tubal
metaplasia (ciliated epithelium). Hybrid glands and replacement of the surface
epithelium by endometrial epithelium were also seen. Crypt architectural
distortion, cryptitis, and crypt abscesses were seen in some cases, mimicking
chronic active colitis or enteritis. A panel of immunohistochemical stains (CK7, 
CK20, CDX2, and ER) was found to be useful in biopsies with suspected
endometriosis demonstrating unusual histology or only containing endometrioid
stroma tissue. Vascular involvement by endometriosis was identified in one case. 
Endometrial hyperplasia (n=2) and cancer (n=1) were also seen in the ectopic
tissue. All patients were alive at follow-up (3-216 months, mean 67 months).

PMID: 23579618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Am Surg. 2013 Apr;79(4):353-60.

Reduced CDX2 expression predicts poor overall survival in patients with
colorectal cancer.

Hong KD(1), Lee D, Lee Y, Lee SI, Moon HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

The homeodomain transcription factor CDX2 directs development and maintenance of 
normal intestinal epithelium. However, the role of CDX2 in colorectal
carcinogenesis is poorly understood. Hence, we investigated the CDX2 expression
in patients with colorectal cancer and its relationship to tumor cell
proliferation and differentiation and evaluated the role of this molecule as a
biologic marker for the prediction of poor patient survival. We retrospectively
reviewed 207 patients with colorectal cancer, with an available paraffin block,
who underwent surgical resection between January 2002 and December 2004 at Korea 
University Guro Hospital. CDX2 expression was compared between tumor tissue and
the adjacent normal mucosa using immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. 
Immunohistochemical staining for CDX2, Ki-67, and CK20 was performed in each
tumor tissue. Immunohistochemistry revealed that CDX2 protein is overexpressed by
colorectal cancer compared with adjacent normal mucosa (P < 0.001). In the
Western blot analysis, tumor tissue showed a trend toward overexpression of CDX2 
protein compared with normal mucosa (P = 0.09). CDX2 expression showed a
significant direct correlation with the expression of Ki-67 and CK20 in tumor
tissue (P = 0.028 and P = 0.042, respectively). Survival analysis showed that
reduced CDX2 expression was statistically and significantly related to poor
overall survival. Reduced CDX2 expression is associated with poor overall
survival in patients with colorectal cancer and may be clinically useful as a
marker for poor prognosis.

PMID: 23574843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013;6(4):795-7. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Sarcomatoid carcinoma in the pelvic cavity.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Sarcomatoid carcinoma in the pelvic cavity is very rare. A 58-year-old Japanese
man was admitted to our hospital because of lower abdominal fullness. CT and MRI 
revealed a large mass in the left pelvic cavity. Transurethral bladder endoscopy 
showed tumor invasion, and large biopsies were obtained from the bladder lesion. 
Histologically, the tumor was composed of malignant round cells with
hyperchromatic nuclei. Many intracytoplasmic vacuoles were present. No
carcinomatous areas were seen. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were
positive for cytokeratin (CK) 18, vimentin, p53 and Ki-67 (labeling 80%). The
tumor cells were negative for panCK AE1/3, CD5/6, CK7, CK8, CK14, CK19, CK20, CK 
34BE12, EMA, desmin, calretinin, WT-1, S100 protein, a-smooth muscle actin, CEA, 
CD34, CD45, CD20, factor VIII-related antigen, synaptophysin, p63, CDX2, and
myoglobin. Because the CK18 was diffusely expressed, the pathological diagnosis
was sarcomatoid carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3606872
PMID: 23573329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Virchows Arch. 2013 May;462(5):515-22. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1405-5. Epub 2013 
Apr 9.

Disturbed balance between SOX2 and CDX2 in human vitelline duct anomalies and
intestinal duplications.

Raghoebir L(1), Biermann K, Buscop-van Kempen M, Wijnen RM, Tibboel D, Smits R,
Rottier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, of the Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000, CA,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Congenital gastric-type heteroplasia is common in intestinal duplications and
anomalies, which originate from incomplete resorption of the omphalomesenteric
duct during development. Two transcription factors determine the proximodistal
specification of the gastrointestinal tract, SOX2, expressed exclusively in the
proximal part of the primitive gut, and CDX2, expressed solely in the distal
part. Aberrant expression of these factors may result in abnormal development and
congenital abnormalities. Therefore, we analyzed the expression of SOX2 and CDX2 
in a number of pediatric intestinal anomalies. We investigated the expression
pattern of SOX2 and CDX2 in three congenital intestinal anomalies in which
ectopic gastric tissue may be present, Meckel's diverticulum (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>8), persistent 
ductus omphalomesentericus (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>14), and intestinal duplications (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>8). CDX2,
but not SOX2, was detected in intestinal epithelial cells in tissue lacking
gastric heteroplasia. In gastric-type heteroplasia, a reciprocal expression
pattern existed between SOX2 and CDX2 in the gastric and intestinal tissues,
respectively. Interestingly, patches of CDX2-positive cells were present within
the gastric mucosa in a subset of Meckel's diverticula and intestinal
duplications, suggesting that it is not the absence of CDX2, but rather the
ectopic expression of SOX2 that leads to gastric tissue in the prospective
intestinal tissue. This is in concordance with our previous mouse studies.
Collectively, our data indicate that a fine balance between SOX2 and CDX2
expression in the gastrointestinal tract is essential for proper development and 
that ectopic expression of SOX2 may lead to malformations of the gut.

PMID: 23568430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2013 Dec;19(12):961-9. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEC.2012.0710.
Epub 2013 May 10.

Use of collagen gel as an alternative extracellular matrix for the in vitro and
in vivo growth of murine small intestinal epithelium.

Jabaji Z(1), Sears CM, Brinkley GJ, Lei NY, Joshi VS, Wang J, Lewis M, Stelzner
M, Martín MG, Dunn JC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, University of California , Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California.

Methods for the in vitro culture of primary small intestinal epithelium have
improved greatly in recent years. A critical barrier for the translation of this 
methodology to the patient's bedside is the ability to grow intestinal stem cells
using a well-defined extracellular matrix. Current methods rely on the use of
Matrigel(), a proprietary basement membrane-enriched extracellular matrix gel
produced in mice that is not approved for clinical use. We demonstrate for the
first time the capacity to support the long-term in vitro growth of murine
intestinal epithelium in monoculture, using type I collagen. We further
demonstrate successful in vivo engraftment of enteroids co-cultured with
intestinal subepithelial myofibroblasts in collagen gel. Small intestinal crypts 
were isolated from 6 to 10 week old transgenic enhanced green fluorescent protein
(eGFP+) mice and suspended within either Matrigel or collagen gel; cultures were 
supported using previously reported media and growth factors. After 1 week,
cultures were either lysed for DNA or RNA extraction or were implanted
subcutaneously in syngeneic host mice. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR) was performed to determine expansion of the transgenic eGFP-DNA
and to determine the mRNA gene expression profile. Immunohistochemistry was
performed on in vitro cultures and recovered in vivo explants. Small intestinal
crypts reliably expanded to form enteroids in either Matrigel or collagen in both
mono- and co-cultures as confirmed by microscopy and eGFP-DNA qPCR
quantification. Collagen-based cultures yielded a distinct morphology with smooth
enteroids and epithelial monolayer growth at the gel surface; both enteroid and
monolayer cells demonstrated reactivity to Cdx2, E-cadherin, CD10, Periodic
Acid-Schiff, and lysozyme. Collagen-based enteroids were successfully subcultured
in vitro, whereas pure monolayer epithelial sheets did not survive passaging.
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction demonstrated evidence of Cdx2,
villin 1, mucin 2, chromogranin A, lysozyme 1, and Lgr5 expression, suggesting a 
fully elaborated intestinal epithelium. Additionally, collagen-based enteroids
co-cultured with myofibroblasts were successfully recovered after 5 weeks of in
vivo implantation, with a preserved immunophenotype. These results indicate that 
collagen-based techniques have the capacity to eliminate the need for Matrigel in
intestinal stem cell culture. This is a critical step towards producing
neo-mucosa using good manufacturing practices for clinical applications in the
future.

PMCID: PMC3833386
PMID: 23566043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Oncotarget. 2013 Feb;4(2):174-5.

Deregulation of the CDX2-KLF4 axis in acute myeloid leukemia and colon cancer.

Rouhi A, Fröhling S.

PMCID: PMC3712560
PMID: 23563447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Jun;28(6):906-11. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12209.

Premalignant conditions of gastric cancer.

Sugano K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan. ssugano@jichi.ac.jp

Premalignant lesions of gastric cancer encompass a variety of conditions such as 
chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia, in which elevated risk of
developing gastric cancer have been documented. Among them, intestinal metaplasia
is frequently encountered in our daily endoscopic examination, yet its clinical
significance is often underestimated despite of a number of reports demonstrating
genetic and epigenetic alterations in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa. In this 
review, I will describe the molecular mechanisms of phenotypic changes from
gastric mucosa to intestinal metaplasia based on our analysis of mouse model of
intestinal metaplasia generated by ectopic expression of CDX2 in conjunction with
the studies with human intestinal metaplasia.

© 2013 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23560829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):625-33. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318285be00.

Intestinal-type endocervical adenocarcinoma in situ: an immunophenotypically
distinct subset of AIS affecting older women.

Howitt BE(1), Herfs M, Brister K, Oliva E, Longtine J, Hecht JL, Nucci MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Division of Women's and
Perinatal Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Feb;38(2):289-91.

Conventional endocervical adenocarcinoma in situ (cAIS) is typically strongly and
diffusely positive for p16 with a high Ki67 index consistent with its frequent
association with high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. The intestinal
variant (iAIS) is less common, and its relationship to HPV infection has not been
thoroughly examined. This study compares the clinicopathologic features,
frequency of HPV infection, and expression of CDX2 and surrogate biomarkers of
HPV infection (p16, Ki67) in cAIS with those of iAIS. A total of 86 cases with a 
diagnosis of AIS (49 iAIS, 37 cAIS) were identified from our multi-institutional 
files. Of these, 13 iAIS and 20 cAIS cases had slides and tissue available for
histopathologic review, immunohistochemical analysis, and molecular tests. All 86
cases were used to evaluate clinical parameters; however, HPV DNA analysis and
immunohistochemical analysis for p16, MIB-1, CDX2, and p53 were performed only on
those cases with available slides or paraffin blocks. The average age at
diagnosis was significantly higher in iAIS compared with that in cAIS (44.5 vs.
32.6 y) (P=0.0001). All 20 cAIS cases showed moderate to strong and diffuse p16
staining; however, only 9/13 iAIS cases showed this degree of p16 staining,
whereas 4/13 (31%) iAIS cases showed weak and patchy distribution (P<0.02). Only 
6/9 (67%) iAIS cases were positive for either HPV type 18 (5) or 33 (1), in
contrast to 11/11 conventional cAIS (P=0.04). Similarly, 12/14 cAIS, but only
5/13 iAIS, cases showed a high Ki67 proliferative index. CDX2 was positive in all
iAIS cases, whereas p53 was negative. Most iAIS cases are positive for high-risk 
HPV and show moderate to strong and diffuse p16 staining; however, a subset of
iAIS shows variable staining with p16 and Ki67, is not associated with HPV, and
occurs in a distinctly older age group suggesting an alternative pathogenesis.
Awareness that iAIS can show variable staining for p16 and Ki67 is important when
resolving problematic endocervical lesions, particularly in small biopsies with
unusual p16 staining patterns.

PMID: 23552379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1658. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2646.

Ets2-dependent trophoblast signalling is required for gastrulation progression
after primitive streak initiation.

Polydorou C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus, PO
Box 20537, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus.

Although extraembryonic ectoderm trophoblast signals the embryo for primitive
streak initiation, a prerequisite for gastrulation, it is unknown whether it also
signals for the progression of gastrulation after primitive streak initiation.
Here, using Ets2-/- mice, we show that trophoblast signalling is also required in
vivo for primitive streak elongation, completion of intraembryonic mesoderm
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the development of anterior primitive
streak derivatives such as the node. We show that Ets2-dependent trophoblast
signalling is required for the maintenance of high levels of Nodal and Wnt3
expression in the epiblast and for the induction of Snail expression in the
primitive streak, between embryonic day 6.3 and 6.7. Within extraembryonic
ectoderm trophoblast, Ets2 maintains the expression of the transcription factors 
Elf5, Cdx2 and Eomes, and that of the signalling molecule Bmp4. We propose a
model that provides a genetic explanation as to how Ets2 in trophoblast mediates 
the progression of gastrulation within the epiblast.

PMID: 23552073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Bone Miner Metab. 2013 Nov;31(6):695-702. doi: 10.1007/s00774-013-0454-9. Epub 
2013 Apr 2.

Vitamin D and calcium-sensing receptor polymorphisms differentially associate
with resting energy expenditure in peripubertal children.

Hanks LJ(1), Casazza K, Ashraf AP, Ramanadham S, Ard J, Bray MS, Mark Beasley T, 
Fernandez JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Webb
445, 1720 Second Ave South, Birmingham, AL, 35294-3360, USA, hankslj@uab.edu.

Given that calcium metabolism is influenced by genes and is tightly linked to
energy-utilizing pathways, this study evaluated the association of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and
calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) with resting energy expenditure (REE). In 273
boys and girls, 7-12 years of age, cross-sectional REE was measured via indirect 
calorimetry, body composition by DXA, and dietary measures by 24-h recall. SNPs
for VDR Cdx-2 (rs11568820) and CASR A986S (rs1801725) were genotyped using the
Illumina Golden Gate assay. Multiple linear regression models were used to
determine the association between SNPs and REE. African American carriers of the 
'A' VDR Cdx2 allele had increased levels of REE in the overall sample, and this
association was apparent among participants with an adiposity level of <25 % and 
30 % body fat in males and females, respectively. For CASR, an association
between carriers of the 'A' allele and REE was observed only in those in the
upper median of calcium intake. VDR and CASR variants are associated with REE in 
children and are influenced by levels of calcium intake and adiposity. Our
results bring awareness to mechanisms underlying the regulation of REE and
biological and dietary influential factors.

PMCID: PMC3965256
PMID: 23546818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Int J Oncol. 2013 May;42(5):1682-91. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1875. Epub 2013 Mar
28.

PTEN expression and suppression of proliferation are associated with Cdx2
overexpression in gastric cancer cells.

Bai ZG(1), Ye YJ, Shen DH, Lu YY, Zhang ZT, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, PR China.

The prognosis of gastric cancer (GC) is associated with Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN
coexpression. This study aimed to determine the expression patterns of Cdx2 and
PTEN in various GC tissues and cell lines to identify their relationship in GC.
Immunohistochemistry was undertaken to assess the expression patterns of Cdx2 and
PTEN in paraffin-embedded specimens of 228 GC patients who had undergone radical 
D2 gastrostomy with long-term follow-up. Cell growth and tumorigenicity were
analyzed in the BGC823 cells with exogenous Cdx2 and any changes in the
associated signaling pathways were interpreted in exogenous cdx2 expression and
cdx2 knockdown. Cdx2 was found in the nuclei of GC cells in 43.4% (99/228) of the
paraffin-embedded biopsies. A higher expression of nuclear PTEN was observed in
36.4% (83/228). Coexpression of Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN was detected in GC tumors
(59/228, 25.9%) which correlated with the prognosis of advanced GC patients
(p<0.001). The expression levels of Cdx2 and PTEN were variable in the different 
GC cell lines. However, the trends were similar between PTEN and Cdx2 in GC
tissues and cell lines. High expression of Cdx2 and PTEN significantly reduced
tumorigenicity in BGC823 cells compared with the empty vector control. Exogenous 
expression of Cdx2 triggered the upregulation of PTEN expression and decreased
PI3K and pAkt expression and vice versa. The coexpression levels of PTEN and Cdx2
in GC tumors correlated with prognosis in GC patients. Cdx2 may play a role in
the upregulation of PTEN by triggering PI3K/Akt inactivation in GC cells.

PMID: 23546539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Urol. 2013 Sep;190(3):1083-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.03.109. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Expression and functional role of Cdx2 in intestinal metaplasia of cystitis
glandularis.

Lin ME(1), Huang D, Deng BH, Lv YS, Rong L, Yao YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Cdx2 is an essential transcription factor in intestinal epithelial cell 
differentiation and proliferation. However, to our knowledge the expression and
role of Cdx2 in the development of intestinal cystitis glandularis, a metaplastic
lesion induced by chronic inflammation, remained to be explored.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to examine
Cdx2, LI-cadherin and villin expression in typical and intestinal cystitis
glandularis, and normal bladder tissue. Cdx2 cDNA was subcloned to the retroviral
vector pLNCX2 for subsequent transfection into human bladder urothelium cells and
rat bladder urothelium. Cdx2 mRNA and protein levels, and cell morphology and
proliferation were assessed after transfection using real-time polymerase chain
reaction, phase contrast microscopy, transmission electron microscopy and MTT
assay, respectively.
RESULTS: Higher mRNA levels of Cdx2, villin and LI-cadherin were detected in
intestinal cystitis glandularis compared to normal bladder and typical cystitis
glandularis. Only Cdx2 groups attained statistical significance (p <0.001).
Retroviral over expression of Cdx2 resulted in increased mRNA and protein
expression of Cdx2 as well as villin and LI-cadherin levels, and increased cell
proliferation. A distinct change in cellular morphology, in which cells resembled
intestinal-like cells, was also observed in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdx2 may have a critical role in regulating intestinal metaplasia in
cystitis glandularis. Further studies are planned to assess the potential of
using Cdx2 as a marker and therapeutic target for cystitis glandularis.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23545100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Mar;26(3):395-406. doi: 10.1071/RD12243.

Production of viable cloned miniature pigs by aggregation of handmade cloned
embryos at the 4-cell stage.

Siriboon C(1), Tu CF(2), Kere M(1), Liu MS(2), Chang HJ(2), Ho LL(2), Tai ME(2), 
Fang WD(2), Lo NW(3), Tseng JK(4), Ju JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, 250 Kuokuang
Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Animal Technology Institute Taiwan, 52 Kedung
2 Road, Ding-Pu LII, Chunan, Miaoli, Taiwan, ROC. (3)Department of Animal Science
and Biotechnology, Tunghai University, 181, Sec. 3, Taichung Harbor Road,
Taichung 407, Taiwan, ROC. (4)School of Optometry, Chung Shan Medical University,
110 Chien-Kuo North Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan, ROC.

The aim of the present study was to improve the quality of handmade cloned
porcine embryos by multiple embryo aggregations. Embryos derived from aggregation
of three cloned embryos (3×) had a better blastocyst rate than cloned control
(1×) embryos (73.6% vs 35.1%, respectively; P<0.05), but did not differ from
those produced by aggregation of two cloned embryos (2×; 63.0%). Total cell
numbers differed among treatments (P<0.05), with the greatest cell numbers (126) 
in the 3× group and the lowest (55) in the control group. The ratio of inner cell
mass:total cell number was comparable in the 2× and 3× groups (25.1% vs 26.1%,
respectively) and was significantly better than that in the control group
(15.3%). The proportion of apoptotic cells in 2× and 3× groups was lower than
that in the control group (2.7% and 2.2% vs 4.7%, respectively; P<0.05).
Expression of Oct4 and Cdx2 was higher, whereas that of Bax was lower (P<0.05),
in the 3× compared with non-aggregate group. Seven piglets were born to two
surrogate mothers after embryo transfer of 3× aggregated blastocysts. In
conclusion, aggregated embryos had greater total cell numbers and better
pluripotency gene expression, with reduced expression of the pro-apoptosis gene
Bax. Collectively, these improvement may be associated with the development of
cloned embryos to term.

PMID: 23544704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Pregnancy Hypertens. 2013 Apr;3(2):82. doi: 10.1016/j.preghy.2013.04.071. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

PP044. Differential expression of trophoblast-, endothelial- and embryonic stem
cell-associated transcription factors in 1st trimester, and in 3rd trimester
preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction.

Weber M, Schlembach D, Schleussner E, Markert UR, Fitzgerald JS.

OBJECTIVES: Trophoblast progenitor cells express stem cells markers (SCM) to
maintain the proliferative characteristic of stem cells. Beyond blastocyst stage 
or in preeclampsia (PE) or intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) little is known
about expression of SCMs. We examined the expression of trophoblast and other
SCMs in 1st and 3rd trimester placenta and in preeclampsia (PE) and intrauterine 
growth restriction (IUGR) in order to discriminate if these markers might be
involved in progenitor cell functions.
METHODS: 8 samples each of 1st trimester placentae (elective abortions), 3rd
trimester IUGR, PE and control (normal term pregnancy placentae) were stained by 
immunoperoxidase to detect the SCMs: CDX2 (trophectoderm SCM), SOX2, NANOG and
OCT4A (embryonic SCMs) and NOTCH1 (endothelial SCM).
RESULTS: In 1st trimester all SCM were detected, expressed homogenous in
syncytio- and cytotrophoblast, and grow increasingly mosaic-like towards the end 
of 1st trimester. These signals are lost or diminished in 3rd trimester, whereby 
the syncytiotrophoblast loses these signals first. NOTCH1, however, remains
highly expressed in all trophoblast subtypes of both IUGR and PE pregnancies.
CONCLUSION: Both embryonic and trophoblast SCMs are expressed in 1st trimester
trophoblast and appear most vivid among the villous trophoblast of very early
pregnancy. Loss of stem cell transcription factor expression in term placentae
indicates temporal regulation, and a so far unknown specific function.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26105899  [PubMed]


471. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1637. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2657.

Probing transcription factor diffusion dynamics in the living mammalian embryo
with photoactivatable fluorescence correlation spectroscopy.

Kaur G(1), Costa MW, Nefzger CM, Silva J, Fierro-González JC, Polo JM, Bell TD,
Plachta N.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Australia, Australian
Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia.

Transcription factors use diffusion to search the DNA, yet the mechanisms
controlling transcription factor diffusion during mammalian development remain
poorly understood. Here we combine photoactivation and fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy to study transcription factor diffusion in developing mouse embryos.
We show that the pluripotency-associated transcription factor Oct4 displays both 
fast and Brownian and slower subdiffusive behaviours that are controlled by DNA
interactions. Following cell lineage specification, the slower DNA-interacting
diffusion fraction distinguishes pluripotent from extraembryonic cell nuclei.
Similar to Oct4, Sox2 shows slower diffusion in pluripotent cells while Cdx2
displays opposite dynamics, suggesting that slow diffusion may represent a
general feature of transcription factors in lineages where they are essential.
Slow Oct4 subdiffusive behaviours are conserved in embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells), and lost during differentiation. We
also show that Oct4 diffusion depends on its interaction with ERG-associated
protein with SET domain. Photoactivation and fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy provides a new intravital approach to study transcription factor
diffusion in complex in vivo systems.

PMID: 23535658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Ann Surg. 2013 Jul;258(1):141-51. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31828cd008.

Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas with distinct pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas are frequently of gastric subtype.

Ideno N(1), Ohtsuka T, Kono H, Fujiwara K, Oda Y, Aishima S, Ito T, Ishigami K,
Tokunaga S, Ohuchida K, Takahata S, Nakamura M, Mizumoto K, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To identify a high-risk group of patients with pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC), independently arising in the pancreas with intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), using histopathologic subtypes.
BACKGROUND: Pathologic features of IPMN with distinct PDAC, including
histopathologic subtypes of IPMN and PDAC phenotypes, have not been well
characterized. Mucin expression patterns and the mutational status of GNAS and
KRAS are useful to explore the relationship between these 2 lesion types.
METHODS: Clinicopathologic data of 179 resected IPMNs and 180 resected PDACs
without IPMNs as a control group were reviewed. IPMNs were classified into 4
grades (low-grade, intermediate-grade, high-grade dysplasia, and an associated
invasive carcinoma) and 4 subtypes (gastric, intestinal, pancreatobiliary, and
oncocytic). The expression of MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and CDX2 was investigated
by immunohistochemistry in IPMNs and PDACs with and without IPMNs. The mutational
status of GNAS and KRAS was evaluated by cycle sequencing in PDACs and
pre-/coexisting IPMNs.
RESULTS: Twenty-six synchronous or metachronous PDACs were identified in 20
patients (11.2%) with IPMNs. Occurrence of concomitant PDACs was more frequently 
observed in gastric-type IPMNs (18/110, 16.4%) compared with intestinal (1/49,
2.0%), pancreatobiliary (1/17, 5.9%), or oncocytic-type (0/3, 0%) (P = 0.047).
Both PDACs with and without IPMNs were frequently positive for MUC1, MUC5AC, and 
MUC6 expression, as assessed by immunohistochemistry, but were negative for MUC2 
and CDX2. The mucin-staining patterns were similar to those of invasive tubular
adenocarcinoma arising from gastric-type IPMNs. Mutation of GNAS within codon 201
was not detected in PDACs and gastric-type IPMNs, whereas most of these exhibited
KRAS mutations. However, the R201H GNAS mutation was detected in 1
intestinal-type IPMN with distinct PDAC.
CONCLUSIONS: Mucin expression patterns demonstrate that PDAC without GNAS
mutations of an aggressive phenotype frequently arise in the pancreas with benign
gastric-type IPMN in the absence of GNAS mutations.

PMID: 23532108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. BMC Cancer. 2013 Mar 22;13:142. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-142.

Alcohol dehydrogenase, iron containing, 1 promoter hypermethylation associated
with colorectal cancer differentiation.

Tae CH(1), Ryu KJ, Kim SH, Kim HC, Chun HK, Min BH, Chang DK, Rhee PL, Kim JJ,
Rhee JC, Kim YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The aberrant methylation of CpG islands in the promoter is associated
with colorectal cancer (CRC) carcinogenesis. In our previous study, the promoter 
of alcohol dehydrogenase, iron containing, 1 (ADHFE1) was most highly methylated 
in CRC compared to normal colorectal mucosa. In this study, we examined the
expression and function of the ADHFE1 in CRC.
METHODS: We examined the promoter methylation and mRNA expression of ADHFE1 with 
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-2-dC) in 12 CRC cell lines, 124 paired CRC and
adjacent normal mucosa, and 59 advanced adenomas. To confirm methylation of
ADHFE1, we performed bisulfite genomic sequencing in 3 CRC cell lines, 6 paired
CRC and adjacent normal mucosa. ADHFE1 protein expression was studied using
western blot and immunohistochemistry, respectively in the 36 and 243 paired CRC 
and adjacent normal tissue. We transfected the DLD-1 with pcDNA3.1 vector
containing ADHFE1 and examined the expression of differentiation marker, such as 
ALP, CEA and Cdx2. We examined the ADHFE1 expression at distinct developmental
stages in mouse embryos.
RESULTS: The ADHFE1 promoter was hypermethylated in all CRC cell lines, 81.8% in 
CRCs, and 84.7% in advanced adenomas, with reciprocal change by 5-Aza-2-dC. The
expression of ADHFE1 mRNA was down-regulated in all CRC cell lines and 96.3% in
CRC tissues. The expression of ADHFE1 protein was down-regulated in 91.7% of CRC 
tissues. In the immunohistochemistry, normal epithelial cells at the crypt top
showed very strong ADHFE1 expression, whereas they were much weaker at the crypt 
base. In CRC, the good differentiation was significantly associated with high
ADHFE1 expression. The activity of differentiation marker, such as ALP and CEA,
was higher in pcDNA3.1-ADHFE1 transfected CRC cells with consistent correlation
with ADHFE1 protein than control. In mouse embryos, ADHFE1 in the large intestine
was the first detected at E15.5. At E18.5, ADHFE1 was predominantly expressed in 
the top of the mature crypt epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: It showed that the hypermethylation of ADHFE1 promoter in CRC is
concordance with down-regulation of ADHFE1 mRNA and ADHFE1 protein. ADHFE1 has an
important role of differentiation in CRC, as well as normal colorectal mucosa and
embryonic developmental processes.

PMCID: PMC3618294
PMID: 23517143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 26;110(13):E1212-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303094110. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Complete and unidirectional conversion of human embryonic stem cells to
trophoblast by BMP4.

Amita M(1), Adachi K, Alexenko AP, Sinha S, Schust DJ, Schulz LC, Roberts RM,
Ezashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, and Bond Life Sciences Center, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Human ES cells (hESC) exposed to bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4) in the absence
of FGF2 have become widely used for studying trophoblast development, but the
soundness of this model has been challenged by others, who concluded that
differentiation was primarily toward mesoderm rather than trophoblast. Here we
confirm that hESC grown under the standard conditions on a medium conditioned by 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts in the presence of BMP4 and absence of FGF2 on a
Matrigel substratum rapidly convert to an epithelium that is largely KRT7(+)
within 48 h, with minimal expression of mesoderm markers, including T
(Brachyury). Instead, they begin to express a series of trophoblast markers,
including HLA-G, demonstrate invasive properties that are independent of the
continued presence of BMP4 in the medium, and, over time, produce extensive
amounts of human chorionic gonadotropin, progesterone, placental growth factor,
and placental lactogen. This process of differentiation is not dependent on
conditioning of the medium by mouse embryonic fibroblasts and is accelerated in
the presence of inhibitors of Activin and FGF2 signaling, which at day 2 provide 
colonies that are entirely KRT7(+) and in which the majority of cells are
transiently CDX2(+). Colonies grown on two chemically defined media, including
the one in which BMP4 was reported to drive mesoderm formation, also
differentiate at least partially to trophoblast in response to BMP4. The
experiments demonstrate that the in vitro BMP4/hESC model is valid for studying
the emergence and differentiation of trophoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3612666
PMID: 23493551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Thyroid. 2013 Jun;23(6):714-9. doi: 10.1089/thy.2012.0455.

Columnar cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a study of 10 cases with
emphasis on CDX2 expression.

Sujoy V(1), Pinto A, Nosé V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.

BACKGROUND: Columnar cell variant is a recognized rare variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma (PTC) that has an uncertain clinical course. This variant has
two subvariants, and one is regarded as a more aggressive form in comparison to
the more common classical and follicular variants. These tumors have
morphological resemblance with endometrial or colonic adenocarcinoma. CDX2, a
transcription factor of the caudal homeobox family, plays a key role in
intestinal development and differentiation, and it is widely used as a marker to 
detect adenocarcinomas of intestinal and colonic origin. CDX2 has been rarely
reported in PTC.
METHODS: We studied 10 cases of columnar cell variant of PTC (CCV-PTC). The
histological, architectural, and cytological features fulfilled the diagnostic
criteria of the CCV-PTC, as defined by the current World Health Organization
classification. Ten patients (six men and four women) ranging in age from 32 to
90 years (mean, 58.3 years) presented with tumors classified as indolent (four
cases) or aggressive (six cases); three harbored a BRAF(V600E) mutation. All
cases were ß-catenin negative. The Ki-67 proliferative index was up to 50%. All
cases were thyroid transcription factor-1-positive. Using paraffin-embedded
blocks, immunohistochemistry for CDX2 was performed to evaluate the reactivity of
this antibody to this variant of PTC.
RESULTS: Nuclear positivity for CDX2 was detected in one out of the 10 cases
studied (10%); the other nine cases did not express CDX2.
CONCLUSION: Only one of our cases showed nuclear positivity for CDX2. Therefore, 
our study failed to confirm it as a marker for CCV-PTC. The absence of CDX2 in
the majority of the cases does not support the theory of CDX2 playing a role in
the intestinal phenotype of these tumors.

PMID: 23488912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Inorg Chem. 2013 Mar 18;52(6):3225-35. doi: 10.1021/ic302716n. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Cd(II)-coordination framework: synthesis, anion-induced structural
transformation, anion-responsive luminescence, and anion separation.

Hou S(1), Liu QK, Ma JP, Dong YB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Key
Laboratory of Molecular and Nano Probes, Engineering Research Center of Pesticide
and Medicine Intermediate Clean Production, Ministry of Education, Shandong
Normal University, Jinan 250014, People's Republic of China.

A series of Cd(II) coordination frameworks that are constructed from a new
oxadiazole-bridged ligand 3,5-bis(3-pyridyl-3-(3'-methylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole 
(L) and CdX2 (X = NO3(-), Cl(-), Br(-), I(-), N3(-), and SCN(-)) were
synthesized. The NO3(-) anion of the solid CdL2(NO3)2·2THF (1) is able to be
quantitatively exchanged with Cl(-), Br(-), I(-), SCN(-), and N3(-) in the solid 
state. For Cl(-) and Br(-), the anion exchange resulted in a anion-induced
structural transformation to form the structures of 2 and 3, respectively. In
addition, the Cd(II) structure herein exhibits the anion-responsive
photoluminescence, which could be a useful method to monitor the anion-exchange
process. Notably, compound 1 can recognize and completely separate SCN(-)/N3(-)
with similar geometry.

PMID: 23461490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2012 Oct-Dec;55(4):560-2. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.107820.

Cervical metastasis of esophagogastric junction cancer.

Cai Z(1), Shu X, Li J, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Yangtze University,
Jingzhou, Hubei, China.

As cervical metastases in esophagogastric junction cancer are extremely rare, the
authors herein report a case. A 63-year-old woman presented with dysphagia since 
6 months. Diagnostic endoscopy showed that the tumor was located at the
esophagogastric junction and histopathological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was
offered. A subtotal gastrectomy was performed. Histopathological diagnosis was
moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, invading upto the serosa with
metastases to perigastric nodes. The patient received chemotherapy of cisplatin
and fluorouracil for one cycle and oral capecitabine for two cycles. Two years
later, the patient presented with vaginal bleeding and magnetic resonance imaging
of pelvis revealed a tumor of the cervix. Histopathological impression of the
tumor was metastatic cervical adenocarcinoma and immunohistochemistry showed the 
tumor was cytokeratin, villin, and CDX2 were positive and cytokeratin 20, CA125, 
and CA199 were negative. The immunohistochemical profile was the same as that of 
primary.

PMID: 23455807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Feb 25;2013. pii: bcr2012007849. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2012-007849.

Testicular metastasis of colorectal carcinoma: an unusual presentation.

Verma N(1), Babu S, Kushwaha JK, Singhai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, KGMU, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
rubyruby2k4@yahoo.com

Metastasis of colorectal carcinoma to testis is rare. The authors report a case
of 35-year-old man with right testicular mass. Contrast-enhanced CT scan (CECT)
of testes showed testicular mass with ascitis and enlargement of retroperitoneal 
lymphnodes. Thus, a provisional diagnosis of disseminated primary testicular
tumour was made. On subsequent high orchidectomy pathological examination
revealed mucinous adenocarcinoma with CDX2 positivity thereby suggesting the
possibility of metastasis from adenocarcinoma. Further, the diagnostic evaluation
revealed a colorectal mass, which was inoperable (stage IV) and found to be
primary colorectal mucinous adenocarcinoma. The authors conclude that occult
colorectal carcinoma may rarely metastasise to testis and this unusual
presentation may produce diagnostic dilemma. Although rare, metastases to testes 
should be considered as a differential diagnosis, especially where symptoms are
unusual for primary malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3604314
PMID: 23440985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Apr 1;31(10):1348-56. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.46.8868. Epub 2013
Feb 25.

Histomolecular phenotypes and outcome in adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of vater.

Chang DK(1), Jamieson NB, Johns AL, Scarlett CJ, Pajic M, Chou A, Pinese M,
Humphris JL, Jones MD, Toon C, Nagrial AM, Chantrill LA, Chin VT, Pinho AV,
Rooman I, Cowley MJ, Wu J, Mead RS, Colvin EK, Samra JS, Corbo V, Bassi C,
Falconi M, Lawlor RT, Crippa S, Sperandio N, Bersani S, Dickson EJ, Mohamed MA,
Oien KA, Foulis AK, Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL, Kench JG, Carter CR, Gill AJ,
Scarpa A, McKay CJ, Biankin AV.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW
2010 Australia.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Oct 20;31(30):3843-4.
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Oct 20;31(30):3842-3.

PURPOSE: Individuals with adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater demonstrate a
broad range of outcomes, presumably because these cancers may arise from any one 
of the three epithelia that converge at that location. This variability poses
challenges for clinical decision making and the development of novel therapeutic 
strategies.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We assessed the potential clinical utility of
histomolecular phenotypes defined using a combination of histopathology and
protein expression (CDX2 and MUC1) in 208 patients from three independent cohorts
who underwent surgical resection for adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.
RESULTS: Histologic subtype and CDX2 and MUC1 expression were significant
prognostic variables. Patients with a histomolecular pancreaticobiliary phenotype
(CDX2 negative, MUC1 positive) segregated into a poor prognostic group in the
training (hazard ratio [HR], 3.34; 95% CI, 1.69 to 6.62; P < .001) and both
validation cohorts (HR, 5.65; 95% CI, 2.77 to 11.5; P < .001 and HR, 2.78; 95%
CI, 1.25 to 7.17; P = .0119) compared with histomolecular nonpancreaticobiliary
carcinomas. Further stratification by lymph node (LN) status defined three
clinically relevant subgroups: one, patients with histomolecular
nonpancreaticobiliary (intestinal) carcinoma without LN metastases who had an
excellent prognosis; two, those with histomolecular pancreaticobiliary carcinoma 
with LN metastases who had a poor outcome; and three, the remainder of patients
(nonpancreaticobiliary, LN positive or pancreaticobiliary, LN negative) who had
an intermediate outcome.
CONCLUSION: Histopathologic and molecular criteria combine to define clinically
relevant histomolecular phenotypes of adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater and 
potentially represent distinct diseases with significant implications for current
therapeutic strategies, the ability to interpret past clinical trials, and future
trial design.

PMID: 23439753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003204. Epub 2013 Feb 
21.

Ectopic expression of Ptf1a induces spinal defects, urogenital defects, and
anorectal malformations in Danforth's short tail mice.

Semba K(1), Araki K, Matsumoto K, Suda H, Ando T, Sei A, Mizuta H, Takagi K,
Nakahara M, Muta M, Yamada G, Nakagata N, Iida A, Ikegawa S, Nakamura Y, Araki M,
Abe K, Yamamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Resource Development and
Analysis, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Danforth's short tail (Sd) is a semidominant mutation on mouse chromosome 2,
characterized by spinal defects, urogenital defects, and anorectal malformations.
However, the gene responsible for the Sd phenotype was unknown. In this study, we
identified the molecular basis of the Sd mutation. By positional cloning, we
identified the insertion of an early transposon in the Sd candidate locus
approximately 12-kb upstream of Ptf1a. We found that insertion of the transposon 
caused overexpression of three neighboring genes, Gm13344, Gm13336, and Ptf1a, in
Sd mutant embryos and that the Sd phenotype was not caused by disruption of an
as-yet-unknown gene in the candidate locus. Using multiple knockout and knock-in 
mouse models, we demonstrated that misexpression of Ptf1a, but not of Gm13344 or 
Gm13336, in the notochord, hindgut, cloaca, and mesonephros was sufficient to
replicate the Sd phenotype. The ectopic expression of Ptf1a in the caudal embryo 
resulted in attenuated expression of Cdx2 and its downstream target genes T,
Wnt3a, and Cyp26a1; we conclude that this is the molecular basis of the Sd
phenotype. Analysis of Sd mutant mice will provide insight into the development
of the spinal column, anus, and kidney.

PMCID: PMC3578775
PMID: 23436999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Diagn Pathol. 2013 Feb 20;8:31. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-8-31.

Right-sided rhabdoid colorectal tumors might be related to the serrated pathway.

Pancione M(1), Remo A, Sabatino L, Zanella C, Votino C, Fucci A, Di Blasi A,
Lepore G, Daniele B, Fenizia F, Molinari E, Normanno N, Manfrin E, Vendraminelli 
R, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of
Sannio, Benevento, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdoid colorectal tumor (RCT) is a rare, highly aggressive neoplasm
recurrent in elderly patients, commonly at the caecum. The molecular mechanisms
underlying RCT pathogenesis remain poorly elucidated. The differential diagnosis 
is with the malignant rhabdoid tumors of infancy characterized by genetic
inactivation of SMARCB1 (INI1) or deletions of chromosome 22q12 locus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To shed light on RCT pathogenesis, we investigated genetic
and epigenetic alterations in two cases of pure and composite RCT and compared
them with the profiles of matched adenomas and normal mucosa. Immunohistochemical
analysis, FISH, methylation specific PCR and DNA sequencing analysis were
performed on paraffin-embedded tissues.
RESULTS: Loss of epithelial markers, (CK20, CDX2 and E-cadherin) and intense
vimentin expression was observed in RCTs but neither in the normal mucosa or
adenomas. INI1 expression was detected in normal mucosa, adenomas and retained in
pure RCT, while it was undetected in composite RCT. Rearrangement of the 22q12
locus was found only in pure RCT. The APC/ß-catenin pathway was not altered,
while MLH1 immunostaining was negative in RCTs and positive in adenomas and
normal mucosa. These expression profiles were associated with V600E BRAF
mutation, a progressive accumulation of promoter methylation at specific CIMP
loci and additional genes from the normal mucosa to tubular adenoma and RCT.
CONCLUSIONS: Right-sided RCT could be characterized by epigenetic events and
molecular features likely similar to those occurring in the serrated pathway and 
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition. These extremely rare tumors
may benefit from the use of new biological molecules specific for colorectal
carcinoma.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1641385210804556.

PMCID: PMC3640919
PMID: 23425390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr;41(7):3986-99. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt087. Epub 2013 Feb
13.

CDX2 regulation by the RNA-binding protein MEX3A: impact on intestinal
differentiation and stemness.

Pereira B(1), Sousa S, Barros R, Carreto L, Oliveira P, Oliveira C, Chartier NT, 
Plateroti M, Rouault JP, Freund JN, Billaud M, Almeida R.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University
of Porto, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal.

The homeobox transcription factor CDX2 plays a crucial role in intestinal cell
fate specification, both during normal development and in tumorigenic processes
involving intestinal reprogramming. The CDX2 regulatory network is intricate, but
it has not yet been fully uncovered. Through genome-wide screening of a 3D
culture system, the RNA-binding protein MEX3A was identified as putatively
involved in CDX2 regulation; therefore, its biological relevance was addressed by
setting up cell-based assays together with expression studies in murine
intestine. We demonstrate here that MEX3A has a repressive function by
controlling CDX2 levels in gastric and colorectal cellular models. This is
dependent on the interaction with a specific binding determinant present in CDX2 
mRNA 3'untranslated region. We have further determined that MEX3A impairs
intestinal differentiation and cellular polarization, affects cell cycle
progression and promotes increased expression of intestinal stem cell markers,
namely LGR5, BMI1 and MSI1. Finally, we show that MEX3A is expressed in mouse
intestine, supporting an in vivo context for interaction with CDX2 and modulation
of stem cell properties. Therefore, we describe a novel CDX2 post-transcriptional
regulatory mechanism, through the RNA-binding protein MEX3A, with a major impact 
in intestinal differentiation, polarity and stemness, likely contributing to
intestinal homeostasis and carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3627580
PMID: 23408853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Exp Ther Med. 2013 Mar;5(3):735-741. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Reactivation of the homeotic tumor suppressor gene CDX2 by
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-induced demethylation inhibits cell proliferation and
induces caspase-independent apoptosis in gastric cancer cells.

Zhang JF(1), Zhang JG, Kuai XL, Zhang H, Jiang W, Ding WF, Li ZL, Zhu HJ, Mao ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China.

The DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) is widely used
as an anticancer drug for the treatment of leukemia and solid tumors. Gastric
cancer (GC) patients who were positive for caudal type homeobox transcription
factor 2 (CDX2) expression showed a higher survival rate compared with those who 
were CDX2 negative, which suggests that CDX2 performs a tumor suppressor role.
However, the molecular mechanisms leading to the inactivation of CDX2 remain
unclear. In the present study we demonstrated that the expression levels of CDX2 
and DNA methyltransferase enzyme 1 (DNMT1) mRNA were significantly higher in GC
compared with distal non-cancerous tissue. The expression of CDX2 mRNA was
significantly correlated with Lauren classification, TNM stage and lymph node
metastasis. DNMT1 mRNA expression was significantly correlated with TNM stage,
pathological differentiation and lymph node metastasis. The expression of CDX2
mRNA was inversely correlated with that of DNMT1 mRNA in GC. Hypermethylation of 
the CDX2 gene promoter region, extremely low expression levels of CDX2 mRNA and
no expression of CDX2 protein were the characteristics observed in MKN-45 and
SGC-7901 GC cell lines. Following the treatment of MKN-45 cells with 5-aza-CdR,
the hypermethylated CDX2 gene promoter region was demethylated and expression of 
CDX2 was upregulated, while DNMT1 expression was downregulated. Furthermore, a
concentration- and time-dependent growth inhibition as well as increased
apoptosis were observed. Caspase-3, -8 and -9 activities increased in a
concentration-dependent manner following exposure to different concentrations of 
5-aza-CdR. Therefore, our data show that the overexpression of DNMT1 and
methylation of the CDX2 gene promoter region is likely to be responsible for CDX2
silencing in GC. 5-Aza-CdR may effectively induce re-expression of the CDX2 gene,
inhibit cell proliferation and enhance the caspase-independent apoptosis of
MKN-45 cells in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3570199
PMID: 23408490  [PubMed]


484. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Apr 1;31(10):e152-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.44.7771. Epub 2013 
Feb 11.

a-fetoprotein secreting extrapulmonary small-cell carcinoma of the liver.

Walshauser MA(1), Ishii K, Murugappan K, Masoom S, Yong S, Bhoopalam N.

Author information: 
(1)Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA. mwalshauser@lumc.edu

PMID: 23401444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):325-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2553. Epub 2013 Feb 10.

Endogenous retroviruses function as species-specific enhancer elements in the
placenta.

Chuong EB(1), Rumi MA, Soares MJ, Baker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA. echuong@stanford.edu

The mammalian placenta is remarkably distinct between species, suggesting a
history of rapid evolutionary diversification. To gain insight into the molecular
drivers of placental evolution, we compared biochemically predicted enhancers in 
mouse and rat trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and found that species-specific
enhancers are highly enriched for endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) on a genome-wide
level. One of these ERV families, RLTR13D5, contributes hundreds of
mouse-specific histone H3 lysine 4 monomethylation (H3K4me1)- and histone H3
lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac)-defined enhancers that functionally bind Cdx2,
Eomes and Elf5-core factors that define the TSC regulatory network. Furthermore, 
we show that RLTR13D5 is capable of driving gene expression in rat placental
cells. Analysis in other tissues shows that species-specific ERV enhancer
activity is generally restricted to hypomethylated tissues, suggesting that
tissues permissive for ERV activity gain access to an otherwise silenced source
of regulatory variation. Overall, our results implicate ERV enhancer co-option as
a mechanism underlying the extensive evolutionary diversification of placental
development.

PMCID: PMC3789077
PMID: 23396136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jun;34(6):1361-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt037. Epub 2013 Feb 
7.

Regulation of APC and AXIN2 expression by intestinal tumor suppressor CDX2 in
colon cancer cells.

Olsen AK(1), Coskun M, Bzorek M, Kristensen MH, Danielsen ET, Jørgensen S, Olsen 
J, Engel U, Holck S, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sygehus Syd Naestved, Naestved 4700, Denmark.

Wnt signaling is often constitutively active in colorectal cancer cells. The
expression of the intestinal specific transcription factor CDX2 is found to be
transiently decreased in invasive cells at the tumor/stroma interface. A recent
ChIP-Seq study has indicated that several Wnt signaling-related genes are
regulated by CDX2. The aim was to investigate the role of decreased CDX2 level on
the expression of APC, AXIN2 and GSK3ß in migrating colon cancer cells at the
invasive front. CDX2-bound promoter and enhancer regions from APC, AXIN2 and
GSK3ß were analyzed for gene regulatory activity and the expression pattern of
APC and GSK3ß at the invasive front was evaluated by immunohistochemical
procedures. Transfection of intestinal and non-intestinal cell lines demonstrated
that CDX2 activated APC and AXIN2 promoter activities via intestinal
cell-specific enhancer elements. Suppressed CDX2 expression was associated with
endogenous downregulation of APC and AXIN2 expression in Caco-2 cells but did not
affect GSK3ß expression. Furthermore, elevated levels of nuclear ß-catenin and
reduced levels of cytoplasmic APC were correlated to a low CDX2 expression in
migrating colon cancer cells in vivo. These results suggest that a low CDX2 level
has influence on the Wnt signaling in invasive colon cancer cells possibly
promoting cellular migration.

PMID: 23393221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biol Reprod. 2013 Mar 28;88(3):74. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.103390. Print 2013
Mar.

Inhibition of MAP2K and GSK3 signaling promotes bovine blastocyst development and
epiblast-associated expression of pluripotency factors.

Harris D(1), Huang B, Oback B.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ltd., Ruakura Research Centre, Reproductive Technologies, Hamilton,
New Zealand.

Cells in the mammalian blastocyst segregate into three distinct lineages, namely,
trophoblast, hypoblast, and epiblast. During development, these will form
extraembryonic and embryonic tissues, respectively. In mouse, only epiblast cells
can be directly converted into cultured pluripotent embryonic stem cells, capable
of forming all adult cell types. This conversion is promoted by the double
inhibition (i.e., 2i) of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (Map2k),
antagonizing Fgf signaling, and of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (Gsk3), stimulating
the Wnt pathway. We investigated the effect of 2i treatment on lineage
segregation and pluripotency-related gene expression in bovine blastocysts. In
vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos were cultured in the presence of dimethyl
sulfoxide or inhibitors of MAP2K (0.4 µM PD0325901) and GSK3 (3 µM CHIR99021)
from the zygote (Day 1) stage. Compared to vehicle controls, 2i conditions
increased the abundance of cumulus cells in bovine IVF cultures, which
compromised blastocyst formation. Following cumulus removal, 2i accelerated
blastocyst development and increased inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast cell
numbers by 30% and 27%, respectively. These developmental and morphological
changes were accompanied by alterations in gene expression. Signal inhibition
increased transcription of putative epiblast markers NANOG and SOX2 while
repressing putative hypoblast marker GATA4. Using microsurgical blastocyst
dissection, we found that the increase in NANOG and SOX2 levels was specific to
the ICM and not due to ectopic expression in the trophoblast. Expression of other
pluripotency-related (POU5F1, KLF4, DPPA3) or trophoblast-enriched (CDX2) genes
was not affected. In summary, 2i conditions reprogrammed the transcriptional
profile of bovine ICM but not trophoblast cells. By shifting the balance from
hypoblast- to epiblast-associated gene expression, 2i culture may prime bovine
epiblast for subsequent derivation of pluripotent stem cell cultures.

PMID: 23390165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;33(10):835-8.

[Expression level of CDX2 gene in acute myeloid leukemia and its clinical
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu Y(1), Wang Q, Mu QT, Yu MX, Chen ZM, Lou JY, Jin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Ningbo First Hospital, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression and clinical significance of Caudal-type
homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) gene in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
patients.
METHOD: Real time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) was used to test the expression level
of CDX2 gene in 108 de novo AML patients and the clinical features of these
patients were analyzed.
RESULTS: CDX2 gene transcript levels were detectable in bone marrow mononuclear
cells from 108 AML patients and 7 healthy donors, the median expression level
were 1179.44 (range 14.15 - 867 961.10) and 105.30 (range 22.30 - 453.11). There 
was a statistically significant difference in expression level of CDX2 gene
between the AML patients and normal donor (P < 0.01). All 14 patients with
FLT3-ITD(+) were in CDX2 gene higher expression group (P = 0.018), including 10
patients with normal karyotype. In the 83 treated AML patients (P = 0.046) and 57
higher WBC count (= 10×10(9)/L, P = 0.048) patients, the higher expression level 
of CDX2 gene was associated with lower complete remission (CR) rates.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher expression level of CDX2 gene was seen mostly in AML patients
with FLT3-ITD mutation and with lower CR rates. CDX2 gene might be a prognostic
molecular marker in AML patients with normal karyotype.

PMID: 23384906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054757. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 exhibit transcriptional specificity in the intestine.

Grainger S(1), Hryniuk A, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

The caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed 
in the developing endoderm with expression persisting into adulthood. Cdx1(-/-)
mutants are viable and fertile and display no overt intestinal phenotype. Cdx2
null mutants are peri-implantation lethal; however, conditional mutation
approaches have revealed that Cdx2 is required for patterning the intestinal
epithelium and specification of the colon. Cdx2 is also necessary for homeostasis
of the intestinal tract in the adult, where Cdx1 and Cdx2 appear to functionally 
overlap in the distal colon, but not during intestinal development. Cdx1 and Cdx2
exhibit complete overlap of expression in the intestine, although they differ in 
their relative levels, with Cdx1 maximal in the distal colon and Cdx2 peaking in 
the proximal cecum. Moreover, Cdx1 protein is graded along the crypt-villus axis,
being abundant in the crypts and diminishing towards the villi. Cdx2 is expressed
uniformly along this axis, but is differentially phosphorylated; the functional
relevance of these expression domains and phosphorylation is currently unknown.
Cdx1 and Cdx2 have been suggested to exhibit functional specificity in the
intestinal tract. In the present study, using cell-based models, we found that
relative to Cdx1, Cdx2 was significantly less potent at effecting a
transcriptional response from the Cdx1 promoter, a known Cdx target gene. We
subsequently assessed this relationship in vivo using a "gene swap" approach and 
found that Cdx2 cannot substitute for Cdx1 in this autoregulatory loop. This is
in marked contrast with the ability of Cdx2 to support Cdx1 expression and
function in paraxial mesoderm and vertebral patterning, thus providing novel in
vivo evidence of context-dependent transcriptional specificity between these
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3559873
PMID: 23382958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jan 28;19(4):536-41. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i4.536.

Cdx2 expression and its promoter methylation during
metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence in Barrett's esophagus.

Makita K(1), Kitazawa R, Semba S, Fujiishi K, Nakagawa M, Haraguchi R, Kitazawa
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine,
Toon 791-0295, Japan.

AIM: To examine how the expression of caudal type homebox transcription factor 2 
(Cdx2) is regulated in the development of malignancy in Barrett's esophagus.
METHODS: Cdx2, mucin (MUC) series (MUC2, MUC5AC and MUC6), p53 and E-cadherin
expression in Barrett's esophagus and adenocarcinoma specimens were examined by
immunostaining. Isolated clusters of cells from (1) MUC2 and Cdx2-positive
intestinal metaplastic mucosa; (2) MUC5AC and MUC6-positive, and MUC2 and
Cdx2-negative high-grade dysplasia (HD), or intramucosal adenocarcinoma (IMC);
and (3) MUC5AC, MUC6 and Cdx2-positive poorly-differentiated invasive
adenocarcinoma (PDA) were analyzed by methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction using sets of primers for detecting methylation status of the Cdx2 gene.
RESULTS: Most of the non-neoplastic Barrett's esophageal mucosa showing
intestinal-type metaplasia with or without low-grade dysplasia was positive for
E-cadherin, MUC series and Cdx2, but negative for p53. A portion of the low-grade
to HD was positive for E-cadherin, MUC5AC, MUC6 and p53, but negative for MUC2
and Cdx2. The definite IMC area was strongly positive for MUC5AC, MUC6 and p53,
but negative for MUC2 and Cdx2. Methylation of the Cdx2 promoter was not observed
in intestinal metaplasia, while hypermethylation of part of its promoter was
observed in hot dipped and IMC. Hypermethylation of a large fraction of the Cdx2 
promoter was observed in PDA.
CONCLUSION: Cdx2 expression is restored irrespective of the methylation status of
its promoter. Apparent positive immunohistochemical results can be a molecular
mark for gene silencing memory.

PMCID: PMC3558578
PMID: 23382633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Feb 1;2013. pii: bcr2012008302. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2012-008302.

Dyspnoea and the ovaries: a rare presentation of Krukenberg tumour.

Rawasia WF(1), Chaddha U, El-Kersh K, Perez RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville, Kentucky, USA.

Krukenberg tumour is a metastatic signet-ring adenocarcinoma of the ovary,
usually with a gastrointestinal primary detected metachronously or synchronously.
We present here a case of a 48 year-old woman who presented with a prolonged
history of dyspnoea on exertion. Workup had revealed a pelvic mass.
Thoracocentesis of her pleural effusion, with cytology, and pathology reports
from her total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
revealed a carcinoma with signet-ring cells. Immunostains were positive for CDX2,
CK7 and CK20, which was highly suggestive of a gastric primary. Colonoscopy was
negative, and an oesophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a few small crater ulcers, 
the biopsy of which was negative for cancer. A right-sided pleurodesis was
performed for the unremitting malignant effusion, and a PleurX catheter was
placed in her left pleural space. She was discharged home with a very poor
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3604473
PMID: 23378553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cell Rep. 2013 Feb 21;3(2):442-57. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.01.006. Epub 2013
Jan 31.

Asymmetric localization of Cdx2 mRNA during the first cell-fate decision in early
mouse development.

Skamagki M(1), Wicher KB, Jedrusik A, Ganguly S, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QN, United Kingdom.

A longstanding question in mammalian development is whether the divisions that
segregate pluripotent progenitor cells for the future embryo from cells that
differentiate into extraembryonic structures are asymmetric in cell-fate
instructions. The transcription factor Cdx2 plays a key role in the first
cell-fate decision. Here, using live-embryo imaging, we show that localization of
Cdx2 transcripts becomes asymmetric during development, preceding cell lineage
segregation. Cdx2 transcripts preferentially localize apically at the late
eight-cell stage and become inherited asymmetrically during divisions that set
apart pluripotent and differentiating cells. Asymmetric localization depends on a
cis element within the coding region of Cdx2 and requires cell polarization as
well as intact microtubule and actin cytoskeletons. Failure to enrich Cdx2
transcripts apically results in a significant decrease in the number of
pluripotent cells. We discuss how the asymmetric localization and segregation of 
Cdx2 transcripts could contribute to multiple mechanisms that establish different
cell fates in the mouse embryo.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3607255
PMID: 23375373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mod Pathol. 2013 Jul;26(7):944-54. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.232. Epub 2013 Feb
1.

Lynch syndrome-associated breast cancers do not overexpress chromosome 11-encoded
mucins.

Walsh MD(1), Cummings MC, Pearson SA, Clendenning M, Walters RJ, Nagler B, Hopper
JL, Jenkins MA, Suthers GK, Goldblatt J, Tucker K, Gattas MR, Arnold JL, Parry S,
Macrae FA, McGuckin MA, Young JP, Buchanan DD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Population Studies Group, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Herston, QLD 4006, Australia. Michael.Walsh@qimr.edu.au

Mismatch repair-deficient breast cancers may be identified in Lynch syndrome
mutation carriers, and have clinicopathological features in common with mismatch 
repair-deficient colorectal and endometrial cancers such as tumour-infiltrating
lymphocytes and poor differentiation. Mismatch repair-deficient colorectal
cancers frequently show mucinous differentiation associated with upregulation of 
chromosome 11 mucins. The aim of this study was to compare the protein expression
of these mucins in mismatch repair-deficient and -proficient breast cancers.
Cases of breast cancer (n=100) were identified from families where (1) both
breast and colon cancer co-occurred and (2) families met either modified
Amsterdam criteria or had at least one early-onset (<50 years) colorectal cancer.
Tumour sections were stained for the epithelial mucins, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B and
MUC6, and the homeobox protein CDX2, a regulator of MUC2 expression. In all, 16
mismatch repair-deficient Lynch syndrome breast cancers and 84 non-Lynch breast
cancers were assessed for altered mucin expression. No significant difference in 
the expression of MUC2, MUC5AC or MUC6 was observed between the mismatch
repair-deficient and mismatch repair-proficient breast cancers; however, there
was a trend for mismatch repair-deficient tumours to express high levels of MUC5B
less frequently (P=0.07, OR=0.2 (0.0-1.0)). Co-expression of two or more
gel-forming mucins was common. Ectopic expression of CDX2 was associated with
expression of MUC2 (P=0.035, OR=8.7 (1.3-58.4)). Mismatch repair-deficient breast
cancers do not show differential expression of the mucins genes on chromosome 11 
when compared with mismatch repair-proficient breast cancers, in contrast with
mismatch repair-deficient colorectal and endometrial cancers, which frequently
have increased mucin protein expression when compared with their mismatch
repair-proficient counterparts. In addition, ectopic CDX2 expression is
positively associated with de novo MUC2 expression.

PMCID: PMC4204018
PMID: 23370770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Jan 25;2013. pii: bcr2012007667. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2012-007667.

Enteric adenocarcinoma lung: a rare presentation in an Omani woman.

Qureshi A(1), Furrukh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
asimqureshi32@hotmail.com

Pulmonary adenocarcinoma is a common neoplasm, yet the one with enteric or
intestinal differentiation poses a diagnostic challenge to pathologists as it
shares a common immunohistochemical profile with metastatic colorectal carcinoma.
We report a case of a 61-year-old woman. She was on surveillance when
incidentally she was discovered to have multiple bilateral lung nodules on
imaging; the largest was surgically removed for histological examination.
Morphology was consistent with a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma .The
tumour cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CDX2, CK20 and were negative
for thyroid transcription factor 1. The morphology and immune histochemical
profile raised the differential diagnosis of a metastatic colorectal carcinoma
and a primary lung adenocarcinoma with enteric differentiation. On the basis of
morphology and CK7 positivity we established the diagnosis of enteric-type
adenocarcinoma of primary lung origin. She has completed planned courses of
palliative chemotherapy and remains on surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3603974
PMID: 23355573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Mar;37(3):399-405. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31826f042c.

Islet-1 is a sensitive but not entirely specific marker for pancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms and their metastases.

Graham RP(1), Shrestha B, Caron BL, Smyrk TC, Grogg KL, Lloyd RV, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Islet-1 (Isl1) is a transcription factor involved in the embryogenesis of islets 
of Langerhans. Immunohistochemically, Isl1 is a sensitive lineage-specific marker
for pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) and their metastases. Its
specificity has not been documented, nor have large numbers of NENs from other
parts of the gut or other organs been studied. We examined Isl1 expression in 203
primary NENs (gastroenteropancreatic, lung, breast, and ovarian neoplasms) and 40
hepatic NEN metastases (enteropancreatic and lung neoplasms) from known
primaries. The correlation between Isl1 and CDX2 expression was studied using a
tissue microarray containing 46 pancreatic NENs. Immunostaining for Isl1 and CDX2
was also performed in selected NENs from other sites. Isl1 was positive in 90% of
pancreatic, 89% of duodenal, 100% of rectal, 38% of colonic, 14% of appendiceal, 
and 6% of ileal primaries. Isl1 was negative in all other NENs. Among metastatic 
neoplasms, 76% of pancreatic and 2 of 2 rectal NEN metastases were Isl1 positive,
whereas all other tested metastases were negative. The overall sensitivity and
specificity of Isl1 in identifying primary pancreatic NENs was 88% and 80%,
respectively. Thirty-six of 46 pancreatic NENs in the tissue microarray were Isl1
positive; 4 were Isl1 negative but CDX2 positive. Our findings confirm that Isl1 
is a sensitive marker of pancreatic origin in cases of metastatic NEN. However,
Isl1 does not distinguish pancreatic NEN from duodenal and colorectal NEN, even
when used in association with CDX2.

PMID: 23348208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Development. 2013 Mar;140(5):965-75. doi: 10.1242/dev.091629. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Early cell lineage specification in a marsupial: a case for diverse mechanisms
among mammals.

Frankenberg S(1), Shaw G, Freyer C, Pask AJ, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, 3010 Victoria, Australia.
srfr@unimelb.edu.au

Early cell lineage specification in eutherian mammals results in the formation of
a pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast. By contrast, marsupials have
no ICM. Here, we present the first molecular analysis of mechanisms of early cell
lineage specification in a marsupial, the tammar wallaby. There was no overt
differential localisation of key lineage-specific transcription factors in
cleavage and early unilaminar blastocyst stages. Pluriblast cells (equivalent to 
the ICM) became distinguishable from trophoblast cells by differential expression
of POU5F1 and, to a greater extent, POU2, a paralogue of POU5F1. Unlike in the
mouse, pluriblast-trophoblast differentiation coincided with a global
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic transition of CDX2 localisation. Also unlike in the mouse,
Hippo pathway factors YAP and WWTR1 showed mutually distinct localisation
patterns that suggest non-redundant roles. NANOG and GATA6 were conserved as
markers of epiblast and hypoblast, respectively, but some differences to the
mouse were found in their mode of differentiation. Our results suggest that there
is considerable evolutionary plasticity in the mechanisms regulating early
lineage specification in mammals.

PMID: 23344710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Gastric Cancer. 2013 Oct;16(4):462-71. doi: 10.1007/s10120-012-0208-8. Epub 2013 
Jan 18.

The contribution of cell phenotype to the behavior of gastric cancer.

Solcia E(1), Klersy C, Vanoli A, Grillo F, Manca R, Tava F, Luinetti O, Fiocca R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pavia, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero 
e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Policlinico San Matteo, 27100, Pavia,
Italy.

Erratum in
    Gastric Cancer. 2013 Oct;16(4):472.

BACKGROUND: Several histochemical studies suggest a role of tumor cell phenotype 
and related differentiation markers in the prognostic assessment of gastric
cancer. Unfortunately, most studies have dealt with single or a few markers and
have paid limited attention to their interplay with tumor histological types,
which are potentially informative of prognosis.
METHODS: In this study, 292 invasive (T1b to T4) gastric cancers with prolonged
follow-up and carefully analyzed histotype, inclusive of histotype-based grade,
were investigated histochemically with a panel of 14 phenotypic markers known to 
be expressed in normal gut tissues and gastric cancer.
RESULTS: Three of seven intestinal type markers investigated showed a trend for
improved prognosis, one of which, CDX2, was stage independent. Three among
gastric and pancreatobiliary duct markers (MUC1, MUC6, and pepsinogen II),
predicted more severe prognosis stage independently, as did a combination of
eight potentially informative (p < 0.1 at univariable Cox analysis) markers.
Cancers with predominantly intestinal phenotype had significantly better
prognosis than those with predominantly gastric, mixed, or poorly defined
phenotypes; among the latter, those with high lymphocyte response, with favorable
outcome, were separated from anaplastic cancers, with ominous prognosis. At
multivariable analysis, CDX2 and the eight marker combination proved to be stage-
and grade-independent predictors.
CONCLUSIONS: When individually considered, and with the exception of CDX2, the
biomarkers investigated gave an appreciable, although moderate, contribution to
the prognostic evaluation of gastric cancer. Combined analysis of all potentially
informative markers gave more important information, highly additive to both
stage and histotype-based grade.

PMID: 23329390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(11):5691-4.

No association between the CDX2 G543C polymorphism and risk of gastric atrophy
and cancer.

Goto Y(1), Kato T, Ando T, Goto H, Hamajima N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. y-goto@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Ectopic expression of CDX2 in the stomach is closely associated with chronic
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection and intestinal metaplasia. Whether CDX2
has tumor suppression or tumorigenesis potential remains to be elucidated. In
this study, we investigated the association between the CDX2 G543C polymorphism
(silent mutation) and the risk for H. pylori-induced gastric atrophy and cancer
as well as H. pylori infection, using 454 Japanese subjects undergoing a health
checkup and 202 gastric cancer patients. The frequency of the minor allele was
the same as previously reported in China, but different from that reported in
England. CDX2 G543C was not associated with risk of H. pylori infection, gastric 
atrophy, or gastric cancer, although the point estimate for non-cardiac
differentiated gastric cancer as compared to controls with gastric atrophy was
2.22 (95%CI=0.17-29.4). In conclusion, our results indicate that the CDX2 G543C
polymorphism is unlikely to affect the H. pylori infection-gastric
atrophy-gastric cancer sequence.

PMID: 23317240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 15;22(10):1564-75. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0352. Epub 2013
Mar 11.

Stress induces AMPK-dependent loss of potency factors Id2 and Cdx2 in early
embryos and stem cells [corrected].

Xie Y(1), Awonuga A, Liu J, Rings E, Puscheck EE, Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and
Development, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Oct 1;23(19):2401.

The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) mediates rapid, stress-induced loss of
the inhibitor of differentiation (Id)2 in blastocysts and trophoblast stem cells 
(TSC), and a lasting differentiation in TSC. However, it is not known if AMPK
regulates other potency factors or regulates them before the blastocyst stage.
The caudal-related homeodomain protein (Cdx)2 is a regulatory gene for
determining TSC, the earliest placental lineage in the preimplantation mouse
embryo, but is expressed in the oocyte and in early cleavage stage embryos before
TSC arise. We assayed the expression of putative potency-maintaining
phosphorylated Cdx2 ser60 in the oocyte, two-cell stage embryo, blastocyst, and
in TSC. We studied the loss of Cdx2 phospho ser60 expression induced by
hyperosmolar stress and its underlying mechanisms. Hyperosmolar stress caused
rapid loss of nuclear Cdx2 phospho ser60 and Id2 in the two-cell stage embryo by 
0.5<U+2009>h. Stress-induced Cdx2 phospho ser60 and Id2 loss is reversed by the AMPK
inhibitor compound C and is induced by the AMPK agonist
5-amino-1-ß-d-ribofuranosyl-imidazole-4-carboxamide in the absence of stress. In 
the two-cell stage embryo and TSC hyperosmolar, stress caused AMPK-mediated loss 
of Cdx2 phospho ser60 as detected by immunofluorescence and immunoblot. We
propose that AMPK may be the master regulatory enzyme for mediating
stress-induced loss of potency as AMPK is also required for stress-induced loss
of Id2 in blastocysts and TSC. Since AMPK mediates potency loss in embryos and
stem cells it will be important to measure, test mechanisms for, and manage the
AMPK function to optimize the stem cell and embryo quality in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3653377
PMID: 23316940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):197-202. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.135. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Roles of CDX2 and EOMES in human induced trophoblast progenitor cells.

Chen Y(1), Wang K, Gong YG, Khoo SK, Leach R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA.
ying.chen@hc.msu.edu

Abnormal trophoblast lineage proliferation and differentiation in early pregnancy
have been associated with the pathogenesis of placenta diseases of pregnancy.
However, there is still a gap in understanding the molecular mechanisms of early 
placental development due to the limited primary trophoblast cultures and
fidelity of immortalized trophoblast lines. Trophoblasts stem (TS) cells, an in
vitro model of trophectoderm that can differentiate into syncytiotrophoblasts and
extravillous trophoblasts, can be an attractive tool for early pregnancy
research. TS cells are well established in mouse but not in humans due to
insufficient knowledge of which trophoblast lineage-specific transcription
factors are involved in human trophectoderm (TE) proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we applied induced pluripotent stem cell technique to
investigate the human trophoblast lineage-specific transcription factors. We
established human induced trophoblast progenitor (iTP) cells by direct
reprogramming the fibroblasts with a pool of mouse trophoblast lineage-specific
transcription factors consisting of CDX2, EOMES, and ELF5. The human iTP cells
exhibit epithelial morphology and can be maintained in vitro for more than 2
months. Gene expression profile of these cells was tightly clustered with human
trophectoderm but not with human neuron progenitor cells, mesenchymal stem cells,
or endoderm cells. These cells are capable of differentiating into cells with an 
invasive capacity, suggesting extravillous trophoblasts. They also form
multi-nucleated cells which secrete human chorionic gonadotropin and estradiol,
consistent with a syncytiotrophoblast phenotype. Our results provide the evidence
that transcription factors CDX2 and EOMES may play critical roles in human iTP
cell generation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3570630
PMID: 23313847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):158-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.004. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Transcriptional regulation of PCFT by KLF4, HNF4a, CDX2 and C/EBPa: implication
in its site-specific expression in the small intestine.

Furumiya M(1), Inoue K, Ohta K, Hayashi Y, Yuasa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.

Proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT), which is responsible for the intestinal
uptake of folates and analogs, is expressed only in the proximal region in the
small intestine. The present study was to examine its transcriptional regulation,
which may be involved in such a unique expression profile and potentially in its 
alteration, using dual-luciferase reporter assays in human embryonic kidney (HEK)
293 cells. The luciferase activity derived from the reporter construct containing
the 5'-flanking sequence of -1695/+96 of the human PCFT gene was enhanced most
extensively by the introduction of Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4). The KLF4-induced
luciferase activity was further enhanced by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) 
synergistically. To the contrary, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2
(CDX2) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa) extensively suppressed the
luciferase activity induced by KLF4 alone and also that induced by KLF4 and
HNF4a. Western blot analysis using the rat small intestine indicated uniform
expression of KLF4 along the intestinal tract, proximal-oriented expression of
HNF4a, distal-oriented expression of CDX2 and C/EBPa. These results suggest that 
the activity of PCFT promoter is basically induced by KLF4 and the gradiented
expression profile of PCFT may be at least in part accounted for by those of
HNF4a, CDX2 and C/EBPa.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23313509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2013 Jun;17(3):239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2012.10.008. 
Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Mucinous cystadenoma of the pyelocaliceal system: a report of 3 examples and an
analysis of 17 previously published cases.

Chablé-Montero F(1), Mendoza-Ramírez S, Lavenant-Borja MI, González-Romo MA,
Soto-Abraham V, Henson DE, Albores-Saavedra J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology of Médica Sur Clinic and Foundation, Tlalpan, D.F. CP.
14050, México. fredy010583@gmail.com

We report 3 patients all men between 45 and 64 years of age with unilocular or
multilocular mucinous cystadenomas of the kidney. One tumor arose from the renal 
pelvis, and 2 involved the entire pyelocaliceal system. The tumors measured
between 2.4 and 37 cm in greatest dimension. Two patients were asymptomatic, and 
1 had recurrent attack of acute pyelonephritis. Microscopically, the morphology
and immunophenotype (CK20, MUC2, and CDX2 positive) of the tumors were similar to
the colonic adenomas. Two patients were asymptomatic 24 and 64 months after
surgery, including the patient with mucinous cystadenoma and intramucosal
carcinoma. One patient died of acute myocardial infarction, and his tumor was an 
autopsy finding. Only 17 cases of mucinous cystadenomas and 5 cases of mucinous
cystadenocarcinomas have been reported. Of the 17 mucinous cystadenomas, 2 arose 
in horseshoe kidneys. The mean size of these neoplasms was 15 cm (2.4-37 cm).
Despite their large size, some patients with mucinous cystadenomas were
asymptomatic. Sixty percent were associated with renal lithiasis. Thirty percent 
progressed to mucinous adenocarcinomas, and only 2 cases showed areas of
intramucosal carcinomas. Two cases were associated with carcinoid tumors, similar
to those reported in the appendix. Most patients were asymptomatic after surgery,
and only 1 patient died by abdominal sepsis related to adenomucinosis. The 3
examples of mucinous cystadenomas of the pyelocaliceal system reported here, and 
those previously published indicate that they are very uncommon neoplasms with
morphology and intestinal immunophenotype similar to the colonic adenomas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23312708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Anal Quant Cytopathol Histpathol. 2012 Dec;34(6):325-30.

Intraductal tubular adenoma of the pancreas as a possible rare variant of
gastric-type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm: a report of two cases.

Teng X(1), Xue D, Lai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

BACKGROUND: Intraductal tubular adenoma (ITA) of the pancreas has been reported
recently, but no more than 20 cases have been documented. Two cases of ITA are
described in order to investigate histogenesis and discuss the relationship
between ITA and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN).
CASE: Two patients were hospitalized because of midsection discomfort and
pancreatic mass. Both tumors presented as polypoid tumor in the cysts, located in
the main pancreatic duct. Histologically they were composed of closely packed
tubular glands or had a branching tubular growth pattern mimicking pyloric-type
glands. The epithelia within the same cyst appeared typical of gastric IPMN.
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) IA and IB were present in smaller
ducts around the tumors in both cases. The tumors predominantly showed neutral
mucin. CK7 and MUCSAC stains were positive, whereas MUC1, MUC2, CK20 and CDX2
were negative; both of the IPMNs and associated PanINs shared the same
immunohistochemical profile. The 2 patients had no recurrence of disease at 142
months and 38 months postoperatively, respectively.
CONCLUSION: ITA is a rare, benign tumor almost always accompanied by gastric-type
IPMN. It may be a variant of gastric-type IPMN. Smaller ducts around the tumor
with low-grade PanIN are one of the features of the tumor.

PMID: 23304818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biol Reprod. 2013 Feb 28;88(2):48. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.104471. Print 2013
Feb.

Locus-specific DNA methylation reprogramming during early porcine embryogenesis.

Zhao MT(1), Rivera RM, Prather RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

During early mammalian embryogenesis, there is a wave of DNA demethylation
postfertilization and de novo methylation around implantation. The paternal
genome undergoes active DNA demethylation, whereas the maternal genome is
passively demethylated after fertilization in most mammals except for sheep and
rabbits. However, the emerging genome-wide DNA methylation landscape has revealed
a regulatory and locus-specific DNA methylation reprogramming pattern in
mammalian preimplantation embryos. Here we optimized a bisulfite sequencing
protocol to draw base-resolution DNA methylation profiles of several selected
genes in gametes, early embryos, and somatic tissue. We observed locus-specific
DNA methylation reprogramming in early porcine embryos. First, some pluripotency 
genes (POU5F1 and NANOG) followed a typical wave of DNA demethylation and
remethylation, whereas CpG-rich regions of SOX2 and CDX2 loci were hypomethylated
throughout development. Second, a differentially methylated region of an imprint 
control region in the IGF2/H19 locus exhibited differential DNA methylation which
was maintained in porcine early embryos. Third, a centromeric repeat element
retained a moderate DNA methylation level in gametes, early embryos, and somatic 
tissue. The diverse DNA methylation reprogramming during early embryogenesis is
thought to be possibly associated with the multiple functions of DNA methylation 
in transcriptional regulation, genome stability and genomic imprinting. The
latest technology such as oxidative bisulfite sequencing to identify
5-hydroxymethylcytosine will further clarify the DNA methylation reprogramming
during porcine embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC3589235
PMID: 23303676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Feb;15(1):24-34. doi: 10.1089/cell.2012.0055. Epub 2012 Dec 
31.

Effects of donor fibroblasts expressing OCT4 on bovine embryos generated by
somatic cell nuclear transfer.

Goissis MD(1), Suhr ST, Cibelli JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA.

The production of healthy, live, cloned animals by somatic cell nuclear transfer 
(SCNT) has been hampered by low efficiencies. Significant epigenetic changes must
take place to ensure proper chromatin remodeling in SCNT. We hypothesized that
exogenous expression of OCT4 in donor fibroblasts prior to its fusion with
enucleated oocytes would facilitate SCNT reprogramming. We infected bovine adult 
fibroblasts with retroviral vectors containing yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)
only, or the OCT4 gene fused to YFP (YO). We found that development to the
blastocyst stage was not different between NT-YFP and NT-YO groups. NT-YFP
embryos had the fewest trophoblast cells, measured by numbers of CDX2-positive
cells. Fibroblasts expressing OCT4 had reduced levels of histone 3 lysine 9 or 27
trimethylation (H3K9me3 and H3K27me3, respectively). NT-YO blastocysts displayed 
higher H3K9me3 levels than IVF and NT-YFP embryos; however, they did not have
different H3K27me3 levels. Levels of XIST mRNA expression in NT-YO and NT-YF were
higher when compared to in vitro-fertilized blastocysts. We observed no
differences in the expression of SOX2, NANOG, and CDX2. Although overexpression
of OCT4 in donor cells increased H3K9me3 and did not reduce XIST gene expression,
we show that a single transcription factor can affect the number of trophectoderm
cells in bovine SCNT embryos.

PMID: 23276226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 25;430(4):1195-200. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.085. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Src family kinase inhibitor PP2 accelerates differentiation in human intestinal
epithelial cells.

Seltana A(1), Guezguez A, Lepage M, Basora N, Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Intestinal Physiopathology, Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada J1H 5N4.

The proto-oncogene Src is an important protein tyrosine kinase involved in
signaling pathways that control cell adhesion, growth, migration and survival.
Here, we investigated the involvement of Src family kinases (SFKs) in human
intestinal cell differentiation. We first observed that Src activity peaked in
early stages of Caco-2/15 cell differentiation. Inhibition of SFKs with PP2, a
selective SFK inhibitor, accelerated the overall differentiation program.
Interestingly, all polarization and terminal differentiation markers tested,
including sucrase-isomaltase, lactase-phlorizin hydrolase and E and Li-cadherins 
were found to be significantly up-regulated after only 3 days of treatment in the
newly differentiating cells. Further investigation of the effects of PP2 revealed
a significant up-regulation of the two main intestinal epithelial cell-specific
transcription factors Cdx2 and HNF1a and a reduction of polycomb PRC2-related
epigenetic repressing activity as measured by a decrease in H3K27me3, two events 
closely related to the control of cell terminal differentiation in the intestine.
Taken together, these data suggest that SFKs play a key role in the control of
intestinal epithelial cell terminal differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23274493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e48677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048677. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Morphologic and gene expression criteria for identifying human induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Wakao S(1), Kitada M, Kuroda Y, Ogura F, Murakami T, Niwa A, Dezawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Histology, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. wakao@med.tohoku.ac.jp

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be generated from somatic cells by the
forced expression of four factors, Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. While a great
variety of colonies grow during induction, only a few of them develop into iPS
cells. Researchers currently use visual observation to identify iPS cells and
select colonies resembling embryonic stem (ES) cells, and there are no
established objective criteria. Therefore, we exhaustively analyzed the
morphology and gene expression of all the colonies generated from human
fibroblasts after transfection with four retroviral vectors encoding individual
factors (192 and 203 colonies in two experiments) and with a single polycistronic
retroviral vector encoding all four factors (199 and 192 colonies in two
experiments). Here we demonstrate that the morphologic features of emerged
colonies can be categorized based on six parameters, and all generated colonies
that could be passaged were classified into seven subtypes in colonies
transfected with four retroviral vectors and six subtypes with a single
polycistronic retroviral vector, both including iPS cell colonies. The essential 
qualifications for iPS cells were: cells with a single nucleolus; nucleus to
nucleolus (N/Nls) ratio ~2.19: cell size ~43.5 µm(2): a nucleus to cytoplasm
(N/C) ratio ~0.87: cell density in a colony ~5900 cells/mm(2): and number of cell
layer single. Most importantly, gene expression analysis revealed for the first
time that endogenous Sox2 and Cdx2 were expressed specifically in iPS cells,
whereas Oct3/4 and Nanog, popularly used markers for identifying iPS cells, are
expressed in colonies other than iPS cells, suggesting that Sox2 and Cdx2 are
reliable markers for identifying iPS cells. Our findings indicate that
morphologic parameters and the expression of endogenous Sox2 and Cdx2 can be used
to accurately identify iPS cells.

PMCID: PMC3521736
PMID: 23272044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 1;375(1):54-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.008. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Analysis of human embryos from zygote to blastocyst reveals distinct gene
expression patterns relative to the mouse.

Niakan KK(1), Eggan K.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute and the
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. kkn21@cam.ac.uk

Early mammalian embryogenesis is controlled by mechanisms governing the balance
between pluripotency and differentiation. The expression of early
lineage-specific genes can vary significantly between species, with implications 
for developmental control and stem cell derivation. However, the mechanisms
involved in patterning the human embryo are still unclear. We analyzed the
appearance and localization of lineage-specific transcription factors in staged
preimplantation human embryos from the zygote until the blastocyst. We observed
that the pluripotency-associated transcription factor OCT4 was initially
expressed in 8-cell embryos at 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), and restricted to
the inner cell mass (ICM) in 128-256 cell blastocysts (6dpf), approximately 2
days later than the mouse. The trophectoderm (TE)-associated transcription factor
CDX2 was upregulated in 5dpf blastocysts and initially coincident with OCT4,
indicating a lag in CDX2 initiation in the TE lineage, relative to the mouse.
Once established, the TE expressed intracellular and cell-surface proteins
cytokeratin-7 (CK7) and fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1), which are
thought to be specific to post-implantation human trophoblast progenitor cells.
The primitive endoderm (PE)-associated transcription factor SOX17 was initially
heterogeneously expressed in the ICM where it co-localized with a sub-set of OCT4
expressing cells at 4-5dpf. SOX17 was progressively restricted to the PE adjacent
to the blastocoel cavity together with the transcription factor GATA6 by 6dpf. We
observed low levels of Laminin expression in the human PE, though this basement
membrane component is thought to play an important role in mouse PE cell sorting,
suggesting divergence in differentiation mechanisms between species.
Additionally, while stem cell lines representing the three distinct cell types
that comprise a mouse blastocyst have been established, the identity of cell
types that emerge during early human embryonic stem cell derivation is unclear.
We observed that derivation from plating intact human blastocysts resulted
predominantly in the outgrowth of TE-like cells, which impairs human embryonic
stem cell derivation. Altogether, our findings provide important insight into
developmental patterning of preimplantation human embryos with potential
consequences for stem cell derivation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23261930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Reprod Dev. 2013;59(2):151-8. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Changes in the expression patterns of the genes involved in the segregation and
function of inner cell mass and trophectoderm lineages during porcine
preimplantation development.

Fujii T(1), Sakurai N, Osaki T, Iwagami G, Hirayama H, Minamihashi A, Hashizume
T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Iwate 020-8550, Japan.

In mouse embryos, segregation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE)
lineages is regulated by genes, such as OCT-4, CDX2 and TEAD4. However, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the segregation of the ICM and TE lineages in 
porcine embryos remain unknown. To obtain insights regarding the segregation of
the ICM and TE lineages in porcine embryos, we examined the mRNA expression
patterns of candidate genes, OCT-4, CDX2, TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, FGF4, FGFR1-IIIc
and FGFR2-IIIc, in blastocyst and elongated stage embryos. In blastocyst embryos,
the expression levels of OCT-4, FGF4 and FGFR1-IIIc were significantly higher in 
the ICM than in the TE, while the CDX2, TEAD4 and GATA3 levels did not differ
between the ICM and TE. The expression ratio of CDX2 to OCT-4 (CDX2/OCT-4) also
did not differ between the ICM and TE at the blastocyst stage. In elongated
embryos, OCT-4, NANOG, FGF4 and FGFR1-IIIc were abundantly expressed in the
embryo disc (ED; ICM lineage), but their expression levels were very low in the
TE. In contrast, the CDX2, TEAD4 and GATA3 levels were significantly higher in
the TE than in the ED. In addition, the CDX2/OCT-4 ratio was markedly higher in
the TE than in the ED. We demonstrated that differences in the expression levels 
of OCT-4, CDX2, TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, FGF4, FGFR1-IIIc and FGFR2-IIIc genes
between ICM and TE lineages cells become more clear during development from
porcine blastocyst to elongated embryos, which indicates the possibility that in 
porcine embryos, functions of ICM and TE lineage cells depend on these gene
expressions proceed as transition from blastocyst to elongated stage.

PMCID: PMC3934199
PMID: 23257836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hum Reprod. 2013 Mar;28(3):740-9. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des432. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Human trophectoderm cells are not yet committed.

De Paepe C(1), Cauffman G, Verloes A, Sterckx J, Devroey P, Tournaye H, Liebaers 
I, Van de Velde H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium.

STUDY QUESTION: Are human trophectoderm (TE) cells committed or still able to
develop into inner cell mass (ICM) cells?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Human full blastocyst TE cells still have the capacity to develop
into ICM cells expressing the pluripotency marker NANOG, thus they are not yet
committed.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Human Day 5 full blastocyst TE cells express the
pluripotency markers POU5F1, SOX2 and SALL4 as well as the TE markers HLA-G and
KRT18 but not yet CDX2, therefore their developmental direction may not yet be
definite.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: The potency of human blastocyst TE cells was
investigated by determining their in vitro capacity to develop into a blastocyst 
with ICM cells expressing NANOG; TE cells were isolated either by aspiration
under visual control or after labeling with fluorescent 594-wheat germ
agglutinin. Further on, aspirated TE cells were also labeled with fluorescent
PKH67 and repositioned in the center of the original embryo.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Human preimplantation embryos were used
for research after obtaining informed consent from IVF patients. The experiments 
were approved by the Local Ethical Committee and the 'Belgian Federal Committee
on medical and scientific research on embryos in vitro'. Outer cells were
isolated and reaggregated by micromanipulation. Reconstituted embryos were
analyzed by immunocytochemistry.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Isolated and reaggregated TE cells from full
human blastocysts are able to develop into blastocysts with ICM cells expressing 
the pluripotency marker NANOG. Moreover, the majority of the isolated TE cells
which were repositioned in the center of the embryo do not sort back to their
original position but integrate within the ICM and start to express NANOG.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Owing to legal and ethical restrictions,
manipulated human embryos cannot be transferred into the uterus to determine
their totipotent capacity. The definitive demonstration that embryos
reconstructed with TE cells are a source of pluripotent cells is to obtain human 
embryonic stem cell 'like' line(s), which will allow full characterization of the
cells.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our finding has important implications in
reproductive medicine and stem cell biology because TE cells have a greater
developmental potential than assumed previously.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): Scientific Research Foundation-Flanders
(FWO-Vlaanderen) and Research Council (OZR) of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel.
None of the authors declared a conflict of interest.

PMID: 23257394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Reproduction. 2013 Jan 24;145(2):191-201. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0220. Print 2013
Feb.

The expression of fibroblast growth factor receptors during early bovine
conceptus development and pharmacological analysis of their actions on
trophoblast growth in vitro.

Ozawa M(1), Yang QE, Ealy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611, USA.

The overall aim of this work was to examine the expression profiles for
fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) and describe their biological
importance during bovine pre- and peri-implantation conceptus development. FGFR1 
and FGFR2 mRNAs were detected at 1-, 2-, 8-cell, morula and blastocyst stages
whereas FGFR3 and FGFR4 mRNAs were detected after the 8-cell stage but not
earlier. The abundance of FGFR1, FGFR3, and FGFR4 mRNAs increased at the morula
and blastocyst stages. Immunofluorescence microscopy detected FGFR2 and FGFR4
exclusively in trophoblast cells whereas FGFR1 and FGFR3 were detected in both
trophoblast cells and inner cell mass in blastocysts. Neither transcripts for
FGF10 nor its receptor (FGFR2b) were temporally related to interferon t (IFNT)
transcript profile during peri- and postimplantation bovine conceptus
development. A series of studies used a chemical inhibitor of FGFR kinase
function (PD173074) to examine FGFR activation requirements during bovine embryo 
development. Exposing embryos to the inhibitor (1<U+200A>µM) beginning on day 5
post-fertilization did not alter the percentage of embryos that developed into
blastocysts or blastocyst cell numbers. The inhibitor did not alter the abundance
of CDX2 mRNA but decreased (P<0.05) the relative abundance of IFNT mRNA in
blastocysts. Exposing blastocysts to the inhibitor from days 8 to 11
post-fertilization reduced (P<0.05) the percentage of blastocysts that formed
outgrowths after transfer to Matrigel-coated plates. In conclusion, each FGFR was
detected in bovine embryos, and FGFR activation is needed to maximize IFNT
expression and permit outgrowth formation.

PMID: 23241344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2013 Jan;30(1):81-9. doi: 10.1007/s10815-012-9896-6. Epub 
2012 Dec 8.

Effect of sperm entry on blastocyst development after in vitro fertilization and 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection - mouse model.

Piotrowska-Nitsche K(1), Chan AW.

Author information: 
(1)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, 954 Gatewood Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA
30329, USA. karolina@piotrowska-nitsche.com

PURPOSE: To investigate whether in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic
sperm injection (ICSI), influence the embryo's development and its quality using 
the mouse as a model.
METHODS: Assisted fertilization was performed using ICSI and IVF. Fluorescent
beads were adhered to the fertilization cone or place of previous sperm injection
in the natural mated (NM), IVF and ICSI embryos, respectively. Embryo examination
was carried out at the two-cell and blastocyst stage to determine the position of
fluorescent bead. Protein expression was detected by fluorescence
immunocytochemical staining and confocal microscopic imaging of blastocysts.
RESULTS: IVF and ICSI embryos developed at rates comparable to NM group. Embryos 
show similar expression patterns of two transcription factors, Oct4 and Cdx2. The
most preferred place for spermatozoa attachment was the equatorial site of the
egg, whether fertilization occurred in vitro or under natural conditions. We also
link the sperm entry position (SEP) to embryo morphology and the number of cells 
at the blastocyst stage, with no influence of the method of fertilization.
CONCLUSIONS: IVF and ICSI, do not compromise in vitro pre-implantation
development. Additional data, related to sperm entry, could offer further
criteria to predict embryos that will implant successfully. Based on embryo
morphology, developmental rate and protein expression level of key transcription 
factors, our results support the view that ART techniques, such as IVF and ICSI, 
do not perturb embryonic development or quality.

PMCID: PMC3553354
PMID: 23224695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncologist. 2012;17(12):1504-7. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0432. Epub 2012
Dec 7.

Adjuvant therapy for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: the debate continues.

Zhu AX(1), Knox JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Cancer Center POB Room 232,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. azhu@partners.org

Presentation of the Case A 37-year-old woman presented at 35 weeks of gestation
with her third child with failure to adequately gain weight and was noted by her 
obstetrician to have delay in the growth of her baby. Ultrasound of the abdomen
incidentally revealed the presence of a liver lesion. After additional
evaluation, she ultimately delivered her daughter at 36 weeks uneventfully. She
subsequently underwent additional evaluation. Liver magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) revealed a 5-cm solitary solid mass in segment 4A of the liver, concerning 
for malignancy. Serum a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen
(CA)19-9, CA15-3, and CA125 were all normal. Liver biopsy was positive for
adenocarcinoma. The tumor cells demonstrated a phenotype suggesting a possible
breast primary, although the immunohistochemistry did not support that diagnosis 
and the tumor was negative for mammaglobin, gross cystic disease fluid protein
(GCDFP)-15, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR) (Table 1). The
tumor was also CDX2 and cardiotrophin-1 negative, but cytokeratin (CK) 19
positive. Her endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, upper endoscopy,
colonoscopy, breast mammogram, and breast MRI were completely normal. A positron 
emission tomography-computed tomography scan showed a fluorodeoxyglucose-avid
5.8-cm × 6.0-cm hypoattenuating lesion with peripheral enhancement involving
segment 4 and segment 8 at the dome. In addition, central necrosis within the
lesion was noted. The left main portal vein was mildly attenuated by the mass.
She eventually underwent a left hepatectomy en bloc with caudate resection,
portal lymphadenectomy, cholecystectomy, and omental pedicle flap. On exploration
of the abdomen, no additional disease was noted. The final pathology revealed a
9.4-cm moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the intrahepatic
bile ducts. Venous invasion was present. Perineural invasion was absent. The
margins were negative. Thirteen lymph nodes were obtained, all of which were
negative, consistent with a stage T2, N0, MX intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. The
tumor was positive for CK7, CK19, and CA19-9 and negative for CK20, CDX2, CA125, 
ER, PR, GCDFP-15, synaptophysin, and chromogranin (Table 1). The uninvolved liver
was unremarkable and a trichrome stain showed no fibrosis. Following an
uneventful postoperative recovery, she was referred for consideration of adjuvant
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3528382
PMID: 23220842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2013 Jan;32(1):131-6. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31824fe2c8.

Vaginal tubulovillous adenoma: a clinicopathologic and molecular study with
review of the literature.

Peña-Fernández M(1), Abdulkader-Nallib I, Novo-Domínguez A, Turrado-Sánchez EM,
Brea-Fernández A, Sebio-Lago L, Ruíz-Ponte C, Cameselle-Teijeiro J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Vaginal villous or tubulovillous adenomas (TVA) are uncommon tumors
histologically similar to their intestinal counterparts. After reviewing the
literature, we report the eighth case of TVA, which presented as a polypoid tumor
in the vagina, at suburethral level, in a 19-yr-old woman with Arnold-Chiari type
II malformation and a myelomeningocele at birth. The tumor consisted of long
villi lined by columnar cells with brush borders, pseudostratified nuclei, and
foci of high-grade atypia. Immunohistochemistry was positive for cytokeratin 7,
estrogen and progesterone receptors, CA19.9, p16, p53, and Ki-67 (53%), with a
normal membranous pattern for ß-catenin, but negative for cytokeratin 20, CDX2,
carcinoembryonic antigen, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin. Neither human
papillomavirus nor mutations in the K-RAS, BRAF, or LKB1/STK11 genes were
detected. Although a rare neoplasm, awareness of this tumor is important as it
must be distinguished from colonic adenocarcinoma or other malignant or benign
conditions. The existence of 2 previously reported malignant cases merging with
TVAs, and the presence of foci of high-grade dysplasia (p53-positive) in the
present case, support TVA as a premalignant lesion.

PMID: 23202776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jan;123(1):299-314. doi: 10.1172/JCI64745. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

CDX2-driven leukemogenesis involves KLF4 repression and deregulated PPAR<U+03B3>
signaling.

Faber K(1), Bullinger L, Ragu C, Garding A, Mertens D, Miller C, Martin D,
Walcher D, Döhner K, Döhner H, Claus R, Plass C, Sykes SM, Lane SW, Scholl C,
Fröhling S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

Aberrant expression of the homeodomain transcription factor CDX2 occurs in most
cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and promotes leukemogenesis, making CDX2,
in principle, an attractive therapeutic target. Conversely, CDX2 acts as a tumor 
suppressor in colonic epithelium. The effectors mediating the leukemogenic
activity of CDX2 and the mechanism underlying its context-dependent properties
are poorly characterized, and strategies for interfering with CDX2 function in
AML remain elusive. We report data implicating repression of the transcription
factor KLF4 as important for the oncogenic activity of CDX2, and demonstrate that
CDX2 differentially regulates KLF4 in AML versus colon cancer cells through a
mechanism that involves tissue-specific patterns of promoter binding and
epigenetic modifications. Furthermore, we identified deregulation of the PPAR<U+03B3>
signaling pathway as a feature of CDX2-associated AML and observed that PPAR<U+03B3>
agonists derepressed KLF4 and were preferentially toxic to CDX2+ leukemic cells. 
These data delineate transcriptional programs associated with CDX2 expression in 
hematopoietic cells, provide insight into the antagonistic duality of CDX2
function in AML versus colon cancer, and suggest reactivation of KLF4 expression,
through modulation of PPAR<U+03B3> signaling, as a therapeutic modality in a large
proportion of AML patients.

PMCID: PMC3533294
PMID: 23202735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 26;31:98. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-98.

Prognostic significance of Cdx2 immunohistochemical expression in gastric cancer:
a meta-analysis of published literatures.

Wang XT(1), Wei WY, Kong FB, Lian C, Luo W, Xiao Q, Xie YB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, PR China.

Cdx2 is a homeobox domain-containing transcription factor that is important in
the development and differentiation of the intestinal cells, and served as a
potential biomarker of tumor progression in early intestinal-type gastric cancer.
However, its prognostic value and significance in gastric cancer remain
controversial. A meta-analysis based on published studies was performed to obtain
an accurate evaluation of the association between the presence of Cdx2-positive
in clinical samples and clinical outcome. A total of 13 eligible retrospective
cohort studies with 1513 patients were included. Cdx2-positive cases were
significantly associated with higher male-to-female ratio (RR=1.27, 95% CI:
1.17-1.38, P<0.00001 fixed-effect), lower (I+II) clinical stage (RR=1.63, 95% CI:
1.42-1.87, P<0.00001 fixed-effect), better histologic differentiation (RR=1.54,
95% CI: 1.34-1.76, P<0.00001 fixed-effect), and lower rate of vascular invasion
(RR=1.23, 95% CI: 1.08-1.41, P=0.002 fixed-effect) and lymph node metastasis
(RR=1.52, 95% CI: 1.33-1.73, P<0.00001 fixed-effect), as well as higher 5-year
survival rate (HR=2.22, 95% CI: 1.78-2.75, P<0.00001 fixed-effect). However, the 
presence of Cdx2 was not associated with tumor size. In summary, Cdx2 is a
prognostic factor in gastric cancer, which acts as a marker of good outcome in
patients with gastric cancer. Further clinical studies are needed to confirm the 
role of Cdx2 in clinical practice.

PMCID: PMC3533813
PMID: 23181722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Pathologe. 2013 Feb;34(1):74-6. doi: 10.1007/s00292-012-1711-8.

[Signet ring cell infiltrate in the colon and gastric mucosa].

[Article in German]

Grosse-Holz M(1), Schmidt KD, Seitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Klinikum der Sozialstiftung Bamberg, Buger Str. 80,
96049, Bamberg, Deutschland. michaela.grosse-holz@sozialstiftung-bamberg.de

A 49-year-old female patient presented with anemia of unclear origin (hemoglobin 
level 6 µg/dl). During coloscopy a circular wall edema in the right flexure of
the colon was observed and gastroduodenoscopy gave rise to the suspicion of
fundic gland polyps (Elster's cysts) of the mucosa. In the lamina propria of the 
gastric mucosa, infiltration of a poorly differentiated carcinoma with signet
ring cell morphology could be histologically identified resulting in the
suspected diagnosis of a primary gastric signet ring carcinoma. Using
immunohistochemistry it could be shown that the tumor cells expressed cytokeratin
7 (CK7), estrogen receptors and Gata 3 but not CK20 or Cdx2. The diagnosis of
metastases of lobular breast cancer in the gastric and colon mucosa could be
made.

PMID: 23179207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Theriogenology. 2013 Jan 15;79(2):284-90.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.08.018. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Possible involvement of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway in hatching and
trophectoderm differentiation of pig blastocysts.

Lim KT(1), Gupta MK, Lee SH, Jung YH, Han DW, Lee HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center/Bio-Organ
Research Center, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway plays essential roles in the regulation of
cell fate and polarity during embryonic development of many animal species. This 
study investigated the possible involvement of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway
during hatching and trophectoderm (TE) development in pig blastocysts. Results
showed that ß-catenin and DVL3, the key mediators of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling,
disappeared from the nucleus after blastocyst hatching. Specific inhibition of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, by Dickkopf-1, increased the rate of blastocyst 
hatching, total nuclear number per blastocyst, and reduced the ratio of inner
cell mass (ICM):TE (P < 0.05). In contrast, specific activation of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, by lithium chloride, reduced the rate of
blastocyst hatching, total nuclear number per blastocyst, and increased the ratio
of ICM:TE (P < 0.05). The change in the ICM:TE ratio was associated with the
change in the number of TE cells but not the ICM cells. Activation or inhibition 
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and ß-catenin nuclear accumulation, by lithium
chloride or Dickkopf-1, also altered the expression of CDX2. These data
therefore, suggest the possible involvement of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in
regulating hatching and TE fate during the development of pig blastocyst.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23174779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Ann Pathol. 2012 Nov;32(5 Suppl):S32-3. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2012.08.003. Epub
2012 Oct 12.

[Transcription factors: which diagnostic applications?].

[Article in French]

Scoazec JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital Édouard-Herriot, 5, place d'Arsonval,
69437 Lyon cedex 03, France. jean-yves.scoazec@chu-lyon.fr

PMID: 23127931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Ann Pathol. 2012 Nov;32(5 Suppl):S24-7. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2012.08.005. Epub
2012 Oct 12.

[Identity and intestinal pathologies: the Cdx2 homeotic gene].

[Article in French]

Freund JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U682, 3, avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France. freund@unistra.fr

PMID: 23127929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Dec;138(6):907-9; author reply p.910. doi:
10.1309/AJCP1BGCA6MFCNKH.

CDX2 Expression in Some Variants of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.

Cameselle-Teijeiro J, Alberte-Lista L, Peteiro-González D, Abdulkader-Nallib I,
Reyes-Santías R, Soares P, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Comment on
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 May;137(5):722-6.

PMID: 23161723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;25(7-8):669-71.

Association of vitamin D receptor gene Cdx2 polymorphism with bone markers in
Turner syndrome patients.

Peralta López M(1), Centeno V, Miras M, Silvano L, Pérez A, Muñoz L, Sobrero G,
Ulla M, Tolosa de Talamoni N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio 'Dr. Cañas', Cátedra de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad 
de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Turner syndrome (TS) patients usually have low bone mineral density
(BMD) and increased risk of osteoporotic fractures. We have previously
demonstrated an association of bb (BsmI polymorphic site) and ff (FokI
polymorphic site) vitamin D receptor (VDR) genotypes with reduced BMD in TS
patients.
AIM: To analyze the relationship between VDR-Cdx2 polymorphism and BMD as well as
bone metabolic variables in TS patients.
METHODS: Fifty-five TS patients and 59 control women were studied. VDR-Cdx2
genotypes were determined using TaqMan probes in a real time thermocycler. Lumbar
and femoral BMD were determined by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) and
serum intact parathyroid hormone, osteocalcin and beta3-CrossLaps were determined
by electrochemiluminescence.
RESULTS: Patients with genotype GG had higher levels of both osteocalcin and
beta-CrossLaps as compared to patients with genotype GA (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Patients carrying genotype GG have higher levels of bone formation
and resorption markers. This indicates a more active bone turnover that could
impact on their future bone mineral density.

PMID: 23155691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Reprod Dev. 2013;59(2):115-22. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

Effect of embryo density on in vitro development and gene expression in bovine in
vitro-fertilized embryos cultured in a microwell system.

Sugimura S(1), Akai T, Hashiyada Y, Aikawa Y, Ohtake M, Matsuda H, Kobayashi S,
Kobayashi E, Konishi K, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)National Livestock Breeding Center, Fukushima 961-8511, Japan.

To identify embryos individually during in vitro development, we previously
developed the well-of-the-well (WOW) dish, which contains 25 microwells. Here we 
investigated the effect of embryo density (the number of embryos per volume of
medium) on in vitro development and gene expression of bovine in vitro-fertilized
embryos cultured in WOW dishes. Using both conventional droplet and WOW culture
formats, 5, 15, and 25 bovine embryos were cultured in 125 µl medium for 168 h.
The blastocysts at Day 7 were analyzed for number of cells and expression of ten 
genes (CDX2, IFN-tau, PLAC8, NANOG, OCT4, SOX2, AKR1B1, ATP5A1, GLUT1 and IGF2R).
In droplet culture, the rates of formation of >4-cell cleavage embryos and
blastocysts were significantly lower in embryos cultured at 5 embryos per droplet
than in those cultured at 15 or 25 embryos per droplet, but not in WOW culture.
In both droplet and WOW culture, developmental kinetics and blastocyst cell
numbers did not differ among any groups. IFN-tau expression in embryos cultured
at 25 embryos per droplet was significantly higher than in those cultured at 15
embryos per droplet and in artificial insemination (AI)-derived blastocysts.
Moreover, IGF2R expression was significantly lower in the 25-embryo group than in
the 5-embryo group and in AI-derived blastocysts. In WOW culture, these
expressions were not affected by embryo density and were similar to those in
AI-derived blastocysts. These results suggest that, as compared with conventional
droplet culture, in vitro development and expression of IFN-tau and IGF2R in the 
microwell system may be insensitive to embryo density.

PMCID: PMC3934200
PMID: 23154384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Theriogenology. 2013 Jan 15;79(2):351-7. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.10.003. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Effects of heat stress on development, quality and survival of Bos indicus and
Bos taurus embryos produced in vitro.

Silva CF(1), Sartorelli ES, Castilho AC, Satrapa RA, Puelker RZ, Razza EM,
Ticianelli JS, Eduardo HP, Loureiro B, Barros CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Bioscience, University of São Paulo
State (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.

Heat stress is an important cause of poor development and low survival rates in
bovine embryos. Experiments were conducted to test the hypothesis that Bos
indicus embryos are more resistant to heat stress than are Bos taurus embryos. In
experiment 1, Nelore and Jersey embryos from oocyte pick-up-derived oocytes were 
submitted to heat stress (96 hours post-insemination, 41 °C, 6 hours),
developmental ratios were assessed at Day 7 (Day 0 = day of fertilization), and
blastocysts were frozen for RNA extraction. Experiment 2 evaluated expression of 
COX2, CDX2, HSF1, and PLAC8 in previously frozen blastocysts. In experiment 3,
Nellore and Angus embryos from oocyte pick-up-derived oocytes were submitted to
heat stress (96 hours post-insemination, 41 °C, 12 hours) and transferred to
recipients on Day 7. In experiment 4, embryos developed as in experiment 3 were
fixed for Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling labeling
and total cell counting. In experiment 1, heat stress decreased the percentage of
Jersey oocytes that became blastocysts, but had no effect on Nellore embryos
(34.6%, 25.0%, 39.5%, and 33.0% for Jersey control, Jersey heat-stressed, Nellore
control, and Nellore heat-stressed oocytes, respectively; P < 0.05). In
experiment 2, heat stress decreased (P < 0.05) expression of CDX2 and PLAC8, with
higher expression of these genes in Nellore embryos than in Jersey embryos. Heat 
stress also decreased (P < 0.05) expression of COX2 in Jersey embryos, but had no
effect on Nellore embryos. Expression of HSF1 was decreased (P < 0.05) by heat
stress in both breeds, with a greater effect in Nellore embryos. In experiment 3,
heat stress tended (P = 0.1) to decrease the percentage of pregnancies among cows
(Day 30 to 35) that received Angus embryos. In experiment 4, heat stress
increased (P < 0.05) the percentage of apoptotic blastomeres, but had no
breed-specific effects. In addition, Nellore embryos had fewer (P < 0.05)
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling- positive
blastomeres than did Angus embryos. We concluded that the detrimental effects of 
heat stress were dependent upon embryo breed and were more evident in Bos taurus 
embryos than in Bos indicus embryos.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23154141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;18(22):6136-46. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-1915. 
Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Expression profiling of archival tumors for long-term health studies.

Waldron L(1), Ogino S, Hoshida Y, Shima K, McCart Reed AE, Simpson PT, Baba Y,
Nosho K, Segata N, Vargas AC, Cummings MC, Lakhani SR, Kirkner GJ, Giovannucci E,
Quackenbush J, Golub TR, Fuchs CS, Parmigiani G, Huttenhower C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology and Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

PURPOSE: More than 20 million archival tissue samples are stored annually in the 
United States as formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks, but RNA
degradation during fixation and storage has prevented their use for
transcriptional profiling. New and highly sensitive assays for
whole-transcriptome microarray analysis of FFPE tissues are now available, but
resulting data include noise and variability for which previous expression array 
methods are inadequate.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We present the two largest whole-genome expression studies
from FFPE tissues to date, comprising 1,003 colorectal cancer (CRC) and 168
breast cancer samples, combined with a meta-analysis of 14 new and published FFPE
microarray datasets. We develop and validate quality control (QC) methods through
technical replication, independent samples, comparison to results from
fresh-frozen tissue, and recovery of expected associations between gene
expression and protein abundance.
RESULTS: Archival tissues from large, multicenter studies showed a much wider
range of transcriptional data quality relative to smaller or frozen tissue
studies and required stringent QC for subsequent analysis. We developed novel
methods for such QC of archival tissue expression profiles based on sample
dynamic range and per-study median profile. This enabled validated identification
of gene signatures of microsatellite instability and additional features of CRC, 
and improved recovery of associations between gene expression and protein
abundance of MLH1, FASN, CDX2, MGMT, and SIRT1 in CRC tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: These methods for large-scale QC of FFPE expression profiles enable 
study of the cancer transcriptome in relation to extensive clinicopathological
information, tumor molecular biomarkers, and long-term lifestyle and outcome
data.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3500412
PMID: 23136189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e47545. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047545. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Reg IV is a direct target of intestinal transcriptional factor CDX2 in gastric
cancer.

Naito Y(1), Oue N, Hinoi T, Sakamoto N, Sentani K, Ohdan H, Yanagihara K, Sasaki 
H, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

REG4, which encodes Reg IV protein, is a member of the calcium-dependent lectin
superfamily and potent activator of the epidermal growth factor
receptor/Akt/activator protein-1 signaling pathway. Several human cancers
overexpress Reg IV, and Reg IV expression is associated with intestinal phenotype
differentiation. However, regulation of REG4 transcription remains unclear. In
the present study, we investigated whether CDX2 regulates Reg IV expression in
gastric cancer (GC) cells. Expression of Reg IV and CDX2 was analyzed by Western 
blot and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in 9 GC
cell lines and 2 colon cancer cell lines. The function of the 5'-flanking region 
of the REG4 gene was characterized by luciferase assay. In 9 GC cell lines,
endogenous Reg IV and CDX2 expression were well correlated. Using an estrogen
receptor-regulated form of CDX2, rapid induction of Reg IV expression was
observed in HT-29 cells. Reporter gene assays revealed an important role in
transcription for consensus CDX2 DNA binding elements in the 5'-flanking region
of the REG4 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that CDX2 binds
directly to the 5'-flanking region of REG4. These results indicate that CDX2
protein directly regulates Reg IV expression.

PMCID: PMC3487720
PMID: 23133598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2012;58(4):287-91.

Short-chain fatty acids increase the level of calbindin-D9k messenger RNA in
Caco-2 cells.

Fukushima A(1), Aizaki Y, Sakuma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Nutrition, Kagawa Nutrition University, Sakado,
Saitama, Japan.

Fructooligosaccharides (FOS) are indigestible oligosaccharides that increase the 
expression of calbindin-D9k and consequently increase calcium absorption by the
colon in rats. The molecular mechanism of the increased expression of
calbindin-D9k resulting from FOS ingestion has not been elucidated. Short-chain
fatty acids (SCFAs), namely, fermentation products of FOS by intestinal bacteria 
have been hypothesized as direct effectors of calbindin-D9k gene expression. To
test this hypothesis, SCFAs were added to Caco-2 human intestinal epithelial
cells, and changes in the levels of transcription of genes for calbindin-D9k, and
transcription factors (vitamin D receptor: VDR, caudal homeobox-2: Cdx-2,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a: HNF1-a) were determined by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. Addition of sodium propionate or sodium 
butyrate to cell cultures increased levels of calbindin-D9k mRNA to 731% (p<0.05)
and 321% (p<0.05), respectively. However, addition of these SCFAs did not affect 
the levels of mRNA VDR, Cdx-2, or HNF1-a. In conclusion, addition of SCFAs to
cultured Caco-2 cells results in elevation of calbindin-D9k mRNA, consistent with
the expected role of SCFAs as mediators of the increase of calcium absorption in 
rats that were fed with FOS.

PMID: 23132313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ann Oncol. 2013 Mar;24(3):693-701. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds506. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

A clinical-biological risk stratification model for resected gastric cancer:
prognostic impact of Her2, Fhit, and APC expression status.

Bria E(1), De Manzoni G, Beghelli S, Tomezzoli A, Barbi S, Di Gregorio C,
Scardoni M, Amato E, Frizziero M, Sperduti I, Corbo V, Brunelli M, Bersani S,
Tortora G, Scarpa A.

Author information: 
(1)ARC-NET the Miriam Cherubini Loro, Applied Research on Cancer Center.

BACKGROUND: To obtain a prognostic stratification model for resected gastric
cancer patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Clinicopathological and molecular data (expression of Cdx2,
Apc, ß-catenin, E-cadherin, Fhit, p53, and human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (Her2); HER2 and TOPO2A gene copy number; PIK3CA mutations;
microsatellite instability) were correlated to cancer-specific/overall survival
(CSS/OS) using a Cox model. Individual patient probability (IPP) was estimated by
logistic equation. A continuous score to identify risk-classes was derived
according to the model ratios.
RESULTS: Two-hundred eight patients were studied (median follow-up 20 months). At
multivariate analysis, sex, stage, margins, location, nodes, Apc, and Fhit were
independent predictors for CSS; the same factors (and age and Her2, except Fhit) 
predicted OS. Multivariate model predicted IPP with high prognostic accuracy
(0.90 for CSS; 0.91 for OS). A two-class model significantly separated low- and
high-risk patients for CSS (23.4% and 85.6%, P < 0.0001) and OS (21.4% and 82.0%,
P < 0.0001). A three-class model differentiated low-, intermediate-, and
high-risk patients for CSS (6.3%, 35.3%, and 88.0%, P < 0.0001) and OS (6.1%,
34.6%, and 86.5%, P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: A risk classification system comprising the immunohistochemical
expression of three proteins (Apc, Fhit, and Her2) and five clinicopathological
parameters (stage, resected nodes, margins, location, and sex) accurately
separates the resected gastric cancer patients into three classes of risk.

PMID: 23131390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;33(2):281-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01185-12. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Intestinal master transcription factor CDX2 controls chromatin access for partner
transcription factor binding.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, San Roman AK, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(2):496.

Tissue-specific gene expression requires modulation of nucleosomes, allowing
transcription factors to occupy cis elements that are accessible only in selected
tissues. Master transcription factors control cell-specific genes and define
cellular identities, but it is unclear if they possess special abilities to
regulate cell-specific chromatin and if such abilities might underlie lineage
determination and maintenance. One prevailing view is that several transcription 
factors enable chromatin access in combination. The homeodomain protein CDX2
specifies the embryonic intestinal epithelium, through unknown mechanisms, and
partners with transcription factors such as HNF4A in the adult intestine. We
examined enhancer chromatin and gene expression following Cdx2 or Hnf4a excision 
in mouse intestines. HNF4A loss did not affect CDX2 binding or chromatin, whereas
CDX2 depletion modified chromatin significantly at CDX2-bound enhancers,
disrupted HNF4A occupancy, and abrogated expression of neighboring genes. Thus,
CDX2 maintains transcription-permissive chromatin, illustrating a powerful and
dominant effect on enhancer configuration in an adult tissue. Similar,
hierarchical control of cell-specific chromatin states is probably a general
property of master transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3554120
PMID: 23129810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013 Jan;22(1):16-24. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-0922-T. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Protective effects of low calcium intake and low calcium absorption vitamin D
receptor genotype in the California Collaborative Prostate Cancer Study.

Rowland GW(1), Schwartz GG, John EM, Ingles SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

BACKGROUND: High calcium intake is consistently associated with increased
prostate cancer risk in epidemiologic studies. We previously reported that the
positive association between calcium intake and risk of aggressive prostate
cancer was modified by the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the CDX-2
binding site of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, among African American men.
METHODS: We expanded our previous study to include White men, a population with a
higher calcium intake and a higher prevalence of the low absorption allele. We
also examined VDR polymorphisms at other loci unrelated to calcium absorption.
The study included 1,857 prostate cancer cases (1,140 with advanced stage at
diagnosis, 717 with localized stage) and 1,096 controls. OR were estimated using 
conditional logistic regression.
RESULTS: Among both Blacks and Whites, we observed a threshold for calcium intake
(604 mg/d) below which prostate cancer risk declined sharply. Low calcium intake 
was most strongly associated with decreased risk among men with the VDR Cdx2 low 
calcium absorption genotype (P for interaction = 0.001 and P = 0.06 for Whites
and African Americans, respectively). Among all men with this genotype, those in 
the lowest quartile of calcium intake (=604 mg/d) had a 50% reduction in risk as 
compared with those in the upper three quartiles [OR = 0.49; 95% confidence
interval (CI), 0.36-0.67]. The association between calcium intake and prostate
cancer risk was not modified by genotype at other VDR loci.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the hypothesis that genetic determinants of
calcium absorption influence prostate cancer risk.
IMPACT: The differences between African Americans and Whites in calcium
absorption and dietary calcium intake may contribute to racial disparities in
prostate cancer incidence and mortality rates.

PMCID: PMC3763955
PMID: 23129590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Dev Biol. 2012;56(9):755-60. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.120080fn.

The secondary human yolk sac has an immunophenotype indicative of both hepatic
and intestinal differentiation.

Nogales FF(1), Dulcey I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain.
fnogales@ugr.es

Although the microscopy of the secondary human yolk sac (SHYS) is well known, few
studies have addressed its immunohistochemical profile. The SHYS is involved in
the synthesis, absorption and transfer of various proteins and behaves as a
temporary liver and intestine. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
presence of immunohistochemical markers of hepatic and intestinal function in the
SHYS. We performed a retrospective histological and immunohistochemical study of 
26 SHYS from spontaneous abortions and tubal pregnancies, 15 of which were from
the 7th to 8th week. The antibodies used were against alpha-foetoprotein (AFP),
glypican 3 (GLP3), hepatocyte-paraffin-1 (HepPar-1), villin, CDX2, SALL4 and
podoplanin (D2-40). Early SHYS from the 5th to the 8th week revealed a network of
intracellular vesicles communicating with the lumen of endodermal tubules that
were highlighted by intense membrane AFP expression. Endodermal cells
consistently expressed AFP, GLP3, SALL4, hep-par-1, villin and CDX2, while
mesothelial cells only expressed D2-40. The endodermal layer of the SHYS from the
5th to the 8th week revealed a transient canalicular network which was
highlighted by strong membranous AFP expression; this may represent the substrate
of a SHYS transport system during its period of maximal activity. The synthetic
and transfer functions of the yolk sac endoderm were reflected in a hybrid
immunophenotype in which proteins characteristic of hepatic function such as AFP,
GLP3, SALL4 and hep-par-1 were coexpressed simultaneously with others such as
villin and CDX2, indicative of an intestinal role.

PMID: 23124968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):359-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.026. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

Depletion of Suds3 reveals an essential role in early lineage specification.

Zhang K(1), Dai X, Wallingford MC, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, 455, 661 N. Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Preimplantation development culminates with the emergence of three distinct
populations: the inner cell mass, primitive endoderm and trophectoderm. Here, we 
define the mechanisms underlying the requirement of Suds3 in
pre/peri-implantation development. Suds3 knockdown blastocysts exhibit a failure 
of both trophectoderm proliferation as well as a conspicuous lack of primitive
endoderm. Expression of essential lineage factors Nanog, Sox2, Cdx2, Eomes, Elf5 
and Sox17 are severely reduced in the absence of Suds3. Importantly, we document 
deficient FGF4/ERK signaling and show that exogenous FGF4 rescues primitive
endoderm formation and trophectoderm proliferation in Suds3 knockdown
blastocysts. We also show that Hdac1 knockdown reduces Sox2/FGF4/ERK signaling in
blastocysts. Collectively, these data define a role for Suds3 in activation of
FGF4/ERK signaling and determine an essential molecular role of Suds3/Sin3/HDAC
complexes in lineage specification in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Nov 2;7:151. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-151.

Primary bladder adenocarcinoma versus metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma: a
persisting diagnostic challenge.

Roy S(1), Smith MA, Cieply KM, Acquafondata MB, Parwani AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15232, USA.

AIM: This study attempted to distinguish primary bladder adenocarcinoma (PBA)
from metastatic colonic adenocarcinomas (MCA), which is a difficult diagnostic
and clinical problem.
METHODS: Twenty-four cases of bladder adenocarcinomas (12 primary & 12 metastatic
colorectal) were included in the study with urothelial carcinoma (UC) and colonic
adenocarcinoma (CA) as controls. A panel of immunohistochemical (IHC) stains
along with fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH), using the UroVysion probe
set, was performed.
RESULTS: The majority of the PBAs presented with advanced disease. Enteric
histologic subtype was the most common morphological variant. Strong nuclear with
cytoplasmic-membranous staining of ß-catenin was seen in 75% of MCA and only
16.7% PBA (<10% staining cells). Although abnormal nuclear staining with
E-cadherin was seen in both PBA and MCA, it was more frequent in former. CK-7,
CK-20, villin and CDX-2 stains were not helpful in distinguishing the two
entities. FISH did not reveal any unique differences in chromosomal abnormality
between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Although there was a statistically significant difference in
ß-catenin and E-cadherin staining between two groups, we did not find any IHC or 
FISH marker that was specific for PBA. Distinction between PBA and MCA remains a 
diagnostic problem and clinical correlation is vital before rendering a
diagnosis.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slides for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1393156268152357.

PMCID: PMC3502416
PMID: 23121893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20584-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1208651109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

CDX1 confers intestinal phenotype on gastric epithelial cells via induction of
stemness-associated reprogramming factors SALL4 and KLF5.

Fujii Y(1), Yoshihashi K, Suzuki H, Tsutsumi S, Mutoh H, Maeda S, Yamagata Y,
Seto Y, Aburatani H, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20173-4.

Intestinal metaplasia of the stomach, a mucosal change characterized by the
conversion of gastric epithelium into an intestinal phenotype, is a precancerous 
lesion from which intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma arises. Chronic
infection with Helicobacter pylori is a major cause of gastric intestinal
metaplasia, and aberrant induction by H. pylori of the intestine-specific
caudal-related homeobox (CDX) transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, plays a key
role in this metaplastic change. As such, a critical issue arises as to how these
factors govern the cell- and tissue-type switching. In this study, we explored
genes directly activated by CDX1 in gastric epithelial cells and identified
stemness-associated reprogramming factors SALL4 and KLF5. Indeed, SALL4 and KLF5 
were aberrantly expressed in the CDX1(+) intestinal metaplasia of the stomach in 
both humans and mice. In cultured gastric epithelial cells, sustained expression 
of CDX1 gave rise to the induction of early intestinal-stemness markers, followed
by the expression of intestinal-differentiation markers. Furthermore, the
induction of these markers was suppressed by inhibiting either SALL4 or KLF5
expression, indicating that CDX1-induced SALL4 and KLF5 converted gastric
epithelial cells into tissue stem-like progenitor cells, which then
transdifferentiated into intestinal epithelial cells. Our study places the
stemness-related reprogramming factors as critical components of CDX1-directed
transcriptional circuitries that promote intestinal metaplasia. Requirement of a 
transit through dedifferentiated stem/progenitor-like cells, which share
properties in common with cancer stem cells, may underlie predisposition of
intestinal metaplasia to neoplastic transformation.

PMCID: PMC3528493
PMID: 23112162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 13;109(46):E3196-205. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206004109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

CDX2 is an amplified lineage-survival oncogene in colorectal cancer.

Salari K(1), Spulak ME, Cuff J, Forster AD, Giacomini CP, Huang S, Ko ME, Lin AY,
van de Rijn M, Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

The mutational activation of oncogenes drives cancer development and progression.
Classic oncogenes, such as MYC and RAS, are active across many different cancer
types. In contrast, "lineage-survival" oncogenes represent a distinct and
emerging class typically comprising transcriptional regulators of a specific cell
lineage that, when deregulated, support the proliferation and survival of cancers
derived from that lineage. Here, in a large collection of colorectal cancer cell 
lines and tumors, we identify recurrent amplification of chromosome 13, an
alteration highly restricted to colorectal-derived cancers. A minimal region of
amplification on 13q12.2 pinpoints caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2
(CDX2), a regulator of normal intestinal lineage development and differentiation,
as a target of the amplification. In contrast to its described role as a
colorectal tumor suppressor, CDX2 when amplified is required for the
proliferation and survival of colorectal cancer cells. Further, transcriptional
profiling, binding-site analysis, and functional studies link CDX2 to
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, itself a key oncogenic pathway in colorectal cancer.
These data characterize CDX2 as a lineage-survival oncogene deregulated in
colorectal cancer. Our findings challenge a prevailing view that CDX2 is a tumor 
suppressor in colorectal cancer and uncover an additional piece in the multistep 
model of colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3503165
PMID: 23112155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. FEBS Lett. 2012 Nov 30;586(23):4100-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.030. Epub
2012 Oct 26.

Cdk1 interplays with Oct4 to repress differentiation of embryonic stem cells into
trophectoderm.

Li L(1), Wang J, Hou J, Wu Z, Zhuang Y, Lu M, Zhang Y, Zhou X, Li Z, Xiao W,
Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.

Cdk1 plays an important role in undifferentiated ES cells, but the underlying
mechanism remains unclear. This study explores how Cdk1 collaborates with Oct4 to
inhibit differentiation in mouse ES cells. We show a direct interaction between
Cdk1 and Oct4, whereas other Cdk members, including Cdk2 and Cdk4, fail to
associate with Oct4. By immunocytochemistry we show that Cdk1 and Oct4
co-localize in ES cells. The biological function of the Cdk1-Oct4 complex was
also addressed. We found that Cdk1 enhances the binding of Oct4 on the
trophectoderm marker Cdx2 and promotes Cdx2 repression. This regulation is
independent of Cyclins and of the kinase activity of Cdk1. Our study explains how
Cdk1 and Oct4 interplay to inhibit ES cell differentiation into trophectoderm and
thereby maintain stemness.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23108051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Feb;37(2):211-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31826be303.

HNF4a as a marker for invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Sugano M(1), Nagasaka T, Sasaki E, Murakami Y, Hosoda W, Hida T, Mitsudomi T,
Yatabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

A new lung adenocarcinoma classification was recently proposed by IASLC/ATS/ERS. 
In this classification, invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMC) is placed in a new
category because of its unique radiologic, morphologic, and genetic
characteristics. Minimal cytologic atypia characterizes this tumor; thus, it is
occasionally difficult to make a diagnosis with a biopsy specimen. We used
immunohistochemistry to examine HNF4a expression in a tissue microarray
consisting of 278 lung adenocarcinoma specimens. In addition, we analyzed the
clinicopathologic features, including EGFR, KRAS, and ALK mutation status. HNF4a 
expression was detected in 33 of the 37 surgically resected IMCs. The tumor cells
were uniformly labeled with the molecule in all of the corresponding biopsy
specimens, whereas the normal cells were not. Although HNF4a was also expressed
in other lung adenocarcinoma subtypes, those with HNF4a expression shared IMC
features, including negative TTF-1 expression (P<0.001), positive CDX2 expression
(P<0.001), positive KRAS mutation status (P=0.001), and negative EGFR mutation
status (P<0.001). Although some ALK-positive adenocarcinomas showed IMC
morphology, the tumors were negative for HNF4a, suggesting that they belonged to 
a different group of tumors. We found that HNF4a labeled all of the IMC tumors
except the ALK-positive adenocarcinomas. Thus, HNF4a positivity could serve as a 
useful marker for overcoming the diagnostic difficulties caused by minimal
nuclear atypia and sparse tumor cells in small biopsy samples. Because other
adenocarcinoma subtypes with HNF4a expression share clinicopathologic features
with IMC, these adenocarcinomas, especially the columnar cell type of
acinar-predominant adenocarcinoma, might constitute a biological spectrum of IMC.

PMID: 23108025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Nov;136(11):1347-58. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0447-OA.

Mucinous carcinomas of the gallbladder: clinicopathologic analysis of 15 cases
identified in 606 carcinomas.

Dursun N(1), Escalona OT, Roa JC, Basturk O, Bagci P, Cakir A, Cheng J, Sarmiento
J, Losada H, Kong SY, Ducato L, Goodman M, Adsay NV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Istanbul Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.

CONTEXT: There are virtually no data in the literature regarding the incidence,
patterns, and clinicopathologic characteristics of mucinous carcinomas (MCs) of
the gallbladder (GB).
OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of mucinous differentiation in invasive GB 
carcinomas and the clinicopathologic characteristics of those that qualify as MC.
DESIGN: Primary invasive GB carcinomas (n <U+200A>=<U+200A> 606) were reviewed for mucinous
differentiation. Some degree of mucin production was identified in 40 cases
(6.6%); however, only 15 (2.5%) were qualified for the World Health Organization 
definition of MC (stromal mucin deposition constituting >50% of the tumor).
RESULTS: The mean age was 65 years, and the female to male ratio was 1.1 (versus 
3.9 for conventional pancreatobiliary-type GB adenocarcinomas; P <U+200A>=<U+200A> .04). A
significant proportion of the cases (8 of 12, 67%) presented with the clinical
picture and intraoperative findings that were interpreted as acute cholecystitis.
Mean and median tumor sizes were larger than those of conventional
adenocarcinomas (4.8 and 3.4 cm versus 2.9 and 2.5 cm, respectively; P <U+200A>=<U+200A> .01). 
Most (13 of 15, 87%) cases presented with pT3 tumors (versus 48% for ordinary GB 
carcinomas; P <U+200A>=<U+200A> .01). Two cases had almost an exclusive colloid pattern (>90%
composed of well-defined stromal mucin nodules that contained scanty carcinoma
cells, most of which were floating within the mucin). Eight cases were of
mixed-mucinous type, showing a mixture of colloid and noncolloid patterns. Five
others had prominent signet-ring cells, both floating within the mucin (which
constituted >50% of the tumor by definition) and infiltrating into the stroma as 
individual signet-ring cells in some areas. Immunohistochemical analysis
performed on the 7 cases that had available tissue revealed CK7 in 4 of 7 (57%), 
CK20 in 2 of 7 (29%), MUC1 in 4 of 7 (57%), MUC2 in 6 of 7 (86%), CDX2 in 1 of 7 
(14%), MUC5AC in 6 of 7 (86%), MUC6 in 0 of 7 (0%), and loss of E-cadherin in 6
of 7 (86%). The MLH1 and MSH2 were retained in 6 of 7 cases (100%). Follow-up
information was available for 13 cases: 11 (85%) died of disease (1-37 months)
and 2 (15%) were alive (23 months and 1 month). Overall survival of MCs was
significantly worse than that of conventional adenocarcinomas (13 versus 26
months; P <U+200A>=<U+200A> .01); however, that did not seem to be independent of stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Mucinous carcinomas constitute 2.5% of GB carcinomas. They present
with an acute cholecystitis-type picture. Most MCs are a mixed-mucinous, not pure
colloid, type. They are typically large and advanced tumors at the time of
diagnosis and thus exhibit more-aggressive behavior than do ordinary GB
carcinomas. Immunophenotypically, they differ from conventional GB
adenocarcinomas by MUC2 positivity, from intestinal carcinomas by an often
inverse CK7/20 profile, from pancreatic mucinous carcinomas by CDX2 negativity,
and from mammary colloid carcinomas by a lack of MUC6. Unlike gastrointestinal
MCs, they appear to be microsatellite stable.

PMID: 23106580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Feb;66(2):109-12. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201138. Epub
2012 Oct 26.

Is CDX2 immunostaining useful for delineating anorectal from penile/vulvar
squamous cancer in the setting of squamous cell carcinoma with clinically unknown
primary site presenting with histologically confirmed inguinal lymph node
metastasis?

Gunia S(1), Koch S, May M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Pathology at the Johanniter Hospital
Stendal, Stendal, Germany. sven-gunia@gmx.de

AIMS: Penile, vulvar and anal squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) share
histomorphological overlap and are prone to lymphatic dissemination into inguinal
nodes. Anal SCCs might derive from the anorectal zone (ARZ), anal transitional
zone, squamous zone or from perianal skin. These anatomically distinct zones
differ in terms of their embryological development. We sought to investigate the 
role of caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2), a homeobox gene implicated in the
development and anterior/posterior pattern specification from duodenum to rectum 
including the ARZ, in terms of narrowing the possible sites of origin to be
considered in the setting of SCC with unknown primary presenting with
histologically confirmed inguinal lymph node metastasis.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry (IHC) employing a panel of antibodies directed
against CK5/6, CK7, CK20, p63, p16, CEA and CDX2, we compared 89 penile, 11
vulvar and eight anal SCCs with respect to their staining profiles. Moreover,
anal SCCs were subjected to in situ hybridisation (ISH) for high-risk human
papillomavirus (HPV) subtypes.
RESULTS: By IHC, CDX2 expression was observed in 2/8 anal SCCs (25%) while being 
absent from all penile and vulvar SCCs examined. High-risk HPV subtypes were
detected by ISH in all anal SCCs examined, which were uniformly p16-positive by
IHC.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 might be valuable in terms of narrowing the possible sites of
origin to be considered in the setting of SCC with unknown primary presenting
with inguinal lymph node metastasis. However, despite its favourable specificity,
the diagnostic benefit achieved by this observation is limited by the low
sensitivity.

PMID: 23105122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Acta Med Okayama. 2012;66(5):423-7.

Duodenal carcinoma from a duodenal diverticulum mimicking pancreatic carcinoma.

Furukawa M(1), Izumi S, Tsukuda K, Tokumo M, Sakurai J, Mano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan. masashifurukawa2000@hotmail.com

An 81-year-old man was found to have a pancreatic head tumor on abdominal
computed tomography (CT) performed during a follow-up visit for sigmoid colon
cancer. The tumor had a diameter of 35mm on the CT scan and was diagnosed as
pancreatic head carcinoma T3N0M0. The patient was treated with pylorus-preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy. Histopathological examination showed that the tumor had 
grown within a hollow structure, was contiguous with a duodenal diverticulum, and
had partially invaded the pancreas. Immunohistochemistry results were as
follows:CK7 negative, CK20 positive, CD10 negative, CDX2 positive, MUC1 negative,
MUC2 positive, MUC5AC negative, and MUC6 negative. The tumor was diagnosed as
duodenal carcinoma from the duodenal diverticulum. Preoperative imaging showed
that the tumor was located in the head of the pancreas and was compressing the
common bile duct, thus making it appear like pancreatic cancer. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the second report of a case of duodenal carcinoma from a
duodenal diverticulum mimicking pancreatic carcinoma.

PMID: 23093061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2012 Oct;60(4):262-6.

[A case of hepatic metastasis of gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma mistaken for
primary hepatocellular carcinoma].

[Article in Korean]

Moon JY(1), Kim GH, Cheong JH, Lee BE, Ryu DY, Song GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine,
Busan, Korea.

Gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma is a special type of gastric carcinoma, which
produces AFP. We report a case of an metastatic gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma
mistaken for primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). A 72 year-old woman was
transferred to our hospital for treatment of the hepatic mass. She underwent
subtotal gastrectomy for gastric cancer 2 years ago. A year ago, she was
diagnosed with hepatic mass and treated with transhepatic chemoembolization under
the suspicion of primary HCC in other hospital. The hepatic mass looked like
primary HCC on CT, and serum AFP was elevated to 18,735 IU/mL. We did the
transhepatic mass biopsy and compared it to the histology of the previous gastric
cancer. The results of immunohistochemical staining between them was coincident, 
and so it was diagnosed as a hepatic metastasis of gastric hepatoid
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 23089914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dig Endosc. 2012 Nov;24(6):419-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1443-1661.2012.01314.x. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

Nature of white opaque substance in gastric epithelial neoplasia as visualized by
magnifying endoscopy with narrow-band imaging.

Yao K(1), Iwashita A, Nambu M, Tanabe H, Nagahama T, Maki S, Ishikawa H, Matsui
T, Enjoji M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Endoscopy Pathology Gastroenterology, Fukuoka University
Chikushi Hospital Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka University,
Fukuoka, Japan. yao@fukuoka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Magnifying endoscopy (ME) with narrow-band imaging (NBI)
revealed a white opaque substance (WOS) within the superficial part of the
gastric neoplasia; however, its nature has remained obscure. A WOS noted within
the duodenum was reported to comprise lipid droplets (LD) absorbed by the
duodenal epithelium. We attempted to ascertain whether the WOS within gastric
neoplasia could also comprise LD and whether the presence of this WOS could be
correlated with a specific phenotype.
METHODS: Forty-three patients with early gastric epithelial neoplasia underwent
ME with NBI. The presence or absence of WOS in the neoplasias was recorded based 
on the findings of ME with NBI. One biopsy specimen was taken from each of the
neoplasias. Cryostat sections underwent oil red O staining for LD. Serial
sections were immunostained using the first antibody of CD10, MUC2, CDX2, human
gastric mucin, MUC5AC and MUC6. The tissue phenotype was classified as intestinal
(I), gastric (G) and gastrointestinal (GI) type based on the results of
immunostaining. In total, 49 gastric neoplasias from 43 patients were
investigated.
RESULTS: Prevalence of LD in WOS-positive versus WOS-negative lesions was 96.2%
(25/26) and 4.3% (1/23), respectively (P < 0.001, Fisher's exact test). WOS was
present in GI- and I-type lesions, but not in G-type lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: WOS may be LD that have been accumulated in the superficial part of 
the gastric neoplasia of a certain intestinal phenotype.

© 2012 The Authors. Digestive Endoscopy © 2012 Japan Gastroenterological
Endoscopy Society.

PMID: 23078433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Dec 15;303(12):G1335-46. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00291.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Sox9 drives columnar differentiation of esophageal squamous epithelium: a
possible role in the pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus.

Clemons NJ(1), Wang DH, Croagh D, Tikoo A, Fennell CM, Murone C, Scott AM,
Watkins DN, Phillips WA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Oncology Research Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. nicholas.clemons@petermac.org

The molecular mechanism underlying the development of Barrett's esophagus (BE),
the precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma, remains unknown. Our previous work
implicated sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling as a possible driver of BE and
suggested that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4) and Sox9 were downstream
mediators. We have utilized a novel in vivo tissue reconstitution model to
investigate the relative roles of Bmp4 and Sox9 in driving metaplasia. Epithelia 
reconstituted from squamous epithelial cells or empty vector-transduced cells had
a stratified squamous phenotype, reminiscent of normal esophagus. Expression of
Bmp4 in the stromal compartment activated signaling in the epithelium but did not
alter the squamous phenotype. In contrast, expression of Sox9 in squamous
epithelial cells induced formation of columnar-like epithelium with expression of
the columnar differentiation marker cytokeratin 8 and the intestinal-specific
glycoprotein A33. In patient tissue, A33 protein was expressed specifically in
BE, but not in normal esophagus. Expression of Cdx2, another putative driver of
BE, alone had no effect on reconstitution of a squamous epithelium. Furthermore, 
epithelium coexpressing Cdx2 and Sox9 had a phenotype similar to epithelium
expressing Sox9 alone. Our results demonstrate that Sox9 is sufficient to drive
columnar differentiation of squamous epithelium and expression of an intestinal
differentiation marker, reminiscent of BE. These data suggest that Shh-mediated
expression of Sox9 may be an important early event in the development of BE and
that the potential for inhibitors of the hedgehog pathway to be used in the
treatment of BE and/or esophageal adenocarcinoma could be tested in the near
future.

PMID: 23064761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47512. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047512. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Offspring from mouse embryos developed using a simple incubator-free culture
system with a deoxidizing agent.

Itoi F(1), Tokoro M, Terashita Y, Yamagata K, Fukunaga N, Asada Y, Wakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genomic Reprogramming, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN,
Kobe, Japan.

To culture preimplantation embryos in vitro, water-jacketed CO(2) incubators are 
used widely for maintaining an optimal culture environment in terms of gas phase,
temperature and humidity. We investigated the possibility of mouse embryo culture
in a plastic bag kept at 37°C. Zygotes derived from in vitro fertilization or
collected from naturally mated B6D2F1 female mice were put in a drop of medium on
a plastic culture dish and then placed in a commercially available plastic bag.
When these were placed in an oven under air at 37°C for 96 h, the rate of
blastocyst development and the cell numbers of embryos decreased. However, when
the concentration of O(2) was reduced to 5% using a deoxidizing agent and a small
oxygen meter, most zygotes developed into blastocysts. These blastocysts were
judged normal according to their cell number, Oct3/4 and Cdx2 gene expression
levels, the apoptosis rate and the potential for full-term development after
embryo transfer to pseudopregnant recipients. Furthermore, using this system,
normal offspring were obtained simply by keeping the bag on a warming plate. This
culture method was applied successfully to both hybrid and inbred strains. In
addition, because the developing embryos could be observed through the
transparent wall of the bag, it was possible to capture time-lapse images of live
embryos until the blastocyst stage without needing an expensive microscope-based 
incubation chamber. These results suggest that mouse zygotes are more resilient
to their environment than generally believed. This method might prove useful in
economical culture systems or for the international shipment of embryos.

PMCID: PMC3467247
PMID: 23056643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Oncogene. 2013 Sep 5;32(36):4313-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.445. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Increasing the oxygen load by treatment with myo-inositol trispyrophosphate
reduces growth of colon cancer and modulates the intestine homeobox gene Cdx2.

Derbal-Wolfrom L(1), Pencreach E, Saandi T, Aprahamian M, Martin E, Greferath R, 
Tufa E, Choquet P, Lehn JM, Nicolau C, Duluc I, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, Strasbourg, France.

Preventing tumor neovascularisation is one of the strategies recently developed
to limit the dissemination of cancer cells and apparition of metastases. Although
these approaches could improve the existing treatments, a number of unexpected
negative effects have been reported, mainly linked to the hypoxic condition and
the subsequent induction of the pro-oncogenic hypoxia inducible factor(s)
resulting from cancer cells' oxygen starvation. Here, we checked in vivo on colon
cancer cells an alternative approach. It is based on treatment with myo-inositol 
trispyrophosphate (ITPP), a molecule that leads to increased oxygenation of
tumors. We provide evidence that ITPP increases the survival of mice in a model
of carcinomatosis of human colon cancer cells implanted into the peritoneal
cavity. ITPP also reduced the growth of subcutaneous colon cancer cells
xenografted in nu/nu mice. In the subcutaneous tumors, ITPP stimulated the
expression of the homeobox gene Cdx2 that is crucial for intestinal
differentiation and that also has an anti-tumoral function. On this basis, human 
colon cancer cells were cultured in vitro in hypoxic conditions. Hypoxia was
shown to decrease the level of Cdx2 protein, mRNA and the activity of the Cdx2
promoter. This decline was unrelated to the activation of HIF1a and HIF2a by
hypoxia. However, it resulted from the activation of a phosphatidylinositol
3-kinases-like mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, as assessed by the fact 
that LY294002 and U0126 restored high Cdx2 expression in hypoxia. Corroborating
these results, U0126 recapitulated the increase of Cdx2 triggered by ITPP in
subcutaneous colon tumor xenografts. The present study provides evidence that a
chemical compound that increases oxygen pressure can antagonize the hypoxic
setting and reduce the growth of human colon tumors implanted in nu/nu mice.

PMID: 23045284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Oct 8;7:139. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-139.

Primary mucinous cystadenoma of the spermatic cord within the inguinal canal.

Kim JY(1), Lee YT, Kang HJ, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Research Institute, Pusan National
University Hospital, Seo-gu, Busan, Republic of Korea.

We report a hitherto not documented case of primary mucinous cystadenoma arising 
in the spermatic cord within the right inguinal canal of a78-year-old man. The
tumor was painless, hard and mobile. A computed tomography scan on the pelvis
revealed an oval shaped, low attenuation mass, measuring 5.0x2.5x2.1 cm, that was
present adjacent to the vas deferens. Grossly, the excised mass was multicystic
mucinous tumor, filled with thick mucoid materials. Microscopically, the cystic
wall was irregularly thickened. The cystic epithelium commonly showed short
papillae lined by a single layer of columnar to cuboidal mucinous epithelial
cells without significant stratification or cytologic atypia. Goblet cells were
also frequently present. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells showed
positive reaction to carcinoembryonic antigen, cytokeratin 20, CDX2, epithelial
membrane antigen, and CD15. However, they were negative for PAX8 and Wilms' tumor
1 protein. Pathological diagnosis was a papillary mucinous cystadenoma of the
spermatic cord. Although mucinous cystadenoma in this area is extremely rare, it 
is important that these lesions be recognized clinically and pathologically in
order to avoid unnecessary radical surgery.VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s)
for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1720965948762004.

PMCID: PMC3502436
PMID: 23044077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mod Pathol. 2013 Mar;26(3):370-84. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.172. Epub 2012 Oct
5.

Mesothelioma with signet-ring cell features: report of 23 cases.

Ordóñez NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas, MD, Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. nordonez@mdanderson.org

Signet-ring cell mesothelioma is uncommon and only two case reports have been
published on this mesothelioma variant, both of which were initially misdiagnosed
as signet-ring cell carcinoma. Herein are reported 23 signet-ring cell
mesotheliomas that were investigated by immunohistochemistry, 12 of which were
also studied by electron microscopy. Twenty-one of the cases originated in the
pleura and two in the peritoneum. For comparison purposes and in order to
determine the value of these techniques in the differential diagnosis of these
tumors, seven cases of signet-ring cell lung adenocarcinoma were also studied.
All signet-ring cell mesotheliomas were positive for calretinin, keratin 5/6,
keratin 7, and mesothelin, 93% for podoplanin, and 91% for WT1; whereas, none
reacted for MOC-31, CEA, TAG-72, CD15, TTF-1, napsin A, or CDX2. Among
signet-ring cell lung adenocarcinomas, 100% were positive for keratin 7, CEA, and
napsin A, 86% each for TTF-1 and TAG-72, 71% for CD15, and 14% for mesothelin,
while all were negative for calretinin, keratin 5/6, WT1, podoplanin, and CDX2.
After analyzing the results, it is concluded that the panels of markers used in
the differential diagnosis of this mesothelioma variant should include those
markers that are usually expressed in mesotheliomas (eg, calretinin, keratin 5/6,
WT1, and podoplanin), broad-spectrum carcinoma markers that are frequently
expressed in adenocarcinomas regardless of their site of origin (eg, MOC-31 and
CEA), and organ-associated markers (eg, TTF-1 and napsin A for lung), which allow
the site of origin of a metastatic adenocarcinoma to be established. Electron
microscopy can be very useful as it permits the identification of characteristic 
ultrastructural mesothelioma and adenocarcinoma markers, and it also allows a
better understanding of the morphologic features seen on routine light
microscopy. Pathologists should be aware of this mesothelioma subtype as it can
potentially be confused with other tumors that exhibit signet-ring features.

PMID: 23041828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Dec;16(6):459-69. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2012.08.007. 
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Biphasic alveolosquamoid renal carcinoma: a histomorphological,
immunohistochemical, molecular genetic, and ultrastructural study of a
distinctive morphologic variant of renal cell carcinoma.

Petersson F(1), Bulimbasic S, Hes O, Slavik P, Martínek P, Michal M, Gomolcáková 
B, Hora M, Damjanov I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charles University in Prague-Faculty of Medicine in
Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic.

Only a few cases of sarcomatoid renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) with squamous
differentiation have been published. We present 2 RCCs exhibiting a hitherto not 
reported biphasic neoplastic cell population exhibiting a predominantly alveolar 
architecture where squamoid differentiation was identified in one of the
neoplastic cell populations. None of the tumors showed chromophobe features or
any evidence of sarcomatoid transformation. The tumors arose in 2 adult patients 
and were characterized by routine histology, immunohistochemistry,
ultrastructure, array comparative genomic hybridization, confirmatory fluorescent
in situ hybridization, and loss of heterozygosity analysis. Tumors measured 3 and
4 cm and were located within the renal parenchyma and had no pelvicalyceal
connection. Both tumors were composed of a distinctly dual-cell population. The
larger tumor cells displayed squamoid features and formed round well-demarcated
solid alveolated islands that, in large parts, were surrounded by a smaller
neoplastic cell component. The squamoid cells were immunoreactive for
cytokeratins (CKs) (AE1-AE3, Cam 5.2, CK5/6, CK7, and CK20), epithelial membrane 
antigen, racemase/AMACR, and carboanhydrase IX (in 1 case focally). The small
cell population was positive for CK7, epithelial membrane antigen, and
racemase/AMACR, whereas CK20, AE1-3, and carboanhydrase IX were negative. CD10
was focally positive in the large squamoid cells in 1 case. Cathepsin K,
E-cadherin, and CD117 displayed focal positivity in 1 case. Vimentin, RCC marker,
parvalbumin, S100 protein, S100 A1, p63, p53, CDX2, uroplakin III, HMB45, TFE3,
WT1, synaptophysin, chromogranin A, thyroglobulin, and TTF1 were negative. The
proliferative activity (Ki-67) was low (1%) in the small cell component in both
cases, whereas the large neoplastic tumor cells displayed a significantly higher 
proliferation (20%-35%). Ultrastructurally, desmosomes and tonofilaments were
identified in the large tumor cells, confirming squamoid differentiation in a
subset of tumor cells. Array comparative genomic hybridization of 1 analyzable
case (confirmed with fluorescent in situ hybridization and loss of heterozygosity
analysis) revealed partial or complete losses of chromosomes 2, 5, 6, 9, 12, 15, 
16, 17, 18 and 22, (including biallelic loss of CDKN2A locus) and partial gains
of chromosomes 1, 5, 11, 12 and 13. Follow-up at 6 years showed no recurrence or 
metastasis in 1 patient. The other (male) patients had a subcutaneous metastasis 
at presentation, but during a 1-year follow-up no evidence of recurrence or
further metastatic events have been documented. Our data indicate that biphasic
alveolosquamoid renal carcinoma is a unique and distinctive tumor. The large
squamoid and small tumor cells have overlapping but still distinctive
immunohistochemical patterns of protein expression. Multiple chromosomal
aberrations were identified, some of them located in regions with known tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23036259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;136:187-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.09.026.
Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Vitamin D status and the Cdx-2 polymorphism of the vitamin D receptor gene are
determining factors of bone mineral density in young healthy postmenopausal
women.

Casado-Díaz A(1), Cuenca-Acevedo R, Navarro-Valverde C, Díaz-Molina C,
Caballero-Villarraso J, Santiago-Mora R, Dorado G, Quesada-Gómez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), 14004
Córdoba, Spain. bb1cadia@uco.es

Bone mineral density (BMD) is a main determinant of osteoporotic fractures. A
cross-sectional study was conducted in 229 young, healthy postmenopausal women
(PMW) to evaluate the contribution of the vitamin D endocrine system and other
clinical, biochemical and genetic parameters. Clinical risk factors for
osteoporosis were obtained by a questionnaire. Serum concentrations of 25OHD,
1,25(OH)2D, PTH, and bone turnover markers were measured. The BsmI, FokI and
Cdx-2 polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene were determined. DXA and
the WHO criteria were applied for the diagnosis of osteoporosis. Univariate
logistic and multivariate logistic regression analyses were carried out.RESULTS: 
The prevalence of vitamin D deficiency (<50nmol/l) was 50%. Age increased
osteoporosis risk; whereas body mass index (BMI), number of reproductive years,
25OHD level and the Cdx-2 polymorphism in the VDR gene (when allele A is present)
were found to be protective. Therefore, both serum 25OHD and VDR polymorphism
should be taken into account in the evaluation and implementation of therapeutic 
strategies concerning PMW, especially as the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency
is still alarmingly high even at Southern latitudes. This article is part of a
Special Issue entitled 'Vitamin D Workshop'.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23026509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Turk Patoloji Derg. 2012;28(3):251-8. doi: 10.5146/tjpath.2012.01132.

CDX2, COX2 and MUC2 expressions in Barrett's esophagus: can they be useful in
determination of the dysplasia?

Türkmen IÇ(1), Bassüllü N, Uraz S, Yerdel MA, Memisoglu R, Bülbül Dogusoy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Istanbul Bilim University, Faculty of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey. ilknurcetinaslan@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The description of Barrett's esophagus which is a risk factor for
esophageal adenocarcinoma has differences, and the need of goblet cells for
diagnosis is controversial. However, the pathophysiology in the metaplasia seen
in Barrett's esophagus is not totally understood and new methods are searched for
the assessment of progression to dysplasia. We aimed to search the
immunohistochemical expression of CDX2, COX2 and MUC2 in Barrett's esophagus to
detect any early evidence of intestinal metaplasia or dysplasia.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The staining properties were examined in the intestinal
metaplastic (goblet cell-containing columnar epithelium), columnar (non-goblet
columnar epithelium), distant columnar (non-goblet columnar epithelium distant
from intestinal metaplastic epithelium) and squamous epithelium in 59
pathologically diagnosed Barrett's esophagus, 22 of which having dysplasia. The
results were compared statistically with Pearson and Fisher exact tests.
RESULTS: The distribution of the staining of intestinal metaplastic, non-goblet
columnar distant columnar, and squamous epithelium, respectively were as follows:
for CDX2 76.3%, 23.7%, 1.7%, 0%; for COX-2 93.2%, 47.5%, 8%, 62.9%; for MUC2
93.2%, 11.9%, 4% and 0%. The expression of CDX2, COX2 and MUC2 in the intestinal 
metaplastic epithelium was higher than the expression in distant and non-goblet
columnar epithelium. The expression of CDX2, COX2 and MUC2 in the foci of
dysplasia decreased significantly (18.2%, 27.3%, 31.9%, and p=0.039, 0.0001,
0.0001, respectively). COX2 expression in squamous epithelium was also lower when
the adjacent mucosa has dysplasia (p=0.014).
CONCLUSION: The CDX2, COX2 and MUC2 expressions were seen in the intestinal
epithelium having goblet cells. The use of the markers in the diagnosis is
controversial but the difference in the Barrett esophagus-dysplasia sequence
seems to be meaningful.

PMID: 23011828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2012 Nov;21(11):2101-7. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-0730. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Bile acid promotes intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinogenesis.

Tatsugami M(1), Ito M, Tanaka S, Yoshihara M, Matsui H, Haruma K, Chayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Bile acid and Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) are important toxic
factors for gastric mucosal injury. We examined the role of bile acid in
promoting histologic gastritis and gastric carcinoma in Japanese patients.
METHODS: A total of 767 patients (452 men, mean age 51.1 years) were studied.
Gastric juice was collected by gastro-endoscopic examination, and the bile acid
concentration was examined by enzymatic method. The grade of histologic gastritis
was evaluated by gastric biopsies, and the relationship between the bile acid
concentration and the gastritis score was examined. The occurrence of gastric
cancer was examined by a retrospective cohort study. CDX2/CINC1 expression in
RGM-1 cells was evaluated by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In H. pylori-positive patients, we found significant positive
correlation between the bile acid concentration and the grades of
atrophy/intestinal metaplasia (P < 0.01). However, we found significant negative 
associations between the bile acid concentrations and the histologic scores of
mononuclear cell/neutrophil infiltrations (P < 0.01). Patients with a high
concentration of bile acid developed gastric cancer more frequently than those
with a low concentration (P < 0.05). Cholic acid treatment significantly
increased CDX2 expression in RGM-1 cells. CINC1 expression in RGM-1 cell was
significantly induced by coculture with H. pylori, and the induction was reduced 
by glycochenodeoxycholic acid treatment.
CONCLUSION: The bile acid in gastric juice contributes to the progression of
histologic atrophy and intestinal metaplasia without inflammatory cell
infiltration, followed by carcinogenesis in H. pylori-positive patients.
IMPACT: Bile acid promotes intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinogenesis
without inflammatory cell infiltration.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 23010643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2013 Jul;32(4):316-7. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2012.721481.
Epub 2012 Sep 24.

CDX2 highlights mucinous epithelium in hepatoblastoma with teratoid components.

Fan R, Lin J.

Originally only considered as a maker for intestinal differentiation, CDX2 was
later found to be expressing in other tumors outside of gastrointestinal (GI)
tract. We report an interesting phenomenon that CDX2 also highlighted the
teratoid component in hepatoblastoma-its mucinous epithelium. It is speculated
that CDX2 can be a good marker for mucinous differentiation with morphological
intestinal characteristics in general.

PMID: 23003007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Development. 2012 Nov;139(21):3969-72. doi: 10.1242/dev.086025. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Maternal Cdx2 is dispensable for mouse development.

Blij S(1), Frum T, Akyol A, Fearon E, Ralston A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.

In many invertebrate and vertebrate species, cell fates are assigned through the 
cellular inheritance of differentially localized maternal determinants. Whether
mammalian embryogenesis is also regulated by deterministic mechanisms is highly
controversial. The caudal domain transcription factor CDX2 has been reported to
act as a maternal determinant regulating cell fate decisions in mouse
development. However, this finding is contentious because of reports that
maternal Cdx2 is not essential for development. Notably, all of the previously
published studies of maternal Cdx2 relied on injected RNA interference
constructs, which could introduce experimental variation. Only deletion of the
maternal gene can unambiguously resolve its requirement in mouse development.
Here, we genetically ablated maternal Cdx2 using a Cre/lox strategy, and we
definitively establish that maternal Cdx2 is not essential for mouse development.

PMCID: PMC3472595
PMID: 22992952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 8;32(32):3782-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.401. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Regulation of the tumor suppressor homeogene Cdx2 by HNF4a in intestinal cancer.

Saandi T(1), Baraille F, Derbal-Wolfrom L, Cattin AL, Benahmed F, Martin E,
Cardot P, Duclos B, Ribeiro A, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unité 682, Strasbourg, France.

The gut-specific homeotic transcription factor Cdx2 is a crucial regulator of
intestinal development and homeostasis, which is downregulated in colorectal
cancers (CRC) and exhibits a tumor suppressor function in the colon. We have
previously established that several endodermal transcription factors, including
HNF4a and GATA6, are involved in Cdx2 regulation in the normal gut. Here we have 
studied the role of HNF4a in the mechanism of deregulation of Cdx2 in colon
cancers. Crossing Apc(<U+0394>14/+) mice prone to spontaneous intestinal tumor
development with pCdx2-9LacZ transgenic mice containing the LacZ reporter under
the control of the 9.3-kb Cdx2 promoter showed that this promoter segment
contains sequences recapitulating the decrease of Cdx2 expression in intestinal
cancers. Immunohistochemistry revealed that HNF4a, unlike GATA6, exhibited a
similar decrease to Cdx2 in genetic (Apc(min/+) and Apc(<U+0394>14/+)) and chemically
induced (Azoxymethane (AOM) treatment) models of intestinal tumors in mice. HNF4a
and Cdx2 also exhibited a comparable deregulated pattern in human CRC. Correlated
patterns were observed between HNF4a and Cdx2 in several experimental models of
human colon cancer cell lines: xenografts in nude mice, wound healing and glucose
starvation. Furthermore, Cdx2 decreased by knocking down HNF4a in human colon
cancer cells using siRNA and in the colon of mice conditionally knocked out for
the Hnf4a gene in the adult intestine (Hnf4a(f/f);VilCre(ERT2) mice). Finally,
the conditionally knocked out mice Hnf4a(f/f);VilCre(ERT2) treated with the
carcinogen AOM developed colorectal tumors earlier than wild-type mice, as
previously reported for mice with a reduced Cdx2 expression. In conclusion, this 
study provides evidence that the downregulation of HNF4a is an important
determinant of the reduced expression of the Cdx2 tumor suppressor gene in
intestinal cancers. Consistently, similar to Cdx2, HNF4a exerts a tumor
suppressor function in the colon in that its loss of function facilitates tumor
progression.

PMID: 22986531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Theriogenology. 2012 Oct 15;78(7):1597-610. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.07.006.

Expression patterns of sirtuin genes in porcine preimplantation embryos and
effects of sirtuin inhibitors on in vitro embryonic development after
parthenogenetic activation and in vitro fertilization.

Kwak SS(1), Cheong SA, Yoon JD, Jeon Y, Hyun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Embryology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Chungbuk, South Korea.

We examined the expression patterns of porcine sirtuin 1 to 3 (Sirt1-3) genes in 
preimplantation embryos derived from parthenogenetic activation (PA), in vitro
fertilization (IVF) and somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). We also
investigated the effects of sirtuin inhibitors (5 mM nicotinamide [NAM] and 100
µM sirtinol) on embryonic development of PA and IVF embryos under in vitro
culture (IVC). The expression patterns of Sirt1-3 mRNA in preimplantation embryos
of PA, IVF, and SCNT were significantly (P < 0.05) decreased from metaphase stage
of oocyte to blastocyst stage. Especially, the expressions of Sirt1-3 in SCNT
blastocysts were significantly (P < 0.05) lower and Sirt2 in PA blastocyst was
significantly higher compared with the IVF blastocysts. Treatment with sirtuin
inhibitors during IVC resulted in significantly (P < 0.05) decreased blastocyst
formation and total cell number of blastocyst derived from PA (NAM: 29.4% and
29.6, sirtinol: 31.0% and 30.3, and control: 40.9% and 41.7, respectively) and
IVF embryos (NAM: 10.4% and 30.9, sirtinol: 6.3% and 30.5, and control: 16.7% and
42.8, respectively). There was no significant difference in cleavage rate in both
PA and IVF embryos. The early and expanded blastocyst formations at Day 7 were
significantly lower in the sirtuin inhibitors-treated groups than the control. It
was demonstrated that sirtuin inhibitor (NAM) influenced the percentage of
blastocyst formation and total cell number of PA derived blastocyst when NAM was 
added during day 4 to 7 (22.1% and 32.4) or day 0 to 7 (23.1% and 31.6) of IVC
compared with the control (41.8% and 41.5). No significant difference in cleavage
rates appeared among the groups. The blastocysts derived from PA embryos treated 
with sirtuin inhibitors showed lower (P < 0.05) expressions of POU5F1 and Cdx2
genes. Also, Sirt2 mRNA expression was significantly decreased in sirtinol
treated group and Sirt3 mRNA expression was also significantly decreased in both 
NAM and sirtinol treated groups compared with the control. In conclusion, these
results suggest that sirtuins may have a physiological and important role in
embryonic development of porcine preimplantation embryos by regulating essential 
gene expressions of developing embryos. These findings could have implications
for understanding the role of sirtuins during embryo development and for
improving SCNT and related techniques.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22980088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Hum Pathol. 2013 Jan;44(1):1-19. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.05.014. Epub 2012
Sep 7.

Application of immunohistochemistry in the diagnosis of epithelioid mesothelioma:
a review and update.

Ordóñez NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Pathology,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. nordonez@mdanderson.org

A large number of immunohistochemical markers that can assist in the differential
diagnosis of epithelioid mesotheliomas are currently available. Because these
markers are expressed differently in the various types of carcinomas that can
metastasize to the serosal membranes and can potentially be confused with
epithelioid mesothelioma, their selection for inclusion in a diagnostic panel
largely depends on the differential diagnosis, as well as on which ones work the 
best in a given laboratory. Traditionally, the panels used in the differential
diagnosis of epithelioid mesothelioma have consisted of a combination of positive
mesothelioma markers and broad-spectrum carcinoma markers. At present, a wide
variety of organ-associated carcinoma markers such as thyroid transcription
factor-1 and napsin A for the lung, PAX 8 and PAX 2 for the kidney, and
Müllerian-derived tumors; gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 and mammaglobin
for the breast; and CDX2 for intestinal differentiation are available, which can 
assist in establishing the site of origin of an adenocarcinoma when included in a
diagnostic panel. This article provides updated information on the composition of
the panels of markers recommended in the various differential diagnoses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22963903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 15;371(2):227-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.018. Epub 2012 
Aug 30.

Cdx2 contributes to the expansion of the early primordial germ cell population in
the mouse.

Bialecka M(1), Young T, Chuva de Sousa Lopes S, ten Berge D, Sanders A, Beck F,
Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell research and UMC
Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cdx gene products regulate the extent of axial elongation from the posterior
growth zone. These transcription factors sustain the emergence of trunk and tail 
tissues by providing a suitable niche in the axial progenitor zone, via
regulation of Wnt signaling. Cdx genes are expressed in and along the complete
primitive streak including its posterior part wherefrom the extraembryonic
mesoderm of the allantois emerges. Cdx genes are required for the full
development of the allantois and its derivatives in the placental labyrinth. The 
mouse germ cell lineage also originates from the proximo-posterior epiblast of
the primitive streak, and is established within the extraembryonic mesoderm that 
generates the allantois. We asked whether the expression of Cdx genes around the 
newly specified PGCs is necessary for the maintenance and expansion of this
population, as it is for the allantois and axial progenitors. We observed a
significantly lower number of PGCs in Cdx2(null) embryos than in controls. We
found that Wnt3a loss of function decreases the PGC population to the same extent
as Cdx2 inactivation. Moreover, exogenous Wnt3a corrects the lower PGC number in 
Cdx2(null) posterior embryonic tissues cultured in vitro. Cdx2 is not expressed
in PGCs themselves, and we propose that the expression of Cdx2 in posterior
extraembryonic tissues contributes to the proper niche of the germ cell
progenitors by stimulating canonical Wnt signaling. Since PGC residence within
the posterior growth zone is a mouse-specific feature, our data suggest that
mouse PGCs opportunistically became dependent on the axial progenitor niche.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22960234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2013;25(4):617-23. doi: 10.1071/RD12011.

Actin nucleator Arp2/3 complex is essential for mouse preimplantation embryo
development.

Sun SC(1), Wang QL, Gao WW, Xu YN, Liu HL, Cui XS, Kim NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 361-763,
Korea.

The Arp2/3 complex is a critical actin nucleator, which promotes actin assembly
and is widely involved in a diverse range of actin-related processes such as cell
locomotion, phagocytosis and the establishment of cell polarity. Previous studies
showed that the Arp2/3 complex regulates spindle migration and asymmetric
division during mouse oocyte maturation; however, the role of the Arp2/3 complex 
in early mouse embryo development is still unknown. The results of the present
study show that the Arp2/3 complex is critical for cytokinesis during mouse
embryo development. The Arp2/3 complex was concentrated at the cortex of each
cell at the 2- to 8-cell stage and the peripheral areas of the morula and
blastocyst. Inhibition of the Arp2/3 complex by the specific inhibitor CK666 at
the zygote stage caused a failure in cell division; mouse embryos failed to
undergo compaction and lost apical-basal polarity. The actin level decreased in
the CK666-treated group, and two or more nuclei were observed within a single
cell, indicating a failure of cell division. Addition of CK666 at the 8-cell
stage caused a failure of blastocyst formation, and CDX2 staining confirmed the
loss of embryo polarity and the failure of trophectoderm and inner cell mass
formation. Taken together, these data suggest that the Arp2/3 complex may
regulate mouse embryo development via its effect on cell division.

PMID: 22951093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Stem Cells. 2012 Nov;30(11):2423-36. doi: 10.1002/stem.1217.

Cellular heterogeneity during embryonic stem cell differentiation to epiblast
stem cells is revealed by the ShcD/RaLP adaptor protein.

Turco MY(1), Furia L, Dietze A, Fernandez Diaz L, Ronzoni S, Sciullo A, Simeone
A, Constam D, Faretta M, Lanfrancone L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan,
Italy.

The Shc family of adaptor proteins are crucial mediators of a plethora of
receptors such as the tyrosine kinase receptors, cytokine receptors, and
integrins that drive signaling pathways governing proliferation, differentiation,
and migration. Here, we report the role of the newly identified family member,
ShcD/RaLP, whose expression in vitro and in vivo suggests a function in embryonic
stem cell (ESC) to epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs) transition. The transition from
the naïve (ESC) to the primed (EpiSC) pluripotent state is the initial important 
step for ESCs to commit to differentiation and the mechanisms underlying this
process are still largely unknown. Using a novel approach to simultaneously
assess pluripotency, apoptosis, and proliferation by multiparameter flow
cytometry, we show that ESC to EpiSC transition is a process involving a tight
coordination between the modulation of the Oct4 expression, cell cycle
progression, and cell death. We also describe, by high-content immunofluorescence
analysis and time-lapse microscopy, the emergence of cells expressing
caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2) transcription factor during ESC to EpiSC
transition. The use of the ShcD knockout ESCs allowed the unmasking of this
process as they presented deregulated Oct4 modulation and an enrichment in
Oct4-negative Cdx2-positive cells with increased MAPK/extracellular-regulated
kinases 1/2 activation, within the differentiating population. Collectively, our 
data reveal ShcD as an important modulator in the switch of key pathway(s)
involved in determining EpiSC identity.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3533801
PMID: 22948967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genetics. 2012 Nov;192(3):857-68. doi: 10.1534/genetics.112.144121. Epub 2012 Aug
31.

An ex vivo model for imprinting: mutually exclusive binding of Cdx2 and Oct4 as a
switch for imprinted and random X-inactivation.

Erwin JA(1), del Rosario B, Payer B, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02214, USA.

In the early mammalian embryo, X chromosome inactivation (XCI) achieves dosage
parity between males and females for X-linked genes. During mouse development,
imprinted paternal XCI is observed first and switches to random XCI in the
epiblast but not placental lineages. The mechanism by which this epigenetic
switch occurs is currently unknown. Here, we establish an ex vivo model for
imprinting and identify a novel trans-acting regulatory factor for imprinted XCI.
Using an induced trophoblast stem cell (iTS) model, we show that embryonic stem
(ES) cells transdifferentiated into trophoblasts retain partial memory of the XCI
imprint. Cdx2, a stem cell factor that determines commitment to the
extraembryonic lineage, directly binds Xist and activates expression of Xist RNA 
in extrembryonic cells. Cdx2 competes with Oct4, a stem cell factor that
determines commitment to the embryonic lineage, for overlapping binding sites
within Xist. We propose that mutually exclusive binding between Cdx2 and Oct4 in 
Xist underlies the switch between imprinted and random XCI in the early mouse
embryo.

PMCID: PMC3522163
PMID: 22942124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Pathol. 2013 Jan;44(1):20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.04.018. Epub 2012
Aug 30.

Gene expression microarray-based assay to determine tumor site of origin in a
series of metastatic tumors to the ovary and peritoneal carcinomatosis of
suspected gynecologic origin.

Azueta A(1), Maiques O, Velasco A, Santacana M, Pallares J, Novell A,
Llombart-Cussac A, Gonzalez-Tallada X, Mozos A, Prat J, Pillai R, Mata M,
Matias-Guiu X.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, University of Lleida, IRBLLEIDA,
Spain.

The origin of the primary tumor is sometimes difficult to determine in peritoneal
and ovarian metastases. A series of 25 metastatic tumors to the ovary and 7 cases
of peritoneal carcinomatosis of suspected gynecologic origin were collected.
Total RNA was extracted from frozen tumor tissue and studied by the Tissue of
Origin-Frozen test, a microarray-based gene expression test from Pathwork
Diagnostics (Redwood City, CA). Independently, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
tumor tissue was subjected to pathologic analysis. Immunohistochemical stains
included keratins 7 and 20, estrogen and progesterone receptors, CDX2, villin,
CEA, WT-1, TTF-1, mammoglobin, GCDF-15, and CD31. Clinical data were considered
as gold standard, and after clinicopathologic evaluation, the tissue of origin
was found in 29 cases. The Tissue of Origin-Frozen test correctly identified the 
ovary as site of origin in 7 of 7 peritoneal carcinomatosis cases, whereas
immunohistochemical stains only allowed appropriate recognition in 5. In
addition, the Tissue of Origin-Frozen test identified correctly the site of
origin in 18 of the 22 metastatic tumors to the ovary with known origin. In the
remaining 4 tumors, the correct origin was the second option in 2 cases and was
not determined in the other 2. Immunohistochemistry correctly identified the site
of origin in 17 of these 22 ovarian metastases. A combination of Tissue of
Origin-Frozen and immunohistochemistry correctly identified the site of origin in
19 of 22 ovarian metastases of known origin. Although conventional pathologic
examination and immunohistochemistry are commonly used for assessing the tumor
site of origin, Tissue of Origin testing can be useful in difficult cases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22939961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1651-64. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23851. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Ectopic expression of Fgf3 leads to aberrant lineage segregation in the mouse
parthenote preimplantation embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Parthenogenetic mammalian embryos were reported to die in utero no
later than the 25-somite stage due to abnormal development of both embryonic and 
extraembryonic lineages. Interestingly, it has been shown that parthenogenetic
ICM cells tend to differentiate more into primitive endoderm cells and less into 
epiblast and ES cells. Hence we are interested in studying the molecular
mechanisms underlying lineage defects of parthenotes.
RESULTS: We found that parthenote inner cell masses (ICMs) contained decreased
numbers of Sox2(+) /Nanog(+) epiblast cells but increased numbers of Gata4(+)
primitive endoderm cells, indicating an unusual lineage segregation. We
demonstrate for the first time that the increased Gata4 level in parthenotes may 
be explained by the strong up-regulation of Fgf3 and Fgfr2 phosphorylation.
Inhibition of Fgfr2 activation by SU5402 in parthenotes restored normal Nanog and
Gata4 levels without affecting Fgf3, indicating that Fgf3 is upstream of Fgfr2
activation. In parthenote trophectoderm, we detected normal Cdx2 but ectopic
Gata4 expression and reduced Elf5 and Tbr2(Eomes) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our work provides for the first time the insight
into the molecular mechanisms of the developmental defects of parthenogenetic
embryos in both the trophectoderm and ICM.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22930543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043748. Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Efficient delivery of DNA and morpholinos into mouse preimplantation embryos by
electroporation.

Peng H(1), Wu Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Key Laboratory of
Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi, People's
Republic of China.

Mouse preimplantation development is characterized by three major transitions and
two lineage segregations. Each transition or lineage segregation entails
pronounced changes in the pattern of gene expression. Thus, research into the
function of genes with obvious changes in expression pattern will shed light on
the molecular basis of preimplantation development. We have described a
simplified and effective method--electroporation--of introducing plasmid DNA and 
morpholinos into mouse preimplantation embryos and verified effectiveness of this
approach by testing the procedure on the endogenous gene Oct4. Before
electroporation, the zona pellucida was weakened by the treatment of acid
Tyrode's solution. Then we optimized the parameters such as voltage, pulse
duration, number of pulses and repeats, and applied these parameters to
subsequent experiments. Compared with the control groups, the number of apoptotic
cells and the expression and localization of OCT3/4 or CDX2 was not significantly
changed in blastocysts developed from 1-cell embryos, which were electroporated
with pIRES2-AcGFP1-Nuc eukaryotic expression vector or mismatched morpholino
oligonucleotides. Furthermore, electroporated plasmid DNA and morpholinos
targeting the endogenous gene Oct4 were able to sharply down regulate expression 
of OCT4 protein and actually cause expected phenotypes in mouse preimplantation
embryos. In conclusion, plasmid DNA and morpholinos could be efficient delivered 
into mouse preimplantation embryos by electroporation and exert their functions, 
and normal development of preimplantation embryos was not affected.

PMCID: PMC3424252
PMID: 22928027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Aug;138(2):211-22. doi: 10.1309/AJCPKSHXI3XEHW1J.

Tissue-specific cadherin CDH17 is a useful marker of gastrointestinal
adenocarcinomas with higher sensitivity than CDX2.

Panarelli NC(1), Yantiss RK, Yeh MM, Liu Y, Chen YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Cadherin 17 (CDH17) is a cell adhesion molecule expressed in intestinal
epithelium and transcriptionally regulated by CDX2. We compared the usefulness of
CDH17 as an immunohistochemical intestinal marker to that of CDX2 in
gastrointestinal and extragastrointestinal carcinomas and nonneoplastic tissues. 
Nonneoplastic intestinal and pancreatic duct epithelia were CDH17-positive. Most 
esophageal (79%), gastric (86%), and colonic (99%) adenocarcinomas were
CDH17-positive/CDX2-positive, whereas 1% of colonic, 18% of esophageal, and 10%
of gastric adenocarcinomas were CDH17-negative/CDX2-negative. Rare colonic,
esophageal, and gastric adenocarcinomas were CDH17-positive/CDX2-negative (1%,
3%, and 4%, respectively), and none were CDH17-negative/CDX2-positive. Diffuse
CDH17 was also observed in all metastatic colon carcinomas, 20% of which were
only focally CDX2-positive. Of intestinal low-grade neuroendocrine tumors, 74%
coexpressed CDX2 and CDH17. CDH17 was also positive in 12% of pancreatic and 24% 
of bronchial neuroendocrine tumors, all of which were CDX2-negative. Pancreatic
adenocarcinomas and cholangiocarcinomas were more frequently CDH17-positive than 
CDX2-positive (50% vs 27%, 53% vs 27%). One (2%) hepatocellular carcinoma was
CDH17-positive/CDX2-negative. Nine percent of non-small cell lung cancers and 7% 
of endometrial carcinomas were CDH17-positive, whereas 3% of lung, 5% of
endometrial, 3% of ovarian, and 2% of breast carcinomas were CDX2-positive. Thus,
CDH17 is slightly more sensitive than CDX2 when detecting gastrointestinal
adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 22904132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Dec;93(3):345-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.07.005. Epub 2012
Aug 10.

Invasive mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.

Baker ML(1), Seeley ES, Pai R, Suriawinata AA, Mino-Kenudson M, Zamboni G,
Klöppel G, Longnecker DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center and Dartmouth
Medical School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. bakerm10@lsus.edu

Mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCN) and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms
(IPMN) of the pancreas both appear to have been included and intermixed in some
early reports of pancreatic cystic neoplasms. Recognition of their distinguishing
features evolved during the last decade of the twentieth century. One legacy of
the early period is the statement that mucinous cystic neoplasms sometimes
progress to invasive colloid carcinoma. It is now recognized that colloid
carcinomas characteristically arise from IPMN. We set out to see if we could find
MCN that invaded as colloid carcinomas and found no examples in MCN collected in 
two academic medical centers. We then sought to expand the number of MCN by
evaluating series from additional centers. This yielded no examples of colloid
carcinomas associated with 291 MCN, however one MCN exhibited a minor component
with colloid (non-cystic mucinous) growth pattern within the fibrous wall of the 
neoplasm. The expression of CDX2, a marker of intestinal differentiation that is 
found in colloid carcinomas was examined by immunostaining in the original MCN
series and in the MCN with the intratumoral colloid growth pattern. Focal
expression of CDX2 was found in 22 of 43 MCN including the MCN that exhibited the
intratumoral colloid growth pattern. Overall, the data suggest that MCN rarely,
if ever, invade as colloid carcinoma but the expression of CDX2 by some MCN and
the observation of intratumoral colloid growth pattern in one MCN seems to leave 
open the possibility that MCN might rarely invade as colloid carcinoma. The
majority of malignant MCN invade with a tubular (ductal) pattern, and rarely the 
invasive component was anaplastic.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Curr Biol. 2012 Sep 25;22(18):1705-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.07.013. Epub 2012 
Aug 16.

Sox2 acts through Sox21 to regulate transcription in pluripotent and
differentiated cells.

Kuzmichev AN(1), Kim SK, D'Alessio AC, Chenoweth JG, Wittko IM, Campanati L,
McKay RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Sox2 is an important transcriptional regulator in embryonic and adult stem cells.
Recently, Sox2 was identified as an oncogene in many endodermal cancers,
including colon cancer. There is great interest in how Sox2 cooperates with other
transcription factors to regulate stem cell renewal, differentiation, and
reprogramming. However, we still lack a general understanding of Sox2
transcriptional action. To determine transcriptional partners of Sox2 in adult
cells, we generated mice where gene expression could be induced by an externally 
applied stimulus. We analyzed the consequences in the intestine where cell
turnover is rapid. Sox2 expression, but not Oct4, specifically increased the
numbers of stem cells and repressed Cdx2, a master regulator of endodermal
identity. In vivo studies demonstrated that Sox21, another member of the SoxB
gene family, was a specific, immediate, and cell-autonomous target of Sox2 in
intestinal stem cells. In vitro experiments showed that Sox21 was sufficient to
repress Cdx2 in colon cancer cells and in pluripotent stem cells. Sox21 was also 
specifically induced by Sox2 in fibroblasts and inhibition of Sox21 blocked
reprogramming to the pluripotent state. These results show that transcriptional
induction of Sox21 is a rapid and general mediator of the effects of Sox2 on cell
identity in a wide range of cell types.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Aug;1266:47-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06625.x.

Caudal genes in blood development and leukemia.

Lengerke C(1), Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen Medical Center-Hematology & Oncology, Tübingen,
Germany. claudia.lengerke@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Members of the caudal gene family (in mice and humans: Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) have
been studied during early development as regulators of axial elongation and
anteroposterior patterning. In the adult, Cdx1 and Cdx2, but not Cdx4, have been 
intensively explored for their function in intestinal tissue homeostasis and the 
pathogenesis of gastrointestinal cancers. Involvement in embryonic hematopoiesis 
was first demonstrated in zebrafish, where cdx genes render posterior lateral
plate mesoderm competent to respond to genes specifying hematopoietic fate, and
compound mutations in cdx genes thus result in a bloodless phenotype. Parallel
studies performed in zebrafish embryos and murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
delineate conserved pathways between fish and mammals, corroborating a
BMP/Wnt-Cdx-Hox axis during blood development that can be employed to augment
derivation of blood progenitors from pluripotent stem cells in vitro. The
molecular regulation of Cdx genes appears complex, as more recent data suggest
involvement of non-Hox-related mechanisms and the existence of auto- and
cross-regulatory loops governed by morphogens. Here, we will review the role of
Cdx genes during hematopoietic development by comparing effects in zebrafish and 
mice and discuss their participation in malignant blood diseases.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3431192
PMID: 22901255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Tumour Biol. 2012 Dec;33(6):2185-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0479-z. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

CDX-2 expression in malignant germ cell tumors of the testes, intratubular germ
cell neoplasia, and normal seminiferous tubules.

Lee MJ(1), Vogt AP, Hsiao W, Osunkoya AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Room H174, 1364 
Clifton Road, NE, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

CDX-2 is a caudal-type homeobox gene, encoding a transcription factor that plays 
an important role in proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial
cells. The utility of antibodies to CDX2 in the identification of adenocarcinomas
of the gastrointestinal tract, particularly colorectal adenocarcinomas, in both
primary and metastatic settings is well established. It is well-known that
patients with testicular tumors may occasionally lack an obvious palpable mass.
However, the expression of CDX2 in malignant germ cell tumors of the testes which
have metastatic potential has not been previously studied in a large series. A
tissue microarray was constructed from 52 malignant germ cell tumors of the
testes including: 29 cases of classic seminoma, 8 cases of embryonal carcinoma, 8
cases of yolk sac tumor, 4 cases of malignant teratoma, 2 cases of
choriocarcinoma, and 1 case of spermatocytic seminoma. Ten cases of intratubular 
germ cell neoplasia and seven cases of benign testicles with normal seminiferous 
tubules were also included in tissue microarray. Immunohistochemical stains for
CDX2 was performed and analyzed. Only nuclear staining was considered positive.
Positive expression of CDX2 was identified in 2/2 cases (100 %) of
choriocarcinoma, 4/8 cases (50 %) of teratoma, 3/8 cases (38 %) of embryonal
carcinoma, 3/8 cases (38 %) of yolk sac tumor, and 1/29 cases (3 %) of classic
seminoma. CDX2 was negative in all cases of intratubular germ cell neoplasia,
normal seminiferous tubules, and the only case of spermatocytic seminoma. The
role of CDX-2 in the differentiation of intestinal/enteric epithelial cells may
contribute to the formation of trophoblastic, glandular, villous, or cystic
structures in germ cell tumors of the testes. This study suggests that the
expression of CDX2 in a variety of malignant germ cell tumors of the testes may
be a potential pitfall in metastatic tumors of unknown primary, which are thought
to be of gastrointestinal/colorectal origin but are actually from a clinically
occult testicular tumor.

PMID: 22895825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Sep;36(9):1385-94. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31825fa4b4.

Histomorphologic and molecular features of pouch and peripouch adenocarcinoma: a 
comparison with ulcerative colitis-associated adenocarcinoma.

Jiang W(1), Shadrach B, Carver P, Goldblum JR, Shen B, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The occurrence of adenocarcinoma after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for
ulcerative colitis (UC) is an infrequent but potentially lethal complication.
Neither histomorphologic nor molecular features of pouch adenocarcinoma after
ileal pouch-anal anastomosis have been fully investigated. We report the largest 
series of 12 pouch and peripouch adenocarcinomas and compared them with 58
randomly selected UC-associated adenocarcinomas. The mean age of patients with
pouch/peripouch adenocarcinoma was 55.2 years (SD 14.8), which was not
significantly different from that of controls (P=0.52). Pouch/peripouch
adenocarcinoma and UC-associated adenocarcinoma had a comparable frequency of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, lack of dirty necrosis, mucin differentiation,
signet ring cell differentiation, heterogeneity, and well differentiation (P>0.05
for all). Pouch/peripouch adenocarcinoma was more likely to show Crohn-like
reaction compared with UC-associated adenocarcinoma (P=0.047). Loss of at least 1
mismatch repair protein was noted in 9% of pouch/peripouch adenocarcinomas and
9.6% of UC-related adenocarcinomas (P=1.0). There was no significant difference
in the frequency of p53 overexpression (36.4% vs. 61.1%, P=0.184) or nuclear
immunoreactivity for ß-catenin (9% vs. 7.4%, P=0.99) in pouch/peripouch versus
UC-associated adenocarcinomas, respectively. Pouch/peripouch and UC-associated
adenocarcinoma had a comparable positive rate for CK7 (54.5% vs. 55.5%, P=0.99), 
CK20 (100% vs. 98.1%, P=0.99), and CDX2 (72.8% vs. 72.2%, P=0.99) by
immunohistochemistry. In summary, pouch and peripouch adenocarcinoma can occur in
patients without colorectal neoplasia and in those with idiopathic inflammatory
bowel disease, can be potentially lethal, and has histomorphologic and molecular 
features similar to those of UC-associated adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22895272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Sep;36(9):1279-301.

Intracholecystic papillary-tubular neoplasms (ICPN) of the gallbladder
(neoplastic polyps, adenomas, and papillary neoplasms that are =1.0 cm):
clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis of 123 cases.

Adsay V(1), Jang KT, Roa JC, Dursun N, Ohike N, Bagci P, Basturk O, Bandyopadhyay
S, Cheng JD, Sarmiento JM, Escalona OT, Goodman M, Kong SY, Terry P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. volkan.adsay@emory.edu

The literature on the clinicopathologic characteristics of tumoral
intraepithelial neoplasms (neoplastic polyps) of the gallbladder (GB) is fairly
limited, due in part to the variability in definition and terminology. Most
reported adenomas (pyloric gland type and others) were microscopic and thus
regarded as clinically inconsequential, whereas papillary in situ carcinomas have
been largely considered a type of invasive adenocarcinoma under the heading of
"papillary adenocarcinomas." In this study, 123 GB cases that have a well-defined
exophytic preinvasive neoplasm measuring =1 cm were analyzed. The patients were
predominantly female (F/M=2:1) with a mean age of 61 y and a median tumor size of
2.2 cm. Half of the patients presented with pain, and in the other half the
neoplasm was detected incidentally. Other neoplasms, most being gastrointestinal 
tract malignancies, were present in 22% of cases. Gallstones were identified in
only 20% of cases. Radiologically, almost half were diagnosed as "cancer,"
roughly half with polypoid tumor, and in 10% the lesion was missed. Pathologic
findings: (1) The predominant configuration was papillary in 43%, tubulopapillary
in 31%, tubular in 26%. (2) Each case was assigned a final lineage type on the
basis of the predominant pattern (>75% of the lesion) on morphology, and
supported with specific immunohistochemical cell lineage markers. The predominant
cell lineage could be identified as biliary in 50% (66% of which were MUC1),
gastric foveolar in 16% (all were MUC5AC), gastric pyloric in 20% (92% MUC6),
intestinal in 8% (100% CK20; 75% CDX2; 50%, MUC2), and oncocytic in 6% (17%
HepPar and 17% MUC6); however, 90% of cases had some amount of secondary or
unclassifiable pattern and hybrid immunophenotypes. (3) Of the cases that would
have qualified as "pyloric gland adenoma," 21/24 (88%) had at least focal
high-grade dysplasia and 18% had associated invasive carcinoma. Conversely, 8 of 
47 "papillary adenocarcinoma"-type cases displayed some foci of low-grade
dysplasia, and 15/47 (32%) had no identifiable invasion. (4) Overall, 55% of the 
cases had an associated invasive carcinoma (pancreatobiliary type, 58; others,
10). Factors associated significantly with invasion were the extent of high-grade
dysplasia, cell type (biliary or foveolar), and papilla formation. Among
systematically analyzed invasive carcinomas, tumoral intraepithelial neoplasia
was detected in 6.4% (39/606). (5) The 3-year actuarial survival was 90% for
cases without invasion and 60% for those associated with invasion. In contrast,
those associated with invasion had a far better clinical outcome compared with
pancreatobiliary-type GB carcinomas (3-yr survival, 27%), and this survival
advantage persisted even with stage-matched comparison. Death occurred in
long-term follow-up even in a few noninvasive cases (4/55; median 73.5 mo)
emphasizing the importance of long-term follow-up. In conclusion, tumoral
preinvasive neoplasms (=1 cm) in the GB are analogous to their pancreatic and
biliary counterparts (biliary intraductal papillary neoplasms, pancreatic
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, and intraductal tubulopapillary
neoplasms). They show variable cellular lineages, a spectrum of dysplasia, and a 
mixture of papillary or tubular growth patterns, often with significant overlap, 
warranting their classification under 1 unified parallel category,
intracholecystic papillary-tubular neoplasm. Intracholecystic papillary-tubular
neoplasms are relatively indolent neoplasia with significantly better prognosis
compared with pancreatobiliary-type GB carcinomas. In contrast, even seemingly
innocuous examples such as those referred to as "pyloric gland adenomas" can
progress to carcinoma and be associated with invasion and fatal outcome.

PMID: 22895264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2012 Aug 15;11(4):424-8.

Gastric- and intestinal-type marker expression in invasive ductal adenocarcinoma 
of the pancreas.

Takano Y(1), Ohike N, Tajiri T, Asonuma K, Harada K, Takahashi H, Morohoshi T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo
142-8555, Japan. yuichitakano1028@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: Although invasive ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas (PDAC)
manifests as a relatively uniform histomorphological feature of the
pancreatobiliary type, it may be complicated by metaplastic changes and
heterogeneous gastric and intestinal elements. This study aimed to investigate
the complication rate and clinicopathological significance of such heterogeneous 
elements.
METHODS: Fifty-nine patients who underwent resection of PDAC were examined in
this study. Immunohistochemically, tumors showing high expression (>25%) of the
intestinal-type (INT) marker CDX2 were classified as PDAC with INT. Those with
high expression (>25%) of the gastric-type (GAS) marker MUC5AC were classified as
PDAC with GAS, while those with high expression of both markers were classified
as PDAC with INT/GAS. These patients were compared with those with PDAC of the
negative group in which neither markers was highly expressed to examine their
clinicopathological significance.
RESULTS: In the 59 patients, 31 (52.5%) showed high CDX2 or MUC5AC expression.
Twenty-eight patients (47.5%) belonged to a negative group, 11 (18.6%) to a PDAC 
with INT group, 15 (25.4%) to a PDAC with GAS group, and 5 (8.5%) to a PDAC with 
INT/GAS group. No significant differences were observed for age, gender, size,
localization, T classification, or prognosis among the four groups. Although the 
PDAC with GAS group had well differentiated types significantly more than the
other groups, the rate of lymph node metastasis in this group was significantly
higher (PDAC with GAS: 73%; other groups: 36%).
CONCLUSION: Complications with heterogeneous elements are not uncommon in PDAC,
and this should be considered during the diagnosis and treatment of PDAC along
with histogenesis of the disease.

PMID: 22893471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012 Oct;13(12):1152-7. doi: 10.4161/cbt.21344. Epub 2012 Aug
23.

CDX2 serves as a Wnt signaling inhibitor and is frequently methylated in lung
cancer.

Liu X(1), Zhang X, Zhan Q, Brock MV, Herman JG, Guo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Aberrant promoter region hypermethylation of upstream transcription factors may
be responsible for silencing entire anti-neoplastic gene networks. In this study,
we explored whether transcription factor coding gene, caudal-related homeobox 2
(CDX2), is silenced by promoter hypermethylation in lung cancer, and examined its
potential tumor-suppressive functions. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that four 
of six lung cancer cell lines exhibited no or weak CDX2 expression. Expression of
CDX2 was correlated to CDX2 promoter region methylation status, as determined by 
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and bisulfite sequencing. Restoration of CDX2
expression was induced by treatment with demethylating drug
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-AZA) in lung cancer cell lines. Methylation of CDX2 was
common in human primary lung cancer (61 of 110 tumors, 55.45%), but no
methylation was found in normal lung tissues. Re-expression of CDX2 suppressed
lung cancer cell proliferation and blocked cells in G1 phase. ß-catenin/TCF
activity and downstream genes expression were inhibited by re-expression of CDX2,
and increased by depletion of CDX2. In conclusion, CDX2 is frequently methylated 
in lung cancer, and expression of CDX2 is regulated by promoter region
hypermethylation. CDX2 may serve as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer and
inhibits lung cancer cell proliferation by suppressing Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3469472
PMID: 22892849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2012 Oct;36(5):473-83. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2012.06.001. Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Aberrant expression of Wnt and Notch signal pathways in Barrett's esophagus.

Chen X(1), Jiang K, Fan Z, Liu Z, Zhang P, Zheng L, Peng N, Tong J, Ji G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Endoscopy and Medical Center for Digestive Diseases,
Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 121, Jing Jiayuan,
Nanjing 210011, China.

BACKGROUND: Specialized intestinal metaplasia (SIM) mucosa observed in Barrett's 
esophagus (BE) has been a hot research topic due to the close relationship with
adenocarcinoma of esophagus (ACE). Earlier studies found that SIM mucosa was
similar to normal intestinal epithelium on morphology and histology. The signal
pathway involved in conformation of intestinal epithelium may be a critical
initiator for BE.
METHODS: The expressions of key regulators (Tcf4, Cdx2, Hes1 and Math1) in Wnt
and Notch signal pathways were measured in 41 paired esophageal biopsies. Cell
morphological changes in normal esophagus were compared among groups treated by
acid, bile acid and the mixture of both media.
RESULTS: The expression levels of regulators (Tcf4, Cdx2, Hes1 and Math1) were
found significantly increased in SIM, C = 3Mn and high-grade dysplasia (HGD)
groups. Distinct ultrastructure changes and highly expressed key regulators were 
also detected at the seventh day for group treated by 400 µmol bile acid.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant expressed regulators in Wnt and Notch pathways were
observed in BE tissue and normal esophageal cells treated by acid, bile acid and 
the mixture of both media. This study provided preliminary data to understand the
mechanism of BE conformation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22889748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 1;22(3):431-43. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0279. Epub 2012
Sep 28.

A focused microarray for screening rat embryonic stem cell lines.

Hong J(1), He H, Bui P, Ryba-White B, Rumi MA, Soares MJ, Dutta D, Paul S,
Kawamata M, Ochiya T, Ying QL, Rajanahalli P, Weiss ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University College of
Veterinary Medicine, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, USA.

Here, we describe a focused microarray for screening rat embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) and provide validation data that this array can distinguish
undifferentiated rat ESCs from rat trophoblast stem (TS) cells, rat
extraembryonic endoderm cells, mouse embryonic fibroblast feeder cells, and
differentiated rat ESCs. Using this tool, genuine rat ESC lines, which have been 
expanded in a conventional rat ESC medium containing two inhibitors (2i), for
example, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MEK) inhibitors, and leukemia inhibitory factor, and genuine rat ESCs, which
have been expanded in rat ESC medium containing four inhibitors (4i), for
example, GSK3, MEK, Alk5, and Rho-associated kinase inhibitors were compared; as 
were genuine rat ESCs from 4 different strains of rats. Expression of Cdx2, a
gene associated with trophoblast determination, was observed in genuine,
undifferentiated rat ESCs from 4 strains and from both 2i and 4i ESC derivation
medium. This finding is in contrast to undifferentiated mouse ESCs that do not
express Cdx2. The rat ESC focused microarray described in this report has utility
for rapid screening of rat ESCs. This tool will enable optimization of culture
conditions in the future.

PMCID: PMC3549623
PMID: 22889370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Trends Mol Med. 2012 Sep;18(9):555-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2012.07.006. Epub
2012 Aug 4.

Gastric intestinal metaplasia revisited: function and regulation of CDX2.

Barros R(1), Freund JN, David L, Almeida R.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of
Porto, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal. rbarros@ipatimup.pt

Intestinal metaplasia of the stomach is a preneoplastic lesion that appears
following Helicobacter pylori infection and confers increased risk for gastric
cancer development. However, the molecular networks connecting infection to
lesion formation and the cellular origin of this lesion remain largely unknown. A
more comprehensive understanding of how intestinal metaplasia arises and is
maintained will be a major breakthrough towards developing novel therapeutic
interventions. Furthermore, after ascertaining the pivotal role of CDX2 in
establishing and maintaining intestinal metaplasia, it becomes important to
decipher the upstream molecular pathways leading to its ectopic expression. Here,
we review the pathophysiology of intestinal metaplasia in the context of the
molecular network involved in its establishment and maintenance, with emphasis on
CDX2 function and regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22871898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Gastric Cancer. 2013 Apr;16(2):220-32. doi: 10.1007/s10120-012-0173-2. Epub 2012 
Aug 4.

"Crawling-type" adenocarcinoma of the stomach: a distinct entity preceding poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma.

Okamoto N(1), Kawachi H, Yoshida T, Kitagaki K, Sekine M, Kojima K, Kawano T,
Eishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Yushima
1-5-45, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gastric "crawling-type" adenocarcinoma (CTAC) is a neoplasm
histologically comprising irregularly fused glands with low-grade cellular atypia
that tends to spread laterally in the mucosa. It is necessary to elucidate the
clinicopathological characteristics of CTAC.
METHODS: We evaluated 25 CTACs-16 intramucosal (M-) and 9 submucosal invasive
(SM-) cancers-clinicopathologically and immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: CTAC was most frequently located in the lesser curvature of the
middle-third of the stomach. Macroscopically, 21 lesions were
superficial-depressed and 4 were superficial-flat type. Histologically, all CTACs
had cystic dilated glands and 16 lesions had focal signet-ring cells. All
invasive areas of the SM-CTACs were occupied by poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma with an infiltrative growth pattern and abundant stroma. Fifteen
CTACs were surrounded by mucosa with partial or no intestinal metaplasia. In the 
intramucosal area, 24 lesions were mixed phenotype with mucin and brush border
immunoexpression. SM-CTAC was frequent in lesions with an intramucosal poorly
differentiated component (PDC) greater than 10 mm in size (P = 0.041), and lymph 
node metastasis (LNM) was frequent in lesions with a PDC greater than 20 mm (P = 
0.039). The frequency of an expanded pattern (Ki-67-positive cells occupying > 50
% of the mucosa) was higher in SM-CTAC than in M-CTAC (P = 0.027). p53
overexpression was not detected in the intramucosal areas of any of the lesions.
CONCLUSION: CTAC is a distinct subgroup of gastric adenocarcinoma in the early
phase. A larger PDC and a Ki-67 expanded pattern were predictive of submucosal
invasion or LNM.

PMID: 22865191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3248-59. doi: 10.1172/JCI61216. Epub 2012 Aug 6.

Notch1 counteracts WNT/ß-catenin signaling through chromatin modification in
colorectal cancer.

Kim HA(1), Koo BK, Cho JH, Kim YY, Seong J, Chang HJ, Oh YM, Stange DE, Park JG, 
Hwang D, Kong YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Crosstalk between the Notch and wingless-type MMTV integration site (WNT)
signaling pathways has been investigated for many developmental processes.
However, this negative correlation between Notch and WNT/ß-catenin signaling
activity has been studied primarily in normal developmental and physiological
processes in which negative feedback loops for both signaling pathways are
intact. We found that Notch1 signaling retained the capability of suppressing the
expression of WNT target genes in colorectal cancers even when ß-catenin
destruction by the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) complex was disabled.
Activation of Notch1 converted high-grade adenoma into low-grade adenoma in an
Apcmin mouse colon cancer model and suppressed the expression of WNT target genes
in human colorectal cancer cells through epigenetic modification recruiting
histone methyltransferase SET domain bifurcated 1 (SETDB1). Extensive microarray 
analysis of human colorectal cancers also showed a negative correlation between
the Notch1 target gene, Notch-regulated ankyrin repeat protein 1 (NRARP), and WNT
target genes. Notch is known to be a strong promoter of tumor initiation, but
here we uncovered an unexpected suppressive role of Notch1 on WNT/ß-catenin
target genes involved in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3428081
PMID: 22863622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem J. 2012 Nov 1;447(3):449-55. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120434.

Multiple microRNAs induced by Cdx1 suppress Cdx2 in human colorectal tumour
cells.

Tagawa T(1), Haraguchi T, Hiramatsu H, Kobayashi K, Sakurai K, Inada K, Iba H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Host-Parasite Interaction, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

The mammalian transcriptional factors, Cdx1 and Cdx2 (Cdx is caudal-type
homeobox) are paralogues and critical for the cellular differentiation of
intestinal or colorectal epithelia. It has been reported previously that in Cdx1 
transgenic or knockout mice, endogenous Cdx2 levels are inversely correlated with
Cdx1 levels. Recently, we found that exogenous Cdx1 expression can suppress
Cdx2 in a human colorectal tumour cell line, SW480, although the underlying
molecular mechanisms were unclear. In the present study, we show that several
microRNAs induced by exogenous Cdx1 expression directly bind to the CDX2 mRNA
3'UTR (untranslated region) to destabilize these transcripts, finally leading to 
their degradation. Using microarray analysis, we found that several miRNAs that
were computationally predicted to target CDX2 mRNAs are up-regulated by exogenous
Cdx1 expression in SW480 cells. Among these molecules, we identified miR-9,
miR-16 and miR-22 as having the potential to suppress Cdx2 through the binding of
the 3'UTR to its transcript. Importantly, simultaneous mutations of both the
miR-9- and miR-16-binding sites in the CDX2 3'UTR were shown to be sufficient to 
block Cdx2 suppression. The results of the present study suggest a unique feature
of miRNAs in which they contribute to homoeostasis by limiting the levels of
transcription factors belonging to the same gene family.

PMID: 22849325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Patholog Res Int. 2012;2012:569609. doi: 10.1155/2012/569609. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Malignant mixed mullerian tumor: an immunohistochemical study.

Bing Z(1), Pasha T, Wang LP, Zhang PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Malignant mixed Mullerian tumor (MMMT) is an uncommon aggressive neoplasm
composed of both malignant epithelial and mesenchymal components. In this study, 
immunohistochemical stains of germ cell markers, including SALL4, OCT3/4,
glypican-3, and alpha-fetal protein (AFP), and CDX2 were performed in a series of
MMMTs. SALL4 nuclear immunoreactivity was detected in 6 out of 19 cases (33%).
The staining extent ranged from focal to extensive. The staining intensity was
usually intermediate to strong (the score ranged from 1.5 to 3, and average score
was 2.3 ± 0.5 in the positive cases). In addition, glypican-3 cytoplasmic
reactivity was detected in 14 out of 16 cases (88%) with a mean score of 1.8 ±
0.7 (score ranging from 1 to 3). In contrast, OCT3/4 was only positive in 1 out
of 19 cases and AFP in 2 out of 18 cases (11%). In summary, SALL4 and glypican-3 
were frequently expressed in a subset of MMMTs. Their roles in the pathogenesis
and biology of MMMT are yet to be determined. MMMT should be included in the
differential diagnosis when a tumor is positive for SALL4 and/or glypican-3.

PMCID: PMC3400397
PMID: 22848863  [PubMed]


80. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2012 Oct;47(10):1148-58. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

The role of nitric oxide in the induction of caudal-type homeobox 2 through
epidermal growth factor receptor in the development of Barrett's esophagus.

Kusaka G(1), Uno K, Iijima K, Endo H, Asano N, Koike T, Imatani A, Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The high concentration of nitric oxide (NO) around the
gastro-esophageal junction (GEJ) might play an important role in the development 
of Barrett's esophagus (BE), a precursor of Barrett's adenocarcimona. Although
previous studies revealed that the expression of caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2),
an important marker of BE, might be induced through Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor (EGFR), the roles of NO in this signal transduction remain unclear.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: First, we investigated the expressions of EGFR, CDX2 and
nitrotyrosine by immunohistochemical study for BE and squamous epithelium of
human specimens. Second, we studied the effect of peroxynitrite, peroxynitrite
stimulator, SIN-1, or NO donor, NOC7, on the expression of phosphorylated EGFR
and CDX2 in KYSE30, an EGFR-rich human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
cell-line. Specific inhibitors for EGFR, AG1478 and small interfering RNA for
EGFR (EGFR-siRNA) were employed to elucidate the role of EGFR in the induction of
CDX2.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemical study revealed that the expressions of EGFR,
CDX2 and nitrotyrosine in BE were stronger than those in squamous epithelium with
positive correlations. Exposure to peroxynitrite, SIN-1 or NOC7 induced EGFR
phosphorylation and CDX2 expression in dose- and time-dependent manners. Both
EGFR phosphorylation and CDX2 induction were significantly diminished by AG 1478 
and EGFR-siRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: We revealed for the first time that extrinsic NO might directly
induce CDX2 expression through EGFR phosphorylation. We suggested that NO had an 
important role in the development of BE from squamous epithelium around GEJ.

PMID: 22834965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gastric Cancer. 2013 Apr;16(2):208-19. doi: 10.1007/s10120-012-0172-3. Epub 2012 
Jul 25.

Re-evaluation of phenotypic expression in undifferentiated-type early gastric
adenocarcinomas using mucin core protein and CDX2.

Ikarashi S(1), Nishikura K, Ajioka Y, Aoyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Diagnostic Pathology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Undifferentiated-type early gastric adenocarcinomas are generally
classified into two groups: pure undifferentiated-type adenocarcinomas, which
naturally develop as undifferentiated-type without a glandular component; and
mixed differentiated/undifferentiated-type adenocarcinomas, which are associated 
with some vestigial glandular component and presumably develop from
differentiated-type adenocarcinoma. The differences in phenotypic expression
between these two groups were examined using mucin core protein and CDX2.
METHODS: A total of 210 lesions of undifferentiated-type early gastric
adenocarcinoma less than 25 mm in diameter were classified into four categories
(gastric type, gastrointestinal type, intestinal type, and null type) based on
their MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2, and CDX2 immunoprofiles.
RESULTS: Gastric type was significantly (p < 0.01) decreased and gastrointestinal
type was significantly (p < 0.01) increased both in pure undifferentiated-type
adenocarcinomas and in mixed differentiated/undifferentiated-type adenocarcinomas
when CDX2 was applied to mucin core protein. In the pure undifferentiated-type
adenocarcinomas, gastric type decreased and gastrointestinal type increased as
tumor size increased (p < 0.05). In contrast, in the mixed
differentiated/undifferentiated-type adenocarcinomas, gastrointestinal type was
most common even in small-sized (=10 mm) carcinomas and was generally stable
regardless of tumor size. In submucosal carcinomas, gastrointestinal type
decreased and gastric type and intestinal type increased during carcinoma
invasion from the intramucosal to submucosal parts (p < 0.05). The positivity
rates for all phenotypic markers, especially gastric markers, tended to decrease 
during submucosal invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 is a sensitive marker for assessing intestinal phenotypic
expression, and it is likely that there are two different pathways of tumor
progression in undifferentiated-type adenocarcinoma of the stomach, according to 
phenotypic expression.

PMID: 22829163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jul 23;12:309. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-309.

Ephrin-A1 inhibits NSCLC tumor growth via induction of Cdx-2 a tumor suppressor
gene.

Sukka-Ganesh B(1), Mohammed KA, Kaye F, Goldberg EP, Nasreen N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tumor formation is a complex process which involves constitutive
activation of oncogenes and suppression of tumor suppressor genes. Receptor EphA2
and its ligand ephrin-A1 form an important cell communication system with its
functional role in cell-cell interaction and tumor growth. Loss of cell-cell
adhesion is central to the cellular transformation and acquisition of metastatic 
potential. Claudins, the integrated tight junction (TJ) cell-cell adhesion
proteins located on the apico-lateral portion of epithelial cells, functions in
maintaining cell polarity. There is extensive evidence implicating Eph receptors 
and ephrins in malignancy, but the mechanisms how these molecular players affect 
TJ proteins and regulate tumor growth are not clear. In the present study we
hypothesized that EphA2 signaling modulates claudin-2 gene expression via
induction of cdx-2, a tumor suppressor gene in NSCLC cells.
METHODS: The expression of EphA2, claudin-2 was determined in various NSCLC cell 
lines by using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blot 
analysis. The claudin-2 expression was also analyzed by immunofluorescence
analysis. EphA2 and erk1/erk2 phosphorylation in ephrin-A1 activated cells was
evaluated by Western blot analysis. The cell proliferation and tumor colony
formation were determined by WST-1 and 3-D matrigel assays respectively.
RESULTS: NSCLC cells over expressed receptor EphA2 and claudin-2. Ephrin-A1
treatment significantly down regulated the claudin-2 and EphA2 expression in
NSCLC cells. The transient transfection of cells with vector containing ephrin-A1
construct (pcDNA-EFNA1) decreased the expression of claudin-2, EphA2 when
compared to empty vector. In addition ephrin-A1 activation increased cdx-2
expression in A549 cells. In contrast over-expression of EphA2 with plasmid
pcDNA-EphA2 up regulated claudin-2 mRNA expression and decreased cdx-2
expression. The transient transfection of cells with vector containing cdx-2
construct (pcMV-cdx-2) decreased the expression of claudin-2 in A549 cells.
Moreover, silencing the expression of receptor EphA2 by siRNA significantly
reduced claudin-2 expression and decreased cell proliferation and tumor
formation. Furthermore, silencing cdx-2 gene expression before ephrin-A1
treatment increased claudin-2 expression along with increased cell proliferation 
and tumor growth in A549 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that EphA2 signaling up-regulates the expression 
of the TJ-protein claudin-2 that plays an important role in promoting cell
proliferation and tumor growth in NSCLC cells. We conclude that receptor EphA2
activation by ephrin-A1 induces tumor suppressor gene cdx-2 expression which
attenuates cell proliferation, tumor growth and thus may be a promising
therapeutic target against NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3488573
PMID: 22824143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e36075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036075. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Alleviation of gut inflammation by Cdx2/Pxr pathway in a mouse model of chemical 
colitis.

Dou W(1), Mukherjee S, Li H, Venkatesh M, Wang H, Kortagere S, Peleg A, Chilimuri
SS, Wang ZT, Feng Y, Fearon ER, Mani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New
York, United States of America.

Pregnane X Receptor (PXR), a master regulator of drug metabolism and
inflammation, is abundantly expressed in the gastrointestinal tract. Baicalein
and its O-glucuronide baicalin are potent anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer
herbal flavonoids that undergo a complex cycle of interconversion in the liver
and gut. We sought to investigate the role these flavonoids play in inhibiting
gut inflammation by an axis involving PXR and other potential factors. The
consequences of PXR regulation and activation by the herbal flavonoids, baicalein
and baicalin were evaluated in vitro in human colon carcinoma cells and in vivo
using wild-type, Pxr-null, and humanized (hPXR) PXR mice. Baicalein, but not its 
glucuronidated metabolite baicalin, activates PXR in a Cdx2-dependent manner in
vitro, in human colon carcinoma LS174T cells, and in the murine colon in vivo.
While both flavonoids abrogate dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-mediated colon
inflammation in vivo, oral delivery of a potent bacterial ß-glucuronidase
inhibitor eliminates baicalin's effect on gastrointestinal inflammation by
preventing the microbial conversion of baicalin to baicalien. Finally, reduction 
of gastrointestinal inflammation requires the binding of Cdx2 to a specific
proximal site on the PXR promoter. Pharmacological targeting of intestinal PXR
using natural metabolically labile ligands could serve as effective and potent
therapeutics for gut inflammation that avert systemic drug interactions.

PMCID: PMC3398007
PMID: 22815676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Genesis. 2012 Oct;50(10):775-82. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22049. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Generation and live imaging of an endogenous Cdx2 reporter mouse line.

McDole K(1), Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218,
USA. mcdole@ciwemb.edu

To understand cell fate specification and maintenance during development, it is
essential to visualize both lineage markers and cell behaviors in real time using
endogenous markers to report cell fate. We have generated a reporter line in
which eGFP is fused to the endogenous locus of Cdx2, a transcription factor
essential for trophectoderm specification, allowing us to visualize cell fate
decisions in the preimplantation mouse embryo. We used two-photon laser scanning 
microscopy to visualize expression of the endogenous Cdx2 fusion protein and show
that Cdx2 undergoes phases of upregulation. Additionally, we show that as late as
the 32-cell stage, outer trophectoderm cells may change their fates by migrating 
inward and losing Cdx2 expression. Furthermore, the tools and techniques we
report allow for dual-colored imaging, which will greatly facilitate the study of
not only preimplantation development, but later stages of development and tissues
where Cdx2 plays an important role.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3477249
PMID: 22814996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2012 Sep;22(7):1170-6. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e318261d89c.

Up-regulation of cadherin 17 and down-regulation of homeodomain protein CDX2
correlate with tumor progression and unfavorable prognosis in epithelial ovarian 
cancer.

Huang LP(1), Yu YH, Sheng C, Wang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nan Fang Hospital, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Cadherin 17 (CDH17), belonging to the 7D-cadherin superfamily,
represents a novel oncogene, which is involved in tumor invasion and metastasis. 
Its expression has been demonstrated to be regulated by caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor CDX2. The roles of 2 biomarkers have been conflictingly
explained. Therefore, the aims of this study were to investigate the expression
patterns of CDH17 and CDX2 in human epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and to
evaluate the clinical significance of these 2 markers in the progression and
prognosis of EOC.
METHODS: CDH17 and CDX2 expressions in 182 paraffin-embedded EOC specimens were
detected by immunohistochemical staining. Associations of their expression with
clinical pathological factors and overall survival were statistically evaluated.
RESULTS: Compared with normal surface ovarian epithelium tissues, CDH17
expression was upregulated and CDX2 expression was downregulated in EOC tissues. 
There was a negative correlation between CDH17 and CDX2 expression in EOC tissues
(r = -0.76, P = 0.001). Tumors with high CDH17 expression were more likely to
have advanced stage (P = 0.01) and higher grade (P = 0.03). Patients with low
CDX2 expression were more frequently to be at the advanced stage of disease (P = 
0.01). In addition, univariate analysis indicated that the patients with high
CDH17 expression correlated with poor prognosis in patients with EOC (P = 0.001),
as opposed to CDX2 (P = 0.003). Especially, the survival rate of patients with
EOC with CDH17-high/CDX2-low expression was the lowest (P < 0.001). Multivariate 
statistical analysis showed that the conjoined expression of CDH17/CDX2 was an
independent prognostic indicator of EOC (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that both the up-regulation of CDH17 and the
down-regulation of CDX2 may be associated with the advanced stage of EOC. A
conjoined detection of CDH17/CDX2 expression may be associated with unfavorable
prognosis in patients with this disease.

PMID: 22810971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5(5):442-7. Epub 2012 May 23.

Adenoid squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Because immunohistochemical features of adenoid squamous cell carcinoma (AdSCC)
of the oral cavity is unclear, the author reports herein AdSCC in the gingival
with an emphasis on immunohistochemical features. A 73-year-old woman presented
with a left lower gingival tumor. The tumor was mildly elevated tumor measuring
1.5 x 1.5 x 0.5 cm. Dentist's diagnosis was granulation tissue, and a biopsy was 
taken. The biopsy showed proliferation of carcinoma cells arranged in cords, and 
squamous and tubular differentiations were noted in places. The biopsy diagnosis 
was adenosquamous carcinoma. Tumor excision with resection of mandibular bone was
performed. The resected tissue showed a mixture and squamous cell carcinoma and
tubular formation. Gradual merges between the two and acantholytic features of
the squamous cell carcinoma element were seen. Both components were free from
mucins. Both components were positive for pancytokeratins (AE1/3, CAM5.2) +++,
cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 +, CK34ßE12 ++, CK7 +, CK14 +++, CEA +, CA19-9 +, CA125 +,
p53 +++, p63 +++, KIT + and MUC1 ++. Both components were negative for CK8, CK18,
CK19, CK20, EMA, vimentin, TTF-1, desmin, myoglobin, S100 protein, melanosome,
smooth muscle actin, CD34, CDX2, CD10, chromogranin, synaptophysin, NSE, CD56,
lysozyme, CD68, MDM2, PDGFRA, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6. Since both components were 
positive for squmaous cell carcinoma markers (CD5/6, CK34ßE12, and p63) and
adenocarcinoma markers (CEA, CA19-9, CA125, MUC1), this case of AdSCC appears an 
intermediate form between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. The margins
were negative. No metastasis was found by imaging techniques. The patient is now 
free from tumor and is followed up carefully.

PMCID: PMC3396063
PMID: 22808297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hum Pathol. 2012 Dec;43(12):2292-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.04.003. Epub 2012
Jul 15.

Adenocarcinoma with pyloric gland phenotype of the extrahepatic bile ducts: a
previously unrecognized and distinctive morphologic variant of extrahepatic bile 
duct carcinoma.

Albores-Saavedra J(1), Chablé-Montero F, Méndez-Sánchez N, Mercado MÁ,
Vilatoba-Chapa M, Henson DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology of Medica Sur Clinic and Foundation, and Instituto
Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubiran, Mexico City, Mexico.
alboresjorge@yahoo.com

Carcinomas of the extrahepatic bile ducts are uncommon and morphologically
heterogeneous. We report 3 unique examples of adenocarcinomas that show
predominantly pyloric gland differentiation (80%-100%) and compare their
immunohistochemical profile with that of pyloric gland adenomas of the
gallbladder, foveolar, and intestinal-type adenocarcinomas of the extrahepatic
bile duct. The 3 patients with pyloric gland adenocarcinomas were younger than
those with conventional adenocarcinomas. The 3 tumors were very well
differentiated but showed extensive perineural invasion. They consisted of a
variable proportion of small, medium-sized, and cystically dilated glands
separated by abundant desmoplastic stroma. The glands were lined by columnar
cells with abundant mucin-containing cytoplasm and small hyperchromatic basally
placed nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli. A characteristic feature of these
pyloric gland adenocarcinomas was that the glands had a stellar pattern that was 
not seen in foveolar-, intestinal-, or biliary-type adenocarcinomas. Two pyloric 
gland adenocarcinomas coexpressed MUC6 and MUC5AC. The diffuse pattern of
reactivity of MUC5AC and MUC6 was similar to that of 10 pyloric gland adenomas of
the gallbladder and 2 foveolar adenocarcinomas of the extrahepatic bile duct. In 
contrast, 5 intestinal adenocarcinomas of the extrahepatic bile duct labeled with
the intestinal marker CDX2 and 3 with the colonic MUC2 but were negative for MUC6
and MUC5AC. We believe that these pyloric gland adenocarcinomas represent a
previously unrecognized distinct clinicopathologic entity. Despite their
deceptively benign microscopic appearance, 1 patient died with local recurrence
and liver metastasis, another patient is living with tumor, and the third patient
is asymptomatic but only 5 months after surgery.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22795356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Oct;33(10):1985-92. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs233. Epub 2012
Jul 12.

Helicobacter pylori and the BMP pathway regulate CDX2 and SOX2 expression in
gastric cells.

Camilo V(1), Barros R, Sousa S, Magalhães AM, Lopes T, Mário Santos A, Pereira T,
Figueiredo C, David L, Almeida R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal.

Helicobacter pylori infection is the main risk factor for intestinal metaplasia
(IM) and gastric cancer development. IM is a pre-neoplastic lesion, induced by
the transcription factor CDX2, where the gastric mucosa is converted to an
intestinal phenotype. We previously demonstrated that key elements of the bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway co-localize with CDX2 in IM and upregulate
CDX2 expression in gastric cell lines. These observations, together with the
hypothesis that CDX2 could be repressed by SOX2, led us to test whether H.
pylori, through BMPs, SOX2 and CDX2 could participate in a molecular network
critical for the development of IM. AGS cells with and without SMAD4 knock-down
were co-cultured with H. pylori or BMP2 to assess the expression of BMP pathway
members as well as CDX2 and SOX2 by qPCR and western blot. Proximity ligation
assay (PLA) was also performed to evaluate SMAD proteins interaction.
Immunohistochemistry and western blot were performed in gastric samples from mice
infected with Helicobacter spp. to measure Smad4, pSmad1/5/8, Cdx2 and Sox2
expression in vivo. Increased expression and activity of the BMP pathway
accompanied by CDX2 upregulation and SOX2 downregulation were observed in AGS
cells co-cultured with H. pylori or BMP2. These effects were impaired by
downregulation of the BMP pathway. Finally, infected mice present BMP pathway
upregulation, focal Cdx2 expression and decreased Sox2. These results provide a
novel link between H. pylori infection and the BMP pathway in the regulation of
intestinal and gastric-specific genes that might be relevant for gastric IM.

PMID: 22791809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jul 7;18(25):3296-302. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i25.3296.

Expression and significance of homeodomain protein Cdx2 in gastric carcinoma and 
precancerous lesions.

Qin R(1), Wang NN, Chu J, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Basic Medical College, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei 230032, Anhui Province, China. rongqincn@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To investigate the expression and significance of caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor (Cdx2) in gastric carcinoma (GC) and precancerous lesions.
METHODS: The expression of Cdx2 in GC, precancerous lesions and normal gastric
mucosa were detected using immunohistochemical method. Hematoxylin and eosin
staining, alcian blue/periodic acid-schiff and high iron diamine/alcian blue
staining were used to classify intestinal metaplasia (IM) and GC.
RESULTS: Cdx2 was not detected in normal gastric mucosa. Cdx2 expression was
detected in 87.1% (101/116) of IM, 50% (36/72) of dysplasia and 48.2% (41/85) of 
GC. The Cdx2-expressing cells in IM were more prevalent than in dysplasia and
carcinoma (P < 0.05). There was no relationship between Cdx2 expression and the
classification of IM or the degree of dysplasia. Expression of Cdx2 was
significantly higher in intestinal-type carcinoma than in diffuse and mixed-type 
carcinoma (P < 0.05). Positive expression of Cdx2 was mainly found in moderately 
to well differentiated GC. There was a negative association between nuclear Cdx2 
expression and lymph node metastasis and tumor, nodes, metastasis stage of GC (P 
< 0.05). The patients with Cdx2-positive expression showed a higher survival rate
than those with Cdx2-negative expression (P = 0.038). Multivariate analysis
revealed that the expression of Cdx2 and lymph node metastasis were independent
prognostic indicators of GC (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Cdx2 may be closely related to IM and the intestinal-type GC and
implicate better biological behavior and outcome. Cdx2 is useful for predicting
the prognosis of GC.

PMCID: PMC3391768
PMID: 22783055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):1799-807. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.03.019. Epub
2012 Jun 28.

Immunohistochemical panel for distinguishing esophageal adenocarcinoma from
squamous cell carcinoma: a combination of p63, cytokeratin 5/6, MUC5AC, and
anterior gradient homolog 2 allows optimal subtyping.

DiMaio MA(1), Kwok S, Montgomery KD, Lowe AW, Pai RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Distinguishing adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus is
often based on morphological criteria and can be difficult in small biopsies. We 
analyzed commonly used immunohistochemical markers (p63, cytokeratin 5/6,
cytokeratin 7, CDX2, MUC2, and MUC5AC) and 2 new markers, anterior gradient
homolog 2 and SOX2, in esophageal carcinomas to establish the best panel to
distinguish these tumors. Tissue microarrays with 69 esophageal adenocarcinomas
and 41 whole sections of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas were stained for
these markers and semiquantitatively scored. Sensitivities and specificities were
calculated for individual markers and select combinations using the morphological
diagnosis as a gold standard. All squamous cell carcinomas expressed p63 with 38 
of 41 demonstrating reactivity in more than 75% of tumor cells. Cytokeratin 5/6
expression was seen in 40 of 41 squamous cell carcinomas with 39 of 41
demonstrating reactivity in more than 75% of tumor cells. SOX2 expression was
present in 35 of 41 of squamous cell carcinomas but also in 24 of 69 of
adenocarcinomas, frequently demonstrating extensive reactivity in
adenocarcinomas. Anterior gradient homolog 2 was highly sensitive for
adenocarcinoma and present in 68 of 69 of cases, but anterior gradient homolog 2 
reactivity was also identified in 15 of 41 of squamous cell carcinomas, typically
demonstrating focal reactivity in squamous cell carcinoma. MUC5AC expression was 
seen almost exclusively in adenocarcinomas with only a single squamous cell
carcinoma demonstrating focal MUC5AC staining. Overall, the dual expression of
both p63 and cytokeratin 5/6 was 99% specific and 98% sensitive for squamous cell
carcinoma. In addition, anterior gradient homolog 2 and MUC5AC are useful
positive markers of adenocarcinoma in the setting of absent or diminished p63 and
cytokeratin 5/6 staining.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3465493
PMID: 22748473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Mar;7(1):76-84. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0379-y. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinoma of the nasal cavity: clinico-pathologic
and molecular study of a case and review of the literature.

La Rosa S(1), Furlan D, Franzi F, Battaglia P, Frattini M, Zanellato E, Marando
A, Sahnane N, Turri-Zanoni M, Castelnuovo P, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, viale Borri 57, 21100 Varese,
Italy. stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

Sinonasal intestinal-type adenocarcinomas (ITACs) are rare neoplasms
histologically resembling intestinal adenocarcinomas. Although a neuroendocrine
differentiation in ITACs has been described, true mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine
carcinomas, neoplasms in which each component represents at least 30 % of the
lesion, are extremely rare and their molecular alterations are largely unknown.
We describe herein the clinico-pathologic features, the methylation profile,
chromosomal gains and losses, and mutation analysis of KRAS, BRAF and p53 in a
nasal mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinoma resected in a 79-year-old man. The 
tumor was composed of an ITAC and a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinoma. Both exocrine and neuroendocrine components were CK8, CK20, CDX2 and
p53 positive, and CK7 and TTF1 negative. The neuroendocrine component also showed
immunoreactivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, serotonin and glicentin.
Gains and losses were found at following chromosome regions: 17p13 (TP53), 14q24 
(MLH3), 19q13 (KLK3), 5q21 (APC), 7q21 (CDK6), 9q34 (DAPK1), 12p13 (TNFRSF 1A,
CDKN1B), 13q12 (BRCA2), 17p13.3 (HIC1), 18q21 (BCL2), and 22q12 (TIMP3). Aberrant
methylation was detected only in the neuroendocrine component and involved APC
and DAPK1 genes. No mutation of KRAS (exons 2-4), BRAF (exon 15), and p53 (exons 
4-10) was found in both components. The results suggest a monoclonal origin of
the tumor from a pluripotent cell undergoing a biphenotypic differentiation and
that the neuroendocrine differentiation may be from an exocrine to an endocrine
pathway. We have also reviewed the literature on sinonasal mixed
exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinomas to give to the reader a comprehensive overview
of these very rare tumor types.

PMCID: PMC3597157
PMID: 22740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dermatology. 2012;224(4):361-8. doi: 10.1159/000339340. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Analysis of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms in vitiligo.

Aydingöz IE(1), Bingül I, Dogru-Abbasoglu S, Vural P, Uysal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Acibadem University School of Medicine, Inonu
Caddesi Okur Sokak No:20, Kozyatagi, Istanbul, Turkey. aydingozi@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is a progressive depigmenting disorder characterized by the 
loss of functional melanocytes from the epidermis. The etiopathogenesis of
vitiligo is still unclear. Vitamin D has both stimulatory and protective effects 
on melanocytes and acts through its nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR) on target
cells.
AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between VDR gene
polymorphisms and susceptibility to vitiligo.
METHODS: 98 patients with vitiligo and 216 age- and sex-matched controls
recruited from dermatology outpatients attending the same department were
included in the study. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes
using a DNA isolation kit. The VDR polymorphisms of BsmI, ApaI, TaqI, FokI and
Cdx2 were investigated by rapid capillary PCR with melting curve analysis.
Differences in genotype distributions and allele frequencies in vitiligo cases
versus controls were compared for statistical significance using <U+03C7>(2) test.
RESULTS: Subjects with TaqI polymorphism had a 2.23-fold increased risk of
developing vitiligo. Furthermore, a haplotype analysis showed that
BsmI/ApaI/TaqI/FokI/Cdx2 GCCCG was significantly overrepresented in the vitiligo 
patients in comparison with controls (p = 0.031).
CONCLUSION: This study showed that VDR TaqI gene polymorphism and the haplotype
BsmI/ApaI/ TaqI/FokI/Cdx2 GCCCG may be considered as novel risk factors in
vitiligo.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22738935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hum Reprod. 2012 Sep;27(9):2627-40. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des223. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

ART culture conditions change the probability of mouse embryo gestation through
defined cellular and molecular responses.

Schwarzer C(1), Esteves TC, Araúzo-Bravo MJ, Le Gac S, Nordhoff V, Schlatt S,
Boiani M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149
Münster, Germany.

STUDY QUESTION: Do different human ART culture protocols prepare embryos
differently for post-implantation development?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The type of ART culture protocol results in distinct cellular and
molecular phenotypes in vitro at the blastocyst stage as well as subsequently
during in vivo development.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: It has been reported that ART culture medium affects human
development as measured by gestation rates and birthweights. However, due to
individual variation across ART patients, it is not possible as yet to pinpoint a
cause-effect relationship between choice of culture medium and developmental
outcome.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: In a prospective study, 13 human ART culture
protocols were compared two at a time against in vivo and in vitro controls.
Superovulated mouse oocytes were fertilized in vivo using outbred and inbred
mating schemes. Zygotes were cultured in medium or in the oviduct and scored for 
developmental parameters 96 h later. Blastocysts were either analyzed or
transferred into fosters to measure implantation rates and fetal development. In 
total, 5735 fertilized mouse oocytes, 1732 blastocysts, 605 fetuses and 178
newborns were examined during the course of the study (December 2010-December
2011).
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Mice of the B6C3F1, C57Bl/6 and CD1
strains were used as oocyte donors, sperm donors and recipients for embryo
transfer, respectively. In vivo fertilized B6C3F1 oocytes were allowed to cleave 
in 13 human ART culture protocols compared with mouse oviduct and optimized mouse
medium (KSOM(aa)). Cell lineage composition of resultant blastocysts was analyzed
by immunostaining and confocal microscopy (trophectoderm, Cdx2; primitive
ectoderm, Nanog; primitive endoderm, Sox17), global gene expression by microarray
analysis, and rates of development to midgestation and to term.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Mouse zygotes show profound variation in
blastocyst (49.9-91.9%) and fetal (15.7-62.0%) development rates across the 13
ART culture protocols tested (R(2)= 0.337). Two opposite protocols, human tubal
fluid/multiblast (high fetal rate) and ISM1/ISM2 (low fetal rate), were analyzed 
in depth using outbred and inbred fertilization schemes. Resultant blastocysts
show imbalances of cell lineage composition; culture medium-specific deviation of
gene expression (38 genes, = 4-fold) compared with the in vivo pattern; and
produce different litter sizes (P = 0.0076) after transfer into fosters.
Confounding effects of subfertility, life style and genetic heterogeneity are
reduced to a minimum in the mouse model compared with ART patients.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: This is an animal model study. Mouse embryo
responses to human ART media are not transferable 1-to-1 to human development due
to structural and physiologic differences between oocytes of the two species.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our data promote awareness that human ART
culture media affect embryo development. Effects reported here in the mouse may
apply also in human, because no ART medium presently available on the market has 
been optimized for human embryo development. The mouse embryo assay (MEA), which 
requires ART media to support at least 80% blastocyst formation, is in need of
reform and should be extended to include post-implantation development.

PMID: 22736328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. N Z Med J. 2012 Jun 8;125(1356):47-51.

Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms in colorectal cancer in New Zealand: an
association study.

Bentley RW(1), Keown DA, Gearry RB, Cameron VA, Keenan J, Roberts RL, Day AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Robert.Bentley@otago.ac.nz

AIM: Polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene may be a risk factor for 
colorectal cancer (CRC). We investigated the association of three single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the VDR gene with CRC in age and gender
matched patients and controls of European origin in New Zealand.
METHOD: CRC (N=200) and healthy control (N=200) samples were genotyped for the
Fok1 (rs2228570), Taq1 (rs731236) and Cdx2 (rs11568820) polymorphisms using
Taqman® SNP genotyping assays. Chi-squared analysis was used to test for overall 
association of VDR genotype with disease, and by age and gender subgroups.
RESULTS: There were no significant associations of the three VDR SNPs with
disease either by allelic frequencies (p=0.43-0.73) or genotypic distribution
(p=0.15-0.90). Furthermore, no significant differences for allelic frequencies of
the three SNPs were revealed in subgroup analysis by age (above/below median age 
of 72 yrs; p=0.38-0.91), gender (p=0.22-0.88), or age/gender (p=0.33-0.93)
CONCLUSION: We found no evidence to suggest that the VDR SNPs Fok1, Taq1 and Cdx2
influence CRC risk in New Zealand Europeans.

PMID: 22729058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 1;21(16):2987-3000. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0099. Epub
2012 Aug 6.

FGF inhibition directs BMP4-mediated differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells to syncytiotrophoblast.

Sudheer S(1), Bhushan R, Fauler B, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. sudheer@molgen.mpg.de

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling is known to support differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into mesoderm and extraembryonic lineages,
whereas other signaling pathways can largely influence this lineage
specification. Here, we set out to reinvestigate the influence of ACTIVIN/NODAL
and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathways on the lineage choices made by hESCs 
during BMP4-driven differentiation. We show that BMP activation, coupled with
inhibition of both ACTIVIN/NODAL and FGF signaling, induces differentiation of
hESCs, specifically to ßhCG hormone-secreting multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast 
and does not support induction of embryonic and extraembryonic lineages,
extravillous trophoblast, and primitive endoderm. It has been previously reported
that FGF2 can switch BMP4-induced hESC differentiation outcome to mesendoderm.
Here, we show that FGF inhibition alone, or in combination with either
ACTIVIN/NODAL inhibition or BMP activation, supports hESC differentiation to
hCG-secreting syncytiotrophoblast. We show that the inhibition of the FGF pathway
acts as a key in directing BMP4-mediated hESC differentiation to
syncytiotrophoblast.

PMCID: PMC3475151
PMID: 22724507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biol Reprod. 2012 Sep 13;87(3):60. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.100180. Print 2012
Sep.

Coculture system that mimics in vivo attachment processes in bovine trophoblast
cells.

Sakurai T(1), Bai H, Bai R, Arai M, Iwazawa M, Zhang J, Konno T, Godkin JD, Okuda
K, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The establishment of pregnancy requires bidirectional communication between the
developing conceptus and the uterine endometrium. The aim of this study was to
establish an in vitro coculture system with bovine trophoblast cells and uterine 
epithelial cells (EECs) that mimics the in vivo attachment process. We previously
reported that expression of interferon tau (IFNT), a major secretory product from
the trophectoderm, decreases with changes in chromatin structure when the
conceptus successfully attaches to the uterine epithelium. Thus, IFNT is a good
marker to assess whether attachment has successfully occurred. In this study,
bovine trophoblast CT-1 cells were cultured to generate spheroids, which were
then placed on type I collagen-coated plates (monoculture) or bovine EECs
(coculture) with or without uterine flushings collected from Day 15 cyclic or
Days 15, 17, or 19 pregnant animals. In the coculture but not the monoculture,
addition of uterine flushings from Day 15 or 17 pregnant animals resulted in
decreased IFNT and CDX2 mRNA expression in CT-1 spheroids, accompanied with
changes in histone modifications. In monocultured CT-1 spheroids, integrin
subunit ITGA8 and ITGB3 mRNAs were minimally expressed but were induced in
cocultured CT-1 spheroids with or without uterine flushings. Expression of CDH2, 
another marker for bovine conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium, was
also induced in the cocultured CT-1 spheroids. These results suggest that this in
vitro coculture system could be used to isolate processes essential for conceptus
attachment to uterine EECs.

PMID: 22723465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e37174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037174. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Caudal homeobox protein Cdx-2 cooperates with Wnt pathway to regulate claudin-1
expression in colon cancer cells.

Bhat AA(1), Sharma A, Pope J, Krishnan M, Washington MK, Singh AB, Dhawan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Dysregulation of tight junctions (TJs) is often associated with human diseases
including carcinogenesis and recent studies support role of TJ integral proteins 
in the regulation of Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). In this regard, 
expression of claudin-1, a key constituent of TJs, is highly increased in colon
cancer and is causally associated with the tumor growth and progression. However,
mechanism/s underlying regulation of claudin-1 expression in intestinal
epithelial cells remains poorly understood. In our studies, we have identified
putative binding sites for intestinal transcription factors Cdx1, -2 and GATA4 in
the 5'-flanking region of the claudin-1 gene. Our further studies using full
length and/or deletion mutant constructs in two different human colon cancer cell
lines, SW480 and HCT116, showed key role of Cdx1, Cdx2 and GATA4 in the
regulation of claudin-1 mRNA expression. However, overexpression of Cdx2 had the 
most potent effect upon claudin-1 mRNA expression and promoter activity. Also, in
colon cancer patient samples, we observed a significant and parallel correlation 
between claudin-1 and Cdx2 expressions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay confirmed the Cdx2 binding with claudin-1 promoter in vivo. Using Cdx2
deletion mutant constructs, we further mapped the Cdx2 C-terminus domain to be
important in the regulation of claudin-1 promoter activity. Interestingly,
co-expression of activated ß-catenin further induced the Cdx2-dependent
upregulation of claudin-1 promoter activity while expression of the dominant
negative (dn)-TCF-4 abrogated this activation. Taken together, we conclude that
homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1, Cdx2 and GATA4 regulate claudin-1 gene
expression in human colon cancer cells. Moreover, a functional crosstalk between 
Wnt-signaling and transcriptional activation related to caudal-related homeobox
(Cdx) proteins and GATA-proteins is demonstrated in the regulation of claudin-1
promoter-activation.

PMCID: PMC3376107
PMID: 22719836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2012;24(5):691-703. doi: 10.1071/RD11068.

Gene expression profiling of pluripotency and differentiation-related markers in 
cat oocytes and preimplantation embryos.

Filliers M(1), Goossens K, Van Soom A, Merlo B, Pope CE, de Rooster H, Smits K,
Vandaele L, Peelman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction, Obstetrics, and Herd Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium. muriel.filliers@ugent.be

During mammalian preimplantation development, two successive differentiation
events lead to the establishment of three committed lineages with separate fates:
the trophectoderm, the primitive endoderm and the pluripotent epiblast. In the
mouse embryo, the molecular mechanisms underlying these two cell fate decisions
have been studied extensively, leading to the identification of lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Species-specific differences in expression patterns of key
regulatory genes have been reported, raising questions regarding their role in
different species. The aim of the present study was to characterise the gene
expression patterns of pluripotency (OCT4, SOX2, NANOG) and differentiation
(CDX2, GATA6)-related markers during feline early development using reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. In addition, we assessed
the impact of in vitro development on gene expression by comparing transcript
levels of the genes investigated between in vitro and in vivo blastocysts. To
normalise quantitative data within different preimplantation embryo stages, we
first validated a set of stable reference genes. Transcript levels of all genes
investigated were present and changed over the course of preimplantation
development; a highly significant embryo-stage effect on gene expression was
observed. Transcript levels of OCT4 were significantly reduced in in vitro
blastocysts compared with their in vivo counterparts. None of the other genes
investigated showed altered expression under in vitro conditions. The different
gene expression patterns of OCT4, SOX2, CDX2 and GATA6 in cat embryos resembled
those described in mouse embryos, indicative of a preserved role for these genes 
during early segregation. However, because of the absence of any upregulation of 
NANOG transcription levels after embryonic genome activation, it is unlikely that
NANOG is a key regular of lineage segregation. Such results support the
hypothesis that the behaviour of early lineage markers can be species specific.
The present study also revealed a pool of maternal NANOG mRNA transcripts, the
role of which remains to be elucidated. Comparing transcription levels of these
genes between in vivo and in vitro blastocysts revealed low levels of OCT4 mRNA
in the latter, which may contribute to the reduced developmental competence of
embryos under suboptimal conditions.

PMID: 22697119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Oct;19(11):3506-14. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2437-9. Epub
2012 Jun 14.

Keratin 17 expression correlates with tumor progression and poor prognosis in
gastric adenocarcinoma.

Ide M(1), Kato T, Ogata K, Mochiki E, Kuwano H, Oyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. idem@gunma-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Keratin 17 (K17) is regarded as a basal/myoepithelial cell keratin
and is known to be inducible in activated keratinocytes. The high frequency of
K17 expression in pancreaticobiliary nonmucinous adenocarcinoma or basal-like
breast carcinoma has previously been described. However, its expression in
gastric cancer (GC) is controversial.
METHODS: We investigated the clinicopathological features and prognostic
significance of 192 patients with GC by immunohistochemical staining of tissue
microarrays. Analysis of epithelial markers including K17, K14, and K5/6, cell
cycle-associated proteins p53, Ki-67, and 14-3-3 sigma, and mucinous phenotype
markers including CD10, CDX2, MUC5AC, and MUC6 was performed.
RESULTS: Cytoplasmic expression of K17 was observed in 95 (49.5%) of 192 patients
with GC. K17 expression positively correlated with lymph node metastasis (P =
0.003) and advanced stages of the disease (P = 0.014). K17 expression was
significantly correlated with 14-3-3 sigma expression (P < 0.001) and CD10
expression (P = 0.015). The overall survival rates of patients with K17-positive 
GC were significantly lower than those with negative K17 expression (50.5 vs.
71.1%, P = 0.004). Univariate analysis revealed that K17 expression confers a
poor prognosis in patients with GC (P = 0.004), and it was also an independent
prognostic factor in multivariate analysis (P = 0.049).
CONCLUSIONS: K17 expression is correlated with tumor progression in GC and may
serve as a biomarker for poor prognosis.

PMID: 22695933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Growth Factors. 2012 Aug;30(4):258-66. doi: 10.3109/08977194.2012.693920. Epub
2012 Jun 13.

Expression of pleiotrophin, an important regulator of cell migration, is
inhibited in intestinal epithelial cells by treatment with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.

Silver K(1), Desormaux A, Freeman LC, Lillich JD.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Center for Grain and Animal Health
Research, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most widely used
drugs for the suppression of inflammation and pain. However, the analgesic
properties of NSAIDs are also associated with significant negative side effects, 
most notably in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Increasingly, evidence indicates
that the ulcerogenic properties of some NSAIDs are not exclusively the result of 
inhibition of cyclooxygenase isoforms in the GI tract, and other mechanisms,
including inhibition of cell migration and epithelial restitution, are being
explored. Recently, microarray analysis was used to identify potential novel
targets of NSAID activity in intestinal epithelial cells. Treated cells exhibited
significant reductions in the gene expression of pleiotrophin (PTN), a cytokine
and growth factor known to participate in angiogenesis and bone growth. This
report aimed to confirm the microarray results reported previously, and to
measure protein expression of PTN in intestinal epithelial cells. Furthermore, we
also examined the effects of exogenous PTN on cell migration in the presence and 
absence of either NSAIDs with variable ulcerogenic potential or PTN-specific
siRNA. Our results demonstrated that indomethacin and NS-398, two NSAIDs with
ulcerogenic potential significantly decrease both gene and protein expressions of
PTN in IEC-6 cells and protein expression in IEC-6-Cdx2 cells. Additionally, cell
migration experiments with PTN siRNA showed that PTN is an important mediator of 
IEC-6 cell migration, and addition of exogenous PTN partially restores the
deficits in cell migration caused by treatment with indomethacin and NS-398.
Finally, measurement of PTN protein expression in the GI tract of horses treated 
with phenylbutazone showed that PTN expression is reduced by NSAIDs in vivo. Our 
results show that PTN is an important mediator of cell migration in IEC-6 cells, 
and PTN is a potential target through which NSAIDs may inhibit cell migration,
epithelial restitution, and wound healing in the GI tract.

PMID: 22691166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hepatol Res. 2012 Jul;42(7):721-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2012.00967.x.

Projected focal nodular hyperplasia of the liver with pronounced atypical
ductular reaction resembling ductal plate and expressing KIT.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.

A 26-year-old woman was found to have a left abdominal tumor in the space among
the hepatic left lobe, stomach and spleen. A laparoscopic examination revealed
that the tumor was a projected liver tumor, and resection of the tumor was
performed. Grossly, the tumor was not encapsulated and measured
4 cm × 4 cm × 5 cm. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of mature
hepatocytes, fibrous septae, abnormal vessels and ductular reaction (DR). A
pathological diagnosis of projected focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) was made.
Characteristically, the cells of the DR showed atypical features such as small
cells and hyperchromatic nuclei. The DR assumed the features of ductal plate-like
structures and immunohistochemically expressed KIT, suggesting that the cells of 
DR are stem cells and that when the stem cells proliferate they take a form of
ductal plate-like structures, similar to fetal bile duct development.
Immunohistochemically, the cells of DR were positive for cytokeratin (CK) AE1/3, 
CK CAM5.2, CK7, CK8, CK18, CK19, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA19-9, Ki-67
(labeling = 3%) and KIT, but negative for CK20, p53, TTF-1, CDX2, MUC1, MUC2,
MUC5AC and MUC6. The hepatocytes were positive for CK CAM5.2, CK8, CK18 and Ki-67
(labeling = 4%), but negative for CK AE1/3, CK7, CK19, CK20, CEA, CA19-9, p53,
KIT, TTF-1, CDX2, MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC and MUC6. In conclusion, the author reported
a projected FNH. The DR of the FNH showed atypical features such as small cells
and hyperchromatic nuclei. The DR assumed features of ductal plate-like
structures. KIT was positive in the DR in the FNH, suggesting that the cells of
DR are liver stem cells, and proliferation of these cells take features of ductal
plate-like structures, similar to embryonic biliary development. MUC apomucins
are negative in the DR.

© 2012 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMID: 22686860  [PubMed]


102. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 Dec;57(12):3126-35. doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2259-4. Epub 2012
Jun 9.

Butyrate enhances intestinal epithelial barrier function via up-regulation of
tight junction protein Claudin-1 transcription.

Wang HB(1), Wang PY, Wang X, Wan YL, Liu YC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Peking University First Hospital, Peking
University, 8 Xi ShiKu Street, Beijing, 100034, People's Republic of China.
wang12hong3bo@126.com

BACKGROUND: Barrier function is essential for the maintenance of normal
intestinal function. Dysregulation of the intestinal barrier underlies a wide
range of disorders.
AIM: Previously, we found that sodium butyrate (NaB) decreased the molecular
permeability of intestinal barrier in vivo model, but the mechanism by which NaB 
facilitated the tightness of tight junctions (TJs) in small intestinal epithelium
needed further studies.
METHODS: In vitro culture of the cdx2-IEC monolayer was used to mimic barrier
function. The TJs were assessed by transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER)
and paracellular flux of fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated dextran 40,000
(FD-40), Western blot, Q-RT-PCR, and immunofluorescence. Promoter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were also done to analyze the Claudin-1 gene.
RESULTS: NaB decreased FD-40 flux, increased TEER and TJ protein Claudin-1
expression, induced ZO-1 and Occludin redistribution in cellular membrane, and
reversed the damage effect after calcium (Ca(2+)) switch assay. Silencing
Claudin-1 prevented protective function of NaB from enhancing intestinal barrier 
integrity. Further studies demonstrated that NaB increased Claudin-1
transcription by facilitating the interaction between transcription factor SP1
and a specific motif within the promoter region of Claudin-1. This SP1 binding
motif was located upstream of the coding region (-138 to -76 bp) and
indispensable for the transcription of Claudin-1 following NaB treatment. ChIP
assay confirmed the association between SP1 and Claudin-1 promoter, and the
elimination of the SP1 binding site by point mutation resulted in a significant
loss of Claudin-1 transcription after NaB dealing.
CONCLUSIONS: NaB enhanced intestinal barrier function through increasing
Claudin-1 transcription via facilitating the association between SP1 and
Claudin-1 promoter.

PMID: 22684624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Oct;26(7):1061-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.05.016. Epub
2012 Jun 6.

Repeated exposure to water immersion stress reduces the Muc2 gene level in the
rat colon via two distinct mechanisms.

Shigeshiro M(1), Tanabe S, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biofunctional Science and Technology, Graduate School of
Biosphere Science, Hiroshima University, Japan.

The mucin family plays a number of important roles in intestinal homeostasis.
Among its members, the gel-forming Muc2, produced in goblet cells, is a major
component of mucus and contributes to intestinal barrier integrity. Whereas
psychological stress is known to impair intestinal barrier, the effects of
chronic or repeated stress on mucin expression and goblet cell differentiation
have not been well documented. The present study first examined the effects of
different levels of exposure (3 days, 1 and 2 weeks) to water immersion stress on
intestinal mucin gene expression in rats, and then explored the mechanisms
underlying the stress-induced decrease in the colonic Muc2 level. Repeated water 
immersion stress for 1 and 2 weeks decreased colonic Muc2 gene levels to 40% of
that of non-stressed animals, while exposure to stress for 3 days induced only a 
25% decrease. The goblet cell numbers counts in the colons of the 1- and 2-week
stress groups, but not the 3-day stress group, were decreased to 85% of that in
non-stressed animals. Cdx2 expression, a transcriptional factor related to Muc2
synthesis in the goblet cells, was decreased in all stress groups, whereas Rath1 
and Klf4 expressions, transcriptional factors related to goblet cell
differentiation in Notch signaling were decreased in the 1-week stress group.
Collectively, the repeated exposure to water immersion stress decreases Muc2
synthesis in the goblet cells via decreased Cdx2 expression and subsequently
reduces the goblet cell number via Notch signaling suppression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22683765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;4(6):377-85. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjs030. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

SOX2 redirects the developmental fate of the intestinal epithelium toward a
premature gastric phenotype.

Raghoebir L(1), Bakker ER, Mills JC, Swagemakers S, Kempen MB, Munck AB, Driegen 
S, Meijer D, Grosveld F, Tibboel D, Smits R, Rottier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Center, Dr Molewaterplein 50,
3015GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Various factors play an essential role in patterning the digestive tract. During 
development, Sox2 and Cdx2 are exclusively expressed in the anterior and the
posterior parts of the primitive gut, respectively. However, it is unclear
whether these transcription factors influence each other in determining
specification of the naïve gut endoderm. We therefore investigated whether Sox2
redirects the fate of the prospective intestinal part of the primitive gut.
Ectopic expression of Sox2 in the posterior region of the primitive gut caused
anteriorization of the gut toward a gastric-like phenotype. Sox2 activated the
foregut transcriptional program, in spite of sustained co-expression of
endogenous Cdx2. However, binding of Cdx2 to its genomic targets and thus its
transcriptional activity was strongly reduced. Recent findings indicate that
endodermal Cdx2 is required to initiate the intestinal program and to suppress
anterior cell fate. Our findings suggest that reduced Cdx2 expression by itself
is not sufficient to cause anteriorization, but that Sox2 expression is also
required. Moreover, it indicates that the balance between Sox2 and Cdx2 function 
is essential for proper specification of the primitive gut and that Sox2 may
overrule the initial patterning of the primitive gut, emphasizing the plasticity 
of the primitive gut.

PMCID: PMC3523556
PMID: 22679103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Tumori. 2012 Mar-Apr;98(2):63e-66e. doi: 10.1700/1088.11953.

Metastasis of sigmoid colon cancer in cryptorchid testis: report of a case.

Rampa M(1), Battaglia L, Caprotti A, Gazzano G, Prestianni P, Muscarà C, Vannelli
A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery B, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori,
Milan, Italy.

Isolated testicular metastasis from colorectal cancer is considered an unusual
event. In this case report we describe for the first time a metastasis from an
adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon to a cryptorchid testis. The patient
developed a painless testicular nodule three years after the diagnosis of primary
sigmoid colon cancer. Recent reports have suggested that the incidence of
genitourinary abnormalities in human males has increased over the past 50 years; 
in particular, cryptorchid testes increase the clinical risk factors for primary 
or metastatic testicular cancer. In conclusion, there should be awareness of the 
risk of metastasis of colorectal cancer to the testis in the workup of patients
with testicular symptoms. Furthermore, patients with colorectal cancer and
cryptorchidism should be managed with a single surgical intervention: when the
primary colorectal tumor is removed, the cryptorchid testicle should also be
removed to reduce the risk of late metastases.

PMID: 22678008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38422. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038422. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Histological and molecular evaluation of patient-derived colorectal cancer
explants.

Uronis JM(1), Osada T, McCall S, Yang XY, Mantyh C, Morse MA, Lyerly HK, Clary
BM, Hsu DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Mouse models have been developed to investigate colorectal cancer etiology and
evaluate new anti-cancer therapies. While genetically engineered and
carcinogen-induced mouse models have provided important information with regard
to the mechanisms underlying the oncogenic process, tumor xenograft models remain
the standard for the evaluation of new chemotherapy and targeted drug treatments 
for clinical use. However, it remains unclear to what extent explanted colorectal
tumor tissues retain inherent pathological features over time. In this study, we 
have generated a panel of 27 patient-derived colorectal cancer explants (PDCCEs) 
by direct transplantation of human colorectal cancer tissues into NOD-SCID mice. 
Using this panel, we performed a comparison of histology, gene expression and
mutation status between PDCCEs and the original human tissues from which they
were derived. Our findings demonstrate that PDCCEs maintain key histological
features, basic gene expression patterns and KRAS/BRAF mutation status through
multiple passages. Altogether, these findings suggest that PDCCEs maintain
similarity to the patient tumor from which they are derived and may have the
potential to serve as a reliable preclinical model that can be incorporated into 
future strategies to optimize individual therapy for patients with colorectal
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3366969
PMID: 22675560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2012 Jul;139(14):2576-83. doi: 10.1242/dev.079848. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Evolutionarily conserved requirement of Cdx for post-occipital tissue emergence.

van Rooijen C(1), Simmini S, Bialecka M, Neijts R, van de Ven C, Beck F,
Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan 
8, 3584 CT Utrecht, and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Mouse Cdx genes are involved in axial patterning and partial Cdx mutants exhibit 
posterior embryonic defects. We found that mouse embryos in which all three Cdx
genes are inactivated fail to generate any axial tissue beyond the cephalic and
occipital primordia. Anterior axial tissues are laid down and well patterned in
Cdx null embryos, and a 3' Hox gene is initially transcribed and expressed in the
hindbrain normally. Axial elongation stops abruptly at the post-occipital level
in the absence of Cdx, as the posterior growth zone loses its progenitor
activity. Exogenous Fgf8 rescues the posterior truncation of Cdx mutants, and the
spectrum of defects of Cdx null embryos matches that resulting from loss of
posterior Fgfr1 signaling. Our data argue for a main function of Cdx in enforcing
trunk emergence beyond the Cdx-independent cephalo-occipital region, and for a
downstream role of Fgfr1 signaling in this function. Cdx requirement for the
post-head section of the axis is ancestral as it takes place in arthropods as
well.

PMID: 22675207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem J. 2012 Sep 1;446(2):203-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120693.

Transcriptional networks driving enhancer function in the CFTR gene.

Kerschner JL(1), Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

A critical cis-regulatory element for the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator) gene is located in intron 11, 100 kb distal to the
promoter, with which it interacts. This sequence contains an intestine-selective 
enhancer and associates with enhancer signature proteins, such as p300, in
addition to tissue-specific TFs (transcription factors). In the present study we 
identify critical TFs that are recruited to this element and demonstrate their
importance in regulating CFTR expression. In vitro DNase I footprinting and EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) identified four cell-type-selective
regions that bound TFs in vitro. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) identified 
FOXA1/A2 (forkhead box A1/A2), HNF1 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1) and CDX2
(caudal-type homeobox 2) as in vivo trans-interacting factors. Mutation of their 
binding sites in the intron 11 core compromised its enhancer activity when
measured by reporter gene assay. Moreover, siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated
knockdown of CDX2 caused a significant reduction in endogenous CFTR transcription
in intestinal cells, suggesting that this factor is critical for the maintenance 
of high levels of CFTR expression in these cells. The ChIP data also demonstrate 
that these TFs interact with multiple cis-regulatory elements across the CFTR
locus, implicating a more global role in intestinal expression of the gene.

PMCID: PMC3419791
PMID: 22671145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5(4):374-6. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath composed largely of epithelioid
histiocytes.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath (GCTTS) is a relatively uncommon lesion.
GCTTS composed largely epithelioid histiocytes are very rare. In the literature, 
the author could not find such cases. A 73-year-old man presented with a mass of 
right thumb, and resection of the mass was performed. Grossly, the mass was
encapsulated and yellowish, and measured 1.5 x 2 x 2 cm. Microscopically, the
mass was composed of cellular and hypocellular zones. The former was composed of 
spindle cells and osteoclast-like giant cells, while the latter of epithelioid
clear histiocytes. The area of the former was 20%, and the latter 80%. Pigment
was seen in the former elements. Mitotic figures were seen in 3/per 30 high power
fields (HPFs) in the former element and 2/per 30 HPFs in the latter element.
Histochemically, the pigment was hemosiderin positive with Prussian blue
staining. Immunohistochemically, both the elements were negative for cytokeratin 
(CK) CE1/3, CK CAM5.2, CEA, HMB45, alpha-smooth muscle antigen, p53, CD10, TTF-1,
and CDX2. Both the elements were positive for CD68 and Ki-67 (cellular element
30% and hypocellular element 20%). The histiocytes of the hypocellular element
and osteoclast-like giant cell of the cellular element were positive for CD45.
S100-protein positive Langerhans cells and CD45-positive lymphocytes were
scattered. The pathological diagnosis was GCTTS. In the author's experience,
GCTTS composed largely epithelioid histiocytes are very rare. In the literature, 
the author could not find such cases. Thus, the author reports herein this case.

PMCID: PMC3365814
PMID: 22670184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2012 Jul;31(4):313-8. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31823f844d.

Metastatic mucinous carcinomas in the ovary: a practical approach to diagnosis
related to gross aspects and to immunohistochemical evaluation.

Pinto PB(1), Derchain SF, Andrade LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Campinas 
(UNICAMP), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

Ovarian mucinous carcinomas are uncommon, and the differential diagnosis is
metastatic carcinoma mainly from the gastrointestinal tract. The aim was to
verify the importance of immunohistochemical reactions and the algorithm
described in literature on the basis of laterality and tumor size. Twenty-five
cases identified as metastatic mucinous adenocarcinomas were reviewed, along with
clinical records; a tissue microarray was created, and immunohistochemical
reactions for CK7, CK20, Ca125, hormonal receptors, WT1, DPC4, ß-catenin, and
Cdx2 were determined. The median age was 51, and only 9 patients had a history of
cancer. Sixteen patients (64%) had bilateral tumors, with sizes ranging from 5 to
36 cm (average, 20.5 cm); 9 (36%) had unilateral tumors varying from 5.5 to 38 cm
(average, 21.8 cm). Algorithm agreement was 76%; most unilateral tumors were >13 
cm. Common positive markers were Dpc4 (88%), Cdx2 (68%), CK20 (60%), and CK7
(44%). The useful markers were CK7, CK20, and Cdx2, although there were cases
with overlapping results. The most common primary tumor was of colorectal origin 
(14 cases). The mean survival age was 32.6 mo. Although the proposed algorithm
and immunohistochemical reactions are useful tools for diagnosis, some mucinous
tumors cannot be definitively classified as primary or metastatic without further
clinical evaluation, emphasizing the limits of this challenging diagnosis.

PMID: 22653343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2012 Apr 23;3:58. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00058.
eCollection 2012.

Vitamin D and cancer.

Vuolo L(1), Di Somma C, Faggiano A, Colao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology and Oncology, "Federico II"
University of Naples Naples, Italy. lauravuolo@tiscali.it

Vitamin D system is a complex pathway that includes precursors, active
metabolites, enzymes, and receptors. This complex system actives several
molecular pathways and mediates a multitude of functions. In addition to the
classical role in calcium and bone homeostasis, vitamin D plays "non-calcemic"
effects in host defense, inflammation, immunity, and cancer processes as
recognized in vitro and in vivo studies. The aim of this review is to highlight
the relationship between vitamin D and cancer, summarizing several mechanisms
proposed to explain the potential protective effect of vitamin D against the
development and progression of cancer. Vitamin D acts like a transcription factor
that influences central mechanisms of tumorigenesis: growth, cell
differentiation, and apoptosis. In addition to cellular and molecular studies,
epidemiological surveys have shown that sunlight exposure and consequent
increased circulating levels of vitamin D are associated with reduced reduced
occurrence and a reduced mortality in different histological types of cancer.
Another recent field of interest concerns polymorphisms of vitamin D receptor
(VDR); in this context, preliminary data suggest that VDR polymorphisms more
frequently associated with tumorigenesis are Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1, Apa1, EcoRV, Cdx2;
although further studies are needed to clarify their role in the cancer. In this 
review, the relationship between vitamin D and cancer is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3355893
PMID: 22649423  [PubMed]


112. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Jun;136(6):601-9. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0326-OA.

Reevaluation and identification of the best immunohistochemical panel (pVHL,
Maspin, S100P, IMP-3) for ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.

Liu H(1), Shi J, Anandan V, Wang HL, Diehl D, Blansfield J, Gerhard G, Lin F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Geisinger Medical Center, 100 N Academy
Ave, Danville, PA 17822, USA.

CONTEXT: Differentiation of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas from
nonneoplastic pancreatic tissues can be challenging, especially in small biopsy
and fine-needle aspiration specimens.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the utility of 26 immunohistochemical markers (CAM 5.2,
CK [cytokeratin] 7, CK20, CK17, CK19, MUC1, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC6, p53,
DPC4/SMAD4, CDX2, pVHL [von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene protein], S100P, 
IMP-3 [insulin-like growth factor 2 messenger RNA binding protein 3], maspin,
mesothelin, claudin 4, claudin 18, annexin A8, fascin, PSCA [prostate stem cell
antigen], MOC31, CEA [carcinoembryonic antigen], and CA19-9 [cancer antigen
19-9]) in the diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
DESIGN: Immunohistochemical staining for these markers was performed in 60 cases 
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma on routine and tissue microarray sections. In
addition, immunohistochemical staining for maspin, S100P, IMP-3, and pVHL was
performed on cell blocks from 67 pancreatic fine-needle aspiration cases,
including 44 cases of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
RESULTS: The results demonstrated that (1) more than 90% of cases of ductal
adenocarcinoma were positive for maspin, S100P, and IMP-3; (2) nearly all
adenocarcinoma cases were negative for pVHL, whereas nonneoplastic ducts and
acini were positive for pVHL in all cases; (3) normal/reactive pancreatic ducts
were frequently positive for CK7, CK19, MUC1, MUC6, CA19-9, MOC31, PSCA,
mesothelin, annexin A8, claudin 4, and claudin 18; (4) normal pancreatic ducts
were usually negative for IMP-3, maspin, S100P, CK17, MUC2, MUC4, and MUC5AC; (5)
60% of adenocarcinomas were negative for DPC4/SMAD4; and (6) strong background
staining was frequently seen with fascin, PSCA, and annexin A8.
CONCLUSIONS: pVHL, maspin, S100P, and IMP-3 constitute the best diagnostic panel 
of immunomarkers for confirming the diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
in both surgical and fine-needle aspiration specimens.

PMID: 22646265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2012 Aug;29(8):723-33. doi: 10.1007/s10815-012-9797-8.
Epub 2012 May 26.

Developmental expression of lineage specific genes in porcine embryos of
different origins.

Kumar BM(1), Maeng GH, Jeon RH, Lee YM, Lee WJ, Jeon BG, Ock SA, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, 501, Jinju-daero, Jinju, 660-701,
Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: This study compared the expression of genes involved in pluripotency,
segregation of inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE), and primitive
endoderm (PE) formation in porcine embryos produced by in vitro fertilization
(IVF), parthenogenetic activation (PA), and nuclear transfer (NT) using either
fetal fibroblasts (FF-NT) or mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-NT).
METHODS: Blastocyst formation and total cell number were analyzed. The expression
patterns of transcripts, including SRY-related HMG-box gene 2 (SOX2), reduced
expression gene 1 (REX1/ZFP42), LIN28, caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), TEA domain 
family member 4 (TEAD4), integrin beta 1 (ITGB1) and GATA6 were assessed at the
4-8 cell and blastocyst stage embryos by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Developmental rates to blastocyst stage and total cell number were
higher in IVF and PA embryos than in NT embryos. But MSC-NT embryos had increased
blastocyst formation and higher total cell number compared to FF-NT embryos. The 
relative expressions of transcripts were higher in blastocysts than in 4-8 cell
stage embryos. The mRNA expression levels of SOX2 and REX1 were largely similar
in embryos of different origins. However, the genes such as LIN28, CDX2, TEAD4,
ITGB1 and GATA6 showed the differential expression pattern in PA and NT embryos
compared to IVF embryos. Importantly, the transcript levels in MSC-NT embryos
were relatively less variable to IVF than those in FF-NT embryos.
CONCLUSION: MSCs seem to be better donors for porcine NT as they improved the
developmental competency, and influenced the expression pattern of genes quite
similar with IVF embryos than that of FFs.

PMCID: PMC3430790
PMID: 22639061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Biol Reprod. 2012 Aug 23;87(2):37. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.098079. Print 2012
Aug.

Connexin 31 (GJB3) deficiency in mouse trophoblast stem cells alters giant cell
differentiation and leads to loss of oxygen sensing.

Koch Y(1), van Fürden B, Kaiser S, Klein D, Kibschull M, Schorle H, Carpinteiro
A, Gellhaus A, Winterhager E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical School,
Essen, Germany.

The nonphysiological placental oxidative environment has been implicated in many 
complications during human pregnancy. Oxygen tension can influence a broad
spectrum of molecular changes leading to alterations in trophoblast cell lineage 
development. In this study, we report that mouse wild-type trophoblast stem cells
(TSCs) react to low oxygen (3%) with an enhanced differentiation into the giant
cell pathway, indicated by a downregulation of the early stem cell markers Eomes 
and Cdx2 as well as by a significant upregulation of Tfap2c and the
differentiation markers Tpbpa and Prl3d1. Here we demonstrated that connexin
31/GJB3-deficient TSCs failed to stabilize HIF-1A under low oxygen, resulting in 
nonresponsiveness of different marker genes, such as Cdx2 and Eomes and Tfap2c
and Tpbpa. Moreover, connexin 31-deficient TSCs revealed a shift in giant cell
differentiation from Prl3d1 expressing parietal giant cells to Ctsq, Prl3b1, and 
Prl2c2-positive giant cells, probably sinusoidal and canal lining trophoblast
giant cells. Thus, loss of connexin 31 led to different giant cell subtypes which
bypass the progenitor regulators Tfap2c and Tpbpa under low oxygen conditions.

PMID: 22623621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Jul;79(7):445-50. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22052. Epub 2012 May 31.

Effect of vitrification on promoter methylation and the expression of
pluripotency and differentiation genes in mouse blastocysts.

Zhao XM(1), Du WH, Hao HS, Wang D, Qin T, Liu Y, Zhu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology and Reproduction Laboratory, Institute of Animal Science,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Haidian District, Beijing, PR China.

The present study was designed to determine the effects of vitrification on
promoter methylation and the expression levels of pluripotency and
differentiation genes in mouse blastocysts. Promoter region CpG methylation
patterns and the expression levels of octamer-binding transcription factor
(Oct4), Nanog homeobox (Nanog), caudal-type homeobox 2 (Cdx2), and heart and
neural crest derivatives-expressed transcript 1 (Hand1) were analyzed in fresh
and vitrified mouse blastocysts. Methylation was measured by bisulphate
mutagenesis and sequencing; gene expression was determined by real-time reverse
transcription-PCR. The results showed that vitrification significantly reduced
the methylation levels of the Oct4 (85% vs. 62.5%), Nanog (77.5% vs. 55%), and
Cdx2 promoters (4.6% vs. 1.4%; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in mouse blastocysts, which correlated
with increased expression of Oct4 and Nanog in vitrified blastocysts. Hand1
promoter methylation was not significantly different in the fresh (17.9%) versus 
vitrification group (21.4%; P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). The expression levels of Cdx2 and Hand1
were not significantly different in fresh and vitrified blastocysts. In
conclusion, vitrification significantly decreased Oct4, Nanog, and Cdx2 promoter 
methylation in mouse blastocysts, which correlated with increased expression of
Oct4 and Nanog.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22618890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2012 May;59(5):382-5.

[Gastrointestinal metastasis from a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung presenting
with acute abdominal pain].

[Article in Korean]

Hsing CT(1), Kim HY, Lee JH, Han JS, Lee JH, Chang JS, Choi SR, Jeong JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Dong-A
University College of Medicine, 1 Dongdaesin-dong 3-ga, Seo-gu, Busan 602-103,
Korea.

Symptomatic gastro-intestinal metastasis in lung cancer is extremely rare and
only a few case reports have been published. Here, we report a case with lung
adenocarcinoma that presented with acute abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting due 
to duodenum, jejunum, and colon obstruction by the gastro-intestinal metastasis. 
The patient underwent colonoscopy and the pathologic report was adenocarcinoma.
When there are similar histologic findings in both colon and pulmonary lesion,
the question is whether both lesions are primary cancer or the colon lesions are 
metastases from lung cancer. Microscopic examination of a conventional pathologic
section was not sufficient to make this determination. Immunohistochemistry was
positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and 
negative for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and caudal-related homeobox transcription
factor-2 (CDX-2) on colon mucosa specimen. Accordingly, we used
immunohistochemical marker for differential diagnosis of primary adenocarcinoma
of the lung with gastro-intestinal metastasis.

PMID: 22617534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Pathol Int. 2012 Jun;62(6):429-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2012.02810.x. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma of the breast with a basal-like immunophenotype.

Deng Y(1), Xue D, Wang X, Xu S, Ao Q, Hu Z, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma (MCA) of the breast is extremely rare and was only
recently described as a distinct variant of invasive ductal carcinoma of the
breast. A case of MCA is reported in a 41-year-old woman. Mammographic and
ultrasonographic examinations showed an irregularly shaped 10.0 × 8.0 × 5.5 cm
lesion with patching calcification in the upper outer quadrant of the left
breast. The gross examination revealed that the tumor has a well-circumscribed
edge with a gelatinous cut surface and hemorrhage and necrosis were also noticed 
in the mass. Microscopically, the mass resembled mucinous cystic neoplasm of the 
ovary and pancreas closely, with cystic areas lined by columnar mucinous cells
and associated with abundant extracellular and intracellular mucin, which is
distinctively different from mucinous carcinoma with typically nests of low grade
neoplastic cells floating in the mucin pool. The tumor cells were positive for
CK7, CK20 and CDX2 were negative and displayed a typical immunophenotype of
basal-like breast cancer (ER, PR, HER2 were negative, CK5/6 and EGFR were
positive). Metastatic carcinoma was identified in three of 14 axillary lymph
nodes. We describe here a very unusual case of breast MCA with basal-like
immunophenotype.

© 2012 The Authors. Pathology International © 2012 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22612513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Case Rep Oncol. 2012 Jan;5(1):84-90. doi: 10.1159/000336579. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Presacral teratocarcinoma presenting as anal fistula and rectal adenocarcinoma: a
unique case presentation and literature review.

Ho SP(1), Wang JS, Tseng HH, King TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Somatic malignancy arising from presacral or retroperitoneal primary teratoma is 
extremely rare. We report the case of a 37-year-old male patient with
adenocarcinoma of respiratory type arising from primary presacral teratoma, but
which first presented as anal fistula and rectal adenocarcinoma. The two tumors
show the same morphology and immunophenotype (CK7-CK20+CDx2+). Malignant
adenocarcinoma transformations from the normal respiratory epithelium are also
found. To the best of our knowledge, this is the second case of respiratory type 
adenocarcinoma arising from primary presacral mature cystic teratoma.

PMCID: PMC3355654
PMID: 22611366  [PubMed]


119. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 1;368(1):54-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.013. Epub 2012
May 17.

Delay of polarization event increases the number of Cdx2-positive blastomeres in 
mouse embryo.

Kondratiuk I(1), Bazydlo K, Maleszewski M, Szczepanska K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Institute of Zoology, University of Warsaw,
Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland.

During preimplantation mouse embryo development expression of Cdx2 is induced in 
outer cells, which are the trophectoderm (TE) precursors. The mechanism of Cdx2
upregulation in these cells remains unclear. However, it has been suggested that 
the cell position and polarization may play a crucial role in this process. In
order to elucidate the role of these two parameters in the formation of TE we
analyzed the expression pattern of Cdx2 in the embryos in which either the
position of cells and the time of polarization or only the position of cells was 
experimentally disrupted. Such embryos developed from the blastomeres that were
isolated from 8-cell embryos either before or after the compaction, i.e. before
or after the cell polarization took place. We found that in the embryos developed
from polar blastomeres originated from the 8-cell compacted embryo, the
experimentally imposed outer position was not sufficient to induce the Cdx2 in
these blastomeres which in the intact embryo would form the inner cells. However,
when the polarization at the 8-cell stage was disrupted, the embryos developed
from such an unpolarized blastomeres showed the increased number of cells
expressing Cdx2. We found that in such experimentally obtained embryos the
polarization was delayed until the 16-cell stage. These results suggest that the 
main factor responsible for upregulation of Cdx2 expression in outer blastomeres,
i.e. TE precursors, is their polarity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biosci Bioeng. 2012 Sep;114(3):342-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.04.012. Epub
2012 May 16.

Preferential emergence of cell types expressing markers for primitive endoderm
lineages in mouse embryonic stem cells expressing exogenous EGAM1 homeoprotein.

Soma M(1), Iha M, Kihara Y, Sato S, Sato Y, Sato S, Mori Y, Sugawara S, Kasuga K,
Kojima I, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita 010-0195, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have been considered as a valuable renewable source of 
materials in regenerative medicine. Recently, we identified the homeoprotein
EGAM1 both in preimplantation mouse embryos and mouse ES cells. Expression of the
Egam1 transcript and its encoded protein was detectable in differentiating mouse 
ES cells, while it was almost undetectable in undifferentiated cells. In the
present study, in order to clarify the effect of forced expression of EGAM1 on
the differentiation of mouse ES cells in vitro, transfectants expressing
exogenous EGAM1 were generated. Egam1 transfectants promoted differentiation into
cell types expressing Gata6, Gata4, Afp, or Plat, genes associated with emergence
of the extra-embryonic endoderm lineages. On the other hand, Egam1 transfectants 
inhibited the expression of specific genes for the embryonic lineages, including 
Fgf5 (epiblast) and T (mesoderm), in addition to Cdx2, a specific gene for the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineages. Changes in the percentage of cells
recognizing by antibodies against specific marker proteins closely correlated
with the expression patterns of their transcripts. Taken together, the results
obtained in this study suggested that mouse ES cells expressing exogenous EGAM1
preferentially differentiate into extra-embryonic primitive endoderm lineages,
rather than embryonic lineages or extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineages.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22608553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 Jan;21(1):64-72. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318257f8aa.

Demonstration of CDX2 is highly antibody dependant.

Borrisholt M(1), Nielsen S, Vyberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University Hospital, DK-9100 
Aalborg, Denmark.

OBJECTS: CDX2 is a widely used immunohistochemical marker for intestinal
differentiation in neoplasms. In the Nordic Immunohistochemical Quality Control
external quality assessment scheme, only 45% of the laboratories participating in
the CDX2 challenge in 2009 produced sufficient staining. A major cause of
insufficient staining results appeared to be less successful primary antibody
(Ab) clones. To evaluate the Ab performance in a standardized way, a comparative 
study was carried out.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tissue microarrays containing 309 non-neoplastic tissues
and tumor samples with expected high, low, and no CDX2 expression were used. Five
Abs were selected for comparison: EPR2764Y concentrated (Conc), EPR2764Y in a
ready-to-use format, and DAK-CDX2, AMT28, and CDX2-88, all Conc. The CDX2 stains 
were scored blindly using the H-score method. Tissue/tumor samples with a maximum
H-score of 150 to 300 (on the basis of the staining giving the highest score)
were classified as CDX2 high expressors, samples with a maximum H-score of 10 to 
149 as low expressors, and samples with a maximum H-score <10 as negative.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: A total of 106 tumors were CDX2 positive with at least
one of the Abs. For 56 high-expressor tumors, the mean H-scores with EPR2764Y
Conc, EPR2764Y ready-to-use, DAK-CDX2, AMT28, and CDX2-88 were 262, 236, 234,
167, and 149, respectively, and the percentage of positive tumors 100, 100, 100, 
98, and 93, respectively. For 50 low-expressor tumors, the mean H-scores with the
same Abs were 59, 26, 28, 7, and 5, respectively, and the percentage of positive 
tumors 98, 58, 64, 18, and 14, respectively. With EPR2764Y Conc, CDX2 was
demonstrated in 5/19 (26%) urothelial carcinomas, 7/64 (11%) lung
adenocarcinomas, 5/30 (17%) large cell/sarcomatoid lung carcinomas, and 4/19
(21%) esophagus squamous cell carcinomas. In-house optimized protocols gave for
all 4 Conc Abs better staining results than the vendors' recommended protocols.
The sensitivity of CDX2 Abs and protocols must be taken into consideration when
classifying neoplasms of unknown origin.

PMID: 22595949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jul 15;53(2):347-56. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.04.032. Epub 2012 May 8.

Constitutive expression of an antioxidant enzyme, glutathione S-transferase P1,
during differentiation of human intestinal Caco-2 cells.

Kusano Y(1), Horie S, Morishita N, Shibata T, Uchida K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan.

In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism of the constitutive
expression of an antioxidant enzyme, glutathione S-transferase (GST), during
differentiation of human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells. We observed that the
class p GST isozyme (GST P1) expression correlated with the increased expression 
of caudal-related homeodomain protein 2 (CDX2), a member of the mammalian
homeobox family of transcription factors. In addition, transfection of Caco-2
cells with the human CDX2 cDNA resulted in enhanced expression of the GST P1 gene
and protein. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that CDX2 binds to 
the GST P1 promoter containing the putative consensus CDX-binding element, TTTAC,
located at -247 upstream from the established site for transcription initiation. 
Using the dsDNA pull-down assay, it was revealed that CDX2 recognized and bound
to the putative consensus CDX-binding element within the human GST P1 promoter
region and that the amount of the CDX2 bound to the putative consensus
CDX-binding element increased during Caco-2 cell differentiation. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that CDX2 formed the transcriptional complex with Sp1 and bound to
the putative consensus CDX-binding element within the human GST P1 promoter
region. These data suggest that CDX2 binds to the human GST P1 promoter via
complex formation with Sp1 and controls the constitutive expression of GST P1
during Caco-2 cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22580340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Gastroenterol. 2012 Oct;47(10):1108-14. doi: 10.1007/s00535-012-0589-9. Epub
2012 May 11.

Usefulness of endoscopic brushing and magnified endoscopy with narrow band
imaging (ME-NBI) to detect intestinal phenotype in columnar-lined esophagus.

Murao T(1), Shiotani A, Yamanaka Y, Kimura Y, Tsutsui H, Matsumoto H, Kamada T,
Manabe N, Hata J, Haruma K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kawasaki
Medical School, 577 Matsushima, Kurashiki, Okayama 701-0192, Japan.
murataka@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus with specialized intestinal metaplasia (SIM),
which is at high risk of progressing to esophageal adenocarcinoma, has been
identified by obtaining biopsy specimens randomly. Magnified endoscopy with
narrow band imaging (ME-NBI) is reported to be useful for detecting SIM or the
intestinal phenotype. We aimed to evaluate the usefulness of endoscopic brushing 
followed by ME-NBI for the detection of the intestinal phenotype.
METHODS: Biopsy and brushing samples were taken following endoscopic observation 
by ME-NBI. Total RNA was extracted from the whole sample and microdissected
samples, and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
analysis of SHH, CDX2, and mucin mRNA expression was performed.
RESULTS: Fifty patients (32 men, 18 women, average age 67.3 years) with
metaplastic columnar epithelium of the lower esophagus were studied. MUC2 (85 vs.
65 %) and CDX2 (95 vs. 75 %) were detected more frequently in the brushing
samples than in the biopsy samples. MUC2 expression levels were significantly
higher in the brushing samples than those in the biopsy samples. CDX2 and MUC2
expression levels in the brushing samples were significantly higher in the mucosa
with tubular/villous pattern observed by ME-NBI than the levels in mucosae with
other patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: Endoscopic brushing in mucosa of columnar epithelium with a
tubular/villous pattern visualized by ME-NBI is useful to detect the intestinal
phenotype.

PMID: 22576025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Development. 2012 Jun;139(12):2130-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.076497. Epub 2012 May 9.

Failure of extra-embryonic progenitor maintenance in the absence of dosage
compensation.

Mugford JW(1), Yee D, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Genetics,
Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

Proper regulation of X-linked gene expression, termed dosage compensation, is
required for the normal development of mammalian embryos. Through the process of 
X chromosome inactivation (XCI), somatic cells of mammalian females inactivate
one of their two X chromosomes in order to balance X-linked gene dosage with
their male counterparts. The process of XCI is dependent upon the long non-coding
RNA Xist, which is expressed from and coats the inactivated X chromosome (Xi) in 
cis. During mouse embryogenesis, imprinted XCI inactivates the paternally
inherited X chromosome (Xp) within the extra-embryonic lineages. Consequently,
females harboring a paternally derived Xist mutation (X/X(Xist-)) die owing to
failure of imprinted XCI and, presumably, poor trophoblast development. Here, we 
investigate the consequence of two active X chromosomes in the extra-embryonic
ectoderm (ExE) of X/X(Xist-) female embryos. At embryonic day (E) 6.5, we find
that the X/X(Xist-) ExE lacks the transcriptional regulator CDX2, a factor
required to maintain the ExE in a progenitor state. In addition,
spongiotrophoblast progenitors are not maintained. Surprisingly, we observe
evidence of an Xi in a subpopulation of X/X(Xist-) ExE cells. We demonstrate
further that trophectodermal stem cells derived from X/X(Xist-) embryos
completely reverse normal imprinted XCI patterns. Taken together, our data
suggest that, much like in the cells of the epiblast, the initial imprint that
establishes imprinted XCI is probably erased in ExE cells. Conversely, unlike the
epiblast, in which XCI is not required for progenitor cell maintenance, we
demonstrate that dosage compensation is indispensable for the maintenance of
trophoblast progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3357907
PMID: 22573614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jul;41(1):201-10. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1459. Epub 2012 May 2.

Biological significance of tumor budding at the invasive front of human
colorectal carcinoma cells.

Yusra(1), Semba S, Yokozaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Pathology, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

At the invasive front of colorectal carcinoma (CRC), the existence of tumor
budding (TB), the detachment and migration of small clusters of tumor cells from 
the neoplastic epithelium, correlates with high incidence of local invasion and
distant metastasis; however, the molecular background of TB is still unknown. In 
human CRC-derived SW480 cells, CD133+ cells showed cancer stem cell (CSC)-like
properties, high tumorigenicity and pluripotency. By a comparative study of gene 
expression between CD133+ and CD133- SW480 cells, high sensitivity against
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) was suggested in CD133+ SW480 cells.
Interestingly, treatment with recombinant TGF-ß1 increased the numbers of cells
expressing CD133 and SNAI1. Furthermore, in CD133- SW480 cells, the SNAI1-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) restored the population of CD133+ cells
and increased tumorigenicity, cell motility/invasiveness and matrix
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) expression. In stage II CRC tissues, TB was associated
with increased levels of SNAI1 expression as well as high incidence of
metachronous lymph node metastasis post-surgical resection. These findings
suggest that TGF-ß regulates not only the induction of EMT but also the
restoration of CSCs in CRC. The tumor microenvironment at the invasive front is
important for the formation of tumor buds in CRC.

PMID: 22569829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Apr 28;18(16):1903-14. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i16.1903.

siRNA targeting of Cdx2 inhibits growth of human gastric cancer MGC-803 cells.

Wang XT(1), Xie YB, Xiao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.

AIM: To investigate the effects of small interference RNA (siRNA) targeting of
Cdx2 on human gastric cancer MGC-803 cells in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: The recombinant pSilencer 4.1-Cdx2 siRNA plasmids were constructed and
transfected into gastric cancer MGC-803 cells in vitro. The stable transfectants 
were selected. The effects of Cdx2 siRNA on growth, proliferation, cell cycle,
apoptosis, migration and invasiveness of human gastric cancer MGC-803 cells were 
evaluated and the expression of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), caspase-9 
and caspase-3 was observed in vitro by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting analysis. We also investigated the effect 
of Cdx2 siRNA on growth of MGC-803 cells in nude mice in vivo.
RESULTS: Cdx2 siRNA led to inhibition of endogenous Cdx2 mRNA and protein
expression as determined by RT-PCR and Western blotting analysis. Cdx2 siRNA
significantly inhibited cell growth and proliferation, blocked entry into the
S-phase of the cell cycle, induced cell apoptosis, and reduced the motility and
invasion of MGC-803 cells. Cdx2 siRNA also increased PTEN expression, and
activated caspase-9 and caspase-3 in MGC-803 cells in vitro . In addition, siRNA 
targeting of Cdx2 inhibited the growth of MGC-803 cells and promoted tumor cell
apoptosis in vivo in nude mice tumor models.
CONCLUSION: Cdx2 was involved in regulating pro-gression of human gastric cancer 
cells MGC-803. Manipulation of Cdx2 expression may be a potential therapeutic
strategy for gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3337565
PMID: 22563170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5(3):254-9. Epub 2012 Mar 25.

Pigmented adenoid cystic carcinoma of the ear skin arising from the epidermis: a 
case report with immunohistochemical studies.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) in the skin is very rare; only about 60 cases have
been reported. Herein presented is a case of pigmented ACC arising from epidermis
of the ear skin. An 85-year-old man presented black tumor of the right ear.
Dermatologists' diagnosis was basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Large biopsy was
obtained. The biopsy showed proliferation of atypical basaloid cells arranged in 
a cribriform pattern. The tumor cells were continuous with epidermis, as if it
arose from the epidermis. Focal areas show melanin deposition in the tumor cells.
Mucin stains showed that the tumor cells and tubular lumens contained acidic
mucin. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 
AE1/3, CK34BE12, CK5/6, CK7, CK14, p63, alpha-smooth muscle actin (ASMA), S100
protein, p53, Ki-67 (labeling 85%), KIT, PDGFRA and CD56. The tumor cells were
negative for CK CAM5.2, CK8, CK18, CK19, CK20, EMA, desmin, CEA, HMB45, CD10,
CD34, neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CDX2, MUC1, MUC2,
MUC5AC and MUC6. HMB-positive and S100-positive melanocytes were seen in a very
few areas. Since characteristic cribriform pattern was recognized in the tumor
and the tumor showed epithelial markers, myoepithelial markers (CD14, p63, ASMA, 
S100 protein) and KIT, the pathological diagnosis of ACC was made. No distant and
lymph node metastasis is now seen. The patient will be treated by complete
resection. The present cutaneous ACC was unique in that the ACC arose from the
epidermis, had melanin pigment, and occurred in ear skin.

PMCID: PMC3341680
PMID: 22558481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036181. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Oocytes selected using BCB staining enhance nuclear reprogramming and the in vivo
development of SCNT embryos in cattle.

Su J(1), Wang Y, Li R, Peng H, Hua S, Li Q, Quan F, Guo Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A & F University, Key Laboratory of 
Animal Reproductive Physiology & Embryo Technology, Ministry of Agriculture,
Yangling, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

The selection of good quality oocytes is crucial for in vitro fertilization and
somatic cloning. Brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) staining has been used for selection
of oocytes from several mammalian species. However, the effects of differential
oocyte selection by BCB staining on nuclear reprogramming and in vivo development
of SCNT embryos are not well understood. Immature compact cumulus-oocyte
complexes (COCs) were divided into control (not exposed to BCB), BCB+ (blue
cytoplasm) and BCB- (colorless cytoplasm) groups. We found that BCB+ oocytes
yielded a significantly higher somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) blastocyst
rate and full term development rate of bovine SCNT embryos than the BCB- and
control oocytes. BCB+ embryos (embryos developed from BCB+ oocytes) showed
increased acetylation levels of histone H3 at K9 and K18 (AcH3K9, AcH3K18), and
methylation levels of histone H3 at K4 (H3K4me2) than BCB- embryos (embryos
developed from BCB- oocytes) at the two-cell stage. Furthermore, BCB+ embryos
generated more total cells, trophectoderm (TE) cells, and inner cell mass (ICM)
cells, and fewer apoptotic cells than BCB- embryos. The expression of SOX2, CDX2,
and anti-apoptotic microRNA-21 were up-regulated in the BCB+ blastocysts compared
with BCB- blastocysts, whereas the expression of pro-apoptotic gene Bax was
down-regulated in BCB+ blastocysts. These results strongly suggest that BCB+
oocytes have a higher nuclear reprogramming capacity, and that BCB staining can
be used to select developmentally competent oocytes for nuclear transfer.

PMCID: PMC3338625
PMID: 22558373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jul 15;303(2):G209-19. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00500.2011. Epub 2012 May 3.

Type 2 cGMP-dependent protein kinase regulates proliferation and differentiation 
in the colonic mucosa.

Wang R(1), Kwon IK, Thangaraju M, Singh N, Liu K, Jay P, Hofmann F, Ganapathy V, 
Browning DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia Health Sciences
University, Augusta, Georgia, GA 30912-2100, USA.

Signaling through cGMP has emerged as an important regulator of tissue
homeostasis in the gastrointestinal tract, but the mechanism is not known. Type 2
cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG2) is a major cGMP effector in the gut
epithelium, and the present studies have tested its importance in the regulation 
of proliferation and differentiation in the mouse colon and in colon cancer cell 
lines. Tissue homeostasis was examined in the proximal colon of Prkg2(-/-) mice
using histological markers of proliferation and differentiation. The effect of
ectopic PKG2 on proliferation and differentiation was tested in vitro using
inducible colon cancer cell lines. PCR and luciferase reporter assays were used
to determine the importance of Sox9 downstream of PKG2. The colons of Prkg2(-/-) 
mice exhibited crypt hyperplasia, increased epithelial apoptosis, and reduced
numbers of differentiated goblet and enteroendocrine cells. Ectopic PKG2 was able
to inhibit proliferation and induce Muc2 and CDX2 expression in colon cancer
cells, but did not significantly affect cell death. PKG2 reduced Sox9 levels and 
signaling, suggesting possible involvement of this pathway downstream of cGMP in 
the colon. The work presented here demonstrates a novel antiproliferative and
prodifferentiation role for PKG2 in the colon. These homeostatic functions of
PKG2 were reproducible in colon cancer cells lines where downregulation of Sox9
is a possible mechanism. The similarities in phenotype between PKG2 and GCC
knockout mice positions PKG2 as a likely mediator of the homeostatic effects of
cGMP signaling in the colon.

PMID: 22556146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 15;109(20):7776-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1111135109. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Transcription factors c-Myc and CDX2 mediate E-selectin ligand expression in
colon cancer cells undergoing EGF/bFGF-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Sakuma K(1), Aoki M, Kannagi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya,
Aichi 464-8681, Japan.

Sialyl Lewis x (sLe(x)) and sialyl Lewis a (sLe(a)) glycans are expressed on
highly metastatic colon cancer cells. They promote extravasation of cancer cells 
and tumor angiogenesis via interacting with E-selectin on endothelial cells.
Recently, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been noted as a critical
phenotypic alteration in metastatic cancer cells. To address the association
between sLe(x/a) expression and EMT, we assessed whether sLe(x/a) are highly
expressed on colon cancer cells undergoing EMT. Treatment of HT29 and DLD-1 cells
with EGF and/or basic FGF (bFGF) induced EMT and significantly increased sLe(x/a)
expression resulting in enhanced E-selectin binding activity. The transcript
levels of the glycosyltransferase genes ST3GAL1/3/4 and FUT3 were significantly
elevated and that of FUT2 was significantly suppressed by the treatment. We
provide evidence that ST3GAL1/3/4 and FUT3 are transcriptionally up-regulated by 
c-Myc with probable involvement of Ser62 phosphorylation, and that FUT2 is
transcriptionally down-regulated through the attenuation of CDX2. The
contribution of c-Myc and CDX2 to the sLe(x/a) induction was proved to be
significant by knockdown or forced expression experiments. Interestingly, the
cells undergoing EMT exhibited significantly increased VEGF secretion, which can 
promote tumor angiogenesis in cooperation with sLe(x/a). Finally,
immunohistological study indicated high E-selectin ligand expression on cancer
cells undergoing EMT in vivo, supporting their coexistence observed in vitro.
These results suggest a significant link between sLe(x/a) expression and EMT in
colon cancer cells and a pivotal role of c-Myc and CDX2 in regulating sLe(x/a)
expression during EMT.

PMCID: PMC3356678
PMID: 22547830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Blood. 2012 Jul 19;120(3):519-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-385898. Epub 2012
Apr 30.

Beyond Hox: the role of ParaHox genes in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Rawat VP(1), Humphries RK, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Experimental Cancer Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center and
University Hospital Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, Ulm, Germany.

During the past decade it was recognized that homeobox gene families such as the 
clustered Hox genes play pivotal roles both in normal and malignant
hematopoiesis. More recently, similar roles have also become apparent for members
of the ParaHox gene cluster, evolutionarily closely related to the Hox gene
cluster. This is in particular found for the caudal-type homeobox genes (Cdx)
genes, known to act as upstream regulators of Hox genes. The CDX gene family
member CDX2 belongs to the most frequent aberrantly expressed proto-oncogenes in 
human acute leukemias and is highly leukemogenic in experimental models.
Correlative studies indicate that CDX2 functions as master regulator of perturbed
HOX gene expression in human acute myeloid leukemia, locating this ParaHox gene
at a central position for initiating and maintaining HOX gene dysregulation as a 
driving leukemogenic force. There are still few data about potential upstream
regulators initiating aberrant CDX2 expression in human leukemias or about
critical downstream targets of CDX2 in leukemic cells. Characterizing this
network will hopefully open the way to therapeutic approaches that target
deregulated ParaHox genes in human leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3448567
PMID: 22547580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jul;36(7):1087-92. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182549b6d.

Detection of human papillomavirus in small cell carcinomas of the anus and
rectum.

Cimino-Mathews A(1), Sharma R, Illei PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Small cell carcinomas represent <1% of colorectal/anal carcinomas and have a poor
prognosis. Anorectal squamous cell carcinomas are often associated with high-risk
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, similar to squamous and small cell
carcinomas of the uterine cervix. In HPV infection, the oncoprotein E7
inactivates the tumor suppressor Rb, leading to p16 upregulation; however, in
small cell carcinomas, the Rb pathway is often blocked by other mechanisms; thus,
increased p16 may not indicate HPV infection. P16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) may 
have a limited role in evaluating small cell carcinomas for HPV infection.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections of previously diagnosed small
cell carcinomas of the anus (n=5) and rectum (n=11) were subjected to IHC for
p16, CDX2, and p63, followed by in situ hybridization for high-risk HPV. All
(100%) cases of anal and rectal small cell carcinomas were positive for p16, and 
100% of anal and 82% of rectal small cell carcinomas were positive for high-risk 
HPV. The majority of cases showed low or very low HPV copy numbers. In 6 cases,
HPV was detected only by using the HPV-16 genotype-specific assay detecting very 
low copy numbers (1 to 2 viral copies). The majority of tumors expressed p63,
which was more pronounced in the anal tumors. CDX2 expression was observed
predominantly in rectal tumors. High-risk HPV can be detected using in situ
hybridization in the majority of anorectal small cell carcinomas, which are
uniformly p16 positive by IHC. HPV-targeted therapy could result in better
control of these aggressive neoplasms.

PMID: 22531171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Vet Med Sci. 2012 Sep;74(9):1095-102. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Porcine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor improves the in vitro
development of cloned porcine embryos.

Kwak SS(1), Cheong SA, Jeon Y, Hyun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Embryology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 361-763, Republic of Korea.

We examined the effects of porcine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (pGM-CSF) on the in vitro development of porcine embryos produced by
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) for the first time. We evaluated the effects
of pGM-CSF on SCNT-derived blastocyst formation and investigated gene expression.
A total of 522 cloned embryos in 6 replicates were treated with 10 ng/ml pGM-CSF 
during in vitro culture (IVC). This treatment significantly (P<0.05) increased
blastocyst formation and total cell number in blastocysts compared with the
control (12.3% and 41.4 vs. 9.0% and 34.7, respectively). However, there was no
effect on cleavage rate. The numbers of cells in the inner cell mass and
trophectoderm were significantly higher in the pGM-CSF treatment group (6.0 and
43.0, respectively) compared with the control (4.4 and 31.9, respectively).
Treatment with 10 ng/ml pGM-CSF significantly increased POU5F1 and Cdx2 mRNA
expression in blastocysts. In addition, Bcl-2, Dnmt1 and proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) mRNA expression were upregulated in blastocysts in the
pGM-CSF supplemented group compared with the control. These results suggest that 
pGM-CSF improves the quality and developmental viability of porcine SCNT embryos 
by regulating transcription factor expression.

PMID: 22531103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):7362-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1201595109. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Altered subcellular localization of transcription factor TEAD4 regulates first
mammalian cell lineage commitment.

Home P(1), Saha B, Ray S, Dutta D, Gunewardena S, Yoo B, Pal A, Vivian JL, Larson
M, Petroff M, Gallagher PG, Schulz VP, White KL, Golos TG, Behr B, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):E3389-90; author reply E3391-2.

In the preimplantation mouse embryo, TEAD4 is critical to establishing the
trophectoderm (TE)-specific transcriptional program and segregating TE from the
inner cell mass (ICM). However, TEAD4 is expressed in the TE and the ICM. Thus,
differential function of TEAD4 rather than expression itself regulates
specification of the first two cell lineages. We used ChIP sequencing to define
genomewide TEAD4 target genes and asked how transcription of TEAD4 target genes
is specifically maintained in the TE. Our analyses revealed an evolutionarily
conserved mechanism, in which lack of nuclear localization of TEAD4 impairs the
TE-specific transcriptional program in inner blastomeres, thereby allowing their 
maturation toward the ICM lineage. Restoration of TEAD4 nuclear localization
maintains the TE-specific transcriptional program in the inner blastomeres and
prevents segregation of the TE and ICM lineages and blastocyst formation. We
propose that altered subcellular localization of TEAD4 in blastomeres dictates
first mammalian cell fate specification.

PMCID: PMC3358889
PMID: 22529382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 May;137(5):722-6. doi: 10.1309/AJCPXE3PUBWVZCGZ.

CDX2 expression in columnar cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Enriquez ML(1), Baloch ZW, Montone KT, Zhang PJ, LiVolsi VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Dec;138(6):907-9; author reply p.910.

The columnar cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (CCV-PTC) is a rare
subtype of PTC that exhibits morphologic features often described as reminiscent 
of secretory endometrium or colonic adenomas/adenocarcinomas. CDX2, a nuclear
transcription factor, is important for intestinal development. It is normally
expressed in intestinal epithelium and is also detected in adenoma and
adenocarcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract; however, it has also been reported
in tumors of other sites with intestinal-type morphologic features. We evaluated 
CDX2 expression in CCV-PTC and in a thyroid tissue microarray composed of various
benign and malignant thyroid lesions. CDX2 expression was identified in 6 (55%)
of 11 cases of CCV-PTC, but not in any other benign and malignant thyroid
lesions. We conclude that CDX2 is selectively expressed in CCV-PTC and can be
used in distinguishing it from other variants of PTC with overlapping morphologic
features.

PMID: 22523209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Reprod Dev. 2012;58(4):425-31. Epub 2012 Apr 21.

Embryonic development and implantation related gene expression of oocyte
reconstructed with bovine trophoblast cells.

Saadeldin IM(1), Choi W, Roibas Da Torre B, Kim B, Lee B, Jang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea.

The temporal progressive increase of interferon tau (IFNt) secretion from the
bovine trophoblast is a major embryonic signal of establishing pregnancy. Here,
we cultured and isolated bovine trophoblast cells (BTs) from IVM/IVF oocytes and 
in vitro produced blastocysts, used them, for the first time, as donor cells for 
nuclear transfer and compared them with adult fibroblasts (AFs) as donor cells.
BTs were reprogrammed in enucleated oocytes to blastocysts with similar
efficiency to AFs (14.5% and 15.6% respectively, P=0.05). The levels of IFNt,
CDX2 and OCT4 expression in IVF-, BT- and AF-derived blastocysts were analyzed
using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and reverse transcription
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR and RT-qPCR). IVF-produced embryos
were used as reference to analyze the linear progressive expression of IFNt
through mid, expanded and hatching blastocysts. RT-PCR and RT-qPCR studies showed
that IFNt expression was higher in BT-derived blastocysts than IVF- and
AF-derived blastocysts. Both IVF- and BT-derived blastocysts showed a progressive
increase in IFNt expression as blastocyst development advanced when it compared
with AF-derived blastocysts. OCT4 was inversely related with IFNt expression,
while CDX2 was found to be directly related with IFNt temporal expression.
Persistence of high expression of IFNt and CDX2 was found to be higher in
BT-derived embryos than in IVF- or AF-derived embryos. In conclusion, using BTs
expressing IFNt as donor cells for bovine NT could be a useful tool for
understanding the IFNt genetics and epigenetics.

PMID: 22522228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(1):247-50.

Expression of CDX2 and villin in gastric cardiac intestinal metaplasia and the
relation with gastric cardiac carcinogenesis.

Xiao ZY(1), Ru Y, Sun JT, Gao SG, Wang YF, Wang LD, Feng XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cancer Institute, First Affiliated Hospital of Henan
University of Science and Technology, Luoyang, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether CDX2 and villin protein expression are associated
with intestinal metaplasia (IM) in gastric cardiac mucosa and to explore the
relationship with evolution of gastric cardiac adenocarcinoma (GCA).
METHODS: We studied 143 gastric cardiac biopsy or resection specimens from Henan 
province China, including 25 cardiac gastritis specimens with IM, 65 dysplasia
specimens with IM and 35 gastric cardiac adenocarcinoma specimens and stained
them for CDX2 and villin by the immunohistochemical SP method. 15 normal gastric 
cardiac biopsy specimens were also collected as control.
RESULTS: (1) Normal gastric mucosa presented no CDX2 and villin expression. The
positive rates of CDX2 protein in cardiac gastritis with IM, dysplasia with IM,
and carcinoma tissues were 84.0% (21/25), 66.7% (32/48) and 36.4% (20/55),
respectively. While the positive rates of villin protein in cardiac gastritis
with IM, dysplasia with IM, and carcinoma tissues were 76.0% (19/25), 70.8%
(34/48) and 45.5% (25/55), respectively.There were significant differences among 
the three groups for both CDX2 and villin (P<0.01). Spearman's rank correlation
coefficient(rho) showed a close correlation between the two proteins (r=0.843,
P<0.01) and both were positively related with tumor differentiation (both
P<0.05), but not associated with age, sex, invasion and metastasis of lymph node 
(P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that ectopic expression of CDX2 and villin may be
involved in early-stage IM and tumorigenesis in gastric cardia and the expression
of villin may be regulated by CDX2.

PMID: 22502678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 May;36(5):737-43. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824aba59.

PDX-1, CDX-2, TTF-1, and CK7: a reliable immunohistochemical panel for pancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms.

Chan ES(1), Alexander J, Swanson PE, Jain D, Yeh MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
98195-6100, USA.

Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) occur in virtually all sites of the body. As NETs
arising in different organs share similar morphologic features, distinguishing
metastatic from primary NETs on the basis of morphologic grounds alone is
difficult. Pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX-1) is a Hox-type transcription
factor that is essential for both exocrine and endocrine pancreatic
differentiation and maintenance of ß-cell function. We investigated PDX-1 as an
immunohistochemical (IHC) marker in primary pancreatic NETs. Eighty primary NETs 
[25 pancreatic, 29 bronchopulmonary, and 26 in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract]
and 13 metastatic NETs in the liver were studied. Clinical and radiologic data
were reviewed to confirm the stated primary sites. IHC analysis for PDX-1, CDX-2,
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), keratin 7 (CK7), and keratin 20 (CK20)
was performed, and the results were based on review blinded to the primary sites.
PDX-1 was seen in 18 of 25 (72%) pancreatic NETs; in contrast, only 3 of 29 (10%)
bronchopulmonary NETs and 1 of 26 (4%) GI NETs were positive. PDX-1 was therefore
93% specific and 72% sensitive for pancreatic NETs. TTF-1 was expressed only in
bronchopulmonary NETs; all other NETs were negative for TTF-1. CK7 was also very 
specific (92%) and moderately sensitive (66%) for bronchopulmonary NETs. CDX-2
was seen in 22 of 26 (85%) cases of GI NETs and in only 1 of 51 (2%) cases of
extra-GI NETs. Thus, CDX-2 was 98% specific and 85% sensitive for GI NETs. In
terms of metastatic NETs found in the liver, PDX-1 was positive in 5 of 5 cases
of metastatic pancreatic NETs and 2 of 2 cases of metastatic duodenal NETs. PDX-1
is highly specific, with very good overall diagnostic accuracy for pancreatic
NETs. An IHC panel including PDX-1, CDX-2, TTF-1, CK7, and CK20 may be useful in 
distinguishing NETs of pancreatic origin from other primaries.

PMID: 22498824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2012 Dec;20(6):573-9. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182494009.

IMP3, NESP55, TTF-1 and CDX2 serve as an immunohistochemical panel in the
distinction among small-cell carcinoma, gastrointestinal carcinoid, and
pancreatic endocrine tumor metastasized to the liver.

Denby KS(1), Briones AJ, Bourne PA, Spaulding BO, Lu D, Fischer-Colbrie R, Qu Z, 
Wang HL, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, NY, USA.

Histopathologic distinction among small-cell carcinoma (SCC), pancreatic
endocrine tumor (PET), and gastrointestinal carcinoids metastasized to the liver 
in needle core biopsies can be extremely challenging because of limited material,
crush artifact, and lack of detailed clinical history. In this study, a total of 
61 surgically resected or biopsied specimens, including 27 SCCs (lung, 17; colon,
1; gallbladder, 2; stomach, 1; and unknown primary, 6), 18 gastrointestinal
carcinoid tumors (GICTs) (stomach, 2; small intestine, 14; colon, 2), and 16 PETs
were immunohistochemically examined for the expression of IMP3, TTF-1, CDX2, and 
NESP55 to evaluate their diagnostic value. The results showed that 24 (89%) of 27
SCCs exhibited strong cytoplasmic staining for IMP3 in 60% to 100% of the tumor
cells. Eighteen (67%) SCCs were strongly and diffusely positive for TTF-1. In the
remaining 9 TTF-1-negative SCCs (including 4 extrapulmonary cases), 7 showed
strong and diffuse IMP3 expression. All SCCs were negative for CDX2 except for 1 
case of colonic origin that showed strong CDX2 immunoreactivity. All 16
metastatic PETs were positively stained for IMP3 with 12 cases (75%) showing a
diffuse and moderate-to-strong staining pattern while they were negative for
TTF-1. Six PETs exhibited moderate-to-strong positivity for CDX2 with nuclear
staining in 5% to 40% of tumor cells, and 5 showed a varying degree of positivity
for NESP55. Three (17%) of 18 metastatic GICTs showed moderate IMP3 staining in
50% to 90% of the tumor cells, whereas CDX2 was expressed in 17 (94%) cases with 
moderate-to-strong staining in 50% to 100% of tumor cells. No NESP55
immunoreactivity was detected in metastatic SCCs and GICTs. In conclusion, a
panel of these 4 markers is useful in segregating among SCC, PET, and GICT to
help determine the primary site of hepatic metastasis.

PMID: 22495359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Jul 1;84(1):104-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.03.017. Epub 
2012 Mar 30.

Intestinal CYP3A4 and midazolam disposition in vivo associate with VDR
polymorphisms and show seasonal variation.

Thirumaran RK(1), Lamba JK, Kim RB, Urquhart BL, Gregor JC, Chande N, Fan Y, Qi
A, Cheng C, Thummel KE, Hall SD, Schuetz EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA. Ranjit.thirumaran@stjude.org

Vitamin D, whose levels vary seasonally with sunlight, is activated to
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) that binds the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and
transcriptionally regulates intestinal CYP3A4 expression. We genotyped VDR
polymorphisms and determined their associations with intestinal CYP3A4 and with
midazolam pharmacokinetics, and whether intestinal CYP3A4 levels/activity varied 
seasonally. The VDR BsmIG > A (rs1544410) polymorphism was significantly
associated with CYP3A4 jejunal expression/activity, with CYP3A4 duodenal mRNA,
and with midazolam area under the curve (AUC). Intestinal CYP3A4
expression/activity was significantly higher in biopsies with the VDR promoter
polymorphisms Cdx2-3731G > A and GATA-1012A > G that increase VDR activation of
target genes. Duodenal CYP3A4 mRNA was significantly higher between April and
September than between October and March. Midazolam p.o. AUC and oral
bioavailability trended higher October through March compared to April through
September. These data suggest VDR polymorphisms are predictors of intestinal
CYP3A4, and that CYP3A4 intestinal expression varies seasonally--likely related
to annual changes in UV sunlight and vitamin D levels.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3774043
PMID: 22484315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Patholog Res Int. 2012;2012:201375. doi: 10.1155/2012/201375. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Gastric composite tumor of alpha fetoprotein-producing carcinoma/hepatoid
adenocarcinoma and endocrine carcinoma with reference to cellular phenotypes.

Suzuki A(1), Koide N, Kitazawa M, Mochizuka A, Ota H, Miyagawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi,
Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

Alpha-fetoprotein-producing carcinoma (AFPC)/hepatoid adenocarcinoma (HAC) and
neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) are uncommon in the stomach. Composite tumors
consisting of these carcinomas and their histologic phenotypes are not well
known. Between 2002 and 2007, to estimate the prevalence of composite tumors
consisting of tubular adenocarcinoma, AFPC/HAC and NEC, we reviewed specimens
obtained from 294 consecutive patients treated surgically for gastric cancer. We 
examined histological phenotype of tumors of AFPC or NEC containing the composite
tumor by evaluating immunohistochemical expressions of MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CDX2, 
and SOX2. Immunohistochemically, AFPC/HAC dominantly showed the intestinal or
mixed phenotype, and NEC frequently showed the gastric phenotype. In the
composite tumor, the tubular and hepatoid components showed the gastric
phenotype, and the neuroendocrine component showed the mixed type. The unique
composite tumor predominantly showed the gastric phenotype, and the hepatoid and 
neuroendocrine components were considered to be differentiated from the tubular
component.

PMCID: PMC3317075
PMID: 22482081  [PubMed]


142. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2012 Jun;35(3):149-61. doi: 10.1007/s13402-012-0076-6. Epub
2012 Apr 3.

Cell culture models for studying the development of Barrett's esophagus: a
systematic review.

Bus P(1), Siersema PD, van Baal JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a premalignant condition caused by
chronic gastroesophageal reflux. BE patients have an increased risk of developing
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). As many aspects of this condition are still
unknown, there is a need for in vitro models to study BE development.
AIM: To review the literature on cell lines and incubation conditions for
studying BE development.
METHODS: A literature search was performed using PubMed, EMBASE and the Cochrane 
library, combining the words esophagus, cell line, culture, Barrett's, bile,
acid, exposure, reflux and adenocarcinoma.
RESULTS: A wide range of cell lines and incubation conditions to study BE
development have been reported. The most commonly used cell lines are derived
from epithelium from patients with BE or EAC. A 25-minute incubation with 200 µM 
bile salts induced cell proliferation and Akt phosphorylation. However, increased
CDX2 and MUC2 expression was only observed with longer incubations or higher bile
salt concentrations. Two-hundred µM bile at pH 6 showed a higher toxicity to EAC 
cells than the same concentration at pH 7. Multiple 5-minute exposures with
200 µM bile at pH 4 or pH 7 increased CK8/18 and COX2 in BE epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Two-hundred µM conjugated primary or secondary bile salts at pH 4
for multiple short exposures is able to induce BE specific factors in BE cell
lines. In SQ and EAC cell lines; however, higher concentrations of secondary bile
salts for 8 h are needed to induce BE specific molecules. Due to the high
variability in reported methods, it is difficult to determine the most effective 
in vitro setup for studying the development of BE.

PMCID: PMC3396334
PMID: 22476962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16623-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.356394. Epub
2012 Mar 28.

Caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) protein-dependent integration of canonical Wnt
signaling on paired-box 3 (Pax3) neural crest enhancer.

Sanchez-Ferras O(1), Coutaud B, Djavanbakht Samani T, Tremblay I, Souchkova O,
Pilon N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics of Development, Department of Biological Sciences, and
BioMed Research Center, Faculty of Sciences, University of Quebec, Montreal,
Quebec H2X 3Y7, Canada.

One of the earliest events in neural crest development takes place at the neural 
plate border and consists in the induction of Pax3 expression by posteriorizing
Wnt·ß-catenin signaling. The molecular mechanism of this regulation is not well
understood, but several observations suggest a role for posteriorizing Cdx
transcription factors (Cdx1/2/4) in this process. Cdx genes are known as
integrators of posteriorizing signals from Wnt, retinoic acid, and FGF pathways. 
In this work, we report that Wnt-mediated regulation of murine Pax3 expression is
indirect and involves Cdx proteins as intermediates. We show that Pax3
transcripts co-localize with Cdx proteins in the posterior neurectoderm and that 
neural Pax3 expression is reduced in Cdx1-null embryos. Using Wnt3a-treated P19
cells and neural crest-derived Neuro2a cells, we demonstrate that Pax3 expression
is induced by the Wnt-Cdx pathway. Co-transfection analyses, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and transgenic studies
further indicate that Cdx proteins operate via direct binding to an
evolutionarily conserved neural crest enhancer of the Pax3 proximal promoter.
Taken together, these results suggest a novel neural function for Cdx proteins
within the gene regulatory network controlling neural crest development.

PMCID: PMC3351347
PMID: 22457346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Lab Invest. 2012 Jun;92(6):896-909. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.56. Epub 2012 Mar
26.

Notch signaling pathway and Cdx2 expression in the development of Barrett's
esophagus.

Tamagawa Y(1), Ishimura N, Uno G, Yuki T, Kazumori H, Ishihara S, Amano Y,
Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane
University, Izumo, Shimane, Japan.

Cdx2 expression in esophageal stem cells induced by reflux bile acids may be an
important factor for development of Barrett's esophagus, whereas Notch signaling 
is a molecular signaling pathway that plays an important role in the
determination of cell differentiation. ATOH1 (a factor associated with Notch
signaling) plays an important role in differentiation of stem cells into goblet
cells. However, the relationship between the Notch signaling pathway and Cdx2
expression in the development of Barrett's esophagus has not been explored. The
aim of this study was to investigate the interrelationship between Notch
signaling and Cdx2 in esophageal epithelial cells. The expressions of Cdx2, MUC2,
and intracellular signaling molecules related to Notch signaling (Notch1, Hes1,
and ATOH1) were examined using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
immunohistochemical staining with biopsy specimens obtained from esophageal
intestinal metaplasia (IM) with goblet cells (IM<U+207A>) and columnar epithelium not
accompanied by goblet cells (IM<U+207B>). For in vitro experiments, we employed human
esophageal epithelial cell lines (OE33, OE19, and Het-1A). After forced Cdx2
expression by applying a Cdx2 expression vector to the cells, changes in the
expressions of Notch1, Hes1, ATOH1, Cdx2, and MUC2 were analyzed by real-time PCR
and western blot analysis. Changes in expressions of Notch1, Hes1, ATOH1, Cdx2,
and MUC2 in cells were analyzed following stimulation with bile acids in the
presence or absence of Cdx2 blocking with Cdx2-siRNA. Suppressed Hes1 and
enhanced ATOH1 and MUC2 expressions were identified in IM<U+207A> specimens. Forced
expression of Cdx2 in cells suppressed Hes1, and enhanced ATOH1 and MUC2
expressions, whereas bile acids suppressed Hes1, and enhanced ATOH1, Cdx2, and
MUC2 expressions. On the other hand, these effects were blocked by siRNA-based
Cdx2 downregulation. Enhanced expression of Cdx2 by stimulation with bile acids
may induce intestinal differentiation of esophageal columnar cells by interaction
with the Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 22449796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Pathol Int. 2012 Apr;62(4):276-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2012.02804.x. Epub
2012 Feb 28.

Malignant transformation of ovarian mature cystic teratoma with a predominant
pulmonary type small cell carcinoma component.

Ikota H(1), Kaneko K, Takahashi S, Kawarai M, Tanaka Y, Yokoo H, Nakazato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Gunma, Japan. ikota@gunma-u.ac.jp

A 68-year-old woman was diagnosed with mature cystic teratoma of the left ovary
when she was 44 years old. The tumor recently enlarged rapidly, and abdominal
magnetic resonance imaging revealed an intrapelvic cystic lesion, which measured 
123 × 120 × 107 mm and contained a mural nodule. Under a clinical diagnosis of
malignant transformation of mature cystic teratoma, bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy with total hysterectomy and omentectomy were performed. The
resected specimen showed a unilocular cystic lesion containing a well-demarcated 
mural nodule measuring 35 × 30 × 25 mm in the left ovary. A microscopic
examination revealed various types of carcinoma in the mural nodule: pulmonary
type small cell carcinoma (65%), adenocarcinoma (25%), squamous cell carcinoma
(5%), and transitional cell carcinoma (5%). Small cell carcinoma was positive for
CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A. The adenocarcinoma component showed
intestinal phenotypes; i.e. cytokeratin (CK) 7(-), CK20(+), CDX2(+), estrogen
receptor(-), and progesterone receptor (-). Interestingly, CDX2 positivity was
retained in all of the carcinomas. It was assumed that the adenocarcinoma had
arisen from an intestinal epithelium in the mature cystic teratoma and then
differentiated into the diverse histological types mentioned above.

© 2012 The Authors. Pathology International © 2012 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22449232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Surg Today. 2012 Jun;42(6):515-25. doi: 10.1007/s00595-012-0167-z. Epub 2012 Mar 
23.

Differentiating rectal carcinoma by an immunohistological analysis of carcinomas 
of pelvic organs based on the NCBI Literature Survey and the Human Protein Atlas 
database.

Miura K(1), Ishida K, Fujibuchi W, Ito A, Niikura H, Ogawa H, Sasaki I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. k-miura@surg1.med.tohoku.ac.jp

The treatments and prognoses of pelvic organ carcinomas differ, depending on
whether the primary tumor originated in the rectum, urinary bladder, prostate,
ovary, or uterus; therefore, it is essential to diagnose pathologically the
primary origin and stages of these tumors. To establish the panels of
immunohistochemical markers for differential diagnosis, we reviewed 91 of the
NCBI articles on these topics and found that the results correlated closely with 
those of the public protein database, the Human Protein Atlas. The results
revealed the panels of immunohistochemical markers for the differential diagnosis
of rectal adenocarcinoma, in which [+] designates positivity in rectal
adenocarcinoma and [-] designates negativity in rectal adenocarcinoma: from
bladder adenocarcinoma, CDX2[+], VIL1[+], KRT7[-], THBD[-] and UPK3A[-]; from
prostate adenocarcinoma, CDX2[+], VIL1[+], CEACAM5[+], KLK3(PSA)[-], ACPP(PAP)[-]
and SLC45A3(prostein)[-]; and from ovarian mucinous adenocarcinoma, CEACAM5[+],
VIL1[+], CDX2[+], KRT7[-] and MUC5AC[-]. The panels of markers distinguishing
ovarian serous adenocarcinoma, cervical carcinoma, and endometrial adenocarcinoma
were also represented. Such a comprehensive review on the differential diagnosis 
of carcinomas of pelvic organs has not been reported before. Thus, much
information has been accumulated in public databases to provide an invaluable
resource for clinicians and researchers.

PMID: 22441574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012 Nov;27(11):1391-9. doi: 10.1007/s00384-012-1460-4.
Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Loss of desmocollin 1-3 and homeobox genes PITX1 and CDX2 are associated with
tumor progression and survival in colorectal carcinoma.

Knösel T(1), Chen Y, Hotovy S, Settmacher U, Altendorf-Hofmann A, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Thalkirchnerstr. 36,
80337 Munich, Germany. thomas.knoesel@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Genomewide expression profiling has identified a number of genes
differentially expressed in colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) compared to normal
tissue. Some of these genes were linked to epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We 
tested whether genes including desmocollins and homeobox genes were distinct on
the protein level and correlated the expression with clinicopathological data.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays of 402 R0-resected colorectal carcinomas of UICC
stage II or III were constructed to evaluate ten biomarkers. Furthermore, mRNA
expression of desmocollins was evaluated in eight colon cancer cell lines.
Demethylation test was performed by treatment with 5-aza-2´-deoxycytide in five
colon cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: On protein level, high expression of desmocollin 1 (DSC1) was observed
in 41.6%, DSC2 in 58.0%, DSC3 in 61.4%, E-cadherin in 71.4%, CDX2 in 58.0%, PITX1
in 55.0%, CDK4 in 0.2%, TLE1 in 1.3%, Factor H in 42.5%, and MDM2 in 0.2%.
Reduced expression of DSC1-3 was statistically linked to higher grading and DSC2,
E-cadherin and CDX2 with shorter survival in high-grade carcinomas. Multivariate 
analysis showed that pathological stage and low PITX1 expression were
statistically associated with shorter patients survival. On mRNA level, seven out
of eight cell lines exhibited no expression of DSC1, and four out of seven
restored DSC1 expression after demethylation test.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced expression of PITX1 was independently correlated to shorter 
patients survival and could serve as a prognostic marker. Decreased expression of
DSC1-3 is significantly correlated with higher tumor grading. Downregulation of
DSC1 could be explained by DNA hypermethylation in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 22438068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Carcinogenesis. 2012 May;33(5):1081-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs121. Epub 2012 Mar 
12.

Upregulation of HOXA10 in gastric cancer with the intestinal mucin phenotype:
reduction during tumor progression and favorable prognosis.

Sentani K(1), Oue N, Naito Y, Sakamoto N, Anami K, Oo HZ, Uraoka N, Aoyagi K,
Sasaki H, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Better
knowledge of the changes in gene expression that occur during gastric
carcinogenesis may lead to improvements in diagnosis, treatment and prevention.
In this study, we screened for genes upregulated in GC by comparing gene
expression profiles from microarray and serial analysis of gene expression and
identified the HOXA10 gene. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
significance of HOXA10 in GC. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that 221 
(30%) of 749 GC cases were positive for HOXA10, whereas HOXA10 was scarcely
expressed in non-neoplastic gastric mucosa except in the case of intestinal
metaplasia. Next, we analyzed the relationship between HOXA10 expression and
clinicopathological characteristics. HOXA10 expression showed a significant
inverse correlation with the depth of invasion and was observed more frequently
in the differentiated type of GC than in the undifferentiated type of GC. HOXA10 
expression was associated with GC with the intestinal mucin phenotype and
correlated with CDX2 expression. Furthermore, the prognosis of patients with
positive HOXA10 expression was significantly better than in the negative
expression cases. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide 
and wound healing assay revealed that knockdown of HOXA10 in GC cells by short
interfering RNA transfection significantly increased viability and motility
relative to the negative control, indicating that HOXA10 expression inhibits cell
growth and motility. These results suggest that expression of HOXA10 may be a key
regulator for GC with the intestinal mucin phenotype.

PMID: 22411957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2012 Nov;21(6):532-40.

Determinants of gastric CDX2 expression: a study in Mozambique.

Peleteiro B(1), Barros R, Carrilho C, Artiaga J, Cunha L, Modcoicar P, Ferreira
R, Figueiredo C, Almeida R, La Vecchia C, David L, Barros H, Lunet N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Predictive Medicine and Public Health,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. barbarap@med.up.pt

As CDX2 expression precedes the occurrence of gastric preneoplastic lesions in
the intestinal differentiation pathway, study of these steps of gastric
carcinogenesis may contribute toward understanding the early effects of gastric
cancer determinants. Our aim was to quantify the association between Helicobacter
pylori infection and other environmental factors and the gastric expression of
CDX2. Dyspeptic patients undergoing an upper digestive endoscopy
(Gastroenterology Department, Maputo Central Hospital) were consecutively invited
to participate in this study and classified as having normal stomach/chronic
nonatrophic gastritis (NS/CNAG), chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG), or intestinal 
metaplasia (IM). For all patients with CAG or IM and a subsample of NS/CNAG
patients (sex-matched and age-matched, 1 : 2), H. pylori infection and CDX2 gene 
expression were assessed by histology and PCR and by immunohistochemistry,
respectively. Age-adjusted, sex-adjusted, education-adjusted, and H. pylori
infection-adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were
computed. CDX2 expression was observed in 56 NS/CNAG (49.1%), 39 CAG (86.7%), and
all IM patients (n=12). It was more frequent among the H. pylori-infected
patients (OR=2.26, 95% CI: 1.00-5.15). Infection with high-virulence strains was 
associated with CDX2 expression in patients with CAG (cagA, OR=3.20, 95% CI:
1.35-7.52) and IM (vacA m1, OR=5.86, 95% CI: 1.08-31.62). Patients with a lower
frequency of vegetable consumption had a higher risk of marked CDX2 expression
(OR=3.64, 95% CI: 1.02-12.95). The virulence of the infecting strains and
vegetable consumption were associated with CDX2 expression and may play a role in
the progression to more advanced lesions.

PMID: 22407102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mod Pathol. 2012 Jun;25(6):893-901. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.34. Epub 2012 Mar
2.

Value of Islet 1 and PAX8 in identifying metastatic neuroendocrine tumors of
pancreatic origin.

Koo J(1), Mertens RB, Mirocha JM, Wang HL, Dhall D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA. jamie.koo@cshs.org

Neuroendocrine tumors can present as liver metastases before discovery of the
primary tumor. Islet 1 and PAX8 have recently been proposed as markers for
neuroendocrine tumors of pancreatic origin. In this study, we compared the
utility of Islet 1 and PAX8 in distinguishing pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
from neuroendocrine tumors of other sites and determined the usefulness of an
immunohistochemical panel, including TTF1, CDX2, Islet 1 and/or PAX8, in
identifying metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. A total of 110 primary
neuroendocrine tumors (33 pancreatic, 31 pulmonary, 23 ileal, 14 rectal, and 9
gastric) and 73 metastatic neuroendocrine tumors (28 pancreatic, 5 pulmonary, 37 
ileal, 1 rectal, 1 colonic, and 1 duodenal) were studied. Islet 1 and PAX8 were
positive in 27/33 (82%) and 29/33 (88%), respectively, of primary pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, and in 19/28 (68%) and 15/28 (54%), respectively, of
metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. No cases of primary (0/23) or
metastatic (0/37) ileal neuroendocrine tumors were positive with either Islet 1
or PAX8. There was Islet 1 positivity in 2/31 (6%) primary pulmonary, 12/14 (86%)
primary rectal, and 1/1 metastatic rectal neuroendocrine tumors, and PAX8
positivity in 7/31 (23%) primary pulmonary, 11/14 (79%) primary rectal, and 2/9
(22%) primary gastric neuroendocrine tumors. ROC curve analysis incorporating
sensitivity and specificity data of immunohistochemical panels for metastatic
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors showed that a four-stain panel, including Islet 
1, PAX8, TTF1, and CDX2 significantly outperformed a three-stain panel composed
of PAX8, TTF1, and CDX2 (P=0.019), and also showed a trend for better performance
compared with a three-stain panel composed of Islet 1, TTF1, and CDX2 (P=0.072). 
Both Islet 1 and PAX8 are reliable immunohistochemical markers for pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors and would be useful adjuncts to other markers (TTF1, CDX2) 
currently used to work up a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor of unknown primary.

PMID: 22388755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Dev Biol. 2012 May 1;365(1):175-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.024. Epub 2012
Feb 24.

Arx is required for normal enteroendocrine cell development in mice and humans.

Du A(1), McCracken KW, Walp ER, Terry NA, Klein TJ, Han A, Wells JM, May CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, USA.

Enteroendocrine cells of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract play a central role in
metabolism, digestion, satiety and lipid absorption, yet their development
remains poorly understood. Here we show that Arx, a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor, is required for the normal development of mouse and human
enteroendocrine cells. Arx expression is detected in a subset of Neurogenin3
(Ngn3)-positive endocrine progenitors and is also found in a subset of
hormone-producing cells. In mice, removal of Arx from the developing endoderm
results in a decrease of enteroendocrine cell types including gastrin-,
glucagon/GLP-1-, CCK-, secretin-producing cell populations and an increase of
somatostatin-expressing cells. This phenotype is also observed in mice with
endocrine-progenitor-specific Arx ablation suggesting that Arx is required in the
progenitor for enteroendocrine cell development. In addition, depletion of human 
ARX in developing human intestinal tissue results in a profound deficit in
expression of the enteroendocrine cell markers CCK, secretin and glucagon while
expression of a pan-intestinal epithelial marker, CDX2, and other non-endocrine
markers remained unchanged. Taken together, our findings uncover a novel and
conserved role of Arx in mammalian endocrine cell development and provide a
potential cause for the chronic diarrhea seen in both humans and mice carrying
Arx mutations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3322318
PMID: 22387004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Hum Pathol. 2012 Sep;43(9):1506-13. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.11.011. Epub 2012
Mar 3.

Adenomas of the gallbladder. Morphologic features, expression of gastric and
intestinal mucins, and incidence of high-grade dysplasia/carcinoma in situ and
invasive carcinoma.

Albores-Saavedra J(1), Chablé-Montero F, González-Romo MA, Ramírez Jaramillo M,
Henson DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology of Medica Sur Clinic and Foundation, Mexico City
14000, Mexico. alboresjorge@yahoo.com

We report 201 gallbladder adenomas from 91 patients most of whom were adult
females. Fifty-three (58%) patients had gallstones. In 83 (91%) patients the
adenomas were single. One gallbladder had 102 adenomas. Histologically, 165 (82%)
of 201 adenomas were classified as pyloric, 28 (14%) as intestinal, 5 (2.4%) as
foveolar, and 3 (1.4%) as biliary. Two patients had intestinal-type adenomas
coexisting with biliary papillomatosis. Twenty-eight percent of pyloric gland
adenomas contained squamoid morules. Two pyloric gland adenomas were composed
predominantly of columnar oxyphil cells. High-grade dysplasia/carcinoma in situ
was identified in 44 (27%) of 165 pyloric gland adenomas and low-grade dysplasia 
in 25 (15%) of 165. However, only 2 (1%) invasive adenocarcinomas, both of
intestinal type, arose in pyloric gland adenomas. Both patients survived more
than 5 years. Intestinal-type adenomas were classified as tubular, papillary, and
tubulopapillary. High-grade dysplasia/carcinoma in situ was recognized in 13
(46%) of 28 intestinal adenomas. However, only 1 (3.5%) invasive adenocarcinoma
with biliary phenotype arose in an intestinal-type adenoma. Foveolar adenomas
showed low-grade dysplasia, and biliary adenomas were composed of columnar cells 
similar to the normal biliary cells of the gallbladder. None of these tumors
progressed to adenocarcinoma. MUC5AC and MUC6 labeled 44 (95%) of 46 pyloric
gland adenomas, whereas CDX2 was positive in 14 (78%) of 18 intestinal adenomas
and MUC2 in 6 (33%) of 18. MUC5AC and MUC6 labeled 2 foveolar adenomas, and 2
biliary adenomas expressed only CK7. The immunophenotype of gallbladder adenomas 
justifies their classification into pyloric, intestinal, foveolar, and biliary.
Our results indicate that adenomas of the gallbladder play a minor role in the
pathway of gallbladder carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22386521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Case Rep Oncol. 2012 Jan;5(1):9-16. doi: 10.1159/000335449. Epub 2012 Jan 7.

Occult breast cancer presenting as metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary: 
clinical presentation, immunohistochemistry, and molecular analysis.

Wang J(1), Talmon G, Hankins JH, Enke C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebr., USA.

We report a rare presentation of a 66-year-old female with diffuse metastatic
adenocarcinoma of unknown primary involving liver, lymphatic system and bone
metastases. The neoplastic cells were positive for CK7 and OC125, while negative 
for CK20, thyroid transcription factor 1, CDX2, BRST-2, chromogranin,
synaptophysin, estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/neu). Fluorescence in situ hybridization
showed no amplification of the HER2/neu gene. Molecular profiling reported a
breast cancer origin with a very high confidence score of 98%. The absence of
immunohistochemistry staining for ER, PR, and HER2/neu further classified her
cancer as triple-negative breast cancer. Additional studies revealed high
expression levels of topoisomerase (Topo) I, androgen receptor, and
ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase large subunit; the results were negative for
thymidylate synthase, Topo II-a and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase. The
patient was initially treated with a combination regimen of cisplatin and
etoposide, and she experienced a rapid resolution of cancer-related symptoms.
Unfortunately, her therapy was complicated by a cerebrovascular accident (CVA),
which was thought to be related to cisplatin and high serum mucin. After recovery
from the CVA, the patient was successfully treated with second-line chemotherapy 
based on her tumor expression profile. We highlight the role of molecular
profiling in the diagnosis and management of this patient and the implication of 
personalized chemotherapy in this challenging disease.

PMCID: PMC3290025
PMID: 22379471  [PubMed]


154. Gut Liver. 2012 Jan;6(1):71-7. doi: 10.5009/gnl.2012.6.1.71. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

The Role of CDX2 in Intestinal Metaplasia Evaluated Using Immunohistochemistry.

Lee BH(1), Kim N, Lee HS, Kang JM, Park HK, Jo HJ, Shin CM, Lee SH, Park YS,
Hwang JH, Kim JW, Jeong SH, Lee DH, Jung HC, Song IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Intestinal metaplasia (IM) has been regarded as a premalignant
condition. This study evaluated the role of the transforming factor CDX2
according to the severity and type of IM.
METHODS: This analysis was performed on 383 subjects with IM in the antrum and/or
body, with diagnoses that were categorized as controls, dysplasias, and gastric
cancers. The IM grades were classified into four groups as negative, mild,
moderate or severe using the updated Sydney scoring system. The IM subtypes were 
categorized as type I, type II, and type III using high iron diamine and alcian
blue (pH 2.5) staining. The CDX2 expression in the IM foci was evaluated using
immunohistochemistry in specimens from the antrum and/or body.
RESULTS: CDX2 expression increased according to IM severity (p=0.001) but was not
associated with the IM subtype (p=0.881) in the antrum specimens. Similarly, CDX2
expression increased according to the IM grade (p=0.001) but was not associated
with the IM subtype (p=0.755) in the body specimens. CDX2 expression was also
increased according to baseline disease in the antrum, especially dysplastic and 
GC group (p=0.003), but not in the body (p=0.582). However, status of
Helicobacter pylori infection was not associated with CDX2 expression in the
antrum (p=0.692) and body (p=0.271).
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that CDX2 expression is associated with the IM
grade regardless of the IM subtype and that it was more frequent in the dysplasia
group. These results suggest that CDX2 expression might play an important role in
the progression of IM in various environments that can affect neoplastic change.

PMCID: PMC3286742
PMID: 22375174  [PubMed]


155. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2012 Jun;14(3):253-61. doi: 10.1007/s11894-012-0252-x.

Clinical implications of molecular changes in pediatric Barrett's esophagus.

Pensabene L(1), Cohen MC, Thomson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Pugliese-Ciaccio Hospital, University "Magna
Græcia" of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy, pensabene@unicz.it

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a preneoplastic condition that predisposes to
esophageal adenocarcinoma. Although data on the occurrence of BE in children are 
limited, recent studies have suggested an increase in the pediatric population.
BE is thought to be a complex disease in which individual genetic predisposition 
interacts with environmental stimuli. Early premalignant clones produce
biological and genetic heterogeneity, resulting in stepwise changes in
differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis, allowing disease progression under
selective pressure. The value of endoscopic surveillance biopsy for dysplasia and
carcinoma in patients with BE is controversial. Thus, the recognition of early
and objective alternative risk markers, less susceptible of sampling error, will 
be of relevance in the management of BE patients. The possibility of performing
molecular genetics on paraffin-embedded biopsies will expand our understanding of
the natural history of BE and may lead to the use of biomarkers to inform
treatment strategies.

PMID: 22373715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Stem Cells. 2012 May;30(5):910-22. doi: 10.1002/stem.1070.

Cnot1, Cnot2, and Cnot3 maintain mouse and human ESC identity and inhibit
extraembryonic differentiation.

Zheng X(1), Dumitru R, Lackford BL, Freudenberg JM, Singh AP, Archer TK, Jothi R,
Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, RTP, North Carolina, USA.

Embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity and self-renewal is maintained by extrinsic
signaling pathways and intrinsic gene regulatory networks. Here, we show that
three members of the Ccr4-Not complex, Cnot1, Cnot2, and Cnot3, play critical
roles in maintaining mouse and human ESC identity as a protein complex and
inhibit differentiation into the extraembryonic lineages. Enriched in the inner
cell mass of blastocysts, these Cnot genes are highly expressed in ESC and
downregulated during differentiation. In mouse ESCs, Cnot1, Cnot2, and Cnot3 are 
important for maintenance in both normal conditions and the 2i/LIF medium that
supports the ground state pluripotency. Genetic analysis indicated that they do
not act through known self-renewal pathways or core transcription factors.
Instead, they repress the expression of early trophectoderm (TE) transcription
factors such as Cdx2. Importantly, these Cnot genes are also necessary for the
maintenance of human ESCs, and silencing them mainly lead to TE and primitive
endoderm differentiation. Together, our results indicate that Cnot1, Cnot2, and
Cnot3 represent a novel component of the core self-renewal and pluripotency
circuitry conserved in mouse and human ESCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3787717
PMID: 22367759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Reproduction. 2012 Apr;143(4):477-89. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0379. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Effect of ectopic expression of homeoprotein EGAM1C on the cell morphology,
growth, and differentiation in a mouse embryonic stem cell line, MG1.19 cells.

Iha M(1), Watanabe M, Kihara Y, Sugawara S, Saito K, Soma M, Sato S, Mori Y,
Kasuga K, Kojima I, Sasamura R, Murata J, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita 010-0195, Japan.

The homeoprotein EGAM1C was identified in preimplantation mouse embryos and
embryonic stem (ES) cells. To explore the impact of EGAM1C on the hallmarks of
mouse ES cells, MG1.19 cells stably expressing EGAM1C at levels similar to those 
in blastocysts were established using an episomal expression system. In the
presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (+LIF), control transfectants with an
empty vector formed flattened cell colonies, while Egam1c transfectants formed
compacted colonies with increased E-CADHERIN expression. In Egam1c transfectants,
the cellular contents of POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, TBX3, and NANOG increased. Cell
growth was accelerated in an undifferentiated state sustained by LIF and in the
course of differentiation. During clonal proliferation, EGAM1C stabilized the
undifferentiated state. In adherent culture conditions, EGAM1C partly inhibited
the progression of differentiation at least within a 4-day culture period in the 
presence of retinoic acid by preventing the downregulation of LIF signaling with 
a robust increase in TBX3 expression. Conversely, EGAM1C enhanced the expression 
of lineage marker genes Fgf5 (epiblast), T (mesoderm), Gata6 (primitive
endoderm), and Cdx2 (trophectoderm) in -LIF conditions. In embryoid bodies
expressing EGAM1C, the expression of marker genes for extraembryonic cell
lineages, including Tpbpa (spongiotrophoblast) and Plat (parietal endoderm),
increased. These results demonstrated that the ectopic expression of EGAM1C is
capable of affecting the stabilization of an undifferentiated state and the
progression of differentiation in MG1.19 ES cells, in addition to affecting
cellular morphology and growth.

PMID: 22367590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Differentiation. 2012 Mar;83(3):116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.10.005. Epub
2011 Nov 20.

Differentiation of Caco-2 cells requires both transcriptional and
post-translational down-regulation of Myc.

Leoni BD(1), Natoli M, Nardella M, Bucci B, Zucco F, D'Agnano I, Felsani A.

Author information: 
(1)CNR, Istituto di Biologia Cellulare e Neurobiologia, Rome, Italy.

Caco-2 cancer cell line is widely used to reproduce in vitro the differentiation 
of absorptive enterocytes of human intestinal epithelium. This cell line, when
cultured over confluence for 21 days, spontaneously undergoes cell cycle arrest
and differentiates with the formation of a polarized enterocyte-like monolayer.
During this process, Myc protein is completely down-regulated, as occurs in
normal enterocytes. Caco-2 cells differ from normal enterocytes for mutations of 
APC and ß-catenin genes, factors known to be involved in the transcriptional
control of MYC gene during enterocyte differentiation. In this paper, we
investigated how Myc regulation could be achieved during Caco-2 differentiative
process, notwithstanding the APC and ß-catenin mutations. We highlighted the post
translational regulation of Myc protein as one of the essential mechanisms that
allows the exit from cell cycle and onset of differentiation of Caco-2 cells.
Moreover, we found a strong correlation between Myc protein downregulation and
the expression of the transcription factor Cdx2, suggesting the existence of a
regulative link between these two proteins.

Copyright Â© 2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22364879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Tsitologiia. 2011;53(12):930-8.

[The interaction between CDX2 transcription factor and DDX5 RNA helicase].

[Article in Russian]

Liskovykh MA, Davydov-Sinitsin AP, Marilovtseva EV, Tomilin AN, Tolkunova EN.

Previously, our results of a two-hybrid screening essay allowed us to recognize
p68 (DDX5) as a possible partner of CDX2. The recent part of research was carried
out to confirm this interaction. We show the co-localization of these proteins in
the nuclei of colon carcinoma cell line and of epithelium of villi. By means of
GST-pulldown we reveal DDX5 as a part of a complex with CDX2. During the
investigation of the effect of DDX5-CDX2 interaction upon beta-catenin-mediated
transcription regulation we note that in each of three investigated cell lines
Cdx2 acts as an activator of luciferase expression. In T98G and U20S cell lines
we observe a partial decline of beta-catenin transcription enhancing effect while
interacting with CDX2. In the cell systems studied, DDX5 acts as a weak repressor
both solely and together with CDX2 and beta-catenin. Concerning the influence
upon D1 cyclin promoter, we find that, depending on environment, CDX2 may either 
decline its transcription (U20S line) or raise it (T98G). Besides, PDGF reduces
CDX2 activity both in activation and repression. When DDX5 and CDX2 are
transfected in T98G cells together, the repressing activity of DDX5 is leveled
with activation by Cdx2. In both cell lines the native DDX5 acts as a weak
repressor of D1 cycline; PDGF treatment does no significant effect on its
activity.

PMID: 22359951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Histopathology. 2012 Jun;60(7):1133-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04170.x.
Epub 2012 Feb 20.

MUC5AC, cytokeratin 20 and HER2 expression and K-RAS mutations within mucinogenic
growth in congenital pulmonary airway malformations.

Rossi G(1), Gasser B, Sartori G, Migaldi M, Costantini M, Mengoli MC, Piccioli S,
Cavazza A, Rivasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pathologic Anatomy, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Policlinico, 
Via del Pozzo 71, Modena, Italy. rossi.giulio@policlinico.mo.it

AIMS:   To analyse the expression of several mucins (MUC1, MUC2, MUC3, MUC5AC and
MUC6), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukaemia
viral oncogene homologue 2 (HER2), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), caudal
type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and cytokeratin 20 (CK20), and the presence of mutations
of EGFR, KRAS and HER2 in congenital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAM).
METHODS AND RESULTS:   Forty-one cases of CPAM and six pulmonary sequestrations
were included. TTF-1 expression was observed in all cases but was not seen in
mucinogenic growths in CPAM. CDX2 expression was completely negative. MUC1
expression was noted in 12 (29%) CPAM and in 33% sequestrations. MUC5AC was noted
in only five cases (26%) by immunohistochemistry and was found in the mucinogenic
proliferations of type 1 CPAM. No immunolabelling was noted for the other mucins.
EGFR was expressed variably in almost all cases, while HER2 and CK20 was seen
exclusively in the mucinogenic proliferations. All mucinous growths were
characterized by KRAS mutations. No EGFR and HER2 gene alterations were
identified.
CONCLUSIONS:   KRAS mutations and MUC5AC, CK20 and HER2 expression was seen in
all mucinogenic proliferations, supporting the neoplastic nature of these
cytologically bland growths. These findings emphasize the importance of complete 
surgical resection of such lesions.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22348416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Med Case Rep. 2012 Feb 13;6:58. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-6-58.

Atypical presentation of colon adenocarcinoma: a case report.

Tumwine LK(1), Kagimu M, Ocama P, Segamwenge I, Masiira-Mukasa N, Wamala D,
Dworak O, Opio CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health
Sciences, Makerere University, P,O,Box 7072, Kampala, Uganda.
tumwinelynnette@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Adenocarcinoma of the colon is the most common histopathological
type of colorectal cancer. In Western Europe and the United States, it is the
third most common type and accounts for 98% of cancers of the large intestine. In
Uganda, as elsewhere in Africa, the majority of patients are elderly (at least 60
years old). However, more recently, it has been observed that younger patients
(less than 40 years of age) are presenting with the disease. There is also an
increase in its incidence and most patients present late, possibly because of the
lack of a comprehensive national screening and preventive health-care program. We
describe the clinicopathological features of colorectal carcinoma in the case of 
a young man in Kampala, Uganda.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 27-year-old man from Kampala, Uganda, presented with gross
abdominal distension, progressive loss of weight, and fever. He was initially
screened for tuberculosis, hepatitis, and lymphoma, and human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome infection. After a battery of tests, a
diagnosis of colorectal carcinoma was finally established with hematoxylin and
eosin staining of a cell block made from the sediment of a liter of cytospun
ascitic fluid, which showed atypical glands floating in abundant extracellular
mucin, suggestive of adenocarcinoma. Ancillary tests with alcian blue/periodic
acid Schiff and mucicarmine staining revealed that it was a mucinous
adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry showed strong positivity with CDX2,
confirming that the origin of the tumor was the colon.
CONCLUSIONS: Colorectal carcinoma has been noted to occur with increasing
frequency in young adults in Africa. Most patients have mucinous adenocarcinoma, 
present late, and have rapid disease progression and poor outcome. Therefore,
colorectal malignancy should no longer be excluded from consideration only on the
basis of a patient's age. A high index of suspicion is important in the diagnosis
of colorectal malignancy in young African patients.

PMCID: PMC3305541
PMID: 22330123  [PubMed]


162. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jun;1822(6):843-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.01.012.
Epub 2012 Feb 3.

TNF-a-induced down-regulation of CDX2 suppresses MEP1A expression in colitis.

Coskun M(1), Olsen AK, Holm TL, Kvist PH, Nielsen OH, Riis LB, Olsen J, Troelsen 
JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Medical Section, Herlev Hospital, University
of Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark. mehmet.coskun@regionh.dk

BACKGROUND/AIMS: High levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines are linked to
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The transcription factor Caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) plays a crucial role in differentiation of
intestinal epithelium and regulates IBD-susceptibility genes, including meprin 1A
(MEP1A). The aim was to investigate the expression of CDX2 and MEP1A in colitis; 
to assess if they are regulated by tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), and finally
to reveal if CDX2 is involved in a TNF-a-induced down-regulation of MEP1A.
METHODS: Expression of CDX2 and MEP1A was investigated in colonic biopsies of
ulcerative colitis (UC) patients and in dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced
colitis. CDX2 protein expression was investigated by immunoblotting and
immunohistochemical procedures. CDX2 and MEP1A regulation was examined in
TNF-a-treated Caco-2 cells by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
with reporter gene assays, and the effect of anti-TNF-a treatment was assessed
using infliximab. Finally, in vivo CDX2-DNA interactions were investigated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: The CDX2 and MEP1A mRNA expression was significantly decreased in active
UC patients and in DSS-colitis. Colonic biopsy specimens from active UC showed
markedly decreased CDX2 staining. TNF-a treatment diminished the CDX2 and MEP1A
mRNA levels, a decrease which, was counteracted by infliximab treatment. Reporter
gene assays showed significantly reduced CDX2 and MEP1A activity upon TNF-a
stimulation. Finally, TNF-a impaired the ability of CDX2 to interact and activate
its own, as well as the MEP1A expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results indicate that a TNF-a-mediated down-regulation
of CDX2 can be related to suppressed expression of MEP1A during intestinal
inflammation.

© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22326557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Reprod Med. 2012 Jan-Feb;57(1-2):68-73.

Primary intestinal-type adenoma of the vagina arising directly from
endocervical-type adenosis: a case report.

Can B(1), Gün S, Aydin O, Kandemir B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ondokuz Mayis,
Antalya, Turkey. canbilge@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Tubular or villous adenomas are common neoplasms of the
gastrointestinal tract. Other locations where these adenomas are found, including
the female genital tract, are very rare. A literature review documents that only 
eight cases of tubular or villous adenomas found within the vagina have been
published.
CASE: A 25-year-old, Caucasian woman presented with a history of primary
infertility and postcoital bleeding. Gynecologic examination revealed a polypoid 
mass attached to the lateral wall of the vagina, approximately 2 cm above the
introitus. The polypectomy specimen was a soft, tan, polypoid mass measuring 2 x 
1 x 0.8 cm in size. Microscopically, the lesion was identical to pure tubular
adenomas of the large intestine. Positive immunohistochemical staining for
cytokeratin (CK) 20, CK 7, CEA and Cdx2 were identified.
CONCLUSION: An intestinal-type adenoma should be included in the differential
diagnosis of a vaginal polypoid mass lesion in women. Our review of the
literature presents the risk of malignant transformation.

PMID: 22324273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Korean Surg Soc. 2011 Dec;81 Suppl 1:S43-6. doi:
10.4174/jkss.2011.81.Suppl1.S43. Epub 2011 Nov 25.

Metastasis to the breast from colonic adenocarcinoma.

Noh KT(1), Oh B, Sung SH, Lee RA, Chung SS, Moon BI, Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

A 63-year-old woman was referred to a breast surgeon with a breast mass
discovered incidentally during follow-up study after colon cancer surgery.
Invasive adenocarcinoma was revealed on core needle biopsy. Wide excision of the 
breast including the tumor was performed. On standard histological examination
the tumor showed features of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The
immunohistochemistry study revealed positive results for cytokeratin (CK)20 and
CDX2, but negative for CK7. These are typical characteristics for colon cancer.
Considering her history of subtotal colectomy for sigmoid colon cancer, it is
presumable that the mass in the breast was of colonic origin, and it was an
extremely rare case of metastasis to the breast from primary colorectal neoplasm.
Although the instance is rare, clinicians should keep the possibility of breast
metastasis from colorectal cancer in mind for early and correct diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3267064
PMID: 22319737  [PubMed]


165. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Apr;36(4):601-11. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318242e21c.

Colorectal poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas and mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinomas: insights into the diagnostic immunophenotype,
assessment of methylation profile, and search for prognostic markers.

La Rosa S(1), Marando A, Furlan D, Sahnane N, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy.
stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

Colorectal poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) and mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinomas (MANECs) are well-recognized entities generally
known to be associated with biological aggressiveness and poor patient survival. 
However, a few published papers have highlighted the existence of a subgroup of
tumors with a better survival than expected; however, to date, there are no
established parameters that usefully identify this category. In the present study
we have investigated the morphologic features, the CpG methylator phenotype
(CIMP), microsatellite instability (MSI), and the immunohistochemical profile,
including the expression of transcription factors (TTF1, ASH1, CDX2, and PAX5),
stem cell markers (CD117 and CD34), and cytokeratins 7 and 20, in a series of 39 
carcinomas (27 NECs and 12 MANECs) to better characterize such neoplasms and to
search for prognostic indicators. No different patient survival was observed
between NECs and MANECs. Neoplasms showed a heterogenous spectrum of morphologic 
and immunohistochemical features; however, only large-cell subtype, significant
peritumoral lymphoid reaction, CD117 immunoreactivity, vascular invasion, and
MSI/CIMP+ status were significantly correlated with prognosis on univariable
analysis. Furthermore, vascular invasion and CD117 immunoreactivity were
independent prognostic markers on multivariable analysis. In addition to these
prognostic features, neoplasms showed different expression of transcription
factors, stem cell markers, and cytokeratins that should be considered for
diagnostic purposes and, especially, for discriminating among possible
differential diagnoses.

PMID: 22314183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Aug;33(8):1844.e1-9. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.038. Epub 2012 Feb 4.

Vitamin D receptor and Alzheimer's disease: a genetic and functional study.

Wang L(1), Hara K, Van Baaren JM, Price JC, Beecham GW, Gallins PJ, Whitehead PL,
Wang G, Lu C, Slifer MA, Züchner S, Martin ER, Mash D, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance
MA, Gilbert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine 1501 NW 10 Ave, Miami, Florida, USA.

Genetic studies on late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) have repeatedly mapped
susceptibility loci onto chromosome 12q13, encompassing the vitamin D receptor
(VDR) gene. Epidemiology studies have indicated vitamin D insufficiency as a risk
factor for AD. Given that VDR is the major mediator for vitamin D's actions, we
sought to clarify the role of VDR in late-onset AD. We conducted an association
study in 492 late-onset AD cases and 496 controls with 80 tagging single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). The strongest association was found at a
promoter SNP rs11568820 (P = 9.1 × 10(-6), odds ratio (OR) = 1.69), which resides
within the transcription factor Cdx-2 binding site and the SNP has been also
known as CDX2. The risk-allele at rs11568820 is associated with lower VDR
promoter activity (p < 10(-11)). The overexpression of VDR or vitamin D treatment
suppressed amyloid precursor protein (APP) transcription in neuroblastoma cells
(p < 0.001). We provide both statistical evidence and functional data suggesting 
VDR confers genetic risk for AD. Our findings are consistent with epidemiology
studies suggesting that vitamin D insufficiency increases the risk of developing 
AD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22306846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Diagn Cytopathol. 2013 Oct;41(10):896-900. doi: 10.1002/dc.22816. Epub 2012 Feb
1.

Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration diagnosis of
mediastinal lymph node metastasis of mucinous adenocarcinoma: arborizing stromal 
meshwork fragments as a diagnostic clue.

Samad A(1), Peltola JC, Mitiek MO, Jessurun J, Manivel JC, Pambuccian SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Endobronchial Ultrasound-Guided Transbronchial Needle Aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) is a
reliable and accurate method for the diagnosis of mediastinal metastases in
patients with pulmonary and extrathoracic neoplasms. We report the cytopathologic
findings of a case of metastatic signet-ring cell carcinoma with abundant
extracellular mucin production in the mediastinal lymph nodes of a 41-year-old
woman, who presented with nausea, abdominal pain, and weight loss. Imaging
studies showed a renal mass, numerous lung nodules, and mediastinal and
retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. EBUS-TBNA of level 4R and 7 lymph nodes showed
abundant, thick, "clean" mucus with entrapped ciliated bronchial cells, rare
histiocytes, and fragments of cartilage. No neoplastic cells could be identified 
in Diff-Quik®-stained smears during the rapid on-site evaluation, but rare
signet-ring cells were identified in the Papanicolaou-stained smears and
cellblock sections. A distinctive feature of the aspirates was the presence of
large branching (arborizing), "spidery" stromal fiber meshwork fragments. These
stained metachromatically (magenta) with Romanowsky-type stains and cyanophilic
to orangeophilic with Papanicolaou stains and showed occasional attached bland
spindle cells, but had no capillary lumina or CD31-staining endothelial cells.
The tumor cells were strongly and diffusely positive for CEA, CDX2, CK7, CK20,
and MUC2, supporting the diagnosis of a metastatic signet-ring cell
adenocarcinoma, most likely of gastrointestinal origin. We believe that the
presence of the large spidery stromal fiber fragments is a useful clue to the
presence of a mucinous neoplasm in EBUS-TBNA and allows the differentiation of
the neoplastic mucus from contaminating endobronchial mucus.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., a Wiley company.

PMID: 22298306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5(1):96-101. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Malignant intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasm of the common bile duct.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Recently, several cases of intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasm (IOPN) of the
liver and hepatic bile ducts have been reported. The author herein reports the
first case of IOPN of the common bile duct (CBD). A 78-year-old man was admitted 
to our hospital because of jaundice. Imaging modalities including US, CT, MRI
revealed an intraductal tumor of the middle CBD and biliary dilation distal to
the tumor. A partial resection of the CBD was performed. Grossly, a papillary
tumor measuring 20 × 15 mm was found within the CBD. Mucus is absent.
Histologically, the papillary tumor was composed of atypical oncocytes. The
atypia was enough to be diagnosed as adenocarcinoma. No invasive features were
noted. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for pancytokeratins
(CK), CK 7, CK 18, CK19, EMA, CA19-9, CEA, mitochondria, p53 protein, C-erbB2,
Ki-67 (labeling = 80%), MUC2, MUC5AC and MUC-6,. The tumor cells were negative
for CK8, CK20, chromogranin, synaptophysin, neuron-specific enolase, S100
protein, CD56, MUC1, CD10 and CDX2. These immunohistochemical findings were
compatible with IOPN. The patient died of other non-tumorous disease 7 year after
the operation. In summary, the author presented the first case of IOPN of the
CBD.

PMCID: PMC3267492
PMID: 22295153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Theriogenology. 2012 Apr 1;77(6):1240-51. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.11.004. Epub 2012 Jan 29.

cDNA microarray analysis of gene expression in parthenotes and in vitro produced 
buffalo embryos.

Abdoon AS(1), Ghanem N, Kandil OM, Gad A, Schellander K, Tesfaye D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Reproduction and Artificial Insemination, Veterinary
Research Division, National Research Centre, Dokki 12622, Cairo, Egypt.
assabdoon@yahoo.com

The retarded development of parthenote embryo could be due to aberrant epigenetic
imprinting, which may disrupt many aspects and lead to conceptus demise. The
present work was conducted to: 1) compare the development of in vitro produced
(IVP) and parthenogenetically developed (P) buffalo embryos from the 2-cell to
blastocyst stage; 2) investigate the global gene expression profile and search
for new candidate transcripts differing between IVP and P buffalo blastocyst
using cDNA microarray analysis (validated by Real Time PCR); 3) follow the
particular expression patterns of PLAC8 and OCT4 genes at five different stages
of preimplantation development by Real Time PCR; and 4) study the expression of
CDX2 at the blastcocyst stage. Cleavage rate was higher (P < 0.05) in P than IVP 
buffalo embryos, while, progression to blastocyst and number of cells per
blastocyst were lower (P < 0.05) in P than IVP blastocysts. Microarray analysis
indicate that 56 differentially expressed genes between the two groups, of which 
51 genes (91.07%) were up-regulated, and five genes were downregulated in IVP
blastocyst, using 1.4 fold-changes as a cutoff. Differentially expressed genes
are related to translation, nucleic acid synthesis, cell adhesion and
placentation. Validation of candidate genes revealed that the transcript
abundance of PTGS2, RPS27A, TM2D3, PPA1, AlOX15, RPLO and PLAC8 were
downregulated (7/8) in parthenote blastocyst compared to the IVP blastocyst.
PLAC8 gene expression was higher (P < 0.05) at 2-cell, morula and blastocyst
stages in IVP embryos compared with parthenote embryos. The OCT4 gene expression 
was higher (P < 0.05) in 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell and blastocysts produced in
vitro. In conclusion, the retarded development of parthenogenetic buffalo embryos
could be due to downregulation of genes related to translation, nucleic acid
synthesis, cell adhesion, and placental development. The low expression of PLAC8 
and OCT4 during the different stages of development may be responsible, in part, 
to the failure of development of parthenote buffalo embryos.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22289221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Pathobiology. 2012;79(3):154-61. doi: 10.1159/000335694. Epub 2012 Jan 28.

Cytokeratin expression profiling in gastric carcinoma: clinicopathologic
significance and comparison with tumor-associated molecules.

Takami H(1), Sentani K, Matsuda M, Oue N, Sakamoto N, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The expressions of cytokeratin (CK) 7 and 20 have been studied in
various primary and metastatic carcinomas, and their determination may help
distinguish the site of origin of metastatic carcinomas. However, little is known
about the molecular basis that determines variations in CK patterns in gastric
cancers (GCs). The aim of the present study was to analyze the CK expression
patterns in a large number of GCs and to investigate how the CK patterns
correlate with clinicopathologic parameters, histology, mucin phenotype or
several tumor-related molecules.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We immunohistochemically examined the CK7/CK20 patterns,
mucin expression profiles (MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2 and CD10), and the cancer-related
molecules (CDX2, p53, EGFR and ß-catenin), using a tissue microarray with 870
GCs. The GCs were divided into four patterns; 17% of CK7+/CK20+, 57% of
CK7+/CK20-, 9% of CK7-/CK20+ and 17% of CK7-/CK20. GCs with the CK7-/CK20-
pattern demonstrated a close relation to undifferentiated adenocarcinoma. CK7
expression was significantly correlated with the expression of MUC5AC and MUC6,
while CK20 expression was correlated with MUC2 and CDX2. There were statistically
significant associations between CK expression patterns and mucin phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the CK7/CK20 expression patterns in GCs
demonstrated different clinicopathologic features and molecular signatures.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22286119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Pathobiology. 2012;79(2):107-14. doi: 10.1159/000334269. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

Liver-intestine cadherin expression is associated with intestinal differentiation
and carcinogenesis in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.

Morimatsu K(1), Aishima S, Kayashima T, Hayashi A, Nakata K, Oda Y, Taguchi T,
Tsuneyoshi M, Tanaka M, Oda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) are classified into
four phenotypes according to the WHO classification. Recently, intestinal-type
IPMN has been suggested to grow with a distinct carcinogenetic pathway. Like
mucin 2, oligomeric mucus/gel forming (MUC2) and caudal-related homeobox 2
(CDX2), liver-intestine cadherin (LI cadherin) is an intestine-specific marker.
We aimed to investigate the roles of LI cadherin expression in IPMN.
METHODS: We examined LI cadherin expression in 135 cases of IPMN by
immunohistochemical staining and the quantitative real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: LI cadherin protein and mRNA levels were significantly higher in
intestinal-type IPMN than in nonintestinal-type IPMN (protein level, p < 0.001;
mRNA level, p = 0.0312). A positive correlation was found between protein and
mRNA of LI cadherin (p = 0.0037). The positivity rates of LI cadherin expression 
were significantly higher in CDX2-positive cases than in CDX2-negative cases (p <
0.001). In 41 intestinal-type IPMNs, LI cadherin-positive rates tended to
increase gradually, from IPMN with low-grade dysplasia (IPMN-L) to IPMN with an
associated invasive carcinoma (IPMN-IC) [IPMN-L vs. IPMN with high-grade
dysplasia (IPMN-H); p = 0.0357, IPMN-L vs. IPMN-IC; p = 0.0230] and positively
correlated with the Ki-67 labeling index (p = 0.0408), whereas this tendency was 
not recognized in nonintestinal-type IPMNs.
CONCLUSIONS: LI cadherin is associated with an intestinal phenotype and an
'intestinal pathway' of carcinogenesis in IPMN.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22286087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 15;363(2):426-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.01.010. Epub 2012 
Jan 21.

Cdx function is required for maintenance of intestinal identity in the adult.

Hryniuk A(1), Grainger S, Savory JG, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, K17 8M5.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed in the
intestinal epithelium from early development, with expression persisting
throughout the life of the animal. While our understanding of the function of Cdx
members in intestinal development has advanced significantly, their roles in the 
adult intestine is relatively poorly understood. In the present study, we found
that ablation of Cdx2 in the adult small intestine severely impacted villus
morphology, proliferation and intestinal gene expression patterns, resulting in
the demise of the animal. Long-term loss of Cdx2 in a chimeric model resulted in 
loss of all differentiated intestinal cell types and partial conversion of the
mucosa to a gastric-like epithelium. Concomitant loss of Cdx1 did not exacerbate 
any of these phenotypes. Loss of Cdx2 in the colon was associated with a shift to
a cecum-like epithelial morphology and gain of cecum-associated genes which was
more pronounced with subsequent loss of Cdx1. These findings suggest that Cdx2 is
essential for differentiation of the small intestinal epithelium, and that both
Cdx1 and Cdx2 contribute to homeostasis of the colon.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Anim Reprod Sci. 2012 Jan;130(1-2):91-8. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2011.12.011. 
Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Lipid-rich blastomeres in the two-cell stage of porcine parthenotes show bias
toward contributing to the embryonic part.

Kim K(1), Park S, Roh S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming & Embryo Biotechnology Lab, School of Dentistry, CLS21 
and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.

This study was designed to determine the fate of the blastomeres in two-cell
porcine parthenotes that display uneven size (larger vs. smaller) or cytoplasmic 
brightness (darker vs. brighter) during development to the blastocyst stage. For 
the non-invasive tracing of cell lineage, lipophilic fluorescence dye DiI (red)
and DiD (blue) was randomly microinjected into each of two different blastomeres 
in each embryo. In blastocysts derived from the two-cell parthenotes with
unevenly-sized blastomeres, no biased contribution was found in the progeny of
either blastomere. However, in the blastocysts derived from the two-cell
parthenote having different cytoplasmic brightnesses, the progeny of darker (more
lipid-rich cytoplasm) blastomeres were more than two-fold more likely to form the
embryonic part (43.6%; 17/39) than they were to form the abembryonic part (17.9%;
7/39), while the contribution of brighter blastomeres (less lipid) was just the
opposite. The expressions of four marker genes involved in lineage allocation
(Cdx2, Tead4, Oct4 and Carm1) were also analyzed in darker and brighter
blastomeres of two-cell parthenotes using quantitative RT-PCR. The expression of 
Carm1 that encodes arginine methyltransferase 1 and that promotes inner cell mass
(ICM) differentiation was significantly higher (P<0.05) in darker blastomeres.
The ICM marker Oct4 also tended to be more highly expressed in the darker
blastomeres, while Cdx2 and the TE marker Tead4 showed comparably higher
expressions in the brighter blastomeres. However, in all cases, the marginal
differences in the expression levels of Oct4, Cdx2 and Tead4 were not
statistically significant (P>0.05). Our findings indicate that expression of
genes related to early differentiation, especially Carm1, are partially
associated with lipid droplet distribution in the two-cell porcine parthenote and
may lead to biased embryonal axis formation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22277840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Jan 23;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-9.

The value of CDX2 and cytokeratins 7 and 20 expression in differentiating
colorectal adenocarcinomas from extraintestinal gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas:
cytokeratin 7-/20+ phenotype is more specific than CDX2 antibody.

Bayrak R(1), Haltas H, Yenidunya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fatih University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Metastatic adenocarcinoma from an unknown primary site is a
common clinical problem. Determining the cytokeratin (CK) 7/CK20 pattern of
tumors is one of the most helpful procedures for this purpose since the
CK7-/CK20+ pattern is typical of colorectal adenocarcinomas. CDX2, a critical
nuclear transcription factor for intestinal development, is expressed in
intestinal epithelium and adenocarcinomas. In the present study, we compared the 
sensitivity and specificity of CDX2 expression and the CK7-/CK20+ phenotype in
differentiating colorectal adenocarcinomas from pancreatic and gastric
adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: CK7/CK20 staining pattern and CDX2 expression were evaluated in 118
cases of colorectal, 59 cases of gastric, and 32 cases of pancreatic
adenocarcinomas. The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative
predictive values of the CK7-/CK20+ phenotype and of CDX2 expression were
analyzed.
RESULTS: The CK7-/CK20+ immunophenotype was expressed by 75 of 118 (64%)
colorectal and 3 of 59 (5%) gastric tumors and was not observed in any pancreatic
adenocarcinomas. The CK7+/CK20+ immunophenotype was expressed in 24/118 (20%) of 
colon, 28/59 (48%) of gastric and 7/32 (22%) of pancreatic adenocarcinomas. The
CK7+/CK20- expression pattern was observed in only 2% (2 of 118) of colorectal
carcinomas. CDX2 was expressed in 114 of 118 (97%) colorectal, 36 of 59 (61%)
gastric, and 5 of 32(16%) pancreatic adenocarcinomas. There was no significant
association between CDX2 expression and tumor differentiation in colorectal
carcinomas. In gastric carcinomas, CDX2 expression was more common in intestinal 
type tumors than in diffuse type carcinomas. The CK7-/CK20+ phenotype showed a
specificity of 96.7% in predicting colorectal adenocarcinomas, which was superior
to that of CDX2 expression. CDX2 expression at both cut-off levels (> 5% and >
50%) had a higher sensitivity (96.6% and 78%) than the CK phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Both the CK7-/CK20+ phenotype and expression of the antibody CDX2
are highly specific and sensitive markers of colorectal origin. CDX2 expression
should be a useful adjunct for the diagnosis of intestinal adenocarcinomas,
particularly when better established markers such as CK7 and CK20 yield equivocal
results. The CK7-/CK20+ phenotype is superior in its specificity and positive
predictive value and might be preferred.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found
here:http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/4851011866354821.

© 2012 Bayrak et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3331835
PMID: 22268990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cancer Cell. 2012 Jan 17;21(1):36-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.004.

Bile acid and inflammation activate gastric cardia stem cells in a mouse model of
Barrett-like metaplasia.

Quante M(1), Bhagat G, Abrams JA, Marache F, Good P, Lee MD, Lee Y, Friedman R,
Asfaha S, Dubeykovskaya Z, Mahmood U, Figueiredo JL, Kitajewski J, Shawber C,
Lightdale CJ, Rustgi AK, Wang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. michael.quante@lrz.tum.de

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) arises from Barrett esophagus (BE),
intestinal-like columnar metaplasia linked to reflux esophagitis. In a transgenic
mouse model of BE, esophageal overexpression of interleukin-1ß phenocopies human 
pathology with evolution of esophagitis, Barrett-like metaplasia and EAC.
Histopathology and gene signatures closely resembled human BE, with upregulation 
of TFF2, Bmp4, Cdx2, Notch1, and IL-6. The development of BE and EAC was
accelerated by exposure to bile acids and/or nitrosamines, and inhibited by IL-6 
deficiency. Lgr5(+) gastric cardia stem cells present in BE were able to lineage 
trace the early BE lesion. Our data suggest that BE and EAC arise from gastric
progenitors due to a tumor-promoting IL-1ß-IL-6 signaling cascade and
Dll1-dependent Notch signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3266546
PMID: 22264787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Mar;36(3):331-42. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31823d08d6.

Divergent expression of MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2, CD10, and CDX-2 in dysplasia and
intramucosal adenocarcinomas with intestinal and foveolar morphology: is this
evidence of distinct gastric and intestinal pathways to carcinogenesis in Barrett
Esophagus?

Khor TS(1), Alfaro EE, Ooi EM, Li Y, Srivastava A, Fujita H, Park Y, Kumarasinghe
MP, Lauwers GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gastrointestinal Pathology Service, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114-2696, USA.

Dysplasia in Barrett esophagus has been recognized to be morphologically
heterogenous, featuring adenomatous, foveolar, and hybrid phenotypes. Recent
studies have suggested a tumor suppressor role for CDX-2 in the
metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence. The phenotypic stability and role of
CDX-2 in the neoplastic progression of different types of dysplasias have not
been evaluated. Thirty-eight endoscopic mucosal resections with dysplasia and/or 
intramucosal carcinoma (IMC) arising in Barrett esophagus were evaluated for the 
expression of MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2, CD10, and CDX-2. The background mucosa was also
evaluated. The results were correlated with morphologic classification and
clinicopathologic parameters. Of 38 endoscopic mucosal resections, 23 had IMC and
dysplasia, 8 had IMC only, and 7 had dysplasia only. Among dysplastic lesions,
73% were foveolar, 17% were adenomatous, and 10% were hybrid. Twenty of 23 cases 
with dysplasia and adjacent IMC showed an identical immunophenotype of dysplasia 
and IMC comprising 16 gastric, 3 intestinal, and 1 mixed immunophenotype. Three
cases showed discordance of dysplasia and IMC immunophenotype. These findings
suggest that most Barrett-related IMC cases are either gastric or intestinal,
with phenotypic stability during progression supporting separate gastric and
intestinal pathways of carcinogenesis. CDX-2 showed gradual downregulation of
expression during progression in adenomatous dysplasia but not in foveolar or
hybrid dysplasia, supporting a tumor suppressor role, at least in the intestinal 
pathway. CDX-2 was also found to be expressed to a greater degree in intestinal
metaplasia compared with nonintestinalized columnar metaplasia. Consistent with
CDX-2 as a tumor suppressor, this suggests that nonintestinalized columnar
metaplasia may be an unstable intermediate state at risk for neoplastic
progression.

PMID: 22261707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029634. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Prognostic significance of vitamin D receptor polymorphisms in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.

Hama T(1), Norizoe C, Suga H, Mimura T, Kato T, Moriyama H, Urashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Epidemiology, Jikei University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, vitamin D
receptor (VDR) polymorphisms and haplotypes are reported to be associated with
survival. We hypothesized that a similar association would be observed in
patients with head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
METHODS: In a post-hoc analysis of our previous prospective cohort study, VDR
polymorphisms including Cdx2 G/A (rs11568820), FokI C/T (rs10735810), BsmI A/G
(rs1544410), ApaI G/T (rs7976091), and TaqI T/C (rs731236) were genotyped by
sequencing in 204 consecutive patients with HNSCC who underwent tumor resection. 
Progression-free survival was compared between VDR polymorphisms using
Kaplan-Meier survival curves with log-rank tests and Cox proportional hazard
models adjusting for age, gender, smoking status, primary tumor sites,
postoperative stages, existence of residual tumor, and postoperative treatment
with chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
RESULTS: During a median follow-up of 1,047 days, tumor progression and death
occurred in 76 (37.3%) and 27 (13.2%) patients, respectively. The FokI T/T
genotype was associated with poor progression-free survival: median survival for 
T/T was 265 days compared with 1,127 days for C/C or C/T (log-rank test:
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0004; adjusted hazard ratio, 3.03; 95% confidence interval, 1.62 to 5.67;
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001). In contrast, the other polymorphisms (Cdx2, BsmI, ApaI, TaqI) showed 
no significant association with progression-free survival. The A-T-G
(Cdx2-FokI-ApaI) haplotype demonstrated a significant association with a higher
progression rate (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that VDR polymorphisms and haplotypes may be
associated with prognosis in patients with HNSCC, although the sample size is not
large enough to draw definitive conclusions.

PMCID: PMC3248455
PMID: 22242137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Jul;19(7):1109-16. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.196. Epub 2012
Jan 13.

ATRX induction by mutant huntingtin via Cdx2 modulates heterochromatin
condensation and pathology in Huntington's disease.

Lee J(1), Hong YK, Jeon GS, Hwang YJ, Kim KY, Seong KH, Jung MK, Picketts DJ,
Kowall NW, Cho KS, Ryu H.

Author information: 
(1)VA Boston Healthcare System, MA, USA.

Aberrant chromatin remodeling is involved in the pathogenesis of Huntington's
disease (HD) but the mechanism is not known. Herein, we report that mutant
huntingtin (mtHtt) induces the transcription of alpha thalassemia/mental
retardation X linked (ATRX), an ATPase/helicase and SWI/SNF-like chromatin
remodeling protein via Cdx-2 activation. ATRX expression was elevated in both a
cell line model and transgenic model of HD, and Cdx-2 occupancy of the ATRX
promoter was increased in HD. Induction of ATRX expanded the size of
promyelocytic leukemia nuclear body (PML-NB) and increased trimethylation of H3K9
(H3K9me3) and condensation of pericentromeric heterochromatin, while knockdown of
ATRX decreased PML-NB and H3K9me3 levels. Knockdown of ATRX/dXNP improved the
hatch rate of fly embryos expressing mtHtt (Q127). ATRX/dXNP overexpression
exacerbated eye degeneration of eye-specific mtHtt (Q127) expressing flies. Our
findings suggest that transcriptional alteration of ATRX by mtHtt is involved in 
pericentromeric heterochromatin condensation and contributes to the pathogenesis 
of HD.

PMCID: PMC3374076
PMID: 22240898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2011 Oct-Dec;54(4):860-1. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.91536.

Aberrant CDX2 expression and metastatic endometrial adenocarcinoma to the lung.

D'Antonio A.

Comment on
    Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2011 Oct-Dec;54(4):858-60.

PMID: 22234143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2011 Oct-Dec;54(4):858-60. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.91535.

CDX2 positivity in metastatic endometrial carcinoma to the lung: a diagnostic
pitfall.

Deodhar KK, Gupta S, Karimundackal G, Tongaonkar HB.

Comment in
    Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2011 Oct-Dec;54(4):860-1.

PMID: 22234142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mech Dev. 2012 Jan-Feb;128(11-12):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.12.004. Epub
2011 Dec 30.

Fate maps of ventral and dorsal pancreatic progenitor cells in early somite stage
mouse embryos.

Miki R(1), Yoshida T, Murata K, Oki S, Kume K, Kume S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The origins of liver progenitor cells have been extensively studied, but evidence
on the origin of pancreatic precursor cells is currently limited. Pancreatic and 
duodenal homeobox gene 1 (Pdx1) is one of the earliest known markers for the
pancreas. A transgenic mouse line expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)
under the control of the Pdx1 promoter showed that Pdx1/GFP expression was first 
observed in the mid-region of the anterior intestinal portal (AIP) lip at
embryonic day (E) 8.5 at the 5-6 somite stage (ss). The liver progenitors were
confirmed to originate from separate domains at the lateral endoderm and the
inner part of the medial AIP as previously reported (Tremblay and Zaret, 2005),
which turned out to lie caudally to the Pdx1/GFP-expressing domain. To confirm if
the early Pdx1/GFP-positive cells give rise to the pancreatic bud, we labeled the
cells on the lip of the AIP using the carbocyanine dye CM-DiI and traced their
fates in 1-4 ss, 5-6 ss and 7-9 ss E8.5 embryos using an ex utero whole embryo
culture method. At 1 ss, the ventral pancreas progenitors were observed in the
lateral endoderm, not yet being segregated from the liver or gut progenitors.
Cells that contributed solely to the ventral pancreas first appeared at the AIP
lip from 5 ss. At 5-6 ss, cells from the medial of the AIP lip contributed to the
ventral pancreas. The pancreas fate region become narrower as development
progresses. At 7-9 ss, the cells contributing to the ventral pancreas resided in 
a narrow region of the AIP lip. From 5 ss, the right flanking region contributes 
to the posterior gut, and the left flanking region contributes to the anterior
gut. Dorsal pancreatic progenitors originate from the dorsal endoderm at the 3-6 
somite level at 7-9 ss, though they have not yet diverged from the dorsal gut
progenitors at this stage.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22230751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Dis Esophagus. 2012 Sep-Oct;25(7):630-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-2050.2011.01300.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Squamous cell carcinoma in Barrett's esophagus: field effect versus metastasis.

Streppel MM(1), Siersema PD, de Leng WW, Morsink FH, Vleggaar FP, Maitra A,
Montgomery EA, Offerhaus GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands. M.M.Streppel@umcutrecht.nl

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a premalignant condition with an increased risk of
developing esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Risk factors for EAC overlap with
those for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), but ESCC is surprisingly
rare in BE. We report two cases of ESCC directly surrounded by BE. Both patients 
had a previous medical history of cancers, i.e., head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas, and were using alcohol and smoking tobacco. Using
immunohistochemistry for p63, CK5, CK7, and CDX2, it was confirmed that these
carcinomas were pure squamous cell carcinomas, and not EACs or esophageal
adenosquamous carcinomas arising from BE. Using TP53 mutation and loss of
heterozygosity analysis, we established that the ESCCs in BE were not metastases 
of the previously diagnosed head and neck squamous cell carcinomas but de novo
primary ESCCs. This study shows the strength of molecular analysis as an adjunct 
to the histopathologic diagnosis for distinguishing between metastases of prior
cancers and primary cancers. Furthermore, these cases imply that presence of BE
is not protective with regards to developing ESCC in the lower one third of the
esophagus. We suggest that their ESCCs arose from islets of squamous epithelium
in BE.

© 2011 Copyright the Authors. Journal compilation © 2011, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
and the International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMCID: PMC3568520
PMID: 22221671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Surg Endosc. 2012 Jul;26(7):1892-7. doi: 10.1007/s00464-011-2121-3. Epub 2012 Jan
5.

Long-term results of ablation with antireflux surgery for Barrett's esophagus: a 
clinical and molecular biologic study.

Kauttu T(1), Räsänen J, Krogerus L, Sihvo E, Puolakkainen P, Salo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Thoracic and Esophageal Surgery, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Haartmaninkatu 4, PO Box 340, 00029 HUS Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The initial results from ablation therapy for metaplastic/dysplastic 
Barrett's esophagus (BE) are promising, but the results of extended follow-up
evaluation are seldom reported.
METHODS: Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser ablation and successful
antireflux surgery for 18 patients with metaplastic BE primarily resulted in the 
total histologic eradication of BE in 15 patients (83%). After antireflux
surgery, the healing of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) was objectively
verified in all the patients. At late follow-up evaluation, endoscopy,
conventional histology, molecular oxidative stress analyses in comparison with
normal control conditions (8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine [8-OHdG], superoxide dismutase
[SOD], glutathione [GSH], myeloperoxydase [MP]), and immunohistochemistry (p53,
and Cdx2, caudal-related homeobox gene 2, marking intestinal differentiation) of 
the neosquamous epithelium were performed.
RESULTS: At the end of the follow-up period (range, 3-15 years; mean, 8 years),
intestinal metaplasia without dysplasia was detected histologically in eight
patients (44%). Six patients had macroscopic BE (mean length, 3.5 cm; range 1-10 
cm). The neosquamous epithelium was histologically normal, with no underlying
columnar tissue. The fundoplication was endoscopically normal in 14 patients
(82%). The 8-OHdG level was higher in the neosquamous epithelium than in the
control conditions in the distal esophagus (4.3 vs. 0.52; P = 0.0002) and the
proximal esophagus (1.8 vs. 0.95; P = 0.006). Likewise, SOD activity was higher
in the neosquamous epithelium (0.38 vs. 0.12; P = 0.0005), whereas MP activity
and GSH levels remained normal. Three patients showed slight nuclear p53
expression (typical in normal inflammatory reactions), whereas Cdx2 positivity
was confined to one case with recurrent intestinal metaplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: The neosquamous mucosa, generated by the ablation of BE and the
treatment of GERD with fundoplication, was stable during long-term follow-up
evaluation in two-thirds of the patients with initial eradication. It had normal 
p53 expression and no Cdx2 protein expression. The oxidative stress of the
neosquamous esophagus remained high, although the clinical significance of this
is unclear.

PMID: 22219010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mov Disord. 2012 Feb;27(2):264-71. doi: 10.1002/mds.24016. Epub 2011 Dec 31.

25-hydroxyvitamin D, vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms, and severity of
Parkinson's disease.

Suzuki M(1), Yoshioka M, Hashimoto M, Murakami M, Kawasaki K, Noya M, Takahashi
D, Urashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

We aimed to examine associations among serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels,
1,25-dihyroxyvitamin D levels, vitamin D receptor polymorphisms, vitamin D
binding protein gene polymorphisms, and the severity of Parkinson's disease. In
137 patients, the severity of Parkinson's disease was evaluated using Hoehn &
Yahr stage and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Stage by neurologists and
compared with 25-hydroxyvitamin D, 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D, vitamin D receptor
polymorphisms, ie, FokI (rs10735810), BsmI (rs1544410), Cdx2 (rs11568820), ApaI
(rs7976091), and TaqI (rs731236), and vitamin D binding protein gene
polymorphisms GC1 (rs7041)/GC2 (rs4588) in a cross-sectional study. Mean ±
standard deviation levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D were 21.1 ± 9.0 ng/mL. Levels
were deficient (<20 ng/mL) in 49% of patients. In contrast, 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D
levels were considered normal in all patients. Higher circulating
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels were significantly associated with milder Parkinson's 
disease evaluated by Hoehn & Yahr stage (P = .002) and total Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Stage (P = .004) even after multivariate adjustment for 8
covariates, including disease duration. However, significant associations were
not observed in 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D levels. Under multivariate analysis with
25-hydroxyvitamin D as well as other 8 covariates including disease duration,
carriers of vitamin D receptor FokICC genotype had a milder form of Parkinson's
disease: odds ratio, 0.32; 95% confidence interval, 0.16 to 0.66, P = 0.002.
These results suggest that higher 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and the vitamin D
receptor FokICC genotype may be independently associated with milder forms of
Parkinson's disease. However, significant associations were not observed in
1,25-hydroxyvitamin D levels.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

PMID: 22213340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Turk Patoloji Derg. 2012;28(1):67-71. doi: 10.5146/tjpath.2012.01100.

[Low grade sinonasal adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Turkish]

Sayilgan AT(1), Kamali G, Ozcan D, Emre F, Hatipoglu A.

Author information: 
(1)S. B. Okmeydani Egitim ve Arastirma Hastanesi, Patoloji Bölümü, Istanbul,
Türkiye. tulaysay@gmail.com

Sinonasal adenocarcinoma is a rare neoplasm which is classified as 'intestinal'
or 'nonintestinal' type, depending on its resemblance to gastrointestinal mucosa.
These tumors are associated with occupational and environmental carcinogens. In
this study, a fifty-year-old oil-painter male patient with a low-grade
nonintestinal type sinonasal adenocarcinoma originating from the left middle
concha and ethmoid sinus is presented. Microscopical examination revealed many
infiltrative glandular structures, most of which were cystically dilated and some
of which were smaller in diameter, arranged back to back in loose fibrous stroma 
as well as intraglandular papillary and micropapillary structures forming complex
branches or a cribriform pattern. The glands were lined by epithelial cells that 
were faintly eosinophilic and relatively abundant cubical/ cylinderical
cytoplasms and mildly pleomorphic round/oval nuclei, with rare mitotic figures.
Intraluminal and focally intracytoplasmic mucin was demonstrated with Alcian
Blue, mucicarmin and PAS stains. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were strongly
and diffusely positive with CK7; focally and weakly positive with CK20 and
negative with CDX2 in accordance with the nonintestinal type. S-100, Actin and
p63, applied for investigating the myoepithelial and salivary glandular origins, 
were all negative. Prognostic markers, TTF-1 and p53 were negative; while the
Ki-67 index was 2%. The fact that intestinal type sinonasal adenocarcinomas are
generally high grade, while nonintestinal tumors are histologically low grade
makes this morphological and immunohistochemical-based classification valuable in
predicting the prognosis of the disease. In addition to the morphological and
immunohistochemical findings, clinical information stands out in the
differentiation of the tumor from benign or malignant primary lesions or
metastatic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22207435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell Reprogram. 2012 Feb;14(1):29-37. doi: 10.1089/cell.2011.0060. Epub 2011 Dec 
28.

Follicular growth-stimulated cows provide favorable oocytes for producing cloned 
embryos.

Sugimura S(1), Kobayashi S, Hashiyada Y, Ohtake M, Kaneda M, Yamanouchi T,
Matsuda H, Aikawa Y, Watanabe S, Nagai T, Kobayashi E, Konishi K, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)National Livestock Breeding Center, Nishigo, Fukushima, Japan.

We examined the influence of recipient oocytes on in vitro development, oxygen
consumption, and gene expression in the resulting cloned bovine embryos. Oocytes 
derived from slaughterhouse ovaries and ovum pickup (OPU)-derived oocytes were
used as recipient cytoplasts for the production of cloned embryos. A series of
OPU sessions was conducted on Holstein cows without follicular growth treatment
(FGT). In the same cows, we then performed dominant follicle ablation and
subsequently administered follicle-stimulating hormone and prostaglandin F(2a)
with controlled internal drug release device before a second series of OPU.
Cumulus cells collected from single Holstein cows were used as donor cells. After
measurement of oxygen consumption at the blastocyst stage with modified scanning 
electrochemical microscopy, analysis of 10 genes (CDX2, IFN-tau, PLAC8, OCT4,
SOX2, NANOG, ATP5A1, GLUT1, AKR1B1, and IGF2R) was performed with real-time
RT-PCR. Rates of fusion, cleavage, and blastocyst formation were not different
among the treatment groups. Levels of oxygen consumption in cloned blastocysts
derived from slaughterhouse ovaries or OPU without FGT were significantly lower
than in blastocysts derived from artificial insemination (AI). However, oxygen
consumption was increased in cloned blastocysts derived from OPU with FGT,
depending on the individual oocyte donor. Furthermore, gene expression of IFN-tau
and OCT4 in cloned blastocysts derived from OPU with FGT was similar to that in
AI-derived blastocysts, whereas expression of those genes in cloned blastocysts
derived from slaughterhouse ovaries or OPU without FGT was significantly
different from that in AI-derived blastocysts. Thus, recipient oocytes collected 
by OPU in combination with manipulation of follicular growth in donor cows are
suitable for producing cloned embryos.

PMID: 22204594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2011;52(4):1369-75.

Synchronous carcinoma of the ascending colon and caecum.

Gruia C(1), Foarfa C, Streba L, Manescu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova,
Romania.

The caecum and the ascending colon are the colon segments most frequently
affected by tumoral synchronism. Synchronous colorectal carcinoma
etiopathogenesis is complex and most likely by malignancy of preexisting adenomas
(adenoma-adenocarcinoma sequence). The following tumoral synchronism clinical
case's particularity is represented by the simultaneous diagnosis of a flat-type 
adenocarcinoma of the caecum (less common histopathological type) and of a
mucinous adenocarcinoma on the ascending colon. Tumor profiles of both carcinomas
were examined histologically and immunohistochemically, emphasizing: (1) tumor
proliferation different histological type; (2) residual adenomas in the periphery
of the flat-type adenocarcinoma; (3) hardly microscopic detectable invasive
character of the flat-type carcinoma; (4) mucinous carcinoma's infiltrating
character and its immunohistochemical phenotype; (5) both tumor aggressiveness.

PMID: 22203948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):875-885.e3. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.12.037. 
Epub 2011 Dec 24.

Cdx2 controls expression of the protocadherin Mucdhl, an inhibitor of growth and 
ß-catenin activity in colon cancer cells.

Hinkel I(1), Duluc I, Martin E, Guenot D, Freund JN, Gross I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, F-67200 Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The intestine-specific homeobox transcription factor Cdx2 is
an important determinant of intestinal identity in the embryonic endoderm and
regulates the balance between proliferation and differentiation in the adult
intestinal epithelium. Human colon tumors often lose Cdx2 expression, and
heterozygous inactivation of Cdx2 in mice increases colon tumorigenesis. We
sought to identify Cdx2 target genes to determine how it contributes to
intestinal homeostasis.
METHODS: We used expression profiling analysis to identify genes that are
regulated by Cdx2 in colon cancer cells lines. Regulation and function of a
potential target gene were further investigated using various cell assays.
RESULTS: In colon cancer cell lines, Cdx2 directly regulated the transcription of
the gene that encodes the protocadherin Mucdhl. Mucdhl localized to the apex of
differentiated cells in the intestinal epithelium, and its expression was reduced
in most human colon tumors. Overexpression of Mucdhl inhibited low-density
proliferation of colon cancer cells and reduced tumor formation in nude mice. One
isoform of Mucdhl interacted with ß-catenin and inhibited its transcriptional
activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcription factor Cdx2 activates expression of the
protocadherin Mucdhl, which interacts with ß-catenin and regulates activities of 
intestinal cells. Loss of Cdx2 expression in colon cancer cells might reduce
expression of Mucdhl and thereby lead to tumor formation.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22202456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. World J Urol. 2013 Apr;31(2):281-7. doi: 10.1007/s00345-011-0813-x. Epub 2011 Dec
23.

Vitamin D receptor gene variants and clinical outcomes after androgen-deprivation
therapy for prostate cancer.

Pao JB(1), Yang YP, Huang CN, Huang SP, Hour TC, Chang TY, Lan YH, Lu TL, Lee HZ,
Juang SH, Huang CY, Bao BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Yangming Branch, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Molecular epidemiology studies have shown that vitamin D receptor (VDR) 
gene polymorphisms are associated with prostate cancer risk. However, the
prognostic value of these polymorphisms on clinical outcomes in prostate cancer
patients receiving androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) has not been determined.
METHODS: We evaluated the association of five common VDR polymorphisms, ApaI,
Tru9I, BsmI, FokI, and Cdx2, with clinicopathologic characteristics and clinical 
outcomes, including disease progression, prostate cancer-specific mortality, and 
all-cause mortality, in a cohort of 601 prostate cancer patients treated with
ADT.
RESULTS: Of the five VDR polymorphisms, FokI rs2228570 and BsmI rs1544410 were
associated with Gleason score at diagnosis (P = 0.043) and prostate-specific
antigen nadir following ADT (P = 0.023), respectively. The haplotype analysis
revealed that the A-A-G (ApaI-Tru9I-BsmI) compared with C-G-G individuals were
more likely to have high Gleason score (P = 0.050). However, none of these
polymorphisms were significantly associated with disease progression and
mortality after ADT.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest study to date investigating the association of
VDR polymorphisms and clinical outcomes in prostate cancer patients receiving
ADT. Polymorphisms in the VDR gene might be associated with Gleason score, but
these polymorphisms had no main effect on predicting response to ADT.

PMID: 22193519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Development. 2012 Feb;139(3):465-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.070722. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Cdx2 determines the fate of postnatal intestinal endoderm.

Stringer EJ(1), Duluc I, Saandi T, Davidson I, Bialecka M, Sato T, Barker N,
Clevers H, Pritchard CA, Winton DJ, Wright NA, Freund JN, Deschamps J, Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Henry Wellcome Building, University of Leicester, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK.

Knock out of intestinal Cdx2 produces different effects depending upon the
developmental stage at which this occurs. Early in development it produces
histologically ordered stomach mucosa in the midgut. Conditional inactivation of 
Cdx2 in adult intestinal epithelium, as well as specifically in the Lgr5-positive
stem cells, of adult mice allows long-term survival of the animals but fails to
produce this phenotype. Instead, the endodermal cells exhibit cell-autonomous
expression of gastric genes in an intestinal setting that is not accompanied by
mesodermal expression of Barx1, which is necessary for gastric morphogenesis.
Cdx2-negative endodermal cells also fail to express Sox2, a marker of gastric
morphogenesis. Maturation of the stem cell niche thus appears to be associated
with loss of ability to express positional information cues that are required for
normal stomach development. Cdx2-negative intestinal crypts produce subsurface
cystic vesicles, whereas untargeted crypts hypertrophy to later replace the
surface epithelium. These observations are supported by studies involving
inactivation of Cdx2 in intestinal crypts cultured in vitro. This abolishes their
ability to form long-term growing intestinal organoids that differentiate into
intestinal phenotypes. We conclude that expression of Cdx2 is essential for
differentiation of gut stem cells into any of the intestinal cell types, but they
maintain a degree of cell-autonomous plasticity that allows them to switch on a
variety of gastric genes.

PMCID: PMC3252350
PMID: 22190642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3456-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1242. Epub 2011
Dec 20.

Cdx2 homeoprotein inhibits non-homologous end joining in colon cancer but not in 
leukemia cells.

Renouf B(1), Soret C, Saandi T, Delalande F, Martin E, Vanier M, Duluc I, Gross
I, Freund JN, Domon-Dell C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, F-67200 Strasbourg, France.

Cdx2, a gene of the paraHox cluster, encodes a homeodomain transcription factor
that plays numerous roles in embryonic development and in homeostasis of the
adult intestine. Whereas Cdx2 exerts a tumor suppressor function in the gut, its 
abnormal ectopic expression in acute leukemia is associated to a pro-oncogenic
function. To try to understand this duality, we have hypothesized that Cdx2 may
interact with different protein partners in the two tissues and set up
experiments to identify them by tandem affinity purification. We show here that
Cdx2 interacts with the Ku heterodimer specifically in intestinal cells, but not 
in leukemia cells, via its homeodomain. Ku proteins do not affect Cdx2
transcriptional activity. However, Cdx2 inhibits in vivo and in vitro the DNA
repair activity mediated by Ku proteins in intestinal cells. Whereas Cdx2 does
not affect the recruitment of Ku proteins and DNA-PKcs into the DNA repair
complex, it inhibits DNA-PKcs activity. Thus, we report here a new function of
Cdx2, acting as an inhibitor of the DNA repair machinery, that may contribute to 
its tumor suppressor function specifically in the gut.

PMCID: PMC3333856
PMID: 22189105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 10;287(7):4773-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.301531. Epub 2011 
Dec 19.

AGR2 gene function requires a unique endoplasmic reticulum localization motif.

Gupta A(1), Dong A, Lowe AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and the Stanford Digestive Disease Center, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Soluble proteins are enriched in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by retrograde
transport from the Golgi that is mediated by the KDEL receptors. In addition to
the classic carboxyl-terminal KDEL motif, a variety of sequence variants are also
capable of receptor binding that result in ER localization. Although different ER
localization signals that exhibit varying affinities for the KDEL receptors
exist, whether there are functional implications was unknown. The present study
determines whether AGR2 requires a specific ER localization signal to be
functionally active. AGR2 is expressed in most human adenocarcinomas and serves a
role in promoting growth and the transformed phenotype. Using two different cell 
lines in which AGR2 induces expression of either the EGFR ligand amphiregulin or 
the transcription factor CDX2, only the highly conserved wild-type
carboxyl-terminal KTEL motif results in the appropriate outcome. Deletion of the 
KTEL motif results in AGR2 secretion and loss of AGR2 function. AGR2 function is 
also lost when ER residence is achieved with a carboxyl-terminal KDEL or KSEL
instead of a KTEL motif. Thus variations in ER localization sequences may serve a
specific functional role, and in the case of AGR2, this role is served
specifically by KTEL.

PMCID: PMC3281655
PMID: 22184114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. World J Gastrointest Surg. 2011 Nov 27;3(11):159-66. doi:
10.4240/wjgs.v3.i11.159.

CDX2 as a marker for intestinal differentiation: Its utility and limitations.

Saad RS(1), Ghorab Z, Khalifa MA, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Reda S Saad, Zeina Ghorab, Mahmoud A Khalifa, Department of Pathobiology,
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center, University of Toronto, Ontario, ON M4N 3M5,
Canada.

CDX2 is a nuclear homeobox transcription factor that belongs to the
caudal-related family of CDX homeobox genes. The gene encoding CDX2 is a
nonclustered hexapeptide located on chromosome 13q12-13. Homeobox genes play an
essential role in the control of normal embryonic development. CDX2 is crucial
for axial patterning of the alimentary tract during embryonic development and is 
involved in the processes of intestinal cell proliferation, differentiation,
adhesion, and apoptosis. It is considered specific for enterocytes and has been
used for the diagnosis of primary and metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma. CDX2 
expression has been reported to be organ specific and is normally expressed
throughout embryonic and postnatal life within the nuclei of epithelial cells of 
the alimentary tract from the proximal duodenum to the distal rectum. In this
review, the authors elaborate on the diagnostic utility of CDX2 in
gastrointestinal tumors and other neoplasms with intestinal differentiation.
Limitations with its use as the sole predictor of a gastrointestinal origin of
metastatic carcinomas are also discussed.

PMCID: PMC3240675
PMID: 22180832  [PubMed]


194. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Nov 14;17(42):4729-33. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i42.4729.

Neuroendocrine and squamous colonic composite carcinoma: case report with
molecular analysis.

Wentz SC(1), Vnencak-Jones C, Chopp WV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232-2561, United States. sabrina.c.wentz@vanderbilt.edu

Composite colorectal carcinomas are rare. There are a modest number of cases in
the medical literature, with even fewer cases describing composite carcinoma with
neuroendocrine and squamous components. There are to our knowledge no reports of 
composite carcinoma molecular alterations. We present a case of composite
carcinoma of the splenic flexure in a 33 year-old Caucasian male to investigate
the presence and prognostic significance of molecular alterations in rare colonic
carcinoma subtypes. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue was
hematoxylin and eosin- and mucicarmine-stained according to protocol, and
immuno-stained with cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, CDX2, AE1/AE3, chromogranin-A and
synaptophysin. DNA was extracted from FFPE tissues and molecular analyses were
performed according to lab-developed methods, followed by capillary
electrophoresis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed admixed neuroendocrine and
keratinized squamous cells. Positive nuclear CDX2 expression confirmed intestinal
derivation. CK7 and CK20 were negative. Neuroendocrine cells stained positively
for synaptophysin and AE1/AE3 and negatively for chromogranin and mucicarmine.
Hepatic metastases showed a similar immunohistochemical profile. Molecular
analysis revealed a G13D KRAS mutation. BRAF mutational testing was negative and 
microsatellite instability was not detected. The patient had rapid disease
progression on chemotherapy and died 60 d after presentation. Although the G13D
KRAS mutation normally predicts an intermediate outcome, the aggressive tumor
behavior suggests other modifying factors in rare types of colonic carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3233680
PMID: 22180717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Diagn Cytopathol. 2012 Jan;40(1):56-61. doi: 10.1002/dc.21599. Epub 2011 Jan 6.

Malignant effusion of chromophobe renal-cell carcinoma: cytological and
immunohistochemical findings.

Teresa P(1), Grazia ZM, Doriana M, Irene P, Michele S.

Author information: 
(1)Rovereto Hospital, Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Rovereto, Italy.
teresa.pusiol@apss.tn.it

Malignant effusions because of renal-cell carcinoma (RCC) are an unusual event
and occur in patients with papillary and clear cell tumors. We have studied a
65-year-old man who underwent right renal tumorectomy, diagnosed as chromophobe
RCC (pT1). After 16 months, the patient presented cough and fever. Positron
emission computed tomography demonstrated extensive mediastinal lymphadenopathy. 
Chest radiograph showed right pleural effusion. The cytological examination of
the fluid showed malignant cells. Immunohistochemistry had been performed on
primary renal tumor and on cell block of pleural effusion. The renal tumor showed
positivity for parvalbumin, cytokeratin (CK) 7, C-kit (CD117), E-cadherin, and
RCC marker. The neoplastic cells of pleural effusion showed positive
immunohistochemical staining for parvalbumin, RCC marker, pancytokeratin,
epithelial membrane antigen, CK7, C-kit (CD117), E-cadherin, and CD10. They were 
negative for thyroid transcription factor-1, CK20, calretinin, CK5, D2-40
podoplanin, CDX2, and Wilms' tumor suppressor gene. Malignant effusion secondary 
to RCC is rare. In several studies, RCC had been the cause of 1-2.2% of malignant
pleural fluids. Chromophobe RCC tends to be localized into the kidney and to be
of nuclear grade 2 at presentation, factors that probably explain its more
favorable outlook. In our case, the chromophobe RCC was asymptomatic and was
discovered because abdominal pain due to stone in the gallbladder. The tumor had 
an unusual aggressive clinical behavior. Immunohistochemistry performed on the
cell block let to establish the renal origin and the chromophobe histotype of
malignant cells found in the pleural fluid.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22180239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Histopathology. 2011 Dec;59(6):1100-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04048.x.

Two distinct pathways of carcinogenesis in primary sclerosing cholangitis.

Zen Y(1), Quaglia A, Heaton N, Rela M, Portmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
yoh.zen@kcl.ac.uk

AIMS: To identify clinicopathological characteristics of cholangiocarcinoma and
premalignant lesions arising in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis
(PSC).
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study consisted of 25 patients with PSC and bile duct
neoplasia [16 with cholangiocarcinoma and nine with biliary intra-epithelial
neoplasia (BilIN) equivalent to biliary dysplasia]. Tumour cell morphology,
growth patterns, history of inflammatory bowel disease and postoperative survival
were recorded. Immunohistochemistry for CK7, CK20, MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6 and
CDX2 was performed to characterize cell phenotypes. Cholangiocarcinoma and BilIN 
were classified into intestinal (n = 14) and non-intestinal classical (n = 11)
types. Intestinal-type lesions showed histological features resembling intestinal
dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. Intestinal-type cholangiocarcinoma commonly showed
intraductal papillary proliferation and mucinous nodule formation.
Intestinal-type lesions often had an intestinal immunophenotype that was not
detected in classical-type lesions: CK20, 50% versus 0% (P = 0.007); MUC2, 86%
versus 0% (P < 0.001); CDX2, 54% versus 0% (P = 0.003). Less commonly,
intestinal-type cholangiocarcinoma showed perineural invasion (P = 0.003).
Patients with intestinal-type cholangiocarcinoma had a more favourable
cancer-specific prognosis than those with classical-type cholangiocarcinoma (P = 
0.043).
CONCLUSIONS: Bile ducts in PSC show two distinct dysplasia-carcinoma sequences as
evidenced by differences in cell morphology, growth patterns, immunophenotypes
and grade of malignancy.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22175890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2012 Sep;21(5):423-31. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0b013e32834ef1aa.

Association between environmental factors and CDX2 expression in gastric cancer
patients.

Peleteiro B(1), Lunet N, Wen X, Afonso LP, Mendes N, Barros R, Carneiro F,
Almeida R, Barros H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Predictive Medicine and Public Health,
University of Porto Medical School, Porto, Portugal. barbarap@med.up.pt

Intestinal differentiation, mediated by CDX2, may occur both in intestinal and in
diffuse gastric carcinomas. In an attempt to ascertain the environmental
determinants of the intestinal differentiation pathway, we aimed to compare the
exposure to environmental factors in gastric cancer cases according to the CDX2
expression status. We evaluated 270 patients undergoing gastrectomy due to
gastric adenocarcinoma. Cases were classified according to tumour location within
the stomach, Laurén's histological type and CDX2 expression. Participants
completed a comprehensive structured questionnaire on sociodemographic and
behavioural characteristics and provided a blood sample for assessment of
Helicobacter pylori infection status. Odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals
were computed by unconditional logistic regression to compare cancer cases
according to histological type and CDX2 expression status. Approximately 80% of
the patients expressed CDX2, regardless of the histological type and location of 
the tumour. No statistically significant or consistent associations between
sociodemographic or environmental exposures and CDX2 expression status were
observed, except for a decreased risk of CDX2 expression in those with higher
coffee consumption for tumours of the intestinal type (= 1 vs. <1 cup/day: odds
ratio =0.36, 95% confidence interval: 0.13-0.97). In conclusion, this is the
first study to use CDX2 expression as a finer marker of intestinal
differentiation to distinguish aetiologically distinct subgroups of gastric
cancer, adding new evidence to the previous research on the determinants of
cancer of Laurén's intestinal and diffuse types.

PMID: 22157086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Diagn Cytopathol. 2013 Sep;41(9):812-6. doi: 10.1002/dc.22811. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Cytopathologic characteristics of the primary strumal carcinoid tumor of the
ovary: a case report with emphasis on differential diagnostic considerations.

Hayashi T(1), Haba R, Kushida Y, Kadota K, Katsuki N, Miyai Y, Shibuya S, Sasaki 
M, Bando K, Matsunaga T, Hata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University,
Kagawa, Japan.

Primary strumal carcinoid tumor of the ovary (SCTO) is an extremely rare entity, 
though the survival rate is excellent if the disease is confined to one ovary. A 
case is presented here in which intraoperative squash smears in a 45-year-old
woman with a left adnexal mass revealed dispersed or small clusters of neoplastic
cells forming loosely cohesive gland-like structures with abundant cytoplasm. The
nuclear chromatin was finely granular with a "salt and pepper" appearance and
occasional tiny nucleoli. The position of the nucleus presented a vaguely
plasmacytoid appearance. Small fragments of thyroidal colloid-like structures
were also identified. A cytopathologic diagnosis of a SCTO was suggested. Further
evaluation and immunohistochemical studies were conducted on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded material. Cords or nests of uniform cells with abundant
cytoplasm, and eccentric nuclei with coarse chromatin and occasional colloidal
tissue were identified on H&E sections. The tumor cells showed diffuse and strong
cytoplasmic staining for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD56, and vimentin but
were negative for calretinin, a-inhibin or CDX2. The proliferative index with
MIB-1 was around 3%. Thyroidal colloid-like structures were immunoreactive for
thyroglobulin and TTF-1 stains. The diagnosis of primary SCTO was confirmed based
on cytopathologic, histopathological, and immunohistochemical results, and the
location of the tumor. Awareness of the cytopathological findings of SCTO can
assist in diagnosing this rare entity correctly.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., a Wiley company.

PMID: 22144175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2011;4(4):299-308. Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Differentiated intestinal epithelial cells express high levels of TGF-ß receptors
and exhibit increased sensitivity to growth inhibition.

Rathor N(1), Wang SR, Chang ET, Rao JN.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

BACKGROUND: Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) within crypts continuously divide 
and differentiate as they migrate up towards the luminal surface of the mucosa.
With the onset of differentiation, IECs lose their proliferative potential, but
the exact mechanism remains unknown. This current study examined the involvement 
of the TGF-ß signaling pathway in this process.
METHODS: Studies were conducted in the IEC-6 cell line derived from rat small
intestinal crypt cells. Cell differentiation was induced by forced expression of 
the Cdx2 gene, a transcription factor responsible for controlling intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation.
RESULTS: Forced expression of the Cdx2 gene in stable Cdx2-transfected IEC-6
cells resulted in a differentiated phenotype as indicated by morphological
features and increased expression of sucrase-isomaltase. Levels of TGF-ß type I
receptor (TGFß-RI) and TGF-ß type II receptor (TGFß-RII) increased in these
differentiated epithelial cells. The induced TGFß-RI and TGFß-RII expression in
Cdx2-transfected IEC-6 cells was associated with increased sensitivity to
TGF-ß-induced growth inhibition. Depletion of cellular polyamines further
increased TGF-ß receptor expression and additionally enhanced the response to
TGF-ß-induced growth inhibition. Increased TGFß-RI and RII in polyamine-deficient
cells were also associated with an induction in JunD/AP-1 activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the loss of the proliferative potential 
in differentiated IECs results partially from the increased expression of TGF-ß
receptors.

PMCID: PMC3228585
PMID: 22140601  [PubMed]


200. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2011 Dec;108(12):2016-22.

[Advanced poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the colon with micropapillary
carcinoma components except specific cytokeratin expressions, report of a case].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi S(1), Kuroiwa G, Hirayama M, Tobioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Otaru Kyokai Hospital. sho@sapmed.ac.jp

A 53-year-old woman had a tumor in the ascending colon. CT revealed tumor
invasion to the surrounding tissue and also showed multiple swollen lymph nodes, 
liver metastases and ascites. Colonic tumor with severe stenosis was diagnosed by
colonoscopy and the obtained biopsy specimen revealed poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for CEA, CK7, MUC2,
MUC5AC·MUC6 (spotty) and negative for CK20, CDX2, TTF-1, GCDFP-15. Cytology of
ascites also showed malignant cells. Although these protein expressions were
specific for not primary colonic cancer but metastasis from ovarian cancer, the
case was clinically and pathologically diagnosed as poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma of the colon with peritoneal metastases composed of micropapillary
carcinoma. MLH1 and MSH2 protein expressions were normal. Even though modified
FOLFOX6 chemotherapy was administered, the patient rapidly worsened due to
pulmonary carcinomatous lymphangiosis and died a month after diagnosis. To
determine the high-risk group of metastases, it seems necessary to require the
accumulation of further cases evaluated by a precise immunohistochemistrical
approach.

PMID: 22139489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011 Dec;135(12):1601-5. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2009-0713-RS.

Adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder.

Roy S(1), Parwani AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pennsylvania
15261, USA. roys911@gmail.com

Primary adenocarcinoma of urinary bladder is an uncommon neoplasm and is a source
of diagnostic confusion with adenocarcinomas arising in adjacent organs,
especially colon. These tumors show varied histologic picture and degree of
differentiation. Clinical association with bladder exstrophy and schistosomiasis 
has been well documented. Primary bladder adenocarcinomas have overlapping
histologic and immunohistochemical features with adenocarcinomas arising from
other primary sites and the suggested immunohistochemical panel includes
cytokeratins 7 and 20, 34ßE12, thrombomodulin, CDX2, and ß-catenin. Clinical,
imaging, histologic, and immunohistochemical correlation should be done while
rendering this diagnosis, as prognosis and therapeutic options for primary versus
metastatic adenocarcinoma vary widely.

PMID: 22129192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Pathobiology. 2011;78(6):302-10. doi: 10.1159/000321703. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Molecular pathology of gastric carcinoma.

Jang BG(1), Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Korea.

Gastric carcinoma (GC) is a biologically heterogeneous disease involving numerous
genetic and epigenetic alterations. A very small proportion of GCs can be caused 
by a specific germ-line mutation of the E-cadherin gene (CDH1). Sporadic GC is
developed through multistep processes that begin with Helicobacter pylori-induced
atrophic gastritis. Epstein-Barr virus is another infectious cause of GC, and the
above two infection-associated GCs are characterized by global CpG island
methylation in the promoter region of cancer-related genes. Mutations of tumor
protein p53 (TP53) and ß-catenin (CTNNB1) genes occur early in the development of
GC and contribute to gastric carcinogenesis. Furthermore, significant numbers of 
GCs show loss of Runx3 due to hemizygous deletion and hypermethylation of the
promoter region. Aberrant Cdx2 expression has been shown in precancerous lesions 
as well as GC. However, it remains unclear whether Cdx2 plays an oncogenic role
in gastric carcinogenesis. GC with microsatellite instability is also a
well-defined subset exhibiting distinctive clinicopathologic features. Targeted
therapy against GC with ERBB2 amplification recently improved the prognosis of
patients with advanced GC. In addition, epigenetic changes in GC could be
attractive targets for cancer treatment with modulators. A genome-wide search has
been undertaken to identify novel methylation-silenced genes in GC, which will
help us understand the overall molecular features of GC and further provide novel
opportunities in the treatment of GC.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22104201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Gac Med Mex. 2011 Sep-Oct;147(5):432-6.

[A rare case of colorectal micropapillary carcinoma].

[Article in Spanish]

Lino-Silva LS(1), Salcedo-Hernández RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía Patológica, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología,
Secretaría de Salud, México. saul.lino.sil@gmail.com

Micropapillary carcinoma is regarded as an aggressive variant of adenocarcinoma
in any location. It is histologically characterized by papillary cell clusters
surrounded by clear spaces. The reported proportion of micropapillary carcinoma
component in the entire tumor ranges from 5-80% and no pure cases have been
reported. To date, there are approximately 130 cases reported in the colorectum. 
We recently examined a patient with a pure micropapillary carcinoma showing
co-expression of CK7, CK20, and absence of CDX2, which had an aggressive tumor
with extensive perineural, vascular, and lymphatic invasion as well as extensive 
nodal metastasis. The presence of a micropapillary carcinoma in the colorectum
seemed to be closely related with nodal metastasis, as observed in micropapillary
carcinomas from other organs. Thus, if a micropapillary component is identified
in a tumor, particularly in a biopsy specimen, extensive surgical resection
should be considered due to the high potential for nodal metastasis, even if the 
preoperative diagnosis is a pedunculated early colorectal cancer.

PMID: 22089678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012 Jan;16(1):7-14; discussion 14-5. doi:
10.1007/s11605-011-1739-8. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Long-term follow-up of Barrett's epithelium: medical versus antireflux surgical
therapy.

Zaninotto G(1), Parente P, Salvador R, Farinati F, Tieppo C, Passuello N, Zanatta
L, Fassan M, Cavallin F, Costantini M, Mescoli C, Battaglia G, Ruol A, Ancona E, 
Rugge M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, SS Giovanni e Paolo Hospital, ULSS 12, Venice, 
Italy. giovanni.zaninotto@unipd.it

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is the most serious complication of GERD. In
BE patients, this observational study compares the effects of antireflux surgery 
versus antisecretory medical therapy.
METHODS: Overall, 89 BE patients (long BE<U+2009>=<U+2009>45; short BE<U+2009>=<U+2009>44) were considered:
45 patients underwent antireflux surgery and 44 underwent medical therapy. At
both initial and follow-up endoscopy, symptoms were assessed using a detailed
questionnaire; BE phenotypic changes [intestinal metaplasia (IM) presence/type,
Cdx2 expression] were assessed by histology (H&E), histochemistry (HID), and
immunohistochemistry. Surgical failures were defined as follows: (1) abnormal
24-h pH monitoring results after surgery, (2) endoscopically evident recurrent
esophagitis, and (3) recurrent hiatal hernia or slipped fundoplication on
endoscopy or barium swallow.
RESULTS: Reversion of IM was observed in 12/44 SSBE and 0/45 LSBE patients
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Reversion was more frequently observed after effective antireflux
surgery than after medical treatment (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04). In patients with no further
evidence of IM after therapy, Cdx2 expression was also absent (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). The
extent of IM was reduced, and the IM phenotype improved in SSBE patients after
surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with short BE (but not those with long BE) may benefit from
surgically reducing the esophagus' exposure to GE reflux; among these patients,
successful surgery carries a higher IM reversion rate than medical treatment.

PMID: 22086718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Jan;138(1):163-72. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1088-8. 
Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Aberrant expression of intelectin-1 in gastric cancer: its relationship with
clinicopathological features and prognosis.

Zheng L(1), Weng M, Qi M, Qi T, Tong L, Hou X, Tong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, Hubei Province, People's
Republic of China.

PURPOSES: Human intelectin-1 (ITLN-1) is a novel identified galactose-binding
lectin that is expressed in the colonic goblet cells. Since gastric
adenocarcinomas can arise through a process of intestinalization, we speculate
that ITLN-1 may be aberrantly expressed in gastric cancer. This study was
undertaken to examine the ITLN-1 expression in gastric cancer and correlate it
with clinical outcomes.
METHODS: One hundred and ninety-six gastric cancer patients were evaluated for
the ITLN-1 expression by immunohistochemistry. The ITLN-1 transcripts were
measured by real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: ITLN-1 expression was absent in normal gastric mucosa, whereas areas of 
intestinal metaplasia revealed ITLN-1 immunoreactivity. One hundred and forty-two
gastric cancer patients (72.4%) were positive for ITLN-1 expression. In a
subtotal of 20 patients, ITLN-1 transcripts were significantly enhanced in
gastric cancer tissues than in normal gastric mucosa (P < 0.001). The expression 
rate of ITLN-1 was higher in intestinal-type carcinomas than in diffuse-type
carcinomas (P = 0.003). ITLN-1 positivity in gastric cancer was positively
correlated with tumor differentiation (P = 0.001) and CDX2 expression
(P < 0.001), and inversely correlated with depth of invasion (P = 0.007), lymph
node metastasis (P = 0.001), distant metastasis (P = 0.014), clinical stage
(P = 0.006), Ki-67 expression (P = 0.001), and heparanase expression (P < 0.001),
without correlation with age, gender, tumor location, or tumor size. In
univariate and multivariate analyses, ITLN-1 was an independent prognostic factor
for longer survival of gastric cancer patients (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The aberrant ITLN-1 expression in gastric cancer is correlated with
clinicopathological features and may be a useful prognostic factor for predicting
the outcomes of gastric cancer patients.

PMID: 22083213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nat Protoc. 2011 Nov 10;6(12):1920-8. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2011.410.

Generating human intestinal tissue from pluripotent stem cells in vitro.

McCracken KW(1), Howell JC, Wells JM, Spence JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Here we describe a protocol for generating 3D human intestinal tissues (called
organoids) in vitro from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). To generate
intestinal organoids, pluripotent stem cells are first differentiated into
FOXA2(+)SOX17(+) endoderm by treating the cells with activin A for 3 d. After
endoderm induction, the pluripotent stem cells are patterned into CDX2(+) mid-
and hindgut tissue using FGF4 and WNT3a. During this patterning step, 3D mid- or 
hindgut spheroids bud from the monolayer epithelium attached to the tissue
culture dish. The 3D spheroids are further cultured in Matrigel along with
prointestinal growth factors, and they proliferate and expand over 1-3 months to 
give rise to intestinal tissue, complete with intestinal mesenchyme and
epithelium comprising all of the major intestinal cell types. To date, this is
the only method for efficiently directing the differentiation of hPSCs into 3D
human intestinal tissue in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3896236
PMID: 22082986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Circ Res. 2012 Jan 6;110(1):82-93. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.249037. Epub 2011 
Nov 14.

Fetal cells traffic to injured maternal myocardium and undergo cardiac
differentiation.

Kara RJ(1), Bolli P, Karakikes I, Matsunaga I, Tripodi J, Tanweer O, Altman P,
Shachter NS, Nakano A, Najfeld V, Chaudhry HW.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L Levy Place, Box 1030, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.

Erratum in
    Circ Res. 2015 Nov 6;117(11):e91.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Jan 6;110(1):3-5.

RATIONALE: Fetal cells enter the maternal circulation during pregnancy and may
persist in maternal tissue for decades as microchimeras.
OBJECTIVE: Based on clinical observations of peripartum cardiomyopathy patients
and the high rate of recovery they experience from heart failure, our objective
was to determine whether fetal cells can migrate to the maternal heart and
differentiate to cardiac cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report that fetal cells selectively home to injured
maternal hearts and undergo differentiation into diverse cardiac lineages. Using 
enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP)-tagged fetuses, we demonstrate
engraftment of multipotent fetal cells in injury zones of maternal hearts. In
vivo, eGFP+ fetal cells form endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and
cardiomyocytes. In vitro, fetal cells isolated from maternal hearts recapitulate 
these differentiation pathways, additionally forming vascular tubes and beating
cardiomyocytes in a fusion-independent manner; 40% of fetal cells in the
maternal heart express Caudal-related homeobox2 (Cdx2), previously associated
with trophoblast stem cells, thought to solely form placenta.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetal maternal stem cell transfer appears to be a critical mechanism
in the maternal response to cardiac injury. Furthermore, we have identified Cdx2 
cells as a novel cell type for potential use in cardiovascular regenerative
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3365532
PMID: 22082491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.030. Epub 2011 
Oct 31.

Human hypoblast formation is not dependent on FGF signalling.

Roode M(1), Blair K, Snell P, Elder K, Marchant S, Smith A, Nichols J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Mouse embryos segregate three different lineages during preimplantation
development: trophoblast, epiblast and hypoblast. These differentiation processes
are associated with restricted expression of key transcription factors (Cdx2,
Oct4, Nanog and Gata6). The mechanisms of segregation have been extensively
studied in the mouse, but are not as well characterised in other species. In the 
human embryo, hypoblast differentiation has not previously been characterised.
Here we demonstrate co-exclusive immunolocalisation of Nanog and Gata4 in human
blastocysts, implying segregation of epiblast and hypoblast, as in rodent
embryos. However, the formation of hypoblast in the human is apparently not
dependent upon FGF signalling, in contrast to rodent embryos. Nonetheless, the
persistence of Nanog-positive cells in embryos following treatment with FGF
inhibitors is suggestive of a transient naïve pluripotent population in the human
blastocyst, which may be similar to rodent epiblast and ES cells but is not
sustained during conventional human ES cell derivation protocols.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368271
PMID: 22079695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hum Pathol. 2012 Jun;43(6):878-87. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.07.017. Epub 2011 
Nov 10.

Relationship between alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression and mucin
phenotype in gastric cancer.

Nozawa Y(1), Nishikura K, Ajioka Y, Aoyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Diagnostic Pathology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.

Alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase controls ß-oxidation of branched-chain fatty
acid and their derivatives. Many investigators have described
alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression in various neoplasias and their
precursor lesions. Although there have been a few reports regarding
alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression in gastric neoplasia, these
reports did not discuss the relationship between alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A
racemase expression and mucin phenotype. This study analyzed
alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression of gastric carcinomas with regard
to mucin phenotype. Alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression was evaluated
in 85 cases of gastric biopsies including gastric epithelial neoplasia and
nonneoplasia and in 108 cases of surgically resected early gastric cancer. In
biopsy cases, alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase was more highly expressed in
neoplasia (69.7%, 23/33) than in nonneoplasia (0%, 0/42) (P = .001).
Alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase was overexpressed in 20.0% (2/10) of cases
that were indefinite for neoplasia, and the 2 positive cases were ultimately
diagnosed as adenocarcinoma. In resected cases of early gastric adenocarcinoma,
alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression significantly correlated with
mucin phenotype (P = .003), but not with tumor progression, histologic
classification, or clinicopathologic features. Alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A
racemase expression was significantly higher in intestinal-phenotype carcinoma
(90.2%, 37/40) than in gastric-phenotype carcinoma (56.3%, 18/31) (P = .006) and 
also correlated with an increase in CDX2 expression (P = .018) and a decrease in 
MUC5AC expression (P = .048). This tendency was observed in all histologic types.
Our results indicate that alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase is a useful marker
for distinguishing gastric neoplasia from nonneoplasia even at an early stage.
Alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase expression is associated with mucin
phenotypes of gastric neoplasia, particularly with the expression of CDX2 and
MUC5AC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22078291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012 Feb;16(2):227-37; discussion 237. doi:
10.1007/s11605-011-1758-5. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Activation of the BMP4 pathway and early expression of CDX2 characterize
non-specialized columnar metaplasia in a human model of Barrett's esophagus.

Castillo D(1), Puig S, Iglesias M, Seoane A, de Bolós C, Munitiz V, Parrilla P,
Comerma L, Poulsom R, Krishnadath KK, Grande L, Pera M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Parc de Salut Mar and Institut de Recerca
Hospital del Mar (IMIM-Hospital del Mar), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Passeig Maritim 25-29, 08003, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A human model of gastroesophageal reflux disease was used to examine 
the contribution of a non-specialized columnar type of metaplasia (NSCM) and key 
molecular events (BMP4 and CDX2) in the development of Barrett's esophagus.
METHODS: Biopsies of the remnant esophagus from 18 patients undergoing
esophagectomy with gastric preservation were taken at 6-36-month intervals
postoperatively and examined for activation of the BMP pathway (BMP4/P-Smad
1/5/8) and CDX2 and CDX1 expression by imunohistochemistry, quantitative
real-time PCR, Western blot, and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: A short segment (mean 15.6 mm) of NSCM was detected in 10 (56%)
patients, with an increasing prevalence from 17% at 6 months to 62% at 36 months.
Nuclear expression of P-Smad 1/5/8 in the squamous epithelium close to the
anastomosis with strong expression in all epithelial cells of NSCM areas was
found. Forty-eight (63%) biopsies with NSCM showed scattered nuclear expression
of CDX2. Two cases showed isolated glands at 18, 24, and 36 months that fully
expressed CDX2 and co-expressed CDX1. BMP4 mRNA and CDX2 mRNA levels were
significantly greater in NSCM than in squamous epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: BMP4 activation in NSCM and early expression of CDX2 are involved in
the columnar epithelial differentiation of Barrett's esophagus.

PMID: 22076569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cell Reprogram. 2011 Dec;13(6):495-502. doi: 10.1089/cell.2011.0021. Epub 2011
Nov 1.

Efficient production and cellular characterization of sheep androgenetic embryos.

Zacchini F(1), Czernik M, Iuso D, Toschi P, di Egidio F, Scapolo PA, Loi P, Ptak 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Teramo, Piazza Aldo Moro 45, 64100 Teramo, Italy.

The production of androgenetic embryos in large animals is a complex procedure.
Androgenetic embryos have been produced so far only in cattle and sheep using
pronuclear transfer (PT) between zygotes derived from in vitro fertilization
(IVF) of previously enucleated oocytes. PT is required due to the poor
developmental potential of androgenotes derived from IVF of enucleated oocytes.
Here we compare the developemt to blastocyst of androgenetic embryos produced by 
the standard pronuclear transfer and by fertilization of oocytes enucleated in
Ca2+/Mg2+-free medium, without pronuclear transfer. The enucleation in
Ca2+/Mg2+-free medium abolished almost completely the manipulation-induced
activation, significantly improving the development to blastocyst of the
androgenetic embryos (IVF followed by PT; 18.6%: IVF only; 17.7%, respectively). 
Karyotype analysis of IVF revealed a similar proportion of diploid embryos in
androgenetic and control blastocysts (35% and 36%, respectively), although
mixoploid blastocysts were frequently observed in both groups (64%). Androgenotes
had lower total cell numbers than control and parthenogenetic embryos, but more
cells in ICM cells comparing to parthenogenotes (30.42 vs. 17.15%). Higher
expression of the pluripotency-associated gene NANOG, and trophoblastic-specific 
gene CDX2, were also observed in androgenotes compared to parthenogenotes and
controls. The global methytion profile of androgenetic embryos was comparable to 
controls, but was lower than parthenogenetic embryos. The cell composition and
methylation pattern we have detected in monoparental sheep monoparental embryos
are unprecedented, and differ considerably from the standard reference mouse
embryos. Altogether, these finding indicate significant differences across
species in the molecular mechanisms regulating early development of monoparental 
embryos, and highlights the need to study postimplantation development of
androgenetic embryos in sheep.

PMCID: PMC3229817
PMID: 22043807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 Jul;21(4):371-5. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31821b193b.

An autopsy case of clear cell adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder is rare. A 73-year-old woman
presented with chronic renal and cardiac failure. Blood tests showed elevated
carcinoembryonic antigen and CA19-9 levels. Imaging techniques showed bilateral
hydronephrosis and hydroureter. Cystoscopy showed a bladder tumor, and the biopsy
showed malignant cells. The patient died 4 months later. Autopsy showed an
elevated tumor of the bladder. Metastases to the liver, lungs, adrenal glands,
spleen and bones were observed. The kidney showed chronic active pyelonephritis
with hydronephrosis. The cause of death was chronic renal and cardiac failure
and/or carcinomatosis. Histologically, the bladder tumor consisted of malignant
clear cells arranged in solid nests and tubules. Histochemical stains for
glycogen and mucins were negative. Metastases also showed similar histology.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for carcinoembryonic
antigen, CA19-9, CA125, CD10, pancytokeratins (AE1/3, CAM5.2), cytokeratin (CK)
34ßE12, CK7, CK8, CK18, CK19, EMA, MUC1, p53, and Ki-67 (labeling=40%). They were
negative for CK5/6, CK14, CK20, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor,
a-methylacyl-CoA-racemase, p63, CDX2, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CD45, CD34, vimentin,
neuron-specific enolase, S100 protein, desmin, HMB45, AFP, a-smooth muscle actin,
MDM2, HER2/neu, synaptophysin, and CD56. Metastases showed the same
immunohistochemical findings.

PMID: 22024991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011 Nov-Dec;58(112):2045-51. doi: 10.5754/hge10840.

Liver-intestine cadherin in intraepithelial neoplasia of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma.

Inoue M(1), Ajioka Y, Wakai T, Takamura M, Korita P, Shirai Y, Hatakeyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver-intestine cadherin (LI-cadherin) is a member of the
cadherin superfamily and aberrant expression of LI-cadherin is associated with
intestinal metaplasia. The aim of this study was to identify factors associated
with LI-cadherin expression in biliary intraepithelial lesions of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC).
METHODOLOGY: We evaluated the immunoreactivity of LI-cadherin, MUC2, CDX2, MUC5AC
and HGM, according to the grade of biliary intraepithelial lesion in 16 resected 
specimens of ICC without hepatolithiasis.
RESULTS: A total of 168 biliary intraepithelial lesions were classified into four
grades: reactive change (42 lesions), biliary intraepithelial neoplasia (BilIN)-1
(10 lesions), BilIN-2 (40 lesions) and BilIN-3 (76 lesions). Biliary
intraepithelial lesions were classified into three mucin phenotypes: null (46
lesions), gastric (97 lesions) and gastrointestinal phenotype (25 lesions).
LI-cadherin expression was found in 45 (27%) of 168 biliary intraepithelial
lesions. BilIN-2/3 (p<0.001), gastrointestinal phenotype (p=0.006) and CDX2
expression (p=0.002) were significantly associated with LI-cadherin expression.
Logistic regression analysis revealed that BilIN-2/3 (p=0.002) was the only
independently significant factor associated with LI-cadherin expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The grade of BilIN independently correlates with LI-cadherin
expression in biliary intraepithelial lesions of ICC without hepatolithiasis,
whereas the mucin phenotype or CDX2 expression does not.

PMID: 22024075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Nov 15;207(11):686-90. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.08.009.
Epub 2011 Oct 22.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 expression in colorectal adenocarcinomas.

Dettmer M(1), Kim TE, Jung CK, Jung ES, Lee KY, Kang CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Although thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) immunoreactivity is considered as
a specific marker of lung and thyroid neoplasms, it may be positive in a
proportion of extrapulmonary adenocarcinomas. This study examined the expression 
of TTF-1 in 555 colorectal adenocarcinomas using three commercial monoclonal
antibodies: clone SPT24 (Novocastra) and 8G7G3/1 (Dako and Cell Marque), and
compared the TTF-1 staining with other immunohistochemical markers, cytokeratin
(CK) 7, CK 20, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2), and MUC2. The 
clinicopathological prognostic factors were compared with the TTF-1 expression
status. Nuclear TTF-1 staining was detected in 24 cases (4.3%) with the SPT24
antibody and 18 cases (3.2%) with the 8G7G3/1 antibody. All cases positive for
8G7G3/1 were also positive for SPT24. CDX2 was expressed constantly in all 24
TTF-1-positive colorectal cancers, whereas CK7, CK20, and MUC2 were detected in 2
(8.3%), 23 (95.8%), and 8 (33.3%) cases, respectively. There was no correlation
between TTF-1 expression and clinicopathological significance. To avoid potential
pitfalls, TTF-1 should be interpreted in conjunction with the clinical setting,
histological features, and the results of other markers, such as CK7, CK20, and
CDX2. MUC2 can be used as supplementary information to confirm difficult cases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):G123-33. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00102.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Regulation of the gene encoding the intestinal bile acid transporter ASBT by the 
caudal-type homeobox proteins CDX1 and CDX2.

Ma L(1), Jüttner M, Kullak-Ublick GA, Eloranta JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    World J Gastroenterol. 2013 May 14;19(18):2736-9.

The apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) is expressed abundantly 
in the ileum and mediates bile acid absorption across the apical membranes.
Caudal-type homeobox proteins CDX1 and CDX2 are transcription factors that
regulate genes involved in intestinal epithelial differentiation and
proliferation. Aberrant expression of both ASBT and CDXs in Barrett's esophagus
(BE) prompted us to study, whether the expression of the ASBT gene is regulated
by CDXs. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of CDXs resulted in reduced
ASBT mRNA expression in intestinal cells. CDXs strongly induced the activity of
the ASBT promoter in reporter assays in esophageal and intestinal cells. Nine CDX
binding sites were predicted in silico within the ASBT promoter, and binding of
CDXs to six of them was verified in vitro and within living cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
respectively. RNAs were extracted from esophageal biopsies from 20 BE patients
and analyzed by real-time PCR. Correlation with ASBT expression was found for
CDX1, CDX2, and HNF-1a in BE biopsies. In conclusion, the human ASBT promoter is 
activated transcriptionally by CDX1 and CDX2. Our finding provides a possible
explanation for the reported observation that ASBT is aberrantly expressed in
esophageal metaplasia that also expresses CDX transcription factors.

PMID: 22016432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 1;361(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.034. Epub 2011 Oct
8.

Cdx regulates Dll1 in multiple lineages.

Grainger S(1), Lam J, Savory JG, Mears AJ, Rijli FM, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Vertebrate Cdx genes encode homeodomain transcription factors related to caudal
in Drosophila. The murine Cdx homologues Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 play important roles
in anterior-posterior patterning of the embryonic axis and the intestine, as well
as axial elongation. While our understanding of the ontogenic programs requiring 
Cdx function has advanced considerably, the molecular bases underlying these
functions are less well understood. In this regard, Cdx1-Cdx2 conditional mutants
exhibit abnormal somite formation, while loss of Cdx1-Cdx2 in the intestinal
epithelium results in a shift in differentiation toward the Goblet cell lineage. 
The aim of the present study was to identify the Cdx-dependent mechanisms
impacting on these events. Consistent with prior work implicating Notch signaling
in these pathways, we found that expression of the Notch ligand Dll1 was reduced 
in Cdx mutants in both the intestinal epithelium and paraxial mesoderm. Cdx
members occupied the Dll1 promoter both in vivo and in vitro, while genetic
analysis indicated interaction between Cdx and Dll1 pathways in both
somitogenesis and Goblet cell differentiation. These findings suggest that Cdx
members operate upstream of Dll1 to convey different functions in two distinct
lineages.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22015720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Histopathology. 2012 Jun;60(7):1023-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03889.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Yolk sac tumours revisited. A review of their many faces and names.

Nogales FF(1), Preda O, Nicolae A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, San Cecilio University Hospital, University of Granada
Medical School, Granada, Spain. fnogales@cica.es

We review the current knowledge on human yolk sac tumours (YSTs) 50 years after
their initial description. Their complex nomenclature and histogenesis stress the
fact that they are not a discrete entity, but represent a multifaceted group of
neoplasms, for which the term primitive endodermal tumours would be more
appropriate, accounting for their capacity to differentiate into various
extraembryonal and somatic cell types. Different histological patterns of human
YSTs correlate with the developmental potential of primitive endoderm and
mesenchyme, but they are also similar to some murine experimental tumours.
Exceptionally, YSTs replicate the tubular structures of the human yolk sac and
allantois. Endodermal somatic differentiation reproduces pulmonary, intestinal
and hepatic tissues and are identical with some, embryonal-type endodermal,
gastric and lung carcinomas, which are indistinguishable from YSTs. YSTs may show
an overgrowth of their mesenchymal (sarcomatous) and epithelial components (such 
as mucinous carcinoma or carcinoid) and also be a source of haematological
malignancies. YSTs associated with non-germ cell tumours probably originate from 
malignant pluripotent somatic stem cells. Only AFP and glypican-3 are
characteristic immunohistochemical markers. Pluripotent antibodies (SALL4, Lin28,
IMP-3) help in differential diagnoses, while some differentiation markers (CDX2, 
TTF-1, HepPar1) facilitate recognition of unusual variants of YSTs.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22008025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Oct 15;207(10):608-12. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.09.006.
Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Molecular pathology of gastric cancer: research and practice.

Yasui W(1), Sentani K, Sakamoto N, Anami K, Naito Y, Oue N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan. wyasui@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Recent advances in the understanding of molecular stomach carcinogenesis are
reviewed. As to molecular events in individual mucin phenotypes of gastric
cancer, the CDX2-Reg IV-SOX9 pathway is associated with the intestinal mucin
phenotype, while OLFM4 and CLDN18 are novel markers for the gastric phenotype.
microRNAs play an important role in epigenetic deregulation in gastric cancer.
Many microRNAs are up-regulated and down-regulated, and some of these are
associated with histological differentiation and cancer progression. Reduced
miR-200 may participate in the genesis of diffuse type gastric cancer by reducing
E-cadherin expression. Genetic polymorphism is a crucial endogenous cause and a
fundamental factor of cancer risk. PSCA polymorphism alters the susceptibility to
diffuse type gastric cancer through modulation of cell proliferation activity.
Cancer stem cells possess the capacity for self-renewal and cause the
heterogeneous lineages of cancer cells. Cancer stem cells also show resistance to
anti-tumor chemotherapy. Only a minor population of gastric cancer cells reveals 
the properties of cancer stem cells, and CD44 is one of the markers for gastric
cancer stem cells. The origin of gastric cancer stem cells remains to be
elucidated.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22005013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jun 10;21(9):1571-86. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0370. Epub 2011 
Nov 22.

Derivation and characterization of embryonic stem cells lines derived from
transgenic Fischer 344 and Dark Agouti rats.

Hong J(1), He H, Weiss ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan,
Kansas 66506, USA.

Rat embryonic stem cell (ESC) lines are not widely available, and there are only 
2 lines available for distribution. Here, ESC lines were derived and
characterized from Fischer 344 (F344) rats that express marker transgenes either 
ß-galactosidase or human placental alkaline phosphatase (AP), nontransgenic F344 
rats, and from Dark Agouti (DA) rats. The ESC lines were maintained in an
undifferentiated state as characterized by colony morphology, expression of Oct4,
Nanog, Sox-2, Cdx2, and Stella, staining for AP, and stage-specific embryonic
antigen-1. Pluripotency was demonstrated in vitro by differentiation to embryoid 
bodies, followed by embryonic monsters. The Cdx2 expression by ESCs was
unexpected and was confirmed via reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction,
immunocytochemistry. Pluripotency of ESCs was demonstrated in vivo by production 
of teratoma after an injection into F344 nontransgenic rats, and by an injection 
of male DA ESCs into F344 or Sprague-Dawley rat blastocysts and the generation of
chimeric rats and germline contribution. ESCs from both F344 and DA contributed
to chimeric rats, and one DA ESC line was proved to be germline competent. ESC
sublines were created by transfection with a plasmid expressing enhanced green
fluorescent protein (eGFP) under the control of a beta actin promoter and
cytomegalovirus enhancer (pCX-eGFP) or by transfection with a plasmid expressing 
GFP under the control of a 3.1 kb portion of the rat Oct4 promoter
(pN1-Oct4-GFP). In pN1-Oct4-GFP sublines, GFP gene expression and fluorescence
were shown to be correlated with endogenous Oct4 gene expression. Therefore,
these new ESC lines may be useful for tissue engineering and transplantation
studies or for optimizing culture conditions required for self-renewal and
differentiation of rat ESCs. While they made chimeric rats, further work is
needed to confirm whether the transgenic F344 rat ESCs described here are
germline-competent ESCs.

PMCID: PMC3359639
PMID: 21995453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Diagn Cytopathol. 2013 Jun;41(6):550-4. doi: 10.1002/dc.21827. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Cytopathologic findings and differential diagnostic considerations of primary
clear cell carcinoma of the lung.

Hayashi T(1), Haba R, Kushida Y, Kadota K, Katsuki N, Miyai Y, Bando K, Shibuya
S, Matsunaga T, Yokomise H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University,
Kagawa, Japan. htoshi@med.kagawa-u.ac.jp

Primary clear cell carcinoma (CLCC) of the lung is an extremely rare disease and 
is a subtype of large cell carcinoma, according to the World Health Organization 
(WHO) classification. A case is presented here in which intraoperative squash
smears in a 53-year-old man revealed sheet and small clusters or tumor cells with
prominent nucleoli and fine granular chromatin. Abundant translucent cytoplasm
with occasional cytoplasmic vacuoles and intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions
was also identified. A cytopathologic diagnosis of a CLCC was suggested. Further 
evaluation and immunohistochemical studies were conducted on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded material. Nests of slightly acidophilic clear tumor cells with 
a prominent cellular membrane and an alveolar growth pattern were identified on
H&E sections. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed diffuse and strong
membranous staining for CK(AE1/AE3), CK7, and CA19-9 but were negative for Napsin
A, CK20, CDX2, TTF-1, alpha-fetoprotein, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD10, and
CD56. The diagnosis of primary CLCC of the lung was confirmed based on
cytopathologic, histopathologic, immunohistochemical results, and a detailed
systemic examination to exclude a possible extrapulmonary origin. We report here 
the cytopathological features of CLCC of the lung with an emphasis on
differential diagnostic considerations.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21987503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Nov;17(11):2251-60. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21611. Epub 2011 Jan
6.

Suppression of hath1 gene expression directly regulated by hes1 via notch
signaling is associated with goblet cell depletion in ulcerative colitis.

Zheng X(1), Tsuchiya K, Okamoto R, Iwasaki M, Kano Y, Sakamoto N, Nakamura T,
Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Atoh1/Hath1 plays crucial roles in the
differentiation program of human intestinal epithelium cells (IECs). Although
previous studies have indicated that the Notch signal suppresses the
differentiation program of IEC, the mechanism by which it does so remains
unknown. This study shows that the undifferentiated state is maintained by the
suppression of the Hath1 gene in human intestine.
METHODS: To assess the effect of Notch signaling, doxycycline-induced expression 
of Notch intracellular domain (NICD) and Hes1 cells were generated in LS174T.
Hath1 gene expression was analyzed by quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Hath1 promoter region targeted by HES1 was
determined by both reporter analysis and ChIP assay. Expression of Hath1 protein 
in ulcerative colitis (UC) was examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Hath1 mRNA expression was increased by Notch signal inhibition. However,
Hath1 expression was suppressed by ectopic HES1 expression alone even under Notch
signal inhibition. Suppression of the Hath1 gene by Hes1, which binds to the 5'
promoter region of Hath1, resulted in suppression of the phenotypic gene
expression for goblet cells. In UC, the cooperation of aberrant expression of
HES1 and the disappearance of caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) caused Hath1
suppression, resulting in goblet cell depletion.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that Hes1 is essential for Hath1 gene
suppression via Notch signaling. Moreover, the suppression of Hath1 is associated
with goblet cell depletion in UC. Understanding the regulation of goblet cell
depletion may lead to the development of new therapy for UC.

Copyright © 2011 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 21987298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Acta Cytol. 2011;55(5):438-44. doi: 10.1159/000329817. Epub 2011 Oct 8.

Pleural effusion in women with a known adenocarcinoma: the role of immunostains
in uncovering another hidden primary tumor.

Nasser H(1), Kuntzman TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI, USA.
samnasser78@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Pleural fluid metastasis occurs often secondary to a known primary
tumor. We aim to identify the percentage of adenocarcinomas metastatic to pleural
effusion in women and the frequency of another primary tumor being the origin of 
the effusion using morphology and immunostains.
STUDY DESIGN: One hundred and thirty-one cases from our archives were reviewed.
RESULTS: Ninety-four percent had a documented primary. The breast was the most
common site (34%); less common were the lung and ovary, and 7.9% had two
different primaries. Seven cases proved to be secondary to an adenocarcinoma
other than the one on record. Lung tumors were the most common overlooked tumors 
(5/7 cases). Six percent remained of inconclusive origin due to an occult
primary, absent cells on cell blocks, or discordance with radiology or cytology
of a known primary. Morphology in association with a small panel of immunostains 
including thyroid transcription factor 1, estrogen receptor, mammaglobin, Wilms
tumor antigen 1, CA125 and CDX2 proved helpful in identifying the primary origin 
in 94% of cases.
CONCLUSION: After a morphological comparison with previously available material, 
and due to major implications in the therapeutic strategy, a small panel of
immunostains is advised on available cell block material to verify the origin of 
the metastatic effusion.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21986171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2011 Dec;47(10):707-15. doi:
10.1007/s11626-011-9458-8.

Endocrine differentiation of rat enterocytes in long-term three-dimensional
co-culture with intestinal myofibroblasts.

Yoshikawa T(1), Hamada S, Otsuji E, Tsujimoto H, Hagiwara A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 645
Kajii-cho Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-0841, Japan.

The proliferation and differentiation of the small intestinal epithelium depends 
on the microenvironment surrounding the stem cells, such as intestinal
subepithelial myofibroblasts. Although there have been many culture studies of
intestinal epithelialmesenchymal interaction, a culture which allows long-term
observations has been difficult. This study investigated the influence of
intestinal subepithelial myofibroblasts on the proliferation and differentiation 
of intestinal epithelial cells with a relatively long-term observation of 3 wk
using a 3D co-culture system. Cultured rat intestinal subepithelial
myofibroblasts, obtained from the duodenum, were embedded in collagen gel and
cells from the rat intestinal epithelial cell line IEC-6 seeded onto it.
Histologic sections of the cell-embedded gels were made and histochemical and
immunohistochemical examinations were carried out in conjunction with expression 
analysis of the pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (pdx-1) transcription factor in
IEC-6 cells. The IEC-6 cells showed increased proliferation and displayed
characteristic endocrine features when co-cultured with rat intestinal
subepithelial myofibroblasts, arranging themselves into multilayer structures and
becoming cuboidal, with abundant cytoplasm and oval nuclei. Some IEC-6 cells were
immunohistochemically positive for chromogranin A and glicentin. They also
expressed the pdx-1 transcription factor at both the mRNA and protein levels. The
number and percentage of chromogranin A-positive cells increased with culture
time, whereas no increase was observed in cells cultured without rat intestinal
subepithelial myofibroblasts. The present study using a long-term 3D co-culture
model has obtained evidence of the participation of intestinal subepithelial
myofibroblasts in enteroendocrine differentiation, supported by the expression of
pdx-1 and glicentin production.

PMID: 21975854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;113(1):19-30. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23391.

A simple and economical route to generate functional hepatocyte-like cells from
hESCs and their application in evaluating alcohol induced liver damage.

Pal R(1), Mamidi MK, Das AK, Gupta PK, Bhonde R.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine, Manipal University Branch Campus, 
Domlur Layout, Bangalore 560071, India.

The in vitro derived hepatocytes from human embryonic stem cells (hESC) is a
promising tool to acquire improved knowledge of the cellular and molecular events
underlying early human liver development under physiological and pathological
conditions. Here we report a simple two-step protocol employing conditioned
medium (CM) from human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, HepG2 to generate
functional hepatocyte-like cells from hESC. Immunocytochemistry, flow cytometry, 
quantitative RT-PCR, and biochemical analyses revealed that the endodermal
progenitors appeared as pockets in culture, and the cascade of genes associated
with the formation of definitive endoderm (HNF-3ß, SOX-17, DLX-5, CXCR4) was
consistent and in concurrence with the up-regulation of the markers for hepatic
progenitors [alpha-feto protein (AFP), HNF-4a, CK-19, albumin,
alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT)], followed by maturation into functional hepatocytes
[tyrosine transferase (TAT), tryptophan-2, 3-dioxygenase (TDO), glucose
6-phosphate (G6P), CYP3A4, CYP7A1]. We witnessed that the gene expression profile
during this differentiation process recapitulated in vivo liver development
demonstrating a gradual down-regulation of extra embryonic endodermal markers
(SOX-7, HNF-1ß, SNAIL-1, LAMININ-1, CDX2), and the generated hepatic cells
performed multiple liver functions. Since prenatal alcohol exposure is known to
provoke irreversible abnormalities in the fetal cells and developing tissues, we 
exposed in vitro generated hepatocytes to ethanol (EtOH) and found that EtOH
treatment not only impairs the survival and proliferation, but also induces
apoptosis and perturbs differentiation of progenitor cells into hepatocytes. This
disruption was accompanied by alterations in the expression of genes and proteins
involved in hepatogenesis. Our results provide new insights into the wider range 
of destruction caused by alcohol on the dynamic process of liver organogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21956183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024585. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Impaired carbohydrate digestion and transport and mucosal dysbiosis in the
intestines of children with autism and gastrointestinal disturbances.

Williams BL(1), Hornig M, Buie T, Bauman ML, Cho Paik M, Wick I, Bennett A,
Jabado O, Hirschberg DL, Lipkin WI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity, Columbia University, New York, New York,
United States of America.

Gastrointestinal disturbances are commonly reported in children with autism,
complicate clinical management, and may contribute to behavioral impairment.
Reports of deficiencies in disaccharidase enzymatic activity and of beneficial
responses to probiotic and dietary therapies led us to survey gene expression and
the mucoepithelial microbiota in intestinal biopsies from children with autism
and gastrointestinal disease and children with gastrointestinal disease alone.
Ileal transcripts encoding disaccharidases and hexose transporters were deficient
in children with autism, indicating impairment of the primary pathway for
carbohydrate digestion and transport in enterocytes. Deficient expression of
these enzymes and transporters was associated with expression of the intestinal
transcription factor, CDX2. Metagenomic analysis of intestinal bacteria revealed 
compositional dysbiosis manifest as decreases in Bacteroidetes, increases in the 
ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes, and increases in Betaproteobacteria.
Expression levels of disaccharidases and transporters were associated with the
abundance of affected bacterial phylotypes. These results indicate a relationship
between human intestinal gene expression and bacterial community structure and
may provide insights into the pathophysiology of gastrointestinal disturbances in
children with autism.

PMCID: PMC3174969
PMID: 21949732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Dec 15;82(12):1963-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.09.014.
Epub 2011 Sep 17.

Insulin deficiency induces abnormal increase in intestinal disaccharidase
activities and expression under diabetic states, evidences from in vivo and in
vitro study.

Liu L(1), Yu YL, Liu C, Wang XT, Liu XD, Xie L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, China. liulee@cpu.edu.cn

Structural and functional alterations in the gastrointestinal tract of diabetic
patients are often accompanied by increase in absorption of intestinal glucose
and activities of brush-border disaccharidases. The purpose of this study was to 
investigate the role of insulin in regulating intestinal disaccharidases using in
vivo and in vitro experiments. Streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats and normal
rats received protamine zinc insulin (10 IU/kg) subcutaneously twice daily for 5 
weeks. Disaccharidase activities and sucrase-isomaltase (SI) complex protein and 
mRNA expression in intestinal regions were assessed. In addition, Caco-2 cells
were cultured in medium containing glucose, insulin or insulin plus some
pharmacological inhibitors for 7 days, disaccharidase activities,
sucrase-isomaltase (SI) complex and Cdx2 mRNA levels were measured. The animal
experiments showed that diabetes increased intestinal disaccharidase activities, 
accompanied by high mRNA and protein expression of SI complex. Insulin treatment 
reversed the increases induced by diabetes. The cellular results showed that
insulin suppressed disaccharidase activities and down-regulated SI complex and
Cdx2 mRNA expression in a concentration-dependent manner. The inhibitor of MAPK
signal pathway PD-98059 blocked the suppression of disaccharidase activities and 
expression of SI complex and Cdx2 mRNA induced by insulin. In conclusion, insulin
deficiency induces abnormal increase in intestinal disaccharidase activities and 
expression under diabetic states. Insulin plays an essential role in regulation
disaccharidase activities and expression, at least in part, via the
MAPK-dependent pathway.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21946084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002277. Epub 2011 
Sep 15.

Study of FoxA pioneer factor at silent genes reveals Rfx-repressed enhancer at
Cdx2 and a potential indicator of esophageal adenocarcinoma development.

Watts JA(1), Zhang C, Klein-Szanto AJ, Kormish JD, Fu J, Zhang MQ, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Understanding how silent genes can be competent for activation provides insight
into development as well as cellular reprogramming and pathogenesis. We performed
genomic location analysis of the pioneer transcription factor FoxA in the adult
mouse liver and found that about one-third of the FoxA bound sites are near
silent genes, including genes without detectable RNA polymerase II. Virtually all
of the FoxA-bound silent sites are within conserved sequences, suggesting
possible function. Such sites are enriched in motifs for transcriptional
repressors, including for Rfx1 and type II nuclear hormone receptors. We found
one such target site at a cryptic "shadow" enhancer 7 kilobases (kb) downstream
of the Cdx2 gene, where Rfx1 restricts transcriptional activation by FoxA. The
Cdx2 shadow enhancer exhibits a subset of regulatory properties of the upstream
Cdx2 promoter region. While Cdx2 is ectopically induced in the early metaplastic 
condition of Barrett's esophagus, its expression is not necessarily present in
progressive Barrett's with dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. By contrast, we find that
Rfx1 expression in the esophageal epithelium becomes gradually extinguished
during progression to cancer, i.e, expression of Rfx1 decreased markedly in
dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. We propose that this decreased expression of Rfx1
could be an indicator of progression from Barrett's esophagus to adenocarcinoma
and that similar analyses of other transcription factors bound to silent genes
can reveal unanticipated regulatory insights into oncogenic progression and
cellular reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3174211
PMID: 21935353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;113(1):302-12. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23356.

Identification of cancer stem cells in vincristine preconditioned SGC7901 gastric
cancer cell line.

Xue Z(1), Yan H, Li J, Liang S, Cai X, Chen X, Wu Q, Gao L, Wu K, Nie Y, Fan D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology & Institute of Digestive Diseases,
Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xi'an 710032, China.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs), or tumor initiating cells, are a subpopulation of
cancer cells with self-renewal and differentiation properties. However, there has
been no direct observation of the properties of gastric CSCs in vitro. Here we
describe a vincristine (VCR)-preconditioning approach to obtain cancer stem-like 
cells (CSLCs) from the gastric cancer cell line SGC7901. The CSLCs displayed
mesenchymal characteristics, including the up-regulated mesenchymal markers
Snail, Twist, and vimentin, and the down-regulated epithelial marker E-cadherin. 
Using a Matrigel-based differentiation assay, CSLCs formed 2D tube-like and 3D
complex lumen-like structures, which resembled differentiated gastric crypts. The
characteristic of cellular differentiation was also found by transmission
electron microscopy and up-regulation of gastrointestinal genes CDX2 and SOX2. We
further showed that CSLCs could self-renew through significant asymmetric
division compared with parent cells by tracing PKH-26, BrdU, and EDU
label-retaining cells. In addition, these CSLCs also increased expression of
CD44, CD90, and CXCR4 at the mRNA level, which was identified as novel targets.
Furthermore, drug sensitivity assays and xenograft experiments demonstrated that 
the cells developed multi-drug resistance (MDR) and significant tumorigenicity in
vivo. In summary, gastric CSCs were identified from VCR-preconditioned SGC7901
cell line, characterized by high tumorigenicity and the capacity for self-renewal
and differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21913215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2011 Dec;137(12):1749-62. doi:
10.1007/s00432-011-1044-7. Epub 2011 Sep 10.

The relationship among PDX1, CDX2, and mucin profiles in gastric carcinomas;
correlations with clinicopathologic parameters.

Oz Puyan F(1), Can N, Ozyilmaz F, Usta U, Sut N, Tastekin E, Altaner S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Trakya University Medical Faculty, Edirne, Turkey.
fulyapuyan@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Several studies performed on pancreatic-duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) have 
demonstrated a loss of expression and negative tumor modulator effect in gastric 
carcinoma. Relations between PDX1 and gastric metaplasia, differentiated type of 
gastric carcinoma, and the early stage of the disease have been exhibited in
previous reports. The aim of this study was to examine expressions of PDX1,
caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and mucin (MUC) profiles to address the role of
PDX1 in gastric carcinogenesis and its relationship with CDX2.
METHODS: Seventy gastrectomy specimens were analyzed immunohistochemically for
PDX1, CDX2, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6 expressions. The sum of cytoplasmic and
nuclear PDX1 immunostaining and PDX1 positivity were assessed. All of the
antibodies were examined for a correlation with tumor type, clinicopathologic
parameters, and metaplasias. The relation of Ki-67 proliferation index with the
expression profiles was also investigated.
RESULTS: Neither PDX1 (66/70) nor CDX2 (37/70) and the mucin profiles
(MUC2:11/70, MUC5AC:48/70, MUC6:41/70) showed a significant difference between
differentiated and undifferentiated types of gastric carcinoma and
clinicopathologic parameters. The PDX1 expression frequency was 94.3%, with an
average PDX1 score of 8.8 ± 4.2. PDX1 and CDX2 expression showed a significant
difference (P = 0.026 and P = 0.002, respectively) among the phenotypic
classification of gastric carcinomas. All of the gastric and intestinal
mixed-phenotype gastric carcinomas (GI-type) showed both PDX1 and CDX2
immunopositivity. Except for the relation of PDX1 score with MUC6 expression, no 
significant difference was detected between PDX1 and CDX2, MUC2, and MUC5AC
expressions. A relationship between CDX2 and MUC2 and also between MUC5AC and
MUC6 was found statistically. The Ki-67 proliferation index revealed a
significant positive correlation with PDX1, CDX2, and MUC2 positivity.
CONCLUSIONS: PDX1 expression revealed a higher positivity in gastric carcinomas
than the previous studies and showed no relation with tumor type,
clinicopathologic parameters, CDX2 expression, or mucin profiles. However, a
significant relation of PDX1 and CDX2 expressions among phenotypic classification
of gastric carcinomas reveals an idea about similar functions for PDX1 and CDX2
in the evolution of gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 21909647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011 Aug 15;4(6):631-6. Epub 2011 Aug 14.

Immunohistochemical profile of normal mesothelium and histiocytic/methothelial
hyperplasia: a case report.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Immunohistochemical profiles of normal mesothelium and histiocytic/mesothelial
hyperplasia (HMH) are unknown. A 19-year-old man was treated by thoracoscopic
resection of bullae of left lung. Histologically, there were cell proliferative
foci composed of round cells without significant atypia (histiocyte, mesothelium 
and T-lymphocytes). The cell proliferative foci were patch-like, and no invasive 
features were seen. Because it is composed of histiocytes, mesothelium, and
T-lymphocytes, the diagnosis was HMH. Immunohistochemically, cell components of
HMH showed the following immunoreactions: calrenitin 3+, D2-40 3+, pancytokeratin
AE1/3 3+, pancytokeratin CAM5.2 3+, cytokeratin (CK) 34ßE12 1+, CK5/6 1+, CK7 1+,
CK8 3+, CK 14 1+, CK18 2+, CK19 2+, p53 10%, Ki67 20%, CD68 3+, CD45 2+, CD45 RO 
2+, vimentin 3+, Ber-EP4 -, CK20 -, EMA -, desmin -, CEA -, CA19-9 -, TTF-1 -,
S100 protein -, asmooth muscle actin -, CD34 -, CD20 -, chromogranin -,
synaptophysin -, NSE -, CDX2 -, CD56 -, HER2 -, MUC1 -, MUC2 -, MUC5AC -, and
MUC6 -. The normal mesothelium showed the following immunoprofile: calrenitin 3+,
D2-40 3+, pancytokeratin AE1/3 3+, pancytokeratin CAM5.2 3+, CK34ßE12 3+, CK5/6
2+, CK7 2+, CK8 3+, CK 14 -, CK18 3+, CK19 2+, vimentin 1+, p53 -, Ki67 1%, CD68 
-, CD45 -, CD45 RO -, Ber-EP4 -, CK20 -, EMA -, desmin -, CEA -, CA19-9 -, TTF-1 
-, S100 protein -, a-smooth muscle actin -, CD34 -, chromogranin -, synaptophysin
-, NSE -, CDX2 -, CD56 -, HER2 -, MUC1 -, MUC2 -, MUC5AC -, and MUC6 -. These
findings indicate that the immunoprolfile of mesothelium in HMH was
immunohistochemically very similar to that of normal mesothelium except for CD68,
p53 protein, Ki-67 labeling, CD45 and CD45 RO. These indicate that the HMH was
reactive phenomenon and HMH is composed of hyperplastic mesothelium, histiocytes 
and T-lymphocytes. The immunoprofile of normal mesothelium provide basic
knowledge of mesothelial pathology.

PMCID: PMC3160615
PMID: 21904639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 4;286(44):38253-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.269670. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

miR-125b, a target of CDX2, regulates cell differentiation through repression of 
the core binding factor in hematopoietic malignancies.

Lin KY(1), Zhang XJ, Feng DD, Zhang H, Zeng CW, Han BW, Zhou AD, Qu LH, Xu L,
Chen YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.

MicroRNA-125b (miR-125b), a small noncoding RNA molecule, has been found to be
deregulated and functions as an oncogene in many cancers including hematopoietic 
malignancies. However, the mechanisms accounting for miR-125b dysregulation
remain to be elucidated. The present study aims to identify the factors that
might contribute to up-regulation of miR-125b in human hematopoietic malignancies
and its downstream targets for lineage-specific differentiation. We at first
reported that CDX2, a homeobox transcription factor, binds to promoter regions of
the miR-125b gene and activates transcriptional regulation of miR-125b in
malignant myeloid cells. We further revealed that increasing levels of CDX2 in
malignant myeloid cells activate miR-125b expression, which in turn inhibits core
binding factor ß (CBFß) translation, thereby counteracting myeloid cell
differentiation, at least for granulocytic lineage, and promoting leukemogenesis.
Interestingly, we found that this novel pathway including CDX2, miR-125b, and
CBFß was mediated by undergoing all-trans-retinoic acid induction. Once
differentiation ensues with all-trans-retinoic acid treatment, CDX2 activity
decreases, leading to a reduction in miR-125b transcription and up-regulation of 
CBFß in myeloid cells and in patients. The study provides a new mechanism that
contributes to hematopoietic malignancies, which could involve deregulation of
miR-125b and its up- and downstream factors. As altered expression of miRNAs has 
been reported in a wide range of malignancies, delineating the underlying
molecular mechanisms of aberrant miRNA expression and characterizing the upstream
and downstream factors will help to understand important steps in the
pathogenesis of these afflictions.

PMCID: PMC3207448
PMID: 21903586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Bone Miner Res. 2012 Jan;27(1):187-94. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.505.

Calcium intake and prostate cancer among African Americans: effect modification
by vitamin D receptor calcium absorption genotype.

Rowland GW(1), Schwartz GG, John EM, Ingles SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

High dietary intake of calcium has been classified as a probable cause of
prostate cancer, although the mechanism underlying the association between
dietary calcium and prostate cancer risk is unclear. The vitamin D receptor (VDR)
is a key regulator of calcium absorption. In the small intestine, VDR expression 
is regulated by the CDX-2 transcription factor, which binds a polymorphic site in
the VDR gene promoter. We examined VDR Cdx2 genotype and calcium intake, assessed
by a food frequency questionnaire, in 533 African-American prostate cancer cases 
(256 with advanced stage at diagnosis, 277 with localized stage) and 250
African-American controls who participated in the California Collaborative
Prostate Cancer Study. We examined the effects of genotype, calcium intake, and
diet-gene interactions by conditional logistic regression. Compared with men in
the lowest quartile of calcium intake, men in the highest quartile had an
approximately twofold increased risk of localized and advanced prostate cancer
(odds ratio [OR]<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.20, 95% confidence interval [CI]<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.40, 3.46), with a
significant dose-response. Poor absorbers of calcium (VDR Cdx2 GG genotype) had a
significantly lower risk of advanced prostate cancer (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.41, 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.19,
0.90). The gene-calcium interaction was statistically significant (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03).
Among men with calcium intake below the median (680<U+2009>mg/day), carriers of the G
allele had an approximately 50% decreased risk compared with men with the AA
genotype. These findings suggest a link between prostate cancer risk and high
intestinal absorption of calcium.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3234334
PMID: 21887707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2011 Nov;19(11):1301-6. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2011.07.017. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Association of vitamin D status with knee pain and radiographic knee
osteoarthritis.

Muraki S(1), Dennison E, Jameson K, Boucher BJ, Akune T, Yoshimura N, Judge A,
Arden NK, Javaid K, Cooper C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Motor System Medicine, 22nd Century Medical & Research 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
murakis-ort@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the present study was to explore the association of
serum vitamin D concentration and polymorphism in the vitamin D receptor (VDR),
with knee pain and radiographic knee osteoarthritis (OA) among men and women in a
large population-based UK cohort study.
METHODS: Seven hundred and eighty-seven participants in the Hertfordshire Cohort 
Study (399 men, 388 women; mean age 65.6±2.7 years) underwent a questionnaire on 
knee pain and radiographic knee examination. This study examined the association 
of Fok1, Cdx2 and Apa1 polymorphism in the gene for the VDR and serum 25(OH)D
concentration with knee pain and radiographic knee OA by a generalized estimating
equations population averaged logistic regression analysis in the Hertfordshire
Cohort Study.
RESULTS: There were no associations of Fok1, Cdx2 and Apa1 polymorphisms of the
VDR with knee OA except for Aa for Apa1 compared with AA [Odds ratio (OR) 0.59,
95% confidence interval (CI) 0.36-0.95, P=0.031]. While, ff for Fok1 (OR 1.60,
95% CI 1.07-2.39, P=0.022) and AA for Cdx2 polymorphism (OR 2.21, 95% CI
1.07-4.56, P=0.032) was significantly associated with higher prevalence of knee
pain compared with FF for Fok1 and GG for Cdx2, respectively. None of these are
statistically significant after adjusting for the three polymorphisms tested.
25(OH)D level was not significantly associated with radiographic knee OA, while, 
low tertile of 25(OH)D level tended to be associated with knee pain compared with
high tertile of 25(OH)D level.
CONCLUSION: The present cross-sectional study using a large-scale population from
the Hertfordshire Cohort study indicated that vitamin D may be associated with
pain rather than radiographic change, but the evidence for an association between
vitamin D genetic variation and pain in knee OA is very weak in the present
study. Further replication of our results will be required to elucidate the
association of vitamin D and knee OA.

Copyright © 2011 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21884812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Metabolism. 2012 Mar;61(3):293-301. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.06.018. Epub 2011
Aug 25.

Association of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms with insulin resistance and 
response to vitamin D.

Jain R(1), von Hurst PR, Stonehouse W, Love DR, Higgins CM, Coad J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Research Unit, School of Applied Sciences, Auckland
University of Technology, Auckland 1010, New Zealand.

Comment in
    Metabolism. 2012 Jun;61(6):759-61.

The objectives of the study were to determine associations between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene and insulin 
resistance and the effects of these SNPs on changes in insulin sensitivity in
response to vitamin D supplementation. The research described here was an
extension of the Surya study. Genotyping of the Cdx-2, FokI, BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI
SNPs was carried out on 239 South Asian women in New Zealand using polymerase
chain reaction-based techniques. Associations of these genotypes and 3' end
haplotypes with insulin resistance were determined using multiple regression
analysis. Associations between SNP genotypes and responses in insulin sensitivity
to vitamin D supplementation (4000 IU vitamin D(3) per day) were also determined 
for a subset (81) of these women. BsmI BB, ApaI AA, and TaqI tt genotypes were
significantly associated with lower insulin resistance compared with BsmI bb,
ApaI aa, and TaqI TT, respectively, in the cohort of 239 women. Furthermore,
homozygosity of the haplotypes baT and BAt was associated with higher and lower
insulin resistance, respectively, compared with no copies of their respective
alleles. Of the 81 subjects who were supplemented with vitamin D, women with the 
FokI Ff genotype showed a significantly greater improvement in insulin
sensitivity (increase of 29.4 [2.9, 38.1]) compared with women with the FokI FF
genotype (increase of 2.3 [-11.5, 10.1]). This study has highlighted the
association of vitamin D responsiveness and insulin resistance with VDR gene
polymorphisms. This is the first study to determine associations between all
three. Genotyping of the VDR gene may provide a predictive measure for insulin
resistance in response to vitamin D intervention.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21871642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 14;286(41):35755-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.271007. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Epigenetic control of the host gene by commensal bacteria in large intestinal
epithelial cells.

Takahashi K(1), Sugi Y, Nakano K, Tsuda M, Kurihara K, Hosono A, Kaminogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Physiological Functions Laboratory, College of Bioresource Sciences, 
Nihon University, 1866 Kameino, Fujisawa-shi, Kanagawa 252-0880, Japan.
ktaka@brs.nihon-u.ac.jp

Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) are continuously exposed to large numbers of
commensal bacteria but are relatively insensitive to them, thereby averting an
excessive inflammatory reaction. We have previously reported that the
hyporesponsiveness of a human IEC line to LPS was primarily the result of a
down-regulation of TLR4 gene transcription through epigenetic mechanisms. In the 
present study we show that DNA methylation in the 5' region of the TLR4 gene is
significantly higher in IECs than in splenic cells in vivo. The methylation was
shown to be dependent on the differentiation state of the IECs, as the
differentiated IEC population that expressed higher levels of intestinal alkaline
phosphatase (IAP) also displayed greater methylation and lower expression of the 
TLR4 gene than the undifferentiated population. The IAP(high), differentiated
population also showed less abundant expression of CDX2, the transcription factor
required for the development of the intestine, than the IAP(low),
undifferentiated population. Overexpression of CDX2 in an IEC line decreased the 
methylation level of the TLR4 gene, increased transcriptional promoter activity
of the gene, and increased responsiveness to the TLR4 ligand. Furthermore, the
methylation level of the TLR4 gene was significantly lower in IECs of the large
intestine of germ-free mice than in those of conventional mice, whereas the level
in IECs of the small intestine was almost equal between these mice, indicating
that commensal bacteria contribute to the maintenance of intestinal symbiosis by 
controlling epigenetic modification of the host gene in the large intestine.

PMCID: PMC3195625
PMID: 21862578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 20;21(8):1250-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0578. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

A model of early human embryonic stem cell differentiation reveals inter- and
intracellular changes on transition to squamous epithelium.

Galat V(1), Malchenko S, Galat Y, Ishkin A, Nikolsky Y, Kosak ST, Soares BM,
Iannaccone P, Crispino JD, Hendrix MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, iPS and Human Stem Cell Core Facility,
Children's Memorial Research Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60614-3394, USA. v-galat@northwestern.edu

The molecular events leading to human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation 
are the subject of considerable scrutiny. Here, we characterize an in vitro model
that permits analysis of the earliest steps in the transition of hESC colonies to
squamous epithelium on basic fibroblast growth factor withdrawal. A set of
markers (GSC, CK18, Gata4, Eomes, and Sox17) point to a mesendodermal nature of
the epithelial cells with subsequent commitment to definitive endoderm (Sox17,
Cdx2, nestin, and Islet1). We assayed alterations in the transcriptome in
parallel with the distribution of immunohistochemical markers. Our results
indicate that the alterations of tight junctions in pluripotent culture precede
the beginning of differentiation. We defined this cell population as "specified,"
as it is committed toward differentiation. The transitional zone between
"specified" pluripotent and differentiated cells displays significant
up-regulation of keratin-18 (CK18) along with a decrease in the functional
activity of gap junctions and the down-regulation of 2 gap junction proteins,
connexin 43 (Cx43) and connexin 45 (Cx45), which is coincidental with substantial
elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels. These findings reveal a set of cellular
changes that may represent the earliest markers of in vitro hESC transition to an
epithelial phenotype, before the induction of gene expression networks that guide
hESC differentiation. Moreover, we hypothesize that these events may be common
during the primary steps of hESC commitment to functionally varied epithelial
tissue derivatives of different embryological origins.

PMCID: PMC3353739
PMID: 21861759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):387-400. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.07.005. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Wnt signaling specifies and patterns intestinal endoderm.

Sherwood RI(1), Maehr R, Mazzoni EO, Melton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis
Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. rsherwood@partners.org

Wnt signaling has been implicated in many developmental processes, but its role
in early endoderm development is not well understood. Wnt signaling is active in 
posterior endoderm as early as E7.5. Genetic and chemical activation show that
the Wnt pathway acts directly on endoderm to induce the intestinal master
regulator Cdx2, shifting global gene away from anterior endoderm and toward a
posterior, intestinal program. In a mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation
platform that yields pure populations of definitive endoderm, Wnt signaling
induces intestinal gene expression in all cells. We have identified a set of
genes specific to the anterior small intestine, posterior small intestine, and
large intestine during early development, and show that Wnt, through Cdx2,
activates large intestinal gene expression at high doses and small intestinal
gene expression at lower doses. These findings shed light on the mechanism of
embryonic intestinal induction and provide a method to manipulate intestinal
development from embryonic stem cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3223331
PMID: 21854845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2011 Nov;46(11):1401-3. doi: 10.3109/00365521.2011.610006.
Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater: does the histopathologic type matter?

Amptoulach S, Josefsson A, Kavantzas N, Kalaitzakis E.

PMID: 21854095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Arkh Patol. 2011 May-Jun;73(3):26-31.

[Morphogenesis of gastric mucosal atrophy as a basis of a phenotype of chronic
gastritis].

[Article in Russian]

Kononov AV, Mosgovoi SI, Markelova MV, Shimanskaia AG.

Atrophic antral gastritis was found to show an absolute decrease in gland volume 
with higher expression of the gastric transcription factor Shh, i.e. absolute
atrophy and that concurrent with the replacement of the specialized gastric
epithelium by the intestinal MUC2-producing one, i.e. metaplastic atrophy. In
atrophic multifocal gastritis along absolute and metaplastic atrophy, there are
foci of the proliferative metaplastic epithelium, i.e. hyperproliferative
metaplastic atrophy that is prevalent in atrophic pangastritis. The molecular
characteristics of hyperproliferative metaplastic atrophy are varying: in some
foci of metaplasia, the high proliferative activity of the epithelium is
concomitant with the hyperexpression of P53, a marker of DNA damage, the lower
expression of the intestinal transcription factor CDX-2, and the low level of
Cpp32, an indicator of apoptosis. Whether such structures can be identified at
the launching pad for tumor growth in atrophic pangastritis is discussed.

PMID: 21853920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mod Pathol. 2011 Dec;24(12):1620-6. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.127. Epub 2011
Aug 12.

Pancreatic-type acinar cell carcinoma of the liver: a clinicopathologic study of 
four patients.

Agaimy A(1), Kaiser A, Becker K, Bräsen JH, Wünsch PH, Adsay NV, Klöppel G.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Pathology, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
abbas.agaimy@uk-erlangen.de

Acinar cell carcinoma of pancreatic type rarely occurs at extra-pancreatic sites.
We report four primary liver tumors with features of pancreatic acinar cell
carcinoma. The patients were two males and two females with a mean age of 65
years (range, 49-72 years). They had upper abdominal pain, weight loss and/or an 
incidentally discovered liver mass. None had evidence of a primary pancreatic
tumor. Grossly, the tumors were large (mean size, 12 cm), well circumscribed and 
showed a lobulated cut surface. Histologically, they showed a predominantly
microacinar pattern, with occasional trabecular, solid and microcystic areas.
Cellular atypia and mitotic activity varied within the same tumor and from tumor 
to tumor. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin 18
and at least one acinar cell marker (ie, trypsin, amylase or lipase), but were
negative for cytokeratins 7, 19 and 20, HepPar-1, AFP, CD10, carcinoembryonic
antigen, CD56, Islet-1 and CDX2. Two tumors stained focally for synaptophysin and
chromogranin A. Adjacent liver parenchyma displayed no evidence of cirrhosis.
During a mean follow-up of 22 months (range, 3-38 months) no metastases occurred,
but one patient developed local recurrence. Our study demonstrates that acinar
cell carcinoma of pancreatic type may also originate from the liver and can be
readily distinguished from other primary liver neoplasms by its distinct
histological and immunohistochemical features. Because our cases were observed
within a rather short period, it is likely that this tumor type is so far
underrecognized and has been mistaken as a variant of hepatocellular carcinoma,
cholangiocarcinoma or any other liver tumor.

PMID: 21841771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Dec;1814(12):1891-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.07.021. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Caudal-related homeodomain proteins CDX1/2 bind to DNA replication-related
element binding factor.

Park SY(1), Jeong MS, Yoo MA, Jang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic of
Korea.

In the intestinal epithelium, the CDX1 and CDX2 homeodomain genes play
proliferative and tumor suppressor roles, respectively. The transcription factor 
DNA replication-related element binding factor (DREF), is an 80kDa polypeptide
homodimer that plays an important role in regulating cell proliferation-related
genes. Homeodomain genes encode DNA-binding proteins that play crucial roles
during development by defining the body plan and determining cell fate. However, 
until now, the regulation of DREF function by caudal-related homeodomain proteins
is poorly understood. In this study, recombinant CDX1/2 homeodomains (CDX1, amino
acids [aa] 152-216 and CDX2, aa 184-248) and the DNA-binding domain of Drosophila
DREF (dDREF; aa 1-125) were isolated in order to investigate the regulatory
mechanism of their interaction. The expression and purification of the truncated 
CDX1/2 and DREF proteins were successfully performed in Escherichia coli. Models 
of the CDX1/2 homeodomain and dDREF were constructed using SWISS-MODEL software, 
a program for relative protein structure modeling. The binding of CDX1/2 and DREF
proteins was detected by fluorescence measurement, size-exclusion column (SEC)
chromatography, His-tagged pull-down assay, and surface plasmon resonance
spectroscopy (BIAcore). In addition, we identified that four different mutants of
CDX1 (S185A, N190A, T194A, and V212A) were bound to dDREF with different degrees 
of interaction. Our results indicate that CDX1/2 homeodomains interact with the
DNA-binding domain of dDREF, thereby regulating its transcription activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21821154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2011 Aug;108(8):1399-404.

A case of Helicobacter pylori-negative depressed type gastric adenoma.

Yuge R(1), Fukumoto A, Sagami S, Iiboshi T, Onogawa S, Hirano N, Amano H, Hanada 
K, Hino F, Obayashi M, Yonehara S.

Author information: 
(1)Gastro Endoscopy Center, JA Onomichi General Hospital.

A 75-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for further examination of
gastric antral abnormal endoscopic findings. Endoscopic study of the stomach
revealed a depressed lesion in the gastric antrum. Atrophic findings were not
recognized in the background gastric mucosa, and Helicobacter pylori infection
was not detected by histology, an urea breath test, a rapid urease test and
serological test. A diagnosis of adenoma was given histopathologically from the
resected specimens. As a result of immunohistological study, the phenotype of the
tumor was not classified as either gastric type or intestinal type. CDX2 was
positive in part of the tumor.

PMID: 21817843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):144-55. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.06.015.

BRACHYURY and CDX2 mediate BMP-induced differentiation of human and mouse
pluripotent stem cells into embryonic and extraembryonic lineages.

Bernardo AS(1), Faial T, Gardner L, Niakan KK, Ortmann D, Senner CE, Callery EM, 
Trotter MW, Hemberger M, Smith JC, Bardwell L, Moffett A, Pedersen RA.

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK. asb63@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):91-2.

BMP is thought to induce hESC differentiation toward multiple lineages including 
mesoderm and trophoblast. The BMP-induced trophoblast phenotype is a
long-standing paradox in stem cell biology. Here we readdressed BMP function in
hESCs and mouse epiblast-derived cells. We found that BMP4 cooperates with FGF2
(via ERK) to induce mesoderm and to inhibit endoderm differentiation. These
conditions induced cells with high levels of BRACHYURY (BRA) that coexpressed
CDX2. BRA was necessary for and preceded CDX2 expression; both genes were
essential for expression not only of mesodermal genes but also of
trophoblast-associated genes. Maximal expression of the latter was seen in the
absence of FGF but these cells coexpressed mesodermal genes and moreover they
differed in cell surface and epigenetic properties from placental trophoblast. We
conclude that BMP induces human and mouse pluripotent stem cells primarily to
form mesoderm, rather than trophoblast, acting through BRA and CDX2.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3567433
PMID: 21816365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2011 Sep;30(5):492-6. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e318211d586.

Endometrial intestinal metaplasia: a report of two cases, including one
associated with cervical intestinal and pyloric metaplasia.

Nicolae A(1), Goyenaga P, McCluggage WG, Preda O, Nogales FF.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department of San Cecilio University Hospital, Avenida Madrid 11,
Granada, Spain.

Intestinal metaplasia of the endometrium is extremely uncommon with only a single
earlier case report. We describe 2 cases of endometrial intestinal metaplasia,
one of them involving an endometrial polyp, characterized by the presence of
intestinal-type epithelium containing goblet and neuroendocrine cells, which were
positive with CK20, CDX2, chromogranin, and villin. In 1 case, there was
concomitant intestinal and pyloric metaplasia in the endocervix. Together with
the observation of the earlier reported case of endometrial intestinal
metaplasia, there was also intestinal metaplasia in the cervix. This suggests a
possible association between intestinal metaplasia at different sites in the
female genital tract.

PMID: 21804398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):946-53. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093203. Epub 2011
Jul 20.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 promotes primitive endoderm development in bovine
blastocyst outgrowths.

Yang QE(1), Fields SD, Zhang K, Ozawa M, Johnson SE, Ealy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611-0910, USA.

Primitive endoderm (PE) is the second extraembryonic tissue to form during
embryogenesis in mammals. The PE develops from pluripotent cells of the
blastocyst inner cell mass. Experimental results described herein provide
evidence that FGF2 stimulates PE development during bovine blastocyst development
in vitro. Bovine blastocysts were cultured individually on a feeder layer-free,
Matrigel-coated surface in the presence or absence of FGF2. A majority of
blastocysts cultures formed outgrowths (76.8%) and the rate of outgrowth
formation was not affected by FGF2 supplementation. However, supplementation with
FGF2 increased the incidence of PE outgrowths on Days 13 and 15 after in vitro
fertilization. Presumptive PE cultures contained cells with a phenotype distinct 
from trophectoderm (TE). Cell identity was validated by expression of GATA4 and
GATA6 mRNA and transferrin protein, all markers of the PE lineage. Expression of 
GATA4 occurred coincident with blastocyst expansion and hatching. These cells did
not express IFNT and CDX2 (TE lineage markers). Profiles of FGF receptor (FGFR)
isoforms were distinct between PE and TE cultures. Specifically, FGFR1b and
FGFR1c were the predominant FGFR transcripts in PE whereas FGFR2b transcripts
were abundant in TE. Supplementation with FGF2 increased the mitotic index of PE 
but not TE. Moreover, FGF signaling appears important for initiation of PE
formation in blastocysts, presumably by lineage committal from NANOG-positive
epiblast cells, because chemical disruption of FGFR kinase activity with PD173074
reduces GATA4 expression and increases NANOG expression. Collectively, these
results indicate that FGF2 and potentially other FGFs specify PE formation and
mediate PE proliferation during early pregnancy in cattle.

PMID: 21778141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 9;286(36):31263-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.238147. Epub 2011
Jul 19.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) regulates claudin-2 expression and tight junction
permeability in intestinal epithelium.

Suzuki T(1), Yoshinaga N, Tanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biofunctional Science and Technology, Graduate School of
Biosphere Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8528, Japan.

In inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), intestinal barrier function is impaired as 
a result of deteriorations in epithelial tight junction (TJ) structure. IL-6, a
pleiotropic cytokine, is elevated in IBD patients, although the role of IL-6 in
barrier function remains unknown. We present evidence that IL-6 increases TJ
permeability by stimulating the expression of channel-forming claudin-2, which is
required for increased caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) 2 through the MEK/ERK and
PI3K pathways in intestinal epithelial cells. IL-6 increases the cation-selective
TJ permeability without any changes to uncharged dextran flux or cell viability
in Caco-2 cells. IL-6 markedly induces claudin-2 expression, which is associated 
with increased TJ permeability. The colonic mucosa of mice injected with IL-6
also exhibits an increase in claudin-2 expression. The claudin-2 expression and
TJ permeability induced by IL-6 are sensitive to the inhibition of gp130, MEK,
and PI3K. Furthermore, expression of WT-MEK1 induces claudin-2 expression in
Caco-2 cells. Claudin-2 promoter activity is increased by IL-6 in a MEK/ERK and
PI3K-dependent manner, and deletion of Cdx binding sites in the promoter sequence
results in a loss of IL-6-induced promoter activity. IL-6 increases Cdx2 protein 
expression, which is suppressed by the inhibition of MEK and PI3K. These
observations may reveal an important mechanism by which IL-6 can undermine the
integrity of the intestinal barrier.

PMCID: PMC3173073
PMID: 21771795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Gastroenterology. 2011 Oct;141(4):1302-13, 1313.e1-6. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.06.086. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Krüppel-like factor 5 is important for maintenance of crypt architecture and
barrier function in mouse intestine.

McConnell BB(1), Kim SS, Yu K, Ghaleb AM, Takeda N, Manabe I, Nusrat A, Nagai R, 
Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Krüppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) is transcription factor that is
expressed by dividing epithelial cells of the intestinal epithelium. KLF5
promotes proliferation in vitro and in vivo and is induced by mitogens and
various stress stimuli. To study the role of KLF5 in intestinal epithelial
homeostasis, we examined the phenotype of mice with conditional deletion of Klf5 
in the gut.
METHODS: Mice were generated with intestinal-specific deletion of Klf5
(Vil-Cre;Klf5fl/fl). Morphologic changes in the small intestine and colon were
examined by immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting, and real-time polymerase chain 
reaction.
RESULTS: Klf5 mutant mice were born at a normal Mendelian ratio but had high
mortality compared with controls. Complete deletion of Klf5 from the intestinal
mucosa resulted in neonatal lethality that corresponded with an absence of
epithelial proliferation. Variegated intestinal-specific deletion of Klf5 in
adult mice resulted in morphologic changes that included a regenerative
phenotype, impaired barrier function, and inflammation. Adult mutant mice
exhibited defects in epithelial differentiation and migration. These changes were
associated with reduced expression of Caudal type homeobox (Cdx) 1, Cdx2, and Eph
and ephrin signaling proteins. Concomitantly, Wnt signaling to ß-catenin was
reduced. Proliferation in regenerative crypts was associated with increased
expression of the progenitor cell marker Sox9.
CONCLUSIONS: Deletion of Klf5 in the gut epithelium of mice demonstrated that
KLF5 maintains epithelial proliferation, differentiation, and cell positioning
along the crypt radial axis. Morphologic changes that occur with deletion of Klf5
are associated with disruption of canonical Wnt signaling and increased
expression of Sox9.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3186863
PMID: 21763241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Am J Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 1;1(4):432-445.

Systemic activation of K-ras rapidly induces gastric hyperplasia and metaplasia
in mice.

Matkar SS(1), Durham A, Brice A, Wang TC, Rustgi AK, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology,
Abramson Cancer Center, the University of Pennsylvania, 412 Curie Blvd.,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Mouse models with conditional activation of K-ras (K-ras(G12D)) are used widely
to investigate the role of oncogenic K-ras in a tissue-specific manner. However, 
the effect of ubiquitous activation of K-ras in adult mice has not been well
studied. Herein, we report that systemic activation of K-ras in mice leads to
rapid changes in gastric cellular homeostasis. Conditional activation of K-ras
results in activation of the MAPK pathway and hyperproliferation of squamous
epithelium in the forestomach and metaplasia in the glandular stomach. Parietal
cells almost completely disappear from the upper part of the stomach adjacent to 
forestomach of K-ras activated mice. CDX2, a caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor normally expressed in the intestine, is upregulated in parts
of the stomach, following activation of K-ras in mice. Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), 
a mediator of inflammation, is also upregulated in parts of the stomach of the
K-ras activated mice with concomitant infiltration of hematopoietic cells in the 
hyperplastic tissue. Moreover, in K-ras activated mice, the expression of
putative progenitor cell marker Dcamkl1 is upregulated in the glandular stomach. 
Expression of CD44, a candidate stomach cancer stem cell marker, is also
increased in forestomach and the glandular stomach. These results suggest that
cells of the stomach, potentially stem or progenitor cells, are highly
susceptible to K-ras activation-induced initiation of gastric precancerous
lesions. The histological changes in the K-ras activated mice resemble the
pre-neoplastic changes that take place during gastric carcinogenesis in humans.
Thus, a mouse model with systemic K-ras(G12D) activation could be useful for
studying the early molecular events leading to gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3134228
PMID: 21761008  [PubMed]


249. Development. 2011 Aug;138(16):3451-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.066118. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Concerted involvement of Cdx/Hox genes and Wnt signaling in morphogenesis of the 
caudal neural tube and cloacal derivatives from the posterior growth zone.

van de Ven C(1), Bialecka M, Neijts R, Young T, Rowland JE, Stringer EJ, Van
Rooijen C, Meijlink F, Nóvoa A, Freund JN, Mallo M, Beck F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Development. 2011 Sep 1;138(17):3859.

Decrease in Cdx dosage in an allelic series of mouse Cdx mutants leads to
progressively more severe posterior vertebral defects. These defects are
corrected by posterior gain of function of the Wnt effector Lef1. Precocious
expression of Hox paralogous 13 genes also induces vertebral axis truncation by
antagonizing Cdx function. We report here that the phenotypic similarity also
applies to patterning of the caudal neural tube and uro-rectal tracts in Cdx and 
Wnt3a mutants, and in embryos precociously expressing Hox13 genes. Cdx2
inactivation after placentation leads to posterior defects, including incomplete 
uro-rectal septation. Compound mutants carrying one active Cdx2 allele in the
Cdx4-null background (Cdx2/4), transgenic embryos precociously expressing Hox13
genes and a novel Wnt3a hypomorph mutant all manifest a comparable phenotype with
similar uro-rectal defects. Phenotype and transcriptome analysis in early Cdx
mutants, genetic rescue experiments and gene expression studies lead us to
propose that Cdx transcription factors act via Wnt signaling during the laying
down of uro-rectal mesoderm, and that they are operative in an early phase of
these events, at the site of tissue progenitors in the posterior growth zone of
the embryo. Cdx and Wnt mutations and premature Hox13 expression also cause
similar neural dysmorphology, including ectopic neural structures that sometimes 
lead to neural tube splitting at caudal axial levels. These findings involve the 
Cdx genes, canonical Wnt signaling and the temporal control of posterior Hox gene
expression in posterior morphogenesis in the different embryonic germ layers.
They shed a new light on the etiology of the caudal dysplasia or caudal
regression range of human congenital defects.

PMID: 21752936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Virchows Arch. 2011 Aug;459(2):147-54. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1118-6. Epub 2011 
Jul 8.

Hormonally defined pancreatic and duodenal neuroendocrine tumors differ in their 
transcription factor signatures: expression of ISL1, PDX1, NGN3, and CDX2.

Hermann G(1), Konukiewitz B, Schmitt A, Perren A, Klöppel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center and Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

We recently identified the transcription factor (TF) islet 1 gene product (ISL1) 
as a marker for well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (P-NETs). In
order to better understand the expression of the four TFs, ISL1,
pancreatico-duodenal homeobox 1 gene product (PDX1), neurogenin 3 gene product
(NGN3), and CDX-2 homeobox gene product (CDX2), that mainly govern the
development and differentiation of the pancreas and duodenum, we studied their
expression in hormonally defined P-NETs and duodenal (D-) NETs. Thirty-six P-NETs
and 14 D-NETs were immunostained with antibodies against the four pancreatic
hormones, gastrin, serotonin, calcitonin, ISL1, PDX1, NGN3, and CDX2. The TF
expression pattern of each case was correlated with the tumor's hormonal profile.
Insulin-positive NETs expressed only ISL1 (10/10) and PDX1 (9/10).
Glucagon-positive tumors expressed ISL1 (7/7) and were almost negative for the
other TFs. Gastrin-positive NETs, whether of duodenal or pancreatic origin,
frequently expressed PDX1 (17/18), ISL1 (14/18), and NGN3 (14/18). CDX2 was
mainly found in the gastrin-positive P-NETs (5/8) and rarely in the D-NETs
(1/10). Somatostatin-positive NETs, whether duodenal or pancreatic in origin,
expressed ISL1 (9/9), PDX1 (3/9), and NGN3 (3/9). The remaining tumors showed
labeling for ISL1 in addition to NGN3. There was no association between a
particular TF pattern and NET features such as grade, size, location, presence of
metastases, and functional activity. We conclude from our data that there is a
correlation between TF expression patterns and certain hormonally defined P-NET
and D-NET types, suggesting that most of the tumor types originate from
embryologically determined precursor cells. The observed TF signatures do not
allow us to distinguish P-NETs from D-NETs.

PMID: 21739268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):G719-30. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00508.2010. Epub 2011 Jul 7.

Constitutive activation of the MEK/ERK pathway inhibits intestinal epithelial
cell differentiation.

Lemieux E(1), Boucher MJ, Mongrain S, Boudreau F, Asselin C, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Quebec.

The Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK cascade regulates intestinal epithelial cell proliferation.
Indeed, while barely detectable in differentiated cells of the villi,
ERK1/2-activated forms are detected in the nucleus of undifferentiated human
intestinal crypt cells. In addition, we and others have reported that ERKs are
selectively inactivated during enterocyte differentiation. However, whether
inactivation of the ERK pathway is necessary for inhibition of both proliferation
and induction of differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells is unknown. Human
Caco-2/15 cells, undifferentiated crypt IEC-6 cells, and differentiating
Cdx3-expressing IEC-6 cells were infected with retroviruses encoding either a
hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged MEK1 wild type (wtMEK) or a constitutively active
S218D/S222D MEK1 mutant (caMEK). Protein and gene expression was assessed by
Western blotting, semiquantitative RT-PCR, and real-time PCR. Morphology was
analyzed by transmission electron microscopy. We found that 1) IEC-6/Cdx3 cells
formed multicellular layers after confluence and differentiated after 30 days in 
culture, as assessed by increased polarization, microvilli formation, expression 
of differentiation markers, and ERK1/2 inhibition; 2) while activated MEK
prevented neither the inhibition of ERK1/2 activities nor the differentiation
process in postconfluent Caco-2/15 cells, caMEK expression prevented ERK
inhibition in postconfluent IEC-6/Cdx3 cells, thus leading to maintenance of
elevated ERK1/2 activities; 3) caMEK-expressing IEC-6/Cdx3 cells exhibited
altered multicellular structure organization, poorly defined tight junctions,
reduced number of microvilli on the apical surface, and decreased expression of
the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a transcription factor and differentiation
markers, namely apolipoprotein A-4, fatty acid-binding protein, calbindin-3,
mucin 2, alkaline phosphatase, and sucrase-isomaltase; and 4) increased Cdx3
phosphorylation on serine-60 (S60) in IEC-6/Cdx3 cells expressing caMEK led to
decreased Cdx2 transactivation potential. These results indicate that
inactivation of the ERK pathway is required to ensure the full Cdx2/3
transcriptional activity necessary for intestinal epithelial cell terminal
differentiation.

PMID: 21737780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hum Pathol. 2011 Nov;42(11):1777-84. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.04.002.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A expression discriminates gastric involvement by
metastatic breast carcinomas from primary gastric adenocarcinomas.

Koyama T(1), Sekine S, Taniguchi H, Tsuda H, Ikegami M, Hano H, Kushima R.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital,
104-0045 Tokyo, Japan.

Breast carcinomas sometimes metastasize to the stomach, and the histopathologic
distinction of such metastases from primary gastric adenocarcinomas is often
difficult. We characterized the clinicopathologic features of 21 breast
carcinomas that had metastasized to the stomach and examined the use of a panel
of antibodies, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A, for distinguishing the
metastases from primary gastric diffuse-type adenocarcinomas. Histologically, all
the metastatic breast carcinomas showed a poorly differentiated and/or signet
ring cell morphology. Although most metastatic breast and primary gastric
carcinomas contained signet ring cell components, the cases that were
predominantly or exclusively composed of univacuolated-type signet ring cells
were limited to metastatic breast carcinomas. Immunohistochemically, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4A was expressed in all 33 primary gastric carcinomas that were
examined but was never expressed in metastatic breast carcinomas. Previously
reported markers for breast and gastric carcinomas also showed a high
specificity, but their sensitivities were quite variable. Estrogen receptor a,
progesterone receptor, mammaglobin, and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15
were expressed in 76%, 33%, 52%, and 62%, respectively, of the metastatic breast 
carcinomas, whereas none of the primary gastric carcinomas expressed these
antigens. CDX2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and CK20 were expressed in 36%, 85%, 27%, and 55%, 
respectively, of the primary gastric carcinomas. All the metastatic breast
carcinomas were negative for these antibodies except for 1 case that expressed
MUC5AC. Overall, the use of immunohistochemistry efficiently discriminated
metastatic breast carcinomas from primary gastric carcinomas. In particular, the 
present study identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A as an excellent marker for 
differentiating the 2 lesions.

PMID: 21733563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21443. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021443. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

DNA methylation changes in atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, adenocarcinoma in
situ, and lung adenocarcinoma.

Selamat SA(1), Galler JS, Joshi AD, Fyfe MN, Campan M, Siegmund KD, Kerr KM,
Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is common in lung adenocarcinoma, but its
timing in the phases of tumor development is largely unknown. Delineating when
abnormal DNA methylation arises may provide insight into the natural history of
lung adenocarcinoma and the role that DNA methylation alterations play in tumor
formation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used MethyLight, a sensitive real-time
PCR-based quantitative method, to analyze DNA methylation levels at 15 CpG
islands that are frequently methylated in lung adenocarcinoma and that we had
flagged as potential markers for non-invasive detection. We also used two repeat 
probes as indicators of global DNA hypomethylation. We examined DNA methylation
in 249 tissue samples from 93 subjects, spanning the putative spectrum of
peripheral lung adenocarcinoma development: histologically normal adjacent
non-tumor lung, atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), adenocarcinoma in situ
(AIS, formerly known as bronchioloalveolar carcinoma), and invasive lung
adenocarcinoma. Comparison of DNA methylation levels between the lesion types
suggests that DNA hypermethylation of distinct loci occurs at different time
points during the development of lung adenocarcinoma. DNA methylation at CDKN2A
ex2 and PTPRN2 is already significantly elevated in AAH, while CpG islands at
2C35, EYA4, HOXA1, HOXA11, NEUROD1, NEUROD2 and TMEFF2 are significantly
hypermethylated in AIS. In contrast, hypermethylation at CDH13, CDX2, OPCML,
RASSF1, SFRP1 and TWIST1 and global DNA hypomethylation appear to be present
predominantly in invasive cancer.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The gradual increase in DNA methylation seen for
numerous loci in progressively more transformed lesions supports the model in
which AAH and AIS are sequential stages in the development of lung
adenocarcinoma. The demarcation of DNA methylation changes characteristic for
AAH, AIS and adenocarcinoma begins to lay out a possible roadmap for aberrant DNA
methylation events in tumor development. In addition, it identifies which DNA
methylation changes might be used as molecular markers for the detection of
preinvasive lesions.

PMCID: PMC3121768
PMID: 21731750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Pancreas. 2011 Aug;40(6):883-95. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31822041a9.

Serotonin-producing enterochromaffin cell tumors of the pancreas:
clinicopathologic study of 15 cases and comparison with intestinal
enterochromaffin cell tumors.

La Rosa S(1), Franzi F, Albarello L, Schmitt A, Bernasconi B, Tibiletti MG, Finzi
G, Placidi C, Perren A, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy.
stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

OBJECTIVES: Serotonin-producing tumors of the pancreas are rare endocrine
neoplasms composed of enterochromaffin (EC) cells that have been mainly described
in the literature as case reports. This study analyzes the clinicopathologic
features of a series of pancreatic EC cell neoplasms and their similarities to
and differences from intestinal EC cell tumors.
METHODS: The morphological, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and fluorescent
in situ hybridization features of 15 pancreatic and 20 intestinal
serotonin-producing neoplasms were compared. In addition, we reviewed the
literature on pancreatic serotonin-producing tumors to better understand the
clinicopathologic features of this rare tumor type.
RESULTS: The lack of substance P and acidic fibroblast growth factor
immunoreactivity; the low immunohistochemical expression of CDX2, vesicular
monoamine transporter 1, connective tissue growth factor, and prostatic acid
phosphatase; the lack of S100-positive sustentacular cells; the strong expression
of vesicular monoamine transporter 2; and peculiar ultrastructural features
characterize pancreatic EC cell tumors and differentiate them from intestinal
ones, although both categories show similar chromosome 18 cytogenetic
alterations. The review of the literature indicates that pancreatic functioning
tumors associated with the carcinoid syndrome arise in younger patients and are
larger, more frequently malignant, and more aggressive neoplasms than pancreatic 
nonfunctioning ones.
CONCLUSIONS: Pancreatic EC cell tumors show several different morphological
features compared with related intestinal tumors despite similar cytogenetic
alterations on chromosome 18.

PMID: 21705949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. BMC Endocr Disord. 2011 Jun 22;11:12. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-11-12.

Efficacy of vitamin D3-fortified-yogurt drink on anthropometric, metabolic,
inflammatory and oxidative stress biomarkers according to vitamin D receptor gene
polymorphisms in type 2 diabetic patients: a study protocol for a randomized
controlled clinical trial.

Shab-Bidar S(1), Neyestani TR, Djazayery A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Biochemistry, School of Public Health, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Iran. neytr@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is determined by the
interactions of genetic and environmental factors. This study was designed to
evaluate the possible role of VDR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on
different aspects of diabetic host response (anthropometric, metabolic, oxidative
stress and inflammatory) to daily intake of vitamin D through fortified yogurt
drink for 12 weeks.
METHODS/DESIGN: This study comprises two parts: (i) a case-control study; and
(ii) an intervention trial. In the first part, VDR polymorphisms (Taq1, FokI,
Apa1, Bsm1, and Cdx2) are determined in 350 T2DM patients and 350 non-diabetic
subjects. In the second part, the possible effects of daily intake of two
servings of vitamin D3-fortified yogurt drink (FYD; 500 IU vitamin D/250 mL) on
some selected metabolic (including insulin resistance), inflammatory and
oxidative stress biomarkers in 135 T2DM patients are assessed. To relate the
resulted changes in the biomarkers to vitamin D replenishment, another group of
diabetic patients (n = 45) are also included in the study who receive 2 servings 
of plain yogurt drink (PYD) a day. The primary outcome is serum level of 25(OH)
D, which it is expected to be elevated only in FYD group. Secondary outcomes
include improvements in glycemic, metabolic, inflammatory and oxidative stress
biomarkers in FYD group compared to PYD group. Three VDR FokI polymorphisms are
determined only in FYD group followed by comparison of changes in the biomarkers 
among these genotypic variants.
DISCUSSION: The present study, at least in part, elucidates the discrepancies in 
the results of different vitamin D-diabetes studies pertaining to the genetic
variations of the population. If VDR polymorphisms are found to influence the
response to our intervention, then knowing distribution of VDR polymorphisms in
both diabetic and non-diabetic populations can give a picture of the proportion
of the community in whom up to 1000 IU/d vitamin D may not be effective enough to
improve insulin resistance and related morbidities. Therefore, they should
ideally receive further nutritional support according to their genotype.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01236846.

PMCID: PMC3146888
PMID: 21696575  [PubMed]


257. J Med Case Rep. 2011 Jun 21;5:223. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-5-223.

Metastasis of a cecal adenocarcinoma to the prostate five years after a right
hemicolectomy: a case report.

Youssef FR(1), Hunt L, Meiring PD, Taraporewalla DR, Gupta R, James MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Glossop Road, Sheffield, S10 2JF, UK.
fyoussef@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Prostatic metastasis from a primary bowel adenocarcinoma has been
only rarely reported in the medical literature. The case reported here is rare in
the fact that the primary tumor was from a right-sided bowel adenocarcinoma. It
is unusual because initial immunostaining was not fully conclusive, and so a
relatively new method of immunostaining, CDX2, was used to ascertain its
histopathology.
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe the case of a 54-year-old Caucasian man who had a 
right hemicolectomy for a primary cecal adenocarcinoma, which was completely
excised. Following the procedure, he received adjuvant chemotherapy. Computed
tomography scans showed no evidence of local recurrence or metastatic disease.
Then, five years later, he presented to his general practitioner with urinary
symptoms. An abnormal prostate was palpated on digital rectal examination.
Trans-rectal prostatic biopsies were performed, which showed colorectal
metastases within the prostate gland. This was confirmed with CDX2
immunohistochemistry. There was no further evidence of distant metastases on
positron emission tomography-computed tomography scans.
CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrates a rare isolated hematogenous spread to the
prostate from a primary cecal adenocarcinoma, several years after definitive
treatment and excision. This highlights the importance of accurate
immunohistochemistry and imaging in planning further management and treatment.

PMCID: PMC3132161
PMID: 21689464  [PubMed]


258. Anal Biochem. 2011 Sep 15;416(2):228-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2011.05.033. Epub 2011
May 27.

Differential apoptotic staining of mammalian blastocysts based on double
immunofluorescent CDX2 and active caspase-3 staining.

Wydooghe E(1), Vandaele L, Beek J, Favoreel H, Heindryckx B, De Sutter P, Van
Soom A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.
Eline.Wydooghe@ugent.be

Several approaches have been described for differential staining of blastocysts, 
but these methods are often time-consuming and unreliable. Here we describe a
method for simultaneous differential staining and detection of apoptosis. The
differential staining is based on the transcription factor CDX2 which is
localized in the nucleus of trophectoderm (TE) cells but absent in the inner cell
mass (ICM). Apoptosis is detected by staining of active caspase-3, a key player
in several apoptotic pathways. This new approach represents a robust method for
quantifying simultaneously ICM/TE ratio and apoptotic cell ratio in bovine,
murine, porcine, and human blastocysts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jul;35(7):971-80. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31821cbd72.

A histologic and immunohistochemical study describing the diversity of tumors
classified as sinonasal high-grade nonintestinal adenocarcinomas.

Stelow EB(1), Jo VY, Mills SE, Carlson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA.

Nonintestinal sinonasal adenocarcinomas (SNACs) are somewhat poorly characterized
and high-grade nonintestinal SNACs have been only rarely reported. Here, we
review our experience with these tumors. Twenty-seven cases of high-grade
nonintestinal SNACs were identified from 22 men and 5 women. Ages ranged from 22 
to 83 years (mean±1 standard deviation=54.7±18.6 y; median=60 y). Thirteen cases 
involved the nasal cavity and sinuses, 10 involved the nasal cavity only, and 4
involved sinuses only. Most cases had marked cytologic and nuclear pleomorphism, 
abundant mitotic activity, and necrosis; however, these features were not
uniform. Although histologically heterogeneous, recurrent growth patterns were
seen that resembled other neoplasms of the area. Tumors lacked CDX2 and CK20
immunoreactivity (aside from rare CK20 immunoreactive cells). High-grade
nonintestinal SNACs are more common in men and, although they occur over a wide
age range, they are much more common in older individuals. Histologically, they
show a great deal of heterogeneity.

PMID: 21677536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Pancreas. 2011 Jul;40(5):791-3. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e318216db94.

Signet ring cell carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater: demonstration of a
pancreatobiliary origin.

Gheza F, Cervi E, Pulcini G, Villanacci V, Giulini SM, Schiavo-Lena M, Ferrari
AB, Bassotti G.

PMID: 21673543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Hum Pathol. 2011 Dec;42(12):1888-96. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.06.020. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Systematic analysis of proteins from different signaling pathways in the tumor
center and the invasive front of colorectal cancer.

Karamitopoulou E(1), Zlobec I, Panayiotides I, Patsouris ES, Peros G, Rallis G,
Lapas C, Karakitsos P, Terracciano LM, Lugli A.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, University of Athens, 12464 Athens, Greece.
ekaramit@med.uoa.gr

In colorectal cancer, the functional impact of proteins from different signaling 
pathways varies between tumor center and tumor front. Our objective was to
identify differential protein expression profiles between the tumor center and
the tumor front of colorectal cancer. Twenty proteins from different signaling
pathways (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], phosphorylated extracellular
signal regulated kinase [pERK], receptor for hyalouronic acid mediated motility
[RHAMM], Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein [RKIP], ß-catenin, E-cadherin,
phosphorylated AK transforming [pAKT], p16, p21, Ki-67, B-cell Lymphoma-2 [BCL2],
vascular endothelial growth factor, apoptosis protease activating factor 1
[APAF-1], mucin1 [MUC1], ephrin B2 receptor [EphB2], matrix metalloproteinase 7
[MMP7], phosphorylated mothers against decapentaplegic 2 [pSMAD2], caudal type
homeobox transcription factor 2 [CDX2], Laminin5<U+03B3>2, and mammalian sterile 20-like
kinase 1 [MST1]) involved in colorectal cancer progression were studied
immunohistochemically on 220 well-characterized patients using a multiple-punch
tissue microarray including 437 and 430 samples from the tumor center and the
invasive front, respectively. Mean expression between the tumor center and the
tumor front varied statistically significantly for pSMAD2, pERK, Raf-1 kinase
inhibitor protein, E-cadherin, pAKT, BCL2, vascular endothelial growth factor,
EphB2, matrix metalloproteinase 7, CDX2, Laminin5<U+03B3>2, MST1, and APAF-1.
Overexpression of pAKT, BCL2, vascular endothelial growth factor, APAF-1, pERK,
EphB2, Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein, CDX2, E-cadherin, MST1 (P < .001 each),
and pSMAD2 (P = .002) was more frequently observed in the tumor center, whereas
matrix metalloproteinase 7 and Laminin5<U+03B3>2 (P < .001 each) overexpression was
associated with the invasive front. In multivariate analysis, vascular
endothelial growth factor (P < .001), Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein (P = .009), 
and Laminin5<U+03B3>2 (P < .001) were the most relevant proteins with the multimarker
phenotypes positive/positive/negative and negative/negative/positive being most
discriminating between the tumor center and the tumor front. Moreover, the
combination negative/negative/positive vascular endothelial growth factor/Raf-1
kinase inhibitor protein/Laminin5<U+03B3>2 at the tumor front was associated with
vascular/lymphatic invasion (P = .014), distant metastasis (P = .019), higher
tumor grade (P < .001), and poorer survival (P = .05). Our findings show that, in
colorectal cancer progression, vascular endothelial growth factor overexpression 
seems to play a role in the tumor center, whereas Laminin5<U+03B3>2-positivity combined 
with Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein loss is associated with tumor invasion at the
front.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21664646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011 Mar-Apr;58(106):583-8.

Intraepithelial ductal spread in colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis.

Wakai T(1), Korita PV, Ajioka Y, Inoue M, Takamura M, Akazawa K, Shirai Y,
Hatakeyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive and General Surgery, Niigata University Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Chuo-ku, Niigata, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: This study aimed to evaluate the usefulness of
immunohistochemical combinations for discrimination between intraepithelial
ductal spread of colorectal carcinoma liver metastasis (CRLM) and that of
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC).
METHODOLOGY: A retrospective analysis of resected specimens from 151 patients
with CRLM and 28 patients with ICC was conducted. Intraepithelial ductal spread
along the bile ducts was judged positive when tumor cells spreading along the
intact basement membranes of intrahepatic bile ducts. We evaluated
immunoreactivity of cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, CDX2, MUC2, MUC5AC and human
gastric mucin (HGM).
RESULTS: Of the 151 patients with CRLM, 21 had intrahepatic bile duct involvement
verified histologically. Intraepithelial ductal spread was detected in 17 of 21
(81%) patients with CRLM with bile duct involvement, whereas it was detected in
22 of 28 (79%) patients with ICC. CK20-positive/ CK7-negative immunophenotype
demonstrated a high accuracy of 95% for evaluation of intraepithelial ductal
spread from CRLM. CK7-positive/ CK20-negative immunophenotype demonstrated the
highest accuracy of 85% for evaluation of intraepithelial ductal spread from ICC.
CONCLUSION: Intraepithelial ductal spread is a common feature of CRLM with bile
duct involvement. Immunohistochemical combination of CK7 and CK20 is useful for
discrimination between intraepithelial ductal spread of CRLM and that of ICC.

PMID: 21661435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Pathol. 2011 Nov;225(3):336-43. doi: 10.1002/path.2879. Epub 2011 Jun 9.

Comprehensive analysis of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)-high, -low, and 
-negative colorectal cancers based on protein marker expression and molecular
features.

Zlobec I(1), Bihl M, Foerster A, Rufle A, Lugli A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40, 4056,
Basel, Switzerland. inti.zlobec@pathology.unibe.ch

CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is being investigated for its role in the 
molecular and prognostic classification of colorectal cancer patients but is also
emerging as a factor with the potential to influence clinical decision-making. We
report a comprehensive analysis of clinico-pathological and molecular features
(KRAS, BRAF and microsatellite instability, MSI) as well as of selected tumour-
and host-related protein markers characterizing CIMP-high (CIMP-H), -low, and
-negative colorectal cancers. Immunohistochemical analysis for 48 protein markers
and molecular analysis of CIMP (CIMP-H: = 4/5 methylated genes), MSI (MSI-H: = 2 
instable genes), KRAS, and BRAF were performed on 337 colorectal cancers. Simple 
and multiple regression analysis and receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve analysis were performed. CIMP-H was found in 24 cases (7.1%) and linked (p 
< 0.0001) to more proximal tumour location, BRAF mutation, MSI-H, MGMT
methylation (p = 0.022), advanced pT classification (p = 0.03), mucinous
histology (p = 0.069), and less frequent KRAS mutation (p = 0.067) compared to
CIMP-low or -negative cases. Of the 48 protein markers, decreased levels of RKIP 
(p = 0.0056), EphB2 (p = 0.0045), CK20 (p = 0.002), and Cdx2 (p < 0.0001) and
increased numbers of CD8+ intra-epithelial lymphocytes (p < 0.0001) were related 
to CIMP-H, independently of MSI status. In addition to the expected
clinico-pathological and molecular associations, CIMP-H colorectal cancers are
characterized by a loss of protein markers associated with differentiation, and
metastasis suppression, and have increased CD8+ T-lymphocytes regardless of MSI
status. In particular, Cdx2 loss seems to strongly predict CIMP-H in both
microsatellite-stable (MSS) and MSI-H colorectal cancers. Cdx2 is proposed as a
surrogate marker for CIMP-H.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21660972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Carcinog. 2012 May;51(5):411-21. doi: 10.1002/mc.20804. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Right-side and left-side colon cancer follow different pathways to relapse.

Bauer KM(1), Hummon AB, Buechler S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, 
Indiana 46556, USA.

There is growing evidence that cancer of the ascending (right-side) colon is
different from cancer of the descending (left-side) colon at the molecular level.
Using microarray data from 102 right-side colon carcinomas and 95 left-side colon
carcinomas we show that different pathways dominate progression to relapse in
right-side and left-side colon cancer. Right-side tumors at a high risk for
relapse exhibit elevated expression of cell cycle control genes and elevated Wnt 
signaling. On the other hand, relapse-prone left-side tumors show elevated
expression of genes that promote stromal expansion and reduced expression of
tumor suppressor genes that initiate Wnt signaling. Single gene prognostic
biomarkers are found separately for right-side and left-side disease. In
left-side tumors with low expression levels of NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) the 5-yr
relapse-free survival probability is 0.89 95% CI (0.80-0.99), and in tumors with 
elevated NOX4 expression the probability is 0.51 95% CI (0.37-0.70). Right-side
tumors with elevated expression levels of caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) have a
5-yr relapse-free survival probability of 0.88 95% CI (0.80-0.96), and those with
low CDX2 expression have a corresponding probability of 0.39 95% CI (0.15-0.78). 
Both NOX4 and CDX2 are much less prognostic on the opposite sides. This newly
identified role of NOX4 in colon cancer is further investigated using the SW620
lymph node metastasis colon adenocarcinoma cell line and RNA interference. We
show that NOX4 is expressed in the SW620 cell line and that application of NOX4
siRNA causes a significant reduction in reactive oxidative species production.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4104680
PMID: 21656576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Thorax. 2011 Aug;66(8):692-8. doi: 10.1136/thx.2010.155234. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Relationship of vitamin D status to adult lung function and COPD.

Shaheen SO(1), Jameson KA, Robinson SM, Boucher BJ, Syddall HE, Sayer AA, Cooper 
C, Holloway JW, Dennison EM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Primary Care and Public Health, Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 2 Newark Street,
Whitechapel, London E1 2AT, UK. s.shaheen@qmul.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: There is considerable interest in the possible role of vitamin D in
respiratory disease, but only one population-based study has reported
associations with lung function.
METHODS: The cross-sectional relationships of total dietary vitamin D intake,
serum 25 hydroxy vitamin D (25(OH)D) concentrations and three vitamin D receptor 
(VDR) polymorphisms (Apa1, Fok1 and Cdx2) with lung function and
spirometrically-defined chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were
investigated in men and women aged 59-73 years in the Hertfordshire Cohort Study,
UK.
RESULTS: After controlling for confounders, total vitamin D intake was positively
associated with forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1); difference in FEV(1)
between top and bottom quintiles of intake 0.079 l (95% CI 0.02 to 0.14), p
trend=0.007, n=2942), ratio of FEV(1) to forced vital capacity (FEV(1)/FVC; p
trend=0.008) and negatively associated with COPD (OR comparing top and bottom
quintiles 0.57 (95% CI 0.38 to 0.87), p trend=0.02). In contrast, serum 25(OH)D
concentrations were not related to FEV(1) (p trend=0.89, n=1197) but were
positively associated with COPD (p trend=0.046). VDR genotypes were unrelated to 
lung function and did not modify the effects of dietary intake or 25(OH)D
concentrations on lung function.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study did not confirm a positive association
between blood 25(OH)D concentrations and adult lung function. The apparent
relationships with dietary vitamin D are likely to be explained by other highly
correlated nutrients in the diet.

PMID: 21653927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Sep;64(9):771-5. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200022. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Lymphoid aggregates may contribute to the migration and epithelial commitment of 
bone marrow-derived cells in colonic mucosa.

Valcz G(1), Krenács T, Sipos F, Patai AV, Wichmann B, Leiszter K, Tóth K, Balogh 
Z, Csizmadia A, Hagymási K, Masszi T, Molnár B, Tulassay Z.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
valczg@yahoo.com

AIMS: Colonic inflammation is followed by regeneration supported by bone
marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) including multipotent cells. They migrate to the
colonic epithelial layer and may transdifferentiate into epithelial-like cells or
keep their stem cell characteristics and produce progenies. The aim was to study 
the role of lymphoid aggregates in the migration and transition of BMDCs in both 
healthy colons and non-specific colitis (NSC).
METHODS: Samples of normal colon (n=5) and NSC (n=5) from female patients who
were initially transplanted with male bone marrow were studied. After detecting
XY chromosomes using fluorescent in situ hybridisation, tissue sections were
digitalised, the coverslips were eliminated and the samples were double stained
for CD45 and cytokeratin with immunofluorescence. Then CDX2 expression, as a sign
of intestinal epithelial commitment of Musashi-1+ stromal BMDCs, was also tested 
with both immunoperoxidase and parallel immunofluorescence stainings. The slides 
were digitalised again and analysed simultaneously.
RESULTS: A significant increase in intraepithelial CD45-BMDCs was found in
regions adjacent to lymphoid aggregates (median: 1.01) compared with healthy
epithelial regions (median: 0.0175) or NSC (median: 0.04) samples. The stromal
Musashi-1+ cells were positive for CDX2 as well, as a sign of epithelial
differentiation. The CDX2+ cells bearing the Y chromosome proved the epithelial
commitment of several stromal BMDCs.
CONCLUSION: Elevated number of intraepithelial CD45-BMDCs at lymphoid aggregates 
suggests that BMDCs play a role in epithelial regeneration and that lymphoid
aggregates serve as their migration route.

PMID: 21653659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Oct;57(5):564-71. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

Effect of fluorescent mercury light irradiation on in vitro and in vivo
development of mouse oocytes after parthenogenetic activation or sperm
microinjection.

Terashita Y(1), Li C, Yamagata K, Sato E, Wakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genomic Reprogramming, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN,
Kobe 650-0046, Japan. yterashita@cdb.riken.jp

The detection of specific cellular components using fluorescent agents such as
green fluorescent protein (GFP), red fluorescent protein or Hoechst dyes provides
a powerful tool for studying cell biology. However, specimens must be exposed to 
high-intensity light, which might cause cellular damage. Here, we exposed mouse
metaphase stage (M) II oocytes to fluorescent mercury vapor light at three
wavelengths (539 nm, 488 nm and 341 nm) to determine the maximum exposure time
that would avoid damage. When oocytes were activated parthenogenetically after
exposure to these wavelengths for more than 20 min, 5 min or 4 sec, respectively,
the percentages of dead oocytes after activation increased, and none of the
surviving embryos developed to blastocysts. However, embryos fertilized by
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) were more tolerant to light damage, even 
though the quality of blastocysts, judged by cell number and cell allocation to
the inner cell mass and trophectoderm measured by immunostaining for Oct4 and
Cdx2, was reduced as exposure times increased. Live, healthy offspring were
obtained when these exposed embryos were transferred into recipient
pseudopregnant females at the 2-cell stage. In addition, MII oocytes collected
from GFP-expressing transgenic mice after 5 min of irradiation with 488-nm light 
were also able to develop to full term following ICSI. Thus, we determined the
safe period of exposure to several wavelengths for oocyte manipulation or
observation that would permit subsequent development.

PMID: 21636957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Sep;17(3):743-51. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9380-0. Epub
2011 Apr 7.

Effects of homeodomain protein CDX2 expression on the proliferation and migration
of lovo colon cancer cells.

Zheng JB(1), Sun XJ, Qi J, Li SS, Wang W, Ren HL, Tian Y, Lu SY, Du JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China.

The homeobox gene, CDX2, plays a major role in development, especially in the
gut, and also functions as a tumor suppressor in the adult colon. In the present 
study, we investigated the effects of CDX2 expression on the proliferation,
migration, and apoptosis of the human colon cancer cell line, Lovo. Lovo cells
exogenously expressing CDX2 exhibited no significant differences in the
percentage of cells in G1- and S-phase or in apoptosis, as determined by flow
cytometry. MTT assay also confirmed that CDX2 expression had no effect on
proliferation in these cells. Interestingly, conditioned medium collected from
CDX2-overexpressing Lovo cells showed a significant decrease in secretion of
MMP-2 and the invasive potential of these cells was significantly inhibited.
Collectively, these data suggest that CDX2 may play a critical role in the
migration and metastasis of colon carcinoma and over-expression of CDX2 in colon 
cancer cells markedly inhibits invasion. Based on these results, exogenous
expression of CDX2 might be a promising option in the treatment of colon
carcinoma.

PMID: 21626348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2011 Aug;28(8):659-68. doi: 10.1007/s10815-011-9587-8.
Epub 2011 May 27.

A potential use of embryonic stem cell medium for the in vitro culture of
preimplantation embryos.

Gelber K(1), Tamura AN, Alarcon VB, Marikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry and
Physiology, University of Hawaii John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI, 
96813, USA.

PURPOSE: To assess the impact of embryonic stem cell culture medium (ESCM) on the
pre- and post-implantation development of the mouse embryo, as a mammalian model,
in comparison with the conventional culture medium, a potassium simplex optimized
medium (KSOM).
METHODS: Development in ESCM versus KSOM was compared in terms of embryo
morphology, cleavage, cavitation, hatching, cell number, expression of TE and ICM
transcription factors (Cdx2 and Oct4, respectively), implantation, and
development in utero.
RESULTS: An enriched medium like ESCM can be beneficial for in vitro embryo
development when cultured from the 8-cell stage, as evidenced by promotion of
blastocyst development with respect to cavity expansion, hatching, and cell
division. Such benefits were not observed when embryos were cultured from the
2-cell stage.
CONCLUSIONS: ESCM may augment in vitro embryo development from the 8-cell stage. 
Using different culture media at different stages may be beneficial to achieve
more effective human in vitro fertilization.

PMCID: PMC3170111
PMID: 21617931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Sep;57(4):518-25. Epub 2011 May 23.

Regulation of trophoblast-specific factors by GATA2 and GATA3 in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Someya Y, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Numerous transcription factors that regulate trophoblast developmental processes 
have been identified; however, the regulation of trophoblast-specific gene
expression has not been definitively characterized. While a new role of Gata3 in 
trophoblast development was being demonstrated in mice, we examined effects of
GATA transcription factors on conceptus interferon tau (IFNT), a major
trophectoderm factor in ruminants. In this study, expression patterns of
trophoblast ASCL2, CDX2, CSH1, ELF5, HAND1, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were initially 
examined, from which ASCL2, CDX2, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were found to be similar 
to those of GATA2 and GATA3 in days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0=day of estrus) bovine
conceptuses. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that
endogenous GATA2 and GATA3 occupied GATA binding sites on the upstream regions of
CSH1, IFNT, and TKDP1 genes and on the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells. In transient transfection analyses of the upstream region
of bovine CSH1, and IFNT or the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene, over-expression of 
GATA2 induced transactivation of these trophoblast-specific genes in bovine
non-trophoblast ear fibroblast EF cells, but over-expression of GATA3 did not
substantially affect their transactivation. In CT-1 cells, endogenous CDX2 and
IFNT mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA2 siRNA, while endogenous ASCL2 and CDX2
mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA3 siRNA. Our results indicate that in addition
to trophectoderm lineage specification, GATA2 and/or GATA3 are involved in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific gene transcription in bovine trophoblast CT-1 
cells.

PMID: 21606631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):25256-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.233601. Epub
2011 May 19.

BabA-mediated adherence is a potentiator of the Helicobacter pylori type IV
secretion system activity.

Ishijima N(1), Suzuki M, Ashida H, Ichikawa Y, Kanegae Y, Saito I, Borén T, Haas 
R, Sasakawa C, Mimuro H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Chronic infection of Helicobacter pylori in the stomach mucosa with translocation
of the bacterial cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) effector protein via the
cag-Type IV secretion system (TFSS) into host epithelial cells are major risk
factors for gastritis, gastric ulcers, and cancer. The blood group
antigen-binding adhesin BabA mediates the adherence of H. pylori to ABO/Lewis b
(Le(b)) blood group antigens in the gastric pit region of the human stomach
mucosa. Here, we show both in vitro and in vivo that BabA-mediated binding of H. 
pylori to Le(b) on the epithelial surface augments TFSS-dependent H. pylori
pathogenicity by triggering the production of proinflammatory cytokines and
precancer-related factors. We successfully generated Le(b)-positive cell lineages
by transfecting Le(b)-negative cells with several glycosyltransferase genes.
Using these established cell lines, we found increased mRNA levels of
proinflammatory cytokines (CCL5 and IL-8) as well as precancer-related factors
(CDX2 and MUC2) after the infection of Le(b)-positive cells with WT H. pylori but
not with babA or TFSS deletion mutants. This increased mRNA expression was
abrogated when Le(b)-negative cells were infected with WT H. pylori. Thus, H.
pylori can exploit BabA-Le(b) binding to trigger TFSS-dependent host cell
signaling to induce the transcription of genes that enhance inflammation,
development of intestinal metaplasia, and associated precancerous
transformations.

PMCID: PMC3137096
PMID: 21596743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. BMC Gastroenterol. 2011 May 20;11:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-11-59.

Small invasive colon cancer with systemic metastasis: a case report.

Matsumoto M(1), Nakajima T, Kato K, Kouno T, Sakamoto T, Matsuda T, Kushima R,
Saito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Endoscopy Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Recently, especially in Japan, several researchers have suggested
that colorectal cancer can develop not only through an adenoma-carcinoma sequence
but also from normal mucosa via a de novo pathway, and that these de novo cancers
have more aggressive malignant potential. We report a case of aggressive colon
cancer resulting in systemic metastasis despite small tumour size.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 35-year-old woman presented at the referring hospital with
swelling of the left cervical lymph node. Biopsy of the lymph node revealed
metastatic adenocarcinoma; however, CT scan and mammography were unable to
identify the site of the primary lesion. She was diagnosed with unknown primary
cancer and referred to our hospital for further examination. Immunohistochemical 
reevaluation showed the cervical lymph node biopsy specimen to be positive for
CDX2 and CK20 and negative for CK7 expression, leading us to suspect the presence
of a primary colorectal cancer. We performed a total colonoscopy, and detected a 
small protruding lesion in the transverse colon. The tumour was only 12 mm in
diameter, with a central depressed component and a severely thickened stalk,
which suggested direct cancer invasion of the deep submucosa. We concluded that
this lesion was the site of origin of the metastasis despite the small tumour
size, and performed diagnostic endoscopic mucosal resection. The lesion was found
to have an intramucosal cancer component, demonstrating that this lesion
represented primary colon cancer. The patient was referred to the
gastrointestinal oncology division for systemic chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: In this case, immunohistochemical findings strongly suggested the
existence of a colorectal cancer. The non-polypoid gross appearance of the tumour
suggested that it can originate de novo , thus providing a valuable case in
support of the aggressive malignant potential of a de novo colorectal cancer
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3123646
PMID: 21595976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Gastroenterol. 2011 Jul;46(7):883-93. doi: 10.1007/s00535-011-0405-y. Epub 2011
May 18.

Role of Th-2 cytokines in the development of Barrett's esophagus in rats.

Kohata Y(1), Fujiwara Y, Machida H, Okazaki H, Yamagami H, Tanigawa T, Watanabe
K, Watanabe T, Tominaga K, Wei M, Wanibuchi H, Arakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Osaka City University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-4-7 Asahimachi, Abenoku, Osaka, 545-8585, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus is characterized by a distinct Th-2-predominant
cytokine profile, unlike the pro-inflammatory nature of reflux esophagitis. The
aim of this study was to examine the role of Th-2 cytokines during the
development of Barrett's esophagus, using a rat model.
METHODS: Barrett's esophagus was induced by Levrat's esophagojejunostomy
technique in Brown-Norway (BN) rats. Rats were killed at 8, 15, 30, and 50 weeks 
after the operation. We studied the incidences of esophagitis and Barrett's
esophagus, and the mRNA expression of cytokines and CDX2 by real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemical staining.
Finally, we compared the incidence of Barrett's esophagus in BN rats with that in
Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats.
RESULTS: Esophagitis was found in all rats. Barrett's esophagus appeared 8 weeks 
after the operation, and its incidence and length increased over time. Levels of 
Th-2 cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, and IL-13 were significantly
increased in Barrett's esophagus as compared to those in non-Barrett's esophagus,
while there were no differences in the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The 
peak of elevated IL-4 mRNA was observed before that of CDX2 mRNA. IL-4 was
co-localized in CD4-positive cells and CDX2-positive goblet cells. The incidence 
of Barrett's esophagus was more common in BN rats (8/10, 80%) than in SD rats
(2/7, 28%) at 30 weeks.
CONCLUSION: Th-2 cytokines, especially IL-4, may play a crucial role in the
development of Barrett's esophagus in an early phase. These results provide
understanding of the pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus from the aspect of the
Th-2 immune response.

PMID: 21590343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jun;35(6):787-98. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182189c11.

Immunohistochemical analysis in a morphologic spectrum of urachal epithelial
neoplasms: diagnostic implications and pitfalls.

Paner GP(1), McKenney JK, Barkan GA, Yao JL, Frankel WL, Sebo TJ, Shen SS,
Jimenez RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Gladell.Paner@uchospitals.edu

The vast majority of urachal epithelial neoplasms are adenocarcinomas with
several described morphologic subtypes that include both enteric and nonenteric
histologies. Adenocarcinoma from several other primaries may mimic any of these
urachal adenocarcinoma subtypes in the bladder or at distant sites. However, data
regarding the immunohistochemical profile of urachal carcinoma are limited, let
alone its correlation with the different histologic subtypes that may have
implications in the differential diagnostic workup with their morphologic mimics.
Herein, we performed an immunohistochemical analysis in a broad spectrum of 39
urachal epithelial neoplasms (34 adenocarcinomas, 1 urothelial carcinoma, and 4
noninvasive mucinous cystic tumors), 13 urachal remnants, and 6 secondary colonic
adenocarcinomas of the bladder, using an antibody panel that included novel and
traditional gastrointestinal tract-associated markers. Expression levels of p63, 
CK7, CK20, CDX2, nuclear ß-catenin, claudin-18, and Reg IV in urachal
adenocarcinoma were as follows: 3%, 50%, 100%, 85%, 6%, 53%, and 85%. In urachal 
adenocarcinoma subtypes, expression levels of CDX2, nuclear ß-catenin,
claudin-18, and Reg IV were as follows: mucinous (8/8, 0/8, 6/8, 8/8), enteric
(10/11, 1/11, 3/11, 8/11), not otherwise specified (5/7, 0/7, 3/7, 5/7), and
signet ring cell (4/6, 0/6, 4/6, 6/6) type. All urachal adenocarcinomas had
membrano-cytoplasmic ß-catenin staining and only 2 tumors had nuclear
localization that were focal to moderate, in contrast to secondary colonic
adenocarcinoma of the bladder, which mostly had both membrano-cytoplasmic and
nuclear positivity. Claudin-18 positivity was observed only in frankly malignant 
tumors and not in noninvasive urachal tumors and urachal remnants. Reg IV
expression seemed to be related to mucin production, which was often diffuse in
mucinous and signet ring cell subtypes and focal in enteric subtype, with goblet 
cell-like reactivity similar to secondary colonic adenocarcinoma. p63 expression 
was present in urothelial urachal remnants (3/3) and contrasted with CDX2
expression seen in glandular (5/6) and mixed urothelial/glandular remnants (2/4).
Thus, this study showed that CDX2 is expressed by urachal remnants of glandular
type, noninvasive urachal mucinous cystic tumors and urachal adenocarcinomas, and
can be diffuse in urachal adenocarcinomas, even without the classic enteric
morphology. Nuclear localization of ß-catenin can rarely occur in urachal
adenocarcinoma; however, diffuse nuclear reactivity argues against its diagnosis.
The novel gastrointestinal tract markers claudin-18 and Reg IV are both expressed
in urachal adenocarcinoma, including in signet ring cell carcinoma, and thus
refutes the suggested specificity for gastrointestinal tract signet ring cell
carcinomas. An immunohistochemical panel that includes ß-catenin and CK7 may have
value in differentiating urachal adenocarcinoma of enteric morphology from
colonic adenocarcinoma. Overall, this study suggests that the different
morphologic presentations of urachal adenocarcinomas have a relatively similar or
overlapping immunophenotype. Knowledge of the similarity in immunostaining to its
different morphologic mimics may help avoid misdiagnosis in urachal
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 21572312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. APMIS. 2011 Jun;119(6):393-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02717.x. Epub 2011
Feb 11.

Filiform serrated adenomatous polyposis arising in a diverted rectum of an
inflammatory bowel disease patient.

Klarskov L(1), Mogensen AM, Jespersen N, Ingeholm P, Holck S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Copenhagen, Hvidovre Hospital, Denmark.

A 54-year-old man, previously colectomized for inflammatory bowel disease,
developed carcinoma in the inflamed rectum stump. The malignant growth was
surrounded by a filiform polyposis, grossly considered as pseudopolyps. The
histology disclosed, however, a morphology corresponding to the recently
described filiform subset of serrated adenoma (FSA). The clustering of the FSA
amounted to a filiform serrated adenomatous polyposis, a hitherto unreported
observation. It is speculated that neoplastic transformation of pre-existing
pseudopolyps and prolaps-related events lead to this peculiar morphology. Minor
zones with a villous structure were admixed as were small areas of traditional
serrated adenoma and patches of flat dysplasia. Although a combined gastric and
intestinal (positivity for MUC5AC, MUC2, MUC6, CDX2) immunoprofile characterized 
the adenomatous component, a downregulation of the gastric mucin along with a
loss of the serrated attribute accompanied the malignant transformation. An added
dynamic shift during the adenoma carcinoma sequence included the acquisition of
CK7 expression in the malignant portion. Gastric mucin may play a role in the
initial step of the neoplastic evolution and CK7 may denote neoplastic
progression. This case confirms the notion of a widely variegated morphology of
precursor lesions of colorectal carcinoma arising in a chronically inflamed bowel
as opposed to the generally more monotonous appearance of adenomas in a sporadic 
context.

© 2011 The Authors. APMIS © 2011 APMIS.

PMID: 21569098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Reproduction. 2011 Aug;142(2):295-307. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0044. Epub 2011 May 9.

Nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility and inefficient development of pig-mouse
cytoplasmic hybrid embryos.

Amarnath D(1), Choi I, Moawad AR, Wakayama T, Campbell KH.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Development and Biotechnology Group, School of Biosciences, The
University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, Loughborough, Leicestershire, LE12
5RD, UK.

Inter-species somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT) embryos usually fail to
develop to the blastocyst stage and beyond due to incomplete reprogramming of
donor cell. We evaluated whether using a karyoplast that would require less
extensive reprogramming such as an embryonic blastomere or the meiotic spindle
from metaphase II oocytes would provide additional insight into the development
of iSCNT embryos. Our results showed that karyoplasts of embryonic or oocyte
origin are no different from somatic cells; all iSCNT embryos, irrespective of
karyoplast origin, were arrested during early development. We hypothesized that
nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility could be another reason for failure of
embryonic development from iSCNT. We used pig-mouse cytoplasmic hybrids as a
model to address nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility in iSCNT embryos. Fertilized
murine zygotes were reconstructed by fusing with porcine cytoplasts of varying
cytoplasmic volumes (1/10 (small) and 1/5 (large) total volume of mouse zygote). 
The presence of pig cytoplasm significantly reduced the development of mouse
zygotes to the blastocyst stage compared with control embryos at 120<U+200A>h post-human
chorionic gondotropin (41 vs 6 vs 94%, P<0.05; 1/10, 1/5, control respectively). 
While mitochondrial DNA copy numbers remained relatively unchanged, expression of
several important genes namely Tfam, Polg, Polg2, Mfn2, Slc2a3 (Glut3), Slc2a1
(Glut1), Bcl2, Hspb1, Pou5f1 (Oct4), Nanog, Cdx2, Gata3, Tcfap2c, mt-Cox1 and
mt-Cox2 was significantly reduced in cytoplasmic hybrids compared with control
embryos. These results demonstrate that the presence of even a small amount of
porcine cytoplasm is detrimental to murine embryo development and suggest that a 
range of factors are likely to contribute to the failure of inter-species nuclear
transfer embryos.

PMID: 21555359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jul;240(7):1660-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22653. Epub 2011 May 5.

Chromosome remodeling and differentiation of tetraploid embryos during
preimplantation development.

Park MR(1), Lee AR, Bui HT, Park C, Park KK, Cho SG, Song H, Kim JH, Nguyen VT,
Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, KonKuk University, Seoul, Korea.

Although it is known that the tetraploid embryo contributes only to the placenta,
the question of why tetraploid embryos differentiate into placenta remains
unclear. To study the effect of electrofusion on the development of mouse
tetraploid oocytes, mouse two-cell embryos were fused and cultured in vitro in
Chatot-Ziomek-Bavister medium. After electrofusion, two chromosome sets from the 
tetraploid blastomere were individually duplicated before nuclear fusion. At 8-10
hr after electrofusion, each chromosome set was condensing and the nuclear
membrane was breaking down. Around 12-14 hr after electrofusion, the two
chromosome sets had combined together and had reached the second mitotic
metaphase, at this point with 8n sets of chromosomes. Interestingly, we
discovered that expression of OCT4, an inner cell mass cells biomarker, is lost
by the tetraploid expanded blastocysts, but that CDX2, a trophectoderm cells
biomarker, is strongly expressed at this stage. This observation provides
evidence clarifying why tetraploid embryos contribute only to trophectoderm.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21547981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Virchows Arch. 2011 Jun;458(6):717-24. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1086-x. Epub 2011 
May 3.

Aberrant activation-induced cytidine deaminase expression is associated with
mucosal intestinalization in the early stage of gastric cancer.

Goto A(1), Hirahashi M, Osada M, Nakamura K, Yao T, Tsuneyoshi M, Takayanagi R,
Oda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Pathological Sciences, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Although Helicobacter pylori is a risk factor for gastric cancer (GC), its
detailed carcinogenesis remains unclear. Recently, aberrant expression of
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) was demonstrated in gastric
epithelium with H. pylori infection and seems to cause the accumulation of
mutation. This investigation aims to elucidate whether or not AID expression
plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of early GC. We examined the
correlation between immunohistochemical AID expression and histological
characteristics, including pre-existing chronic gastritis and cellular mucin
phenotype in 138 cases of intramucosal GC. Furthermore, we investigated the
relationship between AID, p53 protein, and ß-catenin. The low degree of
polymorphonuclear neutrophil activity, and the high degree of glandular atrophy
and intestinal metaplasia were significantly correlated with the high levels of
AID expression in non-neoplastic mucosa (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001, and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003).
With regard to mucin phenotype of carcinoma, the intestinal phenotype tended to
have the higher AID expression levels (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.052). AID showed close correlations 
with Cdx2 and nuclear staining of ß-catenin (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034). As for p53
protein, no correlation was found with AID expression. Our findings suggest that 
aberrant AID expression is correlated with persistent inflammatory condition
induced by H. pylori infection and may contribute to the development of GC
through an inflammatory condition and intestinalization.

PMID: 21538122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 May;26(5):647-53. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.5.647. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

CDX1 and CDX2 expression in intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and gastric cancer.

Kang JM(1), Lee BH, Kim N, Lee HS, Lee HE, Park JH, Kim JS, Jung HC, Song IS.

Author information: 
(1)Healthcare Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital Healthcare
System Gangnam Center, Seoul, Korea.

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) has been regarded as a premalignant condition.
However, the pathogenesis of IM is not fully understood. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the role of CDX1 and CDX2 in the formation of IM and the
progression to dysplasia and gastric cancer (GC). A total of 270 subjects
included 90 with GC, dysplasia and age- and sex-matched controls. Real-time PCR
(RT-PCR) was performed with body specimens for CDX1 and CDX2. The expression of
CDX2 was significantly higher in H. pylori positive group than H. pylori negative
group (P = 0.045). CDX1 and CDX2 expression increased proportional to the IM
grade of the body (P < 0.001). CDX2 expression was significantly higher in
incomplete type of IM than in complete type (P = 0.045). The expression of CDX1
in dysplasia group was significantly higher than in the control group (P =
0.001); in addition, CDX1 and CDX2 in cancer group was significantly higher than 
control group (P < 0.001, and P < 0.001, respectively). Aberrant expression of
CDX1 and CDX2 correlated with H. pylori infection and grade of IM in the body.
Furthermore, the results suggest that CDX1 and CDX2 play a role in the
progression to GC and dysplasia.

PMCID: PMC3082117
PMID: 21532856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Hum Pathol. 2011 Nov;42(11):1653-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.024. Epub 2011
Apr 29.

Flat urothelial carcinoma in situ of the bladder with glandular differentiation.

Lopez-Beltran A(1), Jimenez RE, Montironi R, Patriarca C, Blanca A, Menendez CL, 
Algaba F, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Cordoba
University, E-14004 Cordoba, Spain. em1lobea@uco.es

We present the clinicopathologic and immunonohistochemical features of 25 cases
of flat urothelial carcinoma in situ with glandular differentiation. Previously, 
cases on this category have been reported as in situ adenocarcinoma (a term not
currently preferred). Fourteen of 25 cases had concurrent conventional urothelial
carcinoma in situ. Five of the cases were primary carcinoma in situ with
glandular differentiation; twenty cases of secondary carcinoma in situ with
glandular differentiation were associated with urothelial carcinoma alone (n =
11) or with glandular differentiation (n = 7), discohesive (n = 1) or
micropapillary carcinoma (n = 1). The individual tumor cells were columnar. The
architectural pattern of the carcinoma in situ with glandular differentiation
consisted of 1 or more papillary, flat or cribriform glandular patterns.
Univariate statistical analysis showed no survival differences between urothelial
carcinoma in situ with glandular differentiation and conventional urothelial
carcinoma in situ (log-rank 0.810; P = .368). Carcinoma in situ with glandular
differentiation showed high ki-67 index and p53 accumulation, high nuclear and
cytoplasmic p16 expression and diffuse PTEN expression, a phenotype that also
characterized concurrent conventional carcinoma in situ. MUC5A, MUC2, CK20, and
c-erbB2 were positive in all 25 cases of urothelial carcinoma in situ with
glandular differentiation, and CDX-2 was present in 19 cases; MUC1, CK7, or
34ßE12 was focally present in 21, 19, and 18 cases, respectively. MUC1core was
negative in all cases. We concluded that urothelial carcinoma in situ with
glandular differentiation is a variant of carcinoma in situ that follows the
natural history of conventional urothelial carcinoma in situ. The immunophenotype
suggests urothelial origin with the expression of MUC5A and CDX2 as signature for
glandular differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21531007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;19(2):298-302.

[Expression and clinical significance of caudal type homeobox transcription
factor-2 in adult acute lymphocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu HY(1), Xia HL, Chen XW, Zhu LX, Wang QY, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Anhui Medical University First Hospital, Heifei
230022, Anhui Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the expression and clinical significance of
CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 genes in acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). Expressions of
CDX1, CDX2, and CDX4 in 51 adult acute lymphocytic leukemia patients and 14
healthy subjects were detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The results indicated that CDX1, CDX2 and CDX4 were not expressed in 14
healthy persons and 15 CR ALL patients, the positive expression rate of CDX2 gene
in de novo ALL patients was 60.8%, while it obviously decreased in patients with 
complete remission (CR) (p < 0.05); the expression of CDX2 was increased again in
relapsed patients (81.8%). When the expression of CDX2 was analyzed in different 
risk groups of ALL patients, the CDX2 expression rate in high risk (HR) patients 
was 91.7%, and that in the standard risk (SR) group was 45.7%. Furthermore,
analyses of CDX1 and CDX4 expression in series of ALL samples did not show the
expression of these genes. In patients with adult ALL at diagnosis and relapse,
the CR rate of patients with CDX2 positive expression was lower than that of
patients with CDX2 negative expression (p < 0.05). The median survival time in
CDX2 positive expression patients was shorter than that in negative expression
patient. It is concluded that expression of CDX2 may correlated with pathogenesis
and relapse of adult ALL, but the expression of CDX1 and CDX4 don' t associated
with pathogenesis and relapse of adult ALL; the CR rate and prognosis of patients
with CDX2 positive expression is lower and poor. The expression of CDX2 may be
used as a marker for occurrence, relapse and poor prognosis of adult ALL
patients.

PMID: 21518475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Differentiation. 2011 Jul;82(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.04.001. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

Isolated mouse inner cell mass is unable to reconstruct trophectoderm.

Szczepanska K(1), Stanczuk L, Maleszewski M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Institute of Zoology, University of Warsaw,
Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland. kasiasz@biol.uw.edu.pl

The ability of ICM to differentiate into TE is still a controversial issue. Many 
of authors have showed the reconstruction of TE from isolated ICMs. We showed
that immunosurgical method is not 100% efficient and that the original TE cells
very often remain on the surface of isolated ICMs. We also found that isolated
ICM cells cultured in vitro do not express Cdx2, and that the TE is reconstituted
from TE cells which have survived immunosurgery. This indicates that very soon
after the formation of TE in the blastocyst, the cells of ICM lose the potency to
differentiate into trophectoderm.

Copyright © 2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21514715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):509-11. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2011.03.001.
Epub 2011 Mar 5.

Decisions, decisions: how are they made in the early embryo--and does it matter?

Johnson M.

Comment on
    Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):512-5.
    Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):521-4.

PMID: 21498127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):512-5. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2011.02.003. Epub
2011 Feb 13.

What is the role of maternally provided Cdx2 mRNA in early mouse embryogenesis?

Bruce AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology & Genetics, Department of Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Braniovská 31, 37005
Ceské Budejovice, Czech Republic. awbruce@prf.jcu.cz

Comment in
    Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):516-8; discussion 519-20.
    Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):509-11.

Genetic knockout studies in the mouse model first revealed the essential role of 
zygotically derived Cdx2 transcription factor during the later stages of
blastocyst formation, characterized by a lack of functioning trophectoderm.
However, the extent to which the potential provision of maternally derived Cdx2
affects preimplantation development has proved much less simple to address.
Within the last year, two reports have been published arguing for and against a
distinct functional role for maternal Cdx2. This commentary aims to discuss the
approaches, results and interpretations of both studies in an attempt to resolve 
the apparent conflict and to constructively advance collective understanding.

Copyright © 2011 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21498124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 6;6(4):e18280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018280.

Ectopic Cdx2 expression in murine esophagus models an intermediate stage in the
emergence of Barrett's esophagus.

Kong J(1), Crissey MA, Funakoshi S, Kreindler JL, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is an intestinal metaplasia that occurs in the setting
of chronic acid and bile reflux and is associated with a risk for adenocarcinoma.
Expression of intestine-specific transcription factors in the esophagus likely
contributes to metaplasia development. Our objective was to explore the effects
of an intestine-specific transcription factor when expressed in the mouse
esophageal epithelium. Transgenic mice were derived in which the transcription
factor Cdx2 is expressed in squamous epithelium using the murine Keratin-14 gene 
promoter. Effects of the transgene upon cell proliferation and differentiation,
gene expression, and barrier integrity were explored. K14-Cdx2 mice express the
Cdx2 transgene in esophageal squamous tissues. Cdx2 expression was associated
with reduced basal epithelial cell proliferation and altered cell morphology.
Ultrastructurally two changes were noted. Cdx2 expression was associated with
dilated space between the basal cells and diminished cell-cell adhesion caused by
reduced Desmocollin-3 mRNA and protein expression. This compromised epithelial
barrier function, as the measured trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TEER)
of the K14-Cdx2 epithelium was significantly reduced compared to controls (1189
Ohm*cm(2) ±343.5 to 508 Ohm*cm(2)±92.48, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0532). Secondly, basal cells with 
features of a transitional cell type, intermediate between keratinocytes and
columnar Barrett's epithelial cells, were observed. These cells had reduced
keratin bundles and increased endoplasmic reticulum levels, suggesting the
adoption of secretory-cell features. Moreover, at the ultrastructural level they 
resembled "Distinctive" cells associated with multilayered epithelium. Treatment 
of the K14-Cdx2 mice with 5'-Azacytidine elicited expression of BE-associated
genes including Cdx1, Krt18, and Slc26a3/Dra, suggesting the phenotype could be
advanced under certain conditions. We conclude that ectopic Cdx2 expression in
keratinocytes alters cell proliferation, barrier function, and differentiation.
These altered cells represent a transitional cell type between normal squamous
and columnar BE cells. The K14-Cdx2 mice represent a useful model to study
progression from squamous epithelium to BE.

PMCID: PMC3071814
PMID: 21494671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Ann Surg. 2011 Aug;254(2):302-10. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31821994a8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a expression distinguishes ampullary cancer
subtypes and prognosis after resection.

Ehehalt F(1), Rümmele P, Kersting S, Lang-Schwarz C, Rückert F, Hartmann A,
Dietmaier W, Terracciano L, Aust DE, Jahnke B, Saeger HD, Pilarsky C, Grützmann
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital
Dresden, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate biological differences and prognostic indicators of
different ampullary cancer (AC) subtypes.
BACKGROUND: AC is associated with a favorable prognosis compared with other
periampullary carcinomas. Aside from other prognostic factors, the histological
origin of AC may determine survival. Specifically, the pancreatobiliary subtype
of AC displays worse prognosis compared with the intestinal subtype. However,
knowledge of inherent molecular characteristics of different periampullary tumors
and their effects on prognosis has been limited.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was used to screen for differential gene
expression between 6 PDAC cases and 12 AC cases. Among others, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a) mRNA overexpression was observed in AC cases. Nuclear HNF4a
protein expression was assessed using tissue microarrays consisting of 99
individual AC samples. The correlation of HNF4a expression with
clinicopathological data (n = 99) and survival (n = 84) was assessed.
RESULTS: HNF4a mRNA is 7.61-fold up-regulated in AC compared with that in PDAC.
Bioinformatics analyses indicated its key role in dysregulated signaling
pathways. Nuclear HNF4a expression correlates with histological subtype, grading,
CDX2 positivity, MUC1 negativity and presence of adenomatous components in the
carcinoma. The presence of HNF4a is a univariate predictor of survival in AC mean
survival (50 months versus 119 months, P = 0.002). Multivariate analysis revealed
that HNF4a negativity (HR = 17.95, 95% CI: 2.35-136.93, P = 0.005) and lymph node
positivity (HR = 3.33, 95% CI: 1.36-8.18, P = 0.009) are independent negative
predictors of survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemical determination of HNF4a expression is an
effective tool for distinguishing different AC subtypes. Similarly, HNF4a protein
expression is an independent predictor of favorable prognosis in carcinoma of the
papilla of Vater and may serve for risk stratification after curative resection.

PMID: 21494118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):516-8; discussion 519-20. doi:
10.1016/j.rbmo.2011.02.005. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Role of mouse maternal Cdx2: what's the debate all about?

Wu G(1), Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Comment on
    Reprod Biomed Online. 2011 Jun;22(6):512-5.

Whether mouse oocytes are polarized and pre-patterned has been the subject of
controversy for many years. Cdx2, a class I homeobox transcription factor of the 
caudal-related homeobox gene family, is involved in defining the
anterior/posterior body axis, establishing anterior/posterior patterning of the
intestine and forming a functional trophectoderm. The latter phenomenon suggests 
that maternal Cdx2 might be unevenly distributed in oocytes and plays a key role 
in the first lineage separation event in mouse preimplantation embryos.
Unfortunately, two recent reports on the knockdown of maternal Cdx2 have produced
contradictory results. As two authors of one of these reports, we would like to
address these results and the corresponding commentary of Alexander W Bruce with 
this commentary.

Copyright © 2011 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21493148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Reproduction. 2011 Jul;142(1):87-97. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0049. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Sonic hedgehog supplementation of oocyte and embryo culture media enhances
development of IVF porcine embryos.

Nguyen NT(1), Lo NW, Chuang SP, Jian YL, Ju JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan, ROC.

We investigated the expression of sonic hedgehog (SHH) receptor PTCH1 and its
co-receptor smoothened (SMO) in fertilized porcine embryos. Effects of exogenous 
SHH on embryonic development and expressions of survival- and
pluripotency-related genes were also determined. We found that PTCH1 and SMO are 
expressed from two-cell to blastocyst embryos. When oocytes or fertilized embryos
were respectively cultured in the maturation or embryo culture medium
supplemented with SHH (0.5<U+200A>µg/ml), their blastocyst rates and total cell numbers 
increased (P<0.05) compared with the untreated control. When cultured
simultaneously in the in vitro maturation (IVM) and in vitro culture (IVC) media 
supplemented with SHH, the oocytes gained increased blastocyst rates and total
cell numbers in an additive manner, with reduced apoptotic indices (P<0.05).
Interestingly, SHH treatment did not affect the expression of the BCL2L1 (BCL-XL)
gene, yet reduced BAX expression. Blastocysts cultured with various SHH regimes
had similar pluripotency-related gene (POU5F1 (OCT-4) and CDX2) expression
levels, but blastocysts derived from SHH treatment during IVM had higher ZPF42
(REX01) expression (P<0.05). The highest ZPF42 expression was observed in the
blastocysts derived from SHH-supplemented IVC and from dual IVM and IVC
treatments. The levels of acetylated histone 3 (AcH3K9/K14) increased in the
two-cell and the four-cell embryos when IVM and/or IVC media were supplemented
with SHH (P<0.05). Our findings indicate that SHH conferred a beneficial effect
on preimplantation development of porcine embryos, particularly when both IVM and
IVC media were supplemented with SHH, and the effects may be further carried over
from IVM to the subsequent embryonic development.

PMID: 21490126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011 Mar;4(3):230-40. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Transcriptional factor typing with SOX2, HNF4aP1, and CDX2 closely relates to
tumor invasion and Epstein-Barr virus status in gastric cancer.

Uozaki H(1), Barua RR, Minhua S, Ushiku T, Hino R, Shinozaki A, Sakatani T,
Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. uozaki-tky@umin.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) is a major cancer, sometimes associated with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Some transcriptional factors (TFs) are specific to the 
digestive tract and related to the character of the tumors.
METHODS: We studied three TFs, SOX2, CDX2, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha-promoter 1 (HNF4aP1) in GC. First, 255 tumors including 31 EBV-associated
GC were immunohistochemically examined using tissue arrays and compared TF type
and mucin phenotype. We classified them into 4 TF types: N-TF type as
SOX2-/HNF4aP1- tumor, G: SOX2+/HNF4aP1-, GI: SOX2+/HNF4aP1+, and I:
SOX2-/HNF4aP1+. Next, 915 GCs were intensely investigated and compared with their
clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: In the first study, 255 GCs were classified into N-TF 44%, G-TF 31%,
GI-TF 3%, and I-TF 2%. The TF type did not strictly accord with the mucin
phenotype, classified by MUC2/5AC/6/CD10 expression. EBV status was the only
factor related to both the TF and mucin phenotype classifications (P<0.0001,
<0.0001). TF classification is related to more factors including tumor stage,
than mucin phenotype classification. The second study using 915 GCs revealed that
N-TF gradually increased and I-TF decreased as GC invaded deeper. TF
classification was not related to nodal involvement in each tumor stage. HNF4aP1 
and CDX2 were independent factors for early stage tumor in logistic regression
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV-associated GC is a discriminating group in both TF and mucin
phenotype. TF classification, especially the absence of HNF4aP1 and CDX2, is
related to tumor invasion. TF classification is a useful marker to study the
carcinogenesis of GC further.

PMCID: PMC3071656
PMID: 21487519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cell Reprogram. 2011 Apr;13(2):179-89. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0060.

Trichostatin A modulates apoptotic-related gene expression and improves embryo
viability in cloned bovine embryos.

Cui XS(1), Xu YN, Shen XH, Zhang LQ, Zhang JB, Kim NH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Laboratory Animal, Jilin University, 5333 Xi'an Road, Changchun,
Jilin Province, People's Republic of China. xscui88@hotmail.com

Low efficiency of somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is attributed to
incomplete reprogramming of transferred nuclei into oocytes. Trichostatin A
(TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, has been used to enhance nuclear
reprogramming following SCNT. However, the molecular mechanism of TSA for the
improvement of the preimplantation embryo and fetal development following SCNT is
not known. The present study investigates embryo viability and gene expression of
cloned bovine preimplantation embryos in the presence and absence of TSA compared
to embryos produced by in vitro fertilization or parthenogenetic activation. Our 
results indicated that TSA treatment significantly improved total and inner cell 
mass (ICM) cell number and ratio of ICM:trophectoderm (TE) and also decreased the
apoptotic index including total, ICM, and ratio of ICM:TE. Four apoptotic-related
genes, Bcl-xL, survivin, Bcl2-associated X protein (Bax), and caspase 3 (Casp3), 
and four pluripotency/differentiation related genes, Oct4, SRY (sex determining
region Y)-box 2 (Sox2), Cdx2, and colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (Csf1r),
were measured by real-time RT-PCR. TSA treatment resulted in the high expression 
of antiapoptotic gene Bcl-xL and low expression of pro-apoptotic gene Bax
compared to untreated NT embryos, fertilized embryos, or parthenotes.
Furthermore, mRNA expression of Cdx2 was higher in NT-TSA embryos than in NT and 
in vitro fertilization (IVF) counterparts. Additionally, low expression of
microRNA (mir)-21 in NT embryos was enhanced following TSA treatment. These
results suggest that TSA positively regulates nuclear reprogramming, and TSA may 
increased resistance or reduced signal for induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 21473694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Dig Liver Dis. 2011 Mar;43 Suppl 4:S356-60. doi: 10.1016/S1590-8658(11)60591-4.

Gastroenteropancreatic (neuro)endocrine neoplasms: the histology report.

Rindi G(1), Bordi C, La Rosa S, Solcia E, Delle Fave G; Gruppo Italiano Patologi 
Apparato Digerente (GIPAD); Società Italiana di Anatomia Patologica e
Citopatologia Diagnostica/International Academy of Pathology, Italian division
(SIAPEC/IAP).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, UCSC-Policlinic A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
guido.rindi@rm.unicatt.it

Based on the year 2000 World Health Organization (WHO) classification and the
European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (ENETS) grading and staging proposals, we
here define the minimal guidelines for pathology reporting of (neuro)endocrine
neoplasms. The macroscopical description is recommended according to standard
procedures and the microscopical description according to recognized
architectural and cytological features for endocrine lesions. Minimal diagnostic 
immunohistochemistry entails the use of chromogranin A, synaptophysin and Ki67.
Other potentially useful tests are those for CD56 N-CAM, PGP 9.5 and hormones for
diagnosis, the somatostatin receptor subtype 2 for potential radiodiagnostics and
therapy, and transcription factors like TTF1 and CDX2, for site of origin.
Grading definition is always mandatory as well as TNM staging for surgical
specimens.

Copyright © 2011 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21459341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nature. 2011 Mar 24;471(7339):457-8. doi: 10.1038/471457a.

Developmental biology: A mouse is not a cow.

Rossant J.

PMID: 21430771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Head Neck Pathol. 2011 Sep;5(3):306-13. doi: 10.1007/s12105-011-0252-4. Epub 2011
Mar 20.

Biphasic low-grade nasopharyngeal papillary adenocarcinoma with a prominent
spindle cell component: report of a case localized to the posterior nasal septum.

Petersson F(1), Pang B, Loke D, Hao L, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Health System, 5 Lower Kent Ridge
Road, Singapore 119074, Singapore. fredrikpetersson@live.se

A case (female, 39 years of) of thyroid-like nasopharyngeal low-grade papillary
adenocarcinoma with a significant spindle cell component is presented. The tumor 
was located on the posterior nasal septum. The spindle cells displayed nuclear
features very much similar to the epithelial component and the two cell types
merged imperceptibly. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells (including the 
spindle cell component) were strongly and diffusely positive for TTF-1,
cytokeratins (AE1-3), cytokeratin 19 and vimentin. C-kit immunohistochemistry
showed diffuse mild to moderate membranous positivity with focal areas displaying
moderate to strong immunoreactivity. EMA was strongly positive in the epithelial 
component with membranous and cytoplasmic reactivity whereas the spindle cell
component was weakly although diffusely positive. Carcinoembryonic antigen,
calcitonin, chromogranin A, S100-protein, thyroglobulin, cdx2 and p63 were
negative. The proliferative activity (Mib-1/Ki-67) was low; 3-4%. In the
molecular genetic study we found no mutations at position 1799 (exon 15) in the
BRAF-gene, (BRAFV600E) or in exons 9 and 11 of the KIT-gene.

PMCID: PMC3173538
PMID: 21424532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(10):2026-39. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01250-10. Epub 2011 Mar 
14.

Essential and redundant functions of caudal family proteins in activating adult
intestinal genes.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, Ho LL, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factors that potently induce cell fate often remain expressed in
the induced organ throughout life, but their requirements in adults are uncertain
and varied. Mechanistically, it is unclear if they activate only tissue-specific 
genes or also directly repress heterologous genes. We conditionally inactivated
mouse Cdx2, a dominant regulator of intestinal development, and mapped its genome
occupancy in adult intestinal villi. Although homeotic transformation, observed
in Cdx2-null embryos, was absent in mutant adults, gene expression and cell
morphology were vitally compromised. Lethality was significantly accelerated in
mice lacking both Cdx2 and its homolog Cdx1, with particular exaggeration of
defects in villus enterocyte differentiation. Importantly, Cdx2 occupancy
correlated with hundreds of transcripts that fell but not with equal numbers that
rose with Cdx loss, indicating a predominantly activating role at intestinal
cis-regulatory regions. Integrated consideration of a transcription factor's
mutant phenotype and cistrome hence reveals the continued and distinct
requirement in adults of a critical developmental regulator that activates
tissue-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3133364
PMID: 21402776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2011 Jun;15(3):181-4. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2010.10.002.
Epub 2011 Mar 10.

Low-grade nonintestinal sinonasal adenocarcinoma: a diagnosis of exclusion.

Bhaijee F(1), Carron J, Bell D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.
fbhaijee@umc.edu

The World Health Organization classifies primary sinonasal adenocarcinomas
(SNACs) into salivary and nonsalivary types. Salivary types are usually
well-defined myoepithelial neoplasms, which closely resemble their salivary
counterparts. Nonsalivary types are separated into intestinal-type SNAC (ITAC)
and non-ITAC, and both have low- and high-grade categories. Intestinal-type SNACs
are aggressive tumors that resemble intestinal epithelium and often arise in the 
ethmoid sinus. Non-ITACs are of presumed seromucous gland origin, have marked
morphologic heterogeneity, and can arise anywhere in the sinonasal tract.
Moreover, ITACs typically demonstrate an intestinal-type immunohistochemical
profile (CK20+, CK7-, CDX2+, and villin+), whereas non-ITACs reveal a
respiratory-type profile (CK20-, CK7+, CDX2-, and villin-). Here, we present a
case of low-grade, nonintestinal SNAC in a 17-year-old African American man and a
discussion of the classification and pathologic features of primary SNACs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21393036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011 May;164(5):741-9. doi: 10.1530/EJE-11-0134. Epub 2011 Mar 
9.

Vitamin D-associated polymorphisms are related to insulin resistance and vitamin 
D deficiency in polycystic ovary syndrome.

Wehr E(1), Trummer O, Giuliani A, Gruber HJ, Pieber TR, Obermayer-Pietsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 
15, 8036 Graz, Austria. elisabeth.wehr@medunigraz.at

INTRODUCTION: Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) frequently suffer from 
metabolic disturbances including insulin resistance (IR), which might be related 
to vitamin D metabolism. We aimed to investigate the association of polymorphisms
in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene as well as vitamin D level-associated genes 
with metabolic and endocrine parameters in PCOS women. Moreover, we examined
whether there are associations with PCOS susceptibility.
METHODS: Metabolic, endocrine, and anthropometric measurements and oral glucose
tolerance tests were performed in 545 PCOS and 145 control women. Genotyping of
VDR (Cdx2, Bsm-I, Fok-I, Apa-I, and Taq-I), GC, DHCR7, and CYP2R1 polymorphisms
was performed.
RESULTS: 25-Hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) levels showed significant negative
correlation with IR and positive correlation with insulin sensitivity (P<0.05 for
all) in PCOS women. In PCOS women, the VDR Cdx2 'AA' genotype was associated with
lower fasting insulin (P=0.039) and homeostatic model assessment-IR (P=0.041) and
higher quantitative insulin-sensitivity check index (P=0.012) and MATSUDA index
(P=0.003). The VDR Apa-I 'AA' genotype was associated with lower testosterone
(P=0.028) levels. In PCOS women, 170 women (31.2%) presented with 25(OH)D levels 
<20<U+200A>ng/ml. PCOS women carrying the GC 'GG' genotype and the DHCR7 'GG' genotype
had a significantly higher risk for 25(OH)D levels <20<U+200A>ng/ml (OR 2.53
(1.27-5.06), P=0.009, and OR 2.66 (1.08-6.55), P=0.033 respectively) compared
with PCOS women carrying the GC 'TT' genotype and DHCR 'TT' genotype in
multivariate analyses. We observed no association of genetic variations and PCOS 
susceptibility.
CONCLUSION: VDR and vitamin D level-related variants are associated with
metabolic and endocrine parameters including 25(OH)D levels in PCOS women.

PMID: 21389086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Gastroenterol. 2011 May;46(5):620-8. doi: 10.1007/s00535-011-0391-0. Epub 2011 
Mar 8.

Cell lineage dynamics in the process leading to intestinal metaplasia.

Sakamoto H(1), Mutoh H, Hayakawa H, Sashikawa M, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.
94036hs@jichi.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Gene expression in the early stage of the transition to intestinal
metaplasia in human gastric mucosa has not been determined. In this study, we
investigated the temporal relationship between cell lineage changes and
intestine-specific gene expression in the process leading to intestinal
metaplasia, using Cdx2-transgenic mice.
METHODS: Cellular phenotypes were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and were
compared with the gene expression profiles of cell lineage markers by real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Up to postnatal day (PD) 20, the gastric mucosae of Cdx2-transgenic mice
were histologically similar to those of their normal littermates. However, at
approximately PD 20, we observed the sporadic appearance of glands in which all
the epithelial cells expressed Cdx2 (Cdx2-diffuse positive glands). In the
Cdx2-diffuse positive glands, parietal cells had disappeared, the proliferating
zone had moved from the isthmus to the base, and absorptive cells and goblet
cells were recognized. In contrast, the surrounding mucosa retained the phenotype
of the gastric gland in which only some of the epithelial cells expressed Cdx2.
During PDs 30 and 40, the entire fundic mucosa changed to transdifferentiated
mucosa that was a composite of intestinal metaplasia and spasmolytic
polypeptide-expressing metaplasia. An increase in the expression of
intestine-specific genes, with a reciprocal decrease in gastric-specific gene
expression, began much earlier than the emergence of Cdx2-diffuse positive
glands.
CONCLUSIONS: A dramatic increase in intestine-specific gene expression precedes
the morphological appearance of intestinal metaplasia and spasmolytic
polypeptide-expressing metaplasia.

PMID: 21384254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 May;20(5):1003-16. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-1141. Epub 2011 Mar 4.

Meta-analyses of vitamin D intake, 25-hydroxyvitamin D status, vitamin D receptor
polymorphisms, and colorectal cancer risk.

Touvier M(1), Chan DS, Lau R, Aune D, Vieira R, Greenwood DC, Kampman E, Riboli
E, Hercberg S, Norat T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health,
Imperial College London, London, UK. m.touvier@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Our objective was to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of
prospective studies on colorectal cancer (CRC) and vitamin D intake and
25-hydroxyvitamin D status, as part of the World Cancer Research Fund Continuous 
Update Project. We also aimed at conducting meta-analysis of all studies on CRC
and vitamin D receptor (VDR) single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
METHODS: Relevant studies were identified in PubMed (up to June 2010). Inclusion 
criteria were original and peer-reviewed publications with a prospective design
(for studies on vitamin D intake or status). Random effects of dose-response
meta-analyses were performed on cancer incidence.
RESULTS: We observed inverse associations of CRC risk with dietary vitamin D
[summary relative risk (RR) per 100 IU/day = 0.95, 95% CI: 0.93-0.98; 10 studies;
range of intake (midpoints) = 39-719 IU/day] and serum/plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(RR per 100 IU/L = 0.96, 0.94-0.97; 6 studies; range = 200-1,800 IU/L), but not
with total vitamin D (5 studies). Supplemental (2 studies; range = 0-600 IU/day) 
and total (4 studies; range = 79-732 IU/day) vitamin D intake and
25-hydroxyvitamin D status (6 studies; range = 200-1,800 IU/L) were inversely
associated with colon cancer risk. We did not observe statistically significant
associations between FokI, PolyA, TaqI, Cdx2, and ApaI VDR polymorphisms and CRC 
risk. The BsmI polymorphism was associated with a lower CRC risk (RR = 0.57,
0.36-0.89 for BB versus bb, 8 studies).
CONCLUSIONS: These meta-analyses support the evidence of an inverse association
between vitamin D intake, 25-hydroxyvitamin D status, and the BsmI VDR
polymorphism and CRC risk.
IMPACT: Improving vitamin D status could be potentially beneficial against CRC
incidence.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21378269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jun;84(6):1258-71. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.086413. Epub
2011 Mar 2.

Transcriptomic signature of trophoblast differentiation in a human embryonic stem
cell model.

Marchand M(1), Horcajadas JA, Esteban FJ, McElroy SL, Fisher SJ, Giudice LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
California San Francisco, USA.

Identification of genes involved in trophoblast differentiation is of great
interest in understanding cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in placental
development and is relevant clinically to fetal development, fertility, and
maternal health. Herein, we investigated differentiation of human embryonic stem 
cells (hESCs) down the trophoblast lineage by culture with bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (BMP4) over a 10-day period. Within 2 days, the stemness markers POU5F1
and NANOG were markedly down-regulated, followed temporally by up-regulation of
the CDX2, KRT7, HLA-G, ID2, CGA, and CGB trophoblast markers. To understand, on a
global scale, changes in the transcriptome during the differentiation of hESCs
down the trophoblast lineage, a large-scale microarray analysis was performed.
Through whole-genome analysis, more than 3800 genes displayed statistically
significant and 2-fold or greater changes in expression during the time course.
Of those genes that showed the largest increases, many were involved in processes
associated with trophoblast biology; however, novel genes were also identified.
Some of them are hypothesized to be associated mainly with extracellular matrix
remodeling (e.g., NID2) and cell migration and invasion (e.g., RAB25). Using
Ingenuity pathways analysis software to identify signaling pathways involved in
trophoblast differentiation or function, we discovered that many genes are
involved in WNT/beta-catenin, ERK/MAPK, NFKB, and calcium signaling pathways,
suggesting potential roles for these families in trophoblast development. This
work provides an in vitro functional genomic model with which to identify genes
involved in trophoblast development.

PMID: 21368299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Reprod Domest Anim. 2011 Dec;46(6):1098-103. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0531.2011.01770.x. Epub 2011 Mar 3.

The importance of adequate fixation for immunofluorescent staining of bovine
embryos.

Goossens K(1), Vandaele L, Wydooghe E, Thys M, Dewulf J, Peelman LJ, Van Soom A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Genetics and Ethology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium. karen.goossens@ugent.be

Immunofluorescent staining is often used to investigate the expression of
specific proteins in pre-implantation embryos. The success of this method is
determined by the specificity of the antibodies, but also by the protocol used
for fixation and permeabilization of the samples. In this study, different
fixatives are compared in combination with immunofluorescent staining of
caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2), fibronectin 1 (FN1) and integrins (ITGs) on bovine
blastocysts. For both CDX2 and the ITGs, the outcome of the staining was largely 
dependent on the fixation methods. Paraformaldehyde fixation was best for the
intracellular CDX2 protein, whereas acetone fixation gave the best results for
the transmembrane ITGs. No difference was observed for the FN1 staining between
samples fixed with paraformaldehyde or acetone. These examples demonstrate that
the choice of fixation and permeabilization agents is very important for the
outcome of the experiment, and this choice is dictated by the (extra)cellular
location of the protein under investigation. Inappropriate fixation and/or
permeabilization methods can lead to erroneous conclusions regarding the site and
amount of protein expression.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 21366723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):1000-6. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.32. Epub 2011 Mar
1.

Clinical significance of CDX2-positive circulating tumour cells in colorectal
cancer patients.

Wong SC(1), Ng SS, Cheung MT, Luk LY, Chan CM, Cheung AH, Lee VH, Lai PB, Ma BB, 
Hui EP, Lam MY, Au TC, Chan AT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China, Department of Clinical
Oncology, Sir YK Pao Centre for Cancer, Hong Kong Cancer Institute and Prince of 
Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China. cesar01@netvigator.com

BACKGROUND: Our recent work has shown the feasibility of using a refined
immunomagnetic enrichment (IE) assay to detect cytokeratin 20-positive
circulating tumour cells (CK20 pCTCs) in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. We
attempted to improve the sensitivity for CRC by detecting another intestinal-type
differentiation marker, CDX2 pCTCs, using the same methodology.
METHODS: CDX2 pCTCs were detected in patients with CRC, colorectal adenoma (CAD),
benign colorectal diseases (BCD), other common cancers (OCC) and normal subjects 
(NS). Statistical analysis was used to correlate CDX2 pCTCs to the
clinicohistopathological factors, recurrence, metastasis and survival after
follow-up for 42 months in CRC patients.
RESULTS: CDX2 pCTCs were detected in 81% CRC patients (73 out of 90, median
number=21.5 CTCs), 7.5% CAD patients (3 out of 40), 0% patients with BCD (0 out
of 90), 2.5% patients with OCC (2 out of 80) and 0% NS (0 out of 40).
Furthermore, statistical analysis showed that CDX2 pCTC numbers were associated
with tumour- node-metastasis stage and lymph node status. Using the median CDX2
pCTC numbers as the cutoff points, stratified groups of CRC patients had
significant differences in their recurrence and survival.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the refined IE assay can detect CDX2 pCTCs
with high sensitivity and that CDX2 pCTCs can generate clinically important
information for CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC3065272
PMID: 21364588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;19(1):130-3.

[Expression of cdx2 gene in pediatric patients with leukemia and its clinical
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YX(1), Pan KL, Fan F, Qian XH, Yang XL, Deng YL, Liu YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the expression of cdx2 gene in pediatric
patients with acute leukemia and its clinical implication. The bone marrow and
peripheral blood were collected from 33 newly diagnosed pediatric patients with
acute leukemia, the cdx2 gene expression in each AL subtypes and normal controls 
was detected by RT-PCR, the relationship between cdx2 expression and response to 
treatment was observed. The results showed that the expression of cdx2 was
positive in 25 out of 30 AL cases (83.3%), to be exact, in 20 of 21 ALL cases
(95.2%) and in 5 of 9 AML cases (55.6%), which showed statistical difference (p <
0.05). The cdx2 mRNA could be detected also in 1 of 3 CML cases. However, no
expression of cdx2 was observed in all normal control which revealed significant 
difference between patient group and normal control group. 21 AL patients with
cdx2 positive expression (17 ALL and 4 AML patients) and 4 AL patients with cxd2 
negative expression (1 ALL and 3 AML patients) all reached complete remission
(CR) after treatment, which showed no correlation with CR rate. 8 patients with
positive cdx2 expression were followed up. As a result, the cdx2 positive
expression at initial diagnosis of patients remained positive at reaching CR, but
it gradually turned to negative along with prolonging of CR, while the cdx2
negative expression at initial diagnosis of patients remained negative at CR in
bone marrow level. It is concluded that cdx2 positive expression is observed in
the majority of pediatric AL patients, even positive rate in ALL patients is
higher than that in AML patients, while the cdx2 expression also can be observed 
in CML patients. The cdx2 positive expression is not related to the CR rate in AL
patients.

PMID: 21362237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Development. 2011 Apr;138(7):1361-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.056622. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Cdx mediates neural tube closure through transcriptional regulation of the planar
cell polarity gene Ptk7.

Savory JG(1), Mansfield M, Rijli FM, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.

The vertebrate Cdx genes (Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4) encode homeodomain transcription
factors with well-established roles in anteroposterior patterning. To circumvent 
the peri-implantation lethality inherent to Cdx2 loss of function, we previously 
used the Cre-loxP system to ablate Cdx2 at post-implantation stages and confirmed
a crucial role for Cdx2 function in events related to axial extension. As
considerable data suggest that the Cdx family members functionally overlap, we
extended this analysis to assess the consequence of concomitant loss of both Cdx1
and Cdx2. Here, we report that Cdx1-Cdx2 double mutants exhibit a severely
truncated anteroposterior axis. In addition, these double mutants exhibit fused
somites, a widened mediolateral axis and craniorachischisis, a severe form of
neural tube defect in which early neurulation fails and the neural tube remains
open. These defects are typically associated with deficits in planar cell
polarity (PCP) signaling in vertebrates. Consistent with this, we found that
expression of Ptk7, which encodes a gene involved in PCP, is markedly reduced in 
Cdx1-Cdx2 double mutants, and is a candidate Cdx target. Genetic interaction
between Cdx mutants and a mutant allele of Scrib, a gene involved in PCP
signaling, is suggestive of a role for Cdx signaling in the PCP pathway. These
findings illustrate a novel and pivotal role for Cdx function upstream of Ptk7
and neural tube closure in vertebrates.

PMID: 21350009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3422-32. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22697.

Collagen I regulates the self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells through a2ß1 
integrin- and DDR1-dependent Bmi-1.

Suh HN(1), Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Adhesion of cells to extracellular matrix (ECM) influences vital aspects of
anchorage-dependent cell behavior including survival, proliferation, and
differentiation. However, the role of collagen I in mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs) is not well-known. Therefore, in the present study we examined the effect
of collagen I on mESC self-renewal and related signal pathways. Collagen I
(10<U+2009>µg/ml) maintained mESCs in an undifferentiated state (Nanog, OCT4, and
SSEA-1) and did not affect differentiation (GATA4, Tbx5, Fgf5, and Cdx2) in the
presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Treatment with collagen I bound
both a2ß1 integrin and discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1), and stimulated
intracellular signaling pathways. Collagen I-bound a2ß1 integrin increased
integrin-linked kinase (ILK) phosphorylation, cleaved Notch protein expression in
the nuclear fraction, and Gli-1 mRNA expression. In addition, collagen I-bound
DDR1 increased GTP-bound Ras, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) p85a catalytic
subunit protein expression, and Akt and ERK phosphorylation. Importantly,
collagen I increased Bmi-1 protein expression in the nucleus which was blocked by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) specific for Gli-1 and ERK, showing that parallel
pathways of integrins and DDR1 merge at Bmi-1. Furthermore, collagen I-induced
p16 decrease and p-Rb increase were reversed by Bmi-1-specific siRNA. Moreover,
Bmi-1 silencing abolished the collagen I-induced increase of proliferation
indices and undifferentiation markers. These results indicate that collagen I
stimulates the self-renewal of mESCs mediated by Bmi-1 through a2ß1
integrin-dependent ILK, Notch, Gli-1, and DDR1-dependent Ras, PI3K/Akt, and ERK.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Mar;112(3):942-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23010.

Cdk1 is required for the self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Zhang WW(1), Zhang XJ, Liu HX, Chen J, Ren YH, Huang DG, Zou XH, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.
zhangweiwei2002@hotmail.com

Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) is indispensible for the early development of
the embryo. However, its role in maintaining the undifferentiated state of the
embryonic stem (ES) cells remains unknown. In this study, we dissected the
function of Cdk1 in mouse ES cells by RNA-interference and gene expression
analyses. Cdk1 expression is tightly correlated with the undifferentiated state
of the ES cells. Upon differentiation, Cdk1 expression reduced drastically. Cdk1 
knock-down by RNA interference resulted in the loss of proliferation and colony
formation potential of the ES cells. Consequentially, expression of self-renewal 
genes was reduced while differentiation markers such as Cdx2 were induced. Our
results suggest a role for Cdk1 in maintaining the unique undifferentiated and
self-renewing state of the mouse ES cells.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21328468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Histopathology. 2011 Jan;58(2):315-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03746.x.

Comparison of cadherin-17 expression between primary colorectal adenocarcinomas
and their corresponding metastases: the possibility of a diagnostic marker for
detecting the primary site of metastatic tumour.

Park JH, Seol JA, Choi HJ, Roh YH, Choi PJ, Lee KE, Roh MS.

PMID: 21323956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Dev Cell. 2011 Feb 15;20(2):244-55. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.01.003.

Trophectoderm lineage determination in cattle.

Berg DK(1), Smith CS, Pearton DJ, Wells DN, Broadhurst R, Donnison M, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Technologies, AgResearch Crown Research Institute, Hamilton 3214,
New Zealand.

The trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) are committed and marked by
reciprocal expression of Cdx2 and Oct4 in mouse late blastocysts. We find that
the TE is not committed at equivalent stages in cattle, and that bovine Cdx2 is
required later, for TE maintenance, but does not repress Oct4 expression. A mouse
Oct4 (mOct4) reporter, repressed in mouse TE, remained active in the cattle TE;
bovine Oct4 constructs were not repressed in the mouse TE. mOct4 has acquired
Tcfap2 binding sites mediating Cdx2-independent repression-cattle, humans, and
rabbits do not contain these sites and maintain high Oct4 levels in the TE. Our
data suggest that the regulatory circuitry determining ICM/TE identity has been
rewired in mice, to allow rapid TE differentiation and early blastocyst
implantation. These findings thus emphasize ways in which mice may not be
representative of the earliest stages of mammalian development and stem cell
biology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21316591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Hum Pathol. 2011 Jul;42(7):1047-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.10.016. Epub 2011
Feb 11.

A novel case of rhabdoid colon carcinoma associated with a positive CpG island
methylator phenotype and BRAF mutation.

Pancione M(1), Di Blasi A, Sabatino L, Fucci A, Dalena AM, Palombi N, Carotenuto 
P, Aquino G, Daniele B, Normanno N, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Sannio,
82100 Benevento, Italy.

Colon carcinoma with rhabdoid characteristics is a rare, malignant tumor whose
molecular alterations have not been clarified yet. We report a novel case of a
colon adenocarcinoma with rhabdoid features in a 71-year-old woman, localized to 
the right colon and associated with local lymph node and liver metastasis. The
patient died within 8 months from surgery despite target chemotherapy. The tumor 
was enriched in cells with a typical rhabdoid-type morphology displaying a marked
and diffuse vimentin staining. Cells were also positive for epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), p53, Ki67, and ß-catenin and negative for cytokeratin
20/cytokeratin 7, E-cadherin, and CDX2. Remarkably, the promoter regions of 4 of 
5 specific genes that define the so-called "CpG island methylator phenotype,"
including mutL homolog 1 (MLH1), were methylated. Consistently, microsatellite
instability was detected. A BRAF V600E mutation and no KRAS mutations were
identified. Finally, 4 tumor suppressor gene promoters CDH1, CDKN1B, CDKN1C, and 
MGMT were not methylated. This is the first case of a colorectal carcinoma with
rhabdoid features, "CpG island methylator phenotype," high microsatellite
instability associated with a BRAF mutation, and patient poorer outcome.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21315413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Hum Pathol. 2011 Jun;42(6):824-32. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.09.017. Epub 2011 
Feb 2.

A comparative study of intraductal papillary neoplasia of the biliary tract and
pancreas.

Kloek JJ(1), van der Gaag NA, Erdogan D, Rauws EA, Busch OR, Gouma DJ, ten Kate
FJ, van Gulik TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Academic Medical Center, PO Box 22700, 1100 DE,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas is a rare but
well-established entity in contrast to intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of
the biliary tract. The aim of this study was to compare the clinicopathologic
features of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the biliary tract and of 
the pancreas. Twenty patients who underwent resection for intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasm of the biliary tract were compared with 29 cases resected for
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas. Clinicopathologic
characteristics and resection specimens of all patients were reassessed and
immunohistochemically screened for expression of a distinct set of tumor markers.
Median ages of patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the
biliary tract and of the pancreas were 66 and 62 years, respectively (P < .05).
Twelve patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the biliary tract
(60%) had neoplasms with infiltrating carcinoma, compared with 6 patients with
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas (21%, P < .05).
Cytokeratin 7 and 20 expressions were equal in biliary and pancreatic intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasms. Cytokeratin 20 expression was mainly found in
intestinal-type tumors. Gastric, pancreaticobiliary, and oncocytic subtypes were 
all observed in the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the biliary tract 
group. The distribution was significantly different from the intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas group. The 3-year overall survival
rate of malignant biliary and pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm 
was 63% and 65%, respectively (P = .798). Positive lymph nodes and a high
expression of membranous mucin were associated with a significantly shorter
overall survival in patients with malignant intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm. Finally, p53 and Ki67 proliferation index were both associated with the
carcinogenesis of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, whereas DPC4 and CDX2 
were not. Clinicopathologic features of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm
of the biliary tract largely resemble those of intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm of the pancreas, although intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the
biliary tract was associated with a higher malignancy rate at the time of
surgical treatment. The level of membranous mucin expression and positive lymph
nodes are significant prognosticators in patients with malignant intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21292296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. BMC Cancer. 2011 Feb 1;11:51. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-51.

Mechanisms of confluence-dependent expression of CD26 in colon cancer cell lines.

Abe M(1), Havre PA, Urasaki Y, Ohnuma K, Morimoto C, Dang LH, Dang NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematologic Malignancies, Nevada Cancer Institute, Las Vegas,
Nevada, 89135, USA.

BACKGROUND: CD26 (dipeptidyl peptidase IV, DPPIV) is a 110 kDa surface
glycoprotein expressed in most normal tissues, and is a potential novel
therapeutic target for selected cancers. Our work evaluates the mechanism
involved in confluence-dependent CD26 expression in colon cancer.
METHODS: Colon adenocarcinoma cells were grown to confluence, and expression of
CD26 and transcription factors implicated in its regulation was confirmed by
immunofluorescence and Western blotting. Real-time PCR was also performed to
evaluate CD26 upregulation at the transcriptional level. The influence of c-Myc
on CD26 expression during different growth conditions was further evaluated
following transient transfection of a c-Myc-expressing plasmid and a c-Myc
specific siRNA.
RESULTS: We found that the colon cancer cell lines HCT-116 and HCT-15 exhibited a
confluence-dependent increase in CD26 mRNA and protein, associated with decreased
expression of c-Myc, increased USF-1 and Cdx 2 levels, and unchanged HNF-1a
expression. Meanwhile, ectopic expression of c-Myc in both cell lines led to
decreased CD26 expression. In contrast, transfection of a siRNA targeted to Cdx2 
resulted in decreased CD26 level. Importantly, culturing of cells in
serum-depleted media, but not acidic conditions, upregulated CD26. While HIF-1a
level also increased when cells were cultured in serum-depleted media, its
expression was required but not sufficient for CD26 upregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: CD26 mRNA and protein levels increase in a confluence-dependent
manner in colon carcinoma cell lines, with c-Myc acting as a repressor and Cdx2
acting as an enhancer of CD26 expression. The enhanced expression of CD26 in
serum-depleted media and a requirement for HIF-1a suggest a role for nutrients or
growth factors in the regulation of CD26 protein expression.

PMCID: PMC3038146
PMID: 21284881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Gastroenterology. 2011 May;140(5):1536-46.e8. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.01.043. 
Epub 2011 Jan 27.

Loss of Runx3 is a key event in inducing precancerous state of the stomach.

Ito K(1), Chuang LS, Ito T, Chang TL, Fukamachi H, Salto-Tellez M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: RUNX3 is a tumor suppressor originally identified in gastric
cancer. The mutation R122C in RUNX3 promotes gastric carcinogenesis by unclear
mechanisms. We investigated how Runx3-deficiency contributes to distinct changes 
in the gastric epithelium that precede neoplasia.
METHODS: Runx3-deficient (Runx3(-/-)) and wild-type BALB/c adult mice were
subjected to histological analyses. Gastric cancer formation after administration
of N-methyl-N-nitrosourea was evaluated. Runx3(+/+) and Runx3(-/-) gastric
epithelial cell lines were used to investigate the molecular basis underlying
Runx3 function.
RESULTS: The gastric epithelia in Runx3(-)/(-) adult mice was hyperplastic, with 
loss of chief cells and development of mucin 6- and trefoil factor-2-expressing
metaplasia. The gastric epithelium of Runx3(-)/(-) mice had an intestinal
phenotype that expressed Cdx2. After addition of N-methyl-N-nitrosourea, Runx3-
mice, unlike wild-type mice, consistently developed adenocarcinomas, indicating
that Runx3-deficiency leads to premalignant changes in the gastric epithelia.
RUNX3, but not the RUNX3 mutant R122C, repressed Cdx2 expression by attenuation
of oncogenic beta(symbol)-catenin and Tcfs.
CONCLUSIONS: Runx3-deficiency leads to a precancerous state in the gastric
epithelia of mice, characterized by loss of chief cells but not parietal cells;
inflammation did not appear to be involved.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21277301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Surg Today. 2011 Feb;41(2):242-6. doi: 10.1007/s00595-009-4222-3. Epub 2011 Jan
26.

Metastatic seeding of colon adenocarcinoma manifesting as synchronous breast and 
chest wall localization: report of a case.

Cabibi D(1), Cipolla C, Valerio MR, Ingrao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, University of Palermo, A.O.U. Policlinico Paolo
Giaccone, Via del Vespro 129, Palermo, Italy.

Colon carcinoma rarely metastasizes to the breast and it is usually associated
with a poor prognosis. Even rarer is metastatic seeding of colon cancer cells in 
an intramammary location after surgery. Including a primary breast malignancy in 
the differential diagnosis of such cases is mandatory. We report a rare case of
double seeding implantation of colon adenocarcinoma inside the breast parenchyma 
and intercostal muscles 6 years after resection of a pulmonary metastasis from
colon adenocarcinoma. The metastasis was revealed by the presence of bone
metaplasia in the intercostal muscles. We discuss how negative immunostaining for
estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, and HER-2, along with the
immunohistochemical pattern of cytokeratin (CK) 20+/7-/5- and CDX2-positive
immunostaining, excludes a primary breast malignancy, namely, a
"matrix-producing" carcinoma, from the differential diagnosis. We also present
the hypothesis of a paracrine pathogenetic mechanism to explain the bone
metaplasia.

PMID: 21264761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Helicobacter. 2011 Feb;16(1):66-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-5378.2010.00811.x.

Effect of Helicobacter pylori infection on Barrett's esophagus and esophageal
adenocarcinoma formation in a rat model of chronic gastroesophageal reflux.

Liu FX(1), Wang WH, Wang J, Li J, Gao PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking University First Hospital, Xicheng
District, Beijing 100034, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relationship between Helicobacter pylori infection
and Barrett's esophagus (BE), a rat model of chronic gastroesophageal reflux with
H. pylori infection was established and the degree of inflammation, incidence of 
BE and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) were evaluated.
METHODS: Eight-week-old male specific-pathogen-free SD rats were divided into
five groups randomly: pseudo-operation group; esophagojejunum anastomosis (EJA)
group; EJA with H. pylori infection group; EJA with H. pylori infection and
celecoxib-treated group; EJA with celecoxib-treated group. Rats were kept for 30 
weeks after surgery. Esophageal lesion was evaluated grossly and microscopically.
The expression of COX-2 and CDX2 was determined by RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry staining. The level of PGE2 was assessed by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Esophageal mucosal injury in the group of EJA with H. pylori infection
was decreased than that in EJA group (p < .05). The incidence of BE and EA in
rats undergoing EJA with H. pylori infection was increased than in rats
undergoing EJA with no statistical difference. Celecoxib treatment decreased the 
incidence of EA in rats undergoing EJA with H. pylori infection (p < .05). The
expression of CDX2 mRNA was decreased in rats with H. pylori infection or treated
with celecoxib than in the rats of pseudo-operation group (p < .05). When
compared with those in rats of pseudo-operation group, the expression of COX-2
mRNA and the level of PGE2 were upregulated in rats undergoing EJA irrespective
of H. pylori infection (p < .05) and downregulated in rats treated with celecoxib
(p < .05). When H. pylori colonized in esophagus, the severity of inflammation
and the incidence of BE and EA were increased significantly. Higher levels of
COX-2 expression and PGE2 were detected in rats with esophageal H. pylori
colonization.
CONCLUSIONS: When H. pylori infect in stomach, it may reduce the severity of
inflammation. However, when colonizes in esophagus, H. pylori increases the
severity of esophageal inflammation and the incidence of BE and EA. Celecoxib
administration attenuates the incidence of EA by inhibiting COX-2 expression.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21241415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Pathology. 2011 Jan;43(1):36-9. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e328340e4d6.

Adenocarcinomas associated with perianal fistulae in Crohn's disease have a
rectal, not an anal, immunophenotype.

Nishigami T(1), Kataoka TR, Ikeuchi H, Torii I, Sato A, Tomita N, Tsujimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

AIMS: Perianal fistulae are often observed in patients with Crohn's disease (CD),
although the development of associated adenocarcinomas is very rare. The origin
of adenocarcinomas in perianal fistulae associated with CD remains controversial 
and includes adjacent anal glands or rectal mucosa. Here, we attempted to
determine the origin.
METHODS: We performed immunohistochemical analysis on seven cases of
adenocarcinomas in perianal fistulae associated with CD using antibodies against 
mucins (MUCs), cytokeratins (CKs) and the intestine-specific transcription factor
CDX2.
RESULTS: MUC2 and CK20 were expressed in all seven adenocarcinomas examined.
MUC5AC/CLH2, MUC5AC/HGM and CDX2 were positive in four (57%), five (71%), and
five (71%) adenocarcinomas, respectively. These proteins were positive in rectal 
mucosa, and negative in the anal glands. Six of seven adenocarcinomas (86%) were 
negative for CK7. CK7 was expressed in the anal glands, but not in rectal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: Adenocarcinomas in perianal fistulae associated with CD showed
immunohistochemical phenotypes similar to those of rectal-type mucosa, rather
than the anal glands. The adenocarcinomas might originate from cells migrating
from the adjacent rectal mucosa to the CD-associated perianal fistulae.

PMID: 21240063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Pathology. 2011 Feb;43(2):133-7. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e3283425b7f.

Loss of E-cadherin independently predicts the lymph node status in colorectal
cancer.

Karamitopoulou E(1), Zlobec I, Patsouris E, Peros G, Lugli A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Athens, Greece. ekaramit@med.uoa.gr

BACKGROUND: The identification of biomarkers that improve risk stratification in 
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) is still a challenge. The objective of our 
study was to identify independent protein markers as predictors of lymph node (N)
stage in CRC.
METHODS: Tumour specimens from 221 CRC patients were mounted onto a
multiple-punch tissue microarray and evaluated for 21 tumour related factors and 
one host related factor involved in CRC carcinogenesis, namely ß-catenin,
E-cadherin, EGFR, pERK, RHAMM, pAKT, pSMAD2, p21, p16, Bcl-2, Ki-67, APAF-1,
MST1, RKIP, VEGF, EphB2, MMP7, Laminin5<U+03B3>2, MUC1, CDX2, caspase-3 as well as
intra-tumoural and stromal CD8+ tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (iTILs and
sTILs).
RESULTS: Node positive cancers showed significant losses for p21 (p = 0.026),
Bcl-2 (p = 0.027), APAF-1 (p = 0.033), EphB2 (p = 0.006), E-cadherin (p < 0.001),
RKIP (p = 0.019), CD8+ iTILs and sTILs (p < 0.001 and p = 0.008, respectively)
and cytoplasmic MST1 (p = 0.014). Based on the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) EphB2, E-cadherin, iTILs and sTILs were identified as 
potential predictors of N stage (AUC values >0.6), but only loss of E-cadherin
was an independent predictor in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: E-cadherin appears to be a strong predictor of N stage in CRC and
should be considered in pre-operative and post-operative management of colon and 
rectal cancer patients.

PMID: 21233674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Feb;135(2):202-11. doi: 10.1309/AJCPCTCUQSYI89YT.

Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of carcinomas of the papilla of Vater
has prognostic and putative therapeutic implications.

Kohler I(1), Jacob D, Budzies J, Lehmann A, Weichert W, Schulz S, Neuhaus P,
Röcken C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.

We further characterize the heterogeneous carcinomas of the papilla of Vater
(CPVs) in relation to various clinicopathologic patient characteristics and
patient survival. Of the 71 reevaluated CPVs, 32 were intestinal, 26 were
pancreatobiliary, 6 were mixed, 4 were mucinous, and 3 were poorly differentiated
carcinomas. The prevalence of cytokeratin 20 and cytokeratin 7 correlated with
the intestinal (25/32 [78%] vs 13/32 [41%]) and pancreatobiliary (6/26 [23%] vs
24/26 [92%]) phenotypes. CDX2 was found in mucinous (3/4 [75%]), intestinal (7/32
[22%]), and some mixed (1/6 [1%]) CPVs. A KRAS mutation was detected in all
poorly differentiated CPVs and in about 20% of each of the other types. In
multivariate analyses, tumor type, local tumor spread, and lymph node metastases 
were independent prognostic factors of patient survival. We provide further
evidence of the prognostic relevance of the phenotypic and genotypic diversity of
CPVs. Besides the poorly differentiated CPV, the most common KRAS wild type makes
them a putative target for an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapy.

PMID: 21228360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int J Cancer. 2011 Dec 1;129(11):2611-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25923. Epub 2011 Mar
25.

MiR-9 downregulates CDX2 expression in gastric cancer cells.

Rotkrua P(1), Akiyama Y, Hashimoto Y, Otsubo T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Ectopic expression of CDX2, a caudal-related homeobox protein, is known to be
associated with the development of intestinal metaplasia in the stomach and
gastric carcinogenesis. Previously, we reported that DNA methylation was partly
responsible for CDX2 silencing in gastric cancer (GC). However, the mechanism
underlying the aberrant expression of CDX2 during malignant transformation
remained unclear. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that function as
post-transcriptional regulators. To elucidate the role of miRNAs in CDX2
downregulation in GC cells, putative miRNAs, such as miR-9, were computationally 
predicted. After exogenous pre-miR-9 precursor transfection, the luciferase
activity of a reporter vector containing a part of the 3'-UTR of CDX2 was
downregulated in HEK-293T cells. The inverse correlation between the miR-9 and
CDX2 protein levels was demonstrated in GC cell lines. By means of miR-9
overexpression and knockdown techniques, the expression levels of the CDX2
protein and downstream target genes (p21, MUC2 and TFF3) were responsively
altered in MKN45 and NUGC-3 cells. Transfection of an anti-miR-9 molecule
significantly inhibited cell growth by promoting G(1) cell cycle arrest in MKN45 
cells similarly to the effect of CDX2 overexpression. Moreover, examination of
the miR-9 levels in primary GC tissues revealed that the amounts of miR-9 in the 
CDX2-negative group were significantly higher than those in the CDX2-positive
group (p = 0.004). Therefore, miR-9 might repress CDX2 expression via the binding
site in the 3'-UTR, resulting in the promotion of cell proliferation in GCs.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21225631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 15;71(2):593-602. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2842. Epub
2011 Jan 11.

Suppression of colonic polyposis by homeoprotein CDX2 through its
nontranscriptional function that stabilizes p27Kip1.

Aoki K(1), Kakizaki F, Sakashita H, Manabe T, Aoki M, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, and
Laboratory of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.

Caudal-related homeoprotein CDX2 is expressed in intestinal epithelial cells, in 
which it is essential for their development and differentiation. A tumor
suppressor function is suggested by evidence that CDX2 levels are decreased in
human colon cancer specimens and that an inactivating mutation of Cdx2 in
Apc(<U+0394>716) mice markedly increases the incidence of colonic polyps. In this study,
we investigated roles for transcriptional and nontranscriptional functions of
CDX2 in suppression of colonic tumorigenesis. Mutagenic analysis of CDX2 revealed
that loss of function stabilizes CDK inhibitor p27Kip1 by a nontranscriptional
but homeodomain-dependent mechanism that inhibits cyclin E-CDK2 activity and
blocks G0/G1-S progression in colon cancer cells. p27Kip1 stabilization was
mediated by an inhibition of ubiquitylation-dependent proteolysis associated with
decreased phosphorylation of Thr187 in p27Kip1. siRNA-mediated knockdown of
p27Kip1 relieved the decrease in cyclin E-CDK2 activity and S-phase cell fraction
elicited by CDX2 expression. Together, these results implicate a
nontranscriptional function of CDX2 in tumor suppression mediated by p27Kip1
stabilization. Up to approximately 75% of low-CDX2 human colon cancer lesions
show reduced levels of p27Kip1, whereas approximately 68% of high-CDX2 lesions
retain expression of p27Kip1. These results show that low levels of CDX2
accelerate colon tumorigenesis by reducing p27Kip1 levels.

© 2011 AACR.

PMID: 21224344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Sep;17(3):561-8. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9346-7. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

Expression of CDX2 and hepatocyte antigen in benign and malignant lesions of
gallbladder and its correlation with histopathologic type and clinical outcome.

Li QL(1), Yang ZL, Liu JQ, Miao XY.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan,
China.

Recent studies have shown that both CDX2 and Hepatocyte antigen (Hep) are
detected in different types of cancer and associated with clinical prognosis.
However, fever studies have examined gallbladder cancer specimens, and little is 
known about the clinicopathological significance of both CDX2 and Hep expression 
in gallbladder adenocarcinomas. In present study, we examined the expression
frequencies of CDX2 and Hepatocyte antigen (Hep), and explored their
clinicopathologic significances in gallbladder adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry was used to detect and compare the frequencies of CDX2 and
Hep expression in 108 samples of gallbladder adenocarcinoma, 46 peri-tumor
tissues and 35 chronic cholecystitis. The expression frequencies for CDX2 and Hep
were 49/108 (45.4%) and 45/108 (41.7%) in gallbladder carcinoma; 13/46 (28.3%)
and 11/46 (23.9) in peri-tumor tissues; 5/35 (14.3%) and 2/35 (5.7%) in chronic
cholecystitis. The positive staining of CDX2 or Hep in gallbladder adenocarcinoma
was significantly higher than that in peritumoral tissues (both, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), and
chronic cholecystits (both, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). The expression of CDX2 or Hep was
negatively correlated to grade of differentiation, tumor size and lymph node
metastasis (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01 or P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Elevated expression frequency of CDX2 or Hep
was associated with increased overall survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003 or P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002).
Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that CDX2 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014) or Hep
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.026) expression was an independent prognostic predictor in gallbladder
adenocarcinoma. CDX2 and Hep might function as important biological markers in
the development and prognosis of gallbladder adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3158976
PMID: 21221877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Apr;56(4):1119-26. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1531-8. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

Endoscopic diagnosis of open-type atrophic gastritis is related to the
histological diagnosis of intestinal metaplasia and Cdx2 expression.

Ahn SY(1), Lee SY, Hong SN, Kim JH, Sung IK, Park HS, Shim CS, Jin CJ, Han HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, 4-12
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 143-729, South Korea.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Jun;56(6):1917-8.
    Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Apr;56(4):926-8.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Long-term Helicobacter pylori infection results in
atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia (IM) with Cdx2 expression. We have
tried to determine if there was a link between endoscopic and histological
diagnosis of IM based on the status of aberrant Cdx2 expression.
METHODS: One hundred and one subjects agreed to upper gastrointestinal endoscopic
examination, with biopsy sampling for histology, Giemsa, and Cdx2
immunohistochemical staining before and after the treatment. On endoscopic
examination, atrophic gastritis was defined as discoloration with blood vessel
transparency, and was classified as either closed or open. Metaplastic gastritis 
was defined by the presence of whitish patches, whitish plaques, and/or
homogeneous whitish discoloration. Histologic analysis was performed to determine
H. pylori density, intensity of acute polymorphonuclear cell infiltrates and
chronic mononuclear infiltrates, gastric atrophy, and IM as demonstrated using
immunohistochemistry for cdx2.
RESULTS: Cdx2 protein expression (P=0.018) and the prevalence of histologically
detected IM (P=0.011) were higher in cases of endoscopically diagnosed open-type 
atrophic gastritis and metaplastic gastritis than in closed-type atrophic
gastritis and nonatrophic/nonmetaplastic cases. The degree of activity (P=0.006) 
and inflammation (P=0.007) improved significantly after four weeks of successful 
H. pylori eradication treatment, whereas the degree of atrophy, metaplasia, and
Cdx2 expression did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike endoscopic diagnosis of closed-type atrophic gastritis, that 
of open-type atrophic gastritis is highly correlated with the histological
diagnosis of IM and Cdx2 expression. Endoscopically diagnosed open-type atrophic 
gastritis and endoscopically diagnosed metaplastic gastritis have similar
histological features, which suggests that a high percentage of IM cases are
diagnosed as open-type atrophic gastritis by endoscopic examination.

PMID: 21221798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Theriogenology. 2011 Apr 1;75(6):995-1004. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.11.006. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Effect of different culture media on the temporal gene expression in the bovine
developing embryos.

Saadeldin IM(1), Kim B, Lee B, Jang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine
and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Republic of Korea.

We have previously shown that the in vitro embryonic development and the yield of
viable calves were increased by using a two-step chemically defined medium for
post-fertilization culture of bovine embryos. In this study, we explored the
embryonic development and the temporal behavioral interaction of the genes
involved in IFNt gene expression and how they behave in an orchestrated manner to
increase the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos by culturing in the
chemically defined medium. Behavior of genes included ETS2, CDX2, GATA2, GATA3,
OCT4 and NANOG was analyzed in early bovine IVF produced embryos, (from compact
morulae to the blastocyst hatching stages), by semi- and relative quantitative
PCR and compared between two in vitro culture (IVC) systems, two-step chemically 
defined medium and modified synthetic oviductal fluid (mSOF) containing 8 mg/mL, 
BSA. Early embryonic development was found to be better in two-step chemically
defined culture system than that of mSOF as indicated by the increment of
blastocyst yield, 33.1% in two-step culture system vs 18.8% in mSOF medium, and
the blastocyst hatching, 52.3% in two-step culture system vs 33.5% in mSOF
medium. Relative quantitative gene expression showed harmonic behavior in the
two-step culture system rather than the culture in mSOF, IFNt showed even
increase throughout the embryonic development in the two-step culture medium
while it decreased with blastocyst hatching in mSOF culture condition. Temporal
dominance of OCT4 over all the transcription factors was found in regulation of
IFNt expression (the major factor of expression regulation but in inverse
manner). However, ETS2, CDX2, GATA2 and GATA3 are potent IFNt stimulator in
cumulative manner but in case of OCT4 decrement. CDX2 directly related with IFNt,
but still under OCT4 dominance and also regulated by the subservient of OCT4
which is NANOG. In conclusion, this study confirmed our previous results about
the usefulness of using the two-step chemically defined culture medium for
increasing the developmental competence of IVF produced embryos and elucidated
the dominance of OCT4 over the other genes implicated in regulation of IFNt
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21220156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2011;23(2):353-63. doi: 10.1071/RD10039.

Establishing reference genes for use in real-time quantitative PCR analysis of
early equine embryos.

Paris DB(1), Kuijk EW, Roelen BA, Stout TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Equine Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Yalelaan 114, 3584 CM, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
damien.paris@jcu.edu.au

Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) is invaluable for investigating changes in gene
expression during early development, since it can be performed on the limited
quantities of mRNA contained in individual embryos. However, the reliability of
this method depends on the use of validated stably expressed reference genes for 
accurate data normalisation. The aim of the present study was to identify and
validate a set of reference genes suitable for studying gene expression during
equine embryo development. The stable expression of four carefully selected
reference genes and one developmentally regulated gene was examined by qPCR in
equine in vivo embryos from morula to expanded blastocyst stage. SRP14, RPL4 and 
PGK1 were identified by geNorm analysis as stably expressed reference genes
suitable for data normalisation. RPL13A expression was less stable and changed
significantly during the period of development examined, rendering it unsuitable 
as a reference gene. As anticipated, CDX2 expression increased significantly
during embryo development, supporting its possible role in trophectoderm
specification in the horse. In summary, it was demonstrated that evidence-based
selection of potential reference genes can reduce the number needed to validate
stable expression in an experimental system; this is particularly useful when
dealing with tissues that yield small amounts of mRNA. SRP14, RPL4 and PGK1 are
stable reference genes suitable for normalising expression for genes of interest 
during in vivo morula to expanded blastocyst development of horse embryos.

PMID: 21211469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Reproduction. 2011 Mar;141(3):321-32. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0536. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Trophoblast stem cell marker gene expression in inner cell mass-derived cells
from parthenogenetic equine embryos.

Desmarais JA(1), Demers SP, Suzuki J Jr, Laflamme S, Vincent P, Laverty S, Smith 
LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Centre
de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, University of Montreal, 3200 Sicotte,
St-Hyacinthe, Quebec J2S 7C6, Canada.

Although putative horse embryonic stem (ES)-like cell lines have been obtained
recently from in vivo-derived embryos, it is currently not known whether it is
possible to obtain ES cell (ESC) lines from somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 
and parthenogenetic (PA) embryos. Our aim is to establish culture conditions for 
the derivation of autologous ESC lines for cell therapy studies in an equine
model. Our results indicate that both the use of early-stage blastocysts with a
clearly visible inner cell mass (ICM) and the use of pronase to dissect the ICM
allow the derivation of a higher proportion of primary ICM outgrowths from PA and
SCNT embryos. Primary ICM outgrowths express the molecular markers of
pluripotency POU class 5 homeobox 1 (POU5F1) and (sex determining region-Y)-box2 
(SOX2), and in some cases, NANOG. Cells obtained after the passages of PA primary
ICM outgrowths display alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and POU5F1, SOX2,
caudal-related homeobox-2 (CDX2) and eomesodermin (EOMES) expression, but may
lose NANOG. Cystic embryoid body-like structures expressing POU5F1, CDX2 and
EOMES were produced from these cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of equine
embryos reveals the presence of POU5F1 in trophectoderm, primitive endoderm and
ICM. These results suggest that cells obtained after passages of primary ICM
outgrowths are positive for trophoblast stem cell markers while expressing POU5F1
and displaying AP activity. Therefore, these cells most likely represent
trophoblast cells rather than true ESCs. This study represents an important first
step towards the production of autologous equine ESCs for pre-clinical cell
therapy studies on large animal models.

PMID: 21209071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Sep;20(9):1601-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0281. Epub 2011 Mar
17.

Paracrine and epigenetic control of trophectoderm differentiation from human
embryonic stem cells: the role of bone morphogenic protein 4 and histone
deacetylases.

Erb TM(1), Schneider C, Mucko SE, Sanfilippo JS, Lowry NC, Desai MN, Mangoubi RS,
Leuba SH, Sammak PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Magee Women's Hospital of
UPMC, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213, USA. erbtm75@gmail.com

Our understanding of paracrine and epigenetic control of trophectoderm (TE)
differentiation is limited by available models of preimplantation human
development. Simple, defined media for selective TE differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) were developed, enabling mechanistic studies of
early placental development. Paracrine requirements of preimplantation human
development were evaluated with hESCs by measuring lineage-specific transcription
factor expression levels in single cells and morphological transformation in
response to selected paracrine and epigenetic modulators. Bone morphogenic
protein 4 (BMP4) addition to feeder-free pluripotent stem cells on matrigel
frequently formed CDX2-positive TE. However, BMP4 or activin A inhibition alone
also produced a mix of mesoderm and extraembryonic endoderm under these
conditions. Further, BMP4 failed to form TE from adherent hESC maintained in
standard feeder-dependent monolayers. Given that the efficiency and selectivity
of BMP4-induced TE depended on medium components, we developed a basal medium
containing insulin and heparin. In this medium, BMP4 induction of TE was dose
dependent and with activin A inhibition by SB431542 (SB), approached 100% of
cells. This paracrine stimulation of pluripotent cells transformed colony
morphology from a cuboidal to squamous epithelium quantitatively on day 3, and
produced significant multinucleated syncytiotrophoblasts by day 8. Addition of
trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, reduced HDAC3, histone
H3K9 methylation, and slowed differentiation in a dose-dependent manner.
Modulators of BMP4- or HDAC-dependent signaling might adversely influence the
timing and viability of early blastocyst developed in vitro. Since blastocyst
development is synchronized to uterine receptivity, epigenetic regulators of TE
differentiation might adversely affect implantation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3161106
PMID: 21204619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hepatol Res. 2011 Jan;41(1):93-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2010.00746.x.

Hepatic nodular hamartoma containing liver cysts, ductal plate malformations and 
peribiliary glands.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.

An 83-year-old man with hepatocellular carcinoma was found to have a low-echoic
and low-density tumor measuring 7.2 cm × 5.6 cm. Caroli's disease was absent.
Clinical diagnosis was intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Three cores of liver
biopsy were obtained from the tumor. Histologically, it consisted of liver cysts,
ductal plate malformations, peribiliary glands, hepatocytes, portal tracts and
mesenchymal tissue. Apparent features of cirrhosis were not found. The liver
cysts were lined by a layer of cuboidal cells with multiple papillary
protrusions. The ductal plate malformations resembled fetal ductal plates. The
peribiliary glands were seromucous glands. Immunohistochemically, these abnormal 
ductal structures showed positive reaction to biliary type cytokeratins, namely, 
cytokeratin (CK)7, CK8, CK18 and CK19. Mucin gene expression showed that these
biliary structures are positive for fetal antigen MUC1. MUC6 is also positive in 
them. Aberrant expression of CD10 was observed in these biliary structures. MUC2,
MUC5AC and CDX2 were negative. The author thinks that this lesion is hepatic
hamartoma with ductal plate malformations, liver cysts and peribiliary glands. To
the best of the author's knowledge, this type of liver nodule has not been
reported in the published work.

© 2011 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMID: 21199202  [PubMed]


326. Gut. 2011 May;60(5):608-17. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.221648. Epub 2010 Dec 30.

Roles of Kruppel-like factor 4 in oesophageal epithelial cells in Barrett's
epithelium development.

Kazumori H(1), Ishihara S, Takahashi Y, Amano Y, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Shimane University, School of
Medicine, Izumo, Shimane 693-8501, Japan. kazumori@med.shimane-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: The mechanism of transformation to intestinal metaplasia in Barrett's
oesophagus has not been clarified. We previously reported that bile acids
activate the Cdx2 promoter via nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and stimulate
production of Cdx2 protein in oesophageal keratinocytes, resulting in production 
of intestinal-type mucin. Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is an important
transcription factor in the development of intestinal mucosa and has similar
functions as Cdx2. In the present study, we investigated the direct effects of
bile acids on KLF4 expression as well as the precise mechanisms of expression in 
cultured oesophageal squamous epithelial cells.
METHODS: We investigated the expression of KLF4 in rat and human Barrett's
epithelium specimens, while the response of that expression to bile acids was
studied using a KLF4 promoter luciferase assay. In addition, oesophageal squamous
epithelial cells were transfected with a KLF4 expression vector, after which
their possible transformation into intestinal-type epithelial cells was
investigated.
RESULTS: In both rat and human tissues, Barrett's epithelium strongly expressed
KLF4. Furthermore, a bile acids mixture increased KLF4 promoter activity, and
mRNA and protein expression in oesophageal epithelial cells. Results from
mutation analysis of the KLF4 promoter suggested that the NF-<U+03BA>B binding site is
responsible for bile acid-induced activation of the KLF4 promoter. In addition,
KLF4 and Cdx2 stimulated each other by directly binding to the promoter of the
other, while transfection of the KLF4 expression vector in oesophageal epithelial
cells induced production of MUC2 protein.
CONCLUSION: Bile acid-induced sequential expression of KLF4 followed by MUC2
production may have an important role in the development of Barrett's epithelium.

PMID: 21193454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 May;73(5):623-31. Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Extended exposure to trichostatin A after activation alters the expression of
genes important for early development in nuclear transfer murine embryos.

Kang H(1), Roh S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming and Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Dental Research
Institute and CLS 21, Seoul National University School of Dentistry, Seoul
110749, Korea.

The low viability of embryos reconstructed by somatic cell nuclear transfer
(SCNT) is believed to be associated with epigenetic modification errors, and
reduction of those errors may improve the viability of SCNT embryos. The present 
study shows the effect of trichostatin A (TSA), a strong inhibitor of histone
deacetylase, on the development of murine SCNT embryos. After enucleation and
nuclear injection, reconstructed murine oocytes were activated with or without
TSA for 6 hr (TSA-6 hr). After activation, TSA treatment was extended to 3 hr
(TSA-9 hr), 5 hr (TSA-11 hr) and 18 hr (TSA-24 hr) during culture. As a result,
the SCNT embryos in the TSA-11 hr group showed a remarkably higher blastocyst
rate (21.1%) when compared with the nontreated embryos (3.4%), while the
concentration of TSA did not significantly affect embryonic development. The
expressions of histone deacetylase (HDAC1 and HDAC2) and DNA methylation (DNMT3a 
and DNMT3b) genes decreased in the TSA-11 hr and TSA-24 hr groups, while there
was an increase in the expression of histone acetyltransferase (P300 and CBP),
pluripotency (OCT4 and NANOG) and embryonic growth/trophectoderm formation
(FGF4)-related genes in the same groups. The expression of CDX2, a critical gene 
for trophectoderm formation was upregulated only in the TSA-24 hr group. Our
results show that TSA treatment during the peri- and postactivation period
improves the development of reconstructed murine embryos, and this observation
may be explained by enhanced epigenetic modification of somatic cells caused by
TSA-induced hyperacetylation, demethylation and upregulation of pluripotency and 
embryonic growth after SCNT.

PMID: 21187677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011 May;141(5):1218-22. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.08.089. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Safety distance in the resection of colorectal lung metastases: a prospective
evaluation of satellite tumor cells with immunohistochemistry.

Welter S(1), Theegarten D, Trarbach T, Maletzki F, Stamatis G, Tötsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Ruhrlandklinik Essen, Essen, Germany.
stefan.welter@ruhrlandklinik.uk-essen.de

OBJECTIVE: After complete pulmonary metastasectomy of colorectal lung metastases,
tumor recurrence at the site of former resection develops in some patients.
Well-described risk factors for local recurrence in the lung include incomplete
resection and aerogenous spread of floating cancer cell clusters. The aim of this
study was to describe the distribution and frequency of satellite cancer cells or
clusters in resected tissue to deduce recommendations for safety margins in the
future.
METHODS: Seventeen colorectal metastases from 10 patients were processed.
Evaluation for pattern of growth, satellite cancer cells, and inflammatory
reaction at the surface of the metastases was performed on 102 sections with CDX2
and cytokeratin 20 stains. The distance between the surface of the nodule and the
satellite cancer cell was measured for each satellite and statistically
evaluated.
RESULTS: As a pattern of growth, interstitial spread, inflammatory reaction, and 
lymphangitic spread were observed in 41.2%, 35.3%, and 23.5%, respectively. A
total of 205 satellite cancer cells were identified in 16 of 17 metastases with a
mean distance to the nodule of 0.99 ± 0.85 mm (range, 0.06-6.43 mm). The
percentages of satellite tumor cells that are likely to be found within 1.59 mm, 
3.43 mm, and 7.4 mm around the nodule are 68.27%, 95.5%, and 99.73%,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Satellite tumor cells, a potential source for local recurrence, are 
found in a high number around colorectal lung metastases. As a standard of care, 
a safety distance of 3 mm for small metastases and 8 to 10 mm for larger
metastases must be maintained around the lesion to prevent local recurrence.

Copyright © 2011 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21163502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Int J Cancer. 2011 Oct 15;129(8):1889-98. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25847. Epub 2011 Mar
11.

Sessile serrated adenomas and classical adenomas: an epigenetic perspective on
premalignant neoplastic lesions of the gastrointestinal tract.

Dhir M(1), Yachida S, Van Neste L, Glöckner SC, Jeschke J, Pappou EP, Montgomery 
EA, Herman JG, Baylin SB, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Ahuja N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore 21287, MD, USA.

The diagnosis of sessile serrated adenomas (SSAs) is challenging, and there is a 
great deal of interobserver variability amongst pathologists in differentiating
SSAs from hyperplastic polyps (HPPs). The aim of this study was (i) to assess the
utility of epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation in differentiating SSAs
from HPPs and (ii) to identify common methylation based molecular markers
potentially useful for early detection of premalignant neoplastic lesions of
gastrointestinal tract. A total of 97 primary patient adenoma samples were
obtained from The Johns Hopkins Hospital pathology archive with IRB approval and 
HIPAA compliance. We analyzed the promoter associated CpG island methylation
status of 17 genes using nested multiplex methylation specific PCR (MSP).
Methylation of CDX2, hMLH1 and TLR2 was detected in SSAs and SSAs with dysplasia 
but not in HPPs. A subset of genes including EVL, GATAs (4 and 5), HIN-1, SFRPs
(1, 2, 4 and 5), SOX17 and SYNE1 were methylated frequently in all premalignant
gastrointestinal adenomas including tubular adenomas, villous adenomas, SSAs and 
SSAs with dysplasia but infrequently in non-premalignant polyps such as HPPs.
Methylation of CDX2, hMLH1 and TLR2 may be of diagnostic utility in
differentiating, histologically challenging cases of SSAs from HPPs. Genes such
as EVL, GATAs, HIN-1, SFRPs, SOX17 and SYNE1, which are frequently methylated in 
all types of tested premalignant adenomas, may be useful as biomarkers in
stool-based strategies for early detection of these adenomas and CRCs in future.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3206997
PMID: 21154739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Gut. 2011 Mar;60(3):290-8. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.222323. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

CDX2 autoregulation in human intestinal metaplasia of the stomach: impact on the 
stability of the phenotype.

Barros R(1), da Costa LT, Pinto-de-Sousa J, Duluc I, Freund JN, David L, Almeida 
R.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP, Rua Dr Roberto Frias s/n, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is a gastric preneoplastic lesion
that appears following Helicobacter pylori infection and confers an increased
risk for development of cancer. It is induced by gastric expression of the
intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2. The regulatory mechanisms involved 
in triggering and maintaining gastric CDX2 expression have not been fully
elucidated. The Cdx2(+/-) mouse develops intestinal polyps with gastric
differentiation and total loss of Cdx2 expression in the absence of structural
loss of the second allele, suggesting a regulatory defect. This putative
haplo-insufficiency, together with the apparent stability of IM, led to the
hypothesis that CDX2 regulates its own expression through an autoregulatory loop 
in both contexts.
METHODS: Gastrointestinal cell lines were co-transfected with wild-type or
mutated Cdx2 promoter constructs and CDX2 expression vector for luciferase
assays. Transfection experiments were also used to assess endogenous CDX2
autoregulation, evaluated by RT-PCR, qPCR and western blotting. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation was performed in a cell line, mouse ileum and human IM.
RESULTS: CDX2 binds to and transactivates its own promoter and positively
regulates its expression in gastrointestinal human carcinoma cell lines.
Furthermore, CDX2 is bound to its promoter in the mouse ileum and in human
gastric IM, providing a major contribution to understanding the relevance of this
autoregulatory pathway in vivo.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study demonstrate another layer of complexity in 
CDX2 regulation by an effective autoregulatory loop which may have a major impact
on the stability of human IM, possibly resulting in the inevitable progression of
the gastric carcinogenesis pathway.

PMCID: PMC3034084
PMID: 21148572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Development. 2011 Jan;138(2):197-202. doi: 10.1242/dev.056606. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Choice of random rather than imprinted X inactivation in female embryonic stem
cell-derived extra-embryonic cells.

Murakami K(1), Araki K, Ohtsuka S, Wakayama T, Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Jul;141(14):2913-7.

In female mammals, one of two X chromosomes is epigenetically inactivated for
gene dosage compensation, known as X inactivation (Xi). Inactivation occurs
randomly in either the paternal or maternal X chromosome in all embryonic cell
lineages, designated as random Xi. By contrast, in extra-embryonic cell lineages,
which are segregated from somatic cell lineages in pre-implantation development, 
the paternal X chromosome is selectively inactivated, known as imprinted Xi.
Although it is speculated that erasure of the imprinted mark on either the
maternal or paternal X chromosome in somatic cell lineages might change the mode 
of Xi from imprinted to random, it is not known when this event is completed in
development. Here, we tested the mode of Xi during the differentiation of female 
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells derived from the inner cell mass (ICM) of
blastocyst-stage embryos toward trophectoderm (TE) and primitive endoderm (PrE)
lineages induced by artificial activation of transcription factor genes Cdx2 and 
Gata6, respectively. We found that random Xi occurs in both TE and PrE cells.
Moreover, cloned embryos generated by the transfer of nuclei from the female ES
cells showed random Xi in TE, suggesting the complete erasure of all X imprints
for imprinted Xi in ICM-derived ES cells.

PMID: 21148183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Theriogenology. 2011 Mar 15;75(5):841-8. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.10.026. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Trichostatin A-treated eight-cell bovine embryos had increased histone
acetylation and gene expression, with increased cell numbers at the blastocyst
stage.

Shiratsuki S(1), Iwata H, Kimura K, Kuge T, Monji Y, Kuwayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo University of Agriculture, Funako 1737, Atsugi City 243-0024, Japan.

The objective was to determine the effects of trichostatin A (TSA), a potent
histone deacetylase inhibitor, on eight-cell bovine embryos. That treatment
increased histone acetylation was confirmed by immunostaining with anti-AcH4K5
and AcH4K8 antibodies. Embryos treated with TSA (100 nM) for various intervals
(4, 8, and 12 h) developed to the blastocyst stage as frequently as untreated
embryos (average development rate, 49.5%). Treatment with TSA for 12 h increased 
(P < 0.05) the numbers of inner cell mass (ICM) cells and total cells (TC), as
well as the ICM/TC ratio in the blastocyst, but the number of cells in the
trophectoderm decreased (P < 0.05). Treated embryos had increased relative
abundance (RA) of OCT3/4 and E-CADHERIN mRNA relative to controls at the morula
stage (P < 0.05), however, the RA of CDX2 mRNA was unchanged. In conclusion,
TSA-treated eight-cell stage embryos had increased histone acetylation and gene
expression, which increased ICM and TC numbers and the ICM/TC ratio, but
significantly decreased the number of cells in the trophectoderm of resulting
blastocysts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21144563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Feb;300(2):G292-302. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00461.2010. Epub 2010 Dec 2.

Characterization of squamous esophageal cells resistant to bile acids at acidic
pH: implication for Barrett's esophagus pathogenesis.

Goldman A(1), Chen HD, Roesly HB, Hill KA, Tome ME, Dvorak B, Bernstein H, Dvorak
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Univ. of Arizona, 1501 N. Campbell
Ave. P.O. Box 245044, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a premalignant condition, where normal squamous
epithelium is replaced by intestinal epithelium. BE is associated with an
increased risk of developing esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). However, the BE
cell of origin is not clear. We hypothesize that BE tissue originates from
esophageal squamous cells, which can differentiate to columnar cells as a result 
of repeated exposure to gastric acid and bile acids, two components of refluxate 
implicated in BE pathology. To test this hypothesis, we repeatedly exposed
squamous esophageal HET1A cells to 0.2 mM bile acid (BA) cocktail at pH 5.5 and
developed an HET1AR-resistant cell line. These cells are able to survive and
proliferate after repeated 2-h treatments with BA at pH 5.5. HET1AR cells are
resistant to acidification and express markers of columnar differentiation,
villin, CDX2, and cytokeratin 8/18. HET1AR cells have increased amounts of
reactive oxygen species, concomitant with a decreased level and activity of
manganese superoxide dismutase compared with parental cells. Furthermore, HET1AR 
cells express proteins and activate signaling pathways associated with
inflammation, cell survival, and tumorigenesis that are thought to contribute to 
BE and EAC development. These include STAT3, NF-<U+03BA>B, epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), cyclooxygenase-2, interleukin-6, phosphorylated mammalian target
of rapamycin (p-mTOR), and Mcl-1. The expression of prosurvival and inflammatory 
proteins and resistance to cell death could be partially modified by inhibition
of STAT3 signaling. In summary, our study shows that long-term exposure of
squamous cells to BA at acidic pH causes the cells to display the same
characteristics and markers as BE.

PMCID: PMC3043651
PMID: 21127259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Mar;1812(3):283-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.11.008. 
Epub 2010 Nov 30.

The role of CDX2 in intestinal homeostasis and inflammation.

Coskun M(1), Troelsen JT, Nielsen OH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Copenhagen, DK-2730 Herlev,
Denmark. mehcos01@heh.regionh.dk

Many transcription factors are known to control transcription at several
promoters, while others are only active at a few places. However, due to their
importance in controlling cellular functions, aberrant transcription factor
function and inappropriate gene regulation have been shown to play a causal role 
in a large number of diseases and developmental disorders. Inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD) is characterized by a chronically inflamed mucosa caused by
dysregulation of the intestinal immune homeostasis. The aetiology of IBD is
thought to be a combination of genetic and environmental factors, including
luminal bacteria. The Caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) is
critical in early intestinal differentiation and has been implicated as a master 
regulator of the intestinal homeostasis and permeability in adults. When
expressed, CDX2 modulates a diverse set of processes including cell
proliferation, differentiation, cell adhesion, migration, and tumorigenesis. In
addition to these critical cellular processes, there is increasing evidence for
linking CDX2 to intestinal inflammation. The aim of the present paper was to
review the current knowledge of CDX2 in regulation of the intestinal homeostasis 
and further to reveal its potential role in inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21126581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Clin Pathol. 2011 Feb;64(2):110-3. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.075945. Epub 2010 Nov 
23.

Immunohistochemical assessment for Cdx2 expression in the Barrett
metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence.

Hayes S(1), Ahmed S, Clark P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
stephen.hayes@srft.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Barrett oesophagus (BO) occurs as a consequence of prolonged
gastro-oesophageal reflux and it may precede the development of oesophageal
adenocarcinoma.
AIMS: The aim of this study was to accurately assess Cdx2 expression in the
oesophageal metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence.
METHOD: The expression of the transcription factor Cdx2 in Barrett metaplasia,
high-grade glandular dysplasia and adenocarcinoma was investigated using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The results confirmed previous immunohistochemistry and PCR-based
investigations, indicating that Cdx2 was expressed by intestinal metaplasia in
the oesophagus. In addition, upregulation followed by linear downregulation of
Cdx2 expression through the oesophageal metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma
sequence was demonstrated for the first time.
CONCLUSION: Such downregulation of Cdx2 expression could be in keeping with a
role as a tumour suppressor gene, but a simpler explanation would be
downregulation of a differentiation marker.

PMID: 21106545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 12;5(11):e13952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013952.

Sox2 is essential for formation of trophectoderm in the preimplantation embryo.

Keramari M(1), Razavi J, Ingman KA, Patsch C, Edenhofer F, Ward CM, Kimber SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In preimplantation mammalian development the transcription factor
Sox2 (SRY-related HMG-box gene 2) forms a complex with Oct4 and functions in
maintenance of self-renewal of the pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM). Previously 
it was shown that Sox2-/- embryos die soon after implantation. However, maternal 
Sox2 transcripts may mask an earlier phenotype. We investigated whether Sox2 is
involved in controlling cell fate decisions at an earlier stage.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We addressed the question of an earlier role for Sox2 using
RNAi, which removes both maternal and embryonic Sox2 mRNA present during the
preimplantation period. By depleting both maternal and embryonic Sox2 mRNA at the
2-cell stage and monitoring embryo development in vitro we show that, in the
absence of Sox2, embryos arrest at the morula stage and fail to form
trophectoderm (TE) or cavitate. Following knock-down of Sox2 via three different 
short interfering RNA (siRNA) constructs in 2-cell stage mouse embryos, we have
shown that the majority of embryos (76%) arrest at the morula stage or slightly
earlier and only 18.7-21% form blastocysts compared to 76.2-83% in control
groups. In Sox2 siRNA-treated embryos expression of pluripotency associated
markers Oct4 and Nanog remained unaffected, whereas TE associated markers Tead4, 
Yap, Cdx2, Eomes, Fgfr2, as well as Fgf4, were downregulated in the absence of
Sox2. Apoptosis was also increased in Sox2 knock-down embryos. Rescue experiments
using cell-permeant Sox2 protein resulted in increased blastocyst formation from 
18.7% to 62.6% and restoration of Sox2, Oct4, Cdx2 and Yap protein levels in the 
rescued Sox2-siRNA blastocysts.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that the first essential function of
Sox2 in the preimplantation mouse embryo is to facilitate establishment of the
trophectoderm lineage. Our findings provide a novel insight into the first
differentiation event within the preimplantation embryo, namely the segregation
of the ICM and TE lineages.

PMCID: PMC2980489
PMID: 21103067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Development. 2010 Dec;137(24):4159-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.056630.

Initiation of trophectoderm lineage specification in mouse embryos is independent
of Cdx2.

Wu G(1), Gentile L, Fuchikami T, Sutter J, Psathaki K, Esteves TC, Araúzo-Bravo
MJ, Ortmeier C, Verberk G, Abe K, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany.

The separation of the first two lineages - trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass
(ICM) - is a crucial event in the development of the early embryo. The ICM, which
constitutes the pluripotent founder cell population, develops into the embryo
proper, whereas the TE, which comprises the surrounding outer layer, supports the
development of the ICM before and after implantation. Cdx2, the first
transcription factor expressed specifically in the developing TE, is crucial for 
the differentiation of cells into the TE, as lack of zygotic Cdx2 expression
leads to a failure of embryos to hatch and implant into the uterus. However,
speculation exists as to whether maternal Cdx2 is required for initiation of TE
lineage separation. Here, we show that effective elimination of both maternal and
zygotic Cdx2 transcripts by an RNA interference approach resulted in failure of
embryo hatching and implantation, but the developing blastocysts exhibited normal
gross morphology, indicating that TE differentiation had been initiated.
Expression of keratin 8, a marker for differentiated TE, further confirmed the
identity of the TE lineage in Cdx2-deficient embryos. However, these embryos
exhibited low mitochondrial activity and abnormal ultrastructure, indicating that
Cdx2 plays a key role in the regulation of TE function. Furthermore, we found
that embryonic compaction does not act as a 'switch' regulator to turn on Cdx2
expression. Our results clearly demonstrate that neither maternal nor zygotic
Cdx2 transcripts direct the initiation of ICM/TE lineage separation.

PMCID: PMC2990207
PMID: 21098565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Development. 2011 Jan;138(1):65-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.058727. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

Cdx1 refines positional identity of the vertebrate hindbrain by directly
repressing Mafb expression.

Sturgeon K(1), Kaneko T, Biemann M, Gauthier A, Chawengsaksophak K, Cordes SP.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.

An interplay of transcription factors interprets signalling pathways to define
anteroposterior positions along the vertebrate axis. In the hindbrain, these
transcription factors prompt the position-appropriate appearance of seven to
eight segmental structures, known as rhombomeres (r1-r8). The evolutionarily
conserved Cdx caudal-type homeodomain transcription factors help specify the
vertebrate trunk and tail but have not been shown to directly regulate hindbrain 
patterning genes. Mafb (Kreisler, Krml1, valentino), a basic domain leucine
zipper transcription factor, is required for development of r5 and r6 and is the 
first gene to show restricted expression within these two segments. The
homeodomain protein vHnf1 (Hnf1b) directly activates Mafb expression. vHnf1 and
Mafb share an anterior expression limit at the r4/r5 boundary but vHnf1
expression extends beyond the posterior limit of Mafb and, therefore, cannot
establish the posterior Mafb expression boundary. Upon identifying regulatory
sequences responsible for posterior Mafb repression, we have used in situ
hybridization, immunofluorescence and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analyses to determine that Cdx1 directly inhibits early Mafb expression in the
neural tube posterior of the r6/r7 boundary, which is the anteriormost boundary
of Cdx1 expression in the hindbrain. Cdx1 dependent repression of Mafb is
transient. After the 10-somite stage, another mechanism acts to restrict Mafb
expression in its normal r5 and r6 domain, even in the absence of Cdx1. Our
findings identify Mafb as one of the earliest direct targets of Cdx1 and show
that Cdx1 plays a direct role in early hindbrain patterning. Thus, just as Cdx2
and Cdx4 govern the trunk-to-tail transition, Cdx1 may regulate the
hindbrain-to-spinal cord transition.

PMID: 21098558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cell Biol Int. 2011 Jun;35(6):587-91. doi: 10.1042/CBI20100452.

Gelatin induces trophectoderm differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Peng S(1), Hua J, Cao X, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest AF University, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, Peoples Republic of China. pengsha123@yahoo.com.cn

In this study, we selected gelatin as ECM (extracellular matrix) to support
differentiation of mES (mouse embryonic stem) cells into TE (trophectoderm), as
gelatin was less expensive and widely used. We found that 0.2% and 1.5% gelatin
were the suitable concentrations to induce TE differentiation by means of
detecting Cdx2 expression using real-time PCR. Moreover, about 15% cells were
positive for Cdx2 staining after 6 days differentiation. We discovered that the
expressions of specific markers for TE, such as Cdx2, Eomes, Hand1 and Esx1 were 
prominently increased after gelatin induction. Meanwhile, the expression of Oct4 
was significantly decreased. We also found that inhibition of the BMP (bone
morphogenetic protein) signalling by Noggin could promote mES cells
differentiation into TE, whereas inhibition of the Wnt signalling by Dkk1 had the
contrary effect. This could be used as a tool to study the differentiation and
function of early trophoblasts as well as further elucidating the molecular
mechanism during abnormal placental development.

PMID: 21091439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Dec;34(12):1731-48. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f8ff05.

Intra-ampullary papillary-tubular neoplasm (IAPN): characterization of tumoral
intraepithelial neoplasia occurring within the ampulla: a clinicopathologic
analysis of 82 cases.

Ohike N(1), Kim GE, Tajiri T, Krasinskas A, Basturk O, Coban I, Bandyopadhyay S, 
Morohoshi T, Goodman M, Kooby DA, Sarmiento JM, Adsay NV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University Hospital, Atlanta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: There has been no uniform terminology for systematic analysis of
mass-forming preinvasive neoplasms (which we term tumoral intraepithelial
neoplasia) that occur specifically within the ampulla. Here, we provide a
detailed analysis of these neoplasms, which we propose to refer to as
intra-ampullary papillary-tubular neoplasm (IAPN).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three hundred and seventeen glandular neoplasms involving 
the ampulla were identified through a review of 1469 pancreatoduodenectomies and 
11 ampullectomies. Eighty-two neoplasms characterized by substantial preinvasive 
exophytic component that grew almost exclusively (>75%) within the ampulla (in
the ampullary channel or intra-ampullary portions of the very distal segments of 
the common bile duct or pancreatic duct) were analyzed.
RESULTS: (1) Clinical: The mean age was 64 years, male/female ratio was 2.4, and 
mean tumor size was 2.7 cm. (2) Pathology: The tumors had a mixture of both
papillary and tubular growth (each constituting at least 25% of the lesion) in
57%; predominantly (>75%) papillary in 23%, and predominantly (>75%) tubular in
20%. High-grade dysplasia was present in 94% of cases, of which 39% showed focal 
(<25% of the lesion), 28% showed substantial (25% to 75%), and 27% showed
extensive (>75%) high-grade dysplasia. In terms of cell-lineage morphology, 45%
had a mixture of patterns. However, when evaluated with a forced-binary approach 
as intestinal (INT) versus gastric/pancreatobiliary (GPB) based on the
predominant pattern, 74% were classified as INT and 26% as GPB. (3)
Immunohistochemistry: Percent sensitivity/specificity of cell-lineage markers
were, for INT phenotype: MUC2 85/78 and CDX2 94/61; and for GBP: MUC1 89/79,
MUC5AC 95/69, and MUC6 83/76, respectively. Cytokeratin 7 and 20 were coexpressed
in more than half. (4) Invasive carcinoma: In 64 cases (78%), there was an
associated invasive carcinoma. Size of the tumor and amount of dysplasia
correlated with the incidence of invasion. Invasive carcinoma was of INT-type in 
58% and of pancreatobiliary-type in 42%. Cell lineage in the invasive component
was the same as that of the preinvasive component in 84%. All discrepant cases
were pancreatobiliary-type invasions, which occurred in INT-type preinvasive
lesions. (5) OUTCOME: The overall survival of invasive cases were significantly
worse than that of noninvasive ones (57% vs. 93%; P=0.01); and 3 years, 69%
versus 100% (P=0.08); and 5 years, 45% versus 100% (P=0.07), respectively. When
compared with 166 conventional invasive carcinomas of the ampullary region,
invasive IAPNs had significantly better prognosis with a mean survival of 51
versus 31 months (P<0.001) and the 3-year survival of 69% versus 44% (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Tumoral intraepithelial neoplasia occurring within the ampulla are
highly analogous to pancreatic or biliary intraductal papillary and tubular
neoplasms as evidenced by their papillary and/or tubular growth, variable cell
lineage, and spectrum of dysplastic change (adenoma-carcinoma sequence), and thus
we propose to refer to these as IAPN. IAPNs are biologically indolent;
noninvasive examples show an excellent prognosis, whereas those with invasion
exhibit a malignant but nevertheless significantly better prognosis than typical 
invasive ampullary carcinomas unaccompanied by IAPNs. Twenty eight percent (64 of
230) of invasive carcinomas within the ampulla arise in association with IAPNs.

PMCID: PMC3168573
PMID: 21084962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Gastroenterology. 2011 Feb;140(2):517-528.e8. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.11.033. 
Epub 2010 Nov 13.

Cdx2 levels modulate intestinal epithelium maturity and Paneth cell development.

Crissey MA(1), Guo RJ, Funakoshi S, Kong J, Liu J, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. lynchj@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Caudal-related homeobox protein 2 (Cdx2) is an
intestine-specific transcription factor that is important for intestinal
development and intestine-specific gene expression. Cdx2 regulates intestinal
cell-cell adhesion, proliferation, and the transcriptional activities of Wnt and 
ß-catenin in cell culture systems. We generated transgenic mice that overexpress 
Cdx2 in the small intestinal and colonic epithelium to investigate the role of
Cdx2 in differentiation and function of the intestinal epithelium.
METHODS: We established 4 different lines of villin-Cdx2 transgenic mice.
Intestines were collected from infant, 3-month old, and wild-type mice. Genes of 
interest and cell lineage markers were examined by polymerase chain reaction and 
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Villin-Cdx2 transgenic mice had complex phenotypes that were associated 
with transgene expression levels. The 2 lines that had the greatest levels of
transgene expression had significant, preweaning failure to grow and death; these
were the result of early epithelial maturation and alterations in nutrient
digestion and absorption. Fat malabsorption was a prominent feature. Other
effects associated with the transgene expression included loss of Paneth cell
markers, increases in goblet cells, and migration of proliferating,
EphB2-expressing cells to the crypt base. Loss of Paneth cell markers was
associated with reduced nuclear localization of ß-catenin but not homeotic
posteriorization of the epithelium by Cdx2.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of Cdx2 in the small intestine is associated with
reduced post-natal growth, early epithelial maturation, alterations in crypt base
organization, and changes in Paneth and goblet cell lineages. Cdx2 is a critical 
regulator not only of intestine-specific genes, but also processes that determine
epithelial maturity and function.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3031739
PMID: 21081128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2010;96:231-70. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-381280-3.00010-5.

Cdx genes, inflammation, and the pathogenesis of intestinal metaplasia.

Stairs DB(1), Kong J, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is a biologically interesting and clinically relevant 
condition in which one differentiated type of epithelium is replaced by another
that is morphologically similar to normal intestinal epithelium. Two classic
examples of this are gastric IM and Barrett's esophagus (BE). In both, a chronic 
inflammatory microenvironment, provoked either by Helicobacter pylori infection
of the stomach or acid and bile reflux into the esophagus, precedes the
metaplasia. The Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2
are critical regulators of the normal intestinal epithelial cell phenotype.
Ectopic expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 occurs in both gastric IM as well as in BE.
This expression precedes the onset of the metaplasia and implies a causal role
for these factors in this process. We review the observations regarding the role 
of chronic inflammation and the Cdx transcription factors in the pathogenesis of 
gastric IM and BE.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21075347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):713-26. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.006.

Differentiation-specific histone modifications reveal dynamic chromatin
interactions and partners for the intestinal transcription factor CDX2.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, He HH, Sulahian R, Meyer CA, Montgomery RK, Fleet JC, Brown 
M, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Dec 22;31(6):801.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):647-8.

VIDEO ABSTRACT: Cell differentiation requires remodeling of tissue-specific gene 
loci and activities of key transcriptional regulators, which are recognized for
their dominant control over cellular programs. Using epigenomic methods, we
characterized enhancer elements specifically modified in differentiating
intestinal epithelial cells and found enrichment of transcription factor-binding 
motifs corresponding to CDX2, a critical regulator of the intestine. Directed
investigation revealed surprising lability in CDX2 occupancy of the genome, with 
redistribution from hundreds of sites occupied only in proliferating cells to
thousands of new sites in differentiated cells. Knockout mice confirmed distinct 
Cdx2 requirements in dividing and mature adult intestinal cells, including
responsibility for the active enhancer configuration associated with maturity.
Dynamic CDX2 occupancy corresponds with condition-specific gene expression and,
importantly, to differential co-occupancy with other tissue-restricted
transcription factors, such as GATA6 and HNF4A. These results reveal dynamic,
context-specific functions and mechanisms of a prominent transcriptional
regulator within a cell lineage.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3001591
PMID: 21074721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):647-8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.018.

Global approaches to identify novel participants that modulate intestinal
epithelial cell development.

Murre C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. cmurre@ucsd.edu

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):713-26.

Combinatorial control of lineage-specific gene expression is commonly mediated by
suites of diverse transcriptional regulators. In this issue of Developmental
Cell, Verzi et al. (2010) use an unbiased global and computational approach to
identify distinct partners and functions of CDX2 in intestinal epithelial cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21074714  [PubMed]


345. Fertil Steril. 2011 Feb;95(2):799-802. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.10.006.
Epub 2010 Nov 5.

A novel method for purification of inner cell mass and trophectoderm cells from
blastocysts using magnetic activated cell sorting.

Ozawa M(1), Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and DH Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology
Research Program, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32601, USA.

Erratum in
    Fertil Steril. 2014 Mar;101(3):884.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a simple method to purify blastomeres of inner cell mass
(ICM) and trophectoderm (TE) lineage using magnetic activated cell sorting.
DESIGN: Prospective laboratory study.
SETTING: Embryology research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): None.
INTERVENTION(S): Trophectoderm cells of zona-free blastocysts were labeled with
concanavalin A conjugated to FITC, and every nucleus in the blastocyst was
labeled with Hoechst 33342. The labeled blastocyst was disaggregated to single
cells by trypsin treatment followed by pipetting using a finely drawn,
flame-polished micropipet. Disaggregated blastomeres were incubated with
anti-FITC antibody conjugated to magnetic microbeads and subjected to magnetic
cell sorting to separate cells into FITC-positive and -negative fractions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Purity and gene expression.
RESULT(S): In the FITC-positive fraction, an average of 91.2% of cells was
dual-labeled with FITC and Hoechst, whereas only 7.8% of FITC negative fractions 
were labeled with FITC. Expression of CDX2, a trophectoderm marker, was
significantly higher in the FITC-positive fraction, whereas expression of NANOG, 
an inner cell mass marker, was significantly higher in the FITC-negative
fraction.
CONCLUSION(S): Highly purified trophectoderm cells or inner cell mass cells can
be collected using magnetic activated cell sorting. This method can be useful for
understanding differentiation and function of cell lineages in the blastocyst.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21055741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jul;39(7):497-500.

[Mucosal biopsy diagnosis of Barrett's esophageal: an update].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L, Wang LP.

PMID: 21055188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jul;39(7):442-6.

[Clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study on early gastric signet-ring
cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong ZF(1), Xiao H, Tan YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of gastric and intestinal phenotypic markers
in gastric signet-ring cell (SRC) carcinoma and the relationship with the
clinicopathologic parameters and prognosis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical study was carried out in 91 cases of early-stage SRC
carcinoma using MUC1, MUC5AC and MUC6 antibodies as the gastric phenotypic
markers and MUC2 and CDX2 antibodies as the intestinal phenotypic markers.
According to the expression of phenotypic markers, the tumors were classified
into three different subgroups: gastric, intestinal and mixed. The findings were 
analyzed together with various clinical parameters and follow-up data.
RESULTS: Amongst the 91 cases studied, 53 cases (58.2%) belonged to gastric type,
22 cases (24.2%) mixed type and 16 cases (17.6%) intestinal type. The positive
rates of MUC2 and CDX2 in early submucosal carcinoma were significantly higher
than those in mucosal carcinoma (P < 0.01). On the other hand, the rates of
MUC5AC and MUC6 expression in early submucosal carcinoma were significantly lower
than those in mucosal carcinoma (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05). The rates of MUC2 and
CDX2 expression in cases with lymph node metastasis and vascular invasion were
significantly higher than those in cases without nodal or vascular involvement (P
< 0.05). The expression of CDX2 was also significantly higher in cases with
larger tumor size (P < 0.05). Cases with intestinal phenotype more likely had
invasion deeper than mucosal layer and carried higher chance of lymph node
metastasis (P = 0.000 and P = 0.003). Intestinal and mixed types correlated with 
shortened five-year survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The intestinal type of SRC carcinoma is associated with poorer
biologic behavior and prognosis, as compared with that of the gastric type.
Classification on the basis of immunophenotypic markers may be useful in
predicting prognosis and guiding treatment for patients with gastric SRC
carcinoma.

PMID: 21055171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 7;286(1):450-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.174045. Epub 2010 Nov
4.

Oct1 is a switchable, bipotential stabilizer of repressed and inducible
transcriptional states.

Shakya A(1), Kang J, Chumley J, Williams MA, Tantin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112, USA.

Little is known regarding how the Oct1 transcription factor regulates target gene
expression. Using murine fibroblasts and two target genes, Polr2a and Ahcy, we
show that Oct1 recruits the Jmjd1a/KDM3A lysine demethylase to catalyze the
removal of the inhibitory histone H3K9 dimethyl mark and block repression. Using 
purified murine T cells and the Il2 target locus, and a colon cancer cell line
and the Cdx2 target locus, we show that Oct1 recruits the NuRD
chromatin-remodeling complex to promote a repressed state, but in a regulated
manner can switch to a different capacity and mediate Jmjd1a recruitment to block
repression. These findings indicate that Oct1 maintains repression through a
mechanism involving NuRD and maintains poised gene expression states through an
antirepression mechanism involving Jmjd1a. We propose that, rather than acting as
a primary trigger of gene activation or repression, Oct1 is a switchable
stabilizer of repressed and inducible states.

PMCID: PMC3013004
PMID: 21051540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2011 Mar;41(3):358-64. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyq199. Epub 2010 Nov 
4.

Metastatic carcinoma to subcutaneous tissue and skeletal muscle:
clinicopathological features in 11 cases.

Yoshimura Y(1), Isobe K, Koike T, Arai H, Aoki K, Kato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.
yyoshim@shinshu-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Metastatic carcinoma to subcutaneous tissue or skeletal muscle is
relatively rare. The present study aimed to clarify the clinicopathological
features for confirming the diagnosis as soft tissue metastasis and determining
the primary site.
METHODS: We reviewed records of 11 patients with soft tissue metastasis who were 
in our institution from 1996 to 2009.
RESULTS: In 9 of 10 patients who underwent magnetic resonance imaging, findings
consisted of poorly circumscribed high-intensity lesions around the tumor on
T2-weighted images, irregular peritumoral enhancement and poorly enhanced lesions
at the center of the tumor on T1-weighted images. Systematic immunohistochemical 
examination was more valuable for diagnosing as soft tissue metastasis and
confirming the primary site. The expression patterns of cytokeratins 7 and 20 and
tissue-specific antibodies such as thyroid transcription factor-1, MUC5AC and
CDX2 were useful diagnostic markers. The primary site could be determined in five
patients with cytokeratin 7/20 immunophenotype and positivity for tissue-specific
antibodies. In four cases, determination of the primary site finally became
possible by comparison with the histological findings of operative specimens in
past carcinoma and/or in consideration of radiological findings and the results
of cytokeratin 7/20 phenotyping.
CONCLUSIONS: Systematic immunohistochemical examination is helpful for
confirmation of the primary origin in soft tissue metastasis of carcinoma in
addition to clinical information such as the history and condition of past
carcinoma, radiological findings and comparison between the histology of biopsy
specimens and past carcinoma.

PMID: 21051532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011 Jan;164(1):75-82. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0688. Epub 2010 Nov 
4.

Associations between vitamin D receptor genotypes and mortality in a cohort of
older Dutch individuals.

de Jongh RT(1), Lips P, Rijs KJ, van Schoor NM, Kramer MH, Vandenbroucke JP,
Dekkers OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology EMGO Institute for Health
and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, PO Box 7057, 1007 MB Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. rt.dejongh@vumc.nl

CONTEXT: Vitamin D receptor (VDR) polymorphisms are associated with a variety of 
diseases, which may translate into an effect on mortality.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the associations between VDR gene variants and
mortality among older people.
DESIGN: The analyses were conducted in a population-based, prospective cohort of 
the Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam. Adequate DNA analysis was performed in
923 men and women (=65 years). We aimed to assess the associations between
mortality and the VDR polymorphism FokI, three haplotypes of the Cdx2 and GATA
polymorphisms, and three haplotypes of the BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI polymorphisms.
RESULTS: During the median follow-up of 10.7 years, 480 participants deceased
(51%). Homozygosity for the Cdx2-GATA haplotype 1 allele was associated with a
30% higher mortality risk compared to the absence of alleles (hazard ratios (HR) 
1.30, 95% confidence intervals (CI) 1.01-1.68). Adjustment for cardiovascular
risk factors and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels did not affect this HR. The number of
copies of the Cdx2-GATA haplotype 1 allele was associated, although not
significantly, with an increased risk of osteoporotic fractures (0
copies=reference, HR, 95% CI: 1 copy 2.01, 0.99-4.07 and 2 copies 1.81,
0.87-4.18). After adjustment for osteoporotic fractures, homozygosity for the
Cdx2-GATA haplotype 1 allele was no longer associated with higher mortality risk 
(HR 1.08, 95% CI 0.83-1.41).
CONCLUSIONS: The Cdx2-GATA haplotype 1 allele was related to increased mortality 
risk, which may be partly explained by osteoporotic fractures. As the biological 
mechanism is uncertain and this study size is limited, our results should be
interpreted as hypothesis generating.

PMID: 21051524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 26;5(10):e13615. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013615.

Functional genomics of 5- to 8-cell stage human embryos by blastomere single-cell
cDNA analysis.

Galán A(1), Montaner D, Póo ME, Valbuena D, Ruiz V, Aguilar C, Dopazo J, Simón C.

Author information: 
(1)Valencia Node of The National Stem Cell Bank, Centro de Investigación Príncipe
Felipe, Valencia, Spain.

Blastomere fate and embryonic genome activation (EGA) during human embryonic
development are unsolved areas of high scientific and clinical interest.
Forty-nine blastomeres from 5- to 8-cell human embryos have been investigated
following an efficient single-cell cDNA amplification protocol to provide a
template for high-density microarray analysis. The previously described markers, 
characteristic of Inner Cell Mass (ICM) (n = 120), stemness (n = 190) and
Trophectoderm (TE) (n = 45), were analyzed, and a housekeeping pattern of 46
genes was established. All the human blastomeres from the 5- to 8-cell stage
embryo displayed a common gene expression pattern corresponding to ICM markers
(e.g., DDX3, FOXD3, LEFTY1, MYC, NANOG, POU5F1), stemness (e.g., POU5F1, DNMT3B, 
GABRB3, SOX2, ZFP42, TERT), and TE markers (e.g., GATA6, EOMES, CDX2, LHCGR). The
EGA profile was also investigated between the 5-6- and 8-cell stage embryos, and 
compared to the blastocyst stage. Known genes (n = 92) such as depleted maternal 
transcripts (e.g., CCNA1, CCNB1, DPPA2) and embryo-specific activation (e.g.,
POU5F1, CDH1, DPPA4), as well as novel genes, were confirmed. In summary, the
global single-cell cDNA amplification microarray analysis of the 5- to 8-cell
stage human embryos reveals that blastomere fate is not committed to ICM or TE.
Finally, new EGA features in human embryogenesis are presented.

PMCID: PMC2964308
PMID: 21049019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Differentiation. 2011 Feb;81(2):92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.10.002. Epub 2010 
Oct 30.

Sox2 expression is maintained while gastric phenotype is completely lost in
Cdx2-induced intestinal metaplastic mucosa.

Mutoh H(1), Sashikawa M, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.
muto@jichi.ac.jp

Sox2 is closely related to the gastric phenotype. Sox2 plays a pivotal role in
gastric epithelial differentiation in the adult. Sox2 expression is reduced in
Helicobacter pylori-associated intestinal metaplastic change of the gastric
epithelium. The gastric mucosa is replaced by intestinal metaplastic mucosa in
the stomach of caudal type homeobox 2 (Cdx2)-transgenic mice. The aim of this
study was to use Cdx2-transgenic mice to investigate: (i) Sox2 expression in the 
intestinal metaplastic mucosa of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach; and (ii) the 
relationship between Sox2 and Cdx2. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed to
determine Sox2, Cdx2, Muc5Ac, and alkaline phosphatase mRNA expression levels and
single- or double-label immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the
localization of Sox2, Cdx2, gastric mucin and alkaline phosphatase activity. We
determined that Sox2 mRNA in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa of the
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach was expressed 3.5-fold compared to the normal mouse
stomach. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the same cells in the
intestinal metaplastic mucosa expressed both Cdx2 and Sox2. Gastric mucin was not
expressed while alkaline phosphatase activity was recognized in the intestinal
metaplastic mucosa in spite of the Sox2 expression. Cdx2 increased the
transcriptional activity of the Sox2 gene, and Sox2 increased the transcriptional
activity of the Muc5Ac gene, which was reduced by cotransfecion of Cdx2 together 
with Sox2 in the human gastric carcinoma cell line AGS. In conclusion, Sox2
expression is maintained while gastric phenotype is completely lost in the
intestinal metaplastic mucosa of Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21036460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):3953-63. doi: 10.1242/dev.054775. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Klf5 regulates lineage formation in the pre-implantation mouse embryo.

Lin SC(1), Wani MA, Whitsett JA, Wells JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Kruppel-like transcription factors (Klfs) are essential for the induction and
maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), yet little is known
about their roles in establishing the three lineages of the pre-implantation
embryo. Here, we show that Klf5 is required for the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM), and for repressing primitive
endoderm (PE) development. Although cell polarity appeared normal, Klf5 mutant
embryos arrested at the blastocyst stage and failed to hatch due to defective TE 
development. Klf5 acted cell-autonomously in the TE, downstream of Fgf4 and
upstream of Cdx2, Eomes and Krt8. In the ICM, loss of Klf5 resulted in reduced
expression of pluripotency markers Oct4 and Nanog, but led to increased Sox17
expression in the PE, suggesting that Klf5 suppresses the PE lineage. Consistent 
with this, overexpression of Klf5 in transgenic embryos was sufficient to
suppress the Sox17(+) PE lineage in the ICM. Klf5 overexpression led to a
dose-dependent decrease in Sox17 promoter activity in reporter assays in cultured
cells. Moreover, in chimeric embryos, Klf5(-/-) cells preferentially contributed 
to the Sox17(+) PE lineage and Cdx2 expression was not rescued in Klf5(-/-) outer
cells. Finally, outgrowths from Klf5(-/-) embryos failed to form an
ICM/pluripotent colony, had very few Oct4(+) or Cdx2(+) cells, but showed an
increase in the percentage of Sox17(+) PE cells. These findings demonstrate that 
Klf5 is a dynamic regulator of all three lineages in the pre-implantation embryo 
by promoting the TE and epiblast lineages while suppressing the PE lineage.

PMCID: PMC2976279
PMID: 20980403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Dec;12(6):699-707. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0040. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Nuclear transfer-specific defects are not apparent during the second week of
embryogenesis in cattle.

Smith CS(1), Berg DK, Berg M, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Campus, Hamilton, New Zealand.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT)-specific effects on postblastocyst early
cattle embryogenesis were investigated by comparison to in vitro-produced (IVP)
embryos grown under identical conditions to embryonic days (E) 14 and 15.
Recipient effects were excluded by transferring mixed batches of NT and IVP
embryos into each cow. Embryo recovery rates, proportions with an epiblast and
embryo, as well as epiblast dimensions did not differ between NT and IVP embryos.
A developmental expression profile was determined for nine trophoblast markers,
two inner cell mass (ICM)/epiblast markers, and E-cadherin at nine time points
between E7 and E26, providing a molecular gene signature assay for developmental 
progression. Gene expression levels for these genes (Cdx2, Elf5, Mash2, Ifn-tau, 
Furin, Kunitz1, Pag11, Gata3, Oct4 and Ifitm3) were equal in NT and IVP embryos
of equivalent length. Furthermore, the average residual deviation of all 10 genes
did not differ significantly suggesting an overall "normality" in gene expression
of E14/15 NT embryos. The absence of NT-specific defects during the second,
highly selective, week of cattle embryogenesis is interpreted as supportive for
the view that NT-associated defects are predominantly of an epigenetic nature.

PMID: 20973678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5873-81. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0458. Epub 2010 Oct
20.

Function of a transcription factor CDX2 beyond its trophectoderm lineage
specification.

Sakurai T(1), Bai H, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

The transcription factor caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2) regulates trophectoderm
differentiation, but its function beyond trophectoderm differentiation is not
well characterized. CDX2 was shown to regulate a trophoblast-specific gene,
interferon t (IFNT), in the ruminants. However, its regulatory mechanism has not 
been determined. Here, we report a new role of CDX2 in histone modifications of
the IFNT gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using ovine conceptuses
obtained from d 14, 16, 16.5, or 20 of pregnancy (d 0, day of mating) revealed
that H3K18 acetylation was highly detectable at the upstream and open reading
frame regions of the IFNT gene on d 14 and 16, when CDX2 reached its peak
expression. From d 16.5, when the conceptus initiates attachment to uterine
epithelial cells, histone acetylation along with CDX2 expression declines. Two
candidate CDX2 binding sites (-300 to -294 bp and -293 to -287 bp) of the bovine 
IFNT gene promoter region were detected from chromatin immunoprecipitation and
luciferase assay. When Cdx2 constructs were transfected into bovine ear-derived
fibroblast cells, histone acetylation was increased, concurrent with the
recruitment of cAMP response element binding protein-binding protein, which has
histone acetyltransferase activity. H3K18 acetylation was seen in the proximity
of the CDX2 binding region located at the IFNT gene's upstream region in CT-1
cells, but when these cells were treated with specific CDX2 small interfering
RNA, H3K18 acetylation was decreased. These findings suggest that CDX2 regulates 
its targeted gene through cAMP response element binding protein-binding protein
recruitment, which correlates with greater histone acetylation.

PMID: 20962045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Semin Liver Dis. 2010 Nov;30(4):422-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1267542. Epub 2010 Oct
19.

Primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor: a case report with
literature review.

Zhu H(1), Sun K, Ward SC, Schwartz M, Thung SN, Qin L.

Author information: 
(1)The Lillian and Henry M. Stratton-Hans Popper Department of Pathology, The
Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

Primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor is extremely rare and is
characterized by distinct intracytoplasmic hyaline vacuoles that are mucin
negative and cytokeratin positive. The unique histological features may cause
difficulty in diagnosis and delay patient care. Here the authors report a
49-year-old man with an incidental finding of a 2.7 cm liver mass in the absence 
of chronic liver disease. The resected tumor was grossly unencapsulated but well 
demarcated with friable tissue texture. Microscopically, the entire tumor
consisted of sheets of monotonous cells separated by delicate microvasculature.
The tumor cells had granular chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and eosinophilic 
cytoplasm. Many of the tumor cells had eccentric, pale intracytoplasmic vacuoles 
resembling signet ring cells in adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical studies
showed that the tumor cells were positive for neuroendocrine markers and that the
intracytoplasmic vacuoles were negative for mucin but strongly positive for
cytokeratins. Careful systemic search including OctreoScan scintigraphy
(Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, MO) and capsule endoscopy failed to
reveal any other tumors. A diagnosis of primary hepatic signet ring cell
neuroendocrine tumor was established. Ten months after surgery, the patient is
well without any other detectable tumor on radiology. Serological neuroendocrine 
markers are also within normal limits.

© Thieme Medical Publishers.

PMID: 20960381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2011 Oct;15(5):355-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2010.05.001.
Epub 2010 Jul 8.

Amphicrine carcinoma of the liver.

Ganesan K(1), Achmad E, Sirlin CB, Bouvet M, Datnow B, Weidner N, Peterson MR.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Imaging Group, Department of Radiology, University of California, San
Diego, 92103, USA.

Amphicrine tumors are defined by evidence of both glandular and neuroendocrine
differentiation in the same cell. These are extremely rare tumors, with only
scattered case reports in the pancreas and stomach. We here report a case of
amphicrine carcinoma occurring in apparent isolation in the liver. The tumor was 
characterized by signet ring cell morphology, mucicarmine, and periodic acid
Schiff with diastase (PASD) positivity, and expression of chromogranin,
synaptophysin, villin, and CDX2. No other tumor was identified by radiological or
endoscopic examination of the gastrointestinal tract. The patient is disease-free
22 months after the resection. We speculate that this represents the first
reported occurrence of primary amphicrine carcinoma of the liver.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20952282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2011 Dec;15(6):450-3. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2010.06.006.
Epub 2010 Oct 16.

Combined tubular adenocarcinoma and hepatoid adenocarcinoma arising in Barrett
esophagus.

Kuroda N(1), Onishi K, Lee GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kochi Red Cross Hospital, Kochi
University, 780-8562 Kochi, Japan. kurochankochi@yahoo.co.jp

Hepatoid adenocarcinoma arising in the esophagus is extremely rare. To date,
there are only 3 cases in the world English literature. We report the fourth case
here. A 76-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of the
deterioration of nephritic syndrome. He presented with chest burn, and the
endoscopic examination of upper digestive tract disclosed the tumor in the lower 
esophagus. The subtotal esophagectomy was undertaken because of esophageal
cancer. The postoperative histologic examination showed the finding of combined
tubular adenocarcinoma and hepatoid adenocarcinoma arising in Barrett esophagus. 
Immunohistochemically, hepatoid adenocarcinoma cells were positive for
a-fetoprotein, hepatocyte, a1-antitrypsin, a1-antichymotrypsin, and CDX2, but
negative for MUC5AC and MUC6. Esophageal hepatoid adenocarcinoma seems to be
closely associated with Barrett esophagus and show the intestinal phenotype
rather than gastric phenotype.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20952273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Differentiation. 2011 Jan;81(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.09.182. Epub 2010 
Oct 8.

Intestinal lineage commitment of embryonic stem cells.

Cao L(1), Gibson JD, Miyamoto S, Sail V, Verma R, Rosenberg DW, Nelson CE,
Giardina C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 91 North 
Eagleville Road, Unit 3125 Storrs, CT 06269-3125, USA.

Generating lineage-committed intestinal stem cells from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) could provide a tractable experimental system for understanding intestinal
differentiation pathways and may ultimately provide cells for regenerating
damaged intestinal tissue. We tested a two-step differentiation procedure in
which ESCs were first cultured with activin A to favor formation of definitive
endoderm, and then treated with fibroblast-conditioned medium with or without
Wnt3A. The definitive endoderm expressed a number of genes associated with
gut-tube development through mouse embryonic day 8.5 (Sox17, Foxa2, and Gata4
expressed and Id2 silent). The intestinal stem cell marker Lgr5 gene was also
activated in the endodermal cells, whereas the Msi1, Ephb2, and Dcamkl1
intestinal stem cell markers were not. Exposure of the endoderm to
fibroblast-conditioned medium with Wnt3A resulted in the activation of Id2, the
remaining intestinal stem cell markers and the later gut markers Cdx2, Fabp2, and
Muc2. Interestingly, genes associated with distal gut-associated mesoderm (Foxf2,
Hlx, and Hoxd8) were also simulated by Wnt3A. The two-step differentiation
protocol generated gut bodies with crypt-like structures that included regions of
Lgr5-expressing proliferating cells and regions of cell differentiation. These
gut bodies also had a smooth muscle component and some underwent peristaltic
movement. The ability of the definitive endoderm to differentiate into intestinal
epithelium was supported by the vivo engraftment of these cells into mouse
colonic mucosa. These findings demonstrate that definitive endoderm derived from 
ESCs can carry out intestinal cell differentiation pathways and may provide cells
to restore damaged intestinal tissue.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mech Dev. 2011 Jan-Feb;128(1-2):41-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.09.004. Epub 2010
Oct 7.

Cdx4 is a Cdx2 target gene.

Savory JG(1), Mansfield M, St Louis C, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

The products of the Cdx genes, Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4, play multiple roles in early 
vertebrate development, and have been proposed to serve to relay signaling
information from Wnt, RA and FGF pathways to orchestrate events related to
anterior-posterior vertebral patterning and axial elongation. In addition, Cdx1
and Cdx2 have been reported to both autoregulate and to be subject to cross
regulation by other family members. We have now found that Cdx4 expression is
significantly down regulated in Cdx2(-/-) mutants suggesting previously
unrecognized cross-regulatory interactions. Moreover, we have previously shown
that Cdx4 is a direct target of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, and that
Cdx1 physically interacts with LEF/TCF members in an autoregulatory loop. We
therefore investigated the means by which Cdx2 impacted on Cdx4 expression and
assessed potential interaction between Cdx2 and canonical Wnt signaling on the
Cdx4 promoter. We found that the Cdx4 promoter was regulated by Cdx2 in transient
transfection assays. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that Cdx2 bound
to predicted Cdx response elements in the Cdx4 promoter which, when mutated,
significantly reduced activity. Consistent with these data, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays from embryos demonstrated occupancy of the Cdx4
promoter by Cdx2 in vivo. However, we failed to observe an interaction between
Cdx2 and components of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. These findings
suggest that, while both canonical Wnt and Cdx2 can regulate the activity of the 
Cdx4 promoter, they appear to operate through distinct mechanisms.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20933081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Dev Biol. 2010 Dec 15;348(2):190-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.09.022. Epub 2010
Oct 7.

Individual blastomeres of 16- and 32-cell mouse embryos are able to develop into 
foetuses and mice.

Tarkowski AK(1), Suwinska A, Czolowska R, Ozdzenski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, 
Poland. akt@biol.uw.edu.pl

Cell and developmental studies have clarified how, by the time of implantation,
the mouse embryo forms three primary cell lineages: epiblast (EPI), primitive
endoderm (PE), and trophectoderm (TE). However, it still remains unknown when
cells allocated to these three lineages become determined in their developmental 
fate. To address this question, we studied the developmental potential of single 
blastomeres derived from 16- and 32-cell stage embryos and supported by carrier, 
tetraploid blastomeres. We were able to generate singletons, identical twins,
triplets, and quadruplets from individual inner and outer cells of 16-cell
embryos and, sporadically, foetuses from single cells of 32-cell embryos. The use
of embryos constitutively expressing GFP as the donors of single diploid
blastomeres enabled us to identify their cell progeny in the constructed 2n<U+2194>4n
blastocysts. We showed that the descendants of donor blastomeres were able to
locate themselves in all three first cell lineages, i.e., epiblast, primitive
endoderm, and trophectoderm. In addition, the application of Cdx2 and Gata4
markers for trophectoderm and primitive endoderm, respectively, showed that the
expression of these two genes in the descendants of donor blastomeres was either 
down- or up-regulated, depending on the cell lineage they happened to occupy.
Thus, our results demonstrate that up to the early blastocysts stage, the destiny
of at least some blastomeres, although they have begun to express markers of
different lineage, is still labile.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20932967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Development. 2010 Nov;137(21):3551-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.047027. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Oct1 regulates trophoblast development during early mouse embryogenesis.

Sebastiano V(1), Dalvai M, Gentile L, Schubart K, Sutter J, Wu GM, Tapia N, Esch 
D, Ju JY, Hübner K, Bravo MJ, Schöler HR, Cavaleri F, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Röntgenstrasse, 20 48149 Münster, Germany.

Oct1 (Pou2f1) is a transcription factor of the POU-homeodomain family that is
unique in being ubiquitously expressed in both embryonic and adult mouse tissues.
Although its expression profile suggests a crucial role in multiple regions of
the developing organism, the only essential function demonstrated so far has been
the regulation of cellular response to oxidative and metabolic stress. Here, we
describe a loss-of-function mouse model for Oct1 that causes early embryonic
lethality, with Oct1-null embryos failing to develop beyond the early streak
stage. Molecular and morphological analyses of Oct1 mutant embryos revealed a
failure in the establishment of a normal maternal-embryonic interface due to
reduced extra-embryonic ectoderm formation and lack of the ectoplacental cone.
Oct1(-/-) blastocysts display proper segregation of trophectoderm and inner cell 
mass lineages. However, Oct1 loss is not compatible with trophoblast stem cell
derivation. Importantly, the early gastrulation defect caused by Oct1 disruption 
can be rescued in a tetraploid complementation assay. Oct1 is therefore primarily
required for the maintenance and differentiation of the trophoblast stem cell
compartment during early post-implantation development. We present evidence that 
Cdx2, which is expressed at high levels in trophoblast stem cells, is a direct
transcriptional target of Oct1. Our data also suggest that Oct1 is required in
the embryo proper from late gastrulation stages onwards.

PMID: 20876643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Pathol Int. 2010 Oct;60(10):673-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2010.02587.x. Epub
2010 Aug 17.

Immunohistochemical analysis of colorectal cancer with gastric phenotype:
claudin-18 is associated with poor prognosis.

Matsuda M(1), Sentani K, Noguchi T, Hinoi T, Okajima M, Matsusaki K, Sakamoto N, 
Anami K, Naito Y, Oue N, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Claudin-18 plays a key role in constructing tight junctions, and altered
claudin-18 expression has been documented in various human malignancies; however,
little is known about the biological significance of claudin-18 in colorectal
cancer (CRC). The aim of this study is to investigate the significance of
claudin-18 expression in CRC and its association with clinicopathological
factors. We performed clinicopathological analysis of claudin-18 expression in a 
total of 569 CRCs by immunohistochemistry. Moreover, we investigated the
association between claudin-18 and various markers including gastric/intestinal
phenotype (MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2 and CD10), CDX2, claudin-3, claudin-4, p53 and
Ki-67. Claudin-18 expression was detected in 21 of the 569 CRCs (4%) and was seen
exclusively on the cell membrane. Positive expression of claudin-18 showed a
significant correlation with positive expression of MUC5AC (P < 0.0001) and
negative expression of CDX2 (P= 0.0013). The prognosis of patients with positive 
claudin-18 expression was significantly poorer than in negative cases (P=
0.0106). Multivariate analysis revealed that T grade, M grade and claudin-18
expression were independent predictors of survival in patients with CRC. We
revealed that claudin-18 expression correlates with poor survival in patients
with CRC and is associated with the gastric phenotype.

© 2010 The Authors. Pathology International © 2010 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 20846265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Virchows Arch. 2010 Nov;457(5):537-45. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0972-y. Epub 2010 
Sep 16.

Comparison of six immunohistochemical markers for the histologic diagnosis of
neoplasia in Barrett's esophagus.

Weimann A(1), Rieger A, Zimmermann M, Gross M, Hoffmann P, Slevogt H, Morawietz
L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiochemistry, Charité-University
Medical Center, Berlin, Germany.

In esophageal neoplasms, the histopathologic differentiation between Barrett's
esophagus with or without intraepithelial neoplasia and adenocarcinoma is often
challenging. Immunohistochemistry might help to differentiate between these
lesions. The expression of CDX2, LI-cadherin, mucin 2 (MUC2), blood group 8 (BG8,
Lewis(y)), claudin-2, and villin was investigated in normal gastroesophageal
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>23) and in Barrett's (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>17) mucosa, in low-grade (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>12) and high-grade
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>9) intraepithelial neoplasia (IEN) as well as in esophageal adenocarcinoma
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>16), using immunohistochemistry. For CDX2 and LI-cadherin, the
immunoreactivity score was highest in IEN while for MUC2, BG8, and villin, it
dropped gradually from Barrett's via IEN to adenocarcinoma, and expression of
Claudin-2 was only weak and focal in all lesions. The expression of MUC2 and
LI-cadherin differed significantly between all examined lesions except between
low-grade and high-grade IEN. MUC2 and LI-cadherin are useful immunohistochemical
markers for the differentiation between normal glandular mucosa, Barrett's
mucosa, IEN, and invasive carcinoma of the esophagus; however, none of the
examined markers was helpful for the differentiation between low-grade and
high-grade IEN.

PMID: 20844891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Development. 2010 Oct;137(20):3383-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.050195. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Disorganized epithelial polarity and excess trophectoderm cell fate in
preimplantation embryos lacking E-cadherin.

Stephenson RO(1), Yamanaka Y, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The first two cell lineages in the mouse, the surface trophectoderm (TE) and
inner cell mass (ICM), are morphologically distinguishable by E3.5, with the
outer TE forming a polarized epithelial layer enclosing the apolar ICM. We show
here that in mouse embryos completely lacking both maternal and zygotic
E-cadherin (cadherin 1), the normal epithelial morphology of outside cells is
disrupted, but individual cells still initiate TE- and ICM-like fates. A larger
proportion of cells than normal showed expression of TE markers such as Cdx2,
suggesting that formation of an organized epithelium is not necessary for
TE-specific gene expression. Individual cells in such embryos still generated an 
apical domain that correlated with elevated Cdx2 expression. We also show that
repolarization can occur in isolated early ICMs from both wild-type and Cdx2
mutant embryos, indicating that Cdx2 is not required for initiating polarity. The
results demonstrate that epithelial integrity mediated by E-cadherin is not
required for Cdx2 expression, but is essential for the normal allocation of TE
and ICM cells. They also show that Cdx2 expression is strongly linked to apical
membrane polarization.

PMID: 20826529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 1;347(1):228-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.032. Epub 2010
Sep 15.

Cdx mutant axial progenitor cells are rescued by grafting to a wild type
environment.

Bialecka M(1), Wilson V, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, and Utrecht 
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cdx transcription factors are required for axial extension. Cdx genes are
expressed in the posterior growth zone, a region that supplies new cells for
axial elongation. Cdx2(+/-)Cdx4(-/-) (Cdx2/4) mutant embryos show abnormalities
in axis elongation from E8.5, culminating in axial truncation at E10.5. These
data raised the possibility that the long-term axial progenitors of Cdx mutants
are intrinsically impaired in their ability to contribute to posterior growth. We
investigated whether we could identify cell-autonomous defects of the axial
progenitor cells by grafting mutant cells into a wild type growth zone
environment. We compared the contribution of GFP labeled mutant and wild type
progenitors grafted to unlabeled wild type recipients subsequently cultured over 
the period during which Cdx2/4 defects emerge. Descendants of grafted cells were 
scored for their contribution to differentiated tissues in the elongating axis
and to the posterior growth zone. No difference between the contribution of
descendants from wild type and mutant grafted progenitors was detected,
indicating that rescue of the Cdx mutant progenitors by the wild type recipient
growth zone is provided non-cell autonomously. Recently, we showed that premature
axial termination of Cdx mutants can be partly rescued by stimulating canonical
Wnt signaling in the posterior growth zone. Taken together with the data shown
here, this suggests that Cdx genes function to maintain a signaling-dependent
niche for the posterior axial progenitors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20816799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Jan;17(1):232-40. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21451. Epub 2010 Sep
2.

Immunohistochemical expression of CDX2, ß-catenin, and TP53 in inflammatory bowel
disease-associated colorectal cancer.

Laurent C(1), Svrcek M, Flejou JF, Chenard MP, Duclos B, Freund JN, Reimund JM.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie, Pôle de Biologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France. reimund-jm@chu-caen.fr

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) exposes patients to an increased
risk of colorectal cancer (i-CRC) and differences between i-CRC and sporadic
colorectal cancer (s-CRC) pathogenesis were reported. In s-CRC, studies indicate 
abnormalities in the tumor-suppressor gene Cdx2. This study compared CDX2,
ß-catenin, and TP53 expression in i-CRC, s-CRC, noncancer IBD, and normal control
colonic mucosa.
METHODS: Expression was investigated by immunohistochemistry in 10 normal, 20
s-CRC, 11 noncancer colonic IBD and 30 i-CRC samples, and in four samples of
Crohn's disease (CD)-associated small bowel adenocarcinoma (i-SBA).
RESULTS: In normal and noncancer IBD samples, CDX2 was confined to the
colonocytes nuclei. CDX2 expression was normal in 90% of i-CRC, regardless of
tumor differentiation or inflammation intensity. By contrast, CDX2 expression was
altered in 45% s-CRC, particularly at the front of invasion in undifferentiated
tumors. ß-Catenin was restricted to cell membrane in all controls, in 91%
noncancer IBD, and in 84% i-CRC samples, whereas 35% s-CRC showed cytoplasmic
redistribution and exclusive nuclear staining at the front of invasion. TP53 was 
strongly and homogeneously expressed in i-CRC nuclei compared to normal control
or s-CRC, and increases with inflammation intensity. Nested or diffuse TP53 was
found in 81.8% of noncancer IBD samples with a higher proportion of
TP53-expressing cells in the most inflamed samples. CDX2, ß-catenin, and TP53
expression in CD-associated SBA appears similar to that of i-CRC. Neither Cdx2
nor ß-catenin alterations are prominent features of i-CRC.
CONCLUSIONS: In i-CRC and CD-associated SBA, carcinogenesis is associated early
with p53 mutations and to inflammation intensity.

Copyright © 2010 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 20815042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Toxicol Pathol. 2010 Sep;23(3):115-23. doi: 10.1293/tox.23.115. Epub 2010 Oct
5.

Intestinal metaplasia -the effect of Acid on the gastric mucosa and gastric
carcinogenesis-.

Watanabe H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University,
1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

This review concerns stem cells and their relation to intestinal metaplasia. When
gastric regions of mice, Mongolian gerbils or several strains of rats were
irradiated with a total dose of 20 Gy of X-rays given in two fractions,
intestinal metaplasia was only induced in rats. In addition, it was greatly
influenced by rat strain and sex. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) positive metaplastic
foci were increased by administration of ranitidine (H(2) receptor antagonist),
crude stomach antigens or subtotal resection of the fundus and decreased by
cysteamine (gastric acid secretion stimulator), histamine or removal of the
submandibular glands. Recent studies have shown that Cdx2 transgenic mice with
gastric achlorhydria develop intestinal metaplasia and that in men and animals,
Helicobacterpylori (H. pyrlori) infection can cause intestinal metaplasias that
are reversible on eradication. Our results combined with findings for H. pylori
infection or eradication and transgenic mice suggest that an elevation in the pH 
of the gastric juice due to disappearance of parietal cells is one of the
principal factors for development of reversible intestinal metaplasia. When
different organs were transplanted into the stomach or duodenum, they were found 
to transdifferentiate into gastric or duodenal mucosae, respectively.
Organ-specific stem cells in normal non-liver tissues (heart, kidney, brain and
skin) also differentiate into hepatocytes when transplanted into an injured
liver. Therefore, stem cells have a multipotential ability, transdifferentiating 
into different organs when transplanted into different environments. Finally,
intestinal metaplasia has been found to possibly increase sensitivity to the
induction of tumors by colon carcinogens of the 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH),
azoxymethane (AOM) or 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4.5-b]pyridine (PhIP)
type. This carcinogenic process, however, may be relatively minor compared with
the main gastric carcinogenesis process induced by
N-methy1-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MMNG) or N-methylnitrosourea (MNU), which
is not affected by the presence of intestinal metaplasia. The protocol used in
these experiments may provide a new approach to help distinguish between
developmental events associated with intestinal metaplasia and gastric tumors.

PMCID: PMC3234614
PMID: 22272022  [PubMed]


369. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 1;111(5):1330-6. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22862.

Identification of a functional hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 binding site in the
neutral ceramidase promoter.

Maltesen HR(1), Troelsen JT, Olsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, The
Panum Institute, Bldg 6.4, Blegdamsvej 3, DK2200N, Denmark.

The brush border membrane of the differentiated small intestinal epithelial cell 
is studded with membrane bound hydrolytic ectoenzymes involved in digestion.
Previous studies of the regulation of genes encoding brush border enzymes have
especially implicated the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor HNF-1
and Cdx2. Recent genome-wide studies have, however, also identified HNF-4a as a
transcription factor with a high number of target genes in the differentiated
small intestinal epithelial cell. The Asah2 gene encodes neutral ceramidase,
which is a hydrolytic brush border enzyme involved in ceramide digestion. It was 
the purpose of the present work to experimentally verify the functional
importance of a HNF-4a binding site predicted by bioinformatic analysis to be
present in the Asah2 promoter. Using supershift analysis, HNF-4a overexpression, 
and HNF-4a knockdown experiments it was confirmed that the predicted HNF-4a
binding site identified in the Asah2 promoter is functional. The results support 
the hypothesis that HNF-4a might be important for intestinal glycolipid
metabolism.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20803549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Oct;12(5):617-25. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0017.

Aberrant expression patterns of genes involved in segregation of inner cell mass 
and trophectoderm lineages in bovine embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear
transfer.

Fujii T(1), Moriyasu S, Hirayama H, Hashizume T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Iwate University, Japan.

High rates of embryonic, fetal, or placental abnormalities have consistently been
observed in bovine cloning. Segregation of inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm (TE) lineages in early embryos is an important process for fetal
and placental formation. In mouse embryos, differentiation of ICM and TE is
regulated by various transcription factors, such as OCT-4, CDX2, and TEAD4, but
molecular mechanisms that regulate differentiation in bovine embryos remain
unknown. To clarify gene transcripts involved in segregation of ICM and TE
lineages in bovine embryos, we examined the relative abundances of OCT-4, CDX2,
TEAD4, GATA3, NANOG, and FGF4 transcripts in blastocyst embryos derived from in
vitro fertilization (IVF). Furthermore, transcript levels of such genes in bovine
embryos derived from somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT-SC) and in vivo (Vivo)
were also compared. OCT-4, NANOG, and FGF4 transcript levels in IVF embryos were 
significantly higher in ICM than in TE. In contrast, the CDX2 transcript level
was lower in ICM than in TE. In NT-SC embryos at the blastocyst stage, transcript
levels of all genes except CDX2 were lower than that in Vivo embryos. In the
elongated stage, expression levels of the six genes did not differ between NT-SC 
and Vivo embryos. We observed aberrant expression patterns of various genes
involved in segregation of ICM and TE lineages in bovine NT-SC embryos. These
results raise the possibility that abnormalities in the cloned fetus and placenta
are related to the aberrant expression of genes involved in segregation and
differentiation process in the early developmental stage.

PMID: 20726774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Histopathology. 2010 Aug;57(2):233-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2010.03615.x.

Systematic assessment of protein phenotypes characterizing high-grade tumour
budding in mismatch repair-proficient colorectal cancer.

Karamitopoulou E(1), Lugli A, Panayiotides I, Karakitsos P, Peros G, Rallis G,
Patsouris ES, Terracciano L, Zlobec I.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, University of Athens, Attikon University
Hospital, Rimini 1, Haidari, Athens, Greece. ekaramit@med.uoa.gr

AIMS: A tumour bud is defined as a single tumour cell or tumour cell cluster of
up to five cells at the invasive tumour front. Significant differences in
survival have been detected in colorectal cancer patients with low- compared to
high-grade budding. The aim of this study was to identify potential multi-marker 
phenotypes characterizing low- and high-grade budding in mismatch repair
(MMR)-proficient colorectal cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Established and promising prognostic proteins such as
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), pERK, RHAMM, RKIP, beta-catenin,
E-cadherin, pAKT, p16, p21, Ki67, Bcl-2, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (APAF-1), MUC1, EphB2, matrix
metalloproteinase 7, pSMAD2, CDX2, laminin5gamma2 and MST1 were analysed on 208
MMR-proficient colorectal cancers with complete clinicopathological data. The
most accurate markers for predicting high-grade budding (more than six tumour
buds) were EphB2 (P < 0.001), Bcl-2 (P < 0.001), RKIP (P < 0.001), E-cadherin (P 
= 0.004), laminin5gamma2 (P = 0.004) and APAF-1 (P = 0.005). On multivariable
analysis, only loss of Bcl-2 (P < 0.001) and EphB2 (P < 0.001) were independent
predictors of high-grade budding. Bcl-2-/EphB2- tumours were more frequently
poorly differentiated (P < 0.001), of advanced pT stage (P = 0.002), lymph node
positive (P = 0.023), presented vascular (P = 0.053) and lymphatic invasion (P = 
0.005) and had a negative impact on patient survival (P = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: The multi-marker phenotype EphB2-/Bcl-2- is an independent predictor
of high-grade budding and implies increased aggressive behaviour in
MMR-proficient colorectal cancer.

PMID: 20716165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. World J Surg. 2010 Dec;34(12):2945-52. doi: 10.1007/s00268-010-0759-y.

Survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy for ampullary cancer is not affected by
age.

Yeh CC(1), Jeng YM, Ho CM, Hu RH, Chang HP, Tien YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, 7 Chung-Shan South
Road, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, 10002, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Although pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) provides the best chance of
survival for elderly patients with ampullary carcinoma, it is associated with
considerable surgical risk. The aim of the present study was to compare the
benefits and risks of pancreaticoduodenectomy as a treatment of ampullary
carcinoma between young and elderly patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 171
consecutive patients treated at our hospital. Comparison of the biological
aggressiveness of ampullary cancer between old and younger patients was also
performed by immunohistochemical study of several prognostic biological markers, 
including MUC1, MUC2, CK17, and CDX2.
RESULTS: For patients in whom ampullary carcinoma was presumed resectable
preoperatively, actuarial survival was significantly poorer in 55 elderly
patients because 9 of them did not have PD (the other 46 had PD) than in 101
younger patients (all had PD). Multivariate analysis indicated that PD was the
only independent prognostic factor; age was not. There were no significant
differences in MUC1, CK17, MUC2, and CDX2 immunohistochemical staining of
ampullary carcinomas between elderly and young patients. In spite of increased
co-morbidities, PD could be performed as safely in elderly patients as in young
patients. After PD, the actuarial survival was similar between old and young
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the conclusion that ampullary cancers in elderly
patients should be treated as aggressively as in younger patients.

PMID: 20714897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Am J Pathol. 2010 Sep;177(3):1514-33. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100328. Epub 2010 
Aug 13.

The transcription factor MIST1 is a novel human gastric chief cell marker whose
expression is lost in metaplasia, dysplasia, and carcinoma.

Lennerz JK(1), Kim SH, Oates EL, Huh WJ, Doherty JM, Tian X, Bredemeyer AJ,
Goldenring JR, Lauwers GY, Shin YK, Mills JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The lack of reliable molecular markers for normal differentiated epithelial cells
limits understanding of human gastric carcinogenesis. Recognized precursor
lesions for gastric adenocarcinoma are intestinal metaplasia and spasmolytic
polypeptide expressing metaplasia (SPEM), defined here by ectopic CDX2 and TFF2
expression, respectively. In mice, expression of the bHLH transcription factor
MIST1, normally restricted to mature chief cells, is down-regulated as chief
cells undergo experimentally induced metaplasia. Here, we show MIST1 expression
is also a specific marker of human chief cells. SPEM, with and without MIST1, is 
present in human lesions and, akin to murine data, likely represents transitional
(TFF2(+)/MIST1(+) = "hybrid"-SPEM) and established (TFF2(+)/MIST1(-) = SPEM)
stages. Co-visualization of MIST1 and CDX2 shows similar progressive loss of
MIST1 with a transitional, CDX2(+)/MIST1(-) hybrid-intestinal metaplasia stage.
Interinstitutional analysis and comparison of findings in tissue microarrays,
resection specimens, and biopsies (n > 400 samples), comprising the entire
spectrum of recognized stages of gastric carcinogenesis, confirm MIST1 expression
is restricted to the chief cell compartment in normal oxyntic mucosa, rare in
established metaplastic lesions, and lost in intraepithelial neoplasia/dysplasia 
and carcinoma of various types with the exception of rare chief cell carcinoma ( 
approximately 1%). Our findings implicate MIST1 as a reliable marker of mature,
healthy chief cells, and we provide the first evidence that metaplasia in humans 
arises at least in part from the chief cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC2928982
PMID: 20709804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 1;70(17):6767-78. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4701. Epub
2010 Aug 10.

CDX2 regulates multidrug resistance 1 gene expression in malignant intestinal
epithelium.

Takakura Y(1), Hinoi T, Oue N, Sasada T, Kawaguchi Y, Okajima M, Akyol A, Fearon 
ER, Yasui W, Ohdan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

The caudal-related homeobox transcription factor CDX2 has a key role in
intestinal development and differentiation. CDX2 heterozygous mutant mice develop
colonic polyps, and loss of CDX2 expression is seen in a subset of colon
carcinomas in humans. Ectopic CDX2 expression in the stomach of transgenic mice
promotes intestinal metaplasia, and CDX2 expression is frequently detected in
intestinal metaplasia in the stomach and esophagus. We sought to define
CDX2-regulated genes to enhance knowledge of CDX2 function. HT-29 colorectal
cancer cells have minimal endogenous CDX2 expression, and HT-29 cells with
ectopic CDX2 expression were generated. Microarray-based gene expression studies 
revealed that the Multidrug Resistance 1 (MDR1/P-glycoprotein/ABCB1) gene was
activated by CDX2. Evidence that the MDR1 gene was a direct transcriptional
target of CDX2 was obtained, including analyses with MDR1 reporter gene
constructs and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. RNA interference-mediated
inhibition of CDX2 decreased endogenous MDR1 expression. In various colorectal
cancer cell lines and human tissues, endogenous MDR1 expression was well
correlated to CDX2 expression. Overexpression of CDX2 in HT-29 cells revealed
increased resistance to the known substrate of MDR1, vincristine and paclitaxel, 
which was reversed by an MDR1 inhibitor, verapamil. These data indicate that CDX2
directly regulates MDR1 gene expression through binding to elements in the
promoter region. Thus, CDX2 is probably important for basal expression of MDR1,
regulating drug excretion and absorption in the lower gastrointestinal tract, as 
well as for multidrug resistance to chemotherapy reagent in CDX2-positive
gastrointestinal cancers.

PMCID: PMC3153948
PMID: 20699370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Sep;34(9):1344-50. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ec0810.

Clear cell change in colonic tubular adenoma and corresponding colonic clear cell
adenocarcinoma is associated with an altered mucin core protein profile.

Shi C(1), Scudiere JR, Cornish TC, Lam-Himlin D, Park JY, Fox MR, Montgomery EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Clear cell change is seen in <1% of colonic tubular adenomas (TAs) and remains
incompletely characterized. Associated adenocarcinomas can also demonstrate a
clear cell phenotype. Eleven TAs with at least focal clear cell change with or
without associated invasive adenocarcinoma, from 10 patients were studied. The
lesions were stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)/PAS-diastase and
immunolabeled with antibodies to MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CK7, CK20, and CDX2. Eight
of 11 (77%) TAs with clear cell change had focal to extensive high-grade
dysplasia. Two were associated with invasive clear cell adenocarcinoma. The
adenomas and adenocarcinomas ranged from 0.5 to 3.5 cm. PAS/PAS-diastase stains
showed minimal PAS(+) material in the clear cells. On immunohistochemical
studies, the clear cells had decreased MUC2 labeling compared with the
surrounding conventional adenoma in 9 of 11 (88%) cases, including the 2 clear
cell adenocarcinomas. In 3 of the 11 lesions, the background TA showed at least
focal MUC5 immunoreactivity, their associated clear cell area had decreased MUC5 
labeling in all 3 cases. No immunoreactivity to MUC6 was observed in the
background TAs and clear cells in all cases. Compared with background TA, both
increased and decreased expression of CK7, CK20 (in quantity), and CDX2 (in
intensity) were observed in the clear cells of TAs and adenocarcinomas. One of
the clear cell adenocarcinomas was CK20, CK7, CDX2 and the other was CK20, CK7,
CDX2-focal positive. Thus, although the clear cells have different MUC protein
profiles than the background adenomatous epithelium, invasive clear cell
adenocarcinomas retained the typical CK20(+)/CK7(-) profile of conventional
adenocarcinomas. Our results indicate that clear cell adenocarcinomas can be
primary to the colorectum with identifiable precursors. Awareness of them and
their immunoprofile allows distinction from clear cell lesions from other sites.

PMID: 20697252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 24;107(34):15157-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1003822107. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

TCF4 and CDX2, major transcription factors for intestinal function, converge on
the same cis-regulatory regions.

Verzi MP(1), Hatzis P, Sulahian R, Philips J, Schuijers J, Shin H, Freed E, Lynch
JP, Dang DT, Brown M, Clevers H, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Surprisingly few pathways signal between cells, raising questions about
mechanisms for tissue-specific responses. In particular, Wnt ligands signal in
many mammalian tissues, including the intestinal epithelium, where constitutive
signaling causes cancer. Genome-wide analysis of DNA cis-regulatory regions bound
by the intestine-restricted transcription factor CDX2 in colonic cells uncovered 
highly significant overrepresentation of sequences that bind TCF4, a
transcriptional effector of intestinal Wnt signaling. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed TCF4 occupancy at most such sites and co-occupancy 
of CDX2 and TCF4 across short distances. A region spanning the single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs6983267, which lies within a MYC enhancer and confers colorectal
cancer risk in humans, represented one of many co-occupied sites. Co-occupancy
correlated with intestine-specific gene expression and CDX2 loss reduced TCF4
binding. These results implicate CDX2 in directing TCF4 binding in intestinal
cells. Co-occupancy of regulatory regions by signal-effector and
tissue-restricted transcription factors may represent a general mechanism for
ubiquitous signaling pathways to achieve tissue-specific outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2930576
PMID: 20696899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Sep;34(9):1312-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ead722.

An immunohistochemical profile of the so-called bile duct adenoma: clues to
pathogenesis.

Hughes NR(1), Goodman ZD, Bhathal PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Melbourne University Medical School Building, Western 
Hospital, Footscray, Victoria, Australia.

The so-called bile duct adenoma and peribiliary glands are characterized by the
expression of two foregut antigens (designated D10 and 1F6) and secretion of acid
mucin. On account of this similarity in phenotype and their frequent close
association with a large caliber bile duct, it was earlier suggested that bile
duct adenoma represent a peribiliary gland hamartoma. Here, we compare the
expression of 13 tissue antigens in bile duct adenomas, other benign bile duct
lesions, and various foregut-derived tissues, to further investigate the bile
duct adenoma phenotype and pathogenesis. Antibodies to 4 intestinal mucins, 3
cytokeratins, and CDX2, were not informative. Five foregut antigens (D10, 1F6,
MUC6, MUC5AC, and TFF2) and secretion of acid mucin were of use in distinguishing
bile duct adenoma from other hepatic lesions. 1F6 and MUC6 were normally present 
in bile ductules and canals of Hering, whereas the epithelium lining the larger
bile ducts stained focally for D10, MUC5AC, MUC6, or TFF2 in, respectively, 21%, 
36%, 43%, and 100% of the livers examined. Thirty-six bile duct adenomas examined
were distinguished by expression of MUC6 (94% of bile duct adenoma), MUC5AC
(90%), TFF2 (80%), D10 (67%), and 1F6 (61%), and varying degrees of acid mucin
secretion (100%). Of 30 bile duct adenoma tested for all 5 antigens, 40%
expressed all 5, 27% expressed 4, 17% expressed 3, 13% expressed 2, and 1
expressed only MUC6. Peribiliary glands invariably expressed D10, 1F6, MUC6, and 
TFF2, and showed acid mucin secretion, with MUC5AC present in the inflamed
peribiliary glands of 3/4 livers with recurrent pyogenic cholangitis, but none of
the glands of the other 23 normal or diseased livers tested. The acini of pyloric
gland metaplasia in gallbladder and terminal ileum also stained for D10, 1F6,
MUC6, and TFF2, with MUC5AC focally present in the gastric foveolar metaplasia
overlying the pyloric gland metaplasia but not in the metaplastic glands. MUC6
was expressed in 92% of ductular reactions, 1F6 in 42%, and D10 in 25%. Focal
expression of MUC6, or TFF2 was observed in 1 or 2 examples of 14 von Meyenburg
complexes and 6 polycystic livers, with staining for acid mucin generally obvious
only in the glycocalyx of the epithelium of these two types of lesions. The
distinguishing feature of so-called bile duct adenoma is their display of the
same phenotype as pyloric gland metaplasia. It is concluded that they develop as 
a localized biliary healing response equivalent to the function of a peribiliary 
gland or pyloric gland metaplasia in the foregut.

PMID: 20679879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Pediatrics. 2010 Sep;126(3):e723-7. doi: 10.1542/peds.2009-3512. Epub 2010 Aug 2.

CDX2 in congenital gut gastric-type heteroplasia and intestinal-type Meckel
diverticula.

Martin E(1), Vanier M, Tavian M, Guerin E, Domon-Dell C, Duluc I, Gross I,
Rowland J, Kim S, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, 3 Avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

The mechanisms that determine organ identity along the digestive tract in humans 
are poorly understood. Here we describe the rare case of a young patient who
presented with congenital gastric-type heteroplasia in the midjejunum. The
lesions, located along the antimesenteric midline of the gut, were made of
histologically and functionally normal gastric epithelium without inflammation or
in situ/invasive carcinoma. They resembled the anatomy of the lesions developing 
in the mouse gut as a result of haploinsufficiency of the Cdx2 homeobox gene. The
lesions were devoid of CDX2 but without mutation in the coding sequence or in a
cis-regulatory element required for intestine-specific expression. Combining
these data with the CDX2 expression pattern established from human embryos and
cases of Meckel diverticula, we propose a scenario for this patient's
presentation, in which CDX2 was missing at the site of ventral closure during gut
morphogenesis, with subsequent default differentiation into gastric instead of
intestinal tissue. Altogether, these observations argue in favor of a pivotal
role played by CDX2 in determining intestinal identity during human embryonic
development, as previously shown experimentally in mice.

PMID: 20679295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Nov;299(5):G1054-67. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00297.2010. Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Intestine-specific transcription factor Cdx2 induces E-cadherin function by
enhancing the trafficking of E-cadherin to the cell membrane.

Funakoshi S(1), Kong J, Crissey MA, Dang L, Dang D, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Cdx2 is an intestine-specific transcription factor required for normal intestinal
epithelium development. Cdx2 regulates the expression of intestine-specific genes
and induces cell adhesion and columnar morphogenesis. Cdx2 also has
tumor-suppressor properties, including the reduction of colon cancer cell
proliferation and cell invasion, the latter due to its effects on cell adhesion. 
E-cadherin is a cell adhesion protein required for adherens junction formation
and the establishment of intestinal cell polarity. The objective of this study
was to elucidate the mechanism by which Cdx2 regulates E-cadherin function. Two
colon cancer cell lines were identified in which Cdx2 expression was associated
with increased cell-cell adhesion and diminished cell migration. In both cell
lines, Cdx2 did not directly alter E-cadherin levels but increased its
trafficking to the cell membrane compartment. Cdx2 enhanced this trafficking by
altering receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activity. Cdx2 expression diminished
phosphorylated Abl and phosphorylated Rac levels, which are downstream effectors 
of RTKs. Specific chemical inhibition or short interfering RNA (shRNA) knockdown 
of c-Abl kinase phenocopied Cdx2's cell-cell adhesion effects. In Colo 205 cells,
Cdx2 reduced PDGF receptor and IGF-I receptor activation. This was mediated by
caveolin-1, which was induced by Cdx2. Targeted shRNA knockdown of caveolin-1
restored PDGF receptor and reversed E-cadherin membrane trafficking, despite Cdx2
expression. We conclude that Cdx2 regulates E-cadherin function indirectly by
disrupting RTK activity and enhancing E-cadherin trafficking to the cell membrane
compartment. This novel mechanism advances Cdx2's prodifferentiation and
antitumor properties and suggests that Cdx2 may broadly regulate RTK activity in 
normal intestinal epithelium by modulating membrane trafficking of proteins.

PMCID: PMC2993167
PMID: 20671195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Int J Oncol. 2010 Sep;37(3):707-18.

Characterization of rectal, proximal and distal colon cancers based on
clinicopathological, molecular and protein profiles.

Minoo P(1), Zlobec I, Peterson M, Terracciano L, Lugli A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA
92103, USA. pminoo@ucsd.edu

Accumulating evidence suggests that colorectal cancer (CRC) should be viewed as a
heterogeneous disease, with proximal and distal CRCs showing multiple biological 
and clinical differences. The aim of this study was to develop a
clinicopathological, molecular and protein profile for CRCs based on their region
and thus providing insight into their heterogeneity. CRC patients (n=399) were
evaluated for clinicopathologic and molecular features including K-RAS, BRAF and 
MSI status. Tumors were also screened for expression of 50 immunohistochemical
markers linked to major signaling pathways involved in tumor-progression or
immune response. Proximally located tumors show significantly larger tumor size, 
higher T-stage, higher tumor grade and more frequent mucinous histologic subtype 
compared to the distal colon and rectum. The frequency of BRAF mutation and
MSI-high phenotype were significantly higher in proximal colon cancers. There is 
a significant difference in regional expression of 10 tumor-associated markers
(CDX2, CD44v6, CD44s, TOPK, nuclear beta-catenin, pERK, APAF-1, E-cadherin, p21
and bcl2) and 4 immune response markers (CD68, CD163, FoxP3 and TIA-1). In
multivariate analysis CD44s, CD44v6, nuclear beta-catenin and CD68 expression was
found to best discriminate left- versus right-sided colon cancers. Tumor
diameter, pT stage and MSI status best distinguish right-sided colon cancers from
rectal cancers and pT stage and E-cadherin best discriminate left-sided colon
cancers and rectal cancers. These data along with existing evidence for the
presence of distinct regional embryological origin and gene expression profile
are highly supportive of the concept that proximal and distal CRCs are distinct
clinicopathologic entities.

PMID: 20664940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jul;13(7):524-7.

[Significance of IL-1beta-induced ectopic expression of CDX2 in the intestinal
metaplasia of gastric epithelium].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Wang GB, Sun RH, Tao KX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laparoscopic Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022,China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of IL-1beta on the expression of CDX2 in human 
gastric epithelial cell line GES-1 and its role in the intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS: GES-1 cells were treated with IL-1beta in different concentrations and
the expressions of CDX2 mRNA and protein were detected by real-time PCR,
immunocytochemistry and Western blot at different time points. GES-1 cells were
then pre-treated with NF-KappaB pathway inhibitor PDTC, and the expression of
CDX2 mRNA and protein induced by IL-1beta were detected. The cell ultra-structure
of GES-1 cells was observed by electronic microscope after GES-1 being treated
with IL-1beta for 25 days.
RESULTS: Levels of CDX2 mRNA and protein were 0.0749 + or - 0.0021 and 0.56 + or 
- 0.04 in the cells treated with 1 microg/L IL-1beta(P<0.05). After pre-treatment
with PDTC, levels of CDX2 mRNA and protein were 0.0006 + or - 0.0002 and 0.40 +
or - 0.06(P<0.05). Some changes in the cell ultra-structure of GES-1 were found
by electronic microscope when GES-1 was treated with IL-1beta for 25 days.
CONCLUSION: IL-1beta can stimulate CDX2 mRNA and protein expression in GES-1
cells through the NF-KappaB signal pathway, indicating that IL-1beta plays an
important role in the intestinal metaplasia.

PMID: 20658368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Anticancer Res. 2010 Jun;30(6):1953-60.

Guggulsterone suppresses bile acid-induced and constitutive caudal-related
homeobox 2 expression in gut-derived adenocarcinoma cells.

Yamada T(1), Osawa S, Hamaya Y, Furuta T, Hishida A, Kajimura M, Ikuma M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Guggulsterone, a plant polyphenol guggulipid, has several antitumour 
effects and acts as an antagonist for the farnesoid X receptor. Although bile
acids induce caudal-related homeobox 2 (CdX2), a transcription factor essential
for intestinal development and gut tumourigenesis, the effects of guggulsterone
on regulation of CdX2 in the gut are unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Regulation of CdX2 expression by treatment with bile acids
and/or guggulsterone was analysed by immunoblot analysis in human gut-derived
adenocarcinoma, Bic-1 cells. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activity and the
cell cycle distribution were also examined.
RESULTS: Chenodeoxycholic acid and deoxycholic acid increased CdX2 expression in 
Bic-1 cells. Guggulsterone reduced bile acid-induced and constitutive CdX2
expression at 5 microM. Guggulsterone (up to 5 microM) did not affect cell
viability or the cell cycle and did not attenuate bile acid-induced or
constitutive NF-kappaB activation.
CONCLUSION: Guggulsterone may be used as a novel drug to target CdX2 expression
in certain gut adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 20651339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 15;345(2):191-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.009. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Pinin modulates expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, Cdx2, and plays an
essential role for small intestinal morphogenesis.

Joo JH(1), Taxter TJ, Munguba GC, Kim YH, Dhaduvai K, Dunn NW, Degan WJ, Oh SP,
Sugrue SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Pinin (Pnn), a nuclear speckle-associated protein, has been shown to function in 
maintenance of epithelial integrity through altering expression of several key
adhesion molecules. Here we demonstrate that Pnn plays a crucial role in small
intestinal development by influencing expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, 
Cdx2. Conditional inactivation of Pnn within intestinal epithelia resulted in
significant downregulation of a caudal type homeobox gene, Cdx2, leading to
obvious villus dysmorphogenesis and severely disrupted epithelial
differentiation. Additionally, in Pnn-deficient small intestine, we observed
upregulated Tcf/Lef reporter activity, as well as misregulated
expression/distribution of beta-catenin and Tcf4. Since regulation of Cdx gene
expression has been closely linked to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activity, we
explored the possibility of Pnn's interaction with beta-catenin, a major effector
of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that Pnn, together with its interaction partner CtBP2, a transcriptional
co-repressor, was in a complex with beta-catenin. Moreover, both of these
proteins were found to be recruited to the proximal promoter area of Cdx2. Taken 
together, our results suggest that Pnn is essential for tight regulation of Wnt
signaling and Cdx2 expression during small intestinal development.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2949054
PMID: 20637749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Dig Liver Dis. 2011 Jan;43(1):54-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2010.04.014. Epub 2010 Jul
8.

Expression of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and CDX2 in the columnar epithelium of the
lower oesophagus.

Yamanaka Y(1), Shiotani A, Fujimura Y, Ishii M, Fujita M, Matsumoto H, Tarumi K, 
Kamada T, Hata J, Haruma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kawasaki Medical School, Japan.
yamanaka@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Decreases in Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and CDX2 expression are associated 
with atrophy and intestinal metaplasia in the gastric mucosa. The pathogenesis of
development of Barrett's oesophagus is still unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the gene expression of CDX2 and SHH and their signalling
pathways in the columnar epithelium and the association with endoscopic
appearance, gastric pH or bile acids.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Sixty-three patients with metaplastic columnar epithelium of
the lower oesophagus were studied. Whole biopsy specimens and microdissected
tissues were examined for messenger RNA.
RESULTS: BMP4 expression was significantly higher in patients with tubular
mucosal patterns of columnar epithelium visualised by Narrow Band Imaging with
magnification. The expression of SHH was significantly lower and that of CDX2 was
higher in the goblet columnar epithelium than in non-goblet columnar epithelium. 
CDX2 expression was significantly higher in the patients with hypoacidity than in
the others. BMP4 and PTCH1 expression was significantly higher in the group with 
higher concentrations of deoxycholic acid than in the group with lower
concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: SHH might be the initial factor inducing columnar metaplasia, and
subsequent or simultaneous BMP4 stimuli might induce the CDX2 expression that
causes goblet-cell metaplasia.

Copyright © 2010 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20619754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2010 Nov;45(11):1273-80. doi:
10.3109/00365521.2010.501522. Epub 2010 Jul 5.

Expression of Claudin-2 in intestinal metaplastic mucosa of Cdx2-transgenic mouse
stomach.

Sakamoto H(1), Mutoh H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Cdx2 is expressed in human intestinal metaplastic mucosa and induces
intestinal metaplastic mucosa in Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. Claudin-2 is a
structural component of tight junctions in the intestine and Cdx2 activates the
Claudin-2 promoter in the human intestinal epithelial cell line Caco-2. Our aim
is to evaluate the expression of Claudin-2 in intestinal metaplastic mucosa of
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The Claudin-2 expression in the normal gastric mucosa and
normal intestinal mucosa of wild type mice and the intestinal metaplastic mucosa 
of Cdx2-transgenic mice was analyzed by immunohistochemistry, Western blotting
and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: Claudin-2 was expressed in the base of the glands in intestine and
intestinal metaplasia while it was not expressed in the body of stomach.
Claudin-2 expression was found in the antrum of stomach, while it was weaker than
that in the intestine and the intestinal metaplasia. Claudin-2 was also detected 
in intestinal metaplasia, colon and ileum by both Western blotting and qRT-PCR
while it was not detected in gastric body.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that Cdx2 plays an important role in the
expression of Claudin-2 in vivo.

PMID: 20602571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Folia Neuropathol. 2010;48(2):75-80.

Pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas are CDX2 negative neoplasms.

Schittenhelm J(1), Psaras T, Meyermann R, Honegger J, Beschorner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Research, Eberhard-Karls-University, 72076 Tuebingen,
Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have shown an inverse correlation between the
expression of CDX2 (also known as CDX3) and tumour grade, stage and lymph node
dissemination in colorectal adenomas and adenocarcinomas. Although less frequent,
expression of CDX2 has also been reported in various other epithelial tissues and
carcinomas. While many neoplasms have been studied, to date, no data is available
on CDX2 expression in craniopharyngiomas. Furthermore, only very few data are
available on CDX2 expression in normal pituitary gland tissue and/or pituitary
adenomas.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We investigated CDX2 expression in 28 normal pituitary
glands, 75 pituitary adenomas of varying hormonal activity (including 7 invasive 
adenomas and 7 atypical adenomas) and 23 craniopharyngiomas (17 adamantinous and 
6 papillary) in tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: None of the pituitary adenomas, craniopharyngiomas and normal pituitary 
glands showed expression of CDX2.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no evidence for that CDX2 might play a role in
tumourigenesis, invasive growth or tumour recurrence of pituitary adenomas or in 
tumourigenesis of craniopharyngiomas. But, presence of CDX2 expression might be
useful in distinguishing intrasellar metastases from primary tumours of the
sellar region.

PMID: 20602288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Aug 1;10(3):211-8. Epub 2010 Aug 11.

Corruption of homeostatic mechanisms in the guanylyl cyclase C signaling pathway 
underlying colorectal tumorigenesis.

Li P(1), Waldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Peng.Li@jefferson.edu

Colon cancer, the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide,
originates from the malignant transformation of intestinal epithelial cells. The 
intestinal epithelium undergoes a highly organized process of rapid regeneration 
along the crypt-villus axis, characterized by proliferation, migration,
differentiation and apoptosis, whose coordination is essential to maintaining the
mucosal barrier. Disruption of these homeostatic processes predisposes cells to
mutations in tumor suppressors or oncogenes, whose dysfunction provides
transformed cells an evolutionary growth advantage. While sequences of genetic
mutations at different stages along the neoplastic continuum have been
established, little is known of the events initiating tumorigenesis prior to
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutations. Here, we examine a role for the
corruption of homeostasis induced by silencing novel tumor suppressors, including
the intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 and its gene target guanylyl
cyclase C (GCC), as early events predisposing cells to mutations in APC and other
sequential genes that initiate colorectal cancer. CDX2 and GCC maintain
homeostatic regeneration in the intestine by restricting cell proliferation,
promoting cell maturation and adhesion, regulating cell migration and defending
the intestinal barrier and genomic integrity. Elimination of CDX2 or GCC promotes
intestinal tumor initiation and growth in aged mice, mice carrying APC mutations 
or mice exposed to carcinogens. The roles of CDX2 and GCC in suppressing
intestinal tumorigenesis, universal disruption in their signaling through
silencing of hormones driving GCC, and the uniform overexpression of GCC by
tumors underscore the potential value of oral replacement with GCC ligands as
targeted prevention and therapy for colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3040833
PMID: 20592492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Int J Exp Pathol. 2010 Aug;91(4):357-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2010.00721.x.
Epub 2010 Jun 25.

Establishment and characterization of a murine xenograft model of appendiceal
mucinous adenocarcinoma.

Mavanur AA(1), Parimi V, O'Malley M, Nikiforova M, Bartlett DL, Davison JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA.

We describe the clinical, pathologic and molecular characteristics of a xenograft
model of metastatic mucinous appendiceal adenocarcinoma. Tumours from patients
with mucinous appendiceal neoplasms were implanted in nude mice and observed for 
evidence of intraperitoneal tumour growth. Morphologic and immunohistochemical
features, temporal growth characteristics relative to controls, and loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) at multiple chromosomal alleles were assessed in a
successfully engrafted tumour. Two of seventeen implanted tumours successfully
engrafted and only one mucinous adenocarcinoma propagated throughout the course
of the study. The successful xenograft is morphologically similar to the original
tumour, produces abundant extracellular mucin and exhibits non-invasive growth on
peritoneal surfaces. The temporal growth characteristics of the xenograft tumour 
relative to controls reveal that tumour burden can be followed indirectly by
measuring the weight or abdominal girth of engrafted animals. The cytokeratin,
mucin core protein, CDX2, Ki-67 and p53 expression patterns are identical in the 
xenograft and resected tumour and are consistent with the expected pattern of
protein expression for mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix. LOH was found in 
1 of 10 informative chromosomal loci (chromosome 10p23) in xenograft tumour
cells. Although we were unable to engraft a low-grade appendiceal mucinous
neoplasm, the engrafted adenocarcinoma will be useful for future evaluation of
novel therapeutic strategies directed at mucinous appendiceal adenocarcinoma and 
evaluation of strategies for treating widespread, bulky, mucinous peritoneal
surface neoplasms. Xenograft tumour enrichment can facilitate molecular studies
of appendiceal epithelial neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC2962894
PMID: 20586814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Placenta. 2010 Jul;31(7):630-40. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.05.001. Epub 2010
May 31.

New insights for Ets2 function in trophoblast using lentivirus-mediated gene
knockdown in trophoblast stem cells.

Odiatis C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus,
Nicosia, Cyprus.

Mouse trophoblast stem (TS) cells represent a unique in vitro system that
provides an unlimited supply of TS cells for the study of trophoblast
differentiation and TS cell self-renewal. Although the mouse transcription factor
Ets2 is required for TS cell self-renewal, its role in this and in TS cell
differentiation has not been explored fully, partly due to the early lethality of
Ets2 null mice. To address this, we developed a novel lentivirus-based system
that resulted in efficient Ets2 knockdown in the overwhelming majority of TS
cells. This system enables functional studies in TS cells, especially for genes
required for TS cell self-renewal because TS cell derivation using gene-knockout 
embryos for such genes depends on TS cell self-renewal. Using
morphological/morphometric criteria and gene expression analysis, we show that
the requirement for Ets2 in self-renewal of TS cells cultured in 'stem cell
medium' (SCM) involves maintenance of the expression of genes that inhibit TS
cell differentiation in SCM, such as Cdx2 and Esrrb, and preservation of the
undifferentiated TS cell morphology. During TS cell differentiation caused by
Cdx2/Esrrb downregulation, due to either Ets2 knockdown in SCM or culture in
differentiation medium (DM), Ets2 is also required for the promotion of
trophoblast giant cell (TGC) and junctional zone trophoblast (JZT)
differentiation. This TGC differentiation involves Ets2-dependent expression of
Hand1, a gene required for the differentiation of all TGC types. This study
uncovers new roles for Ets2 in TS cell self-renewal and differentiation and
demonstrates the usefulness of this lentivirus system for gene function studies
in TS cells.

PMID: 20569982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct 15;111(3):618-26. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22742.

HNF1a and CDX2 transcriptional factors bind to cadherin-17 (CDH17) gene promoter 
and modulate its expression in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhu R(1), Wong KF, Lee NP, Lee KF, Luk JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Center for Cancer Research, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

Cadherin-17 (CDH17) belongs to the cell adhesion cadherin family with a prominent
role in tumorigenesis. It is highly expressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) and is proposed to be a biomarker and therapeutic molecule for liver
malignancy. The present study aims to identify the transcription factors which
interact and regulate CDH17 promoter activity that might contribute to the
up-regulation of CDH17 gene in human HCC. A 1-kb upstream sequence of CDH17 gene 
was cloned and the promoter activity was studied by luciferase reporter assay. By
bioinformatics analysis, deletion and mutation assays, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies, we identified hepatic nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) and 
caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2) binding sites at the proximal promoter region
which modulate the CDH17 promoter activities in two HCC cell lines (Hep3B and
MHCC97L). A consistent down-regulation of CDH17 and the two transcriptional
activators (HNF1a and CDX2) expression was found in the liver of mouse during
development, as well as in human liver cancer cells with less metastatic
potential. Suppression of HNF1a and CDX2 expression by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) significantly down-regulated expressions of CDH17 and its downstream
target cyclin D1 and the viability of HCC cells in vitro. In summary, we
identified the minimal promoter region of CDH17 that is regulated by HNF1a and
CDX2 transcriptional factors. The present findings enhance our understanding on
the regulatory mechanisms of CDH17 oncogene in HCC, and may shed new insights
into targeting CDH17 expression as potential therapeutic intervention for cancer 
treatment.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20568120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 17;5(6):e11167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011167.

BMP-2/6 heterodimer is more effective than BMP-2 or BMP-6 homodimers as inductor 
of differentiation of human embryonic stem cells.

Valera E(1), Isaacs MJ, Kawakami Y, Izpisúa Belmonte JC, Choe S.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling pathways are involved in
differentiation of stem cells into diverse cell types, and thus BMPs can be used 
as main guidance molecules for in vitro differentiation of human stem cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have analyzed the ability for inducing
differentiation of the heterodimer BMP-2/BMP-6 (BMP-2/6) compared to the
homodimers BMP-2 or BMP-6, using human embryonic stem (hES) cells H9 as model
system. When incubated in a medium with high concentration of basic fibroblastic 
growth factor (FGF2), 100 ng/ml of human recombinant BMPs induced morphological
changes and differentiation of hES cells in 24 to 48 hours. After 5 days,
expression of differentiation markers was induced and quantified by quantitative 
PCR (qPCR) and flow cytometry. BMP-2/6 exhibited stronger activity for the
induction of the expression of trophectodermal (CDX2) and endodermal (SOX17,
GATA4, AFP) markers than BMP-2 or BMP-6 homodimers. BMP-2/6 also induced the
expression of BMPR2 gene more effectively than BMP-2 or BMP-6 when used at the
same concentration and time. Moreover, the percentage of cells expressing the
surface endodermal marker CXCR4 was also increased for the heterodimer when
compared to both homodimers. BMP-2/6 was a more potent activator of
Smad-dependent (SMAD1/5) and Smad-independent signaling (mitogen-activated
protein kinases ERK and p38) than BMP-2 and BMP-6, and the activation of these
pathways might play a role in its increased potency for inducing hES cell
differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Therefore, we conclude that BMP-2/6 is more potent than
BMP-2 or BMP-6 for inducing differentiation of hES cells, and it can be used as a
more powerful substitute of these BMPs in in vitro differentiation guidance.

PMCID: PMC2887366
PMID: 20567515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2010 Oct;25(10):1231-42. doi: 10.1007/s00384-010-0986-6.
Epub 2010 Jun 20.

New insights into the development and differentiation of the human anorectal
epithelia. Are there clinical consequences?

Fritsch H(1), Zehm S, Illig R, Moser P, Aigner F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Functional Anatomy, Department of Anatomy, Histology 
and Embryology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
helga.fritsch@i-med.ac.at

PURPOSE: The epithelial lining of the anorectum still raises discussions
concerning the levels of transition between the various zones and leads to an
incomplete understanding of the immmunoprofile of rectal carcinoma. Since the
expression of cytokeratins depends on the epithelial cell-type and the
parahox-gene CDX2 is important for the development of the colorectal epithelium, 
we investigated different cytokeratins and CDX2 in the anorectum of human
prenatal stages and in adult normal and neoplastic anorecta.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The differentiation and spatiotemporal distribution of the
epithelial zones were examined in 33 human embryos and fetuses, in a 2-year-old
child and four adults. In comparison, 17 specimens of ultralow rectal
adenocarcinoma and 4 specimens of anal carcinoma were investigated. Monoclonal
antibodies were directed against cytokeratin (CK) 18, 20, 7 and 14 and CDX2.
RESULTS: Due to the cytokeratin profile and to CDX2 expression, the different
anorectal zones could already be differentiated in human prenatal life. We showed
that anorectal epithelial differentiation including the squamous epithelia ran in
a craniocaudal direction, and that the anorectal zone was a transitional zone
between rectal zone and anal transitional zone where CK 7, 18, 20 and CDX2 are
simultaneously expressed. All cases of rectal adenocarcinoma showed positivity
for CK 18, 20 and CDX2, and three also labelled for CK 7, whereas CK 14 was only 
expressed in the cases of anal carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results elucidate the connection between the prenatal pattern
and the origin of the different types of anorectal carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2928443
PMID: 20563874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cancer Sci. 2010 Aug;101(8):1783-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01609.x. Epub
2010 Apr 29.

Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 is generated via TGF-beta by myofibroblasts in
gastric intestinal metaplasia and carcinoma without H. pylori infection.

Mutoh H(1), Sashikawa M, Hayakawa H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) stimulates secretion of monocyte chemoattractant 
protein 1 (MCP-1) from gastric mucosa. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
expression and macrophage infiltration are recognized in human gastric carcinoma.
We have previously generated Cdx2-transgenic mice as model mice for intestinal
metaplasia. Both chronic H. pylori-associated gastritis and Cdx2-transgenic mouse
stomach develop intestinal metaplasia and finally gastric carcinoma. In this
study we have directed our attention to MCP-1 expression in the intestinal
metaplastic mucosa and the gastric carcinoma of Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed to determine MCP-1 and transforming
growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) mRNA expression levels and single- or
double-label immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the localization of MCP-1,
TGF-beta type I receptor, and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA). We determined
that MCP-1 mRNA dramatically increased in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa and
the gastric carcinoma of Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach, compared with normal
mouse stomach. Both MCP-1 and TGF-beta type I receptor were co-expressed in the
alphaSMA-positive myofibroblasts of intestinal metaplastic mucosa and gastric
carcinoma. Exogenous application of TGF-beta1 increased MCP-1 mRNA expression
levels in the intestinal metaplastic tissue. Furthermore, TGF-beta1 was
overexpressed and macrophage was strongly infiltrated in the gastric carcinoma.
In conclusion, MCP-1 expression, which was stimulated by TGF-beta1, was
recognized in the TGF-beta type I receptor-expressing myofibroblasts of the
intestinal metaplastic mucosa and the gastric carcinoma of Cdx2-transgenic mouse 
stomach. The present results suggest that intestinal metaplasia and gastric
carcinoma themselves induce MCP-1 expression independently of H. pylori
infection.

PMID: 20557309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Aug 1;21(15):2649-60. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-01-0053. Epub 2010
Jun 16.

Epigenetic modification affecting expression of cell polarity and cell fate genes
to regulate lineage specification in the early mouse embryo.

Parfitt DE(1), Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/CR UK Gurdon Institute, Cambridge CB2 1QN, United Kingdom.

Formation of inner and outer cells of the mouse embryo distinguishes pluripotent 
inner cell mass (ICM) from differentiating trophectoderm (TE). Carm1, which
methylates histone H3R17 and R26, directs cells to ICM rather that TE. To
understand the mechanism by which this epigenetic modification directs cell fate,
we generated embryos with in vivo-labeled cells of different Carm1 levels, using 
time-lapse imaging to reveal dynamics of their behavior, and related this to cell
polarization. This shows that Carm1 affects cell fate by promoting asymmetric
divisions, that direct one daughter cell inside, and cell engulfment, where
neighboring cells with lower Carm1 levels compete for outside positions. This is 
associated with changes to the expression pattern and spatial distribution of
cell polarity proteins: Cells with higher Carm1 levels show reduced expression
and apical localization of Par3 and a dramatic increase in expression of PKCII,
antagonist of the apical protein aPKC. Expression and basolateral localization of
the mouse Par1 homologue, EMK1, increases concomitantly. Increased Carm1 also
reduces Cdx2 expression, a transcription factor key for TE differentiation. These
results demonstrate how the extent of a specific epigenetic modification could
affect expression of cell polarity and fate-determining genes to ensure lineage
allocation in the mouse embryo.

PMCID: PMC2912351
PMID: 20554762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2010 Apr-Jun;53(2):262-6. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.64341.

Immunohistochemical study of epithelial-myofibroblast interaction in Barrett
metaplasia.

Ochicha O(1), Pringle JH, Mohammed AZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Bayero University Kano, Nigeria.

CONTEXT: Sub-epithelial myofibroblasts are known to influence the biology
(proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis) of overlying epithelia. In the
intestine, myofibroblasts have been demonstrated to be essential for epithelial
differentiation. It is therefore hypothesized that myofibroblasts may also be
involved in intestinal metaplasia that is characteristic of Barrett esophagus.
OBJECTIVE: This study endeavors to immunohistologically evaluate
epithelial-myofibroblast interaction in Barrett's metaplasia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Nineteen archival esophageal endoscopic biopsies of
Barrett's metaplasia were immune-phenotyped for the following epithelial and
myofibroblast antigens - cytokeratins (CK) 8, 13, 18, CDX2 (Caudal type homeobox 
2), a-smooth muscle actin (SMA).
RESULTS: alpha-SMA immunostaining revealed close association between
myofibroblasts and metaplastic Barrett's epithelium but not with normal
esophageal squamous epithelium. Myofibroblasts were more prominent in dysplastic 
than in non-dysplastic Barrett metaplasia. CDX2 and CK 8/18, indicators of
intestinal differentiation were expressed in Barrett metaplasia but not normal
esophageal squamous epithelium, while the reverse was the case for CK 13, which
only stained normal esophageal squamous epithelium.
CONCLUSION: Although their precise role is yet to be clearly defined,
sub-epithelial myofibroblasts are very likely involved in the pathogenesis of
Barrett's metaplasia.

PMID: 20551529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 13;285(33):25115-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.089516. Epub
2010 Jun 15.

Genome-wide analysis of CDX2 binding in intestinal epithelial cells (Caco-2).

Boyd M(1), Hansen M, Jensen TG, Perearnau A, Olsen AK, Bram LL, Bak M, Tommerup
N, Olsen J, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Panum Institute, Building 6.4, 
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3. 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

The CDX2 transcription factor is known to play a crucial role in inhibiting
proliferation, promoting differentiation and the expression of intestinal
specific genes in intestinal cells. The overall effect of CDX2 in intestinal
cells has previously been investigated in conditional knock-out mice, revealing a
critical role of CDX2 in the formation of the normal intestinal identity. The
identification of direct targets of transcription factors is a key problem in the
study of gene regulatory networks. The ChIP-seq technique combines chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with next generation sequencing resulting in a high
throughput experimental method of identifying direct targets of specific
transcription factors. The method was applied to CDX2, leading to the
identification of the direct binding of CDX2 to several known and novel target
genes in the intestinal cell. Examination of the transcript levels of selected
genes verified the regulatory role of CDX2 binding. The results place CDX2 as a
key node in a transcription factor network controlling the proliferation and
differentiation of intestinal cells.

PMCID: PMC2919073
PMID: 20551321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Genes Dev. 2010 Jun 15;24(12):1295-305. doi: 10.1101/gad.1921510.

Cdx2 regulates endo-lysosomal function and epithelial cell polarity.

Gao N(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

In contrast to our significant understanding of signaling cascades that determine
cell polarity in lower eukaryotic or immortalized cells, little is known about
the transcriptional program that governs mammalian epithelial polarization in
vivo. Here we show, using conditional gene ablation and three-dimensional tissue 
culture, that the homeobox transcription factor Cdx2 controls apical-basolateral 
polarity in mouse enterocytes and human colonic epithelial cells. Cdx2 regulates 
a comprehensive gene network involved in endo-lysosomal maturation and protein
transport. In the absence of Cdx2, defective protein trafficking impairs
apical-basal transport and induces ectopic lumen formation. These defects are
partially recapitulated by suppression of key apical transport components, Rab11a
and Kif3b, which are regulated by Cdx2. Furthermore, Cdx2 deficiency affects
components that control the organization of microvillus actin cytoskeleton,
leading to severe microvillus atrophy. These results demonstrate that Cdx2
regulates epithelial cell polarity and morphogenesis through control of apical
protein transport and endo-lysosomal function.

PMCID: PMC2885664
PMID: 20551175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):597-608. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.024.

GSK-3 promotes conditional association of CREB and its coactivators with MEIS1 to
facilitate HOX-mediated transcription and oncogenesis.

Wang Z(1), Iwasaki M, Ficara F, Lin C, Matheny C, Wong SH, Smith KS, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):529-31.

Acute leukemias induced by MLL chimeric oncoproteins are among the subset of
cancers distinguished by a paradoxical dependence on GSK-3 kinase activity for
sustained proliferation. We demonstrate here that GSK-3 maintains the MLL
leukemia stem cell transcriptional program by promoting the conditional
association of CREB and its coactivators TORC and CBP with homedomain protein
MEIS1, a critical component of the MLL-subordinate program, which in turn
facilitates HOX-mediated transcription and transformation. This mechanism also
applies to hematopoietic cells transformed by other HOX genes, including CDX2,
which is highly expressed in a majority of acute myeloid leukemias, thus
providing a molecular approach based on GSK-3 inhibitory strategies to target
HOX-associated transcription in a broad spectrum of leukemias.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919232
PMID: 20541704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Mar;20(3):485-93. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0128. Epub 2010 Oct 
12.

Efficient derivation of pluripotent stem cells from siRNA-mediated Cdx2-deficient
mouse embryos.

Wu G(1), Gentile L, Do JT, Cantz T, Sutter J, Psathaki K, Araúzo-Bravo MJ,
Ortmeier C, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.

In the early mammalian embryo, lineage separation of and subsequent crosstalk
between the trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) are required to support 
further development. Previous studies have shown that the homeobox transcription 
factor Cdx2 is required for TE differentiation and that lack of Cdx2 expression
causes death of embryos at the peri-implantation stage. In this study, we
effectively eliminated Cdx2 transcripts by microinjection of siRNA into embryos
and evaluated the effect on efficiency of deriving embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
By this approach, we successfully created nonviable embryos similar to reported
knockout embryos. Accordingly, the efficiency of ESC derivation dropped from
19.1% in control blastocysts to 2% in Cdx2-deficient blastocysts, indicating loss
of pluripotency in the ICM. Strikingly, when 8-cell stage embryos were cultured
under ESC culture conditions before lineage separation, fully functional
pluripotent stem cell lines were obtained, with efficiency even greater than that
for control embryos. These results demonstrate that Cdx2 plays an essential role 
within the microenvironment created by the TE to support ICM pluripotency but
that the ESC culture system, with mouse embryonic fibroblasts, could rescue the
pluripotent cell population for efficient ESC derivation.

PMCID: PMC3128770
PMID: 20536317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Sep;16(9):2901-13. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2009.0722.

Hypoxic culture maintains self-renewal and enhances embryoid body formation of
human embryonic stem cells.

Chen HF(1), Kuo HC, Lin SP, Chien CL, Chiang MS, Ho HN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine and the Hospital, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Hypoxic environment is theoretically more physiological for the growth of human
embryonic stem (hES) cells. It has been reported that hypoxic culture maintained 
better undifferentiation of hES cells, but the effects on differentiation are
less well established. The hES cells were thus cultured and compared in hypoxia
(2% oxygen [O2]) and normoxia (21% O2). The data showed that the undifferentiated
state of hES cells was maintained more favorably in hypoxia during prolonged
culture. Most tested genes belonging to FGF, TGF-beta/GMP, and Wnt signaling
pathways were enriched in undifferentiated hES cells and downregulated upon
differentiation, accompanied with differential expression of FGFR1, FGFR2, and
FRAT2 between hypoxia and normoxia. Higher P-Smad2/3 level was identified in
hypoxia, favoring the maintenance of hES cells in undifferentiation. Bisulfite
sequencing showed similar imprinting status between different O2 tensions at H19 
differentially methylated region (DMR) and KvDMR loci. Embryoid body formation
was enhanced in hypoxia accompanied with suppressed Sox17, Desmin, Gata4,
Brachyury, and Cdx2 expression. We concluded that hypoxia improved self-renewal
of hES cells through modulation of major signaling pathways and was also more
efficient for differentiation to embryoid bodies, though they might present with 
suppressed expression of some lineage-specific genes across all the three
embryonic germ layers and trophectoderm.

PMID: 20533883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Pathol. 2010 Jul;221(3):275-84. doi: 10.1002/path.2717.

Search for transmembrane protein in gastric cancer by the Escherichia coli
ampicillin secretion trap: expression of DSC2 in gastric cancer with intestinal
phenotype.

Anami K(1), Oue N, Noguchi T, Sakamoto N, Sentani K, Hayashi T, Hinoi T, Okajima 
M, Graff JM, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Genes
expressed only in cancer tissue, and especially on the cell membrane, will be
useful molecular markers for diagnosis and may also be good therapeutic targets. 
To identify genes that encode transmembrane proteins present in GC, we generated 
Escherichia coli ampicillin secretion trap (CAST) libraries from two GC cell
lines and normal stomach. By sequencing 4320 colonies from CAST libraries, we
identified 30 candidate genes that encode transmembrane proteins present in GC.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of these
candidates revealed that ZDHHC14, BST2, DRAM2, and DSC2 were expressed much more 
highly in GC than in 14 kinds of normal tissues. Among these, DSC2 encodes
desmocollin 2, which is one of three known desmocollins. Immunohistochemical
analysis demonstrated that 22 (28%) of 80 GC cases were positive for desmocollin 
2, and desmocollin 2 expression was observed frequently in GC with the intestinal
mucin phenotype. Furthermore, desmocollin 2 expression was correlated with CDX2
expression. These results suggest that expression of desmocollin 2, induced by
CDX2, may be a key regulator for GC with the intestinal mucin phenotype. Our
results provide a list of genes that have high potential as a diagnostic and
therapeutic target for GC.

(c) 2010 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20527021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Sep;117(1):200-8. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq165. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Biological effects and dose-response assessment of diesel exhaust particles on in
vitro early embryo development in mice.

Januário DA(1), Perin PM, Maluf M, Lichtenfels AJ, Nascimento Saldiva PH.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Air Pollution Laboratory-LIM05, University of São Paulo School of
Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil.

An increased risk of early pregnancy loss in women briefly exposed to high levels
of ambient particulate matter during the preconceptional period was recently
observed. The effects of this exposure on early embryo development are unknown.
This study was designed to assess the dose-response and biological effects of
diesel exhaust particles (DEP) on in vitro embryo development using the in vitro 
fertilization (IVF) mouse model. Zygotes obtained from superovulated mice after
IVF were randomly cultured in different DEP concentrations (0, 0.2, 2, and 20
microg/cm(2)) for 5 days and observed for their capacity to attach and develop on
a fibronectin matrix until day 8. Main outcome measures included blastocyst rates
96 and 120 h after insemination, hatching discriminatory score, total cell count,
proportion of cell allocation to inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE),
ICM morphology, attachment rate and outgrowth area, apoptosis and necrosis rates,
and Oct-4 and Cdx-2 expression. Multivariate analysis showed a negative
dose-dependent effect on early embryo development and hatching process,
blastocyst cell allocation, and ICM morphology. Although blastocyst attachment
and outgrowth were not affected by DEP, a significant impairment of ICM integrity
was observed in day 8 blastocysts. Cell death through apoptosis was significantly
higher after DEP exposure. Oct-4 expression and the Oct-4/Cdx-2 ratio were
significantly decreased in day 5 blastocysts irrespective of DEP concentration.
Results suggest that DEP appear to play an important role in disrupting cell
lineage segregation and ICM morphological integrity even at lower concentrations,
compromising future growth and viability of the blastocyst.

PMID: 20525899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Pathol Int. 2010 May;60(5):358-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2010.02527.x.

Diagnostic approach to pancreatic tumors with the specimens of endoscopic
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration.

Hosoda W(1), Takagi T, Mizuno N, Shimizu Y, Sano T, Yamao K, Yatabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) has enabled
clinicians to histologically diagnose pancreatic tumors. However, EUS-FNA
specimens often result in tiny fragmented tissues, so auxiliary utilities are
necessary. Using immunostaining of CK7, CDX2, neuroendocrine markers and KRAS
mutation analysis, we examined 57 FNA cell block sections and 61
surgically-resected specimens (25 invasive ductal carcinomas, 25 endocrine
tumors, and 11 acinar cell tumors). In the majority of the matched pairs, the
diagnoses between EUS-FNA and surgical specimens were concordant using the
following criteria: neuroendocrine markers negative, CK7 positive, and mutated
KRAS gene for invasive ductal carcinomas; neuroendocrine markers diffusely
positive, CK7 and CDX2 negative, and wild-type KRAS gene for well-differentiated 
endocrine tumors; and neuroendocrine markers no more than focal positive, CK7 and
CDX2 with various staining patterns, and wild-type KRAS gene for acinar cell
carcinomas. Expression of CK7 and/or CDX2 in addition to KRAS mutations were
occasionally seen in endocrine carcinomas, but not in well-differentiated
endocrine tumors, suggesting that ductal differentiation in an endocrine tumor
may be a predictor of aggressive disease. The usefulness of these markers was
confirmed using 13 additional pancreatic tumors, prospectively. Although minimal 
in selection, these markers are helpful in making diagnosis from EUS-FNA
specimens of the major pancreatic tumors.

PMID: 20518885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Acta Cytol. 2010 May-Jun;54(3):277-82.

Utility of thyroid transcription factor-1 and CDX-2 in determining the primary
site of metastatic adenocarcinomas in serous effusions.

Kim JH(1), Choi YD, Lee JS, Lee JH, Nam JH, Choi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chonnam National University Medical School and
Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the usefulness of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
and CDX-2 in determining the primary tumor site of metastatic adenocarcinomas
(ACs) in serous effusions.
STUDY DESIGN: Cell blocks were constructed from cells in metastatic AC effusion
fluids (n = 97) that had been previously stained with a panel of antibodies
against MOC-31, D2-40 and calretinin. Primary tumor sites included the lungs (n =
52), ovaries (n = 6), pancreas (n = 4), breasts (n = 3), bile duct (n = 2) and
gastrointestinal (GI) tract (30), including stomach (n = 28) and colon (n = 2).
Primary sites were determined by tissue confirmation of the original tumor or
review of the clinical charts. Immunocytochemical staining was performed with
antibodies against TTF-1 and CDX-2.
RESULTS: The lung ACs showed TTF-1 positivity in 58% (30/52) of cases. All
nonpulmonary ACs lacked TTF-1 staining. Among the 30 GI ACs, 9 (30%) (7 from the 
stomach and 2 from the colon) showed CDX-2 positivity. All non-GI ACs lacked
CDX-2 staining. Specificities and positive predictive values for TTF-1 and CDX-2 
equaled 100% for metastatic pulmonary and GI ACs, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggested that TTF-1 and CDX-2 are specific markers to
separate metastatic pulmonary and GI ACs, respectively, from other metastatic ACs
in serous effusions. However, sensitivity values of these markers were low.

PMID: 20518411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jul;7(7):369-78. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2010.78. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Barrett esophagus: an update.

Badreddine RJ(1), Wang KK.

Author information: 
(1)Salem Gastroenterology Associates, 1830 S. Hawthorne Road, Winston-Salem, NC
27103, USA. badr1919@yahoo.com

Many developments have been made in the field of Barrett esophagus that have
tremendous clinical implications. There are new definitions of Barrett esophagus 
that have had an immediate clinical impact on cancer risk and screening. Of
interest is the definition by the British Society of Gastroenterology, which does
not require the presence of intestinal metaplasia for a diagnosis of Barrett
esophagus. Imaging techniques that allow improved visualization of intestinal
metaplasia at the cellular level are now being used in clinical practice. New
hypotheses elucidating the progression from squamous epithelium to intestinal
metaplasia have been proposed. Indeed, the crucial role that transcription
factors have in the pathogenesis of Barrett esophagus has been clarified.
Improved characterization of the molecular mechanisms underlying Barrett
esophagus is an incentive to undertake more basic science research in this field.
Such research could also help with the development of chemoprevention strategies 
for this precancerous condition. This Review discusses the advances in
understanding of the pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of Barrett esophagus.

PMID: 20517288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jul;24(1):97-104.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha modulates the down-regulation of the homeodomain 
protein CDX2 in colorectal cancer.

Zheng J(1), Sun X, Wang W, Lu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is the main active subunit of HIF-1,
which promotes tumor cell survival and critical steps involved in tumor
progression and aggressiveness. To clarify the possible involvement of the
HIF-1alpha subunit and homeodomain protein CDX2 in the development and
progression of colorectal cancer (CRC), we examined in vivo the
immunohistochemical expression of HIF-1alpha and its topological correlation with
CDX2 expression in colorectal adenocarcinoma. We then examined the in vitro
effect of hypoxia mimicked by CoCl2 on mRNA and protein expression of HIF-1alpha 
and CDX2 using two human colon cancer cell lines, SW480 and LS174T. In addition, 
hypoxia-induced changes in the mRNA expression of Snail were also analyzed. Of
the 62 cases of CRC examined, 43 (69.4%) and 39 (62.9%) were positive for CDX2
and HIF-1alpha, respectively, such that their expression was correlated with
differentiation grade, tumor stage and lymph node metastasis (chi2 test, p<0.01).
Furthermore, HIF-1alpha expression observed in 10 of the 16 (62.5%) poorly
differentiated CRCs showed a topological correlation with loss of CDX2
expression. Real-time PCR and western blotting demonstrated that CDX2 expression 
was decreased by CoCl2 (100 microM) in both SW480 and LS174T cells. mRNA and
protein expression of HIF-1alpha and mRNA expression of Snail was increased by
hypoxia in both colon cancer cell lines. In conclusion, the present observations 
support that hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha induces down-regulation of CDX2 in
colon carcinoma cells and that Snail may be involved in this regulation process. 
These findings suggest that hypoxia plays an important role in the malignant
progression of CRC.

PMID: 20514449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Stem Cells. 2010 Jun;28(6):1030-8. doi: 10.1002/stem.428.

A role for borg5 during trophectoderm differentiation.

Vong QP(1), Liu Z, Yoo JG, Chen R, Xie W, Sharov AA, Fan CM, Liu C, Ko MS, Zheng 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Stem cell differentiation is accompanied by a gradual cellular morphogenesis and 
transcriptional changes. Identification of morphological regulators that control 
cell behavior during differentiation could shed light on how cell morphogenesis
is coupled to transcriptional changes during development. By analyzing cellular
behavior during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), we uncover 
a role of Borg5 (binder of Rho guanosine 5'-triphosphatase 5) in regulating
trophectoderm (TE) cell morphogenesis. We report that differentiation of ESCs
toward TE is accompanied by enhanced actin protrusion and cell motility that
require upregulation of Borg5. Borg5 interacts with both Cdc42 and atypical
protein kinase C (aPKC) and functions downstream of Cdc42 to enhance TE cell
motility. Borg5 is required for the sorting of differentiating TE to the outside 
of ESCs in vitro. In developing embryos, Borg5 protein localizes to cell-cell
contacts and the cytoplasm after compaction. It exhibits higher levels of
expression in outer cells than in inner cells in morula and blastocysts.
Reduction of Borg5 disrupts aPKC localization and inhibits blastocyst formation. 
Since Cdx2 and Borg5 facilitate each other's expression as ESCs differentiate
toward TE, we propose that cell morphogenesis is coupled with transcriptional
changes to regulate TE differentiation. Our studies also demonstrate the utility 
of ESCs in identifying morphological regulators important for development.

PMCID: PMC2957878
PMID: 20506138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):347-58. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084400. Epub 2010
May 26.

Cell polarity regulator PARD6B is essential for trophectoderm formation in the
preimplantation mouse embryo.

Alarcon VB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biogenesis Research, Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry, and
Physiology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu,
Hawaii 96813, USA. vernadet@hawaii.edu

In preimplantation mouse development, the first cell lineages to be established
are the trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass. TE possesses epithelial features,
including apical-basal cell polarity and intercellular junctions, which are
crucial to generate a fluid-filled cavity in the blastocyst. Homologs of the
partitioning defective (par) genes in Caenorhabditis elegans are critical
regulators of cell polarity. However, their roles in regulating TE
differentiation and blastocyst formation remain unclear. Here, the role of mouse 
Pard6b, a homolog of par-6 gene and a component of the PAR-atypical protein
kinase C (aPKC) complex, was investigated. Pard6b expression was knocked down by 
microinjecting RNA interference construct into zygotes. Pard6b-knockdown embryos 
cleaved and compacted normally but failed to form the blastocyst cavity. The
cavitation failure is likely the result of defective intercellular junctions,
because Pard6b knockdown caused abnormal distribution of actin filaments and TJP1
(ZO-1) tight junction (TJ) protein and interfered with cavitation in chimeras
containing cells from normal embryos. Defective TJ formation may be caused by
abnormal cell polarization, because the apical localization of PRKCZ (aPKCzeta)
was absent in Pard6b-knockdown embryos. Pard6b knockdown also diminished the
expression of CDX2, a TE-lineage transcription factor, in the outer cells. TEAD4,
a transcriptional activator that is required for Cdx2 expression and cavity
formation, was not essential for the transcription of Pard6b. Taken together,
Pard6b is necessary for blastocyst morphogenesis, particularly the development of
TE-specific features-namely, the apical-basal cell polarity, formation of TJ,
paracellular permeability sealing, and up-regulated expression of Cdx2.

PMCID: PMC2924801
PMID: 20505164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. PLoS One. 2010 May 12;5(5):e10622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010622.

Brg1 is required for Cdx2-mediated repression of Oct4 expression in mouse
blastocysts.

Wang K(1), Sengupta S, Magnani L, Wilson CA, Henry RW, Knott JG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.

During blastocyst formation the segregation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm is governed by the mutually antagonistic effects of the
transcription factors Oct4 and Cdx2. Evidence indicates that suppression of Oct4 
expression in the trophectoderm is mediated by Cdx2. Nonetheless, the underlying 
epigenetic modifiers required for Cdx2-dependent repression of Oct4 are largely
unknown. Here we show that the chromatin remodeling protein Brg1 is required for 
Cdx2-mediated repression of Oct4 expression in mouse blastocysts. By employing a 
combination of RNA interference (RNAi) and gene expression analysis we found that
both Brg1 Knockdown (KD) and Cdx2 KD blastocysts exhibit widespread expression of
Oct4 in the trophectoderm. Interestingly, in Brg1 KD blastocysts and Cdx2 KD
blastocysts, the expression of Cdx2 and Brg1 is unchanged, respectively. To
address whether Brg1 cooperates with Cdx2 to repress Oct4 transcription in the
developing trophectoderm, we utilized preimplantation embryos, trophoblast stem
(TS) cells and Cdx2-inducible embryonic stem (ES) cells as model systems. We
found that: (1) combined knockdown (KD) of Brg1 and Cdx2 levels in blastocysts
resulted in increased levels of Oct4 transcripts compared to KD of Brg1 or Cdx2
alone, (2) endogenous Brg1 co-immunoprecipitated with Cdx2 in TS cell extracts,
(3) in blastocysts Brg1 and Cdx2 co-localize in trophectoderm nuclei and (4) in
Cdx2-induced ES cells Brg1 and Cdx2 are recruited to the Oct4 promoter. Lastly,
to determine how Brg1 may induce epigenetic silencing of the Oct4 gene, we
evaluated CpG methylation at the Oct4 promoter in the trophectoderm of Brg1 KD
blastocysts. This analysis revealed that Brg1-dependent repression of Oct4
expression is independent of DNA methylation at the blastocyst stage. In toto,
these results demonstrate that Brg1 cooperates with Cdx2 to repress Oct4
expression in the developing trophectoderm to ensure normal development.

PMCID: PMC2868905
PMID: 20485553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Ann Surg. 2010 Jun;251(6):1167-73. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181c9b613.

Esophageal morbidity and function in adults with repaired esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula: a population-based long-term follow-up.

Sistonen SJ(1), Koivusalo A, Nieminen U, Lindahl H, Lohi J, Kero M, Kärkkäinen
PA, Färkkilä MA, Sarna S, Rintala RJ, Pakarinen MP.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki 
University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. saara.sistonen@helsinki.fi

OBJECTIVE: We assessed esophageal morbidity and relationships between surgical
complications, symptoms, endoscopic findings, immunohistochemistry, and
esophageal motility in adults with repaired esophageal atresia (EA).
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: There exist no previous population-based long-term
follow-up studies on EA.
METHODS: Participants were interviewed, and they underwent esophageal endoscopy
and manometry. Matched control subjects (n = 287) served as controls.
RESULTS: A total of 101 (42%) individuals representative of the entire study
population participated at a mean age of 36 years (range, 21-57). Symptomatic
gastroesophageal reflux had occurred in 34% and dysphagia in 85% of the patients 
and in 8% and 2% of the controls (P < 0.001 for both). Endoscopic findings
included hiatal hernia (28%), Barrett's esophagus (11%), esophagitis (8%), and
anastomotic stricture (8%). Immunohistochemistry revealed esophagitis in 25%, and
CDX2-positive columnar epithelial metaplasia in 21%, with additional goblet cells
and MUC2 positivity in 6%. Gastroesophageal reflux and dysphagia were equally
common in individuals with normal histology, esophagitis, or epithelial
metaplasia. Manometry demonstrated nonpropagating peristalsis in 80% of the
patients, and low distal wave amplitudes of the esophagus in all the changes
being significantly worse in those with epithelial metaplasia (P < or = 0.022
metaplasia vs. esophagitis/normal). Anastomotic complications (odds ratio [OR]:
8.6-24, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.7-260, P = 0.011-0.008), age (OR: 20, 95%
CI: 1.3-310, P = 0.034), low distal esophageal body pressure (OR: 2.6, 95% CI:
0.7-10, P = 0.002), and defective esophageal peristalsis (OR: 2.2, 95% CI:
0.4-11, P = 0.014) predicted development of epithelial metaplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant esophageal morbidity associated with EA extends into
adulthood. Surgical complications, increasing age, and impaired esophageal
motility predict development of epithelial metaplasia after repair of EA.

PMID: 20485152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Biol Evol. 2010 Oct;27(10):2386-91. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msq121. Epub 2010 May
12.

Parallel retention of Pdx2 genes in cartilaginous fish and coelacanths.

Mulley JF(1), Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
john.mulley@zoo.ox.ac.uk

The Pdx1 or Ipf1 gene encodes an important homeodomain-containing protein with
key roles in pancreas development and function. Mutations in human PDX1 are
implicated in developmental defects and disease of the pancreas. Extensive
research, including genome sequencing, has indicated that Pdx1 is the only member
of its gene family in mammals, birds, amphibians, and ray-finned fish, and with
the exception of teleost fish, this gene forms part of the ParaHox gene cluster
along with Gsx1 and Cdx2. The ParaHox cluster, however, is a remnant of a 4-fold 
genome duplication; the three other ParaHox paralogues lack a Pdx-like gene in
all vertebrate genomes examined to date. We have used bacterial artificial
chromosome cloning and synteny analysis to show that the ancestor of living jawed
vertebrates in fact had more ParaHox genes, including two Pdx genes (Pdx1 and
Pdx2). Surprisingly, the two Pdx genes have been retained in parallel in two
quite distantly related lineages, the cartilaginous fish (sharks, skates, and
chimeras) and the Indonesian coelacanth, Latimeria menadoensis. The Pdx2 gene has
been lost independently in ray-finned fish and in tetrapods.

PMCID: PMC2944030
PMID: 20463047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Br J Haematol. 2010 Aug;150(3):382-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08204.x. Epub
2010 Apr 29.

Poor prognosis in familial acute myeloid leukaemia with combined biallelic CEBPA 
mutations and downstream events affecting the ATM, FLT3 and CDX2 genes.

Carmichael CL, Wilkins EJ, Bengtsson H, Horwitz MS, Speed TP, Vincent PC, Young
G, Hahn CN, Escher R, Scott HS.

PMID: 20456351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Jan;20(1):139-47. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0515. Epub 2010 Oct 
12.

Characterization of the endocannabinoid system in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Bari M(1), Tedesco M, Battista N, Pasquariello N, Pucci M, Gasperi V, Scaldaferri
ML, Farini D, De Felici M, Maccarrone M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

In this study, we have ascertained the presence and functionality in mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) of members of the endocannabinoid system that have
been proposed as possible modulators of the survival and differentiation of
various type of stem cells. We show that mouse ESCs, in addition to classical
CB(1) and CB(2) cannabinoid receptors, express the transient receptor potential
vanilloid receptor, at mRNA, protein, and binding levels. Remarkably, we
demonstrate that ESCs have the mRNA, protein, and enzyme activity to synthesize
and degrade the prominent endocannabinoids anandamide (through
N-acyl-phosphatidylethanolamine-specific phospholipase D and fatty acid amide
hydrolase) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (through diacylglycerol lipase and
monoacylglycerol lipase). In addition, both endocannabinoids were detected in
ESCs that were also shown to constitutively release a fatty acid amide
hydrolase-activating compound. Finally, we document that the stimulation of ESCs 
by methanandamide, a nonhydrolysable analog of anandamide, does not lead to overt
alteration of the expression of Oct3/4, Nanog, and Cdx2, genes that are involved 
in early cell fate in the preimplantation embryo and stemness, or of the
expression patterns of Brachyury and Hnf4, genes that are used as late markers of
lineage differentiation capability of ESC-derived embryoid bodies. Similarly
ineffective on the expression of the tested stemness genes was
2-arachidonoylglycerol. Taken together, these results confirm and extend the
notion that ESCs express several functional members of the endocannabinoid
system, but they leave open the question about their role in stem cells as
modulators of stemness and differentiation potential.

PMID: 20446814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Int J Surg Pathol. 2010 Oct;18(5):330-7. doi: 10.1177/1066896910364228. Epub 2010
May 5.

CDX2 and LI-cadherin expression in esophageal mucosa: use of both markers can
facilitate the histologic diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus and carcinoma.

Weimann A(1), Zimmermann M, Gross M, Slevogt H, Rieger A, Morawietz L.

Author information: 
(1)Charité University Medical Center, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's mucosa is a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma and
should be detected at an early stage. CDX2 and liver-intestine (LI)-cadherin are 
intestine-specific markers. Aberrant CDX2 expression has been demonstrated in
Barrett's metaplasia, esophagitis, and intestinal metaplasia of the stomach.
METHODS: The relationship between CDX2 and LI-cadherin expression was
investigated in normal gastroesophageal (n = 24) and in Barrett's (n = 20)
mucosa, in low-grade (n = 15) and high-grade (n = 13) intraepithelial neoplasia
(IEN) as well as in esophageal adenocarcinoma (n = 16), using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Nuclear positivity for CDX2 coupled with membranous expression of
LI-cadherin was observed in about 70% of the epithelial cells of Barrett's
mucosa. The intensity of staining and the percentage of positive cells increased 
within the sequential steps of low-grade to high-grade IEN, whereas the normal
cylindric epithelium lacked the expression of both. In adenocarcinoma, the
expression of LI-cadherin and CDX2 was significantly weaker or absent.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 and LI-cadherin are sensitive markers of intestinal metaplasia 
with or without dysplasia in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Both can be
helpful for the early histologic diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus and its
subsequent lesions; however, they do not significantly discern between different 
grades of dysplasia.

PMID: 20444732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Clin Transl Sci. 2009 Aug;2(4):286-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-8062.2009.00131.x.

Bile acids initiate lineage-addicted gastroesophageal tumorigenesis by
suppressing the EGF receptor-AKT axis.

Gong L(1), Debruyne PR, Witek M, Nielsen K, Snook A, Lin JE, Bombonati A, Palazzo
J, Schulz S, Waldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

While bile acids are a risk factor for tumorigenesis induced by reflux disease,
the mechanisms by which they contribute to neoplasia remain undefined. Here, we
reveal that in gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) cells bile acids activate a
tissue-specific developmental program defining the intestinal epithelial cell
phenotype characterizing GEJ metaplasia. Deoxycholic acid (DCA) inhibited
phosphorylation of EGF receptors (EGFRs) suppressing the proto-oncogene AKT.
Suppression of EGFRs and AKT by DCA actuated an intestine-specific cascade in
which NF-kappaB transactivated the tissue-specific transcription factor CDX2. In 
turn, CDX2 orchestrated a lineage-specific differentiation program encompassing
genes characterizing intestinal epithelial cells. Conversely, progression from
metaplasia to invasive carcinoma in patients, universally associated with
autonomous activation of EGFRs and/or AKT, was coupled with loss of this
intestinal program. Thus, bile acids induce intestinal metaplasia at the GEJ by
activating the lineage-specific differentiation program involving suppression of 
EGFR and AKT, activating the NF-kappaB-CDX2 axis. Induction of this axis provides
the context for lineage-addicted tumorigenesis, in which autonomous activation of
AKT corrupts adaptive intestinal NF-kappaB signaling, amplifying tumorigenic
programs.

PMID: 20443907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2010 Apr;61(2):185-92.

Bile acids are multifunctional modulators of the Barrett's carcinogenesis.

Burnat G(1), Majka J, Konturek PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Thuringia-Clinic Saalfeld, Teaching Hospital of the
University of Jena, Germany.

Bile salts play an important pathogenic role in the development of Barrett
adenocarcinoma (BA). However, the precise role of different bile salts in this
process is still unknown. The aim of the present study was to compare the effects
of two different bile salts, deoxycholic acid (DCA) and ursodeoxycholic acid
(UDCA) on the expression of COX-2, CDX-2 and DNA repair enzymes (MUTYH, OGG-1) in
the Barrett epithelial cancer cells (OE-19). OE-19 cells were incubated with
DCAor UDCA(100 microM or 300 microM at pH=7.0) over 24 h. To investigate the
involvement of NF kappaB, in separate experiments the cells were incubated with
DCA in the presence of proteosome inhibitor (MG-132). Cells cycle and apoptosis
were analyzed by FACS analysis. After incubation of OE-19 cells with bile salts, 
the expression of mRNA of COX-2, DNA repair enzymes (MUTYH, OGG-1) and
caudal-related homebox transcription factor CDX-2 were measured by quantitative
RT-PCR. OE-19 cell were also transfected with siRNA-RelA (p65) to asses effect of
NF kappaB inactivation on COX-2 and CDX2 expression. DCA caused a stronger
reduction in cell survival of OE-19 cells than UDCA. In addition, DCA stimulated 
directly the translocation of NF kappaB p65 (active form) in the nuclei of OE-19 
cells. DCA caused stronger than UDCA stimulation of the COX-2 mRNA expression in 
these cells and this effect was significantly attenuated by the addition of
inhibitor of NF kappaB activity (proteosome inhibitor MG-132). siRNA-RelA reduced
expression not only of NF kappaB but also expression of COX-2 as well as CDX-2
mRNA. DCA caused stronger downregulation of mRNA for DNA repair enzymes MUTYH and
OGG-1 than UDCA. In contrast, UDCA induced stronger CDX-2 mRNA expression than
DCA in OE-19 cells. We conclude that bile salts are involved in the
carcinogenesis of Barrett adenocarcinoma via inhibition of DNA repair enzymes and
induction of COX-2 and this last effect is, at least partly, mediated by NF
kappaB. DCA shows carcinogenic potential due to high upregulation of COX-2, CDX-2
and downregulation of DNA repair enzymes.

PMID: 20436219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):129-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.020. Epub 2010
May 12.

Nanog is required for primitive endoderm formation through a non-cell autonomous 
mechanism.

Messerschmidt DM(1), Kemler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. daniel.m@imb.a-star.edu.sg

Early lineage segregation in mouse development results in two, either CDX2- or
OCT4/NANOG-positive, cell populations. CDX2-positive cells form the trophectoderm
(TE), OCT4/NANOG-positive cells the inner cell mass (ICM). In a second lineage
decision ICM cells segregate into Epiblast (EPI) and primitive endoderm (PE). EPI
and PE formation depend on the activity of the transcription factors Nanog and
Gata4/6. A role for Nanog, a crucial pluripotency factor, in preventing PE
differentiation has been proposed, as outgrowths of mutant ICMs result in PE, but
not EPI derivatives. We established Nanog-mutant mouse lines and analyzed EPI and
PE formation in vivo. Surprisingly, Gata4 expression in mutant ICM cells is
absent or strongly decreased, thus loss of Nanog does not result in precocious
endoderm differentiation. However, Nanog-deficient embryos retain the capacity to
form PE in chimeric embryos and, in contrast to recent reports, in blastocyst
outgrowths. Based on our findings we propose a non-cell autonomous requirement of
Nanog for proper PE formation in addition to its essential role in EPI
determination.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20435031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nutr Cancer. 2010;62(4):436-42. doi: 10.1080/01635580903441204.

Calcium, vitamin D, VDR genotypes, and epigenetic and genetic changes in rectal
tumors.

Slattery ML(1), Wolff RK, Herrick JS, Caan BJ, Samowitz W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA.
marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Calcium, vitamin D, exposure to sunshine, and vitamin D receptor (VDR) genotypes 
have been associated rectal cancer. We used data from 750 rectal tumors and 1,205
population-based controls examine associations with TP53, KRAS2, and CpG Island
methylator phenotype (CIMP) markers. Rectal tumors were associated with high
levels of calcium overall and with TP53 tumor mutations specifically (OR = 0.6,
95% CI = 0.42-0.84). High levels of sunshine exposure had a borderline protective
effect for TP53 tumor mutations (OR = 0.78, 95% CI = 0.59-1.03). A mutation at
codon 248 was significantly associated with dietary calcium intake (OR = 0.26,
95% CI = 0.09-0.77); having the Ff/ff genotypes of the FOK1 VDR polymorphism
significantly increased the odds of a mutation at codon 245 (OR = 4.74, 95% CI = 
1.05-21.39); high levels of dietary vitamin D (OR = 3.42, 95% CI = 1.15-10.17)
and the Ff/ff genotypes of FOK1 (OR = 3.34, 95% CI = 1.11-10.02) and the GA/AA
genotypes of the CDX2 VDR polymorphism (OR = 2.85, 95% CI = 1.23-6.58) increased 
the odds of a TP53 mutation at codon 273. These data support an association
between calcium and rectal tumors overall as well as specifically with TP53
mutations. However, given the number of comparisons, findings need to be
confirmed in other studies.

PMCID: PMC2895459
PMID: 20432164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.017. Epub 2010
Apr 27.

Maternally and zygotically provided Cdx2 have novel and critical roles for early 
development of the mouse embryo.

Jedrusik A(1), Bruce AW, Tan MH, Leong DE, Skamagki M, Yao M, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QN, UK.

Divisions of polarised blastomeres that allocate polar cells to outer and apolar 
cells to inner positions initiate the first cell fate decision in the mouse
embryo. Subsequently, outer cells differentiate into trophectoderm while inner
cells retain pluripotency to become inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst.
Elimination of zygotic expression of trophectoderm-specific transcription factor 
Cdx2 leads to defects in the maintenance of the blastocyst cavity, suggesting
that it participates only in the late stage of trophectoderm formation. However, 
we now find that mouse embryos also have a maternally provided pool of Cdx2 mRNA.
Moreover, depletion of both maternal and zygotic Cdx2 from immediately after
fertilization by three independent approaches, dsRNAi, siRNAi and morpholino
oligonucleotides, leads to developmental arrest at much earlier stages than
expected from elimination of only zygotic Cdx2. This developmental arrest is
associated with defects in cell polarisation, reflected by expression and
localisation of cell polarity molecules such as Par3 and aPKC and cell compaction
at the 8- and 16-cell stages. Cells deprived of Cdx2 show delayed development
with increased cell cycle length, irregular cell division and increased incidence
of apoptosis. Although some Cdx2-depleted embryos initiate cavitation, the cavity
cannot be maintained. Furthermore, expression of trophectoderm-specific genes,
Gata3 and Eomes, and also the trophectoderm-specific cytokeratin intermediate
filament, recognised by Troma1, are greatly reduced or undetectable. Taken
together, our results indicate that Cdx2 participates in two steps leading to
trophectoderm specification: appropriate polarisation of blastomeres at the 8-
and 16-cell stage and then the maintenance of trophectoderm lineage-specific
differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2954319
PMID: 20430022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2010 Oct;54(10):1445-51. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.200900467.

The regulation of jejunal induction of the maltase-glucoamylase gene by a
high-starch/low-fat diet in mice.

Mochizuki K(1), Honma K, Shimada M, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, The University of Shizuoka, Graduate
School of Nutritional and Environmental Sciences and Global COE, Shizuoka, Japan.

Maltase and glucoamylase are derived from the same mRNA and are responsible for
digestion of starch in the small intestine. Their jejunal activities in rodents
are induced by a high-starch/low-fat (HS)-diet. However, it is unknown whether
jejunal expression of the maltase-glucoamylase (Mgam) gene is enhanced by the
HS-diet. In this study, we found that jejunal Mgam mRNA was increased by a
HS-diet in mice. We showed that the HS-diet increased acetylation of histones,
bindings of a coactivator, Creb binding protein (CREBBP), and the transcriptional
factors caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and HNF1 homeobox (HNF1) in the
promoter/enhancer and transcriptional regions of Mgam gene. This suggests that
the increase in the jejunal activity of maltase and glucoamylase caused by a
HS-diet in mice is regulated at the mRNA level through histone acetylation and
binding of CREBBP, CDX2 and HNF1 in the promoter/enhancer and transcriptional
regions of Mgam gene.

PMID: 20425755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Dev Biol. 2010 Jul 1;343(1-2):71-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.012. Epub 2010 
Apr 22.

Governing cell lineage formation in cloned mouse embryos.

Balbach ST(1), Esteves TC, Brink T, Gentile L, McLaughlin KJ, Adjaye JA, Boiani
M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrabetae 20, D-48149
Münster, Germany.

Blastomeres of the pre-implantation mouse embryo form trophectoderm and inner
cell mass via a process that requires the transcription factors Tead4, Cdx2, Oct4
and Nanog. In mouse morulae cloned by somatic cell nuclear transfer, we observed 
that the trophectoderm transcription factor Cdx2 is expressed very differently at
the protein level compared to time- and stage-matched fertilized counterparts.
Protein levels of Cdx2 in cloned embryos appear 'erratic,' i.e. are widely
distributed, when plotted as histograms. In contrast to Cdx2, protein levels of
the upstream factor Tead4 and of inner cell mass transcription factors Oct4 and
Nanog are similar in cloned and fertilized embryos. These observations suggest
that trophectoderm formation is initiated but not maintained correctly in cloned 
mouse morulae, which is consistent with cloned blastocysts' limited implantation 
and post-implantation success. Because a cell's ability to differentiate is
greatly enhanced if it is surrounded by more cells differentiating the same way, 
a concept designated community effect by Gurdon, we reasoned that the
insufficient cell numbers often observed in cloned embryos might lead to
premature Cdx2 expression and differentiation of blastomeres into trophectoderm. 
Therefore, we created larger cloned embryos by aggregating them at the 4-cell
stage. Homologous aggregation stimulates expression of multiple signaling
pathways' components and results in cloned embryos with levels of Cdx2 similar to
fertilized embryos. Most of the resultant morulae and blastocysts consist of
cells of all three founders, indicating that aggregation increases stability of
all of the individual components. We conclude that the induction of pluripotency 
in cloned embryos is more efficient than previously assumed, and we propose that 
a minimum cell number is necessary to stabilize pluripotency and inhibit
premature expression of Cdx2 in cloned mouse embryos.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20417198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(13):3310-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01215-09. Epub 2010 Apr 
19.

The transcription factor TCFAP2C/AP-2gamma cooperates with CDX2 to maintain
trophectoderm formation.

Kuckenberg P(1), Buhl S, Woynecki T, van Fürden B, Tolkunova E, Seiffe F, Moser
M, Tomilin A, Winterhager E, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, Bonn D-53127, Germany.

In mammals, cell lineage specification is established at the blastocyst stage. At
this stage, transcription factor Cdx2 represses pluripotency genes, thus
promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate. Recently, transcription factor Gata3
was shown to act in a parallel pathway in promoting trophoblast cell fate,
suggesting that there are more factors working in the trophoblast lineage. Here, 
we report that the transcription factor Tcfap2c is expressed at a high level in
the trophectoderm and is able to induce trophoblast fate in embryonic stem cells.
Trophoblast fate induced by Tcfap2c does not require Cdx2 and vice versa,
suggesting that the molecules act in alternative pathways. However, both Tcfap2c 
and Cdx2 are required for the upregulation of Elf5, a marker of trophoblast stem 
cell maintenance, suggesting that both factors are required for stable
trophoblast induction. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like cells are stable in
long-term culture, indicating that they are capable of self-renewal.
Tcfap2c-controlled trophoblast maintenance involves the induction of Cdx2 and the
repression of the pluripotency factor Nanog. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like
cells differentiate to trophoblast derivatives in vitro and contribute to the
trophectoderm in blastocysts in vivo. Taken together, these observations suggest 
that Tcfap2c and Cdx2 cooperate to override the pluripotency program and
establish the extraembryonic trophoblast maintenance program in murine embryos.

PMCID: PMC2897582
PMID: 20404091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Pathol Int. 2010 Feb;60(2):119-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02485.x.

Colloid carcinoma of the intestinal type in the uterine cervix: mucin
immunohistochemistry.

Shintaku M(1), Kushima R, Abiko K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka Red Cross Hospital, Tennoji, Osaka, Japan.
masa-s@sings.jp

A case of colloid carcinoma (gelatinous carcinoma) of the intestinal type in the 
uterine cervix is reported along with the findings of an immunohistochemical
study of intracytoplasmic mucus of the neoplastic cells. The patient was a
69-year-old woman with a circumferential uterine cervical tumor measuring about 4
cm. Histopathological examination of the hysterectomy specimen demonstrated
typical features of colloid carcinoma. The tumor consisted of numerous mucous
nodules, and low-columnar or cuboidal cells with intracytoplasmic mucus lined the
margins of the mucous nodules or floated within them. The cytoplasm of neoplastic
cells was immunoreactive for both cytokeratins 7 and 20, and the intracytoplasmic
mucus was immunoreactive for MUC2 but negative for MUC5AC and MUC6. Nuclei of
tumor cells were immunoreactive for CDX2. Colloid carcinoma is a very rare
variant of mucus-producing adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix and probably a
heterogeneous group that consists of neoplasms of different histogeneses, that
is, neoplasms of endocervical, gastric, and intestinal origins. Results of the
immunohistochemical studies in the present case showed that neoplastic cells
produced mucus of the large intestine type, thus verifying the presence of a
distinct subtype of colloid carcinoma of the cervix that shows the intestinal
phenotype.

PMID: 20398197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Virchows Arch. 2010 May;456(5):499-505. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0912-x.

Mitochondrion-rich differentiated adenocarcinomas of the stomach:
clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and electron microscopy study of nine
cases.

Caruso RA(1), Napoli P, Nania A, Parisi A, Fedele F, Zuccalà V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia Umana, Policlinico Universitario, Messina, Italy.
rosariocaruso@tin.it

Pathologic and prognostic data of nine patients with mitochondrion-rich
carcinomas (MRC) were compared retrospectively to data of 101 patients with
conventional gastric adenocarcinomas. MRC was defined as a tumour composed
predominantly, or entirely, of columnar adenocarcinoma cells with eosinophilic
cytoplasm and a strong supranuclear immunoreactivity for antimitochondrial
antibody. Electron microscopy confirmed supranuclear distribution of mitochondria
in MRC while immunostaining pattern was irregular or absent in the remaining 101 
cases. MRC exhibited a tubulopapillary or cribriform growth pattern with focal
infiltration of neutrophils in the tumour stroma. Prominent necrosis was present 
including segmental and intraluminal "dirty necrosis", while mitotic and ki-67
proliferative rates were low. MRC showed immunohistochemical findings compatible 
with gastric differentiation (CK7+/CK20-/CDX-) When MRC were compared with
non-MRC carcinomas, tumour size (< 4 cm vs >4 cm, P < 0.01) , frequency of lymph 
node metastases (11% vs. 80%, P < 0.01), low stage (I, II) at diagnosis (100% vs.
56%, P < 0.01), Goseki's group I (100% vs. 6%, P < 0.01), and better survival (0%
vs. 70%, P < 0.01) differed significantly. Our results suggest that MRC of the
stomach may be considered a low-grade malignancy with an excellent prognosis.

PMID: 20393747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Genes Cells. 2010 May;15(5):455-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01400.x. Epub
2010 Apr 9.

Role of SOX2 in maintaining pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells.

Adachi K(1), Suemori H, Yasuda SY, Nakatsuji N, Kawase E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shougoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, 
Japan.

Human embryonic stem cell (ESC) pluripotency is thought to be regulated by
several key transcription factors including OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2. Although the
functions of OCT4 and NANOG in human ESCs are well defined, that of SOX2 has not 
been fully characterized. To investigate the role of SOX2, we modulated the level
of SOX2 expression in human ESCs. Reduction of SOX2 expression in human ESCs
induced trophectodermal and partial endodermal differentiation. Interestingly,
CDX2, a typical trophectoderm-associated gene, was not up-regulated. In contrast,
using the Tet-on gene inducible system, SOX2 over-expression in human ESCs
induced trophectoderm differentiation accompanied by increased CDX2 expression.
Additionally, SOX2 over-expression resulted in an increase in CGalpha-positive
cells, which marks later stage trophectoderm development, rather than placental
lactogen-positive cells. Thus, over-expression as well as repression of SOX2
expression in human ESCs resulted in their differentiation into the trophectoderm
lineage. Our data show that SOX2 plays an important role in the maintenance of
pluripotency of human ESCs and possibly, trophoblast development.

PMID: 20384793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Hum Pathol. 2010 Jul;41(7):1034-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.017. Epub 2010 
Apr 9.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor and gastric adenocarcinoma collision tumors.

Kleist B(1), Lasota J, Miettinen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Soerlandet sykehus HF, Serviceboks 416, N-4604
Kristiansand, Norway. britta.kleist@sshf.no

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors sometimes occur together with gastric carcinoma, 
but true collision tumors featuring these 2 components are very rare. The authors
describe here 2 collision tumors containing a gastrointestinal stromal tumor with
intermingling elements of gastric adenocarcinoma. The gastrointestinal stromal
tumors were 5.5 to 6 cm spindle cell tumors, and one patient had an additional
prepyloric stromal tumor (2.5 cm). All gastrointestinal stromal tumors had low
mitotic counts less than 5/50 high-power fields and were positive for KIT, DOG1, 
and CD34. Different KIT exon 11 mutations (single nucleotide substitution,
complex insertion-duplication) in all tumors indicated that the 2
gastrointestinal stromal tumors in one patient were independent primary tumors.
The adenocarcinoma components displayed gland-forming intestinal type to signet
ring cell morphology with focally accompanying dysplastic epithelium,
immunohistochemical positivity for CDX2, and varying keratin 7/20 expression. We 
hypothesize that development of gastric adenocarcinoma within a gastrointestinal 
stromal tumor may be based on displaced gastric epithelium in a long-standing
stromal tumor with events of intermittent ulceration and epithelial regeneration.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20381123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Hum Pathol. 2010 Aug;41(8):1159-64. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.018. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Invasive micropapillary urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.

Lopez-Beltran A(1), Montironi R, Blanca A, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Surgery, University of Cordoba
Faculty of Medicine, E-14004, Cordoba, Spain. em1lobea@uco.es

In this report, we present the clinicopathologic features of 13 cases of the
invasive micropapillary variant of urothelial carcinoma. This is a rare and
aggressive variant of bladder cancer recognized by the current World Health
Organization classification of urologic tumors. The micropapillary component
varied from 50% to 100% of the tumor specimen; in 10 cases, the micropapillary
component composed greater than 70% of the tumor, with 5 cases showing pure
micropapillary carcinoma. The architectural pattern of the tumor varied from
solid expansile nests with slender papillae within tissue retraction spaces to
pseudoglandular growth with prominent ring-like structures (2 cases, 15%) and
invasive micropapillary carcinoma with squamous differentiation (2 cases, 15%); a
streaking solid architectural pattern of micropapillary carcinoma was
additionally present in 2 cases (15%). At histology, the individual tumor cells
had abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei with prominent nucleoli and
irregular distribution of chromatin, and frequent mitotic figures. Most
neoplastic cells had nuclei of low to intermediate nuclear grade with occasional 
nuclear pleomorphism. Eight mixed cases had concurrent conventional high-grade
urothelial carcinoma with squamous or glandular differentiation in 3 and 1
case(s), respectively. All patients had advanced-stage cancer (>pT2), and 8 (62%)
had lymph node metastasis. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that both
micropapillary and associated conventional urothelial carcinomas were positive
for MUC1 and 2, cytokeratin 7, PTEN, p53, and Ki-67. Her2Neu, uroplakin,
cytokeratin 20, 34betaE12, CA125, and p16 were positive in 4, 10, 8, 7, 3, and 3 
cases, respectively. MUC5A, MUC6, and CDX2 were negative in all micropapillary
cases. Follow-up information was available in all cases (range, 2-21 months;
mean, 10 months). Eleven of patients died of disease from 2 to 14 months, and 2
patients were alive with disease at 14 and 21 months. Univariate statistical
analysis showed survival differences between invasive micropapillary and
conventional urothelial carcinomas (P < .0001). In summary, invasive
micropapillary variant of urothelial carcinoma is an aggressive variant
associated with poor prognosis that presents at an advanced clinical stage. The
immunophenotype of invasive micropapillary carcinoma supports urothelial origin; 
the immunoreactivity to Her2Neu and PTEN might be relevant in terms of future
targeting therapy. The morphologic diversity of micropapillary carcinoma may
represent a diagnostic pitfall in limited samples, where its distinction from
conventional urothelial carcinoma is critical for its clinical management.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20381120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2010 Jul;46(7):619-23. doi:
10.1007/s11626-010-9312-4. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Expression of stemness markers in mouse parthenogenetic-diploid blastocysts is
influenced by slight variation of activation protocol adopted.

Bianchi E(1), Geremia R, Sette C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Cell Biology, Section of Anatomy, University
of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.

The importance of obtaining stem cells through alternative methods has increased 
progressively in the recent years due to the potential role that embryonic stem
(ES) cells play in the field of regenerative medicine. In this regard, generation
of parthenogenetic blastocysts allows the production of ethic-free ES cells
without the need to manipulate normal embryos. Our work was aimed at clarifying
whether variations in the method adopted to generate diploid parthenogenetic
blastocysts could determine differences in the quality of blastocysts produced.
In vitro development of mouse oocytes activated with three protocols, using Sr2+ 
and cytochalasin for different time, was compared with that of in vivo fertilized
embryos. We have evaluated the efficiency of blastocyst formation and analysed
the expression pattern of the stemness markers OCT4, CDX2, and NANOG. Our results
indicate that the yield of diploid parthenogenotes and the segregation of the
stemness marker OCT4 in the developing blastocyst are influenced by the
parthenogenetic protocol adopted. Particularly, even if all methods tested
allowed the production of blastocysts in vitro, the correct segregation of OCT4
occurred only in blastocysts developed from oocytes concomitantly treated for 4 h
with Sr2+ and cytochalasin D. Our results indicate that the protocol employed to 
develop parthenogenetic blastocysts in vitro affects the quality of cells in the 
inner cell mass.

PMID: 20376706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2010 Aug;45(7-8):828-34. doi: 10.3109/00365521003770269.

Relevance of high virulence Helicobacter pylori strains and futility of CDX2
expression for predicting intestinal metaplasia after eradication of infection.

Barros R(1), Peleteiro B, Almeida R, Figueiredo C, Barros H, David L, Lunet N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal. rbarros@ipatimup.pt

OBJECTIVE: Different Helicobacter pylori genotypes are associated with distinct
inflammatory responses and consequent development of pre-neoplastic lesions,
namely intestinal metaplasia (IM), which is dependent on the expression of CDX2. 
We aimed to evaluate IM progression/regression in the context of H. pylori
eradication, bringing into play the effect of the virulence of infecting H.
pylori strains and the hypothesis that CDX2 expression might be a marker for
later development of IM.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty-five male volunteers were evaluated by endoscopy
before H. pylori eradication and after a median six-year follow-up. Histological 
diagnosis was performed at baseline and follow-up, and baseline H. pylori
genotypes and CDX2 expression in non-metaplastic foci were also assessed.
RESULTS: Fifty-one individuals remained free from infection at follow-up. Six out
of 27 who had no metaplastic lesions at baseline developed IM. CDX2 nuclear
expression was observed in 15 of the 21 cases (71.4%) showing no progression to
IM, and in three out of six cases (50%) with progression to IM (p = 0.367). Six
of the 24 cases with IM at baseline showed regression to less severe outcomes,
which was less frequent in those infected with high-virulence strains (7.7% vs.
50%, p = 0.047). In the latter there is a significant persistence of lymphoid
follicles.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support that under infection with high virulence H.
pylori strains, IM is a point of difficult return in the gastric carcinogenic
pathway. The appearance of CDX-expressing cells in non-metaplastic foci was not
associated with the development of IM during the six-year follow-up.

PMID: 20367284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Eur Spine J. 2010 Sep;19(9):1545-50. doi: 10.1007/s00586-010-1385-y. Epub 2010
Apr 2.

Polymorphism in vitamin D receptor is associated with bone mineral density in
patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.

Suh KT(1), Eun IS, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Pusan National 
University School of Medicine, 1-10 Ami-Dong, Seo-Gu, Busan 602-739, Korea.

Low bone mass and osteopenia have been reported in the axial and peripheral
skeleton of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) patients. Furthermore, several 
recent studies have shown that gene polymorphisms are related to osteoporosis.
However, no study has yet linked polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor (VDR)
gene and bone mass in AIS. Accordingly, the authors examined the association
between bone mass and VDR gene polymorphisms in 198 girls diagnosed with AIS. The
VDR BsmI (rs1544410), FokI (rs2228670) and Cdx2 (rs11568820) polymorphisms and
bone mineral density at the lumbar spine (LSBMD) and femoral neck (FNBMD) were
analyzed and compared to their levels in healthy controls. Mean LSBMD and FNBMD
in AIS patients were lower than in age- and sex-matched healthy controls (P =
0.0022 and P = 0.0013, respectively). A comparison of genotype frequencies in AIS
patients and controls revealed a significant difference for the BsmI polymorphism
only (P = 0.0054). Furthermore, a significant association was found between the
VDR BsmI polymorphism and LSBMD. In particular, LSBMD in AIS patients with the AA
genotype was found to be significantly lower than in patients with the GA (P <
0.05) or GG (P < 0.01) genotypes. However, no significant association was found
between LSBMD or FNBMD and the VDR FokI or Cdx2 polymorphisms. These results
suggest that the VDR BsmI polymorphism is associated with LSBMD in girls with
AIS.

PMCID: PMC2989276
PMID: 20361340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jun 15;19(12):2456-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq128. Epub 2010 Mar
30.

ELF5-enforced transcriptional networks define an epigenetically regulated
trophoblast stem cell compartment in the human placenta.

Hemberger M(1), Udayashankar R, Tesar P, Moore H, Burton GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Genetics & Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. myriam.hemberger@bbsrc.ac.uk

The first definitive cell fate decision in development occurs at the blastocyst
stage with establishment of the trophoblast and embryonic cell lineages. In the
mouse, lineage commitment is achieved by epigenetic regulation of a critical
gatekeeper gene, the transcription factor Elf5, that reinforces placental cell
fate and is necessary for trophoblast stem (TS) cell self-renewal. In humans,
however, the epigenetic lineage boundary seems to be less stringent since human
embryonic stem (ES) cells, unlike their murine counterparts, harbour some
potential to differentiate into trophoblast derivatives. Here, we show that ELF5 
is expressed in the human placenta in villous cytotrophoblast cells but not in
post-mitotic syncytiotrophoblast and invasive extravillous cytotrophoblast cells.
ELF5 establishes a circuit of mutually interacting transcription factors with
CDX2 and EOMES, and the highly proliferative ELF5(+)/CDX2(+) double-positive
subset of cytotrophoblast cells demarcates a putative TS cell compartment in the 
early human placenta. In contrast to placental trophoblast, however, ELF5 is
hypermethylated and largely repressed in human ES cells and derived trophoblast
cell lines, as well as in induced pluripotent stem cells and murine epiblast stem
cells. Thus, these cells exhibit an embryonic lineage-specific epigenetic
signature and do not undergo an epigenetic reprogramming to reflect the
trophoblast lineage at key loci such as ELF5. Our identification of the
trophoblast-specific transcriptional circuit established by ELF5 will be
instrumental to derive human TS cell lines that truly reflect early placental
trophoblast and that will be most beneficial to gain insights into the aetiology 
of common pregnancy complications, including intra-uterine growth restriction and
pre-eclampsia.

PMID: 20354077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Lab Invest. 2010 Jul;90(7):1033-48. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.71. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

Fibroblast-derived HB-EGF promotes Cdx2 expression in esophageal squamous cells.

Rahman FB(1), Kadowaki Y, Ishihara S, Tobita H, Imaoka H, Fukuhara H, Aziz MM,
Furuta K, Amano Y, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Shimane University School of Medicine,
Izumo, Shimane, Japan.

The molecular basis of attaining columnar phenotype in Barrett's esophagus is
poorly understood. One hypothesis states that factors locally produced by cells
of mesenchymal origin in chronic reflux esophagitis induce metaplastic
transformation. This study was performed to elucidate the factors secreted from
fibroblasts that cause columnar phenotype in adjacent squamous epithelium. Human 
fibroblast cells were exposed to acidified medium for 20 min, followed by medium 
neutralization for 2 h, and then total RNA was hybridized to Sentrix Human-6
Expression BeadChips. Furthermore, esophageal mucosal biopsy specimens from
reflux esophagitis patients were examined for HB-EGF expression using
immunohistochemistry. In addition, cells from the human esophageal squamous
epithelial cell line HET1A were treated with recombinant HB-EGF, and changes in
expressions of Cdx2 and columnar markers were analyzed. The gene expression
profile revealed significant upregulation of a variety of growth factors and
inflammatory chemokines in response to acid exposure. Among them, HB-EGF was
upregulated more than 10-fold. Biopsy specimens from reflux esophagitis patients 
showed a strong expression of HB-EGF in fibroblast cells underlying the damaged
epithelium. Furthermore, in vitro stimulation of HET1A cells with HB-EGF
increased Cdx2 in dose-dependent manners. Functional analysis of human Cdx2
promoter also revealed its upregulation by HB-EGF stimulation, showing the role
of potential responsive elements (AP-1 and NF-kappaB) for its transcriptional
activation. Moreover, the columnar markers cytokeratin 7 and villin were also
upregulated by HB-EGF stimulation. HB-EGF induces several genes characteristics
of columnar phenotypes of esophageal squamous epithelium in a paracrine manner.

PMID: 20351696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Hum Pathol. 2010 Jun;41(6):910-3. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.10.020. Epub 2010
Mar 24.

Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma of the breast with amplification of the HER2-gene
confirmed by FISH: The first case reported.

Petersson F(1), Pang B, Thamboo TP, Putti TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Health System, Singapore 119074, 
Singapore. fredrikpetersson@live.se

We present the first case of a primary mucinous cystadenocarcinoma of the breast 
that, in addition to the characteristic immunophenotype (CK7(+), CK20(-), ER(-), 
PR(-), and cdx2(-)), showed a strong membranous HER2-protein expression and
HER2-gene amplification documented by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20338619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Stem Cells. 2010 May;28(5):894-902. doi: 10.1002/stem.417.

Engineering cell-permeant FLP recombinase for tightly controlled inducible and
reversible overexpression in embryonic stem cells.

Patsch C(1), Peitz M, Otte DM, Kesseler D, Jungverdorben J, Wunderlich FT,
Brüstle O, Zimmer A, Edenhofer F.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Engineering Group, University of Bonn - Life and Brain Center and
Hertie Foundation, Sigmund-Freud Strasse 25, Bonn, Germany.

Combined application of DNA recombinases Cre and FLP enables tightly controlled
independent and/or sequential gene regulations. However, in practice, such dual
recombinase strategies are hampered by the comparably low efficiency of the FLP
recombinase. Here, we present the engineering of a recombinant cell-permeant FLP 
protein (TAT-FLP) that induces recombination in >75% of fibroblasts and mouse as 
well as human embryonic stem (ES) cells. We show that TAT-FLP ideally complements
the strength of cell-permeant Cre recombinase for genetic engineering as
exemplified by FLP-ON-Cre-OFF, an inducible transgene expression cassette that
enables tightly controlled expression in a reversible manner. We exemplify this
concept by conditional overexpression of LacZ and the caudal-related homeobox
transcription factor CDX2. We expect our FLP transduction system to become widely
useful for numerous genetic interventions addressing complex biological questions
and the generation of transgene-free therapeutically applicable ES cell-derived
cells.

PMID: 20333748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):194-203.e1. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.03.035. 
Epub 2010 Mar 17.

Acid and bile salt-induced CDX2 expression differs in esophageal squamous cells
from patients with and without Barrett's esophagus.

Huo X(1), Zhang HY, Zhang XI, Lynch JP, Strauch ED, Wang JY, Melton SD, Genta RM,
Wang DH, Spechler SJ, Souza RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, VA North Texas Health Care System and the University
of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: It is not clear why only a minority of patients with
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) develop Barrett's esophagus. We
hypothesized that differences among individuals in molecular pathways activated
when esophageal squamous epithelium is exposed to reflux underlie the development
of Barrett's metaplasia.
METHODS: We used esophageal squamous cell lines from patients who had GERD with
Barrett's esophagus (normal esophageal squamous [NES]-B3T and NES-B10T) and
without Barrett's esophagus (NES-G2T and NES-G4T) to study effects of acid and
bile salts on expression of the CDX2 gene. Bay 11-705, Ad5 inhibitor
kappaB(IkappaB)alpha-SR, and site-directed mutagenesis were used to explore
effects of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) inhibition on CDX2 promoter
activity; DNA binding of the NF-kappaB subunits p50 and p65 was assessed by
chromatin immune-precipitation.
RESULTS: Acid and bile salts increased CDX2 messenger RNA (mRNA), protein, and
promoter activity in NES-B3T and NES-B10T cells, but not in NES-G2T or NES-G4T
cells. Inhibition of NF-kappaB abolished the increase in CDX2 promoter activity. 
Increased CDX2 promoter activity was associated with nuclear translocation of
p50, which bound to the promoter. We found CDX2 mRNA in 7 of 10 esophageal
squamous biopsy specimens from patients with Barrett's esophagus, but in only 1
of 10 such specimens from patients who had GERD without Barrett's esophagus.
CONCLUSIONS: Acid and bile salts induce CDX2 mRNA and protein expression in
esophageal squamous cells from patients with Barrett's esophagus, but not from
GERD patients without Barrett's esophagus. We speculate that these differences in
acid- and bile salt-induced activation of molecular pathways may underlie the
development of Barrett's metaplasia.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2902607
PMID: 20303354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):364-9. doi: 10.1042/BST0380364.

The role of Cdx2 in Barrett's metaplasia.

Colleypriest BJ(1), Farrant JM, Slack JM, Tosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.
Bcolleypriest@doctors.net.uk

Metaplasia (or transdifferentiation) is defined as the transformation of one
tissue type to another. Clues to the molecular mechanisms that control the
development of metaplasia are implied from knowledge of the transcription factors
that specify tissue identity during normal embryonic development. Barrett's
metaplasia describes the development of a columnar/intestinal phenotype in the
squamous oesophageal epithelium and is the major risk factor for oesophageal
adenocarcinoma. This particular type of cancer has a rapidly rising incidence and
a dismal prognosis. The homoeotic transcription factor Cdx2 (Caudal-type homeobox
2) has been implicated as a master switch gene for intestine and therefore for
Barrett's metaplasia. Normally, Cdx2 expression is restricted to the epithelium
of the small and large intestine. Loss of Cdx2 function, or conditional deletion 
in the intestine, results in replacement of intestinal cells with a stratified
squamous phenotype. In addition, Cdx2 is sufficient to provoke intestinal
metaplasia in the stomach. In the present paper, we review the evidence for the
role of Cdx2 in the development of Barrett's metaplasia.

PMID: 20298184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):358-63. doi: 10.1042/BST0380358.

Pathophysiology of intestinal metaplasia of the stomach: emphasis on CDX2
regulation.

Barros R(1), Camilo V, Pereira B, Freund JN, David L, Almeida R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Rua Dr. Roberto Frias s/n, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal.

IM (intestinal metaplasia) of the stomach is a pre-neoplastic lesion that usually
follows Helicobacter pylori infection and that confers increased risk for gastric
cancer development. After setting the role played by CDX2 (Caudal-type homeobox
2) in the establishment of gastric IM, it became of foremost importance to
unravel the regulatory mechanisms behind its de novo expression in the stomach.
In the present paper, we review the basic pathology of gastric IM as well as the 
current knowledge on molecular pathways involved in CDX2 regulation in the
gastric context.

PMID: 20298183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):353-7. doi: 10.1042/BST0380353.

The role of Cdx genes in the gut and in axial development.

Beck F(1), Stringer EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Henry Wellcome Building, University of Leicester, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE17RH, UK. fb22@le.ac.uk

The Cdx (Caudal-type homeobox) group of ParaHox genes (Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 in the
mouse) perform multiple functions in mammalian development. Cdx1 is concerned
with axial positional information, and its deletion appears to have no important 
effect other than a disturbance of axial patterning. In contrast, Cdx2 is
required for trophoblast differentiation, axial patterning and extension, as well
as for morphological specification (i.e. patterning) of gut endoderm.
Cdx4-knockout animals do not present an abnormal phenotype, but, when combined
with Cdx2 haploinsufficiency, present a dramatic picture involving abnormal
cloacal specification. The latter is probably due in large part to defective
paraxial mesodermal development in the caudal region, but may also involve
defective endodermal growth. A significant degree of redundancy is apparent
between the Cdx genes with respect to caudal extension and possibly also during
gut development.

PMID: 20298182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):321-6. doi: 10.1042/BST0380321.

Modelling Barrett's oesophagus.

Kong J(1), Stairs DB, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Barrett's oesophagus is the replacement of normal squamous oesophageal epithelium
with an intestinalized columnar epithelium. Although some insight has been gained
as to what Barrett's oesophagus is, how this columnar epithelium emerges from
within a stratified squamous epithelium remains an unanswered question. We have
sought to determine whether oesophageal keratinocytes can be trans-differentiated
into Barrett's oesophagus cells. Using an Affymetrix microarray, we found
unexpectedly that gene-expression patterns in the Barrett's oesophagus were only 
slightly more similar to the normal small intestine than they were to the normal 
oesophagus. Thus gene-expression patterns suggest significant molecular
similarities remain between Barrett's oesophagus cells and normal squamous
oesophageal epithelium, despite their histological resemblance with intestine. We
next determined whether directed expression of intestine-specific transcription
factors could induce intestinalization of keratinocytes. Retroviral-mediated Cdx2
(Caudal-type homeobox 2) expression in immortalized human oesophageal
keratinocytes engineered with human telomerase reverse transcriptase (EPC2-hTERT 
cells) could be established transiently, but not maintained, and was associated
with a reduction in cell proliferation. Co-expression of cyclin D1 rescued
proliferation in the Cdx2-expressing cells, but co-expression of
dominant-negative p53 did not. Cdx2 expression in the EPC2-hTERT.D1 cells did not
induce intestinalization. However, when combined with treatments that induce
chromatin remodelling, there was a significant induction of Barrett's
oesophagus-associated genes. Studies are ongoing to determine whether other
intestinal transcription factors, either alone or in combination, can provoke
greater intestinalization of oesophageal keratinocytes. We conclude that, on the 
basis of gene-expression patterns, Barrett's oesophagus epithelial cells may
represent an intermediate between oesophageal keratinocytes and intestinal
epithelial cells. Moreover, our findings suggest that it may be possible to
induce Barrett's oesophagus epithelial cells from oesophageal keratinocytes by
altering the expression of certain critical genes.

PMID: 20298176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):313-9. doi: 10.1042/BST0380313.

Barrett's metaplasia: molecular mechanisms and nutritional influences.

Slack JM(1), Colleypriest BJ, Quinlan JM, Yu WY, Farrant MJ, Tosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, U.K.

Barrett's metaplasia is discussed in the context of a general theory for the
formation of metaplasias based on developmental biology. The phenotype of a
particular tissue type becomes established during embryonic development by the
expression of a specific set of transcription factors. If this combination
becomes altered, then the tissue type can be altered. Such events may occur by
mutation or by environmental effects on gene expression, normally within the stem
cell population of the tissue. A macroscopic patch of metaplastic tissue will
arise only if the new gene activity state is self-sustaining in the absence of
its original causes, and if the new tissue type can outgrow the parent tissue
type. An important candidate gene for the causation of Barrett's metaplasia is
Cdx2 (Caudal-type homeobox 2). In normal development, this is expressed in the
future intestine, but not the future foregut. Mouse knockout studies have shown
that it is needed for intestinal development, and that its loss from adult
intestine can lead to squamous transformations. It is also expressed in Barrett's
metaplasia and can be activated in oesophageal cell cultures by treatment with
bile acids. We have investigated the ability of Cdx2 to bring about intestinal
transformations in oesophageal epithelium. Our results show that Cdx2 can
activate a programme of intestinal gene expression when overexpressed in HET-1A
cells, or in fetal epithelium, but not in the adult epithelium. This suggests
that Cdx2, although necessary for formation of intestinal tissue, is not
sufficient to provoke Barrett's metaplasia in adult life and that overexpression 
of additional transcription factors is necessary. In terms of diet and nutrition,
there is a known association of Barrett's metaplasia with obesity. This may work 
through an increased risk of gastro-oesophageal reflux. Acid and bile are known
to activate Cdx2 expression in oesophageal cells. It may also increase
circulating levels of TNFalpha (tumour necrosis factor alpha), which activates
Cdx2. In addition, there may be effects of diet on the composition of the bile.

PMID: 20298175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Genetika. 2010 Feb;46(2):282-6.

[Expression of early developmental genes in vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokin MA, Medvedev SP, Shevchenko AI, Slyn'ko NM, Zakiian SM.

The expression of genes Sox2, Klf4, Myc, Sall4, Gata6, Foxa2, Hnf4a, Cdx2, Esrrb,
Hand1 in cultivated cells, embryos and organs of adult voles Microtus
rossiaemeridionalis was studied. High resemblance of the expression patterns of
these genes in the organs of adult voles, mice and humans was demonstrated. It
was established that genes Gata6, Foxa2 and Hnf4a were specifically expressed in 
vole extraembryonic endoderm cells, while Cdx2 and Handl genes, in trophoblast
stem cells. This shows that these genes can be used markers for corresponding
vole cell lines. Indirect confirmation pointing to the fact that Oct4 gene is a
marker gene for epiblast cells both in the vole and mouse was obtained.

PMID: 20297663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jun;23(6):834-43. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.59. Epub 2010 Mar 
12.

Foveolar type dysplasia in Barrett esophagus.

Brown IS(1), Whiteman DC, Lauwers GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Sullivan Nicolaides Pathology and Royal Brisbane
and Women's Hospital Brisbane, Brisbane, Australia. ian_brown@snp.com.au

Adenocarcinoma of the lower esophagus and esophagogastric junction is increasing 
in incidence in Western countries. A metaplasia (Barrett
esophagus)-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence induced by gastroesophageal reflux
disease is established. Two patterns of Barrett dysplasias have been
described-adenomatous (type 1) and non-adenomatous (type 2 or
foveolar/hyperplastic type). Interestingly, little is known about non-adenomatous
dysplasia. Esophagogastrectomy cases from 41 patients with glandular dysplasia
with and without associated invasive adenocarcinoma of the lower esophagus were
evaluated for expression of MUC2, MUC5AC, CDX2, villin, Ki67 and p53. Results
were correlated with sub-classification of the dysplasia into morphologic
patterns of adenomatous vs foveolar vs hybrid type. In addition,
clinicopathological parameters including the presence and extent of background
intestinal metaplasia were also evaluated. Foveolar type dysplasia was present in
46% of the cases and thus, was more common than adenomatous type or hybrid type
(both approximately 27%) dysplasia. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the
histological stratification in all cases. Foveolar type dysplasia commonly
expressed MUC5AC (P<0.12) but was consistently negative for markers of intestinal
differentiation, MUC2, CDX2 and villin (all P<0.01). By contrast, adenomatous
type dysplasia frequently displayed intestinal differentiation markers (all
P<0.0001) Hybrid-type dysplasia was similar to adenomatous type dysplasia in
showing expression of intestinal differentiation markers (P<0.01) and therefore
could not be sustained as a separate category. In conclusion, our study provides 
evidence for a non intestinal pathway to neoplastic development in Barrett
esophagus, that is, gastric metaplasia-foveolar dysplasia-adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 20228780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(4):675-81. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.092942mk.

The effect of superovulation on the contributions of individual blastomeres from 
2-cell stage CF1 mouse embryos to the blastocyst.

Katayama M(1), Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

It remains controversial whether blastomeres of 2-cell stage mouse embryos show
bias in their contribution to the blastocyst and whether there is any effect of
superovulation. Two-cell stage embryos from CF1 mice were derived by either
natural breeding (N) or superovulation (S) and cultured in vitro. At blastocyst, 
inner cell mass and trophectoderm were distinguished by Cdx2 and Oct4
immunostaining. A fluorescent dye (CM-Dil) was also used to tag individual
blastomeres at the 2-cell stage, and the descendant cells identified by their red
fluorescence. S and N embryos developed to blastocyst at the same rate and
contained a similar number of cells. However, with S embryos, the descendants of 
the blastomere labeled with CM-DiI contributed predominantly to either the
embryonic or abembryonic pole about 70% of the time, whereas most N embryos
displayed random patterning, with no restriction to one or other of the poles. In
S-embryos, but not N-embryos, the leading blastomere at second cleavage
contributed preferentially to the embryonic pole of the blastocyst and the
lagging blastomere to the abembryonic pole and hence mural trophectoderm. In
addition, a tetrahedral rather than a flat morphology at the 4-cell stage of
S-embryos was strongly biased to displaying the embryonic/abembryonic pattern at 
blastocyst. In contrast, S-embryos lacking a zona pellucida resembled N embryos
in their patterning. In CF1 mice, superovulation has little effect on development
to blastocyst, but enforces a greater degree of lineage restriction than natural 
breeding, most likely through constraints imposed by the zona pellucida.

PMID: 20209440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):423-34. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091177.

Direct repression of Sonic Hedgehog expression in the stomach by Cdx2 leads to
intestinal transformation.

Mutoh H(1), Hayakawa H, Sashikawa M, Sakamoto H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan. 
muto@jichi.ac.jp

Shh (Sonic Hedgehog) is a morphogen involved in gastric fundic gland
differentiation in the adult. Shh expression is reduced in Helicobacter
pylori-associated intestinal metaplastic change of the gastric epithelium and
mice that lack Shh show intestinal transformation of the gastric mucosa.
Similarly, in the stomach of Cdx2 (caudal-type homeobox 2)-transgenic mice, the
gastric mucosa is replaced by intestinal metaplastic mucosa. The aim of the
present study was to use Cdx2-transgenic mice to investigate: (i) Shh expression 
in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach; and
(ii) the relationship between Shh and Cdx2. We determined that Shh mRNA levels
were dramatically reduced in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa of the
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach compared with the normal (wild-type) mouse stomach.
This was not due to hypermethylation of the Shh promoter, but instead we showed
that Cdx2 directly bound to the TATA box region of the Shh promoter. Cdx2 also
down-regulated transcription of the Shh gene in the human gastric carcinoma cell 
lines AGS, MKN45 and MKN74. In conclusion, Cdx2 reduced Shh expression by binding
to the unmethylated Shh promoter in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa of
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.

PMID: 20199401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Theriogenology. 2010 Jul 1;74(1):45-59. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2009.12.018. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Differential gene expression in bovine elongated (Day 17) embryos produced by
somatic cell nucleus transfer and in vitro fertilization.

Rodríguez-Alvarez L(1), Sharbati J, Sharbati S, Cox JF, Einspanier R, Castro FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Universidad de
Concepción, Campus Chillán, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile.

Somatic cloning in cattle is associated with impaired embryo development, caused 
by inappropriate epigenetic reprogramming during embryogenesis; however, there is
a paucity of data regarding gene expression at the critical elongation and
peri-implantation stages. The objective of the present study was to identify
genes differentially expressed in bovine cloned embryos at Day 17 of development 
(Day 0=day of nucleus transfer or IVF). Day 7 blastocysts (Hand Made Cloned or
IVP) were transferred to recipient cattle and collected at Day 17. The efficiency
of recovery of elongated embryos was similar, however cloned embryos elongated
less than IVP embryos (91.8+/-45.8 vs. 174+/-50mm) and fewer had embryonic discs 
(63 vs. 83%). Qualitative and quantitative PCR detected expression of OCT4,
NANOG, IFNtau, EOMES, FGF4, SOX2, and CDX2 in all IVP embryos. In most cloned
embryos, NANOG and FGF4 were absent (verified by qPCR); NANOG, EOMES, and FGF4
were underexpressed, whereas IFNtau was overexpressed in cloned embryos. Based on
qPCRs, other genes, i.e., SPARC, SNRB1, and CBPP22, were down-regulated in cloned
embryos, whereas HSP70 and TDKP1 were overexpressed. In bovine microarrays, 47
genes (3.6%) were deregulated in cloned embryos, including several involved in
trophoblast growth and differentiation. In conclusion, we inferred that these
data were indicative of incomplete epigenetic reprogramming after cloning; this
could lead to aberrant gene expression and subsequently early pregnancy loss.
There was an apparent association between incomplete morphological elongation and
aberrant reprogramming of a subset of genes critical for early embryonic
development.

PMID: 20197198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jun;82(6):1237-47. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.082982. Epub
2010 Feb 24.

Development of monozygotic twin mouse embryos from the time of blastomere
separation at the two-cell stage to blastocyst.

Katayama M(1), Ellersieck MR, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, and Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center,
University of Missouri, 1201 E. Rollins Street, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The development of blastomeres separated from two-cell stage murine embryos has
been compared. Blastomeres were removed from the zona pellucida (ZP) and cultured
individually; the twin embryos were compared during their progression to
blastocyst in terms of development rate, cell number, morphology, conformation at
the four-cell stage, and CDX2 and POU5F1 (also known as OCT4) expression. In
general, twin embryos, whether obtained from superovulated or normally bred dams,
displayed comparable cell numbers as they advanced. They formed morulae and
blastocysts more or less synchronously with each other and with control embryos, 
although possessing about half of the latter's cell number. Despite this apparent
synchrony, the majority of twin blastocysts differed in terms of their relative
complements of POU5F1+/CDX2- cells, which represent inner cell mass (ICM), and
POU5F1+/CDX2+ cells, which identify trophectoderm (TE). Many, but not all,
exhibited a disproportionately small ICM. By contrast, demiembryos retained
within their ZP and created by randomly damaging one of the two blastomeres in
two-cell stage embryos exhibited a more normal ratio of ICM to TE cells at
blastocyst and significantly less variance in ICM cell number. One possible
explanation is that ZP-free demiembryos only infrequently adopt the same
conformation as their partners, including the favorable tetrahedral form, at the 
four-cell stage, suggesting that such embryos exhibit a high degree of plasticity
with regard to the orientation of their first two cleavage planes and that a
significant number likely deviate from paths that provide an optimal geometric
progression to blastocyst. These data could explain the difficulty of creating
monozygotic twins from two-cell stage embryos.

PMCID: PMC2874505
PMID: 20181620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Carcinogenesis. 2010 May;31(5):946-52. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq046. Epub 2010 Feb 
22.

A new conditional Apc-mutant mouse model for colorectal cancer.

Robanus-Maandag EC(1), Koelink PJ, Breukel C, Salvatori DC, Jagmohan-Changur SC, 
Bosch CA, Verspaget HW, Devilee P, Fodde R, Smits R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene predispose individuals to 
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), characterized by multiple tumours in the
large intestine. Most mouse models heterozygous for truncating mutant Apc alleles
mimic FAP, however, the intestinal tumours occur mainly in the small intestine.
To model large intestinal tumours, we generated a new conditional Apc-mutant
allele, Apc(15lox), with exon 15 flanked by loxP sites. Similar survival of
Apc(1638N/15lox) and Apc(1638N/+) mice indicated that the normal function of Apc 
was not impaired by the loxP sites. Deletion of exon 15, encoding nearly all
functional Apc domains and containing the polyadenylation signal, resulted in a
mutant allele expressing low levels of a 74 kDa truncated Apc protein. Germ line 
Cre-mediated deletion of exon 15 resulted in Apc(Delta15/+) mice, showing a
severe Apc(Min/+)-like phenotype characterized by multiple tumours in the small
intestine and early lethality. In contrast, conditional Cre-mediated deletion of 
exon 15 specifically directed to the epithelia of distal small and large
intestine of FabplCre;Apc(15lox/+) mice led to longer survival and to tumours
that developed predominantly in the large intestine, mimicking human
FAP-associated colorectal cancer and sporadic colorectal cancer. We conclude that
the FabplCre;Apc(15lox/+) mouse should be an attractive model for studies on
prevention and treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 20176656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2010 May;26(3):280-5. doi: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283378eb0.

Ampullary cancer.

Heinrich S(1), Clavien PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Swiss HPB-Center,
University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This manuscript reviews the recent literature on ampullary
cancer, including new staging definitions, histological characteristics and
treatment options.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent publications emphasize the importance of the histological
differentiation (intestinal vs. pancreatobiliary), which is one of the most
important prognostic factors for ampullary cancer. These histological subtypes
can be differentiated by immunohistochemistry: while positivity for mucin-2
(MUC2) and caudal homeobox gene transcription factor-2 (CDX2) excludes the
pancreatobiliary subtype, positivity for MUC1 and cytokeratin-17 (CK17) excludes 
the intestinal subtype. Also, different mechanisms of cancer development have
been described, which might be related to the type of differentiation. Due to the
very low risk of lymphatic spread, local resections appear sufficient for well
differentiated T1 cancer smaller than 1 cm, whereas larger, less differentiated
or more invasive cancer requires a radical resection. As cancer with intestinal
differentiation shares a similar biology with colon cancer, and the
pancreatobiliary differentiation is close to ductal adenocarcinoma of the
pancreas, adjuvant chemotherapy should probably be given according to colon
cancer (intestinal) and pancreatic cancer (pancreatobiliary), respectively.
However, randomized trials are lacking.
SUMMARY: The recent research suggests that the histological differentiation of
periampullary cancer is more important than the anatomical location (ampulla).
Future studies are required to take this emerging issue into account.

PMID: 20168227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Mar;34(3):364-70. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181cf8bb6.

Preferential expression of MUC6 in oncocytic and pancreatobiliary types of
intraductal papillary neoplasms highlights a pyloropancreatic pathway, distinct
from the intestinal pathway, in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

Basturk O(1), Khayyata S, Klimstra DS, Hruban RH, Zamboni G, Coban I, Adsay NV.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, New York University, NY, USA.

The expression of different MUC glycoproteins has helped define cellular lineage 
in variety of pancreatic neoplasms, and has helped identify distinct carcinogenic
pathways such as the intestinal pathway characterized by diffuse/strong MUC2/CDX2
expression in intestinal-type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs)
and their associated colloid carcinomas (CCs). In this study, the expression
profile of MUC6, a pyloric-type mucin, was investigated in both preinvasive and
invasive pancreatic neoplasia. Florid papillary ("in-situ") components of 9
intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs), 24 IPMNs, and 7 mucinous
cystic neoplasms (MCNs), were analyzed immunohistochemically for MUC6 expression,
as were 15 PanINs, 112 usual invasive ductal adenocarcinomas (DAs), and 14 CCs.
In PanINs, MUC6 expression was limited to the very early areas of PanIN-1A that
typically have pyloric features. Expression was lost in later stages. Similarly, 
in IOPNs or IPMNs or MCNs, MUC6 expression was detectable in the cystic or flat
areas that have pyloric-like histology. However, in the more advanced (papillary)
components of these neoplasms, MUC6 expression was mostly limited to the
"cuboidal-cell" but was not seen in the "columnar-cell" phenotype: there was
diffuse or strong expression in 8/9 IOPN and, relatively weaker but consistent
expression in all 6/6 pancreatobiliary-type IPMNs; whereas virtually no
expression in villous or intestinal-type IPMNs. The 7/8 gastric or foveolar-type 
IPMNs were also negative; in the single case with positivity, the labeling was
limited to high-grade dysplastic areas. Interestingly, the papillae in MCNs were 
also mostly negative. Among invasive carcinomas, 39/112 DAs and only 1/14 CC
expressed MUC6. In DA, the expression did not correlate with survival (P=0.94),
or any of the markers of aggressiveness: more than 2-cm tumor size (P=0.76),
positive surgical margins (P=0.27), lymph node metastasis (P=0.82), or high grade
(P=0.08).IN CONCLUSION: (1) The expression of MUC6 in oncocytic and
pancreatobiliary-type neoplasms but not in villous or intestinal-type neoplasms
supports the presence of a pyloropancreatic pathway distinct from the MUC2/CDX2
expressing intestinal pathway in intraductal papillary neoplasia. (2) MUC6
expression is present in the earliest (nonpapillary) form of any type of
preinvasive neoplasia regardless of whether it is PanIN or IOPN or IPMN or MCN
suggesting that these entities may share some characteristics early on, but
evolve along divergent pathways as they progress.

PMCID: PMC3160822
PMID: 20139757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Nov 15;47(22):1689-92.

[Pathologic study of circumferential margin involvement in middle and lower
rectal cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu B(1), Yu YM, Chen YN, Li YT.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Surgery, the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang 050011, China. yubinli_68@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the rule of circumferential margin involvement (CMI) in
middle and low rectal cancer and improve its detection rate.
METHODS: Pathological large slices stained by HE method was combined with
immunohistochemistry to study the CMI of 41 patients with middle and low rectal
cancer. There were 20 female and 21 male patients, with an average age of 59.5
years (range, 33 to 77 years).
RESULTS: The positive rate of CMI by HE staining was 21.9%. The CMI positive
rates of CK20, CDX2 and MMP7 by immunohistochemistry staining was 29.3%, 31.7%
and 26.8%, respectively. The positive rate of CMI was 36.6% when combined both HE
and immunohistochemistry test, which was significantly higher than those in
single methods (all P < 0.05). The positive rate of CMI in poorly differentiated 
tumor was significantly higher than that in moderately and well-differentiated
tumor. The positive rate of CMI in the tumors with a distance of less than 5 cm
between the anal verge and the lower tumor margin was significantly higher than
that in tumors with the above-mentioned distances of greater than or equal to 5
cm (P < 0.05). According to MMP7 detection, the positive rate of CMI in the group
without lymphatic metastasis was significantly lower than that in N1 and N2 group
(all P < 0.05). There was no significant correlation between CMI and gender, age,
tumor infiltration, lymphatic metastasis, general pathological types and
operation methods (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The positive detection rate of CMI can be improved when combined
large slices HE staining and immunohistochemistry. There is significant
association between CMI and poorly differentiated tumor, lower location and
positive lymphatic metastasis.

PMID: 20137717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Apr;298(4):G504-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00265.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 4.

Cooperation between HNF-1alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 in initiating an enterocytic
differentiation program in a normal human intestinal epithelial progenitor cell
line.

Benoit YD(1), Paré F, Francoeur C, Jean D, Tremblay E, Boudreau F, Escaffit F,
Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Team on Digestive Epithelium, Département d'anatomie et de biologie
cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

In the intestinal epithelium, the Cdx, GATA, and HNF transcription factor
families are responsible for the expression of differentiation markers such as
sucrase-isomaltase. Although previous studies have shown that Cdx2 can induce
differentiation in rat intestinal IEC-6 cells, no data are available concerning
the direct implication of transcription factors on differentiation in human
normal intestinal epithelial cell types. We investigated the role of Cdx2,
GATA-4, and HNF-1alpha using the undifferentiated human intestinal epithelial
crypt cell line HIEC. These transcription factors were tested on proliferation
and expression of polarization and differentiation markers. Ectopic expression of
Cdx2 or HNF-1alpha, alone or in combination, altered cell proliferation abilities
through the regulation of cyclin D1 and p27 expression. HNF-1alpha and GATA-4
together induced morphological modifications of the cells toward polarization,
resulting in the appearance of functional features such as microvilli. HNF-1alpha
was also sufficient to induce the expression of cadherins and
dipeptidylpeptidase, whereas in combination with Cdx2 it allowed the expression
of the late differentiation marker sucrase-isomaltase. Large-scale analysis of
gene expression confirmed the cooperative effect of these factors. Finally,
although DcamKL1 and Musashi-1 expression were downregulated in differentiated
HIEC, other intestinal stem cell markers, such as Bmi1, were unaffected. These
observations show that, in cooperation with Cdx2, HNF-1alpha acts as a key factor
on human intestinal cells to trigger the onset of their functional
differentiation program whereas GATA-4 appears to promote morphological changes.

PMCID: PMC2907224
PMID: 20133952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2010 Apr;45(4):440-8. doi: 10.3109/00365521003624144.

Regeneration associated growth factor receptor and epithelial marker expression
in lymphoid aggregates of ulcerative colitis.

Sipos F(1), Muzes G, Valcz G, Galamb O, Tóth K, Leiszter K, Krenács T, Tulassay
Z, Molnár B.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
sipos.ferenc@freemail.hu

OBJECTIVE: Mesenchymal-epithelial transition may have crucial role in mucosal
regeneration, hence we assayed epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR),
insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF1R), hepatocyte-derived growth factor
receptor (HGFR), CDX2 and cytokeratin (CK) expression in lymphoid aggregates (LA)
of ulcerative colitis (UC).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) made of biopsy samples from 20
mildly, 20 moderately and 20 severely active UC, 12 non-specific colitis (NSC)
and 20 healthy colon were prepared, and immunolabelled with anti-EGFR, -IGF1R,
-HGFR, -CDX2, -CK antibodies. After virtual microscopic evaluation, one-way ANOVA
and correlation analysis were performed. For validation, TaqMan real-time RT-PCR 
was performed by using RNA from laser microdissected LA from 10 healthy colon and
10 endoscopically active UC biopsies.
RESULTS: The number of LA was in tight positive correlation with the severity of 
inflammation (r=0.9). The number of EGFR/HGFR positive subepithelial cells was
found to be significantly elevated in severe (21.6+/-2.1%/21.3+/-1.9%), moderate 
(14.3+/-1.7%/14.6+/-1.6%) and mild (7.2+/-1.6%/7.4+/-1.3%) inflammation compared 
to healthy colon mucosa (2.6+/-1.4%/2.4+/-1.03%) (p < 0.005). Some alterations
were found between UC and NSC samples regarding EGFR and HGFR expression. IGF1R
immunoreactive cells were only found in a trace number in all cases. Increasing
trend of CDX2 and CK positive subepithelial cells was found in active UC, but it 
was not in significant correlation with the severity of inflammation.
CONCLUSION: EGFR and HGFR positive subepithelial cells in LA may be involved in
the induction of the regenerative mucosal processes. The presence of CDX2/CK
positive subepithelial cells suggests that mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition
may be located to lymphoid aggregates.

PMID: 20132083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Int J Cancer. 2010 Nov 1;127(9):2009-19. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25227.

Exogenous luminal nitric oxide exposure accelerates columnar transformation of
rat esophagus.

Endo H(1), Iijima K, Asanuma K, Ara N, Ito H, Asano N, Uno K, Koike T, Imatani A,
Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Exposure of the esophageal mucosa to refluxed gastroduodenal contents is
recognized to be an important risk factor for Barrett's esophagus (BE). At the
human gastroesophageal junction, nitric oxide is generated luminally through the 
enterosalivary recirculation of dietary nitrate, and in cases with
gastroesophageal reflux, the site of luminal nitric oxide generation could shift 
to the distal esophagus. The aim of this study is to investigate whether
exogenous luminal nitric oxide could promote the development of BE in rats.
Sodium nitrite plus ascorbic acid were administered to a rat surgical model of
BE, in which the gastroduodenal contents were refluxed into the esophagus to
generate exogenous luminal nitric oxide in the esophagus by the acid-catalyzed
chemical reaction between the 2 reagents. The emergence of BE was evaluated
histologically in the early phase (several weeks) after the surgery with or
without exogenous nitric oxide administration. To elucidate the histogenesis of
BE, CDX2, MUC2 and MUC6 expressions were investigated immunohistochemically.
Coadministration of sodium nitrite plus ascorbic acid significantly accelerated
the timing of emergence and increased the area of BE compared with controls.
Administration of either reagent alone did not show any promotive effects on BE
formation. Immunohistochemically, the columnar epithelium thus induced was
similar to the specialized intestinal metaplasia in human BE. The results of this
animal model study suggest that exogenous luminal nitric oxide could be involved 
in the pathogenesis of the columnar transformation of the esophagus. Further
studies in human are warranted.

PMID: 20131319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Apr 15;109(6):1118-28. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22490.

Control of intestinal promoter activity of the cellular migratory regulator gene 
ELMO3 by CDX2 and SP1.

Coskun M(1), Boyd M, Olsen J, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

An important aspect of the cellular differentiation in the intestine is the
migration of epithelial cells from the crypt to the villus tip. As homeodomaine
transcription factor CDX2 has been suggested to influence cell migration, we
performed a genome-wide promoter analysis for CDX2 binding in the differentiated 
human intestinal cancer cell line Caco-2 in order to identify CDX2-regulated
genes involved in cellular migration. The engulfment and cell motility 3 (ELMO3) 
gene was identified as a potential CDX2 target gene. ELMO3 is an essential
upstream regulator of the GTP-binding protein RAC during cell migration. However,
no information is available about the transcriptional regulation of the ELMO3
gene. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential role of CDX2 in the 
regulation of the ELMO3 promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
showed that CDX2 bound to conserved CDX2 sequences and mutations of the
CDX2-binding sites, significantly reduced the promoter activity. Reporter gene
assays demonstrated that the region mediating ELMO3 basal transcriptional
activity to be located between -270 and -31 bp. Sequence analysis revealed no
typical TATA-box, but four GC-rich sequences. In vitro analyses (electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays and promoter analyses) demonstrate that the SP1-binding
sites are likely to play an important role in regulating the ELMO3 promoter
activity. Furthermore, we showed here that CDX2 and SP1 can activate the ELMO3
promoter. Taken together, the present study reports the first characterization of
the ELMO3 promoter and suggests a significant role of CDX2 in the basal
transcriptional regulation of the intestine-specific expression of ELMO3,
possibly through interaction with SP1.

PMID: 20127720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Digestion. 2010;81(4):223-30. doi: 10.1159/000264651. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

Helicobacter pylori eradication prevents extension of intestinalization even in
the high-risk group for gastric cancer.

Shiotani A(1), Nishi R, Uedo N, Iishi H, Tsutsui H, Ishii M, Imamura H, Kamada T,
Hata J, Haruma K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kawasaki
Medical School, Kurashiki, Japan. shiotani@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: CDX2 is associated with the intestinal phenotype in the
gastrointestinal tracts and is expressed in the intestinal type of gastric
cancer. Helicobacter pylori-associated atrophic gastritis is characterized by
aberrant expression of CDX2. The aim was to investigate the effects of
eradication to the expression of genes related to the gastric and intestinal
phenotype including CDX2. We compared the effect of eradication between the
patients at high risk for gastric cancer and controls.
METHODS: 20 patients with endoscopic resection for early gastric cancer and 12
sex- and age-matched controls were studied. CDX2 and mucin mRNA expressions were 
examined using whole biopsy specimens and microdissected gastric glands taken
from corpus lesser and greater curves before and 1 year after eradication.
RESULTS: CDX2 and MUC2 expressions in the cancer group were significantly higher 
than in the controls and were significantly decreased after eradication. MUC5AC
(p = 0.01) and MUC6 (p = 0.02) expression significantly increased in the control 
group; the difference between the two groups became significant after
eradication. CDX2 expression in the glands without goblet cells was detectable
and disappeared after eradication.
CONCLUSION: H. pylori eradication can reverse gastric phenotype and diminish
aberrant CDX2 expression in the early stage of intestinalization.

PMID: 20110706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010 Apr;14(4):719-28. doi: 10.1007/s11605-010-1156-4. Epub 
2010 Jan 27.

Lymph node involvement and not the histophatologic subtype is correlated with
outcome after resection of adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of vater.

de Paiva Haddad LB(1), Patzina RA, Penteado S, Montagnini AL, da Cunha JE,
Machado MC, Jukemura J.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Surgery Division, Department of Gastroenterology, University of São 
Paulo School of Medicine, R Aracaju 42, ap 41, Higienopolis, São Paulo
0501240030, Brazil. lucianabphaddad@uol.com.br

BACKGROUND: Intestinal and pancreaticobiliary types of Vater's ampulla
adenocarcinoma have been considered as having different biologic behavior and
prognosis. The aim of the present study was to determine the best
immunohistochemical panel for tumor classification and to analyze the survival of
patients having these histological types of adenocarcinoma.
METHOD: Ninety-seven resected ampullary adenocarcinomas were histologically
classified, and the prognosis factors were analyzed. The expression of MUC1,
MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CK7, CK17, CK20, CD10, and CDX2 was evaluated by using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Forty-three Vater's ampulla carcinomas were histologically classified as
intestinal type, 47 as pancreaticobiliary, and seven as other types. The
intestinal type had a significantly higher expression of MUC2 (74.4% vs. 23.4%), 
CK20 (76.7% vs. 29.8%), CDX2 (86% vs. 21.3%), and CD10 (81.4% vs. 51.1%), while
MUC1 (53.5% vs. 82.9%) and CK7 (79.1% vs. 95.7%) were higher in pancreatobiliary 
adenocarcinomas. The most accurate markers for immunohistochemical classification
were CDX2, MUC1, and MUC2. Survival was significantly affected by
pancreaticobiliary type (p = 0.021), but only lymph node metastasis, lymphatic
invasion, and stage were independent risk factors for survival in a multivariate 
analysis.
CONCLUSION: The immunohistochemical expression of CDX2, MUC1, and MUC2 allows a
reproducible classification of ampullary carcinomas. Although carcinomas of the
intestinal type showed better survival in the univariate analysis, neither
histological classification nor immunohistochemistry were independent predictors 
of poor prognosis.

PMID: 20107918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 15;9(4):634-5. Epub 2010 Feb 13.

Converting intestine into esophagus: anterior-posterior patterning of the
vertebrate gut requires Cdx2.

Kaestner KH.

PMID: 20107317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2010 Jan;46(1):81-6. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.09-71. Epub 2009 Dec 
29.

Bile acids induce cdx2 expression through the farnesoid x receptor in gastric
epithelial cells.

Xu Y(1), Watanabe T, Tanigawa T, Machida H, Okazaki H, Yamagami H, Watanabe K,
Tominaga K, Fujiwara Y, Oshitani N, Arakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Osaka City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Clinical and experimental studies showed that the reflux of bile into the stomach
contributes to the induction of intestinal metaplasia of the stomach and gastric 
carcinogenesis. Caudal-type homeobox 2 (Cdx2) plays a key role in the exhibition 
of intestinal phenotypes by regulating the expression of intestine-specific genes
such as goblet-specific gene mucin 2 (MUC2). We investigated the involvement of
the farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a nuclear receptor for bile acids, in the
chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA)-induced expression of Cdx2 and MUC2 in normal rat
gastric epithelial cells (RGM-1 cells). RGM-1 cells were treated with CDCA or
GW4064, an FXR agonist, in the presence or absence of guggulsterone, an FXR
antagonist. CDCA induced dose-dependent expression of Cdx2 and MUC2 at both the
mRNA and protein levels. The maximum stimulation of Cdx2 and MUC2 mRNA induced by
CDCA was observed at 3 h and by 6 h, respectively. GW4064 also induced expression
of these molecules. The effects of CDCA and GW4064 on expression of Cdx2 and MUC2
were abolished by guggulsterone. These findings suggest that bile acids may
induce gastric intestinal metaplasia and carcinogenesis through the FXR.

PMCID: PMC2803137
PMID: 20104269  [PubMed]


460. Dev Growth Differ. 2010 Apr;52(3):263-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01158.x. 
Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Mechanisms of trophectoderm fate specification in preimplantation mouse
development.

Sasaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. sasaki@cdb.riken.jp

During preimplantation mouse development, embryos establish two distinct cell
lineages by the time of blastocyst formation: trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell
mass (ICM). To explain the mechanism of this cell fate specification, two
classical models, namely the inside-outside model and polarity model have been
proposed based on experimental manipulation studies on embryos. This review
summarizes recent findings on the molecular mechanisms of fate specification, and
discusses how these findings fit into the classical models. TE development is
regulated by a transcription factor cascade, the core transcription factors of
which are Tead4 and Cdx2. The transcriptional activity of Tead4 is regulated by
the position-dependent Hippo signaling pathway, thus supporting the
inside-outside model. In contrast, several findings support the polarity model;
some other findings suggest different mechanisms. We also discuss how the two
classical models could be further developed in the light of recent molecular
findings.

PMID: 20100249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):395-403. doi: 10.1242/dev.038828.

Gata3 regulates trophoblast development downstream of Tead4 and in parallel to
Cdx2.

Ralston A(1), Cox BJ, Nishioka N, Sasaki H, Chea E, Rugg-Gunn P, Guo G, Robson P,
Draper JS, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, MARS Building, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, Toronto, ON
M5G 1L7, Canada.

The mouse blastocyst and stem cells derived from its tissue lineages provide a
unique genetic system for examining the establishment and loss of pluripotency.
The transcription factor Cdx2 plays a central role by repressing pluripotency
genes, such as Oct4, and promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate at the
blastocyst stage. However, genetic evidence has suggested that Cdx2 does not work
alone in the trophoblast lineage. We have used bioinformatic and functional
genomic strategies to identify the transcription factor Gata3 as a trophoblast
factor. We show Gata3 to be capable of inducing trophoblast fate in embryonic
stem cells and driving trophoblast differentiation in trophoblast stem cells. In 
addition, Cdx2 is not required for Gata3-induced expression of a subset of
trophoblast genes in embryonic stem cells. We show that Gata3 is coexpressed with
Cdx2 in the blastocyst, but this does not depend on Cdx2. In the embryo,
expression of Gata3, like that of Cdx2, depends on Tead4, and the expression of
both factors becomes restricted to trophoblast by a mechanism that does not
initially rely on Oct4. These observations suggest that Gata3 and Cdx2 can act in
parallel pathways downstream of Tead4 to induce the expression of common and
independent targets in the trophoblast lineage, whereas Oct4 is required for
continued repression of trophoblast fate in the embryonic lineage.

PMID: 20081188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2009 Dec;19(12):1557-64.

Purification of caudal-related homeodomain transcription factor and its binding
characterization.

Jeong MS(1), Hwang EY, Kim HT, Yoo MA, Jang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busa, Korea.

Human CDX2 is known as a caudal-related homeodomain transcription factor that is 
expressed in the intestinal epithelium and is important in differentiation and
maintenance of the intestinal epithelial cells. The caudal-related homeobox
proteins bind DNA according to a helix-turn-helix structure, thereby increasing
the structural stability of DNA. A cancer-tumor suppressor role for Cdx2 has been
shown by a decrease in the level of the expression of Cdx2 in colorectal cancer
but the mechanism of transcriptional regulation has not been examined at the
molecular level. We developed a large-scale system for expression of the
recombinant, novel CDX2, in the Escherichia coli. A highly purified and soluble
CDX2 protein was obtained in E. coli strain BL21(DE3)RIL and a hexahistidine
fusion system using Ni-NTA affinity column, anion exchange, and gel filtration
chromatography. The identity and secondary structure of the purified CDX2 protein
were confirmed by MALDI-TOF MS, Western blot, and a circular dichroism analyses. 
In addition, we studied the DNA binding activity of recombinant CDX2 by ELISA
experiment and isolated human CDX2 binding proteins derived from rat cells by an 
immobilized GST-fusion method. Three CDX2-binding proteins were found in the
gastric tissue, and those proteins were identified to the homeobox protein
Hox-D8, LIM homeobox protein 6, and SMC1L1 protein.

PMID: 20075618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Drug Metab Rev. 2010 Feb;42(1):99-109. doi: 10.3109/03602530903209544.

The regulation of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase genes by tissue-specific and
ligand-activated transcription factors.

Mackenzie PI(1), Hu DG, Gardner-Stephen DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Science and Technology, 
Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
Peter.Mackenzie@flinders.edu.au

Elucidation of the mechanisms regulating UGT genes is of prime importance if the 
adverse effects of interactions between drugs primarily eliminated by
glucuronidation are to be minimized, and if UGT expression is to be manipulated
for therapeutic effect. The factors controlling UGT gene expression in the liver 
include the liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha,
several members of the nuclear-receptor family (CAR, PXR, FXR, LXR, and PPAR),
the arylhydrocarbon receptor, and transcription factors involved in stress
responses (Nrf2, Maf). HNF-1alpha, in concert with the intestine-specific
transcription factor, Cdx2, and Sp1 regulate UGT gene expression in the
gastrointestinal tract, whereas the genes for the major androgen-glucuronidating 
enzymes, UGT2B15 and UGT2B17, are upregulated by estrogens in breast cell lines
and downregulated by androgens in prostate-derived cells. Despite this knowledge,
the complex interactions between these transcription factors and their
coregulators has not been determined, and the mechanisms regulating UGT gene
expression in organs and tissues, other than the liver, gastrointestinal tract,
breast, and prostate, remain to be elucidated.

PMID: 20070244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Am J Dermatopathol. 2010 Apr;32(2):137-43. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e3181b71481.

The role of immunohistochemistry in discriminating primary from secondary
extramammary Paget disease.

Perrotto J(1), Abbott JJ, Ceilley RI, Ahmed I.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology PC, West Des Moines, IA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) is categorized into 2 groups:
primary EMPD or EMPD secondary to underlying malignancy. Primary EMPD has a
better prognosis, and the ability to distinguish between the 2 subsets has
clinical relevance. Recent studies have suggested that immunostains, including
cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, and BRST-2, distinguish between the 2 groups. We
analyzed a large series of EMPD with an expanded immunohistochemical panel to
assess its value in distinguishing primary from secondary disease.
DESIGN: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of 98 EMPD specimens from 61
patients (45 primary and 16 secondary) were immunostained with CK7, CK20,
HER-2/neu, BRST-2, CDX2, androgen receptor (AR), and cyclin D1. The study
included 44 women and 17 men (median age: 73 years). Median follow-up time was 47
months.
RESULTS: All EMPD specimens were vibrantly positive for CK7. The frequency of
positivity for all EMPD samples was CK20 (28%), BRST-2 (40%), HER-2/neu (64%),
CDX2 (10%), AR (16%), and cyclin D1 (76%). For primary EMPD, the frequency of
positivity was CK20 (22%), BRST-2 (48%), HER-2/neu (65%), CDX2 (2%), AR (21%),
and cyclin D1 (84%). For secondary EMPD, the frequency of positivity was CK20
(50%), BRST-2 (25%), HER-2/neu (60%), CDX2 (33%), AR (0%), and cyclin D1 (53%).
Notably, all 6 of 7 cases of EMPD secondary to an anorectal adenocarcinoma tested
were HER-2/neu negative and 5 of those 6 cases (80%) were CDX2 positive.
CONCLUSIONS: The role of CK7, CK20, and BRST-2 in distinguishing primary and
secondary EMPD is limited because CK20 and BRST-2 were positive in large subsets 
of both groups. An expanded immunohistochemical panel, including HER-2/neu and
CDX2, may be useful in discriminating primary EMPD from EMPD secondary to
anorectal adenocarcinoma but fails to distinguish primary EMPD from EMPD
secondary to urothelial or prostatic malignancy. The consistent overexpression of
HER-2/neu in primary EMPD suggests a role for trastuzumab therapy in patients
with recurrent disease.

PMID: 20051815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Clin Invest. 2010 Jan;120(1):71-5. doi: 10.1172/JCI40435.

The bioethics of stem cell research and therapy.

Hyun I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioethics, Case Western Reserve University, School of Medicine, 
10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4976, USA. insoo.hyun@case.edu

Discussion of the bioethics of human stem cell research has transitioned from
controversies over the source of human embryonic stem cells to concerns about the
ethical use of stem cells in basic and clinical research. Key areas in this
evolving ethical discourse include the derivation and use of other human
embryonic stem cell-like stem cells that have the capacity to differentiate into 
all types of human tissue and the use of all types of stem cells in clinical
research. Each of these issues is discussed as I summarize the past, present, and
future bioethical issues in stem cell research.

PMCID: PMC2798696
PMID: 20051638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Anticancer Res. 2009 Dec;29(12):5033-7.

CDX2 expression in cutaneous metastatic carcinomas and extramammary Paget's
Disease.

Lora V(1), Kanitakis J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dermatopathology, Ed. Herriot Hospital Group, 69437 Lyon cedex
03, France.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Res. 2010 Jan;30(1):277.
    Anticancer Res. 2010 Mar;30(3):1033.

BACKGROUND: CDX2 is a gene involved in the regulation of intestinal cell
proliferation/differentiation. It is considered specific for enterocytes and has 
been used for the diagnosis of primary and metastatic colon adenocarcinoma. The
aim of this study was to assess the usefulness of CDX2 in the diagnosis of
cutaneous metastatic tumors and extramammary Paget's disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The immunohistochemical expression of CDX2 was studied in 
68 cutaneous metastatic tumors of various origins and 14 specimens of
extramammary Paget's disease.
RESULTS: CDX2 expression was found in 3/6 metastases of colon adenocarcinoma, 1/1
metastasis of urothelial carcinoma and 1/2 extramammary Paget's disease.
CONCLUSION: CDX2 appears to be specific for cutaneous metastases from intestinal 
and urothelial carcinomas and is a useful diagnostic marker of these tumors.
However, its sensitivity is modest, and we advocate its use in conjunction with
additional immunohistochemical markers. CDX2 seems useful for the diagnosis of
extramammary Paget's disease associated with an underlying colorectal tumor.

PMID: 20044613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 1;339(1):155-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.025. Epub 2010
Jan 4.

Cdx2 regulates patterning of the intestinal epithelium.

Grainger S(1), Savory JG, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 encode homeodomain transcription factors that are involved in
vertebral anterior-posterior (AP) patterning. Cdx1 and Cdx2 are also expressed in
the intestinal epithelium during development, suggesting a role in this tissue.
Intestinal defects have not been reported in Cdx1 null mutants, while Cdx2 null
mutants die at embryonic day 3.5 (E3.5), thus precluding assessment of the null
phenotype at later stages. To circumvent this latter shortcoming, we have used a 
conditional Cre-lox strategy to inactivate Cdx2 in the intestinal epithelium.
Using this approach, we found that ablation of Cdx2 at E13.5 led to a
transformation of the small intestine to a pyloric stomach-like identity,
although the molecular nature of the underlying mesenchyme remained unchanged.
Further analysis of Cdx1-Cdx2 double mutants suggests that Cdx1 does not play a
critical role in the development of the small intestine, at least after E13.5.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20043902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Int J Oncol. 2010 Feb;36(2):509-16.

Overexpression of Cdx2 inhibits progression of gastric cancer in vitro.

Xie Y(1), Li L, Wang X, Qin Y, Qian Q, Yuan X, Xiao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, PR China.

The caudal-type homeobox gene Cdx2 encodes a transcription factor which in adult 
mammals is expressed in the cells of the intestinal epithelium and is thought to 
play an important role in their proliferation and differentiation. Cdx2 mediates 
apoptosis and suppresses tumorigenesis in many tissue types, but there are few
data available on Cdx2 expression and its relationship to tumor kinetics in
gastric cancer. To gain better insight into the involvement of Cdx2 in the
biological characteristics of gastric cancer, we investigated the effect of Cdx2 
overexpression on the progression of gastric carcinoma cells. A gastric cancer
cell line stably overexpressing Cdx2 (MGC-803/Cdx2) was established. The
influence of Cdx2 overexpression on in vitro cell growth was assessed by
measuring cell survival, colony formation and cell cycle progression. The results
clearly showed that overexpression of Cdx2 significantly inhibited cell growth
and proliferation, blocking entry into the S phase of the cell cycle.
MGC-803/Cdx2 cells also had a higher apoptotic rate than control cells. In
addition, Cdx2 reduced the motility and invasion of gastric cancer cells. In
summary, Cdx2 overexpression can effectively inhibit gastric cancer progression
and may be used as a potent therapy.

PMID: 20043087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Stem Cells Regen Med. 2010 Oct 23;6(2):89. eCollection 2010.

The transcription factor TCFAP2C/AP-2gamma cooperates with CDX2 to maintain
trophectoderm formation.

Schorle H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology , Bonn, Germany.

PMID: 24693107  [PubMed]


470. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2010 May;46(5):416-30. doi:
10.1007/s11626-009-9266-6. Epub 2009 Dec 24.

BMP4 induction of trophoblast from mouse embryonic stem cells in defined culture 
conditions on laminin.

Hayashi Y(1), Furue MK, Tanaka S, Hirose M, Wakisaka N, Danno H, Ohnuma K, Oeda
S, Aihara Y, Shiota K, Ogura A, Ishiura S, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Because mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) do not contribute to the formation of 
extraembryonic placenta when they are injected into blastocysts, it is believed
that mESCs do not differentiate into trophoblast whereas human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) can express trophoblast markers when exposed to bone morphogenetic 
protein 4 (BMP4) in vitro. To test whether mESCs have the potential to
differentiate into trophoblast, we assessed the effect of BMP4 on mESCs in a
defined monolayer culture condition. The expression of trophoblast-specific
transcription factors such as Cdx2, Dlx3, Esx1, Gata3, Hand1, Mash2, and Plx1 was
specifically upregulated in the BMP4-treated differentiated cells, and these
cells expressed trophoblast markers. These results suggest that BMP4 treatment in
defined culture conditions enabled mESCs to differentiate into trophoblast. This 
differentiation was inhibited by serum or leukemia inhibitory factor, which are
generally used for mESC culture. In addition, we studied the mechanism underlying
BMP4-directed mESC differentiation into trophoblast. Our results showed that BMP4
activates the Smad pathway in mESCs inducing Cdx2 expression, which plays a
crucial role in trophoblast differentiation, through the binding of Smad protein 
to the Cdx2 genomic enhancer sequence. Our findings imply that there is a common 
molecular mechanism underlying hESC and mESC differentiation into trophoblast.

PMCID: PMC2862943
PMID: 20033790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):620-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22176.

Comparison of extraembryonic expression of Eomes and Cdx2 in pregastrulation
chick and mouse embryo unveils regulatory changes along evolution.

Pernaute B(1), Cañon S, Crespo M, Fernandez-Tresguerres B, Rayon T, Manzanares M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Developmental Biology, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, Madrid, Spain.

In the mouse blastocyst, Eomes and Cdx2 are critical for establishing the
trophoectoderm, the precursor of the placenta. To better understand how the
trophoectoderm lineage arose in mammals during evolution, we examined the
expression of their orthologues in the pregastrulation chick embryo and found
that, while both genes are expressed in extraembryonic tissues, their temporal
pattern of expression differs from what occurs in mouse. Moreover, we failed to
detect expression of other genes specific from the mouse trophoectoderm in
extraembryonic regions of the chick. Also unlike the mouse, chick Eomes is
expressed in primordial germ cells. Finally, conserved noncoding elements in the 
Eomes genomic region are unable to drive trophoectoderm restricted expression in 
the mouse blastocyst, but do so in conserved sites of expression such as the
forebrain. These results suggest that critical changes in the gene regulatory
networks controlling extraembryonic development accompanied the appearance of the
trophoectoderm in mammals.

PMID: 20014105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Stem Cells. 2010 Feb;28(2):201-12. doi: 10.1002/stem.278.

KMT1E mediated H3K9 methylation is required for the maintenance of embryonic stem
cells by repressing trophectoderm differentiation.

Lohmann F(1), Loureiro J, Su H, Fang Q, Lei H, Lewis T, Yang Y, Labow M, Li E,
Chen T, Kadam S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Molecular Pathways, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Dynamic regulation of histone methylation by methyltransferases and demethylases 
plays a central role in regulating the fate of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The
histone H3K9 methyltransferase KMT1E, formerly known as ESET or Setdb1, is
essential to embryonic development as the ablation of the Setdb1 gene results in 
peri-implantation lethality and prevents the propagation of ES cells. However,
Setdb1-null blastocysts do not display global changes in H3K9 methylation or DNA 
methylation, arguing against a genome-wide defect. Here we show that conditional 
deletion of the Setdb1 gene in ES cells results in the upregulation of lineage
differentiation markers, especially trophectoderm-specific factors, similar to
effects observed upon loss of Oct3/4 expression in ES cells. We demonstrate that 
KMT1E deficiency in ES cells leads to a decrease in histone H3K9 methylation at
and derepression of trophoblast-associated genes such as Cdx2. Furthermore, we
find genes that are derepressed upon Setdb1 deletion to overlap with known
targets of polycomb mediated repression, suggesting that KMT1E mediated H3K9
methylation acts in concert with polycomb controlled H3K27 methylation. Our
studies thus demonstrate an essential role for KMT1E in the control of
developmentally regulated gene expression programs in ES cells.

PMID: 20014010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):113-24. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082704as.

Pluripotency of bank vole embryonic cells depends on FGF2 and activin A signaling
pathways.

Suwinska A(1), Tarkowski AK, Ciemerych MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Institute of Zoology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.

The objective of this study was to investigate the capability of bank vole
(Myodes glareolus) embryonic cells to sustain their pluripotent character during 
in vitro culture, and to determine the optimal conditions for derivation of
embryonic stem (ES) cells. We compared the presence of specific pluripotency
(Oct4, Ssea1) and differentiation markers (Gata4 - primitive endoderm marker;
Cdx2 - trophectoderm marker) in blastocysts and inner cell mass (ICM) outgrowths 
obtained from blastocysts of bank vole, and two mouse hybrids F1(C57Bl/6xCBA/H)
and F1(C57Bl/6x129/Sv), which differ in the permissiveness of giving rise to ES
cells. We found that, in contrast to mouse, the expression of pluripotency
markers in the cells of bank vole ICM outgrowths is progressively downregulated
and rapidly lost by the 4th day of culture. This correlates with the appearance
of cells expressing Gata4 and Cdx2, indicating differentiation towards primitive 
endoderm and derivatives of trophectoderm, respectively. We have also shown that 
heterologous cytokine leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) in conjunction with
either homologous or heterologous feeder layer is unable to delay differentiation
and preserve pluripotency of bank vole embryonic cells. Thus, the conditions
optimised for mouse do not support the maintenance of bank vole embryonic cells
in the undifferentiated state and do not allow for the isolation of the ES cells.
Instead, combination of fibroblast growth factor 2 and activin A allows retention
of Oct4 expression in bank vole blastocyst outgrowths during 4-day culture,
indicating that signaling pathways operating in human, rather than mouse ES
cells, might be involved in the process of self-renewal of bank vole embryonic
cells.

PMID: 20013653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2009 Dec;30(12):1634-42. doi: 10.1038/aps.2009.169.

Association between VDR and ESR1 gene polymorphisms with bone and obesity
phenotypes in Chinese male nuclear families.

Gu JM(1), Xiao WJ, He JW, Zhang H, Hu WW, Hu YQ, Li M, Liu YJ, Fu WZ, Yu JB, Gao 
G, Yue H, Ke YH, Zhang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Osteoporosis, Metabolic Bone Disease and Genetics Research Unit,
The Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China.

AIM: The goal of this study was to determine whether polymorphisms in the vitamin
D receptor (VDR) and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) genes are associated with
variations of peak bone mineral density (BMD) and obesity phenotypes in young
Chinese men.
METHODS: A total of 1215 subjects from 400 Chinese nuclear families were
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) and allele-specific multiple PCR (ASM-PCR) analysis at the ApaI, FokI,
and CDX2 sites in the VDR gene and the PvuII and XbaI sites in the ESR1 gene. BMD
at the lumbar spine and hip, total fat mass, and total lean mass were measured
using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. The associations between VDR and ESR1
gene polymorphisms with peak BMD, body mass index (BMI), total fat mass, total
lean mass, and percentage fat mass (PFM) were determined using quantitative
transmission disequilibrium tests (QTDTs).
RESULTS: Using QTDTs, no significant within-family associations were obtained
between genotypes or haplotypes of the VDR and ESR1 genes and peak BMD. For the
obesity phenotypes, the within-family associations were significant between CDX2 
genotypes and BMI (P=0.046), fat mass (P=0.004), and PFM (P=0.020). Further,
PvuII was significantly associated with the variation of fat mass and PFM
(P=0.002 and P=0.039, respectively). A subsequent 1000 permutations were in
agreement with these within-family association results.
CONCLUSION: Our findings showed that VDR and ESR1 polymorphisms were associated
with total fat mass in young Chinese men, but we failed to find a significant
association between VDR and ESR1 genotypes and peak BMD. These findings suggested
that the VDR and ESR1 genes are quantitative trait loci (QTL) underlying fat mass
variation in young Chinese men.

PMCID: PMC4007503
PMID: 19960008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Br J Cancer. 2010 Jan 5;102(1):144-50. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605449. Epub 2009 Nov
24.

Immunophenotype and molecular characterisation of adenocarcinoma of the small
intestine.

Overman MJ(1), Pozadzides J, Kopetz S, Wen S, Abbruzzese JL, Wolff RA, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
moverman@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Br J Cancer. 2010 Oct 12;103(8):1305; author reply 1306.

BACKGROUND: Despite having a dramatically larger surface area than the large
intestine, the small intestine is an infrequent site for the development of
adenocarcinoma. To better understand the molecular abnormalities in small bowel
adenocarcinoma (SBA), we characterised a number of candidate oncogenic pathways
and the immunophenotype of this rare cancer.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays were constructed from tumour samples from 54 patients
with all stages of the disease. Immunohistochemistry and microsatellite
instability (MSI) testing were conducted.
RESULTS: The profile of cytokeratin 20 and 7 coexpression was variable, but
expression of caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) was present in
70% of cases. In this young population (median age 54 years), loss of mismatch
repair (MMR) proteins occurred in 35% of patients, with confirmed MSI in 100% of 
tested cases. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) was common, occurring in 96 and 71% of
patients, respectively. Only one case showed HER2 expression and none showed loss
of phosphatase and tensin homologue mutated on chromosome 10 (PTEN).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that alterations in DNA MMR pathways are
common in SBAs, similar to what is observed in large bowel adenocarcinomas.
Furthermore, the high percentage of tumours expressing both EGFR and VEGF
suggests that patients with this rare cancer may benefit from therapeutic
strategies targeting EGFR and VEGF receptor (VEGFR).

PMCID: PMC2813754
PMID: 19935793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2010 Mar;40(3):208-13. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyp150. Epub 2009 Nov 
18.

CK7, CK20, CDX2 and MUC2 Immunohistochemical staining used to distinguish
metastatic colorectal carcinoma involving ovary from primary ovarian mucinous
adenocarcinoma.

Shin JH(1), Bae JH, Lee A, Jung CK, Yim HW, Park JS, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Kangnam St Mary's Hospital, #505 Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-040, 
Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Colorectal adenocarcinoma, the most common tumor that metastasizes to 
the ovary, is often difficult to distinguish from primary ovarian mucinous
adenocarcinoma (POMA). Obtaining the correct diagnosis is difficult but crucial
to treatment and prognosis.
METHODS: We evaluated the immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of cytokeratin 7
(CK7), cytokeratin 20 (CK20), CDX2, CEA, MUC2, MUC5AC and alpha-methylacyl-CoA
racemase (AMACR) in 22 POMAs and 41 metastatic colorectal adenocarcinomas (MCAOs)
involving ovaries.
RESULTS: MCAOs, in contrast with POMAs, were almost always negative for MUC5
(97.6%), often negative for CK7 (82.9%), focal or diffuse positive for CDX2
(73.2%), diffuse positive for CK20 (65.9%), focal or diffuse positive for MUC2
(51.2%), diffuse positive for CEA (41.5%) and negative for AMACR (41.5%). We
therefore considered CK7 (-), CK20 (diffuse +), CDX2 (+) and MUC2 (+) to be
colonic markers and regarded cases with expression of more than two colonic
markers as MCAO, those with no expression of colonic markers as POMA and those
with expression of one colonic marker as indeterminate. Using CK7/CK20/CDX2/MUC2,
82.5% of the cases were correctly classified, 6.3% were misclassified and 6.3%
were indeterminate.
CONCLUSION: CK7, CK20, CDX2 and MUC2 IHC staining is a useful adjunctive
diagnostic tool to differentiate MCAOs from POMAs, in addition to clinical
history and gross and microscopic findings.

PMID: 19926591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Feb;22(2):228-33. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e328312ebac.

Double primary adenocarcinomas of the jejunum and descending colon with lung
metastases presenting rare immunohistochemical phenotypes: a case report.

Nozawa H(1), Yamada Y, Muto Y, Endo J, Asakage M, Oka T, Furukawa Y, Arai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Odaira Memorial Tokyo Hitachi Hospital, Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0034, Japan. hiroanozawa-gi@umin.ac.jp

We report a male patient with double advanced tumors in the jejunum and
descending colon and multiple lung tumors. The intestinal cancers were surgically
resected. Immunoprofiling of the specimens revealed a rare phenotype: the jejunal
cancer was positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7, partially positive for CK20, and
Cdx-2-negative, whereas the colon cancer was CK7(+), CK20(-), and Cdx-2(-).
Biopsied lung tumor was diagnosed as tubular adenocarcinoma, and
CK7(+)/CK20(+)/Cdx-2(-). Together with clinical information, we deduced that the 
jejunal adenocarcinoma had presumably metastasized to the lung. Moreover,
postoperative oxaliplatin, including chemotherapy, significantly reduced the lung
metastases, suggesting that this regimen is a promising treatment option for
advanced small bowel adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19923997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Feb 1;19(3):480-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp512. Epub 2009 Nov
14.

Involvement of a novel preimplantation-specific gene encoding the high mobility
group box protein Hmgpi in early embryonic development.

Yamada M(1), Hamatani T, Akutsu H, Chikazawa N, Kuji N, Yoshimura Y, Umezawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Mining gene-expression-profiling data identified a novel gene that is
specifically expressed in preimplantation embryos. Hmgpi, a putative chromosomal 
protein with two high-mobility-group boxes, is zygotically transcribed during
zygotic genome activation, but is not transcribed postimplantation. The
Hmgpi-encoded protein (HMGPI), first detected at the 4-cell stage, remains highly
expressed in pre-implantation embryos. Interestingly, HMGPI is expressed in both 
the inner cell mass (ICM) and the trophectoderm, and translocated from cytoplasm 
to nuclei at the blastocyst stage, indicating differential spatial requirements
before and after the blastocyst stage. siRNA (siHmgpi)-induced reduction of Hmgpi
transcript levels caused developmental loss of preimplantation embryos and
implantation failures. Furthermore, reduction of Hmgpi prevented blastocyst
outgrowth leading to generation of embryonic stem cells. The siHmgpi-injected
embryos also lost ICM and trophectoderm integrity, demarcated by reduced
expressions of Oct4, Nanog and Cdx2. The findings implicated an important role
for Hmgpi at the earliest stages of mammalian embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2798723
PMID: 19915186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jul 15;127(2):367-80. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25042.

Clinicopathological and protein characterization of BRAF- and K-RAS-mutated
colorectal cancer and implications for prognosis.

Zlobec I(1), Bihl MP, Schwarb H, Terracciano L, Lugli A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Recent evidence highlights the potential prognostic and predictive value of BRAF 
and K-RAS gene alterations in patients with colorectal cancer. However, a
comprehensive evaluation of BRAF and K-RAS mutations and their specific
clinicopathological features, histomorphological presentation and effect on
protein expression have not been systematically analyzed. The aim of this study
was to characterize the clinicopathological, histomorphological and protein
expression profiles of BRAF- and K-RAS-mutated colorectal cancers and determine
their impact on patient survival. Molecular analysis for microsatellite
instability (MSI), K-RAS and BRAF was carried out on paraffin-embedded samples
from 404 patients with primary colorectal cancer. Using tissue microarrays, 36
tumor-associated and 14 lymphocyte/inflammatory-associated markers were evaluated
by immunohistochemistry. BRAF mutation was associated with right-sided tumor
location (p < 0.001), higher tumor grade (p = 0.029), absence of peritumoral
lymphocytic inflammation (p = 0.026) and MSI-H (p < 0.001). In right-sided
tumors, loss of CDX2 expression was observed in 23 of 24 cases (95.8%). BRAF
mutation was a poor prognostic indicator in patients with right-sided disease (p 
= 0.01). This result was maintained in multivariable analysis (p < 0.001; HR =
2.82; 95% CI: 1.5-5.5) with pT, pN and vascular invasion and independent of CDX2 
expression. K-RAS mutation, in contrast, was not associated with any of the
features analyzed. BRAF gene mutation is an adverse prognostic factor in
right-sided colon cancer patients independent of MSI status and, moreover, in
patients with lymph node-negative disease. These results indicate that molecular 
analysis for BRAF may be a useful biomarker for identifying patients with
right-sided colon cancer with poor outcome who may benefit from a more
individualized course of therapy.

PMID: 19908233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Med Oncol. 2010 Dec;27(4):1155. doi: 10.1007/s12032-009-9352-3. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Retracted article: Interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha regulation
of CDX2 homeobox gene through nuclear factor kappa B-dependent pathway in the
intestinal-type gastric cancer.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Med Oncol. doi: 10.1007/s12032-009-9352-3.

PMID: 19908169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Virchows Arch. 2009 Dec;455(6):527-31. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0852-5. Epub 2009 
Nov 12.

Colonic carcinoma with a pancreatic acinar cell differentiation. A case report.

Chiaravalli AM(1), Finzi G, Bertolini V, La Rosa S, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, viale Borri 57, 21100, Varese,
Italy. annamaria.chiaravalli@tin.it

A case of a colonic carcinoma showing a pancreatic acinar cell differentiation is
described for the first time. A 65-year-old woman underwent surgical resection
for an ulcerated protruding tumour of 4 x 2.5 cm in size on the anterior wall of 
the sigmoid colon. Histologically, tumour cells were organized in acinar
structures resembling pancreatic acini and in solid nests and ribbons or
diffusely infiltrated as poorly cohesive cells. Lymph nodes and femur metastases 
displayed the same histological features. The ultrastructural analysis of the
primary tumour indicated the presence of zymogen-like granules in the cytoplasm
of tumour cells. Immunohistochemically, both acinar and diffuse patterns of
growth showed an intense staining for trypsin, chymotrypsin and BCL10 and a
weaker immunoreactivity for lipase and carboxyl ester hydrolase. Most tumour
cells were cytokeratin 20, CDX2 and p53 positive; whereas, mucin (MUC)2
immunoreactivity was observed only in the signet ring cells present in the
diffuse pattern and chromogranin A in rare isolated tumour cells. No
immunoreactivity was observed for cytokeratin 7, MUC1, MUC5AC, pancreatic amylase
or PDX1. There was no evidence of a pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma or of
heterotopic pancreatic tissue. A colonic origin ought to be suspected when a
metastatic carcinoma of unknown primary shows an acinar differentiation.

PMID: 19908063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4099-110. doi: 10.1242/dev.041582. Epub 2009 Nov
11.

Cdx2 regulation of posterior development through non-Hox targets.

Savory JG(1), Bouchard N, Pierre V, Rijli FM, De Repentigny Y, Kothary R, Lohnes 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 play essential roles in
anteroposterior vertebral patterning through regulation of Hox gene expression.
Cdx2 is also expressed in the trophectoderm commencing at E3.5 and plays an
essential role in implantation, thus precluding assessment of the cognate-null
phenotype at later stages. Cdx2 homozygous null embryos generated by tetraploid
aggregation exhibit an axial truncation indicative of a role for Cdx2 in
elaborating the posterior embryo through unknown mechanisms. To better understand
such roles, we developed a conditional Cdx2 floxed allele in mice and effected
temporal inactivation at post-implantation stages using a tamoxifen-inducible
Cre. This approach yielded embryos that were devoid of detectable Cdx2 protein
and exhibited the axial truncation phenotype predicted from previous studies.
This phenotype was associated with attenuated expression of genes encoding
several key players in axial elongation, including Fgf8, T, Wnt3a and Cyp26a1,
and we present data suggesting that T, Wnt3a and Cyp26a1 are direct Cdx2 targets.
We propose a model wherein Cdx2 functions as an integrator of caudalizing
information by coordinating axial elongation and somite patterning through
Hox-independent and -dependent pathways, respectively.

PMID: 19906845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Dig Dis. 2009 Nov;10(4):272-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-2980.2009.00396.x.

Ectopic expression of guanylyl cyclase C in gastric cancer as a potential
biomarker and therapeutic target.

Mao ZB(1), Zhang JF, Xu Z, Zhu HJ, Zhang JG, Pan ZP, Xiao F, Yang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, China. mzb63@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of guanylyl cyclase C (GCC) in human
gastric cancer (GC) tissues and assess the effect of GCC small interfering RNA
(siRNA) on the proliferation and apoptosis of SGC-7901.
METHODS: The expression of GCC in 30 specimens and three human GC cell lines
(SGC-7901, AGS, NCI-N87) were detected by RT-PCR for messenger RNA (mRNA) by
Western blot and immunofluorescence for proteins. Recombinant plasmids containing
GCC siRNA and scrambled siRNA were constructed and transfected into SGC-7901
cells, respectively. A cell counting kit-8, flow cytometry (FCM) and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TDT)-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end-labeling were
used to evaluate cell viability, cell cycle distribution and apoptosis, followed 
by wound healing assay and cell adherent assay for cell motility and adherent,
respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of GCC was absent in paracancerous tissues, whereas the
GCC mRNA and protein expressions were detected in 20/30 and 19/30 of GC
specimens, respectively. Moreover, intestinal GC was statistically different from
diffuse GC (P < 0.05). The proliferation of SGC-7901 cells was markedly inhibited
by GCC siRNA-3 (P < 0.05) and cell morphological changes including volumetric
reduction, karyopyknosis and karyorrhexis were observed. FCM showed that the cell
count in the sub-G0/G1 peak increased from 5.47% (48 h after transfection) to
5.63% (72 h after transfection). The wound healing assay and cell adherent assay 
revealed that GCC gene silencing decreased cell motility and adherent.
CONCLUSION: The over-expression of GCC has been detected in intestinal type GC.
GCC siRNA can effectively inhibit the proliferation and invasion of SGC-7901
cells and induce cell apoptosis. GCC might be a novel biomarker and therapeutic
target for GC.

PMID: 19906106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Ann Pathol. 2009 Sep;29(4):286-95. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2009.07.007. Epub 2009
Sep 16.

[Adenocarcinomas of nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses: Diagnostic pitfalls in 
sinonasal glandular lesions].

[Article in French]

Poizat F(1), Gonzalez AM, Raynaud P, Baldet P, Garrel R, Crampette L, Costes V.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie et cytologie pathologique, hôpital Gui-de-Chauliac, CHU de 
Montpellier, 80, avenue Augustin-Fliche, 34295 Montpellier cedex 5, France.
florapoiz@yahoo.fr

Among primitive adenocarcinoma of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus, the 2005 WHO 
classification distinguishes two main categories: intestinal type adenocarcinoma 
(ITAC) and low-grade non-intestinal adenocarcinoma, entities with different
clinical and epidemiological characteristics. Low-grade adenocarcinoma shows a
respiratory type phenotype (CK20-/CK7+/CDX2-/villin-) and ITACs, an intestinal
type profile (CK20+/CK7-/CDX2+/villin+). Because of histological, ultrastructural
and phenotypical similarities between ITAC and colorectal adenocarcinomas,
several studies have discussed a possible common pathway in carcinogenesis. But
the review of literature shows conflicting results, suggesting different pathways
of pathogenesis. Differential diagnoses of sinonasal intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma are mainly respiratory epithelial adenomatoid hamartomas, inverted
schneiderian papillomas, salivary glands-type carcinoma and more rarely
metastasis of adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19900634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;138(2):627-35. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.10.047. Epub
2009 Nov 10.

CDX transcription factors positively regulate expression of solute carrier family
5, member 8 in the colonic epithelium.

Kakizaki F(1), Aoki K, Miyoshi H, Carrasco N, Aoki M, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Sakyo, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2
regulate gut development and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells; they
are candidate tumor suppressors of colorectal carcinomas. Because the functions
of CDX1 and CDX2 in the colonic epithelium are not fully understood, we sought to
identify genes that they target.
METHODS: We conducted a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) screen to identify
genes that bind the CDX transcription factors. Expression of target genes was
analyzed in colon cells and tissues from Cdx1(-/-), Cdx2(+/-), Apc(+/Delta716),
and wild-type (control) mice.
RESULTS: Using the ChIP screen, we identified solute carrier family 5, member 8
(SLC5A8, also known as SMCT1) as a direct target of CDX1 and CDX2. CDX
transcription factors bind to the promoter region of SLC5A8 and transactivate
SLC5A8 reporter constructs. Overexpression of Cdx1 or Cdx2 in human colon cancer 
cell lines induced expression of endogenous SLC5A8, whereas CDX1 and CDX2
knockdowns reduced its level. Consistently, Slc5a8 expression was significantly
reduced in colons of Cdx1(-/-) or Cdx2(+/-) mice compared with wild-type mice.
Slc5a8 levels were also reduced in colonic adenomatous polyps and hamartomas from
Apc(+/Delta716) and Cdx2(+/-) mutant mice, respectively, compared with adjacent
normal colon tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1 and CDX2 bind the promoter region of SLC5A8 and up-regulate its
expression in cultured cells and in colonic epithelium. SLC5A8 transports
monocarboxylates such as pyruvate, lactate, and butyrate; CDX1 and CDX2 might
therefore regulate the uptake of these substances in the colon.

PMID: 19900445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Stem Cells. 2010 Jan;28(1):113-21. doi: 10.1002/stem.247.

An FGF4-FRS2alpha-Cdx2 axis in trophoblast stem cells induces Bmp4 to regulate
proper growth of early mouse embryos.

Murohashi M(1), Nakamura T, Tanaka S, Ichise T, Yoshida N, Yamamoto T, Shibuya M,
Schlessinger J, Gotoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-863, Japan.

A variety of stem cells are controlled by the actions of multiple growth factors 
in vitro. However, it remains largely unclear how growth factors control the
proliferation and differentiation of stem cells in vivo. Here, we describe a
novel paracrine mechanism for regulating a stem cell niche in early mammalian
embryos, which involves communication between the inner cell mass (ICM) and the
trophectoderm, from which embryonic stem (ES) cells and trophoblast stem (TS)
cells can be derived, respectively. It is known that ES cells produce fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF)4 and that TS cells produce bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp)4.
We provide evidence that FRS2alpha mediates activation of the extracellular
signal-regulated progein kinase (ERK) pathway to enhance expression of
transcription factor Cdx2 in TS cells in response to FGF4. Cdx2 in turn binds to 
an FGF4-responsive enhancer element of the promoter region of Bmp4, leading to
production and secretion of Bmp4. Moreover, exogenous Bmp4 is able to rescue the 
defective growth of Frs2alpha-null ICM. These findings suggest an important role 
of Cdx2 for production of Bmp4 in TS cells to promote the proper growth of early 
mouse embryos.

PMID: 19890878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 3;4(11):e7684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007684.

Mbd3, a component of NuRD/Mi-2 complex, helps maintain pluripotency of mouse
embryonic stem cells by repressing trophectoderm differentiation.

Zhu D(1), Fang J, Li Y, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Embryonic stem cells (ES cells) can differentiate into cells derived from all
three germ layers and extraembryonic tissues. While transcription factors such
as, Oct4 and Nanog are well known for their requirements for undifferentiated ES 
cell growth, mechanisms of epigenetic repression of germ layer specific
differentiation in ES cells are not well understood. Here, we investigate
functions of Mbd3, a component of nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylation
complex (NuRD/Mi-2) in mouse ES cells. We find that compared to wild type ES
cells, Mbd3 knockdown cells show elevated RNA expression of trophectoderm
markers, including Cdx2, Eomesodermin, and Hand1. In parallel, these cells show
an increased acetylation level of histone 3 in promoters of the respective genes,
suggesting Mbd3 plays a role in repression of these genes in undifferentiated ES 
cells. However, these changes are not sufficient for definitive differentiation
to trophectoderm (TE) in chimeric embryos. When further cultured in ES medium
without LIF or in trophoblast stem (TS) cell medium, Mbd3 knockdown cells
differentiate into TE cells, which express Cdx2 and, at later stages, trophoblast
lineage specific marker Cadherin 3. These results suggest that Mbd3 helps
restrict ES cells from differentiating towards the trophectoderm lineage and is
an important epigenetic player in maintaining full pluripotency of mouse ES
cells.

PMCID: PMC2766630
PMID: 19888462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Genes Dev. 2009 Nov 1;23(21):2507-20. doi: 10.1101/gad.1831909.

Eset partners with Oct4 to restrict extraembryonic trophoblast lineage potential 
in embryonic stem cells.

Yuan P(1), Han J, Guo G, Orlov YL, Huss M, Loh YH, Yaw LP, Robson P, Lim B, Ng
HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

The histone H3 Lys 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase Eset is an epigenetic regulator
critical for the development of the inner cell mass (ICM). Although ICM-derived
embryonic stem (ES) cells are normally unable to contribute to the trophectoderm 
(TE) in blastocysts, we find that depletion of Eset by shRNAs leads to
differentiation with the formation of trophoblast-like cells and induction of
trophoblast-associated gene expression. Using chromatin immmunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses, we identified Eset target genes with
Eset-dependent H3K9 trimethylation. We confirmed that genes that are
preferentially expressed in the TE (Tcfap2a and Cdx2) are bound and repressed by 
Eset. Single-cell PCR analysis shows that the expression of Cdx2 and Tcfap2a is
also induced in Eset-depleted morula cells. Importantly, Eset-depleted cells can 
incorporate into the TE of a blastocyst and, subsequently, placental tissues.
Coimmunoprecipitation and ChIP assays further demonstrate that Eset interacts
with Oct4, which in turn recruits Eset to silence these trophoblast-associated
genes. Our results suggest that Eset restricts the extraembryonic trophoblast
lineage potential of pluripotent cells and links an epigenetic regulator to key
cell fate decision through a pluripotency factor.

PMCID: PMC2779752
PMID: 19884257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):516-26. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.08.010.

Cdx and Hox genes differentially regulate posterior axial growth in mammalian
embryos.

Young T(1), Rowland JE, van de Ven C, Bialecka M, Novoa A, Carapuco M, van Nes J,
de Graaff W, Duluc I, Freund JN, Beck F, Mallo M, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center, 3584 CT Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):439-40.

Hox and Cdx transcription factors regulate embryonic positional identities. Cdx
mutant mice display posterior body truncations of the axial skeleton, neuraxis,
and caudal urorectal structures. We show that trunk Hox genes stimulate axial
extension, as they can largely rescue these Cdx mutant phenotypes. Conversely,
posterior (paralog group 13) Hox genes can prematurely arrest posterior axial
growth when precociously expressed. Our data suggest that the transition from
trunk to tail Hox gene expression successively regulates the construction and
termination of axial structures in the mouse embryo. Thus, Hox genes seem to
differentially orchestrate posterior expansion of embryonic tissues during axial 
morphogenesis as an integral part of their function in specifying head-to-tail
identity. In addition, we present evidence that Cdx and Hox transcription factors
exert these effects by controlling Wnt signaling. Concomitant regulation of
Cyp26a1 expression, restraining retinoic acid signaling away from the posterior
growth zone, may likewise play a role in timing the trunk-tail transition.

PMID: 19853565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):439-40. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.10.003.

More than patterning--Hox genes and the control of posterior axial elongation.

Aulehla A(1), Pourquie O.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. aulehla@embl.de

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):516-26.

Hox genes are well known for their evolutionarily conserved role in patterning
the body axis. Now, Young et al. in this issue of Developmental Cell present
evidence that at least in mouse embryos Hox genes do more, namely controlling the
process of axis formation itself.

PMID: 19853557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2009 Dec;9(6):721-6. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2009.09.005. Epub
2009 Oct 12.

How does inflammation cause Barrett's metaplasia?

Colleypriest BJ(1), Ward SG, Tosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, UK.

Oesophageal adenocarcinoma conveys a poor prognosis and has a rapidly increasing 
incidence. Similarly, Barrett's metaplasia (a precursor lesion for oesophageal
adenocarcinoma) has an increasing incidence. Both oesophageal adenocarcinoma and 
Barrett's metaplasia are more common in the context of inflammation as a result
of acid and bile reflux. The cytokine profile of Barrett's metaplasia is
predominantly a T-helper 2 response that contrasts with the T-helper 1 response
in normal and inflamed oesophagus and normal intestine. A key transcription
factor in the development of Barrett's metaplasia, CDX2, has recently been shown 
to be induced in response to inflammatory mediators. The mechanism for induction 
of CDX2 is dependent on nuclear factor kappa B, a crucial transcription factor in
the inflammatory response. Understanding the role of oesophageal inflammation
will provide important insight into the development of Barrett's metaplasia and
oesophageal cancer.

PMID: 19828375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2009 Oct 15;1(1):69-73. doi: 10.4251/wjgo.v1.i1.69.

Comparison between colorectal low- and high-grade mucinous adenocarcinoma with
MUC1 and MUC5AC.

Onodera M(1), Nishigami T, Torii I, Sato A, Tao LH, Kataoka TR, Yoshikawa R,
Tsujimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Masayuki Onodera, Takashi Nishigami, Ikuko Torii, Ayuko Sato, Li-Hua Tao,
Tatsuki R Kataoka, Tohru Tsujimura, Department of Pathology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

AIM: To explore useful prognostic factors for mucinous adenocarcinoma (MAC) in
the colon and rectum.
METHODS: MAC was divided into low- and high-grade types based on the degree of
structural differentiation; low-grade MAC arisen from well to moderately
differentiated adenocarcinoma and papillary carcinoma, and high-grade MAC from
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet ring cell carcinoma.
Immunohistochemically, the expression of 2 types of MUC1 (MUC1/DF and MUC1/CORE),
MUC2, 2 types of MUC5AC (MUC5AC/CHL2 and HGM), MUC6, CDX2, and CD10 was examined 
in 16 cases of MAC consisting of 6 low- and 10 high-grade types.
RESULTS: MUC1/DF3 was expressed in 3 of 6 low-grade MAC (50%) and 10 of 10
high-grade MAC (100%). MUC1/CORE was expressed in 1 of 6 low-grade MAC (16.7%)
and 7 of 10 high-grade MAC (70%). MUC2 was expressed in all MAC regardless of the
grade. MUC5AC was expressed in 6 of 6 low-grade MAC (100%) and 4 of 10 high-grade
MAC (40%). HGM was expressed in 5 of 6 low-grade MAC (83.3%) and 6 of 10
high-grade MAC (60%). Expression of MUC6 and CD10 was undetected in all MAC
regardless of the grade. CDX2 was expressed in 5 of 6 low-grade MAC (83.3%) and 7
of 10 high-grade MAC (70%). Taken together, MUC1/DF3 was expressed significantly 
more frequently in high-grade MAC than in low-grade, and MUC5AC/CHL2 was
expressed significantly more frequently in low-grade MAC than in high-grade.
CONCLUSION: It is proposed that MUC1/DF3 and MUC5AC/CHL2 immunostaining is useful
to discriminate high-grade MAC from low-grade MAC.

PMCID: PMC2999097
PMID: 21160777  [PubMed]


493. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jan;23(1):54-61. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.135. Epub 2009 Oct 
9.

CDX2 expression in the intestinal-type gastric epithelial neoplasia: frequency
and significance.

Park do Y(1), Srivastava A, Kim GH, Mino-Kenudson M, Deshpande V, Zukerberg LR,
Song GA, Lauwers GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114-2696, USA.

CDX2 is an intestinal transcription factor responsible for regulating the
proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. In gastric
adenocarcinoma, CDX2 expression is known to be associated with limited
invasiveness and intestinal phenotypes. The aims of this study were to analyze
CDX2 expression in a series of well-characterized cases of gastric epithelial
dysplasia, based on the morphologic and mucin phenotypes, and also to analyze
CDX2 expression along the metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence. CDX2
expression was evaluated in 69 cases of gastric epithelial dysplasia, 88 cases of
intestinal-type early gastric cancers, and 56 cases of advanced gastric cancers. 
Increased CDX2 expression was more frequently associated with adenomatous-type
gastric epithelial dysplasia (27/31, 87%) compared with foveolar (7/15, 47%) or
hybrid (10/23, 44%) types of gastric epithelial dysplasia (P=0.001). CDX2
expression correlated with an increase in CD10 expression (P=0.005), and a
decrease in MUC5AC expression (P=0.001) in gastric epithelial dysplasia. CDX2
expression was also gradually decreased from gastric epithelial dysplasia, to
early and advanced gastric cancers (present in 64, 40 and 27% of the cases,
respectively). A negative correlation was also observed between CDX2 expression
and the depth of tumor invasion. Our results indicate that CDX2 expression is
associated with specific morphological and mucin phenotypes of gastric epithelial
dysplasias, and decreases progressively with the advancing stage of gastric
cancers, suggesting a possible tumor suppressor role for CDX2.

PMID: 19820687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Histopathology. 2009 Oct;55(4):465-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03382.x.

Aberrant nuclear Cdx2 expression in morule-forming tumours in different organs,
accompanied by cytoplasmic reactivity.

Wani Y, Notohara K, Nakatani Y, Matsuzaki A.

PMID: 19817898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2009 Oct 7;2(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-2-12.

ERG-associated protein with SET domain (ESET)-Oct4 interaction regulates
pluripotency and represses the trophectoderm lineage.

Yeap LS(1), Hayashi K, Surani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. lsy20@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Pluripotency, the capacity for indefinite self-renewal and
differentiation into diverse cell types is a unique state exhibited by embryonic 
stem (ES) cells. Transcriptional regulators, such as Oct4, are critical for
pluripotency, but the role of epigenetic modifiers remains to be fully
elucidated.
RESULTS: Here, we show that ERG-associated protein with SET domain (ESET), a
histone methyltransferase enzyme, maintains pluripotency through repression of
Cdx2, a key trophectoderm determinant, by histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) of the promoter region. Notably, this repression is mediated through
the synergistic function of small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)ylated ESET
and Oct4. ESET localises to the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) nuclear bodies and 
is SUMOylated in ES cells. Interaction of ESET with Oct4 depends on a
SUMO-interacting motif (SIM) in Oct4, which is critical for the repression of
Cdx2.
CONCLUSION: Loss of ESET or Oct4 results in strikingly similar phenotypes both in
ES cells with their differentiation into trophectoderm cells, and in early
embryos where there is a failure of development of the pluripotent inner cell
mass (ICM) of blastocysts. We propose that SUMOylated ESET-Oct4 complex is
critical for both the initiation and maintenance of pluripotency through
repression of differentiation, particularly of the trophectoderm lineage by
epigenetic silencing of Cdx2.

PMCID: PMC2763847
PMID: 19811652  [PubMed]


496. Hum Pathol. 2010 Jan;41(1):123-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.07.009. Epub 2009
Oct 1.

Expression of the intestinal biomarkers Guanylyl cyclase C and CDX2 in poorly
differentiated colorectal carcinomas.

Winn B(1), Tavares R, Matoso A, Noble L, Fanion J, Waldman SA, Resnick MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown
University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Guanylyl cyclase C, a receptor for bacterial diarrheagenic enterotoxins, is
expressed selectively by intestinal epithelium and is an endogenous downstream
target of CDX2. The expression of Guanylyl cyclase C is preserved throughout the 
adenoma/carcinoma sequence in the colorectum. Detection of Guanylyl cyclase C
expression by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction is currently being 
validated as a technique to identify occult lymph node metastases in patients
with colorectal cancer and for circulating cells in the blood for postoperative
surveillance. Although Guanylyl cyclase C is widely expressed by
well-differentiated colorectal cancer, its expression in poorly differentiated
colorectal cancer has not been evaluated. A tissue microarray was created from 69
archival specimens including 44 poorly differentiated, 15 undifferentiated or
medullary, and 10 signet ring cell colorectal carcinomas. Matched normal colonic 
mucosa was used as a positive control. Immunohistochemical staining for Guanylyl 
cyclase C and CDX2 was evaluated as positive or negative based on at least a 10% 
extent of staining. Of the 69 tumor samples, 75%, 47%, and 90% of the poorly
differentiated, medullary, and signet ring cell tumors were positive for Guanylyl
cyclase C and 75%, 40% and 90% of these subsets were positive for CDX2,
respectively. There was excellent correlation between Guanylyl cyclase C and CDX2
expression on a case-per-case basis (P < .0001). There was also a statistically
significant difference in the Guanylyl cyclase C staining pattern between
medullary carcinomas and poorly differentiated, not otherwise specified (P =
.05). Immunopositivity for Guanylyl cyclase C was greater than 95% in a
separately stained microarray series of well/moderately differentiated colorectal
carcinomas. In conclusion, Guanylyl cyclase C expression is lost in a quarter of 
poorly differentiated and half of undifferentiated colorectal carcinomas.
Therefore, the utility of Guanylyl cyclase C expression as a diagnostic marker
for colorectal carcinoma may be questionable in poorly differentiated colorectal 
neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2789905
PMID: 19800103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Oct 2;5(4):420-33. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.07.012.

Uncovering early response of gene regulatory networks in ESCs by systematic
induction of transcription factors.

Nishiyama A(1), Xin L, Sharov AA, Thomas M, Mowrer G, Meyers E, Piao Y, Mehta S, 
Yee S, Nakatake Y, Stagg C, Sharova L, Correa-Cerro LS, Bassey U, Hoang H, Kim E,
Tapnio R, Qian Y, Dudekula D, Zalzman M, Li M, Falco G, Yang HT, Lee SL, Monti M,
Stanghellini I, Islam MN, Nagaraja R, Goldberg I, Wang W, Longo DL, Schlessinger 
D, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD
21224, USA.

To examine transcription factor (TF) network(s), we created mouse ESC lines, in
each of which 1 of 50 TFs tagged with a FLAG moiety is inserted into a
ubiquitously controllable tetracycline-repressible locus. Of the 50 TFs, Cdx2
provoked the most extensive transcriptome perturbation in ESCs, followed by Esx1,
Sox9, Tcf3, Klf4, and Gata3. ChIP-Seq revealed that CDX2 binds to promoters of
upregulated target genes. By contrast, genes downregulated by CDX2 did not show
CDX2 binding but were enriched with binding sites for POU5F1, SOX2, and NANOG.
Genes with binding sites for these core TFs were also downregulated by the
induction of at least 15 other TFs, suggesting a common initial step for ESC
differentiation mediated by interference with the binding of core TFs to their
target genes. These ESC lines provide a fundamental resource to study biological 
networks in ESCs and mice.

PMCID: PMC2770715
PMID: 19796622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Histol Histopathol. 2009 Dec;24(12):1507-14.

Immunohistochemical analysis of CDX2 expression in normal choroid plexus
epithelium and choroid plexus tumors.

Beschorner R(1), Mittelbronn M, Mugler M, Meyermann R, Schittenhelm J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Research, Eberhard-Karls-University, Tuebingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The Wnt and BMP signaling pathways are involved in the morphogenesis 
of both gastrointestinal and choroid plexus epithelium. In the intestine, Wnt
signaling represses the expression of the tumor suppressor gene CDX2 via SOX9, a 
transcription factor, which is also expressed in the choroid plexus. Recently, an
inverse correlation between CDX2 expression and tumor grade, tumor stage and
lymph node metastasis in colorectal adenocarcinomas has been reported. Besides
intestinal tissues, expression of CDX2 has also been reported in various other
epithelial tissues and carcinomas. To date, no data exist on expression of CDX2
in normal and neoplastic choroid plexus epithelium.
AIM: To investigate CDX2 expression in normal and neoplastic choroid plexus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Paraffin-embedded samples from 60 normal choroid plexus,
including 23 fetal tissue samples and from 65 choroid plexus tumors (47 choroid
plexus papillomas WHO grade I, 16 atypical choroid plexus papillomas and 2
choroid plexus carcinomas WHO grade III) were examined by immunohistochemistry.
Samples from normal choroid plexus were collected from 45 autopsy cases and from 
15 neurosurgical specimens.
RESULTS: Normal and neoplastic choroid plexus lacked CDX2 expression.
CONCLUSION: In our series, immunohistochemistry shows no evidence for a role of
CDX2 in development or differentiation of normal choroid plexus from the 9th
gestational week until adulthood. Since choroid plexus tumors reliably lack CDX2 
immunoreactivity, this marker may be helpful in distinguishing cerebral
metastases from CDX2-positive adenocarcinomas and choroid plexus neoplasms.

PMID: 19795349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Surgery. 2009 Oct;146(4):714-21; discussion 721-2. doi:
10.1016/j.surg.2009.06.050.

Pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus: bile acids inhibit the Notch signaling
pathway with induction of CDX2 gene expression in human esophageal cells.

Morrow DJ(1), Avissar NE, Toia L, Redmond EM, Watson TJ, Jones C, Raymond DP,
Litle V, Peters JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY
14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is the predominant risk factor for the
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma. BE is characterized by intestinal
metaplasia with goblet cells. Reflux of bile acids is known to induce intestinal 
metaplasia, but the mechanisms are unclear. Inhibition of Notch signaling
accompanied by increased Hath1 and induction of caudal homeobox 2 (CDX2) may be
involved in development of intestinal goblet cells.
METHODS: Esophageal adenocarcinoma cell lines OE19 and OE33 were exposed for up
to 8 hours to DCA (100-300 microM), and for up to 24 hours with and without the
gamma-secretase inhibitor, DAPT (20 microM). Notch signaling components and CDX2 
levels were measured by real-time PCR (for mRNA) and by Western blot analysis
(for proteins).
RESULTS: DCA induced a time and concentration dependent decrease in Notch pathway
components mRNAs in OE33 and in the proteins in both cell lines. CDX2 mRNA and
Hath1 protein were increased in OE19 by 3-fold. Inhibition of Notch pathway by
DAPT decreased downstream Notch signaling mRNAs and proteins in both cell lines
and increased Hath1 and CDX2 proteins only in OE19.
CONCLUSION: Bile acid inhibition of Notch signaling in esophageal cells is
correlated with an increase in Hath1 and CDX2 and may be one of the key processes
contributing to the formation of BE.

PMCID: PMC3371765
PMID: 19789031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov-Dec;1789(11-12):709-18. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.09.005. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

Interaction of intestinal and pancreatic transcription factors in the regulation 
of CFTR gene expression.

McCarthy VA(1), Ott CJ, Phylactides M, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Molecular Genetics, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

The tissue-specific regulation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator gene (CFTR) is coordinated by intronic and extragenic cis-acting
elements that influence its transcriptional activity. The promoter apparently
lacks sequences to drive cell type-specific expression. We previously identified 
a number of intronic elements that were associated with DNase I hypersensitive
sites (DHS) and bound the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transcription
factor. Moreover, we demonstrated the likely involvement of HNF1 in the
regulation of CFTR expression in vivo. Here we investigate DHS in introns 16 and 
17a of the CFTR gene, which are evident in intestinal and pancreatic cell lines, 
and determine the transcription factors that interact with these sites. Of
particular interest were factors known to interact with HNF1 in coordinated
expression of genes in the gastrointestinal tract. We demonstrate that though
sequences within these DHS bind HNF1, CDX2, and PBX1 in vitro, only PBX1 show a
robust in vivo interaction. These data contribute to our understanding of the
complexity of cell-type-specific CFTR regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2783911
PMID: 19782160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Mol Cancer. 2009 Sep 25;8:77. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-77.

Selective activation of tumor growth-promoting Ca2+ channel MS4A12 in colon
cancer by caudal type homeobox transcription factor CDX2.

Koslowski M(1), Türeci O, Huber C, Sahin U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Experimental and Translational Oncology, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Obere Zahlbacherstr, 63, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
koslowsk@uni-mainz.de

Colon cancer-associated MS4A12 is a novel colon-specific component of
store-operated Ca2+ (SOC) entry sensitizing cells for epidermal growth factor
(EGF)-mediated effects on proliferation and chemotaxis. In the present study, we 
investigated regulation of the MS4A12 promoter to understand the mechanisms
responsible for strict transcriptional restriction of this gene to the colonic
epithelial cell lineage. DNA-binding assays and luciferase reporter assays showed
that MS4A12 promoter activity is governed by a single CDX homeobox transcription 
factor binding element. RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated silencing of
intestine-specific transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2 and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in LoVo and SW48 colon cancer cells revealed that
MS4A12 transcript and protein expression is essentially dependent on the presence
of endogenous CDX2. In summary, our findings provide a rationale for
colon-specific expression of MS4A12. Moreover, this is the first report
establishing CDX2 as transactivator of tumor growth-promoting gene expression in 
colon cancer, adding to untangle the complex and conflicting biological functions
of CDX2 in colon cancer and supporting MS4A12 as important factor for normal
colonic development as well as for the biology and treatment of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2759907
PMID: 19781065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Pathol. 2009 Dec;219(4):417-26. doi: 10.1002/path.2615.

Increased expression and cellular localization of lipocalin-type prostaglandin D 
synthase in Helicobacter pylori-induced gastritis.

Hokari R(1), Nagata N, Kurihara C, Watanabe C, Komoto S, Okada Y, Kawaguchi A,
Nagao S, Hibi T, Nagata K, Urade Y, Miura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Saitama
359-8513, Japan. ryota@ndmc.ac.jp

Immunological responses in the host can result in different disease outcomes of
Helicobacter pylori-induced gastritis. Prostaglandin E2 derived from
cyclooxygenase (COX) and prostaglandin E synthase contribute to gastric
protection. Recently, prostaglandin D2 was shown to be involved in host immunity 
by chemotactic activity through chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule
expressed on Th2 cells (CRTH2), but its role in H. pylori-induced gastritis has
not been clarified. We determined the expression levels of mRNAs for
haematopoietic PGD synthase (H-PGDS) and lipocalin-type PGDS (L-PGDS), MIP-1
alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-4, and CDX2 in H. pylori-induced gastritis mucosa by
quantitative RT-PCR. We found that L-PGDS was constitutively expressed in the
epithelium of the glandular base. L-PGDS, but not H-PGDS, was induced on
fibroblasts close to infiltrating cells in the H. pylori-infected gastric mucosa.
These fibroblasts co-expressed COX-2. The level of L-PGDS mRNA expression
decreased as gastritis became more severe. In most of the H. pylori-infected
gastric mucosa, CCR5(+) cells had more actively infiltrated than had CRTH2(+)
cells. However, the expression level of IFN-gamma was lower in the mucosa of the 
CRTH2(+) cells-dominantly infiltrating group than that of the less
CRTH2-infiltrating group. Exogenously added PGD2 decreased the H. pylori-induced 
expression of IFN-gamma in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in vitro. The data 
suggest that PGD2 derived from the gastric mucosa and fibroblasts plays
protective roles against inflammatory changes in H. pylori-induced gastritis.

PMID: 19768745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Theriogenology. 2009 Nov;72(8):1097-110. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2009.06.030. Epub 2009 Sep 17.

Trichostatin A affects histone acetylation and gene expression in porcine somatic
cell nucleus transfer embryos.

Cervera RP(1), Martí-Gutiérrez N, Escorihuela E, Moreno R, Stojkovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming Laboratory, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe,
Valencia, Spain. rcervera@cipf.es

Epigenetic aberrancies likely preclude correct and complete nuclear reprogramming
after somatic cell nucleus transfer (SCNT) and may underlie the observed reduced 
viability of cloned embryos. In the current study, we tested the effects of the
histone deacetylase-inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) on preimplantation development
and on histone acetylation and the gene expression of nucleus transfer (NT)
porcine (Sus scrofa) embryos. Our results showed that 5 nM TSA for 26 h after
reconstitution resulted in embryos (NTTSA) that reached the blastocyst stage at a
higher level (48.1% vs. 20.2%) and increased number of cells (105.0 vs. 75.3)
than that of the control (NTC) embryos. In addition, and unlike the NTC embryos, 
the treated embryos displayed a global acetylated histone H4 at lysine 8 profile 
similar to the in vitro-fertilized (IVF) and cultured embryos during the
preimplantation development. Finally, we determined that several transcription
factors exert a dramatic amount of genetic control over pluripotency, including
Oct4, Nanog, Cdx2, and Rex01, the imprinting genes Igf2 and Igf2r, and the
histone deacetyltransferase gene Hdac2. The NT blastocysts showed similar levels 
of Oct4, Cdx2, and Hdac2 but lower levels of Nanog than those of the IVF
blastocyst. However, the NTTSA blastocysts showed similar levels of Rex01, Igf2, 
and Igf2r as those of IVF blastocysts, whereas the NTC blastocysts showed
significantly lower levels for those genes. Our results suggest that TSA improves
porcine SCNT preimplantation development and affects the acetylated status of the
H4K8, rendering acetylation levels similar to those of the IVF counterparts.

PMID: 19765811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. BMC Gastroenterol. 2009 Sep 17;9:68. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-9-68.

Mapping of HNF4alpha target genes in intestinal epithelial cells.

Boyd M(1), Bressendorff S, Møller J, Olsen J, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Panum Institute, Building 6,4, 
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
mboyd@sund.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: The role of HNF4alpha has been extensively studied in hepatocytes and
pancreatic beta-cells, and HNF4alpha is also regarded as a key regulator of
intestinal epithelial cell differentiation. The aim of the present work is to
identify novel HNF4alpha target genes in the human intestinal epithelial cells in
order to elucidate the role of HNF4alpha in the intestinal differentiation
progress.
METHODS: We have performed a ChIP-chip analysis of the human intestinal cell line
Caco-2 in order to make a genome-wide identification of HNF4alpha binding to
promoter regions. The HNF4alpha ChIP-chip data was matched with gene expression
and histone H3 acetylation status of the promoters in order to identify HNF4alpha
binding to actively transcribed genes with an open chromatin structure.
RESULTS: 1,541 genes were identified as potential HNF4alpha targets, many of
which have not previously been described as being regulated by HNF4alpha. The
1,541 genes contributed significantly to gene ontology (GO) pathways categorized 
by lipid and amino acid transport and metabolism. An analysis of the homeodomain 
transcription factor Cdx-2 (CDX2), the disaccharidase trehalase (TREH), and the
tight junction protein cingulin (CGN) promoters verified that these genes are
bound by HNF4alpha in Caco2 cells. For the Cdx-2 and trehalase promoters the
HNF4alpha binding was verified in mouse small intestine epithelium.
CONCLUSION: The HNF4alpha regulation of the Cdx-2 promoter unravels a
transcription factor network also including HNF1alpha, all of which are
transcription factors involved in intestinal development and gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2761415
PMID: 19761587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010 Feb;14 Suppl 1:S81-7. doi: 10.1007/s11605-009-1011-7.
Epub 2009 Sep 16.

The molecular pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus: common signaling pathways in
embryogenesis metaplasia and neoplasia.

Peters JH(1), Avisar N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
jeffrey_peters@urmc.rochester.edu

Although Barrett's esophagus has been recognized for over 50 years, the cellular 
and molecular mechanisms leading to the replacement of squamous esophageal
epithelium with a columnar type are largely unknown. Barrett's is known to be an 
acquired process secondary to chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease and occurs 
in the presence of severe disruption of the gastroesophageal barrier and reflux
of a mixture of gastric and duodenal content. Current hypothesis suggest that
epithelial change occurs due to stimulation of esophageal stem cells present in
the basal layers of the epithelium or submucosal glands, toward a columnar
epithelial differentiation pathway. The transcription factor CDX2 seems to play a
key role in promoting the cellular biology necessary for columnar
differentiation, and can be induced by bile salt and acid stimulation. Several
cellular signaling pathways responsible for modulation of intestinal
differentiation have also been identified and include WNT, Notch, BMP, Sonic HH
and TGFB. These also have been shown to respond to stimulation by bile acids,
acid or both and may influence CDX2 expression. Their relative activity within
the stem cell population is almost certainly responsible for the development of
the esophageal columnar epithelial phenotype we know as Barrett's esophagus.

PMID: 19760304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Feb;31(2):159-66. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp213. Epub 2009 Sep 
4.

The intestine-specific transcription factor Cdx2 inhibits beta-catenin/TCF
transcriptional activity by disrupting the beta-catenin-TCF protein complex.

Guo RJ(1), Funakoshi S, Lee HH, Kong J, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cdx2 is an intestine-specific transcription factor known to regulate
proliferation and differentiation. We have reported previously that Cdx2 limits
the proliferation of human colon cancer cells by inhibiting the transcriptional
activity of the beta-catenin-T-cell factor (TCF) bipartite complex. Herein we
further elucidate this mechanism. Studies with a classic Cdx2 target gene and a
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF reporter suggest that Cdx2 regulates these
promoters by distinctly different processes. Specifically, inhibition of
beta-catenin/TCF activity by Cdx2 does not require Cdx2 transcriptional activity.
Instead, Cdx2 binds beta-catenin and disrupts its interaction with the
DNA-binding TCF factors, thereby silencing beta-catenin/TCF target gene
expression. Using Cdx2 mutants, we map the Cdx2 domains required for the
inhibition of beta-catenin/TCF activity. We identify a subdomain in the
N-terminus that is highly conserved and when mutated significantly reduces Cdx2
inhibition of beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity. Mutation of this
subdomain also abrogates Cdx2's anti-proliferative effects in colon cancer cells.
In summary, we conclude that Cdx2 binds beta-catenin and disrupts the
beta-catenin-TCF complex. Considering the pivotal role of beta-catenin/TCF
activity in driving proliferation of normal intestinal epithelial and colon
cancer cells, our findings suggest a novel mechanism for Cdx2-mediated regulation
of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2812568
PMID: 19734199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Dev Biol. 2009 Nov 1;335(1):179-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.08.025. Epub 2009
Sep 3.

CDX2 in the formation of the trophectoderm lineage in primate embryos.

Sritanaudomchai H(1), Sparman M, Tachibana M, Clepper L, Woodward J, Gokhale S,
Wolf D, Hennebold J, Hurlbut W, Grompe M, Mitalipov S.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health and Science University,
Beaverton, OR, USA.

The first lineage decision during mammalian development is the establishment of
the trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM). The caudal-type homeodomain
protein Cdx2 is implicated in the formation and maintenance of the TE in the
mouse. However, the role of CDX2 during early embryonic development in primates
is unknown. Here, we demonstrated that CDX2 mRNA levels were detectable in rhesus
monkey oocytes, significantly upregulated in pronuclear stage zygotes, diminished
in early cleaving embryos but restored again in compact morula and blastocyst
stages. CDX2 protein was localized to the nucleus of TE cells but absent
altogether in the ICM. Knockdown of CDX2 in monkey oocytes resulted in formation 
of early blastocyst-like embryos that failed to expand and ceased development.
However, the ICM lineage of CDX2-deficient embryos supported the isolation of
functional embryonic stem cells. These results provide evidence that CDX2 plays
an essential role in functional TE formation during primate embryonic
development.

PMCID: PMC2764001
PMID: 19733166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEBS J. 2009 Oct;276(20):5821-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07263.x. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

Transgenic Cdx2 induces endogenous Cdx1 in intestinal metaplasia of
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.

Mutoh H(1), Hayakawa H, Sakamoto H, Sashikawa M, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Cdx1 and Cdx2, which are transcription factors regulating normal intestinal
development, have been studied as potential key molecules in the pathogenesis of 
the precancerous intestinal metaplasia of the human stomach. However, the
regulation of Cdx1 expression in the intestinal metaplasia is poorly understood. 
Cdx2-expressing gastric mucosa of Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach was replaced by
intestinal metaplastic mucosa. The aim of this study was to investigate the
following: (a) Cdx1 expression in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa of the
Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach; and (b) the relationship between Cdx1 and Cdx2. A 
mouse model of intestinal metaplasia, the Cdx2-transgenic mouse, was used to
investigate Cdx1 gene expression by RT-PCR. DNA methylation profile analysis was 
performed by bisulfite sequencing, and the interaction of Cdx2 with the Cdx1
promoter was examined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, and luciferase reporter assays. Cdx2 mRNA was expressed in 
the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. However, endogenous Cdx2 mRNA was not
expressed in the intestinal metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. On
the other hand, endogenous Cdx1 mRNA and protein were expressed in the intestinal
metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach. The Cdx1 promoter was
unmethylated in the intestinal metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse stomach.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that Cdx2 was bound to the Cdx1 promoter region in the intestinal
metaplasia and the normal intestine. Cdx2 upregulated and siRNA-Cdx2
downregulated the transcriptional activity of the Cdx1 gene in the human gastric 
carcinoma cell lines AGS, MKN45, and MKN74. In conclusion, transgenic Cdx2
induced endogenous Cdx1 through the binding of Cdx2 to the unmethylated Cdx1
promoter region in the intestinal metaplasia of the Cdx2-transgenic mouse
stomach.

PMID: 19725873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Oncol Rep. 2009 Oct;22(4):745-55.

CD44v6, MMP-7 and nuclear Cdx2 are significant biomarkers for prediction of lymph
node metastasis in primary gastric cancer.

Okayama H(1), Kumamoto K, Saitou K, Hayase S, Kofunato Y, Sato Y, Miyamoto K,
Nakamura I, Ohki S, Sekikawa K, Takenoshita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organ Regulatory Surgery, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

The aim of this study was to examine the expression of CD44v6, CD54, Cdx2, CXCL5,
Cyclin B1, MMP-7, nm23, RCAS1 and Survivin in primary gastric cancer and to
investigate whether these molecules were useful in predicting the lymph node
status. They were selected as candidates for indicators of lymph node metastasis 
from various kinds of cancer-associated genes reported previously. In 135 cases
of radically resected primary gastric adenocarcinoma, we investigated the
association between the expression of these molecules and clinocopathologic
factors by immunohistochemistry. The results revealed that the expression of
CD44v6 and MMP-7 were significantly associated with lymph node status. By
contrast, nuclear Cdx2 expression was found to be inversely correlated with lymph
node metastasis. Moreover, multivariate analysis demonstrated that CD44v6, MMP-7 
and nuclear Cdx2 were independent predictors for lymph node status. In
conclusion, our results suggest that positive expression of both CD44v6 and
MMP-7, and negative expression of nuclear Cdx2 may serve as powerful predictors
of lymph node metastasis in gastric cancer. Combined evaluation of these markers 
could be further useful to predict lymph node status clinically.

PMID: 19724852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Sep;33(9):1370-7.

A distinctive novel epitheliomesenchymal biphasic tumor of the stomach in young
adults ("gastroblastoma"): a series of 3 cases.

Miettinen M(1), Dow N, Lasota J, Sobin LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soft Tissue Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 6825
16th Street, N.W., Building 54, Room G090, Washington, DC 20306-6000, USA.
miettinen@afip.osd.mil

This report describes 3 cases of a distinctive, hitherto unreported gastric
epitheliomesenchymal biphasic tumor that differs from other biphasic tumors of
the stomach and elsewhere: carcinosarcoma, biphasic synovial sarcoma, teratoma,
and mixed tumor. The tumors occurred in young adults, 2 males and 1 female, of
ages 19, 27, and 30 years. Two tumors were located in the greater curvature in
the gastric body and one in the antrum. The tumors measured 5, 6, and 15 cm in
maximum diameter, and their mitotic rates were 0, 4, and 30 mitoses per 50HPF.
There were 2 components: uniform oval or spindled cells in diffuse sheets, and
clusters or cords of epithelial cells occasionally forming glandular structures
with small lumens. The epithelial elements were positive for keratin cocktail
AE1/AE3, keratin 18, and partly for keratin 7, but were negative for keratins
5/6, 20 and epithelial membrane antigen. The spindle cells were positive for
vimentin and CD10. All components were negative for CD34, CD99, estrogen
receptor, KIT, smooth muscle actin, desmin S100 protein, p63, calretinin,
chromogranin, synaptophysin, CDX2, and thyroid transcription factor 1. In situ
hybridization for SS18 rearrangement was negative in all cases separating this
tumor from synovial sarcoma. All 3 patients were alive after follow-up of 3.5, 5,
and 14 years. Because these tumors have some resemblance to blastomas of other
organs, we propose the term "gastroblastoma" for this distinctive, at least
low-grade malignant epitheliomesenchymal tumor of the stomach.

PMID: 19718790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Pathol. 2009 Dec;40(12):1686-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.06.001. Epub
2009 Aug 27.

Reg IV expression and clinicopathologic features of gallbladder carcinoma.

Tamura H(1), Ohtsuka M, Washiro M, Kimura F, Shimizu H, Yoshidome H, Kato A, Seki
N, Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan.

Regenerating islet-derived family, member 4 (Reg IV) has been shown to be
associated with colorectal carcinogenesis and gastric carcinogenesis through
intestinal metaplasia. In this study, we examined Reg IV expression in the
gallbladder and gallbladder carcinoma, and measured Reg IV levels in sera from
patients with gallbladder carcinoma. Quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that high Reg IV levels were
identified in 17 of 31 gallbladder carcinomas, whereas there was no apparent
amplification in normal gallbladders. Immunohistochemically, although only a
small part of the epithelium with intestinal metaplasia in 2 of 4 cases with
adenomyomatosis showed Reg IV expression, Reg IV was negative in all cases with
normal gallbladder (n = 15) and cholelithiasis (n = 13). In contrast, 34 (56%) of
61 gallbladder carcinomas were positive. Expression was more frequently observed 
in well to moderately differentiated than in poorly differentiated
adenocarcinomas and significantly correlated with expression of caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor (a candidate for involvement in the induction of
intestinal metaplasia). Multivariate analysis revealed negative Reg IV
expression, as well as hepatic parenchymal invasion, to be independently
associated with a poor prognosis in patients with advanced gallbladder carcinoma.
Before surgical resection, 4 (33%) of 12 patients with gallbladder carcinoma had 
high serum Reg IV levels, whereas Reg IV was never elevated in 12 patients with
benign diseases. The serum levels of Reg IV decreased after surgical resection of
the tumors. These results suggest that Reg IV is involved in gallbladder
carcinoma carcinogenesis through intestinal metaplasia and is associated with
relatively favorable prognosis in patients after surgery. The serum level of Reg 
IV may be of use or indicative of neoplasia.

PMID: 19716164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Pathol. 2009 Dec;40(12):1762-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.06.008. Epub 2009
Aug 27.

Intestinal metaplasia in gallbladder correlates with high amylase levels in bile 
in patients with a morphologically normal pancreaticobiliary duct.

Sakamoto H(1), Mutoh H, Ido K, Satoh S, Kumagai M, Hayakawa H, Tamada K, Sugano
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan.

We reported previously that intestinal metaplasia in the gallbladder is strongly 
associated with expression of caudal-related homeobox transcription factor Cdx2. 
It has been documented that occult pancreatobiliary reflux, even in the absence
of pancreaticobiliary maljunction, is associated with elevated risk of biliary
malignancy. We ascertained the correlation between intestinal metaplasia in the
gallbladder and occult pancreatobiliary reflux. In 196 patients with a normal
pancreaticobiliary ductal arrangement who had undergone laparoscopic
cholecystectomy, we performed intraoperative cholangiography and measured amylase
levels in bile sampled from the gallbladder. The cutoff value for high cystic
amylase was defined as a biliary amylase level higher than the normal upper limit
of serum amylase (215 IU/L). We also retrospectively reviewed the
cholecystectomized tissue specimens to investigate the presence of intestinal
metaplasia and expression of Cdx2. Then, we explored the relationship between
intestinal metaplasia in the gallbladder and occult choledocho-pancreatic reflux.
Intestinal metaplasia was found in 16.8% (33/196) of the gallbladders. The
prevalence of choledocho-pancreatic reflux revealed by intraoperative
cholangiography was not significantly different between cases with intestinal
metaplasia (5/33, 15.2%) and those without (25/163, 15.3%; P = .81). However, in 
cases with intestinal metaplasia, the rate of high cystic amylase (13/33, 39.4%) 
was significantly higher compared with cases without intestinal metaplasia
(26/163, 16.0%, P = .005). In conclusion, intestinal metaplasia in the
gallbladder is significantly correlated with high amylase levels in bile in
patients with a morphologically normal pancreaticobiliary ductal arrangement.

PMID: 19716161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hum Pathol. 2009 Dec;40(12):1768-73. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.06.006. Epub
2009 Aug 27.

SOX2 is highly expressed in squamous cell carcinomas of the gastrointestinal
tract.

Long KB(1), Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

SOX2 is a high-mobility group box embryonic stem cell transcription factor that
is expressed in the developing foregut and normal gastric epithelium and is
downregulated in intestinal metaplasia of the stomach and esophagus. In addition,
SOX2 colocalizes with p63 in the basal layer and plays a critical role in the
maintenance of the stratified squamous epithelium of the esophagus. SOX2
expression in squamous cell carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract has not been
previously evaluated. The purpose of this study was to determine whether SOX2 is 
differentially expressed in squamous cell carcinomas versus adenocarcinomas of
the esophagus and rectum/anal canal and to compare its expression to p63,
cytokeratin 5/6, and CDX2. In total, 93 tumors were evaluated: 26 esophageal
squamous cell carcinomas, 23 esophageal adenocarcinomas, 21 squamous cell
carcinomas of the anal canal, and 23 rectal adenocarcinomas. SOX2 was expressed
in 81% of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and 91% of anal canal squamous cell
carcinomas, compared to 13% and 17% of esophageal and rectal adenocarcinomas,
respectively. p63 was expressed in 96% of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and
100% of anal canal squamous cell carcinomas; the single squamous cell carcinoma
negative for p63 was strongly positive for SOX2. Cytokeratin 5/6 was expressed in
most esophageal and anal canal squamous cell carcinomas, but was also positive in
43% of esophageal adenocarcinomas and 13% of rectal adenocarcinomas. In summary, 
SOX2 is preferentially expressed in squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus and
anal canal compared to adenocarcinomas from these sites. SOX2 may be useful in an
immunohistochemical panel to differentiate between squamous cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 19716157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Aug 24;7:87. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-87.

Prolactin signaling through the short isoform of the mouse prolactin receptor
regulates DNA binding of specific transcription factors, often with opposite
effects in different reproductive issues.

Devi YS(1), Shehu A, Halperin J, Stocco C, Le J, Seibold AM, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. sangyen@uic.edu

BACKGROUND: It has been well established that prolactin (PRL) signals through the
long form of its receptor (PRL-RL) and activates the Jak/Stat pathway for
transcription of PRL target genes. However, signaling pathways mediated through
the short PRL-R isoform (PRL-RS) remains controversial. Our recent finding that
PRL signaling through PRL-RS represses two transcription factors critical for
follicular development lead us to examine other putative PRL/PRL-RS target
transcription factors in the decidua and ovary, two well-known target tissues of 
PRL action in reproduction.
METHODS: In this investigation we used mice expressing PRL-RS on a PRL-R knockout
background and a combo protein/DNA array to study the transcription factors
regulated by PRL through PRL-RS only.
RESULTS: We show that PRL activation of the PRL-RS receptor either stimulates or 
inhibits the DNA binding activity of a substantial number of transcription
factors in the decidua as well as ovary. We found few transcription factors to be
similarly regulated in both tissues, while most transcription factors are
oppositely regulated by PRL in the decidua and ovary. In addition, some
transcription factors are regulated by PRL only in the ovary or only in the
decidua. Several of these transcription factors are involved in physiological
pathways known to be regulated by PRL while others are novel.
CONCLUSION: Our results clearly indicate that PRL does signal through PRL-RS in
the decidua as well as the ovary, independently of PRL-RL, and
activates/represses transcription factors in a tissue specific manner. This is
the first report showing PRL/PRL-RS regulation of specific transcription factors.
Many of these transcription factors were not previously known to be PRL targets, 
suggesting novel physiological roles for this hormone.

PMCID: PMC2746216
PMID: 19703295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):28729-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.016840. Epub
2009 Aug 21.

GATA3 is selectively expressed in the trophectoderm of peri-implantation embryo
and directly regulates Cdx2 gene expression.

Home P(1), Ray S, Dutta D, Bronshteyn I, Larson M, Paul S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

During early mammalian development, genesis of the first two cell lineages, inner
cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE), is dependent upon functions of key
transcription factors that are expressed in a regulated and spatially restricted 
fashion. In this study, we demonstrate that during early mouse development, mRNA 
expression of transcription factor GATA3 is induced at the 4-cell stage and is
consistently present during pre-implantation embryonic development.
Interestingly, at the blastocyst stage, Gata3 mRNA is selectively up-regulated
within the TE lineage, and GATA3 protein is abundantly present only in the TE but
not in the ICM. Using mouse trophoblast stem cells (TS cells) as a model, we
found that, knockdown of GATA3 by RNA interference (RNAi) down-regulates
expression of caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2), a key regulator of the TE lineage.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses revealed that, in TS cells, GATA3
directly regulates Cdx2 transcription from a conserved GATA motif at the intron 1
region of the Cdx2 locus. ChIP analyses with mouse blastocysts also detected
GATA3 occupancy at intron 1 of the Cdx2 locus. In addition, down-regulation of
GATA3 in pre-implantation mouse embryos reduces Cdx2 expression and inhibits
morula to blastocyst transformation. Our results indicate a novel function of
GATA3, in which it is selectively expressed in TE, regulates expression of key
genes in TE lineage, and is involved in morula to blastocyst transformation.

PMCID: PMC2781418
PMID: 19700764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Histopathology. 2009 Aug;55(2):161-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03363.x.

Urothelial carcinoma following augmentation cystoplasty: an aggressive variant
with distinct clinicopathological characteristics and molecular genetic
alterations.

Sung MT(1), Zhang S, Lopez-Beltran A, Montironi R, Wang M, Davidson DD, Koch MO, 
Cain MP, Rink RC, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Centre, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

AIMS: Patients who have undergone intestinal augmentation cystoplasty are at risk
for developing latent vesicle malignancy. The aim was to evaluate the
histological and immunohistochemical characteristics and molecular genetic
alterations in these neoplasms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Four patients developing urothelial neoplasms after
augmentation cystoplasty were included in the current study. The mean age of the 
patients, including two men and two women, was 37 years. The latency from bladder
augmentation to developing malignancy ranged from 17 to 21 years (mean 19 years).
All patients died of cancer shortly after diagnosis (mean 5 months). In the
morphological evaluation, all tumours were high-grade (grade 3) invasive
urothelial carcinoma comprising various architectural patterns with brisk mitoses
and tumour necrosis. Three harboured glandular differentiation and the remaining 
one showed squamous differentiation. All cases revealed abnormal decreasing
beta-catenin expression. Two tumours showed nuclear expression of CDX2. On
UroVysion fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, all tumours
displayed characteristic chromosomal abnormalities. Point mutations of both FGFR3
and p53 genes were identified in one case.
CONCLUSIONS: Urothelial carcinomas developed after augmentation cystoplasty are
extremely aggressive and exhibit distinct morphological, immunohistochemical and 
genetic characteristics. UroVysion FISH analysis may offer a surveillance
strategy in patients who undergo augmentation cystoplasty.

PMID: 19694823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Signal. 2009 Dec;21(12):1846-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.07.020. Epub
2009 Aug 14.

Down-regulation of Cdx2 in colorectal carcinoma cells by the Raf-MEK-ERK 1/2
pathway.

Krueger F(1), Madeja Z, Hemberger M, McMahon M, Cook SJ, Gaunt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics & Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, CB22 3AT, UK.

Cdx2 is a homeodomain transcription factor that regulates normal intestinal cell 
differentiation. Cdx2 is frequently lost during progression of colorectal cancer 
(CRC) and is widely viewed as a colorectal tumour suppressor. A previous study
suggested that activation of protein kinase C (PKC) may be responsible for Cdx2
down-regulation in CRC cells. Here we show that activation of PKC does indeed
promote down-regulation of Cdx2 at both the mRNA and protein levels. However,
PKC-dependent loss of Cdx2 is dependent upon activation of the Raf-MEK-ERK1/2
pathway. Indeed, specific activation of the ERK1/2 pathway using the conditional 
kinase DeltaRaf-1:ER is sufficient to inhibit Cdx2 transcription. The
Raf-MEK-ERK1/2 pathway is hyper-activated in a large fraction of colorectal
cancers due to mutations in K-Ras and we show that treatment of CRC cell lines
with MEK inhibitors causes an increase in Cdx2 expression. Furthermore,
activation of the ERK1/2 pathway promotes the phosphorylation and
proteasome-dependent degradation of the Cdx2 protein. The inhibitory effect of
ERK1/2 upon Cdx2 in CRC cells is in sharp contrast to its stimulatory effect upon
Cdx2 expression in trophectoderm and trophoblast stem cells. These results
provide important new insights into the regulation of the Cdx2 tumour suppressor 
by linking it to ERK1/2, a pathway which is frequently activated in CRC.

PMCID: PMC4625762
PMID: 19686845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2009 Jun 15;2(2):159-75.

Vitamin D Receptor Genetic Polymorphisms and Prostate Cancer Risk: A
Meta-analysis of 36 Published Studies.

Yin M(1), Wei S, Wei Q.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology, The University of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX77030, USA.

To update data on the role of vitamin D receptor (VDR) single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in susceptibility to prostate cancer, we performed a
meta-analysis of 36 eligible publications on the association of Taql, Apal, Bsml,
Fokl and CDX2 SNPs of the VDR gene with prostate cancer risk. Our study suggested
that the Taql t and Bsml B alleles were associated with reduced prostate cancer
risk among all study populations. Stratified analysis by ethnicity revealed that 
the Apal a allele was associated with reduced prostate cancer risk only among
Asian populations, whereas the Fokl f allele showed a trend of increased prostate
cancer risk only among Caucasian populations in a dominant model, independent of 
tumor stage (local or advanced). These results suggest that VDR polymorphisms may
be potential biomarkers for prostate cancer susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2719705
PMID: 19684888  [PubMed]


19. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2010 May;17(3):211-22. doi:
10.1007/s00534-009-0158-7. Epub 2009 Aug 14.

Tumorigenesis and phenotypic characteristics of mucin-producing bile duct tumors:
an immunohistochemical approach.

Nakanuma Y(1), Zen Y, Harada K, Ikeda H, Sato Y, Uehara T, Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, 920-8640, Japan. pbcpsc@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct (IPNB) is characterized by
exophytic proliferation of neoplastic epithelial cells with fibrovascular stalks 
in bile duct lumen, mucin hypersecretion, and considerable dilatation or
multilocular changes of the affected bile ducts. A mucin-producing bile duct
tumor is an IPNB with excessive mucin production and clinical symptoms. Herein,
the phenotypes as well as the tumorigenesis and progression of IPNB are reviewed 
with immunohistochemical assistance. The tumors are subdivided into three
phenotypes: pancreatobiliary, intestinal, and gastric. About half of IPNB cases
are of the pancreatobiliary type, and the remaining half are of the intestinal
type. Aberrant expression of CDX2 with MUC2 and CK20 is related to the
development of intestinal metaplasia. Inactivation of P16INK4a and nuclear
expression of beta-catenin are related to the development of IPNB. Decreased
expression of membranous beta-catenin and E-cadherin and aberrant expression of
MMP-7 and -9 and of MUC1 are related to invasion of IPNB with tubular
adenocarcinoma, whereas MUC2 is involved in the invasion of IPNB with mucinous
carcinoma. IPNB can be regarded as a counterpart of intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas, particularly the main duct type. More
comparative studies between IPNB and pancreatic IPMN are recommended for further 
analysis of these papillary neoplasms.

PMID: 19680592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Pathol Res Pract. 2010 Jul 15;206(7):489-92. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2009.07.012. Epub
2009 Aug 11.

Mucinous adenocarcinoma as heterologous element in intermediately differentiated 
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor of the ovary.

Virk R(1), Lu D.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech three, One innovation drive, Department of Pathology, UMass Memorial
Medical Center, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor (SLCT) is a rare tumor involving the ovary.
Approximately 20% of SLCT are associated with heterologous elements that are
either of endodermal or mesodermal origin. The gastrointestinal-type epithelium
is the most commonly described endodermal heterologous element. SLCT with benign 
and borderline mucinous neoplasm has been reported in the literature. However,
SLCT with mucinous adenocarcinoma as heterologous element has been rarely
documented. Herein, we describe a rare case of intermediately differentiated
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor with mucinous adenocarcinoma as the heterologous
element in a 21-year-old woman. She presented with throbbing lower abdominal pain
and was found to have a large, complex left ovarian mass on imaging studies. She 
underwent left salpingo-oophorectomy, appendectomy and lymph node staging. Gross 
examination of the surgical specimen showed a large, encapsulated, solid-cystic
mass completely replacing the ovary. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of
intermediately differentiated Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor and well-differentiated
mucinous adenocarcinoma. Interestingly, the bulk of the tumor (more than 90%) was
composed of mucinous adenocarcinoma, whereas the SLCT component comprised less
than 10% of the total tumor. The mucinous adenocarcinoma expressed positivity for
CK20, CEA, CDX2 and CK7, and the SLCT component was positive for inhibin
expression. The histopathological features and results of immunostaining were
consistent with the diagnosis of the intermediately differentiated SLCT with
mucinous adenocarcinoma as the heterologous element. This case was a diagnostic
challenge as more than 90% of the tumor was composed of mucinous adenocarcinoma
and SLCT constituted only the minor part of the tumor. This feature was in
contrast to the previously described two cases, where mucinous adenocarcinoma as 
heterologous element was present as microscopic foci. This case highlights the
importance of identifying the SLCT component in a case of an apparently pure
mucinous adenocarcinoma in a young patient.

Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 19674851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Gut. 2009 Sep;58(9):1179-80. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.179291.

The modulation of IGF-1 signalling by the intestine-specific factor CDX2.

Liu JK(1), Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment on
    Gut. 2009 Sep;58(9):1250-9.

PMID: 19671549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Anticancer Res. 2009 Sep;29(9):3511-36.

The relevance of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms for cancer: a review
of the literature.

Köstner K(1), Denzer N, Müller CS, Klein R, Tilgen W, Reichrath J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Saarland University Hospital, Homburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, the relevance of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene
restriction fragment length polymorphisms for various types of cancer has been
investigated by a great number of studies. It has been hypothesized that VDR
polymorphisms may influence both the risk of cancer occurrence and prognosis.
However, studies investigating the associations between specific VDR
polymorphisms and cancer often show controversial results. We have now performed 
a systematic review of the literature to analyse the relevance of VDR
polymorphisms for individual malignancies, including cancer of the skin,
prostate, breast, colon, ovary, kidney and bladder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An analysis of studies evaluating the association between 
vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1, Apa1, and Cdx2, poly (A) 
and Bgl1 as well as some haplotype combinations and cancer risk has been
performed. Data were extracted from PubMed using the key words VDR polymorphism
in combination with breast cancer, prostate cancer, skin cancer, colorectal
cancer, ovarian cancer, renal cell carcinoma or bladder cancer.
RESULTS: This analysis was performed with the intent of giving an up-to-date
overview of all data concerning the relevance of VDR polymorphisms for cancer.
Obviously, at present it is still not possible to make any definitive statements 
about the importance of the VDR genotype for cancer occurrence. It seems probable
that interactions with other factors such as calcium and vitamin D intake,
25(OH)D plasma levels and UV radiation exposure play a decisive role in cancer
occurrence and should not be underestimated. Other risk factors such as obesity, 
smoking status, parity status, energy intake and others are also frequently
mentioned as being more or less important for carcinogenesis depending on the VDR
genotype. Moreover, it is often noticed that the same VDR polymorphism has a
different effect depending on the type of cancer, or may be only decisive for
more or less aggressive staging of the tumour.
CONCLUSION: Significant associations with VDR polymorphisms have been reported in
cancer of the breast (Fok1, Bsm1, Taq1, Apa1, poly (A)), prostate (Fok1, Bsm1,
Taq1, poly (A)), skin (Fok1, Bsm1, A-1210), colorectum (Fok1, Bsm1), ovary (Fok1,
Apa1) and bladder (Fok1), and in renal cell carcinoma (Taq1, Apa1). However,
conflicting data have been reported for most malignancies. After careful
evaluation of the actual literature, it can be summarized that data indicating an
association of VDR polymorphisms and cancer risk are strongest for breast cancer 
(Bsm1, Fok1), prostate cancer (Fok1) and malignant melanoma (MM) (Fok1). Data
indicating an association of VDR polymorphisms and cancer prognosis are strongest
for prostate cancer (Fok1), breast cancer (Bsm1, Taq1), MM (Bsm1) and renal cell 
carcinoma (Taq1).

PMID: 19667145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 7;28:108. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-28-108.

CDX2 hox gene product in a rat model of esophageal cancer.

Ingravallo G(1), Dall'Olmo L, Segat D, Fassan M, Mescoli C, Dazzo E, Castoro C,
Polimeno L, Rizzetto C, Baroni MD, Zaninotto G, Ancona E, Rugge M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & Special Therapies, Pathology Unit,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. pepino@uniba.it

BACKGROUND: Barrett's mucosa is the precursor of esophageal adenocarcinoma. The
molecular mechanisms behind Barrett's carcinogenesis are largely unknown.
Experimental models of longstanding esophageal reflux of duodenal-gastric
contents may provide important information on the biological sequence of the
Barrett's oncogenesis.
METHODS: The expression of CDX2 hox-gene product was assessed in a rat model of
Barrett's carcinogenesis. Seventy-four rats underwent esophago-jejunostomy with
gastric preservation. Excluding perisurgical deaths, the animals were sacrificed 
at various times after the surgical treatment (Group A: <10 weeks; Group B: 10-30
weeks; Group C: >30 weeks).
RESULTS: No Cdx2 expression was detected in either squamous epithelia of the
proximal esophagus or squamous cell carcinomas. De novo Cdx2 expression was
consistently documented in the proliferative zone of the squamous epithelium
close to reflux ulcers (Group A: 68%; Group B: 64%; Group C: 80%), multilayered
epithelium and intestinal metaplasia (Group A: 9%; Group B: 41%; Group C: 60%),
and esophageal adenocarcinomas (Group B: 36%; Group C: 35%). A trend for
increasing overall Cdx2 expression was documented during the course of the
experiment (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: De novo expression of Cdx2 is an early event in the spectrum of the
lesions induced by experimental gastro-esophageal reflux and should be considered
as a key step in the morphogenesis of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3225830
PMID: 19664209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2009 May;28(3):296-300. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e3181895592.

Cervical adenocarcinoma in situ recurring as vaginal adenocarcinoma 16 years
after hysterectomy.

Hurrell DP(1), Jamison J, Dobbs SP, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals, Belfast, Northern Ireland.

We report a case in which a vaginal adenocarcinoma was discovered in a
67-year-old woman 16 years after hysterectomy for cervical adenocarcinoma in
situ. Both the vaginal and cervical lesions exhibited morphologic and
immunohistochemical (CDX2-positive) features of intestinal differentiation.
Linear array human papillomavirus genotyping demonstrated the vaginal
adenocarcinoma to contain human papillomavirus 45. We believe the vaginal
adenocarcinoma to be related to the cervical adenocarcinoma in situ and to
represent recurrence of this. This is an extremely rare phenomenon with, as far
as we are aware, only one previous report in the literature.

PMID: 19620950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Eur J Cancer. 2009 Dec;45(18):3271-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2009.06.011. Epub 2009
Jul 15.

Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms, serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, and
melanoma: UK case-control comparisons and a meta-analysis of published VDR data.

Randerson-Moor JA(1), Taylor JC, Elliott F, Chang YM, Beswick S, Kukalizch K,
Affleck P, Leake S, Haynes S, Karpavicius B, Marsden J, Gerry E, Bale L, Bertram 
C, Field H, Barth JH, Silva Idos S, Swerdlow A, Kanetsky PA, Barrett JH, Bishop
DT, Bishop JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Leeds Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

We have carried out melanoma case-control comparisons for six vitamin D receptor 
(VDR) gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin
D(3) levels in order to investigate the role of vitamin D in melanoma
susceptibility. There was no significant evidence of an association between any
VDR SNP and risk in 1028 population-ascertained cases and 402 controls from
Leeds, UK. In a second Leeds case-control study (299 cases and 560 controls) the 
FokI T allele was associated with increased melanoma risk (odds ratio (OR) 1.42, 
95% confidence interval (CI) 1.06-1.91, p=0.02). In a meta-analysis in
conjunction with published data from other smaller data sets (total 3769 cases
and 3636 controls), the FokI T allele was associated with increased melanoma risk
(OR 1.19, 95% CI 1.05-1.35), and the BsmI A allele was associated with a reduced 
risk (OR 0.81, 95% CI 0.72-0.92), in each instance under a parsimonious dominant 
model. In the first Leeds case-control comparison cases were more likely to have 
a higher body mass index (BMI) than controls (p=0.007 for linear trend). There
was no evidence of a case-control difference in serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3)
levels. In 1043 incident cases from the first Leeds case-control study, a single 
estimation of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) level taken at recruitment was
inversely correlated with Breslow thickness (p=0.03 for linear trend). These data
provide evidence to support the view that vitamin D and VDR may have a small but 
potentially important role in melanoma susceptibility, and putatively a greater
role in disease progression.

PMCID: PMC2786912
PMID: 19615888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Dec;76(12):1143-52. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21082.

Involvement of GATA transcription factors in the regulation of endogenous bovine 
interferon-tau gene transcription.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Kim MS, Muroi Y, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Nakajima H, Takahashi M,
Nagaoka K, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Expression of interferon-tau (IFNT), necessary for pregnancy establishment in
ruminant ungulates, is regulated in a temporal and spatial manner. However,
molecular mechanisms by which IFNT gene transcription is regulated in this manner
have not been firmly established. In this study, DNA microarray/RT-PCR analysis
between bovine trophoblast CT-1 and Mardin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells was
initially performed, finding that transcription factors GATA2, GATA3, and GATA6
mRNAs were specific to CT-1 cells. These mRNAs were also found in Days 17, 20,
and 22 (Day 0 = day of estrus) bovine conceptuses. In examining other bovine cell
lines, ovary cumulus granulosa (oCG) and ear fibroblast (EF) cells, GATA2 and
GATA3, but not GATA6, were found specific to the bovine trophoblast cells. In
transient transfection analyses using the upstream region (-631 to +59 bp) of
bovine IFNT gene (bIFNT, IFN-tau-c1), over-expression of GATA2/GATA3 did not
affect the transcription of bIFNT-reporter construct in human choriocarcinoma
JEG3 cells. Transfection of GATA2, GATA3, ETS2, and/or CDX2, however, was
effective in the up-regulation of the bIFNT construct transfected into bovine oCG
and EF cells. One Point mutation studies revealed that among six potential GATA
binding sites located on the upstream region of the bIFNT gene, the one next to
ETS2 site exhibited reduced luciferase activity. In CT-1 cells, endogenous bIFNT 
gene transcription was up-regulated by over-expression of GATA2 or GATA3, but
down-regulated by siRNA specific to GATA2 mRNA. These data suggest that GATA2/3
is involved in trophoblast-specific regulation of bIFNT gene transcription.

PMID: 19598245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;11(3):355-65. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0078.

Expression of pluripotency-related genes during bovine inner cell mass explant
culture.

Pant D(1), Keefer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland 20742, USA.

Recent findings identifying the transcription factors involved in the regulation 
of pluripotency and self-renewal in embryonic stem cells (ESC) may provide keys
that enable the derivation of ESC in domestic species. In this study we monitored
the expression of pluripotency-related genes in bovine inner cell mass (ICM)
explants during the critical first steps in establishment of primary cultures.
The expression of NANOG and POU5F1 transcripts and proteins in intact, in vitro
produced (IVP) blastocysts was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR and fluorescent
immunocytochemistry. NANOG was localized to the nucleoplasm as well as the
nucleoli in the ICM, whereas it appeared to be restricted to the nucleoli in
trophectoderm cells. POU5F1 was localized in the nuclei of ICM and trophectoderm 
cells. ICM explants were analyzed by quantitative PCR and semiquantitative
RT-PCR. The three major pluripotency-related transcription factors, NANOG,
POU5F1, and SOX2, were expressed initially in the ICM explants, but were
downregulated with subsequent culture. Markers of differentiation (BMP4, HNF4,
NCAM, CDX2) and genes involved in LIF, BMP, and WNT signaling pathways were also 
expressed. ICM explants were cultured in the presence of various concentrations
of cytokines belonging to the TGF-beta superfamily. Noggin, a cytokine inhibiting
the BMP4 pathway, successfully upregulated the relative expression of NANOG mRNA 
in the ICM explants with respect to controls.

PMID: 19594391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ann Otolaryngol Chir Cervicofac. 2009 Sep;126(4):175-81. doi:
10.1016/j.aorl.2009.06.001. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

[Sinonasal adenocarcinomas reviewed. Prognostic value of WHO 2005 histological
classification].

[Article in French]

El Ayoubi A(1), Poizat F, Garrel R, Costes V, Guerrier B, Essakalli L, Kzadri M, 
Crampette L.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'ORL et de chirurgie cervico-faciale A, hôpital Gui-de-Chauliac, CHU 
de Montpellier, 80, avenue Augustin-Fliche, 34295 Montpellier cedex 5, France.
alineijou@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: The WHO 2005 histological classification separates sinonasal
adenocarcinoma (ADC) into three classes: intestinal-type adenocarcinoma (ITAC),
low-grade sinonasal ADC and high-grade sinonasal ADC. The goal of this study was 
to check the relevance of this classification on the prognosis of patients
treated for ADC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All the files of patients treated consecutively in the ENT 
department of the Montpellier University Hospital for ADC between 1980 and 2003
were retrospectively re-examined. Each case was reviewed for anatomical and
pathological data based on the immunohistochemistry results according to the WHO 
2005 classification, with a study of a panel of markers: cytokeratin 7 (CK7),
cytokeratin 20 (CK20), Villin, CDX2 and EGFR. The epidemiologic data, the methods
of treatment and the follow-up were studied. The survival probabilities were
calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and the survival graphs were compared
using a log-rank test.
RESULTS: Sixty-two files were reviewed. Twelve patients were reclassified into
the adenoid cystic carcinoma category and excluded from the study. In the 50
remaining cases, there were 36 ITAC cases, four low-grade ADC cases and 10
high-grade dedifferentiated carcinomas. For all of the ADC cases, the total
survival at 5 years and without recurrence was 64 and 52%, respectively. The
analysis of the three subgroups showed a total survival of 72.2% for ITAC, 100%
for low-grade and 20% for high-grade ADC with a significant difference (p=0.044).
This immunohistochemical distinction was mainly based on the expression of CK20
found in 98% of the ITAC cases and absent in low- and high-grade ADC patients.
CONCLUSION: The WHO 2005 classification for sinonasal ADC provides a valuable
prognosis by showing a difference in the progression profile between ITAC,
low-grade ADC and high-grade ADC. Moreover, broader studies should be conducted
to investigate the different subtypes of ITAC.

PMID: 19591973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Hepatology. 2009 Aug;50(2):472-80. doi: 10.1002/hep.22989.

Identification of microRNA-181 by genome-wide screening as a critical player in
EpCAM-positive hepatic cancer stem cells.

Ji J(1), Yamashita T, Budhu A, Forgues M, Jia HL, Li C, Deng C, Wauthier E, Reid 
LM, Ye QH, Qin LX, Yang W, Wang HY, Tang ZY, Croce CM, Wang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):2047-8; author reply 448.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small noncoding RNAs that regulate gene
expression with functional links to tumorigenesis. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
is the most common type of liver cancer, and it is heterogeneous in clinical
outcomes and biological activities. Recently, we have identified a subset of
highly invasive epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)(+) HCC cells from
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)(+) tumors with cancer stem/progenitor cell features, that
is, the abilities to self-renew, differentiate, and initiate aggressive tumors in
vivo. Here, using a global microarray-based miRNA profiling approach followed by 
validation with quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, we 
have demonstrated that conserved miR-181 family members were up-regulated in
EpCAM(+)AFP(+) HCCs and in EpCAM(+) HCC cells isolated from AFP(+) tumors.
Moreover, miR-181 family members were highly expressed in embryonic livers and in
isolated hepatic stem cells. Importantly, inhibition of miR-181 led to a
reduction in EpCAM(+) HCC cell quantity and tumor initiating ability, whereas
exogenous miR-181 expression in HCC cells resulted in an enrichment of EpCAM(+)
HCC cells. We have found that miR-181 could directly target hepatic
transcriptional regulators of differentiation (for example, caudal type homeobox 
transcription factor 2 [CDX2] and GATA binding protein 6 [GATA6]) and an
inhibitor of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling (nemo-like kinase [NLK]). Taken together,
our results define a novel regulatory link between miR-181s and human EpCAM(+)
liver cancer stem/progenitor cells and imply that molecular targeting of miR-181 
may eradicate HCC.

PMCID: PMC2721019
PMID: 19585654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;15(14):4665-73. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0401. 
Epub 2009 Jul 7.

Relationship of CDX2 loss with molecular features and prognosis in colorectal
cancer.

Baba Y(1), Nosho K, Shima K, Freed E, Irahara N, Philips J, Meyerhardt JA,
Hornick JL, Shivdasani RA, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: The homeodomain transcription factor CDX2 is a relatively specific
immunohistochemical marker for gastrointestinal carcinoma. However, no study has 
comprehensively examined the relationship between CDX2 expression in colon cancer
and clinical, pathologic, prognostic, and molecular features, including
microsatellite instability and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Utilizing 621 colorectal cancers with clinical outcome and
molecular data, CDX2 loss was detected in 183 (29%) tumors by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In multivariate logistic regression analysis, CDX2 loss was associated
with female gender [odds ratio (OR), 3.32; P < 0.0001], CIMP-high (OR, 4.42; P = 
0.0003), high tumor grade (OR, 2.69; P = 0.0085), stage IV disease (OR, 2.03; P =
0.019), and inversely with LINE-1 hypomethylation (for a 30% decline; OR, 0.33; P
= 0.0031), p53 expression (OR, 0.55; P = 0.011), and beta-catenin activation (OR,
0.60; P = 0.037), but not with body mass index, tumor location, microsatellite
instability, BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA, p21, or cyclooxygenase-2. CDX2 loss was not
independently associated with patient survival. However, the prognostic effect of
CDX2 loss seemed to differ according to family history of colorectal cancer
(P(interaction) = 0.0094). CDX2 loss was associated with high overall mortality
(multivariate hazard ratio, 2.40; 95% CI, 1.28-4.51) among patients with a family
history of colorectal cancer; no such association was present (multivariate
hazard ratio, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.66-1.41) among patients without a family history of
colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 loss in colorectal cancer is independently associated with
female gender, CIMP-high, high-level LINE-1 methylation, high tumor grade, and
advanced stage. CDX2 loss may be associated with poor prognosis among patients
with a family history of colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2777758
PMID: 19584150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Magy Onkol. 2009 Jun;53(2):127-33. doi: 10.1556/MOnkol.53.2009.2.4.

[Diagnostic problems of ovarian mucinous borderline tumors].

[Article in Hungarian]

Vereczkey I(1), Tóth E, Orosz Z.

Author information: 
(1)Országos Onkológiai Intézet Sebészi és Molekuláris Daganatpatológiai Centrum
1122 Budapest Ráth György u. 7-9. vereczkey.ildiko@oncol.hu

About 15-20% of all ovarian epithelial neoplasms are of borderline type (or
atypical proliferative or carcinoma of low malignant potential) and about 5-7%
are mucinous type, which are the second most common type behind the serous
borderline tumors. The borderline tumor is a serious diagnostic and treatment
problem both for the pathologists and for clinicians. These tumors appeared to be
intermediate in their histologic and prognostic features between the benign
cystadenomas and clearly malignant carcinomas. The borderline tumors occur most
commonly in childbearing age, and show an indolent course. Their prognosis is
good, but they are resistant to the traditional chemotherapies. To diagnose the
intraepithelial carcinoma, to detect the microinvasion and the expansive invasion
in a mucinous borderline tumor, to differentiate from the metastasis of
colorectal tumors may be very problematic in the majority of the cases. Eleven
cases diagnosed as mucinous borderline ovarian tumor in our institute from 2000
to 2008 were reviewed. Eight out of 11 were intestinal type while three were
cervical (mullerian) type. In 5 cases our diagnosis was intraepithelial carcinoma
and in 5 cases we found microinvasion. We discuss all of these problems according
to the latest literature and our experience, mentioning the problems of the
peritoneal and ovarian pseudomyxomas.

PMID: 19581178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Surg Pathol. 2009 Oct;17(5):373-7. doi: 10.1177/1066896909338598. Epub 2009
Jul 3.

CDX2 expression in yolk sac component of testicular germ cell tumors.

Bing Z(1), Pasha T, Tomaszewski JE, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. bingz@uphs.upenn.edu

CDX2 has been detected in the majority of colorectal adenocarcinoma cases and may
be useful in determining the sites of origin of tumors. In this study, the
authors evaluated CDX2 expression in germ cell tumors (GCTs) by
immunohistochemistry. Forty cases of testicular GCTs and 8 cases of metastatic
GCTs were retrieved for study. In the 40 cases of testicular GCTs, 13 were pure
seminomas and 27 mixed GCTs. Yolk sac tumor (YST) was identified by morphology
and glypican 3 staining in 20 testicular mixed GCTs. Of these 20 cases, 8 cases
showed 1+ positivity for CDX2. Other primitive components of GCTs were negative. 
For the 6 cases of metastatic mixed GCT with YST, 4 cases were positive, 2+ in 2 
cases and 1+ in 2 cases. The positivity of CDX2 in GCTs warrants including YST in
the differential diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of unknown origin.

PMID: 19578052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2009;25:483-512. doi:
10.1146/annurev.cellbio.042308.113348.

From mouse egg to mouse embryo: polarities, axes, and tissues.

Johnson MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development, and Neuroscience and Center for
Trophoblast Research, The Anatomy School, Cambridge CB2 3DY, United Kingdom.
mhj21@cam.ac.uk

This review describes the three classical models (mosaic, positional, and
polarization) proposed to explain blastocyst formation and summarizes the
evidence concerning them. It concludes that the polarization model incorporates
elements of the other two models and best explains most known information. I
discuss key requirements of a molecular basis for the generation and
stabilization of polarity and identify ezrin/E-cadherin, PAR proteins, and Cdx2
as plausible key molecular players. I also discuss the idea of a network process 
operating to build cell allocations progressively into committed differences.
Finally, this review critically considers the possibility of developmental
information being encoded within the oocyte and zygote. No final decision can be 
reached on a mechanism of action underlying any encoded information, but a cell
interaction process model is preferred over one that relies solely on
differential inheritance.

PMID: 19575654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;125(7):1739-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24544.

CDX2 promoter methylation is not associated with mRNA expression.

Pereira B, Oliveira C, David L, Almeida R.

Comment on
    Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 1;124(11):2677-82.

PMID: 19569237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 30;4(6):e6086. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006086.

Transcription-independent heritability of induced histone modifications in the
mouse preimplantation embryo.

VerMilyea MD(1), O'Neill LP, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, UK.

Enzyme-catalyzed, post-translational modifications of core histones have been
implicated in the complex changes in gene expression that drive early mammalian
development. However, until recently the small number of cells available from the
preimplantation embryo itself has prevented quantitative analysis of histone
modifications at key regulator genes. The possible involvement of histone
modifications in the embryo's response to extracellular signals, or as
determinants of cell fate or lineage progression, remains unclear. Here we
describe the use of a recently-developed chromatin immunoprecipitation technique 
(CChIP) to assay histone modification levels at key regulator genes (Pou5f1,
Nanog, Cdx2, Hoxb1, Hoxb9) as mouse embryos progress from 8-cell to blastocyst in
culture. Only by the blastocyst stage, when the embryonic (Inner Cell Mass) and
extra-embryonic (Trophoblast) lineages are compared, do we see the expected
association between histone modifications previously linked to active and silent 
chromatin, and transcriptional state. To explore responses to an environmental
signal, we exposed embryos to the histone deacetylase inhibitor, anti-epileptic
and known teratogen valproic acid (VPA), during progression from 8-cell to morula
stage. Such treatment increased H4 acetylation and H3 lysine 4 methylation at the
promoters of Hoxb1 and Hoxb9, but not the promoters of Pou5f1, Nanog,Cdx2 or the 
housekeeping gene Gapdh. Despite the absence of detectable Hoxb transcription,
these VPA-induced changes were heritable, following removal of the inhibitor, at 
least until the blastocyst stage. The selective hyperacetylation of Hoxb
promoters in response to a histone deacetylase inhibitor, suggests that Hox genes
have a higher turnover of histone acetates than other genes in the
preimplantation embryo. To explain the heritability, through mitosis, of
VPA-induced changes in histone modification at Hoxb promoters, we describe how an
epigenetic feed-forward loop, based on cross-talk between H3 acetylation and H3K4
methylation, might generate a persistently increased steady-state level of
histone acetylation in response to a transient signal.

PMCID: PMC2698989
PMID: 19564914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Res. 2009 Sep;19(9):1052-61. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.79. Epub 2009 Jun 30.

Cross-regulation of the Nanog and Cdx2 promoters.

Chen L(1), Yabuuchi A, Eminli S, Takeuchi A, Lu CW, Hochedlinger K, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Dana
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

The first cell fate choice in the mammalian embryo, the segregation of the inner 
cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE), is regulated by the mutually antagonistic
effects of the transcription factors, Oct4 and Cdx2, while the pluripotency
factor, Nanog, is essential to specify the epiblast. We have analyzed the
promoters of Nanog and Cdx2, and have found that these two transcription factors 
are likewise regulated reciprocally. Using an embryonic stem cell line with
conditional TE differentiation, we show that Nanog overexpression suppresses the 
upregulation of TE markers, while Nanog knockdown upregulates the expression of
TE markers. We further show that Nanog and Cdx2 bind to and repress each other's 
promoters. However, whereas Nanog knockout results in detectable Cdx2 expression 
in the ICM, we observe no overt disruption of blastocyst development, indicating 
that Nanog plays a subservient role to Oct4 in segregation of the ICM and TE.

PMID: 19564890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Trends Mol Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):313-22. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2009.05.001. Epub
2009 Jun 27.

Cdx genes, inflammation and the pathogenesis of Barrett's metaplasia.

Colleypriest BJ(1), Palmer RM, Ward SG, Tosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. bc248@bath.ac.uk

Metaplasia is the conversion of one cell or tissue type to another and can
predispose patients to neoplasia. Perhaps one of the best-known examples of
metaplasia is Barrett's metaplasia (BM), a pathological condition in which the
distal oesophageal epithelium switches from stratified squamous to
intestinal-type columnar epithelium. BM predisposes to oesophageal adenocarcinoma
and is the consequence of long-term acid bile reflux. The incidence of BM and
oesophageal adenocarcinoma has risen dramatically in recent years. A key event in
the pathogenesis of BM is the induction of oesophageal CDX2 expression.
Importantly, recent data reveal the molecular mechanisms that link inflammation
in the development of Barrett's metaplasia, CDX2 and the progression to cancer.
This review highlights the relationship between inflammation, metaplasia and
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19564133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Cancer. 2009 Dec 15;125(12):2802-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24683.

KLF4-dependent, PPARgamma-induced expression of GPA33 in colon cancer cell lines.

Rageul J(1), Mottier S, Jarry A, Shah Y, Théoleyre S, Masson D, Gonzalez FJ,
Laboisse CL, Denis MG.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, CNRS UMR 6061, Université Rennes 1, IFR140, Rennes,
France.

The glycoprotein A33 (GPA33) is a colon cancer antigen. Phase I trials with 131I 
and 125I monoclonal antibody A33 in colon carcinoma patients showed excellent
localization to colorectal cancer and some evidence of tumor response. Using DNA 
microarrays, we have identified the GPA33 gene as a target of PPARgamma in
HT29-Cl.16E colon cancer cells. Treatment of HT29-Cl.16E, Caco2, SW1116 and
LS174T colon cancer cells with the PPARgamma agonist GW7845 induced a 2- to
6-fold increase in GPA33 mRNA as determined by real-time PCR. This induction was 
also found in HT29-Cl.16E cells treated with rosiglitazone and ciglitazone and
was prevented by cotreatment with the PPARgamma antagonist GW9662, indicating
that this regulation was PPARgamma dependent. No canonical PPAR responsive
element was found in the GPA33 promoter. We therefore analyzed the expression of 
transcription factors involved in GPA33 expression. CDXl, CDX2 and KLF5
expression was not modified by PPARgamma activation. By contrast, a significant
increase in KLF4 was seen, both at mRNA and protein levels. Furthermore,
chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that an increased amount of
KLF4 protein was bound to the GPA33 promoter in cells treated with rosiglitazone.
Finally, downregulation of KLF4 expression by siRNA reduced rosiglitazone-induced
GPA33 expression. This indicates that PPARgamma activation induces KLF4
expression, which in turn increases GPA33 expression. We also demonstrate that
PPARgamma activation leads to increased (p21WAF1/Cip1 and keratin 19) or
decreased (cyclin D1) expression of known KLF4 targets, suggesting that KLF4 is a
nodal player in a network of PPARgamma-regulated genes.

Copyright (c) 2009 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2791338
PMID: 19551868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. RNA. 2009 Aug;15(8):1588-96. doi: 10.1261/rna.1278109. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Breaking the seals: efficient mRNA detection from human archival
paraffin-embedded tissue.

Illig R(1), Fritsch H, Schwarzer C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Functional Anatomy, Innsbruck Medical University,
6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

During our study on HOXA13, HOXD12, and HOXD13 mRNA expression in human adult and
embryonic tissues, we were confronted with the fact that, within our specimen
collection, as in other University Departments in Europe, <20% of all samples
yielded reliable labeling, while most samples were resistant to hybridization by 
standard protocols due to over-fixation. Fixation is essential for specimen
stability, especially when samples are stored at room temperature and used for
histology, and people tend to be more worried about under- than over-fixation. On
the other hand fixation inhibits penetration by the probe and may also trap mRNA 
within ribosomes. Therefore, we developed a nonradioactive in situ hybridization 
technique, which allows detection of mRNA expressed on low levels from a variety 
of differentially fixed tissues while maintaining tissue integrity. This was
achieved by improving target retrieval and probe detection. In contrast with
others, our method allows reliable staining from tissues that are fixed in
paraformaldehyde from four hours to over one week, and archived samples that were
stored at room temperature for several years (17-19 yr in some cases) and exceeds
detection limits of purely fluorescent methods. Our protocol is highly suitable
for detecting CDX-2 mRNA in carcinoma specimens, but especially designed to
investigate mRNAs in nonpathological adult and embryonic tissues. Due to the use 
of standardized probes, we do not expect problems in detecting other mRNAs
expressed in suitable amounts.

PMCID: PMC2714753
PMID: 19549718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Gastroenterology. 2009 Oct;137(4):1435-47.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.06.043. Epub 2009 Jun 21.

Pathogenic bacteria induce colonic PepT1 expression: an implication in host
defense response.

Nguyen HT(1), Dalmasso G, Powell KR, Yan Y, Bhatt S, Kalman D, Sitaraman SV,
Merlin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.
hnguye9@emory.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Expression of the di/tripeptide transporter PepT1 has been
observed in the colon under inflammatory conditions; however, the inducing
factors and underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we address the effects of
pathogenic bacteria on colonic PepT1 expression together with its functional
consequences.
METHODS: Human colonic HT29-Cl.19A cells were infected with the attaching and
effacing enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC). Wild-type and PepT1 transgenic
mice or cultured colonic tissues derived from these mice were infected with
Citrobacter rodentium, a murine attaching and effacing pathogen related to EPEC.
RESULTS: EPEC induced PepT1 expression and activity in HT29-Cl.19A cells by
intimately attaching to host cells through lipid rafts. Induction of PepT1
expression by EPEC required the transcription factor Cdx2. PepT1 expression
reduced binding of EPEC to lipid rafts, as well as activation of nuclear
factor-kappaB and mitogen-activated protein kinase and production of
interleukin-8. Accordingly, ex vivo and in vivo experiments revealed that C
rodentium induced colonic PepT1 expression and that, compared with their
wild-type counterparts, PepT1 transgenic mice infected with C rodentium exhibited
decreased bacterial colonization, production of proinflammatory cytokines, and
neutrophil infiltration into the colon.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate a molecular mechanism underlying the
regulation of colonic PepT1 expression under pathologic conditions and reveal a
novel role for PepT1 in host defense via its capacity to modulate
bacterial-epithelial interactions and intestinal inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2757477
PMID: 19549526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Sep;9(6):430-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.06.003. Epub
2009 Jun 17.

Effect of retinoic acid signaling on Wnt/beta-catenin and FGF signaling during
body axis extension.

Zhao X(1), Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, Development and Aging Program, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Cell-cell signaling regulated by retinoic acid (RA), Wnt/beta-catenin, and
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) is important during body axis extension, and
interactions between these pathways have been suggested. At early somite stages, 
Wnt/beta-catenin and FGF signaling domains exist both anterior and posterior to
the developing trunk, whereas RA signaling occurs in between in the trunk under
the control of the RA-synthesizing enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (Raldh2).
Previous studies demonstrated that vitamin A deficient quail embryos and
Raldh2(-/-) mouse embryos lacking RA synthesis exhibit ectopic expression of Fgf8
and Wnt8a in the developing trunk. Here, we demonstrate that Raldh2(-/-) mouse
embryos display an expansion of FGF signaling into the trunk monitored by
Sprouty2 and Pea3 expression, and an expansion of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
detected by expression of Axin2, Tbx6, Cdx2, and Cdx4. Following loss of RA
signaling, the caudal expression domains of Fgf8, Wnt8a, and Wnt3a expand
anteriorly into the trunk, but no change is observed in caudal expression of Fgf4
or Fgf17 plus caudal expression of Fgf18 and Cdx1 is reduced. These findings
suggest that RA repression of Fgf8, Wnt8a, and Wnt3a in the developing trunk
functions to down-regulate FGF signaling and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling as the
body axis extends.

PMCID: PMC2791796
PMID: 19539783  [PubMed]


42. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 May;1165:323-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04061.x.

Lymphoepithelial interactions: a new paradigm.

Dahan S(1), Roth-Walter F, Martin AP, Arnaboldi P, Mayer L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Intestinal lymphoepithelial interactions occur in the epithelium and
subepithelial space. We asked whether or not lamina propria lymphocytes (LPL)
could promote intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) differentiation. In contrast to
epithelial cells in UC mucosa, which do not differentiate because of rapid
turnover, differentiation of epithelial cells in CD mucosa occurs in the crypts. 
This dysregulation is driven by alterations in the crosstalk between CD LPL and
CD IECs, leading to an acceleration of their differentiation. This alteration
seems to involve the transcription factor CDX2 via the activation of the PI3K and
MAPK pathways and provides new insights into the dysfunction of the epithelial
barrier in CD versus UC. The absence of lymphocytes in Rag1-deficient mice was
associated with a defect in colonic IEC differentiation, restored by co-transfer 
of naïve and regulatory T cells. Interestingly, the transfer of naïve T cells
alone induced an acceleration of IEC differentiation similar to what was seen in 
the colonic mucosa of CD patients. Thus, there is a crosstalk between LPL and
IECs that is altered in CD, which leads to an absorptive phenotype of IEC
differentiation.

PMID: 19538323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Dec;18(10):1451-8. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0122.

Inner cell mass localization of NANOG precedes OCT3/4 in rhesus monkey
blastocysts.

Harvey AJ(1), Armant DR, Bavister BD, Nichols SM, Brenner CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 48202,
USA. aharvey@med.wayne.edu

The mechanism by which the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE) become
specified is poorly understood. Considerable species variation is evident in the 
expression of lineage-specific and embryonic stem cell (ESC) regulatory markers. 
We sought to investigate localization patterns of these markers in rhesus macaque
compact morulae and blastocysts. NANOG protein was restricted to the ICM of
blastocysts. In contrast to a previous report, the expression of CDX2 was
detected in the primate blastocyst, localized specifically to the TE. Unlike the 
mouse embryo, OCT4 protein was detected using two different antibodies in both
the ICM and TE. The ubiquitous pattern of OCT4 expression is consistent with
observations in human, cow, and pig embryos. Significantly, lack of restricted
OCT4 protein, and ICM localization of NANOG in primate blastocysts, suggests that
NANOG may determine inner cell mass fate more specifically during primate
development or may be less susceptible to culture artifacts. These results
contrast markedly with current mechanistic hypotheses, although other factors may
lie upstream of NANOG to constitute a complex interactive network. This
difference may also underlie observations that regulatory mechanisms in ESC
differ between mice and primates.

PMCID: PMC3016202
PMID: 19537945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Hum Pathol. 2009 Oct;40(10):1391-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.04.002. Epub 2009
Jun 17.

Urothelial carcinoma with abundant myxoid stroma.

Tavora F(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA.

Urothelial carcinomas with abundant myxoid stroma have thus far been only briefly
reported in a couple of textbooks yet not in the peer-reviewed literature.
Thirteen cases of urothelial carcinoma with myxoid features were collected over 9
years. Cases with any distinct adenocarcinoma component were excluded from the
study. The mean age of the patients was 64 years (range, 45-84 years). Nine of
the 13 were male. All cases involved the bladder with one of the cases involving 
a bladder diverticulum. Treatment included transurethral resection of the bladder
only in 6 patients, transurethral resection of the bladder with subsequent
intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guérin treatment in 4 patients, radical cystectomy
only in 2 patients, and neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by cystectomy in 1
patient. In all cases, the myxoid stroma was associated with invasive urothelial 
carcinoma. The 2 most common patterns of cancer with myxoid stroma were small- or
medium-sized nests seen in 10 cases followed by filiform cancer seen in 4 cases. 
Other patterns of invasive cancer associated with myxoid stroma were short cords 
and individual cells. The percentage of invasive urothelial carcinoma that had
myxoid stroma ranged from 5% to 95% (mean, 50%). An unusual finding was the
presence of invasive low-grade urothelial carcinoma associated with myxoid stroma
in 5 cases, 4 of which had an overlying low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma 
component. All cases were uniformly positive for cytokeratin 7 and negative for
CDX2 with 5 cases also positive for cytokeratin 20. Urothelial carcinoma
associated with the extracellular myxoid matrix was positive for MUC5 in 3 cases 
and for MUC2 in 2 cases. Two of the MUC5-positive cases were also positive in the
urothelium for polyclonal CEA. Histochemical stains for Alcian blue with and
without hyaluronidase, periodic acid-Schiff, and mucicarmine showed positivity in
the areas of myxoid differentiation. The current study describes a rare variant
of urothelial carcinoma that may be confused with primary or secondary
adenocarcinoma of the bladder, which can have therapeutic and prognostic
implications.

PMID: 19535127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Diagn Pathol. 2009 Jun 14;4:17. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-4-17.

Synchronous primary carcinoid tumor and primary adenocarcinoma arising within
mature cystic teratoma of horseshoe kidney: a unique case report and review of
the literature.

Armah HB(1), Parwani AV, Perepletchikov AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Presbyterian-Shadyside Hospital, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. armahh2@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Malignant transformation of mature cystic teratoma is a rare
complication. While any of the constituent tissues of a teratoma has the
potential to undergo malignant transformation, squamous cell carcinoma is the
most commonly associated malignancy. Renal carcinoid tumors are rare and
frequently associated with horseshoe kidney and renal teratoma. Renal teratoma
rarely presents together with carcinoid tumor or adenocarcinoma. To the best of
our knowledge, there has never been a report of renal teratoma coexisting with
both carcinoid tumor and adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Here, we present a unique and first case of synchronous primary
carcinoid tumor and moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma arising within
mature cystic teratoma of horseshoe kidney in a 50-year-old female. Lumbar spine 
X-ray, done for her complaint of progressive chronic low back pain, accidentally 
found a large calcification overlying the lower pole of the right kidney. Further
radiologic studies revealed horseshoe kidney and a large multi-septated cystic
lesion immediately anterior to the right renal pelvis with central calcification 
and peripheral enhancement. She underwent right partial nephrectomy.
RESULTS: Macroscopically, the encapsulated complex solid and multiloculated
cystic tumor with large calcification, focal thickened walls and filled with
yellow-tan gelatinous material. Microscopically, the tumor showed coexistent
mature cystic teratoma, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and carcinoid
tumor. Immunohistochemically, alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A-racemase, calretinin,
CD10 and thyroid transcription factor-1 were negative in all the three components
of the tumor. The teratomatous cysts lined by ciliated epithelium showed strong
staining for cytokeratin 7 and pancytokeratin, and those lined by colonic-like
epithelium showed strong staining for CDX2, cytokeratin 20 and pancytokeratin,
but both were negative for calretinin. Additionally, the teratomatous cyst wall
showed strong staining for smooth muscle actin, and weak staining for carbonic
anhydrase IX, CD99, chromogranin and synaptophysin. The adenocarcinoma component 
was strongly positive for cytokeratin 7 and pancytokeratin, weakly positive for
synaptophysin and CD56, and negative for carbonic anhydrase IX, CD99, CDX2,
chromogranin, cytokeratin 20 and smooth muscle actin. The carcinoid tumor
component was strongly positive for CD56, chromogranin and synaptophysin, weakly 
positive for pancytokeratin, and negative for carbonic anhydrase IX, CD99, CDX2, 
cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20 and smooth muscle actin. She received no adjuvant
therapy and is alive without evidence of disease six months after diagnosis and
surgery.
CONCLUSION: This unique and first case herein presented with synchronous primary 
carcinoid tumor and primary adenocarcinoma arising within mature cystic teratoma 
of horseshoe kidney emphasizes the need for thorough sectioning and entire
submission for histologic evaluation of mature cystic teratomas, in order to
avoid missing multiple additional histogenetically distinct neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2704177
PMID: 19523243  [PubMed]


46. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Aug;297(2):G312-22. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00518.2007. Epub 2009 Jun 11.

Helicobacter pylori induces gastric mucosal intestinal metaplasia through the
inhibition of interleukin-4-mediated HMG box protein Sox2 expression.

Asonuma S(1), Imatani A, Asano N, Oikawa T, Konishi H, Iijima K, Koike T, Ohara
S, Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Helicobacter pylori is a major cause of the transdifferentiation into intestinal 
metaplasia that may develop gastric cancer. However, the molecular pathogenesis
of this transdifferentiation is poorly understood. A SRY-related HMG box protein 
Sox2 is an essential transcription factor of organ development in brain, lung,
and stomach. Our aim of this study was to investigate the mechanism responsible
for regulation of Sox2 in host Th1-dominant response to H. pylori. Sox2 protein
was immunohistochemically expressed in both human oxyntic and pyloric glands with
H. pylori infection, but not in intestinal metaplasia. Western immunoblotting of 
gastric epithelial cell lines showed that IL-4, a Th2-related cytokine, dose
dependently enhanced Sox2 expression among H. pylori infection-mediated
cytokines. Small changes of Sox2 expression were observed after each treatment
with IFN-gamma, IL-1beta, or TNF-alpha. IL-4-mediated Sox2 induction was
suppressed by the inhibition of STAT6 activation with STAT6 RNA interference, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that activation of the Sox2
promoter by IL-4 occurred through the action of STAT6. Furthermore, H. pylori and
IFN-gamma inhibited the phosphorylation of STAT6, resulting in the suppression of
IL-4-mediated Sox2 expression. Immunohistochemical analyses showed significantly 
the suppressed STAT6 activity in H. pylori-infected human gastric mucosa.
Additionally, downregulation of Sox2 by knockdown experiments led to intestinal
phenotype with expressions of Cdx2 and MUC2. These results suggest that H. pylori
and IFN-gamma interfere with the differentiation into oxyntic and pyloric glands 
by the downregulation of Sox2 on IL-4/STAT6 signaling, which may contribute to
the transdifferentiation into intestinal metaplasia.

PMID: 19520737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Zygote. 2009 Nov;17(4):353-65. doi: 10.1017/S0967199409005486. Epub 2009 Jun 8.

Elongation and gene expression in bovine cloned embryos transferred to temporary 
recipients.

Rodríguez-Alvarez L(1), Cox J, Navarrete F, Valdés C, Zamorano T, Einspanier R,
Castro FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universidad de
Concepción, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile.

SummaryElongated embryos provide a unique source of information about
trophoblastic differentiation, gene expression and maternal-embryonic
interactions; however they are difficult and costly to obtain, especially
elongated cloned embryos. One alternative is their production in heterologous
temporary recipients such as sheep and goats. We aimed to produce elongated
bovine cloned embryos using heterologous transfer to temporary recipients. Day-7 
cloned cattle blastocysts were transferred to the uteri of ewes and goats and
recovered as elongated structures at day 17. We evaluated elongation, length,
presence of embryonic disc and expression of several important genes for
embryonic development. We also produced homologous (cloned cattle embryos
transferred into cattle uteri). Cloned bovine blastocysts were able to proceed
with preimplantation development through elongation with high efficiency despite 
the species to which they were transferred. In qualitative and quantitative
RT-PCR experiments we found differences in the pattern of gene expression among
embryos recovered from different species. Sox2, Nanog and FGF-4 were markedly
deregulated. No previous reports about the expression pattern of the studied
genes had been published for elongated bovine cloned embryos produced in
intermediate recipients, furthermore, the pattern of expression of Nanog, Oct4,
Eomes, Cdx2, IFN-tau, Dicer, FGF-4 and Sox2 shown here are novel for elongated
cloned bovine embryos created by hand-made cloning. Our data confirmed that sheep
and goats can be used as temporary recipients. This model could serve as a basis 
for further research on gene expression and cellular changes during bovine
peri-implantation development.

PMID: 19500444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(8):926-32. doi: 10.1080/00365520902998661.

Acid and bile salt up-regulate BMP4 expression in human esophageal epithelium
cells.

Zhou G(1), Sun YG, Wang HB, Wang WQ, Wang XW, Fang DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Southwest Hospital, The Third Military Medical
University, ChongQing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Barrett's esophagus (BE) with an intestinal-type epithelium is thought
to be a precancerous lesion of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. The
pathophysiology of Barrett's metaplasia is poorly understood. Previous studies
suggest that differentiation of multipotent cells to columnar epithelium may be
one of the possible mechanisms. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), a factor
determining the fate of cells, is up-regulated in BE and esophagitis mucosa when 
compared with normal squamous or non-goblet cell-containing cardiac epithelium.
The aim of this study was to demonstrate that BMP4 is a molecular mediator that
links etiological agents of BE to the phenotypic changes in human esophagus
epithelium cells (HEECs).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Primary cultured HEECs were used to investigate the effect 
of acid and bile salt on BMP4 expression and to examine the biological effects of
BMP4 on HEECs.
RESULTS: Acid and bile salt increased the expression of BMP4. In addition,
recombinant human BMP4 induced villin expression in HEECs, as did chronic acid
exposure, which can be effectively inhibited by Noggin, a specific antagonist of 
BMP4. Results from a Western blot assay suggest that BMP4 induces activation of
smad1 and promotes protein expression of ID2 and CDX2.
CONCLUSION: BMP4 may play an important role in the development of BE.

PMID: 19488929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Clin J Gastroenterol. 2009 Jun;2(3):175-7. doi: 10.1007/s12328-009-0081-0. Epub
2009 Apr 29.

Metastatic gingival tumor from rectal cancer diagnosed with CDX2.

Iida T(1), Sasaki T(2), Akita H(3), Sasaki M(3), Shiba H(2), Yanaga K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 3-25-8
Nishi-Shinbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan. pooh-tom@jikei.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Surgery, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 3-25-8
Nishi-Shinbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan. (3)Department of Surgery,
Sasaki Hospital, Saitama, Japan.

Metastatic tumors of the oral region are very rare, accounting for approximately 
1% of intraoral malignant tumors. Caudal-related homeobox transcription factor
(CDX2) regulates the development and differentiation of intestinal epithelial
cells. We report herein a case of metastatic gingival tumor from rectal cancer
after low anterior resection in which immunohistochemical analysis of CDX2 was
useful for diagnosis of the origin. To the best of our knowledge, our case is the
first report that immunohistochemical staining with CDX2 can contribute to
diagnose metastatic gingival tumor from rectal cancer.

PMID: 26192290  [PubMed]


50. J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(9):897-911. doi: 10.1007/s00535-009-0082-2. Epub 2009
May 27.

Differential gene expression in normal esophagus and Barrett's esophagus.

Wang J(1), Qin R, Ma Y, Wu H, Peters H, Tyska M, Shaheen NJ, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Julius L. Chambers Biomedical/Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, 700 George Street, Durham, NC
27707, USA.

PURPOSE: As the premalignant lesion of human esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC),
Barrett's esophagus (BE) is characterized by intestinal metaplasia in the normal 
esophagus (NE). Gene expression profiling with microarray and serial analysis of 
gene expression (SAGE) may help us understand the potential molecular mechanism
of human BE.
METHODS: We analyzed three microarray datasets (two cDNA arrays and one
oligonucleotide array) and one SAGE dataset with statistical tools, significance 
analysis of microarrays (SAM) and SAGE(Poisson), to identify individual genes
differentially expressed in BE. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to
identify a priori defined sets of genes that were differentially expressed. These
gene sets were grouped according to either certain signaling pathways (GSEA
curated), or the presence of consensus binding sequences of known transcription
factors (GSEA motif). Immunohistochemical staining (IHC) was used to validate
differential gene expression.
RESULTS: Both SAM and SAGE(Poisson) identified 68 differentially expressed genes 
(55 BE genes and 13 NE genes) with an arbitrary cutoff ratio (> or =4-fold). With
IHC on matched pairs of NE and BE tissues from 6 patients, these genes were
grouped into 6 categories: category I (25 genes only expressed in BE), category
II (5 genes only expressed in NE), category III (8 genes expressed more in BE
than in NE), and category IV (2 genes expressed more in NE than in BE).
Differential expression of the remaining genes was not confirmed by IHC either
due to false discovery (category V), or lack of proper antibodies (category VI). 
Besides individual genes, the TGFbeta pathway and several transcription factors
(CDX2, HNF1, and HNF4) were identified by GSEA as enriched pathways and motifs in
BE. Apart from 9 target genes known to be up-regulated in BE, IHC staining
confirmed up-regulation of 19 additional CDX1 and CDX2 target genes in BE.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested an important role of CDX1 and CDX2 in the
development of BE. The IHC-confirmed gene list will lead to future studies on the
molecular mechanism of BE.

PMCID: PMC3811010
PMID: 19468668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Sep-Oct;52(5):315-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.05.003. Epub
2009 May 19.

Molecular genetic screening of MBS1 locus on chromosome 13 for microdeletions and
exclusion of FGF9, GSH1 and CDX2 as causative genes in patients with Moebius
syndrome.

Uzumcu A(1), Karaman B, Toksoy G, Uyguner ZO, Candan S, Eris H, Tatli B, Geckinli
B, Yuksel A, Kayserili H, Basaran S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Moebius syndrome is a rare disorder primarily characterized by congenital facial 
palsy, frequently accompanied by ocular abduction anomalies, and occasionally
associated with orofacial, limb and musculoskeletal malformations. Abnormal
development of cranial nerves V through XII underlines the disease pathogenesis. 
Although some investigations suggested that a causative gene may lie on
13q12.2-q13, there have been no molecular studies targeting possible
microdeletions in this region to date. In the present study, we performed
microdeletion analyses on 13q12.11-q13 in nine patients, and sequenced three
candidate genes in nineteen patients for functional relevance and further
resolution of our screening. We ruled out microdeletions on the critical region
as a common cause of Moebius syndrome and excluded FGF9, GSH1 and CDX2 genes.

PMID: 19460469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009 Aug;13(8):1430-9. doi: 10.1007/s11605-009-0899-2. Epub 
2009 May 16.

Inhibition of nucleostemin upregulates CDX2 expression in HT29 cells in response 
to bile acid exposure: implications in the pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus.

Sun YG(1), Wang XW, Yang SM, Zhou G, Wang WQ, Wang HB, Wang RQ, Fang DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400038, China.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE), a squamous-to-columnar metaplasia, may
originate from growth-promoting mutations in metaplastic stem cells. Nucleostemin
is a protein highly expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem cells. The
objectives of this study were to explore the potential role of nucleostemin in
the pathogenesis of BE METHODS: The expression profiles of 30,968 genes were
compared between BE and normal esophageal tissues (n = 6 in each group) by using 
oligo microarray. Three siRNA plasmid expression vectors against nucleostemin,
pRNAi-1, pRNAi-2, and pRNAi-3, were constructed and transfected into HT29 cells. 
In addition, HT29 cells were exposed to 100-1,000 microM chenodeoxycholic acid
(CDC), a bile acid, for 2, 12, and 24 h, and then messenger RNA and protein
expressions of nucleostemin and CDX2 were determined by reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Four hundred and twenty-six differentially expressed genes were detected
in BE; 142 were upregulated and 284 downregulated. Nucleostemin was downregulated
while CDX2 was upregulated. In vitro, all the recombinant plasmids inhibited the 
nucleostemin expression in transfected HT29 cells, with pRNAi-1 being the most
effective. CDX2 expression was significantly increased in pRNAi-1-transfected
HT29 cells, compared with that in the empty plasmid (pRNAT-U6.1/Neo) transfected 
or untransfected HT29 cells. In addition, CDX2 expression was increased whereas
nucleostemin expression was decreased in a dose- and time-dependent manner in
HT29 cells treated with CDC.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the inhibition of nucleostemin expression
in "esophageal stem cells" in response to bile acid exposure may be involved in
the pathogenesis of BE through upregulating CDX2 expression.

PMID: 19449081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Int J Surg Pathol. 2011 Dec;19(6):787-90. doi: 10.1177/1066896909336442. Epub
2009 May 14.

Colonic carcinoma metastatic to the endometrium: the importance of clinical
history in averting misdiagnosis as a primary endometrial carcinoma.

Zannoni GF(1), Vellone VG, Fadda G, Petrillo M, Scambia G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Policlinico A. Gemelli, Catholic University, Largo A.
Gemelli 8, 00168 Rome, Italy. gfzannoni@rm.unicatt.it

Metastases to endometrium are a rare event. A case of a 53-year-old woman with a 
previous colon cancer presenting with a dysfunctional uterine bleeding is
reported. The curettage specimens consisted of multiple fragments of
proliferative endometrial tissue mixed with irregular glands, focally amputated, 
lined by very cells with elongated, hyperchromatic nuclei and solid sheets of
neoplastic cells often filled with necrotic debris and inflammatory cells,
resembling endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Neoplastic cells resulted positive at
immunohistochemical reaction for CK20, CDX2, p53 and negative for CK7, vimentin, 
ER, and PR suggesting a metastatic colon adenocarcinoma. Absence of premalignant 
changes, such as hyperplasia, besides frankly malignant glands in an endometrial 
curette should be regarded as an alarming feature for a secondary nature mostly
from large bowel. In these cases clinical history is crucial and an
immunohistochemical panel made up of CK7, CK20, CDX2, p53, vimentin, ER, and PR
is useful for the correct diagnosis.

PMID: 19443868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biochem. 2009 Nov;331(1-2):27-30. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0141-2. Epub
2009 May 7.

No association between the polymorphisms in CDX2 coding regions and colorectal
cancer in Chinese.

Xia X(1), Xu E, Quan S, Huang Q, Lai M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Affiliated with School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310016, China.

CDX2 has been shown to play an important role in the pathogenesis of colorectal
cancer. The aim of this study was to investigate whether genetic variants in CDX2
contributed to the development and progression of colorectal cancer in a Chinese 
population. We detected the polymorphisms in the CDX2 coding regions in 126
patients with colorectal cancer and matched tumor-free subjects by PCR-based
DHPLC. The correlation between the genotypes and clinicopathological parameters
among colorectal cancer cases was also investigated. Three SNPs were identified
in the coding region of the CDX2 gene. Neither the genotype frequencies nor
allele frequencies of CDX2 polymorphisms showed significant difference from those
in healthy controls. There were also no significant association between genotypes
and clinicopathological features. When we examined the linkage disequilibrium
between three SNPs using expectation-maximization algorithm, we found that there 
is strong linkage disequilibrium among these SNPs, but no significant difference 
was found in haplotypes distribution. Our present data suggest that the CDX2
polymorphisms may not be used as a useful marker to predicate susceptibility of
colorectal cancer in Chinese.

PMID: 19421714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2009 May;106(5):653-9.

[Case of a sigmoid colon cancer with metachronous metastases of the stomach and
the abdominal wall].

[Article in Japanese]

Shirakawa S(1), Kaneda K, Fujiwara H, Nishimura T, Sendo H, Wada T, Kizaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Sanda Municipal Hospital. shirakawasachiyo@yahoo.co.jp

We report a rare case of a 73-year-old man with gastric metastasis from
colorectal cancer. Tumors of the stomach and the right side abdominal wall were
diagnosed by FDG/PET-CT. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a submucosal
tumor with central depression in the fornix of the stomach. Since sigmoidectomy
had been performed for cancer 39 months ago, we suspected metastasis. Proximal
gastrectomy and resection of the tumor of the abdominal wall were performed.
Histological findings showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the
submucosal tumor. Immunohistochemical studies revealed focal positive staining
for CK20 and diffuse for CDX2. These findings were similar to those of his
primary sigmoid colon cancer and therefore metastasis was diagnosed.

PMID: 19420869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Oct;48(10):965-74. doi: 10.1002/mc.20549.

Regulation of CDX2 expression in esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Vaninetti N(1), Williams L, Geldenhuys L, Porter GA, Guernsey DL, Casson AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

Reflux of acidic gastric contents and bile acids into the lower esophagus has
been identified to have a central role in esophageal malignancy and is reported
to upregulate caudal-related homologue 2 (CDX2), a regulatory gene involved in
embryonic development and axial patterning of the alimentary tract. The aim of
this study was to characterize the expression of CDX2 in a well-defined series of
human esophageal tissues, comprising reflux-induced esophagitis, premalignant
Barrett esophagus (BE), and primary esophageal adenocarcinoma (EADC). To explore 
potential molecular regulatory mechanisms, we also studied the expression of
beta-catenin, SOX9, and CDX2 promoter methylation in esophageal tissues, in
addition to the effect of bile acids and nitric oxide (NO) on CDX2 expression in 
the normal human esophageal cell line Het1A. Relative to matched normal
esophageal epithelia, CDX2 was overexpressed in esophagitis (37% for RNA;
cytoplasmic immunoreactivity in 48% of tissues), a high proportion (91%) of BE
tissues, and in EADC (57% for RNA; cell nuclear immunopositivity in 80%). An
association with beta-catenin expression was seen, but not with SOX9 or CDX2
promoter methylation. In Het1A cells, CDX2 was upregulated following exposure to 
bile acids and NO, alone and in combination. These results further implicate CDX2
and beta-catenin in the molecular pathogenesis of human EADC. The observed
synergistic effect of NO on the efficacy of bile acid-induction of CDX2 suggests 
a novel role for NO in modulating the development of the Barrett phenotype and
esophageal adenocarcinogenesis.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19415720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Anticancer Res. 2009 Apr;29(4):1281-6.

The role of the homeobox genes BFT and CDX2 in the pathogenesis of non-small cell
lung cancer.

Grimminger P(1), Ling FC, Neiss S, Vallböhmer D, Lurje G, Schneider PM, Hölscher 
AH, Metzger R, Brabender J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Tumor Surgery, University of Cologne,
Joseph-Stelzmann Str. 9, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The role of the homeobox genes Backfoot (BFT) and caudal-related
Homeobox 2 (CDX2) in the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
unclear. The goal of this study was to investigate the mRNA expression of BFT and
CDX2 in NSCLC and to determine the association with the pathogenesis and the
potential as a biomarker of this disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The mRNA expression of BFT and CDX2 was analyzed by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR in the tumor and matching normal tissue from 23
patients with NSCLC.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression was detectable with the following frequencies in the
tumor (t) and normal (n) tissues: BFT=100% (n), 100% (t); CDX2=100% (n), 100%
(t). The median CDX2 mRNA expression was 0.85 (range: 0.01-15.47) in the tumor
tissue and 0.045 (range: 0-1.36) in the matching normal lung tissue (p=0.001).
The median BFT mRNA expression was 0.0034 (range: 0-0.35) in the tumor tissue and
0.0001 (range: 0-0.10) in the matching normal lung tissue (p=n.s.). There were no
associations between the mRNA expression levels of BFT and CDX2 and
clinicopathological variables.
CONCLUSION: The mRNA expression of the homeobox genes is detectable at a high
frequency in the tumor and normal tissue of patients with non-small cell lung
cancer. Up-regulation of CDX2 mRNA expression appears to be associated with the
pathogenesis of this malignant disease. The quantification of CDX2 and BFT mRNA
expression in lung tissue is a potential biomarker for the identification of
patients at risk of the development of NSCLC.

PMID: 19414376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Virchows Arch. 2009 Jun;454(6):629-37. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0769-z. Epub 2009 
Apr 25.

Altered expression of CD44 and DKK1 in the progression of Barrett's esophagus to 
esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Darlavoix T(1), Seelentag W, Yan P, Bachmann A, Bosman FT.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is an acquired condition in which the normal lining of
the esophagus is replaced by intestinal metaplastic epithelium. BE can evolve to 
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) through low-grade dysplasia (LGD) and high-grade 
dysplasia (HGD). The only generally accepted marker for increased risk of EAC is 
the presence of HGD, diagnosed on endoscopic biopsies. More specific markers for 
the prediction of EAC risk are needed. A tissue microarray was constructed
comprising tissue samples from BE, LGD, HGD, and EAC. Marker expression was
studied by immunohistochemistry using antibodies against CD44, DKK1, CDX2, COX2, 
SOX9, OCT1, E-cadherin, and beta-catenin. Immunostaining was evaluated
semi-quantitatively. CD44 expression decreased in HGD and EAC relative to BE and 
LGD. DKK1 expression increased in HGD and EAC relative to BE and LDG. CDX2
expression increased in HGD but decreased in EAC. COX2 expression decreased in
EAC, and SOX9 expression increased only in the upper crypt epithelial cells in
HGD. E-cadherin expression decreased in EAC. Nuclear beta-catenin was not
significantly different between BE, LGD, and HGD. Loss of CD44 and gain of DKK1
expression characterizes progression from BE and LGD to HGD and EAC, and their
altered expression might indicate an increased risk for developing an EAC. This
observation warrants inclusion of these immunohistochemically detectable markers 
in a study with a long patient follow-up.

PMID: 19396460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Med Sci Monit. 2009 May;15(5):CR203-210.

Keratin 7 expression as an early marker of reflux-related columnar mucosa without
intestinal metaplasia in the esophagus.

Cabibi D(1), Fiorentino E, Pantuso G, Mastrosimone A, Callari C, Cacciatore M,
Campione M, Aragona F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, University of Palermo, Italy.
huntermat@libero.it

BACKGROUND: The role of Barrett esophagus in carcinogenesis is widely accepted,
but the significance of esophageal columnar mucosa without histological
intestinal metaplasia, known as columnar-lined esophagus, is debated.
MATERIAL/METHODS: We studied 128 patients free of Helicobacter pylori with
reflux-related symptoms and columnar mucosa in the esophagus at endoscopy, 106
patients with Barrett esophagus (referred to as the Barrett group) and 22
patients without intestinal metaplasia (columnar group). Samples from 20 subjects
free of H. pylori were used as controls. Immunostaining for keratin 7 (KRT7),
keratin 20 (KRT20), caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), mucin 2, oligomeric
mucus/gel-forming (MUC2), and tumor protein p53 (TP53) was assessed.
RESULTS: Samples taken 1 cm above the gastroesophageal junction showed KRT7
staining in all cases in the Barrett and columnar groups and none in the control 
group. Immunostaining for TP53 was absent in the control group, and more frequent
in the columnar group (7, 31.8%) compared with the Barrett group (14, 13.2%,
P=0.033). In the columnar group, low grade dysplasia and TP53 expression was seen
in 7 of 22 biopsy specimens (31.8%) at baseline and in 4 additional specimens
after 2 years, for a total of 11 specimens (50.0%).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of KRT7 might help to explain the pathological,
reflux-related nature of columnar-lined esophagus, as aberrant expression in a
very early stage of the multistep Barrett esophagus progression. Expression of
KRT7 may occur in basal glandular cells as a result of their multipotentiality
and susceptibility to immunophenotype changes induced by reflux.

PMID: 19396034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):G124-34. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90690.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha contributes to an intestinal epithelial
phenotype in vitro and plays a partial role in mouse intestinal epithelium
differentiation.

Babeu JP(1), Darsigny M, Lussier CR, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de
Sherbrooke,Canadian Institutes of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a regulator of hepatocyte and
pancreatic transcription. Hnf4alpha deletion in the mouse is embryonically lethal
with severe defects in visceral endoderm formation. It has been concluded in the 
past that the role of Hnf4alpha in the developing colon was much less important
than in the liver. However, the precise role of Hnf4alpha in the homeostasis of
the small intestinal epithelium remains unclear. Our aim was to evaluate the
potential of Hnf4alpha to support an intestinal epithelial phenotype. First,
Hnf4alpha potential to dictate this phenotype was assessed in nonintestinal cell 
lines in vitro. Forced expression of Hnf4alpha in fibroblasts showed an induction
of features normally restricted to epithelial cells. Combinatory expression of
Hnf4alpha with specific transcriptional regulators of the intestine resulted in
the induction of intestinal epithelial genes in this context. Second, the
importance of Hnf4alpha in maintaining the homeostasis of the intestinal
epithelium was investigated in mice. Mice conditionally deficient for intestinal 
Hnf4alpha developed normally throughout adulthood with an epithelium displaying
normal morphological and functional structures with minor alterations. Subtle but
statistical differences were observed at the proliferation and the
cytodifferentiation levels. Hnf4alpha mutant mice displayed an increase in the
number of goblet and enteroendocrine cells compared with controls. Given the
fundamental role of this transcription factor in other tissues, these findings
dispute the crucial role for this regulator in the maintenance of intestinal
epithelial cell function at a period of time that follows cytodifferentiation but
may suggest a functional role in instructing cells to become specific to the
intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 19389805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Cell. 2009 Apr;16(4):588-99. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.010.

Establishment of intestinal identity and epithelial-mesenchymal signaling by
Cdx2.

Gao N(1), White P, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We demonstrate that conditional ablation of the homeobox transcription factor
Cdx2 from early endoderm results in the replacement of the posterior intestinal
epithelium with keratinocytes, a dramatic cell fate conversion caused by ectopic 
activation of the foregut/esophageal differentiation program. This anterior
homeotic transformation of the intestine was first apparent in the early
embryonic Cdx2-deficient gut by a caudal extension of the expression domains of
several key foregut endoderm regulators. While the intestinal transcriptome was
severely affected, Cdx2 deficiency only transiently modified selected posterior
Hox genes and the primary enteric Hox code was maintained. Further, we
demonstrate that Cdx2-directed intestinal cell fate adoption plays an important
role in the establishment of normal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, as
multiple signaling pathways involved in this process were severely affected. We
conclude that Cdx2 controls important aspects of intestinal identity and
development, and that this function is largely independent of the enteric Hox
code.

PMCID: PMC2673200
PMID: 19386267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mult Scler. 2009 May;15(5):563-70. doi: 10.1177/1352458509102459. Epub 2009 Apr
21.

Past environmental sun exposure and risk of multiple sclerosis: a role for the
Cdx-2 Vitamin D receptor variant in this interaction.

Dickinson JL(1), Perera DI, van der Mei AF, Ponsonby AL, Polanowski AM, Thomson
RJ, Taylor BV, McKay JD, Stankovich J, Dwyer T.

Author information: 
(1)Menzies Research Institute, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania,
Australia. Jo.Dickinson@utas.edu.au

Multiple studies have provided evidence for an association between reduced sun
exposure and increased risk of multiple sclerosis (MS), an association likely to 
be mediated, at least in part, by the vitamin D hormonal pathway. Herein, we
examine whether the vitamin D receptor (VDR), an integral component of this
pathway, influences MS risk in a population-based sample where winter sun
exposure in early childhood has been found to be an important determinant of MS
risk. Three polymorphisms within the VDR gene were genotyped in 136 MS cases and 
235 controls, and associations with MS and past sun exposure were examined by
logistic regression. No significant univariate associations between the
polymorphisms, rs11574010 (Cdx-2A > G), rs10735810 (Fok1T > C), or rs731236
(Taq1C > T) and MS risk were observed. However, a significant interaction was
observed between winter sun exposure during childhood, genotype at rs11574010,
and MS risk (P = 0.012), with the 'G' allele conferring an increased risk of MS
in the low sun exposure group (</=2 h/day). No significant interactions were
observed for either rs10735810 or rs731236, after stratification by sun exposure.
These data provide support for the involvement of the VDR gene in determining MS 
risk, an interaction likely to be dependent on past sun exposure.

PMID: 19383647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Jun 10;315(10):1779-89. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.01.006. Epub
2009 Jan 22.

Cdx2 and the Brm-type SWI/SNF complex cooperatively regulate villin expression in
gastrointestinal cells.

Yamamichi N(1), Inada K, Furukawa C, Sakurai K, Tando T, Ishizaka A, Haraguchi T,
Mizutani T, Fujishiro M, Shimomura R, Oka M, Ichinose M, Tsutsumi Y, Omata M, Iba
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Host-Parasite
Interaction, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Shirokanedai
Minato-ku, Tokyo Japan.

In our recent study showing a correlation between Brm-deficiency and
undifferentiated status of gastric cancer, we found that the Brm-type SWI/SNF
complex is required for villin expression. To elucidate intestinal villin
regulation more precisely, we here analyzed structure and function of the
promoter of human villin. About 1.1 kb upstream of the determined major
transcription start site, we identified a highly conserved region (HCR-Cdx) among
mammals, which contains two binding sites for Cdx. Expression analyses of 30
human gastrointestinal cell lines suggested that villin is regulated by Cdx2.
Introduction of Cdx family genes into colorectal SW480 cells revealed that villin
is strongly induced strongly by Cdx2, moderately by Cdx1, and marginally by Cdx4.
Knockdown of Cdx2 in SW480 cells caused a clear downregulation of villin, and
reporter assays showed that HCR-Cdx is crucial for Cdx2-dependent and
Brm-dependent villin expression. Immunohistochemical analyses of gastric
intestinal metaplasia and cancer revealed that villin and Cdx2 expression are
tightly coupled. GST pull-down assays demonstrated a direct interaction between
Cdx2 and several SWI/SNF subunits. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses showed 
the recruitment of Cdx2 and Brm around HCR-Cdx. From these results, we concluded 
that Cdx2 regulates intestinal villin expression through recruiting Brm-type
SWI/SNF complex to the villin promoter.

PMID: 19371634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Jul;33(7):1006-15. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31819f57e9.

Intestinal differentiation in metaplastic, nongoblet columnar epithelium in the
esophagus.

Hahn HP(1), Blount PL, Ayub K, Das KM, Souza R, Spechler S, Odze RD.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Barrett esophagus (BE) is defined by the presence of metaplastic esophageal
columnar epithelium with goblet cells within endoscopically recognizable areas of
the esophagus. However, some carcinomas in BE, or from the gastroesophageal
junction region, develop within mucosa devoid of goblet cells. However, the
biologic properties, pathogenesis, and risk of malignancy of metaplastic,
esophageal nongoblet columnar epithelium, is, essentially, unknown. In this
study, 89 patients with metaplastic esophageal columnar epithelium were evaluated
immunohistochemically for markers of intestinal differentiation, such as MUC2,
DAS-1, Villin, and CDX2, a marker of gastric differentiation (MUC5AC), and Ki67, 
a marker of cell proliferation. Of the 89 patients, 59 had columnar metaplasia
with goblet cells (BE), which were further separated into low-density goblet cell
and high-density goblet cell groups based on the percentage of crypts with goblet
cells, and 30 patients had columnar metaplasia of the esophagus without goblet
cells. As controls, gastric biopsies from 19 age and sex matched patients without
esophageal or gastric pathology were used. The rate of positivity of the markers 
and the location of Ki67 staining was evaluated only in non-goblet columnar
epithelium from all patient groups. Patients with metaplastic esophageal columnar
epithelium without goblet cells showed positivity for MUC5AC, MUC2, DAS-1,
Villin, and CDX2 in 100%, 0%, 30%, 17%, and 43% of cases, respectively. 17% of
cases showed aberrant surface Ki67 positivity. These values were significantly
higher than gastric controls, which showed absence of staining for all markers
except MUC5AC (100%). In patients with metaplastic esophageal columnar epithelium
with goblet cells (BE) a significant increased rate of staining was observed for 
all markers, except MUC5AC. In addition, both MUC2 and surface Ki67 staining were
significantly increased in BE patients with high-density goblet cells versus
those with low-density goblet cells. In a separate analysis in which metaplastic 
esophageal nongoblet epithelium was evaluated in areas of mucosa devoid of goblet
cells compared with areas of mucosa with goblet cells, from patients who had
goblet cells elsewhere in the mucosa (N=59), no significant differences were
observed with regard to the percentage of cases that stained with any of the
markers in the nongoblet epithelium in areas devoid of goblet cells, similar to
the patient group with metaplastic esophageal epithelium without goblet cells
(N=30). Similar to above, in all cases, expression of intestinal markers
increased in areas of mucosa adjacent to goblet cells. This study provides
evidence that metaplastic esophageal columnar epithelium without goblet cells
shows phenotypic evidence of intestinal differentiation and supports the theory
that squamous epithelium converts initially to nongoblet columnar epithelium
before goblet cell metaplasia. Further prospective studies are needed to evaluate
the pathogenetic sequence, natural history, and risk of malignancy of metaplastic
esophageal nongoblet epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2807916
PMID: 19363439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Zygote. 2009 Aug;17(3):229-37. doi: 10.1017/S0967199409005280. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

Establishment of rat embryonic stem-like cells from the morula using a
combination of feeder layers.

Sano C(1), Matsumoto A, Sato E, Fukui E, Yoshizawa M, Matsumoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Reproduction, Division of Animal Science,
Faculty of Agriculture, Utsunomiya University, Utsunomiya, Tochigi 321-8505,
Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are characterized by pluripotency, in particular the
ability to form a germline on injection into blastocysts. Despite numerous
attempts, ES cell lines derived from rat embryos have not yet been established.
The reason for this is unclear, although certain intrinsic biological differences
among species and/or strains have been reported. Herein, using Wistar-Imamichi
rats, specific characteristics of preimplantation embryos are described. At the
blastocyst stage, Oct4 (also called Pou5f1) was expressed in both the inner cell 
mass (ICM) and the trophectoderm (TE), whereas expression of Cdx2 was localized
to the TE. In contrast, at an earlier stage, expression of Oct4 was detected in
all the nuclei in the morula. These stages were examined using a combination of
feeder layers (rat embryonic fibroblast [REF] for primary outgrowth and SIM mouse
embryo-derived thioguanine- and ouabain-resistant [STO] cells for passaging) to
establish rat ES-like cell lines. The rat ES-like cell lines obtained from the
morula maintained expression of Oct4 over long-term culture, whereas cell lines
derived from blastocysts lost pluripotency during early passage. The
morula-derived ES-like cell lines showed Oct4 expression in a long-term culture, 
even after cryogenic preservation, thawing and EGFP transfection. These results
indicate that rat ES-like cell lines with long-term Oct4 expression can be
established from the morula of Wistar-Imamichi rats using a combination of feeder
layers.

PMID: 19356268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Stem Cells. 2009 Apr;27(4):796-805. doi: 10.1002/stem.14.

Sall4 is essential for stabilization, but not for pluripotency, of embryonic stem
cells by repressing aberrant trophectoderm gene expression.

Yuri S(1), Fujimura S, Nimura K, Takeda N, Toyooka Y, Fujimura Y, Aburatani H,
Ura K, Koseki H, Niwa H, Nishinakamura R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Sall4 is a mouse homolog of a causative gene of the autosomal dominant disorder
Okihiro syndrome. We previously showed that the absence of Sall4 leads to
lethality during peri-implantation and that Sall4-null embryonic stem (ES) cells 
proliferate poorly with intact pluripotency when cultured on feeder cells. Here, 
we report that, in the absence of feeder cells, Sall4-null ES cells express the
trophectoderm marker Cdx2, but are maintained for a long period in an
undifferentiated state with minimally affected Oct3/4 expression. Feeder-free
Sall4-null ES cells contribute solely to the inner cell mass and epiblast in
vivo, indicating that these cells still retain pluripotency and do not fully
commit to the trophectoderm. These phenotypes could arise from derepression of
the Cdx2 promoter, which is normally suppressed by Sall4 and the Mi2/NuRD HDAC
complex. However, proliferation was impaired and G1 phase prolonged in the
absence of Sall4, suggesting another role for Sall4 in cell cycle control.
Although Sall1, also a Sall family gene, is known to genetically interact with
Sall4 in vivo, Sall1-null ES cells have no apparent defects and no exacerbation
is observed in ES cells lacking both Sall1 and Sall4, compared with Sall4-null
cells. This suggests a unique role for Sall4 in ES cells. Thus, though Sall4 does
not contribute to the central machinery of the pluripotency, it stabilizes ES
cells by repressing aberrant trophectoderm gene expression.

PMID: 19350679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Placenta. 2009 May;30(5):448-56. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2009.02.006. Epub 2009
Apr 3.

Developmental ability of trophoblast stem cells in uniparental mouse embryos.

Ogawa H(1), Shindo N, Kumagai T, Usami Y, Shikanai M, Jonwn K, Fukuda A, Kawahara
M, Sotomaru Y, Tanaka S, Arima T, Kono T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture, Tokyo, Japan.
hogawa@nodai.ac.jp

Neither parthenogenetic (PG) nor androgenetic (AG) mouse embryos survive after
day 9.5 of pregnancy, owing to the inadequate growth of extraembryonic tissues,
including the placenta. At day 9.5 of pregnancy, the placental structures are
poorly developed in PG embryos, while trophoblast giant cells are abundant at the
implantation site in AG embryos. These findings suggest that both parental
genomes are required for placental development. To gain further insight into the 
trophoblast lineage in PG and AG embryos, we attempted to derive trophoblast stem
(TS)-like cell lines from uniparental embryos. Furthermore, we sought to assess
their ability to differentiate into cells of the trophoblast lineage by using
gene expression analysis. Three cell lines that expressed marker genes for
undifferentiated TS cells (Cdx2 and Errbeta) were derived from AG embryos. Under 
differentiation conditions, these cells expressed the trophoblast giant
cell-specific genes, but did not express the spongiotrophoblast-specific genes.
In contrast, none of the four cell lines from PG embryos expressed marker genes
for undifferentiated TS cells, but they expressed Oct3/4, a marker gene for
embryonic stem cells. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that PG blastocysts 
expressed Oct3/4 and Cdx2 specifically in inner cell mass and the trophectoderm
respectively. These results suggest that PG embryos do not possess TS cells,
because of the lack of the developmental ability of trophoblast cells.

PMID: 19345411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jul;22(7):906-13. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.41. Epub 2009 Mar 
27.

Expression profile of REG family proteins REG Ialpha and REG IV in advanced
gastric cancer: comparison with mucin phenotype and prognostic markers.

Yamagishi H(1), Fukui H, Sekikawa A, Kono T, Fujii S, Ichikawa K, Tomita S, Imura
J, Hiraishi H, Chiba T, Fujimori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical and Molecular Pathology, Dokkyo University School of
Medicine, Tochigi, Japan.

Regenerating gene family members 1 (REG Ialpha) and 4 (REG IV) are overexpressed 
in a subset of gastric cancers. However, comparative characterization of the
expression of these family proteins has remained unclear. Therefore, we aimed to 
elucidate not only the association between REG protein expression and mucin
phenotype but also their significance as a prognostic marker for patients with
gastric cancer. The expression of REG Ialpha, REG IV, CDX2, MUC2, and MUC5AC in
gastric cancer tissues was examined by immunohistochemistry. The relationship
between REG protein expression and clinicopathological parameters or mucin
phenotype was then analyzed. REG Ialpha and REG IV expression was positive in 33 
(52%) and 31 (49%) of 63 gastric cancers examined, respectively. REG Ialpha
expression was significantly related to venous invasion and tumor stage, whereas 
REG IV expression showed no relationship to clinicopathological features. With
regard to mucin phenotype, REG IV expression was significantly correlated with
MUC2 and CDX2 expression, suggesting an association with the intestinal mucin
phenotype of gastric cancer. On the other hand, REG Ialpha expression had no
correlation with MUC2, CDX2, or MUC5AC in gastric cancer tissues. Expression of
REG Ialpha but not REG IV was an independent predictor of poor outcome in
patients with gastric cancer. In addition, patients with gastric cancer negative 
for both REG Ialpha and REG IV expression had a significantly better outcome than
patients positive for either REG Ialpha or REG IV. Profiling of REG protein
expression is useful to for prognostication of patients with gastric cancer.

PMID: 19329938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 1;330(1):114-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.03.016. Epub 2009
Mar 27.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 are functionally equivalent in vertebral patterning.

Savory JG(1), Pilon N, Grainger S, Sylvestre JR, Béland M, Houle M, Oh K, Lohnes 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

The Cdx transcription factors regulate anterior-posterior (AP) vertebral
patterning, at least in part, through direct regulation of Hox gene expression.
Analysis of allelic series of Cdx mutant mice suggests functional overlap between
these family members. However, the lack of a Cdx2 null mutant makes these
analyses incomplete. Moreover, Hox proteins are sometimes redundant, making it
difficult to discern whether Cdx members regulate identical Hox target genes in a
redundant manner, or whether they regulate separate Hox genes which then converge
on events related to vertebral patterning. To more directly assess this question,
we developed a "knock in" model whereby Cdx2 was substituted for Cdx1. Consistent
with functional redundancy Cdx2 "knock-in" mice exhibited perfect complementation
of the Cdx1-null phenotype, as evidenced by the lack of skeletal defects or
altered expression of Hox genes typically impacted by Cdx1 loss-of-function. It
has been proposed that vertebral AP patterning is reliant on a gradient of the
sum total of Cdx proteins, a posit that is consistent with functional redundancy 
between Cdx family members. To further assess this, we generated a
gain-of-function model using BAC transgenesis to alter Cdx1 dosage. Cdx1 BAC
transgenic mice overexpressed Cdx1 mRNA and protein, and fully complemented the
Cdx1 null allele. However, gain of Cdx1 dosage via this BAC transgene in an
otherwise wild type background had no discernible effects on vertebral patterning
or Hox gene expression, suggesting that a moderate alteration in the Cdx protein 
gradient is of no consequence.

PMID: 19328777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Oct;18(8):1167-78. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0336.

Characterization of canine embryonic stem cell lines derived from different niche
microenvironments.

Wilcox JT(1), Semple E, Gartley C, Brisson BA, Perrault SD, Villagómez DA, Tayade
C, Becker S, Lanza R, Betts DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

Embryo-derived stem cells hold enormous potential for producing cell-based
transplantation therapies, allowing high-throughput drug screening and
delineating early embryonic development. However, potential clinical applications
must first be tested for safety and efficacy in preclinical animal models. Due to
physiological and genetic parity to humans, the domestic dog is widely used as a 
clinically relevant animal model for cardiovascular, neurodegenerative,
orthopedic, and oncologic diseases. Therefore, we established numerous putative
canine embryonic stem cell (cESC) lines by immunodissection of the inner cell
mass (ICM), which we termed OVC.ID.1-23, and by explant outgrowths from whole
canine blastocysts, named OVC.EX.1-16. All characterized lines were
immunopositive for OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, SSEA-3, and SSEA-4; displayed high
telomerase and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activities; and were maintained in this
state up to 37 passages ( approximately 160 days). Colonies from OVC.EX lines
showed classic domed hESC-like morphology surrounded by a ring of fibroblast-like
cells, whereas all OVC.ID lines exhibited a mixed cell colony of tightly packed
cESCs surrounded by a GATA6+/CDX2- hypoblast-derived support layer. Spontaneous
serum-only differentiation without feeder layers demonstrated a strong lineage
selection associated with the colony niche type, and not the isolation method.
Upon differentiation, cESC lines formed embryoid bodies (EB) comprised of cells
representative of all germinal layers, and differentiated into cell types of each
layer. Canine ESC lines such as these have the potential to identify differences 
between embryonic stem cell line derivations, and to develop or to test
cell-based transplantation therapies in the dog before attempting human clinical 
trials.

PMID: 19327015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Histopathology. 2009 Mar;54(4):495-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03248.x.

Interpretation of diffuse Cdx2 expression in endometrioid adenocarcinoma in the
absence of morules.

Wani Y.

Comment on
    Histopathology. 2008 Aug;53(2):156-65.

PMID: 19309406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Dyn. 2009 Apr;238(4):835-52. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21901.

Overlapping functions of Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4 in the development of the amphibian
Xenopus tropicalis.

Faas L(1), Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Using Xenopus tropicalis, we present the first analysis of the developmental
effects that result from knocking down the function of the three Cdx genes
present in the typical vertebrate genome. Knockdowns of individual Cdx genes lead
to a similar range of posterior defects; compound Cdx knockdowns result in
increasingly severe posterior truncations, accompanied by posterior shifts and
reduction of 5' Hox gene expression. We provide evidence that Cdx and Wnt3A genes
are components of a positive feedback loop operating in the posterior axis. We
show that Cdx function is required during later, but not early stages of
development, for correct regional specification of the endoderm and morphogenesis
of the gut. Our results support the hypothesis that during amphibian development 
the overall landscape of Cdx activity in the embryo is more important than the
specific function of individual Cdx proteins.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2701559
PMID: 19301404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Cell. 2009 Mar;16(3):398-410. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.02.003.

The Hippo signaling pathway components Lats and Yap pattern Tead4 activity to
distinguish mouse trophectoderm from inner cell mass.

Nishioka N(1), Inoue K, Adachi K, Kiyonari H, Ota M, Ralston A, Yabuta N,
Hirahara S, Stephenson RO, Ogonuki N, Makita R, Kurihara H, Morin-Kensicki EM,
Nojima H, Rossant J, Nakao K, Niwa H, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2009 Mar;16(3):321-2.
    Dev Cell. 2011 Mar 15;20(3):e3.

Outside cells of the preimplantation mouse embryo form the trophectoderm (TE), a 
process requiring the transcription factor Tead4. Here, we show that
transcriptionally active Tead4 can induce Cdx2 and other trophoblast genes in
parallel in embryonic stem cells. In embryos, the Tead4 coactivator protein Yap
localizes to nuclei of outside cells, and modulation of Tead4 or Yap activity
leads to changes in Cdx2 expression. In inside cells, Yap is phosphorylated and
cytoplasmic, and this involves the Hippo signaling pathway component Lats. We
propose that active Tead4 promotes TE development in outside cells, whereas Tead4
activity is suppressed in inside cells by cell contact- and Lats-mediated
inhibition of nuclear Yap localization. Thus, differential signaling between
inside and outside cell populations leads to changes in cell fate specification
during TE formation.

PMID: 19289085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Pancreas. 2009 Jul;38(5):558-64. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31819f3bd6.

Comparison between mucinous cystic neoplasm and intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm of the branch duct type of the pancreas with respect to expression of
CD10 and cytokeratin 20.

Nishigami T(1), Onodera M, Torii I, Sato A, Tao LH, Kushima R, Kakuno A,
Kishimoto M, Katsuyama E, Fujimori T, Hirano H, Satake M, Kuroda N, Nishiguchi S,
Fujimoto J, Tsujimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Mucinous cystic neoplasm (MCN) and intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm of the branch duct type (IPMN-BD) differ in biological and clinical
behaviors, but MCN is often misdiagnosed as IPMN-BD. The purpose of this study
was to find useful markers for the differential diagnosis of MCN and IPMN-BD.
METHODS: Immunohistochemically, the expression of the 2 types of mucin (MUC) 1
(MUC1/DF3 and MUC1/CORE), MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, human gastric mucin (HGM),
caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2), CD10, cytokeratin (CK) 7, 
and CK20 was examined in 7 cases of MCN and 16 cases of IPMN-BD.
RESULTS: Expression frequencies in MCN and IPMN-BD were 100% versus 44% for
MUC1/DF3, 86% versus 31% for MUC1/CORE, 57% versus 19% for MUC2, 86% versus 100% 
for MUC5AC, 57% versus 88% for MUC6, 86% versus 100% for HGM, 57% versus 0% for
CDX2, 71% versus 0% for CD10, 100% versus 69% for CK7, and 86% versus 6% for
CK20.
CONCLUSIONS: Mucin 1/DF3, MUC1/CORE, CDX2, CD10, and CK20 were expressed
significantly more frequently in MCN than in IPMN-BD. In particular, CD10 and
CK20 showed marked differences in immunohistochemical sensitivity and specificity
between MCN and IPMN-BD. It is therefore proposed that CD10 and CK20 may be used 
for the differential diagnosis of MCN and IPMN-BD.

PMID: 19287335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Histochem Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;131(6):765-72. doi: 10.1007/s00418-009-0579-z. Epub
2009 Mar 6.

Juvenile polyps have gastric differentiation with MUC5AC expression and
downregulation of CDX2 and SMAD4.

Barros R(1), Mendes N, Howe JR, Reis CA, de Bolos C, Carneiro F, David L, Almeida
R.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP, Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do
Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias si/na, 4200 Porto, Portugal.

CDX2 is a homeobox transcription factor that works as a master gene in intestinal
differentiation, both in the colon and in aberrant locations such as intestinal
metaplasia (IM) of the stomach. Transgenic mice with Cdx2 expression in the
stomach develop IM and Cdx2(+/-) mice develop hamartomatous polyps in the colon
presenting gastric differentiation. We previously observed regulation of CDX2 by 
the BMP/SMAD pathway in the gastric context. Here, we hypothesized that juvenile 
polyps, which are hamartomatous polyps caused by mutations in members of the
BMP/SMAD pathway, might recapitulate the gastric differentiation observed in
Cdx2(+/-) mice due to SMAD4 and CDX2 downregulation. We characterized SMAD4 and
CDX2 expression in a series of 18 solitary juvenile polyps and 2 polyps from
juvenile polyposis (JP) patients, one with a germline SMAD4 mutation and one with
a germline BMPRIA mutation, as well as the expression of an intestinal
differentiation marker, MUC2 (by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization),
and gastric differentiation markers, MUC5AC and MUC6 (by immunohistochemistry).
We observed that juvenile polyps have a heterogeneous expression of CDX2, MUC2
and SMAD4, with negative areas, and 15 of the 18 solitary polyps and the JP case 
with SMAD4 mutation exhibit de novo expression of MUC5AC but not MUC6. In
conclusion, juvenile polyps have gastric transdifferentiation associated with
downregulation of CDX2 and SMAD4, lending support to the role of the BMP/SMAD
pathway in CDX2 regulation.

PMID: 19266212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Am J Pathol. 2009 Apr;174(4):1280-90. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080409. Epub 2009 
Mar 5.

Ets transcription factors control epithelial maturation and transit and
crypt-villus morphogenesis in the mammalian intestine.

Jedlicka P(1), Sui X, Sussel L, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical
Center, PO Box 6511, MS 8104, Aurora CO 80045, USA. paul.jedlicka@ucdenver.edu

Members of the Ets transcription factor family are widely expressed in both the
developing and mature mammalian intestine, but their biological functions remain 
primarily uncharacterized. We used a dominant repressor transgene approach to
probe the function of epithelial Ets factors in the homeostasis of the
crypt-villus unit, the functional unit of the small intestine. We show that
targeted expression in small intestinal epithelium of a fusion protein composed
of the Engrailed repressor domain and the Erm DNA-binding domain (En/Erm) results
in marked disruption of normal crypt-villus homeostasis, including a
cell-autonomous disturbance of epithelial maturation, increased epithelial
transit, severe villus dysmorphogenesis, and crypt dysmorphogenesis. The
epithelial maturation disturbance is independent of the regulation of TGFbetaRII 
levels, in contrast to Ets-mediated epithelial differentiation during
development; rather, regulation of Cdx2 expression may play a role. The villus
dysmorphogenesis is independent of alterations in the crypt-villus boundary and
inappropriate beta-catenin activation, and thus appears to represent a new
mechanism controlling villus architectural organization. An Analysis of animals
mosaic for En/Erm expression suggests that crypt nonautonomous mechanisms
underlie the crypt dysmorphogenesis phenotype. Our studies thus uncover novel
Ets-regulated pathways of intestinal homeostasis in vivo. Interestingly, the
overall En/Erm phenotype of disturbed crypt-villus homeostasis is consistent with
recently identified Ets function(s) in the restriction of intestinal epithelial
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2671360
PMID: 19264912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Acta Med Indones. 2009 Jan;41(1):30-5.

Recent progressions in stem cell research: breakthroughs achieved and challenges 
faced.

Tani J(1), Umbas R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Indonesia, Jakarta Pusat, Indonesia.
jowtani@yahoo.com

Stem cell studies have been conducted to study characteristics of stem cells, to 
develop better techniques for patient-specific stem cell lines generation, and to
explore the therapeutic potential of stem cells. Techniques that enable efficient
generation of new stem cell lines would facilitate research and allow generation 
of patient-specific stem cell lines for transplantation therapy. Somatic-Cell
Nuclear Transfer (SCNT), which involves injection of donor cell nucleus into
enucleated ovum, is the standard technique for new embryonic stem (ES) cell lines
generation; presently its efficiency is low. A newer technique, pluripotent stem 
cell induction, reprograms somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells by introducing certain factors into somatic cells. While certain adult stem
cell treatments have been investigated on human participants, most ES cell or iPS
cell treatments were still experimented on animal models. Recently, therapeutic
potential of stem cell for several disorders was demonstrated. Researchers
demonstrated stem cell's potential for treating hematologic disorders by
correcting sickle cell anemia in rat model with iPS cells. Its potential role in 
treating cardiovascular disorder was demonstrated as injection of damaged rat
heart with human ES cells derived cardiomyocyte plus "prosurvival" cocktail
improved heart function. It might also treat nervous system disorders; injected
into brain, ES cells derived neurons replace some loss cells in stroke rats and
iPS cells derived neurons improved Parkinsonian syndrome in rats. Progress was
also seen in other aspects of regenerative medicine. To overcome controversies
caused by embryo destruction for obtaining ES cells, single blastomer stem cell
derivation, Cdx2-inactivation, and parthenogenesis were proposed. All ES cell,
iPS cell, and adult stem cell research should be continued with support from all 
sides.

PMID: 19258678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 May;33(5):659-68. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31819aa4ae.

Urachal carcinoma: a clinicopathologic analysis of 24 cases with outcome
correlation.

Gopalan A(1), Sharp DS, Fine SW, Tickoo SK, Herr HW, Reuter VE, Olgac S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: Urachal carcinomas occur mostly in the bladder dome, comprising 22%
to 35% of vesical adenocarcinomas, and are generally treated by partial
cystectomy with en bloc resection of the median umbilical ligament and umbilicus.
Detailed pathologic studies with clinical outcome correlation are few.
DESIGN: We reviewed histologic material and clinical data from 24 cases selected 
from a database of 67 dome-based tumors diagnosed and treated at our institution 
from 1984 to 2005. Follow-up information was available for all 24 patients.
RESULT: The mean age at diagnosis was 52 years (range: 26 to 68 y). Fifteen
patients were male and 9 were female. Location was the dome in 23 and dome and
anterior wall in 1. Thirteen cases were pure adenocarcinoma, not otherwise
specified, 9 were enteric type adenocarcinoma, and 2 were adenocarcinoma with
focal components of lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma and urothelial carcinoma
with cytoplasmic clearing. Signet ring cell features were focally seen in 2
cases. Cystitis cystica and cystitis glandularis were seen in 4 and 2 cases,
respectively. In all instances but 1, cystitis cystica/glandularis was focal and 
predominantly in the bladder overlying the urachal neoplasm. Urachal remnants
were identified in 15 cases: the urachal epithelium was benign urothelial-type in
6 cases and showed adenomatous changes in 9. The overlying bladder urothelium was
colonized by adenocarcinoma in 3 cases. In all 3, urachal remnants were
identified and showed transition from benign to adenomatous epithelium. On
immunohistochemistry, these tumors were positive for CK20 and variably positive
for CK7 and 34BE12. The majority showed a cytoplasmic membranous staining pattern
for beta-catenin, although in 1 case, focal nuclear immunoreactivity was
identified. The Sheldon pathologic stage was pT1 in 0, pT2 in 2, pT3a in 8, pT3b 
in 11, pT3c in 1, pT4a in 1, and pT4b in 1 patient. One patient had a positive
soft tissue margin. The mean follow-up period was 40 months (range: 0.3 to 157.6 
mo). Seven of 24 (29%) cases recurred locally. The incidence of local recurrence 
was higher in patients who underwent a partial cystectomy alone (37.5%) versus
those who had a more radical surgery (27%). Distant metastases occurred in 9
(37.5%) patients, 4 of whom had no prior local recurrence. Seven patients (29%)
died of the disease. All cases with locally recurrent and metastatic disease
belonged to stage pT3 or higher.
CONCLUSIONS: Pathologic stage is an important prognostic factor in urachal
carcinoma. Surface urothelial involvement by carcinoma and presence of cystitis
cystica/glandularis do not necessarily exclude the diagnosis of urachal
carcinoma. Immunostains do not unequivocally discriminate a urachal from a
colorectal carcinoma, but diffuse positivity for 34BE12 would support, and
diffuse nuclear immunoreactivity for beta-catenin would militate against, a
diagnosis of urachal carcinoma. Local recurrence may be owing to seeding within
the distal urothelial tract, particularly in tumors with a configuration that is 
polypoid and which open into the bladder cavity. The type of surgery performed
may have an effect on local recurrence despite negative margins of resection.

PMCID: PMC4225778
PMID: 19252435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Mar;62(3):254-9. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.060061.

The combined presence of H pylori infection and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
leads to an up-regulation of CDX2 gene expression in antrum and cardia.

Bornschein J(1), Wex T, Peitz U, Kuester D, Roessner A, Malfertheiner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke-University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: CDX2 is an epithelial transcription factor that regulates intestinal 
differentiation and is involved in the development of intestinal metaplasia (IM).
AIM: To analyse the expression of CDX2 in the gastric mucosa in various locations
and its relationship to Helicobacter pylori infection and gastro-oesophageal
reflux disease (GORD).
METHODS: 69 patients with upper gastrointestinal symptoms were stratified into
four groups according to their H pylori and GORD status. Patients without
infection and without GORD were the reference group (H pylori(-)/GORD(-)).
Biopsies from the antrum, corpus and cardia were assessed by histopathology
according to the updated Sydney System. CDX2 transcription levels were determined
by quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: CDX2 gene expression was significantly up-regulated in antral and cardia
mucosa of patients with both H pylori infection and GORD (26- and 100-fold,
respectively; p<0.05), but remained unchanged in corpus mucosa. If only H pylori 
infection or GORD was present, CDX2 expression levels were 6- to 11-fold
increased in the antrum, but without reaching statistical significance. CDX2
expression correlated positively with the degree of IM (p<0.01) and the degree of
H pylori induced inflammation (p<0.05). Gene expression data were confirmed
immunohistochemically by the detection of CDX2 in areas of IM and in focally
distributed CDX2-expressing cells in non-metaplastic gastric mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: The combined presence of H pylori infection and GORD leads to an
up-regulation of CDX2 gene expression in cardia and antral mucosa, but not in the
corpus.

PMID: 19251954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Histopathology. 2009 Feb;54(3):337-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03227.x.

Differentiation markers in pancreatic head adenocarcinomas: MUC1 and MUC4
expression indicates poor prognosis in pancreatobiliary differentiated tumours.

Westgaard A(1), Schjølberg AR, Cvancarova M, Eide TJ, Clausen OP, Gladhaug IP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Rikshospitalet University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway. arne.westgaard@medisin.uio.no

AIMS: To examine how accurately immunohistochemical markers discriminate between 
pancreatobiliary and intestinal-type adenocarcinomas in the pancreatic head and
to explore the prognostic importance of these markers among each of these
histological types.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Histopathological features of 114 consecutively resected
adenocarcinomas of pancreatobiliary (n = 67) and intestinal (n = 47) type of
differentiation were recorded according to a standardized protocol.
Immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, MUC1, MUC2, MUC4 and CDX2 was 
performed on tissue microarrays. Classification of the adenocarcinomas based on
immunohistochemistry was compared with the morphological evaluation of
histological type. Presence of CK7 and MUC4, and absence of CDX2, were
independent predictors of pancreatobiliary versus intestinal type. Using these
markers to optimize immunohistochemical classification, agreement between
immunohistochemical and morphological classification was only moderate (kappa =
0.53). In pancreatobiliary differentiated tumours, MUC1 and/or MUC4 expression
was an independent prognostic factor (hazard ratio 2.02, 95% confidence interval 
1.02, 3.98) when adjusting for nodal involvement, vessel involvement and tumour
size. In intestinally differentiated tumours, none of the markers was
significantly associated with prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Agreement between immunohistochemical and morphological
classification of pancreatic head adenocarcinomas is moderate. In
pancreatobiliary adenocarcinomas, MUC1 and/or MUC4 expression indicates a
particularly poor prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2680278
PMID: 19236510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;69(5):1885-91. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3515. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

Polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor and risk of ovarian cancer in four
studies.

Tworoger SS(1), Gates MA, Lee IM, Buring JE, Titus-Ernstoff L, Cramer D,
Hankinson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Boston, MA 02115, USA. nhsst@channing.harvard.edu

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 15;69(12):5267. Gate, Margaret A [corrected to Gates,
Margaret A].

Prior studies have suggested that vitamin D may reduce ovarian cancer risk. Thus,
we examined whether three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the vitamin D 
receptor (VDR) gene (Fok1, Bsm1, Cdx2) were associated with risk of epithelial
ovarian cancer in a retrospective case-control study (New England Case-Control
study, NECC) and a nested case-control study of three prospective cohort studies:
the Nurses' Health Study (NHS), NHSII, and the Women's Health Study. Data from
the cohort studies were combined and analyzed using conditional logistic
regression and pooled with the results from the NECC, which were analyzed using
unconditional logistic regression, using a random effects model. We obtained
genotype data for 1,473 cases and 2,006 controls. We observed a significant
positive association between the number of Fok1 f alleles and ovarian cancer risk
in the pooled analysis (P(trend) = 0.03). The odds ratio (OR) for the ff versus
FF genotype was 1.26 [95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.01-1.57]. Neither the Bsm1
(P(trend) = 0.96) or Cdx2 (P(trend) = 0.13) SNPs were significantly associated
with ovarian cancer risk. Among the prospective studies, the risk of ovarian
cancer by plasma vitamin D levels did not clearly vary by any of the genotypes.
For example, among women with the Fok1 FF genotype, the OR comparing plasma
25-hydroxyvitamin D >or=32 ng/mL versus <32 ng/mL was 0.66 (95% CI, 0.34-1.28),
and among women with the Ff or ff genotype the OR was 0.71 (95% CI, 0.43-1.18).
Our results of an association with the Fok1 VDR polymorphism further support a
role of the vitamin D pathway in ovarian carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2666963
PMID: 19223536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gut. 2009 Sep;58(9):1250-9. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.158386. Epub 2009 Feb 15.

Expression and localisation of insulin receptor substrate 2 in normal intestine
and colorectal tumours. Regulation by intestine-specific transcription factor
CDX2.

Modica S(1), Morgano A, Salvatore L, Petruzzelli M, Vanier MT, Valanzano R,
Esposito DL, Palasciano G, Duluc I, Freund JN, Mariani-Costantini R, Moschetta A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bari, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy.

Comment in
    Gut. 2009 Sep;58(9):1179-80.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Self-renewal and differentiation of intestinal epithelium is
a tightly regulated process, whose perturbations are implicated in human
colorectal tumourigenesis. The insulin/insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
signalling pathway may play an important role in intestinal epithelium
homeostasis. Insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2) is a poorly characterised
component in this pathway.
METHODS: Using complementary in vitro and in vivo human and murine models,
expression (mRNA and protein levels), localisation (immunohistochemistry) and
regulation of IRS2 were investigated in the normal intestine and colorectal
tumours. In silico analysis of the human IRS2 promoter was performed together
with reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: Significant IRS2 expression was detected in the intestine, with specific
protein localisation in the villus region of the ileum and in the surface
epithelium of the colon. In human HT29 and Caco2 cells, IRS2 mRNA levels
increased with spontaneous and induced differentiation, together with CDX2
(caudal-related homeobox protein 2), P21 and KLF4 (Krüppel-like factor 4).
Adenoviral infection with human CDX2 induced IRS2 expression in APC- (adenomatous
polyposis coli) and beta-catenin-mutated cells. On the other hand, IRS2
downregulation was observed in differentiated enterocytes after adenoviral
infection with short hairpin CDX2 (shCDX2), in the intestine of CDX2 heterozygous
mice and in colorectal tumours of Apc(Min/+) and patients with familial
adenomatous polyposis (FAP). The human IRS2 promoter region presents several
CDX2-binding sites where CDX2 immunoprecipitated in vivo. IRS2 reporters were
functionally activated via CDX2 and blocked via a dominant-negative CDX2 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining gain- and loss-of-function approaches, an intriguing
scenario is presented whereby IRS2 is significantly expressed in the apical
intestinal compartment and is directly controlled by CDX2 in normal intestine and
tumours.

PMID: 19221108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Blood. 2009 Apr 23;113(17):4049-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-196634. Epub 2009 
Feb 13.

Aberrant expression of the homeobox gene CDX2 in pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Riedt T(1), Ebinger M, Salih HR, Tomiuk J, Handgretinger R, Kanz L, Grünebach F, 
Lengerke C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Tuebingen Medical Center II, 
Tuebingen, Germany.

Members of the caudal (cdx) family of homeobox proteins are essential regulators 
of embryonic blood development in zebrafish. Previously, we reported that the
murine homologues (Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) affect formation and differentiation of 
embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells. Consistent with
the notion that embryonic pathways can reactivate during adult oncogenesis,
recent studies suggest involvement of CDX2 in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Here we study CDX2 in healthy and leukemic human lymphoid cells, and show that a 
majority of leukemic samples display various degrees of aberrant CDX2 expression.
Analysis of a cohort of 37 childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients 
treated in our hospital reveals that high CDX2 expression levels at diagnosis
correlate with persistence of minimal residual disease (MRD) during the course of
treatment. Thus, CDX2 expression levels may serve as a marker for adverse
prognosis in pediatric ALL.

PMID: 19218548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncol Rep. 2009 Mar;21(3):609-13.

Expression of osteopontin and CDX2: indications of phenotypes and prognosis in
advanced gastric cancer.

Zhang X(1), Tsukamoto T, Mizoshita T, Ban H, Suzuki H, Toyoda T, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center, Research Institute,
Aichi 464-8681, Japan.

We have investigated the expression of osteopontin (OPN) and CDX2 in advanced
gastric cancers, and analyzed correlations with clinicopathological features to
assess their prognostic potential. One-hundred and nine patients suffering from
gastric cancer were recruited. Expression of OPN and CDX2 and other molecular
markers was determined by immunohistochemistry. The total positive rate for OPN
expression was 46.8%, with a relation to depth of cancer invasion and down
regulation of intestinal markers (P<0.001), but not age, gender, or histological 
type. OPN was more frequently expressed in CDX2-negative (39/109=35.7%) as
compared with positive lesions (12/109=11.0%) and a significant reverse
correlation was noted between the two factors (P<0.001). Patients with positive
OPN tumors had worse 5-year survival than those with OPN-negative cancer
(P<0.001). Further analysis revealed the OPN-/CDX2+ group to have better 5-year
survival than all the other three groups: OPN+/CDX2-, OPN-/CDX2- and OPN+/CDX2+. 
With multivariate analysis for 5-year survival, OPN was the most significant
predictor of a poor prognosis of advanced gastric cancer (P=0.0043), with tumor
depth of invasion as another independent indicator (P=0.0315). Osteopontin is a
useful prognostic marker in gastric cancer, and combined with CDX2, may have
particular advantage for predicting survival of advanced gastric cancer patients.
Furthermore the present results provide a clue that in gastric cancer, CDX2 may
be a transcription factor modulating the expression of osteopontin.

PMID: 19212618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jun;80(6):1223-31. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.073916. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Induction of endogenous interferon tau gene transcription by CDX2 and high
acetylation in bovine nontrophoblast cells.

Sakurai T(1), Sakamoto A, Muroi Y, Bai H, Nagaoka K, Tamura K, Takahashi T,
Hashizume K, Sakatani M, Takahashi M, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Veterinary Medical Sciences, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Interferon tau gene (IFNT) is expressed only by mononuclear trophectoderm cells
in ruminant ungulates. To our knowledge, its epigenetic regulation and
interaction with trophectoderm lineage-specific caudal-related homeobox 2
transcription factor (CDX2) have not been characterized. Herein, we studied
differences in chromatin structures and transcription of endogenous bovine IFNT
in bovine trophoblast BT-1 and CT-1 cells and in nontrophoblast MDBK cells.
Transcripts from endogenous IFNT and CDX2 genes were found in BT-1 and CT-1 cells
but not in MDBK cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation study revealed that CDX2
binding sites exist in proximal upstream regions of IFNT (IFN-tau-c1). Endogenous
IFNT transcription in BT-1 cells was increased with CDX2 overexpression but was
reduced with short interfering RNA specific for the CDX2 transcript. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies, histone H3K18 acetylation of IFNT was higher in CT-1
cells than in MDBK cells, while histone H3K9 methylation was lower in CT-1 cells 
than in nontrophoblast cells. In MDBK cells (but not in CT-1 cells), histone
deacetylases were bound to IFNT, which was reversed with trichostatin A
treatment; treatment with trichostatin A and CDX2 then increased IFNT mRNA levels
that resulted from abundant CDX2 mRNA expression. These data provide evidence
that significant increase in endogenous IFNT transcription in MDBK cells (which
do not normally express IFNT) can be induced through CDX2 overexpression and high
H3K18 acetylation, but lowering of H3K9 methylation could also be required for
the degree of IFNT transcription seen in trophoblast cells.

PMID: 19211809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Feb 6;4(2):103-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.12.001.

Optimal timing of inner cell mass isolation increases the efficiency of human
embryonic stem cell derivation and allows generation of sibling cell lines.

Chen AE(1), Egli D, Niakan K, Deng J, Akutsu H, Yamaki M, Cowan C, Fitz-Gerald C,
Zhang K, Melton DA, Eggan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

PMCID: PMC3335201
PMID: 19200798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 10;106(6):1936-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0812904106. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Gastrointestinal differentiation marker Cytokeratin 20 is regulated by homeobox
gene CDX1.

Chan CW(1), Wong NA, Liu Y, Bicknell D, Turley H, Hollins L, Miller CJ, Wilding
JL, Bodmer WF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

CDX1 is a transcription factor that plays a key role in intestinal development
and differentiation. However, the downstream targets of CDX1 are less well
defined than those of its close homologue, CDX2. We report here the
identification of downstream targets of CDX1 using microarray gene-expression
analysis and other approaches. Keratin 20 (KRT20), a member of the intermediate
filament and a well-known marker of intestinal differentiation, was initially
identified as one of the genes likely to be directly regulated by CDX1. CDX1 and 
KRT20 mRNA expression were significantly correlated in a panel of 38 colorectal
cancer cell lines. Deletion and mutation analysis of the KRT20 promoter showed
that the minimum regulatory region for the control of KRT20 expression by CDX1 is
within 246 bp upstream of the KRT20 transcription start site. ChIP analysis
confirmed that CDX1 binds to the predicted CDX elements in this region of the
KRT20 promoter in vivo. In addition, immunohistochemistry showed expression of
CDX1 parallels that of KRT20 in the normal crypt, which further supports their
close relationship. In summary, our observations strongly imply that KRT20 is
directly regulated by CDX1, and therefore suggest a role for CDX1 in maintaining 
differentiation in intestinal epithelial cells. Because a key feature of the
development of a cancer is an unbalanced program of proliferation and
differentiation, dysregulation of CDX1 may be an advantage for the development of
a colorectal carcinoma. This could, therefore, explain the relatively frequent
down regulation of CDX1 in colorectal carcinomas by hypermethylation.

PMCID: PMC2644142
PMID: 19188603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 1;124(11):2677-82. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24231.

DNA methylation status is inversely correlated with green tea intake and physical
activity in gastric cancer patients.

Yuasa Y(1), Nagasaki H, Akiyama Y, Hashimoto Y, Takizawa T, Kojima K, Kawano T,
Sugihara K, Imai K, Nakachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 
Japan. yuasa.monc@tmd.ac.jp

Comment in
    Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;125(7):1739-42.

Epigenetic silencing of genes by aberrant DNA methylation is recognized as a
crucial component of the mechanism underlying tumorigenesis. However, the
relationship between DNA methylation and the past lifestyle in cancer patients
remains largely unknown. We examined the methylation statuses of 6 tumor-related 
genes, CDX2 (homeobox transcription factor), BMP-2 (bone morphogenetic protein
2), p16 (INK4A), CACNA2D3 (calcium channel-related), GATA-5 (transcription
factor) and ER (estrogen receptor), in 106 primary gastric carcinomas by
methylation-specific PCR and compared them with the past lifestyles of the
patients. The methylation frequencies of the genes were 23.6, 21.7, 9.4, 32.4,
40.8 and 59.1%, respectively. Significant association was found between a
decreased intake of green tea and methylation of CDX2 and BMP-2. More physical
activity was correlated with a lower methylation frequency of CACNA2D3. Of these 
6 genes, the methylation statuses of CDX2, BMP-2 and p16 revealed a significant
interrelationship and those of CACNA2D3, GATA-5 and ER did likewise. Thus, some
epidemiological factors, such as green tea intake, could be important as to
determination of the methylation statuses of selected genes and may influence the
development of cancer, including that of the stomach.

PMID: 19170207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec 30;88(48):3418-21.

[Expression of guanylyl cyclase-c and caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2
in human gastric cancer and precursor lesions].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu HJ(1), Xu Z, Mao ZB, Zhang JF, Zhang JG, Pan ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong
226001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of guanylyl cyclase-C (GC-C) and caudal 
type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) in human gastric mucosa at different 
stages and the significance thereof.
METHODS: An Immunofluorescence method was used to detect the expression of GC-C
and CDX-2 in 23 specimens of gastric carcinoma and matching noncancerous tissues.
Western blotting was used to detect the protein expression of GC-C and CDX2 in
the gastric carcinoma tissues and matching noncancerous tissues too.
RESULTS: The GC-C and CDX2 expression rates were 39.1% and 39.1% respectively in 
the intestinal metaplasia specimens, 55.6% and 55.6% respectively in the
dysplasia specimens, and 56.7 % and 60.0% in the gastric carcinoma specimens, all
significantly higher than those in the normal mucosa specimens (all P = 0.000)
without significant differences in the expression of GC-C and CDX-2 among the 3
pathological groups. The GC-C and CDX-2 expression was positively correlated with
Lauren classification, The expression levels of GC-C and CDX-2 were significantly
higher in the intestinal-type than in the diffuse-type gastric carcinoma (P <
0.05). The GC-C expression was positively correlated with the expression of CDX-2
in intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: Ectopic expression of GC-C and CDX2 in human gastric mucosa may play 
an important role in the carcinogenesis of intestinal-type gastric carcinoma.
Detection of GC-C and CDX2 helps diagnose gastric carcinoma and precursor
lesions.

PMID: 19159573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Leukemia. 2009 Apr;23(4):649-55. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.355. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

The homeobox gene CDX2 is aberrantly expressed and associated with an inferior
prognosis in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Thoene S(1), Rawat VP, Heilmeier B, Hoster E, Metzeler KH, Herold T, Hiddemann W,
Gökbuget N, Hoelzer D, Bohlander SK, Feuring-Buske M, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany.

Molecular characterization of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has greatly
improved the ability to categorize and prognostify patients with this disease. In
this study, we show that the proto-oncogene CDX2 is aberrantly expressed in the
majority of cases with B-lineage ALL and T-ALL. High expression of CDX2
correlated significantly with the ALL subtype pro-B ALL, cALL, Ph(+) ALL and
early T-ALL. Furthermore, high expression of CDX2 was associated with inferior
overall survival and showed up as a novel and strong risk factor for ALL in
bivariate analysis. Functional analyses showed that overexpression of Cdx2 in
murine bone marrow progenitors perturbed genes involved in lymphoid development
and that depletion of CDX2 in the human ALL cell line Nalm6 inhibited colony
formation. These data indicate that aberrant CDX2 expression occurs frequently
and has prognostic impact in adult patients with ALL.

PMID: 19158837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2009 Feb;61(2):95-106. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0897.2008.00673.x.

Control of interferon-tau expression during early pregnancy in ruminants.

Ealy AD(1), Yang QE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences; University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32611-0910, USA. ealy@ufl.edu

PROBLEM: A type I interferon (IFN), termed IFN-tau (tau), is responsible for the 
establishment and maintenance of early pregnancy in cattle and sheep. The control
of IFNtau gene (IFNT) expression is not completely understood.
METHOD OF STUDY: This article will provide an overview of recent progress made in
understanding the dynamic expression pattern of IFNT during pre- and
peri-attachment conceptus development.
RESULTS: Several ubiquitous transcriptional regulators (Ets2 and AP1) and at
least two trophectoderm factors (Cdx2 and Dlx3) control IFNT transcription during
early pregnancy. Co-activators (CBP/p300) are also involved in this process. At
least two uterine-derived factors (GM-CSF and FGF2) stimulate IFN-tau production 
in bovine trophectoderm, and multiple signaling pathways are functionally linked 
with IFNT expression.
CONCLUSION: Although understanding the regulation of IFNT expression is far from 
complete, considerable progress has been made in uncovering how uterine-derived
factors and key placental-specific transcriptional regulators control IFNT
expression.

PMID: 19143673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Dec;23 Suppl 2:S161-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05406.x.

Sonic hedgehog and CDX2 expression in the stomach.

Shiotani A(1), Kamada T, Yamanaka Y, Manabe N, Kusunoki H, Hata J, Haruma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki City,
Okayama, Japan. shiotani@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an essential regulator of patterning processes throughout
development, and CDX proteins act as the master regulators for intestinal
development and differentiation. Shh and CDX2 seem to be interdependently linked 
with cellular differentiation through different signal cascades. We have recently
shown that the loss of Shh and aberrant expression of CDX2 in Helicobacter pylori
(H. pylori)-associated atrophic gastritis can be modified by H. pylori
eradication prior to incomplete intestinal metaplasia. On the other hand,
abnormal signaling of the hedgehog pathway has been reported in gastric cancer,
especially diffuse-type cancer and advanced gastric cancer, and Shh acts as a
proliferation factor in both the normal mucosa and malignant lesions. CDX2
expressed in the early stage of gastric carcinogenesis is associated with the
intestinal phenotypic region and thus with a better outcome. However, it remains 
unclear how Shh and CDX2 are involved with intestinal transformation and further 
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19120891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mod Pathol. 2009 Mar;22(3):460-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.205. Epub 2009 Jan 
9.

REG4 is associated with carcinogenesis in the 'intestinal' pathway of intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasms.

Nakata K(1), Nagai E, Ohuchida K, Aishima S, Hayashi A, Miyasaka Y, Yu J,
Mizumoto K, Tanaka M, Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Subclassification of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas
(IPMNs), based on morphological features and immunohistochemical profiles, has
been proposed. Intestinal-type IPMNs frequently show moderate to severe
dysplasia. Regenerating islet-derived family, member 4 (REG4) is associated with 
the adenoma-carcinoma sequence in colon cancer and it is also associated with
intestinal phenotype. Therefore, to identify REG4 expression in IPMNs may be
helpful to detect high-grade IPMNs. We also investigated REG4 expression and CDX2
expression in IPMNs. To investigate the expressions of REG4 and CDX2 in IPMNs and
in invasive ductal adenocarcinoma derived from IPMN, we used immunohistochemical 
staining and microdissection-based quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Among 125 IPMNs, 43 (34%) were positive 
for REG4 and most of the intestinal-type IPMNs showed its expression (35/38). The
positive ratio of REG4 expression in colloid carcinoma (5/7) was significantly
higher than that in tubular carcinoma (1/17; P=0.003). Most of CDX2-positive
cases (31/33) expressed REG4 protein, whereas only 12 of 92 CDX2-negative cases
did (P<0.001). The levels of REG4 mRNA in intestinal-type IPMN were significantly
higher compared to those in gastric-type IPMN or to normal pancreatic ductal
epithelium (P=0.005, P=0.004, respectively). REG4 expression was observed more
frequently in borderline lesions (14/28) and carcinoma (21/45) compared to
adenoma (8/52). Using the Ki-67 labeling index, REG4 expression was significantly
correlated with proliferative activity in borderline lesions. We conclude that
REG4 is involved in the 'intestinal' pathway of carcinogenesis in IPMN.

PMID: 19136934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Gut. 2009 May;58(5):620-8. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.152975. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Roles of caudal-related homeobox gene Cdx1 in oesophageal epithelial cells in
Barrett's epithelium development.

Kazumori H(1), Ishihara S, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Izumo City General Medical Center, 613
Nadabun-cho, Izumo, Shimane 691-0003, Japan. kazumori-hideaki@izumo-hospital.jp

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The mechanism of transformation to intestinal metaplasia in 
Barrett's oesophagus has not been clarified. We previously reported that bile
acids activate the Cdx2 promoter via nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) and
stimulate production of Cdx2 protein in oesophageal keratinocytes with a
resulting production of intestinal type mucin. In addition to Cdx2, Cdx1 may play
an important role in the development of Barrett's oesophagus. Therefore, we
studied the direct effects of bile acids on the expression of Cdx1 as well as the
precise mechanisms of Cdx1 expression in cultured oesophageal squamous epithelial
cells. Furthermore, we investigated the relationship between Cdx1 and Cdx2
expression in cultured oesophageal squamous epithelial cells.
METHODS: A rat model of Barrett's oesophagus was produced by anastomosing the
oesophagus and jejunum. The expression of Cdx1 was investigated by
immunohistochemistry, while the response of that expression to bile acids was
studied using a Cdx1 promoter luciferase assay. In addition, oesophageal squamous
epithelial cells were transfected with a Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression vector, after
which their possible transformation to intestinal-type epithelial cells was
investigated.
RESULTS: In our Barrett's rat model, the metaplastic epithelium and adjoining
squamous epithelium strongly expressed Cdx1. Further, the bile acids mixture
dose-dependently increased Cdx1 promoter activity and Cdx1 protein in oesophageal
epithelial cells. Transfection of the Cdx1 expression vector in cultured
oesophageal epithelial cells induced production of Cdx2 protein.
CONCLUSION: Bile acid-induced sequential expression of Cdx1 followed by Cdx2 may 
have an important role in the development of Barrett's epithelium.

PMID: 19136512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Mar;42(3):239-47. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0108. Epub 2009 Jan 
8.

The combinations of polymorphisms in vitamin D receptor, osteoprotegerin and
tumour necrosis factor superfamily member 11 genes are associated with bone
mineral density.

Mencej-Bedrac S(1), Prezelj J, Kocjan T, Teskac K, Ostanek B, Smelcer M, Marc J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) upregulates tumour necrosis factor superfamily
member 11 (TNFSF11) that codes for the receptor activator of nuclear factor
kappaB ligand (RANKL), and downregulates osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression. We
have analyzed the individual effects of polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor
gene (VDR), OPG and TNFSF11, and searched for interactions between them. Six
hundred and forty one subjects were evaluated: 239 osteoporotic and 228
non-osteoporotic post-menopausal, 57 pre-menopausal women and 117 elderly men.
The subjects were genotyped for BsmI, FokI and Cdx2 in VDR, K3N in OPG and
-290C>T, -643C>T and -693G>C in TNFSF11 gene. Bone mineral density (BMD) and
biochemical markers were measured. In the osteoporotic women, femoral neck BMD
(BMD-fn) showed associations with BsmI(VDR) and Cdx2(VDR) (P=0.015 and 0.047
respectively), and lumbar spine BMD (BMD-ls) with K3N(OPG) and -290C>T(TNFSF11)
(P=0.021 and 0.017). No association with BMD was found in the non-osteoporotic
women. In the pre-menopausal women, the Cdx2(VDR) polymorphism was associated
with BMD-fn and total hip BMD (P=0.011 and 0.011). In elderly men, FokI(VDR) was 
associated with BMD-fn and BMD-ls (P=0.040 and 0.036). Interestingly, the
-290C>T(TNFSF11)-K3N(OPG) combination was associated with BMD-th (P=0.041) in the
osteoporotic women. In the non-osteoporotic women, the combination
K3N(OPG)-Cdx2(VDR) was associated with BMD-ls, BMD-th and BMD-fn (P=0.032, 0.049 
and 0.022), and the combination -290C>T(TNFSF11)-K3N(OPG) with BMD-fn (P=0.029). 
For the first time, the presence of gene-gene interactions between VDR, OPG and
TNFSF11 genes was studied. Our results strongly suggest further confirmation of
their combined influence on larger cohorts.

PMID: 19131500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pathol Int. 2009 Jan;59(1):53-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02325.x.

Intraductal tubular carcinoma, intestinal type, of the pancreas.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

Presented herein is an unusual case of intraductal tubular carcinoma, intestinal 
type, of the pancreas. This tumor was characterized by intraductal adenoma with a
few malignant foci, and also by entire involvement of the main pancreatic duct
and no involvement of its branches. A 67-year-old man was admitted to hospital
because of abdominal pain. On endoscopy and endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography, irregular pancreatic duct was seen. No mucus secretion 
was observed on endoscopy. Because a biopsy showed tubular atypical cells,
pancreato-duodenectomy was performed. Grossly, the entire main pancreatic duct
had intraductal tumor, sparing its branches. No intraductal mucus was noted.
Microscopically, the entire main pancreatic duct had proliferation of tubular
adenomatous tumor without secretory mucins. Goblet cells were present in some
areas. No pyloric type tubules were recognized. Malignant transformation was
present in a few areas. No invasive features were recognized. On mucin
histochemistry the tumor cell cytoplasm contained a little or no neutral and
acidic mucus, and no secretory mucins were recognized. Immunohistochemically, the
tumor cells were positive for cytokeratins (CK), CK 8, 9, 18, 19 and 20,
epithelial membrane antigen, CDX2, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and Ki-67 (labeling
30%), MUC2, MUC5AC and MUC6, and CD10. The tumor cells were negative for C-erbB2,
MUC1, trypsin, pancreatic amylase and pancreatic lipase. The tumor cells were
negative for p53 protein, but the malignant foci were positive for p53 protein
and had high Ki-67 antigen (labeling 60%). The patient was free of disease 4
years after the operation. In summary, presented here is an extremely rare case
of intraductal tubular carcinoma, intestinal type, showing focal malignant foci.

PMID: 19121093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Akush Ginekol (Sofiia). 2009;48(5):20-2.

[Differential diagnostic importance of immunochistochemistry applied at
metastases of adenocarcinomas of the peritoneum].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Porjazova E, Zaprjanov Z, Batashki I, Milchev N, Markova D.

Patients with metastatic carcinomas with unclear primary tumor site are often
clinical and pathological problem. They are diagnosed in about 3-65 of the cases 
with solid tumors. In 60% of cases the reason is adenocarcinomas. The most
frequent reason for peritoneal carcinomas at women is the ovarian cancer. In such
cases we must exclude the probability of colorectal cancer. In fact there are not
international standards for prove the origin of adenocarcinomas; different
research groups use different criteria. We present the use of four
antibodies--Cytokeratin 7 and 20, Beta cathenin and CDX2 and define their
positiveness at metastases from different groups of adenocarcinomas in the
peritoneum.

PMID: 20198793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Akush Ginekol (Sofiia). 2009;48(4):32-4.

[CDX2--an immunochystochemistry marker of intestinal differentiation of
adenocarcinomas].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Porjazova E, Zaprjanov Z, Milchev N, Markova D, Batashki I.

CDX2 is a nuclear transcribing factor, important for the development and
differentiation of the bowels. According to the recent publications, CDX2
expression is immunochystochemisry detector in the normal enterocytes of the
bowels and is normally met in the most, but not at all colorectal carcinomas. Two
homeostatic genes are detected at people CDX1 u CDX2. We present examination of
CDX2 expression at 15 adenomas and 30 colorectal carcinomas. All the adenomas are
positive for CDX2, 27 /90%/ of the adenocarcinomas show nuclear expression of
CDX2.

PMID: 20198783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Akush Ginekol (Sofiia). 2009;48(2):7-12.

[Immunohistochemical profile of colorectal and ovarian carcinomas--examination
with cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, beta catenin and cDX 2].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Porjazova E, Zaprjanov Z, Batashki I, Markova D, Milchev N.

INTRODUCTION: Metastases from colorectal adenocarcinomas can be histologically
similar to serous, mucinous and endometrioid ovarian adenocarcinomas. The
differentiation between primary and metastatic ovarian tumours is of great
importance for the patients because of the different treatment and prognosis.
AIM: The aim of the study was to determine whether the differences in the
expression of Cytokeratin 7, Cytokeratin 20, Beta catenin and CDX2 can be used to
distinguish the different types of carcinomas and their metastases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The immunohistochemical expression of the listed above
antibodies was examined retrospectively and prospectively in 38 colorectal
adenocarcinomas (primary and metastatic) and 32 ovarian adenocarcinomas (primary 
and metastatic). The metastases in both types of adenocarcinomas are located in
the peritoneum.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemical expression was evaluated using a
semi-quantitative method. The ovarian adenocarcinomas are mostly positive for
Cytokeratin 7 (in 63%), while colorectal carcinomas are mostly positive for
Cytokeratin 20 (in 73%). Regarding Beta catenin, in colorectal carcinomas the
expression is mostly nuclear (in 65%) and in ovarian carcinomas mostly membrane
(in 68%). In cases of uncertain expression of the markers mentioned above, CDX2
was used. Positive nuclear expression was observed only in intestinal tumours (in
86%).
CONCLUSION: For differential diagnosis between ovarian and colorectal
adenocarcinomas, the use of antibodies, determining the intestinal
differentiation of the tumours like Cytokeratin 20, Beta catenin and CDX2 is
recommended.

PMID: 20198769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Pancreas. 2009 Jan;38(1):49-57. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31817fa2ba.

Homeobox gene CDX2 inhibits human pancreatic cancer cell proliferation by
down-regulating cyclin D1 transcriptional activity.

Takahashi K(1), Hirano F, Matsumoto K, Aso K, Haneda M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism and Biosystemic Sciences, Department of Medicine,
Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, Japan. t-kenji@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: Homeobox gene caudal related homeobox gene 2 (CDX2) is an
intestine-specific tumor suppressor gene. This study is intended to investigate
the effect of CDX2 expression on cell proliferation and cyclin D1 expression in
pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: Four pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines (PancQGO-1, BxPC-3,
MIAPaCa-2, CFPAC-1), 1 islet carcinoma cell line (QGP-1), and 1 adenosquamous
carcinoma cell line (KP-3) were analyzed for CDX1 and CDX2 expression using
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot
analysis. Proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells was analyzed using WST-1 assay
after CDX2 transfection. Luciferase assay was performed to examine the effects of
CDX2 on cyclin D1 transcriptional activity.
RESULTS: CDX2 was expressed at a significantly higher level in QGP-1 cells than
in KP-3 cells. Moreover, CDX2 was expressed at a middle level in 4 pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma cells. Cell proliferation and cyclin D1 mRNA level were
inhibited significantly after CDX2 transfection in pancreatic cancer cells.
Furthermore, CDX2 inhibited exogenous nuclear factor kappaB-p65-induced
luciferase gene expression in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, CDX2
inhibited pGL2HIVD1kappaB2-luciferase activity.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 might play a role in inhibiting cell proliferation and
repressing cyclin D1 transcriptional activity through the proximal nuclear factor
kappaB binding site in pancreatic cancer cells.

PMID: 19106744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Histopathology. 2008 Dec;53(6):685-97.

Intratumoural heterogeneity of intestinal expression reflects environmental
induction and progression-related loss of induction in undifferentiated-type
gastric carcinomas.

Natsagdorj L(1), Sugihara H, Bamba M, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.

AIMS: Gene expression in tumours is regulated by environmental as well as
genetic/epigenetic factors. This study assessed the environmental factors in
intestinal expression of gastric cancers.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We immunohistochemically examined intratumoural
heterogeneity in the expression of Cdx2, MUC2, MUC5AC and MUC6 in 39 intramucosal
and 49 extramucosally invasive undifferentiated-type gastric carcinomas (UGCs),
consisting of signet ring cell carcinomas showing a layered structure (LS) in the
mucosa and dedifferentiated tubular adenocarcinomas without LS and with minor
tubular components (TC). The LS retains mucosal vertical polarity with
superficial MUC5AC expression. Loss of this polarity was independent of
intestinal expression and associated with extramucosal invasion. In LS(+) UGCs,
intestinal expression was enhanced as the size of mucosal spread increased and
was significantly reduced with deeper extramucosal invasion, whereas, in
LS(-)/TC(+) UGCs, intestinal expression was frequent and predominant in the
mucosa and was insignificantly reduced with deeper extramucosal invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: In LS(+) UGCs, intestinal expression showed dynamic alteration
probably by environmental induction and progression-related loss of induction,
whereas it was relatively stable in LS(-)/TC(+) UGCs. Thus, intestinal expression
in UGCs is not useful as a marker of tumour progression because it is also
affected by environmental factors and genetic lineage.

PMID: 19102008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 May;17(3):233-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181917af0.

Characterization and applications of a newly developed rabbit monoclonal antibody
to cytokeratin 7 (CK7) for immunohistochemistry.

Qi W(1), Chu J, Zhou D, Tacha D.

Author information: 
(1)Biocare Medical, LLC, Concord, CA 94520, USA. wqi@biocare.net

Erratum in
    Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Oct;17(5):464.

In this paper, we describe the development of a novel rabbit monoclonal
cytokeratin 7 (CK7) antibody. CK7 is widely used in immunohistochemical tests
that are commonly performed in histopathology laboratories. Rabbits were
immunized with a peptide corresponding to C-terminus of CK7. Recombinant
monoclonal antibodies were developed using proprietary technology. Antibodies
were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay against CK7 peptide, and the
specificity of the antibody was verified by Western blotting on Hela cell lysates
and by immunohistochemical staining on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
sections. One clone, designated as BC1 was selected and tested on a variety of
human tissues. Its reactivity was tested and compared with a well-characterized
mouse monoclonal CK7 antibody OV-TL 12/30 on lung, breast, ovarian, and colon
cancers, and on a variety of normal tissues. The staining patterns and
specificity were concordant with mouse monoclonal OV-TL 12/30. The BC1 clone,
however, showed superior staining to OV-TL 12/30 in terms of intensity and
staining of debris. CK7 combined with CK20 or CDX2 and TTF1 is a common panel
used in histopathology laboratories in discrimination between primary
adenocarcinomas and metastatic lung adenocarcinomas from colonic origin. We then 
developed a 4-step double stain (multiplex) assay by combining CDX-2 with CK7 in 
an antibody cocktail and tested the efficacy on lung, breast, and colon cancers. 
Results showed that this novel antibody can be used as a single component and/or 
in combination with CDX2 and TTF1 in applications for diagnostic pathology.

PMID: 19098679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 May;17(3):196-201. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31819268f2.

CDX2, cytokeratins 7 and 20 immunoreactivity in rectal adenocarcinoma.

Saad RS(1), Silverman JF, Khalifa MA, Rowsell C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sunnybrook Health Science Center, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. reda.saad@sunnybrook.ca

Erratum in
    Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Oct;17(5):464.

There are limited data regarding CDX2 expression in rectal carcinoma. The
CK20/CK7 immunoprofile of colorectal adenocarcinoma has been described in
studies, which have mostly lumped colonic and rectal tumors together. In this
study, we investigated the diagnostic utility of immunohistochemical stains for
CK7, CK20, and CDX2 in a series of rectal adenocarcinoma. Fifty-five specimens of
rectal adenocarcinomas were retrieved and immunostained for CK7 (Dako-M7018),
CK20 (NovoCastra NCL-L-CK20), and CDX2 (NovoCastra NCL-CDX2). Thirty cases of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma and 15 cholangiocarcinomas were also studied as a
comparison group. CK7 was expressed in 12/55 (22%) and CK20 in 48/55 (87%) cases 
of rectal adenocarcinoma. The CK7-/CK20+ immunophenotype was identified in 36/55 
(65%), CK7+/CK20+ in 12/55 (22%), and CK7-/CK20- in 7/55 (13%) rectal
adenocarcinoma. CDX2 showed moderate-strong positivity in all cases and was not
related to tumor differentiation. Benign rectal mucosa was available in 37 cases 
and showed the following results: CK7-/CK20+ in 25/37 (67%), CK7+/CK20+ in 8/37
(22%) and CK7-/CK20- in 4/37 (11%) cases. In pancreatic adenocarcinomas and
cholangiocarcinomas, 29/45 (64%) were CK7+/CK20+ and 16/45 (36%) were CK7+/CK20-.
CDX2 was positive in only 3/45 (7%) of these cases; all were pancreatic
adenocarcinomas. In conclusion, CK7 can be expressed in rectal adenocarcinoma,
and should not be used as the sole basis for excluding a rectal primary. CDX2 is 
a sensitive marker for rectal origin of adenocarcinoma. It can be helpful in
cases with metastatic rectal carcinoma, especially those with CK7+/CK20+ or
CK20-/CK7- immunophenotype. In this study, CDX2 expression was not influenced by 
the grade (differentiation) of rectal adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19098678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jan;238(1):194-203. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21816.

Cloning and expression analysis of the anterior parahox genes, Gsh1 and Gsh2 from
Xenopus tropicalis.

Illes JC(1), Winterbottom E, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Gsx class proteins are members of the ParaHox homeodomain transcription factor
family with conserved roles in specification and patterning of the nervous
system. We report the cloning of two Gsx genes, Gsh1 and Gsh2, from the frog
Xenopus tropicalis. We demonstrate the existence of a single, intact Xenopus
ParaHox cluster, containing Gsh1, Pdx, and Cdx2, plus three degenerate clusters
containing Gsh2, Cdx1, and Cdx4. Anterior expression boundaries of genes from the
intact ParaHox cluster are co-linear with respect to their genomic organization. 
We show that Gsh1 and Gsh2 exhibit complex, overlapping patterns of expression
within the anterior nervous system from open neural plate stages. We also find
that expression of Gsh2, Nkx6, and Msx1 across the medio-lateral axis of the
amphibian neural plate is strikingly similar to that of related genes in the
Drosophila neuroectoderm. These findings provide further evidence for a conserved
pathway regulating dorso-ventral patterning in the Bilateria.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19097192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jan;238(1):29-42. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21810.

Transcriptional dynamics of endodermal organ formation.

Sherwood RI(1), Chen TY, Melton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Although endodermal organs including the liver, pancreas, and intestine are of
significant therapeutic interest, the mechanism by which the endoderm is divided 
into organ domains during embryogenesis is not well understood. To better
understand this process, global gene expression profiling was performed on early 
endodermal organ domains. This global analysis was followed up by dynamic
immunofluorescence analysis of key transcription factors, uncovering novel
expression patterns as well as cell surface proteins that allow prospective
isolation of specific endodermal organ domains. Additionally, a repressive
interaction between Cdx2 and Sox2 was found to occur at the prospective
stomach-intestine border, with the hepatic and pancreatic domains forming at this
boundary, and Hlxb9 was revealed to have graded expression along the
dorsal-ventral axis. These results contribute to understanding the mechanism of
endodermal organogenesis and should assist efforts to replicate this process
using pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3756511
PMID: 19097184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Dec 16;8:115. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-115.

RBM19 is essential for preimplantation development in the mouse.

Zhang J(1), Tomasini AJ, Mayer AN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of
Wisconsin and Children's Research Institute, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
jzhang@mcw.edu

BACKGROUND: RNA-binding motif protein 19 (RBM19, NCBI Accession # NP_083038) is a
conserved nucleolar protein containing 6 conserved RNA recognition motifs. Its
biochemical function is to process rRNA for ribosome biogenesis, and it has been 
shown to play a role in digestive organ development in zebrafish. Here we
analyzed the role of RBM19 during mouse embryonic development by generating mice 
containing a mutation in the Rbm19 locus via gene-trap insertion.
RESULTS: Homozygous mutant embryos failed to develop beyond the morula stage,
showing defective nucleologenesis, activation of apoptosis, and upregulation of
P53 target genes. A unique feature of RBM19 is its localization to the cytoplasm 
in morula stage-embryos, whereas most other nucleolar proteins are localized to
the nucleolar precursor body (NPB). The nucleoli in the Rbm19 mutant embryos
remain immature, yet they can carry out rRNA synthesis. The timing of
developmental arrest occurs after expression of the inner cell mass markers
OCT3/4 and NANOG, but prior to the specification of trophectoderm as reflected by
CDX2 expression.
CONCLUSION: The data indicate that RBM19 is essential for preimplantation
development, highlighting the importance of de novo nucleologenesis during this
critical developmental stage.

PMCID: PMC2627835
PMID: 19087264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008 Aug;43(8):915-21.

Helicobacter pylori infection induces a reversible expression of the CDX2
transcription factor protein in human gastric epithelium.

Vauhkonen M(1), Vauhkonen H, Sipponen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department ofMedicine, Helsinki University Hospital, Jorvi Hospital, Espoo,
Finland. matti.vauhkonen@hus.fi

Comment in
    Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(1):124-5.

OBJECTIVE: The homeobox gene CDX2 is implicated in the appearance of intestinal
metaplasia in Helicobacter pylori gastritis. The aim of this study was to
investigate whether CDX2 expression in gastric mucosa occurs before the
appearance of overt intestinal metaplasia in H. pylori gastritis, and whether or 
not this expression is reversible.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: CDX2 was studied by immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 38 
patients with H. pylori gastritis before and after eradication (mean follow-up
6.3 years) of H. pylori. A cohort of 49 individuals with healthy stomachs was
analysed as a control.
RESULTS: In the control group no immunostaining of CDX2 in the epithelial cells
of the gastric body was found, while in 57% of the cases a mild, aberrant nuclear
immunostaining of CDX2 in the non-metaplastic epithelial cells in antrum,
designated as "positive staining of single cells" (PSSC), was found. In H. pylori
gastritis, the PSSC was seen in antrum and corpus in 100% and 26% of the cases,
respectively. The prevalence of antral PSSC was significantly increased (on
average by 4-fold) in H. pylori gastritis as compared with controls. After
eradication of H. pylori, the prevalence of PSSC decreased significantly in
antrum but not in corpus.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of CDX2 at low intensity is common in the epithelium of
normal antrum, and this expression is enhanced in H. pylori gastritis. Expression
of CDX2 is reversible at least in antrum after eradication of H. pylori
infection.

PMID: 19086163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biol Reprod. 2009 Mar;80(3):511-7. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.073270. Epub 2008 
Dec 10.

Functional analysis of male mouse haploid germ cells of various differentiation
stages: early and late round spermatids are functionally equivalent in producing 
progeny.

Ohta H(1), Sakaide Y, Wakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genomic Reprogramming, RIKEN Kobe Institute, Center for
Developmental Biology, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan. ohta@cdb.riken.jp

Spermiogenesis is a complex process consisting of three main phases: the round,
elongating, and elongated spermatid phases. Although the germ cells acquire a
haploid set of paternal chromosomes after meiosis, how functional these male
haploid germ cells are as male gametes at various differentiation stages has
remained unclear. We selectively injected specific steps of haploid male germ
cells into oocytes and assessed the function of the zygotes. Applying the
transillumination technique using acrosin-green fluorescent protein transgenic
mice, we succeeded in selecting four types of haploid male germ cells for
microinsemination: early round spermatids (steps 2-3), late round spermatids
(steps 7-8), elongating spermatids (steps 9-10), and elongated spermatids (step
16). The microinsemination technique revealed that the early and late round
spermatids had similar developmental abilities in producing progeny, indicating
that the nuclear status of newly generated round spermatids was similar to that
of late round spermatids. An increased birthrate of progeny was first observed in
steps 9-10 of elongating spermatids, but the frequency was slightly lower than
that of the elongated spermatids. These results indicated that the transition
from steps 7-8 of round spermatids to steps 9-10 of elongating spermatids is a
key step in changing the nuclear status of male gametes in producing progeny.

PMID: 19073998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Pathol Int. 2008 Dec;58(12):792-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02313.x.

Colonic-type adenocarcinoma arising in a primary retroperitoneal mature cystic
teratoma.

Cheung WL(1), Cao D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

A 47-year-old woman who presented with abdominal pain was found to have a 20 cm
cystic retroperitoneal mass. Pathology indicated a colonic-type adenocarcinoma
arising in a primary retroperitoneal mature cystic teratoma. The adenocarcinoma
was predominantly intracystic with focal superficial invasion into the cyst wall 
but not beyond the teratoma capsule. Immunohistochemistry showed that the
adenocarcinoma cells were diffusely positive for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and
caudal-type homeobox transcription factor-2 (CDX2) but negative for CK7,
confirming the colonic phenotype. In addition, the adenocarcinoma was seen
adjacent to teratomatous colonic-type mucosa with adenomatous change (i.e.
adenoma), suggesting that it was probably arising from a colonic-type adenoma
within the teratoma. The carcinoma had a higher Ki-67 proliferation index and had
a higher percentage of cells stained for p53 than the adjacent adenomatous
lesion. To the authors' knowledge this is the first documented case in which a
colonic-type adenocarcinoma was seen arising from a precursor lesion (i.e. a
colonic-type adenoma in a primary retroperitoneal mature cystic teratoma) and is 
the second case of intestinal-type adenocarcinoma arising in a primary
retroperitoneal mature cystic teratoma.

PMID: 19067855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Endoscopy. 2009 Jan;41(1):51-4. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1077780. Epub 2008 Dec 4.

Ulcers and gastritis.

Kashiwagi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
hkashiwagi.surg@jikei.ac.jp

PMID: 19058127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Jun 1;46(11):847-50.

[Caudal-related homeobox 2 gene expression and its effects on human gastric
carcinoma cell line].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Xiao Q, Xie YB, Ma YL, Tang ZY, Yin YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, the First Hospital Affiliated to Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning 530021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of human caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2)
gene expression on human gastric carcinoma cell line MGC-803.
METHODS: pCMV-Cdx2-HA eukaryotic expression plasmid was constructed by using DNA 
recombinant method. The MGC-803 cells were divided into 4 groups:
non-transfected, transfected with pCMV-HA, transfected with pCMV-GAPDH-HA,
transfected with pCMV-Cdx2-HA. Cdx2 gene and its protein expression was detected 
by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and Western blot
techniques respectively. The effects of Cdx2 overexpression on the growth of
MGC-803 cells in vitro was assessed by measuring MTT, flow cytometry and
transmission electron microscopy analysis.
RESULTS: In MGC-803 cells transfected with pCMV-Cdx2-HA, cell proliferation was
significantly suppressed, the cells was ultrastructurally destroyed, cell cycle
progression was blocked in G0/G1 and apoptosis rate was higher (P<0.05) in
comparison with non-transfected cells or cells transfected with empty vector.
CONCLUSION: It indicated that Cdx2 gene can suppress the growth of gastric
carcinoma and may save as a novel therapeutic target.

PMID: 19035222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Evol Dev. 2008 Nov-Dec;10(6):671-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2008.00280.x.

Platypus Pou5f1 reveals the first steps in the evolution of trophectoderm
differentiation and pluripotency in mammals.

Niwa H(1), Sekita Y, Tsend-Ayush E, Grützner F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 6500047, Japan.
niwa@cdb.riken.jp

Uterine nourishment of embryos by the placenta is a key feature of mammals.
Although a variety of placenta types exist, they are all derived from the
trophectoderm (TE) cell layer of the developing embryo. Egg-laying mammals
(platypus and echidnas) are distinguished by a very short intrauterine embryo
development, in which a simple placenta forms from TE-like cells. The Pou5f1 gene
encodes a class V POU family transcription factor Oct3/4. In mice, Oct3/4
together with the highly conserved caudal-related homeobox transcription factor
Cdx2, determines TE fate in pre-implantation development. In contrast to Cdx2,
Pou5f1 has only been identified in eutherian mammals and marsupials, whereas, in 
other vertebrates, pou2 is considered to be the Pou5f1 ortholog. Here, we show
that platypus and opossum genomes contain a Pou5f1 and pou2 homolog,
pou2-related, indicating that these two genes are paralogues and arose by gene
duplication in early mammalian evolution. In a complementation assay, we found
that platypus or human Pou5f1, but not opossum or zebrafish pou2, restores
self-renewal in Pou5f1-null mouse ES cells, showing that platypus possess a fully
functional Pou5f1 gene. Interestingly, we discovered that parts of one of the
conserved regions (CR4) is missing from the platypus Pou5f1 promoter, suggesting 
that the autoregulation and reciprocal inhibition between Pou5f1 and Cdx2 evolved
after the divergence of monotremes and may be linked to the development of more
elaborate placental types in marsupial and eutherian mammals.

PMID: 19021737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Jul;17(4):351-6. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31818a9d90.

Expression of Galectin-3, CD138, p16INK4a, and TTF-1 in mucinous
bronchioloalveolar adenocarcinoma after Hodgkin lymphoma.

Al-Salam S(1), Al-Ashari M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Pathology Department, United Arab
Emirates University, Al Ain, UAE. suhaila@uaeu.ac.ae

Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC) is a subset of lung adenocarcinoma that has a 
distinct clinical presentation, tumor biology, response to therapy, and prognosis
compared with other subtypes of non-small-cell lung carcinoma. BAC
disproportionately affects women, never-smokers, and is characterized by growth
along alveolar septae without evidence of stromal, vascular, or pleural invasion.
Microscopically, BACs have been divided into mucinous, nonmucinous, and mixed
types. We describe a case of young female who received radiation therapy to the
mediastinum and chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma and now develops mucinous
bronchioalveolar adenocarcinoma of the left lung which to the best of our
knowledge has not been previously described after radiotherapy and chemotherapy
for Hodgkin lymphoma. The tumor cells express Galectin-3, CD138, p16INK4a,
thyroid transcription factor-1, cytokeratin 7, epithelial membrane antigen,
carcinoembryonic antigen, E-cadherin, neuron-specific enolase, and S100 whereas
no expression of cytokeratin 20, calretinin, and CDX2 is seen.

PMID: 18997617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 2008 Dec;135(23):3935-45. doi: 10.1242/dev.023747.

The cytoplasm of mouse germinal vesicle stage oocytes can enhance somatic cell
nuclear reprogramming.

Bui HT(1), Wakayama S, Kishigami S, Kim JH, Van Thuan N, Wakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Kobe
650-0047, Japan. bthuy@konkuk.ac.kr

In mammalian cloning, evidence suggests that genomic reprogramming factors are
located in the nucleus rather than the cytoplasm of oocytes or zygotes. However, 
little is known about the mechanisms of reprogramming, and new methods using
nuclear factors have not succeeded in producing cloned mice from differentiated
somatic cell nuclei. We aimed to determine whether there are functional
reprogramming factors present in the cytoplasm of germinal vesicle stage (GV)
oocytes. We found that the GV oocyte cytoplasm could remodel somatic cell nuclei,
completely demethylate histone H3 at lysine 9 and partially deacetylate histone
H3 at lysines 9 and 14. Moreover, cytoplasmic lysates of GV oocytes promoted
somatic cell reprogramming and cloned embryo development, when assessed by
measuring histone H3-K9 hypomethylation, Oct4 and Cdx2 expression in blastocysts,
and the production of cloned offspring. Thus, genomic reprogramming factors are
present in the cytoplasm of the GV oocyte and could facilitate cloning
technology. This finding is also useful for research on the mechanisms involved
in histone deacetylation and demethylation, even though histone methylation is
thought to be epigenetically stable.

PMID: 18997114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Lett. 2009 Feb 8;274(1):143-50. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.09.019. Epub
2008 Nov 8.

Phosphatase activity of nuclear PTEN is required for CDX2-mediated intestinal
differentiation of gastric carcinoma.

Semba S(1), Satake S, Matsushita M, Yokozaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe
650-0017, Japan. semba@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

The PTEN tumor suppressor localizes predominantly to the cytoplasm, where it
negatively regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT signaling pathway;
however, the biological significance of nuclear PTEN in gastric carcinoma (GC)
remains unknown. In this study, transduction of recombinant PTEN into GC-derived 
TMK-1 cells promoted PTEN nuclear localization with increased mRNA levels of CDX2
and intestinal claudins (CLDN3 and CLDN4), whereas the G129E phosphatase 'dead'
mutant had no effect. In GC tissue samples, tumors with nuclear PTEN expression
frequently demonstrated the intestinal-type claudin phenotype. Our results
suggested that nuclear localization of PTEN is important for determining
intestinal differentiation of GCs.

PMID: 18996641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Hum Pathol. 2009 Mar;40(3):398-404. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.08.014. Epub 2008
Nov 7.

Differentiating the undifferentiated: immunohistochemical profile of medullary
carcinoma of the colon with an emphasis on intestinal differentiation.

Winn B(1), Tavares R, Fanion J, Noble L, Gao J, Sabo E, Resnick MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown
University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Undifferentiated or medullary carcinoma is characterized by its distinct
histologic appearance and relatively better prognosis compared to poorly
differentiated colonic carcinoma. These 2 entities may be difficult to
differentiate by light microscopy alone. Only limited immunohistochemical studies
investigating medullary carcinoma have been reported. These studies suggest a
loss of intestinal differentiation, exemplified by a high percentage of CDX2
negativity. Our aim was to further characterize the immunohistochemical profile
of medullary carcinoma, with particular emphasis on intestinal markers. Paraffin 
blocks from 16 cases of medullary carcinoma and 33 cases of poorly differentiated
colonic carcinoma were retrieved, and tissue microarrays were constructed and
stained with an immunohistochemical panel including CDX2, CK7, CK20, p53,
intestinal trefoil factor 3, chromogranin, synaptophysin, MLH-1, MUC-1, MUC-2,
and calretinin. A significantly higher proportion of medullary carcinomas, as
opposed to poorly differentiated colonic carcinomas, showed loss of staining for 
MLH-1 and for the intestinal transcription factor CDX2, in accordance with
previous studies. MLH-1 staining was present in only 21% of medullary carcinoma
cases compared with 60% of the poorly differentiated colonic carcinoma cases (P =
.02), whereas CDX2 was positive in 19% of medullary carcinomas and 55% of poorly 
differentiated colonic carcinomas (P = .03). Interestingly, calretinin staining
was strongly positive in 73% of medullary carcinomas compared to only 12% of
poorly differentiated colonic carcinomas (P < .0001). Evidence of intestinal
differentiation by MUC-1, MUC-2, and TFF-3 staining was seen in 67%, 60%, and 53%
of the medullary carcinomas, respectively. These 3 markers were frequently
positive in many of the CDX2-negative medullary carcinoma cases. Medullary
carcinoma of the colon retains a significant degree of intestinal differentiation
as evidenced by its high percentage of staining for MUC-1, MUC-2, and TFF-3.
Calretinin, MLH-1, and CDX2 may help to differentiate medullary carcinoma from
poorly differentiated colonic carcinoma of the colon.

PMCID: PMC2657293
PMID: 18992917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mutat Res. 2009 Jan 15;660(1-2):12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.001. Epub
2008 Oct 15.

Colon tumor mutations and epigenetic changes associated with genetic
polymorphism: insight into disease pathways.

Slattery ML(1), Wolff RK, Curtin K, Fitzpatrick F, Herrick J, Potter JD, Caan BJ,
Samowitz WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Variation in genes associated with serum levels of proteins may be useful for
examining specific disease pathways. Using data from a large study of colon
cancer, we examine genetic variants in insulin, inflammation, estrogen,
metabolizing enzymes, and energy homeostasis genes to explore associations with
microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG Island methylator phenotype (CIMP),
mutations of p53 in exons 5 through 8, and mutations in codons 12 and 13 of
Ki-ras. Insulin-related genes were associated with CIMP-positive and MSI tumors, 
with the strongest associations among aspirin users. The Fok1 vitamin D receptor 
(VDR) polymorphism was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors; the
Poly A and CDX2 VDR polymorphisms were associated only with Ki-ras-mutated
tumors. NAT2 was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors but not with
MSI tumors. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with p53 mutated
tumors. Most associations varied by recent aspirin/NSAID use: IL6 rs1800796 and
rs1800795 polymorphisms were associated inversely with tumor mutations in the
presence of aspirin/NSAIDs; POMC significantly reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated
tumors when aspirin/NSAIDs were not used; the TCF7L2 rs7903146 was associated
with reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated tumors in the presence of aspirin and
increased risk in the absence of aspirin. These data, although exploratory,
identify specific tumor subsets that may be associated with specific
exposures/polymorphism combinations. The important modifying effects of
aspirin/NSAIDs on associations with genetic polymorphisms reinforce the
underlying role of inflammation in the etiology of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2907671
PMID: 18992263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(1):124-5. doi: 10.1080/00365520802530846.

CDX2 expression is induced by Helicobacter pylori in AGS cells.

Barros R, Marcos N, Reis CA, De Luca A, David L, Almeida R.

Comment on
    Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008 Aug;43(8):915-21.

PMID: 18991163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Dec 10;314(20):3712-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.10.004. Epub
2008 Oct 21.

KLF4 regulation in intestinal epithelial cell maturation.

Flandez M(1), Guilmeau S, Blache P, Augenlicht LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, 111 East 210th St. Bronx, NY 10467, USA. mflandez@montefiore.org

The Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) transcription factor suppresses tumorigenesis in
gastrointestinal epithelium. Thus, its expression is decreased in gastric and
colon cancers. Moreover, KLF4 regulates both differentiation and growth that is
likely fundamental to its tumor suppressor activity. We dissected the expression 
of Klf4 in the normal mouse intestinal epithelium along the crypt-villus and
cephalo-caudal axes. Klf4 reached its highest level in differentiated cells of
the villus, with levels in the duodenum>jejunum>ileum, in inverse relation to the
representation of goblet cells in these regions, the lineage previously linked to
KLF4. In parallel, in vitro studies using HT29cl.16E and Caco2 colon cancer cell 
lines clarified that KLF4 increased coincident with differentiation along both
the goblet and absorptive cell lineages, respectively, and that KLF4 levels also 
increased during differentiation induced by the short chain fatty acid butyrate, 
independently of cell fate. Moreover, we determined that lower levels of KLF4
expression in the proliferative compartment of the intestinal epithelium are
regulated by the transcription factors TCF4 and SOX9, an effector and a target,
respectively, of beta-catenin/Tcf signaling, and independently of CDX2. Thus,
reduced levels of KLF4 tumor suppressor activity in colon tumors may be driven by
elevated beta-catenin/Tcf signaling.

PMCID: PMC2652355
PMID: 18977346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):227-34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070920. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Glial cells missing homologue 1 is induced in differentiating equine chorionic
girdle trophoblast cells.

de Mestre AM(1), Miller D, Roberson MS, Liford J, Chizmar LC, McLaughlin KE,
Antczak DF.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health and Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
ademestre@rvc.ac.uk

The objective of this study was to identify transcription factors associated with
differentiation of the chorionic girdle, the invasive form of equine trophoblast.
The expression patterns of five transcription factors were determined on a panel 
of conceptus tissues from early horse pregnancy. Tissues from Days 15 through 46 
were tested. Eomesodermin (EOMES), glial cells missing homologue 1 (GCM1), heart 
and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (HAND1), caudal type homeobox
2 (CDX2), and distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3) were detected in horse trophoblast,
but the expression patterns for these genes varied. EOMES had the most restricted
distribution, while DLX3 CDX2, and HAND1 were widely expressed. GCM1 seemed to
increase in the developing chorionic girdle, and this was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR assays. GCM1 expression preceded a striking increase in
expression of equine chorionic gonadotropin beta (CGB) in the chorionic girdle,
and binding sites for GCM1 were discovered in the promoter region of the CGB
gene. GCM1, CGB, and CGA mRNA were expressed preferentially in binucleate cells
as opposed to uninucleate cells of the chorionic girdle. Based on these findings,
it is likely that GCM1 has a role in differentiation and function of the invasive
trophoblast of the equine chorionic girdle and endometrial cups. The equine
binucleate chorionic girdle (CG) secreting trophoblast shares molecular,
morphological, and functional characteristics with human syncytiotrophoblast and 
represents a model for studies of human placental function.

PMCID: PMC2804814
PMID: 18971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003451. Epub 2008 Oct 20.

Contrasting expression of keratins in mouse and human embryonic stem cells.

Maurer J(1), Nelson B, Ceceña G, Bajpai R, Mercola M, Terskikh A, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

RNA expression data reveals that human embryonic stem (hES) cells differ from
mouse ES (mES) cells in the expression of RNAs for keratin intermediate filament 
proteins. These differences were confirmed at the cellular and protein level and 
may reflect a fundamental difference in the epithelial nature of embryonic stem
cells derived from mouse and human blastocysts. Mouse ES cells express very low
levels of the simple epithelial keratins K8, K18 and K19. By contrast hES cells
express moderate levels of the RNAs for these intermediate filament proteins as
do mouse stem cells derived from the mouse epiblast. Expression of K8 and K18
RNAs are correlated with increased c-Jun RNA expression in both mouse and human
ES cell cultures. However, decreasing K8 and K18 expression associated with
differentiation to neuronal progenitor cells is correlated with increasing
expression of the Snai2 (Slug) transcriptional repression and not decreased Jun
expression. Increasing K7 expression is correlated with increased CDX2 and
decreased Oct4 RNA expression associated with the formation of trophoblast
derivatives by hES cells. Our study supports the view that hES cells are more
similar to mouse epiblast cells than mouse ES cells and is consistent with the
epithelial nature of hES cells. Keratin intermediate filament expression in hES
cells may modulate sensitivity to death receptor mediated apoptosis and stress.

PMCID: PMC2565505
PMID: 18941637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003478. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

A computational model for understanding stem cell, trophectoderm and endoderm
lineage determination.

Chickarmane V(1), Peterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have associated the transcription factors, Oct4, Sox2 
and Nanog as parts of a self-regulating network which is responsible for
maintaining embryonic stem cell properties: self renewal and pluripotency. In
addition, mutual antagonism between two of these and other master regulators have
been shown to regulate lineage determination. In particular, an excess of Cdx2
over Oct4 determines the trophectoderm lineage whereas an excess of Gata-6 over
Nanog determines differentiation into the endoderm lineage. Also,
under/over-expression studies of the master regulator Oct4 have revealed that
some self-renewal/pluripotency as well as differentiation genes are expressed in 
a biphasic manner with respect to the concentration of Oct4.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We construct a dynamical model of a minimalistic 
network, extracted from ChIP-on-chip and microarray data as well as literature
studies. The model is based upon differential equations and makes two plausible
assumptions; activation of Gata-6 by Oct4 and repression of Nanog by an
Oct4-Gata-6 heterodimer. With these assumptions, the results of simulations
successfully describe the biphasic behavior as well as lineage commitment. The
model also predicts that reprogramming the network from a differentiated state,
in particular the endoderm state, into a stem cell state, is best achieved by
over-expressing Nanog, rather than by suppression of differentiation genes such
as Gata-6.
CONCLUSIONS: The computational model provides a mechanistic understanding of how 
different lineages arise from the dynamics of the underlying regulatory network. 
It provides a framework to explore strategies of reprogramming a cell from a
differentiated state to a stem cell state through directed perturbations. Such an
approach is highly relevant to regenerative medicine since it allows for a rapid 
search over the host of possibilities for reprogramming to a stem cell state.

PMCID: PMC2566811
PMID: 18941526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008 Jan;43(1):25-33.

Quantitative analysis of the effect of Helicobacter pylori on the expressions of 
SOX2, CDX2, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, TFF1, TFF2, and TFF3 mRNAs in human gastric
carcinoma cells.

Matsuda K(1), Yamauchi K, Matsumoto T, Sano K, Yamaoka Y, Ota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Hospital, Asahi,
Matsumoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the phenotypic characters of carcinoma cells and the
response of gastric epithelial cells to Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection
using the gastric carcinoma cell lines.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was used to assess the effect of H. pylori infection on mRNA levels of
transcription factors (SOX2 and CDX2), mucin core proteins (MUC2, MUC5AC, and
MUC6), and trefoil factor family peptides (TFF) (TFF1, TFF2, and TFF3) in gastric
carcinoma cells (AGS, MKN45, and KATO III cells). H. pylori ATCC 43504 and its
isogenic cag pathogenicity island (PAI) deleted mutant were used.
RESULTS: These cell lines expressed mixed gastric and intestinal phenotypes. The 
intestinal phenotype predominated in AGS cells and gastric phenotypes in MKN45
and KATO III cells. In all three cell lines, H. pylori infection inhibited SOX2
mRNA expression, but induced the three TFFs mRNAs. In AGS cells, H. pylori
induced cag PAI-dependent mRNA expression of CDX2, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6. mRNA
expressions of CDX2, MUC5AC, and MUC6 were inhibited in KATO III cells, whereas
MUC2 mRNA expression was unchanged. In MKN45 cells, H. pylori induced the three
MUCs mRNAs but inhibited CDX2 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a useful platform for selecting appropriate cell
lines to model H. pylori-related changes in the gastric epithelium that mirror
the changes seen in vivo. The outcome of H. pylori infection may reflect changes 
in the mucus gel layer caused by altered expression of mucins and TFF peptides.

PMCID: PMC3128253
PMID: 18938748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Dec;295(6):C1499-509. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00232.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Rac1 promotes intestinal epithelial restitution by increasing Ca2+ influx through
interaction with phospholipase C-(gamma)1 after wounding.

Rao JN(1), Liu SV, Zou T, Liu L, Xiao L, Zhang X, Bellavance E, Yuan JX, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Baltimore Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Intestinal mucosal restitution occurs as a consequence of epithelial cell
migration and reseals superficial wounds after injury. This rapid
reepithelialization is mediated in part by a phospholipase C-gamma1
(PLC-gamma1)-induced Ca(2+) signaling, but the exact mechanism underlying such
signaling and its regulation remains elusive. The small GTP-binding protein Rac1 
functions as a pivotal regulator of several signaling networks and plays an
important role in regulating cell motility. The current study tests the
hypothesis that Rac1 modulates intestinal epithelial cell migration after
wounding by altering PLC-gamma1-induced Ca(2+) signaling. Inhibition of Rac1
activity by treatment with its inhibitor NSC-23766 or Rac1 silencing with small
interfering RNA decreased store depletion-induced Ca(2+) influx and suppressed
cell migration during restitution, whereas ectopic overexpression of Rac1
increased Ca(2+) influx and promoted cell migration. Rac1 physically interacted
with PLC-gamma1 and formed Rac1/PLC-gamma1 complex in intestinal epithelial
cells. PLC-gamma1 silencing in cells overexpressing Rac1 prevented stimulation of
store depletion-induced Ca(2+) influx and cell migration after wounding.
Polyamine depletion inhibited expression of both Rac1 and PLC-gamma1, decreased
Rac1/PLC-gamma1 complex levels, reduced Ca(2+) influx, and repressed cell
migration. Overexpression of Rac1 alone failed to rescue Ca(2+) influx after
store depletion and cell migration in polyamine-deficient cells, because it did
not alter PLC-gamma1 levels. These results indicate that Rac1 promotes intestinal
epithelial cell migration after wounding by increasing Ca(2+) influx as a result 
of its interaction with PLC-gamma1.

PMCID: PMC2603560
PMID: 18923057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Virchows Arch. 2008 Dec;453(6):589-98. doi: 10.1007/s00428-008-0682-x. Epub 2008 
Oct 15.

Intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct associated with Clonorchis
sinensis infection.

Jang KT(1), Hong SM, Lee KT, Lee JG, Choi SH, Heo JS, Choi DW, Choi D, Lim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, and Center of Clinical
Research, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Intraductal papillary neoplasm of bile duct (IPNB) is one of the precursor
lesions of cholangiocarcinoma. Although hepatolithiasis has been extensively
studied in its association with IPNBs, there had been no comprehensive study of
IPNBs with Clonorchis sinensis infection. Twelve IPNBs were selected from 20
surgically resected cholangiocarcinomas, positive for C. sinensis tests (60%) and
compared with eight IPNBs, selected from 51 resected cholangiocarcinomas,
negative for C. sinensis tests (16%), by histologic and immunohistochemical
studies of mucin core proteins and cytokeratin panels. The predominant
immuno-phenotype of IPNB cases with Clonorchiasis was pancreatobiliary type
(MUC1+/MUC2-/CDX2-; 9/12 cases), while that of IPNB cases with negative for C.
sinensis was intestinal type (MUC1-/MUC2+/CDX2+; 6/8; p = 0.04). The prevalence
of IPNBs was higher when patients with cholangiocarcinoma had Clonorchiasis.
IPNBs with Clonorchiasis tended to have a more pancreatobiliary phenotype, which 
suggests IPNBs with Clonorchiasis may have a different tumorigenesis pathway from
IPNBs with other etiologies.

PMID: 18855009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009 Feb;13(2):212-22. doi: 10.1007/s11605-008-0720-7. Epub 
2008 Oct 15.

Bile acid alone, or in combination with acid, induces CDX2 expression through
activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).

Avissar NE(1), Toia L, Hu Y, Watson TJ, Jones C, Raymond DP, Matousek A, Peters
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood
Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. nelly_avissar@urmc.rochester.edu

OBJECTIVES: Bile acids and acid are implicated in the development of Barrett's
esophagus. Evidence suggests that Barrett's esophagus intestinal metaplasia may
occur via induction of caudal homeobox gene 2 (CDX2). We hypothesized that
induction of CDX2 by bile acids may be due to ligand-dependent transactivation of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
METHODS: Human mucosal epithelial cells (SEG-1) were treated for 0 to 24 h with
up to 300 microM deoxycholic acid (DCA) at pH 7 or 5 with or without (w/wo)
antibodies against EGFR ligand-binding site (Mab528, 3-5 mug/ml). Treatment with 
100 ng/ml EGF served as control. CDX2 mRNA expression was determined by real-time
polymerase chain reaction. EGFR activation was analyzed by Westerns of
phosphorylated EGFR tyrosines.
RESULTS: Acid (pH 5) increased the induction of CDX2 mRNA expression caused by
DCA. CDX2 mRNA induction was markedly reduced by EGFR blockade with Mab528. Each 
treatment (pH 5, DCA or pH 5 plus DCA) activated the EGFR on all tyrosines tested
but in different time courses. Phosphorylation by DCA was inhibited by Mab528.
Activation of EGFR by DCA at pH 5 resulted in EGFR degradation, while that by DCA
alone did not.
CONCLUSION: Thus, CDX2 induction by DCA w/wo acid occurs through ligand-dependent
transactivation of the EGFR. The variations in EGFR degradation pattern with DCA 
or DCA at pH 5 indicate differential transactivation pathways. The molecular
pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus may occur via bile-stimulated cell signaling 
through the EGFR.

PMID: 18854960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jan;30(1):122-30. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn227. Epub 2008 Oct 
8.

Induction of intestinalization in human esophageal keratinocytes is a multistep
process.

Kong J(1), Nakagawa H, Isariyawongse BK, Funakoshi S, Silberg DG, Rustgi AK,
Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Barrett's esophagus (BE) is the replacement of normal squamous esophageal mucosa 
with an intestinalized columnar epithelium. The molecular mechanisms underlying
its development are not understood. Cdx2 is an intestine-specific transcription
factor that is ectopically expressed in BE, but its role in this process is
unclear. Herein, we describe a novel cell culture model for BE.
Retroviral-mediated Cdx2 expression in immortalized human esophageal
keratinocytes [EPC-human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)] could
transiently be established but not maintained and was associated with a reduction
in cell proliferation. Coexpression of cyclin D1, but not a dominant-negative
p53, rescued proliferation in the Cdx2-expressing cells. Cdx2 expression in the
EPC-hTERT.D1 cells decreased cell proliferation but did not induce
intestinalization. We investigated for other treatments to enhance
intestinalization and found that acidic culture conditions uniformly killed
EPC-hTERT.D1.Cdx2 cells. However, treatment with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-AzaC)
to demethylate epigenetically silenced genes did appear to be tolerated. Multiple
Cdx2 target genes, markers of intestinal differentiation and markers of BE, were 
induced by this 5-AzaC treatment. More interestingly, the expression level of
several of these genes was enhanced only in the EPC-hTERT.D1-Cdx2 cells treated
with 5-AzaC. Two of these, SLC26a3/DRA (downregulated in adenoma) and Na+/H+
exchanger 2 (NHE2), were not previously known to be elevated in BE; however, we
confirmed their elevation in BE tissue samples. 5-AzaC treatment also induced
cell senescence, even at low doses. We conclude that ectopic proliferation
signals, alterations in epigenetic gene regulation and the inhibition of tumor
suppressor mechanisms are required for Cdx2-mediated intestinalization of human
esophageal keratinocytes in BE.

PMCID: PMC2722140
PMID: 18845559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Virchows Arch. 2008 Nov;453(5):521-7. doi: 10.1007/s00428-008-0680-z. Epub 2008
Oct 9.

Aberrant expression of an "intestinal marker" Cdx2 in pyloric gland adenoma of
the gallbladder.

Wani Y(1), Notohara K, Fujisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki, Okayama,
Japan. yw7144@kchnet.or.jp

The aim of this study was to survey Cdx2 expression in pyloric gland adenoma
(PGA) of the gallbladder. We reviewed 29 PGA cases, ten (34.4%) and seven (24.1%)
of which showed intestinal metaplasia (IM) and squamous morule (SM),
respectively. The immunostaining for Cdx2, beta-catenin, MUC5AC, MUC2, MUC6, and 
M-GGMC-1 was performed and scored (0 = negative, 1+ = <10%, 2+ = 10% to <30%, 3+ 
= 30% to <50%, 4+ = 50% to <70%, 5+ = 70-100%). Although its scores were
relatively low (1+ or 2+), Cdx2 was frequently expressed in 27 cases (93.1%). Not
only goblet and/or Paneth cells were positive but also non-IM cells in PGAs, as
opposed to the lack of staining in the background mucosa. Cdx2 scores were not
correlated with those of IM (p = 0.485) and MUC2 (p = 0.868). Of note, Cdx2 was
positive in foci of SM in all seven cases, and there was a significant difference
in Cdx2 scores between PGAs with and without SM. Furthermore, the p value of
scores between Cdx2 and beta-catenin was 0.051, and both mean labeling indices
(LIs) were correlated (r = 0.736). With Cdx2, higher morular LIs than glandular
LIs were observed (p = 0.001). Finally, we concluded that aberrant Cdx2
expression in PGAs is closely associated with nuclear beta-catenin expression and
SM in contrast with IM.

PMID: 18843504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;10(11):1280-90. doi: 10.1038/ncb1786. Epub 2008 Oct 5.

Epigenetic restriction of embryonic cell lineage fate by methylation of Elf5.

Ng RK(1), Dean W, Dawson C, Lucifero D, Madeja Z, Reik W, Hemberger M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Mouse ES cells can differentiate into all three germ layers of the embryo but are
generally excluded from the trophoblast lineage. Here we show that ES cells
deficient in DNA methylation can differentiate efficiently into trophoblast
derivatives. In a genome-wide screen we identified the transcription factor Elf5 
as methylated and repressed in ES cells, and hypomethylated and expressed in TS
and methylation-deficient ES cells. Elf5 creates a positive-feedback loop with
the TS cell determinants Cdx2 and Eomes that is restricted to the trophoblast
lineage by epigenetic regulation of Elf5. Importantly, the late-acting function
of Elf5 allows initial plasticity and regulation in the early blastocyst. Thus,
Elf5 functions as a gatekeeper, downstream of initial lineage determination, to
reinforce commitment to the trophoblast lineage or to abort this pathway in
epiblast cells. This epigenetic restriction of cell lineage fate provides a
molecular mechanism for Waddington's concept of canalization of developmental
pathways.

PMCID: PMC2635539
PMID: 18836439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Oct;132(10):1546-7author reply 1547. doi:
10.1043/1543-2165(2008)132[1546c:HVOIUC]2.0.CO;2.

Histologic variants of infiltrating urothelial carcinoma.

Vardar E.

Comment on
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Aug;131(8):1244-56.

PMID: 18834203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genes Dev. 2008 Oct 1;22(19):2692-706. doi: 10.1101/gad.486108.

Role of Cdx2 and cell polarity in cell allocation and specification of
trophectoderm and inner cell mass in the mouse embryo.

Jedrusik A(1), Parfitt DE, Guo G, Skamagki M, Grabarek JB, Johnson MH, Robson P, 
Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, Cambridge CB2 1QN, United 
Kingdom.

Genesis of the trophectoderm and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages occurs in two
stages. It is initiated via asymmetric divisions of eight- and 16-cell
blastomeres that allocate cells to inner and outer positions, each with different
developmental fates. Outside cells become committed to the trophectoderm at the
blastocyst stage through Cdx2 activity, but here we show that Cdx2 can also act
earlier to influence cell allocation. Increasing Cdx2 levels in individual
blastomeres promotes symmetric divisions, thereby allocating more cells to the
trophectoderm, whereas reducing Cdx2 promotes asymmetric divisions and
consequently contribution to the ICM. Furthermore, both Cdx2 mRNA and protein
levels are heterogeneous at the eight-cell stage. This heterogeneity depends on
cell origin and has developmental consequences. Cdx2 expression is minimal in
cells with unrestricted developmental potential that contribute preferentially to
the ICM and is maximal in cells with reduced potential that contribute more to
the trophectoderm. Finally, we describe a mutually reinforcing relationship
between cellular polarity and Cdx2: Cdx2 influences cell polarity by
up-regulating aPKC, but cell polarity also influences Cdx2 through asymmetric
distribution of Cdx2 mRNA in polarized blastomeres. Thus, divisions generating
inside and outside cells are truly asymmetric with respect to cell fate
instructions. These two interacting effects ensure the generation of a stable
outer epithelium by the blastocyst stage.

PMCID: PMC2559904
PMID: 18832072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Feb;33(2):186-93. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31817d7ff4.

Pyloric gland adenoma: an entity distinct from gastric foveolar type adenoma.

Chen ZM(1), Scudiere JR, Abraham SC, Montgomery E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21231-2410,
USA.

Pyloric gland adenoma (PGA) is a rare neoplasm demonstrating gastric epithelial
differentiation. In this series, we studied 41 PGAs from 36 patients. We compared
them to 28 gastric foveolar type gastric adenomas (GTAs) from 25 patients. PGAs
occurred in an older population with a mean age of 73 compared with 48 in GTAs
(P<0.001). There was a significant female predominance, particularly for gastric 
PGAs. Morphologically, PGAs were characterized by closely packed pyloric
gland-type tubules with a monolayer of cuboidal to low columnar epithelial cells 
containing round nuclei and pale to eosinophilic cytoplasm with a ground glass
appearance. The cells lacked an apical mucin cap, a feature distinct from GTAs.
An immunohistochemical panel of mucin core peptides (MUCs) and CDX2 was performed
on a subset of the lesions. All PGAs expressed MUC6 with coexpression of MUC5AC, 
whereas GTAs expressed predominantly MUC5AC without MUC6. Both lesions lacked
CDX2 and MUC2 except in areas of intestinal metaplasia (IM) found in some PGAs.
Histologic features consistent with conventional dysplasia were found in 26
(63.4%) PGAs. Using a 2-tier grading system, 5 (12.2%) cases demonstrated
low-grade dysplasia whereas 21 (51.2%) cases showed high-grade dysplasia
including 5 (12.2%) cases with an associated intramucosal or more deeply invasive
adenocarcinoma. This was significantly different from GTAs; all cases showed only
low-grade dysplasia (P<0.001). In addition, 60% of gastric PGAs were associated
with IM in the surrounding mucosa and 40% of lesions arose in a background of
autoimmune gastritis, whereas these 2 conditions were only associated with 1 case
(3%) of GTA. In summary, PGA is a distinct entity. Despite its bland histologic
appearance, it is much more likely to be accompanied by background IM and
autoimmune gastritis and can evolve into invasive adenocarcinoma displaying
pyloric gland differentiation.

PMID: 18830123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Dec;10(4):495-502. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0030.

BMP4 induces primitive endoderm but not trophectoderm in monkey embryonic stem
cells.

Kobayashi M(1), Takada T, Takahashi K, Noda Y, Torii R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

Monkey embryonic stem (ES) cells share similar characteristics to human ES cells 
and provide a primate model of allotransplantation, which allows to validate
efficacy and safety of cell transplantation therapy in regenerative medicine.
Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) is known to promote trophoblast
differentiation in human ES cells in contrast to mouse ES cells where BMP4
synergistically maintains self-renewal with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF),
which represents a significant difference in signal transduction of self-renewal 
and differentiation between murine and human ES cells. As the similarity of the
differentiation mechanism between monkey and human ES cells is of critical
importance for their use as a primate model system, we investigated whether BMP4 
induces trophoblast differentiation in monkey ES cells. Interestingly, BMP4 did
not induce trophoblast differentiation, but instead induced primitive endoderm
differentiation. Prominent downregulation of Sox2, which plays a pivotal role not
only in pluripotency but also placenta development, was observed in cells treated
with BMP4. In addition, upregulation of Hand1, Cdx2, and chorionic gonadotropin
beta (CG-beta), which are markers of trophoblast, was not observed. In contrast, 
BMP4 induced significant upregulation of Gata6, Gata4, and LamininB1, suggesting 
differentiation into the primitive endoderm, visceral endoderm, and parietal
endoderm, respectively. The threshold of BMP4 activity was estimated as about 10 
ng/mL. These findings suggest that BMP4 induced differentiation into the
primitive endoderm lineage but not into trophoblast in monkey ES cells.

PMID: 18823266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Sep;6(9):1478-90. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2161.

Repression of the desmocollin 2 gene expression in human colon cancer cells is
relieved by the homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2.

Funakoshi S(1), Ezaki T, Kong J, Guo RJ, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Desmosomes are intracellular junctions that provide strong cell-cell adhesion in 
epithelia and cardiac muscle. Their disruption causes several human diseases and 
contributes to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition observed in cancer.
Desmocollin 2 (DSC2) is a cadherin superfamily member and a critical component of
desmosomes found in intestinal epithelium. However, the mechanism regulating DSC2
gene expression in intestinal cells is not known. Cdx1 and Cdx2 are homeodomain
transcription factors that regulate intestine-specific gene expression. Cdx
expression in the past has been associated with the induction of desmosomes. We
now show that the DSC2 gene is a transcriptional target for Cdx1 and Cdx2. Colon 
cancer cell lines retaining Cdx2 expression typically express DSC2. Restoration
of Cdx expression in Colo 205 cells induced DSC2 mRNA and protein and the
formation of desmosomes. The 5'-flanking region of the DSC2 promoter contains two
consensus Cdx-binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that Cdx1
and Cdx2 bind these sites in vitro, and chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed
Cdx2 binding in vivo. DSC2 promoter truncations established that these regions
are Cdx responsive. The truncations also identify a region of the promoter in
which potent transcriptional repressors act. This repressor activity is relieved 
by Cdx binding. We conclude that the homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and
Cdx2 regulate DSC2 gene expression in intestinal epithelia by reversing the
actions of a transcriptional repressor. The regulation of desmosomal junctions by
Cdx contributes to normal intestinal epithelial columnar morphology and likely
antagonizes the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition necessary for the metastasis
of colon cancer cells in humans.

PMID: 18819935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer. 2008 Nov 1;113(9):2398-407. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23867.

Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms and the risk of cutaneous melanoma: a systematic
review and meta-analysis.

Mocellin S(1), Nitti D.

Author information: 
(1)Meta-analysis Unit, Department of Oncological and Surgical Sciences,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. simone.mocellin@unipd.it

It has been hypothesized that polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene 
affect the risk of developing melanoma. However, results often are conflicting,
and no meta-analysis has been performed to date on published data. Six studies
(cases, 2152; controls, 2410) that investigated the association between 5 VDR
polymorphisms (TaqI, FokI, BsmI, EcoRV, and Cdx2) and the risk of melanoma were
retrieved and analyzed. The model-free approach was applied to meta-analyze these
molecular association studies. Available data suggested a significant association
between the BsmI VDR polymorphism and melanoma risk (pooled odds ratio [OR],
1.30; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.11-1.53; P= .002; heterogeneity Cochran Q
test, P> .1), and the population-attributable risk was 9.2%. In contrast, the
FokI polymorphism did not appear to be associated with such risk (OR, 1.09; 95%
CI, 0.99-1.21; P= .07; heterogeneity Cochran Q test, P> .1). For the TaqI and the
EcoRV polymorphisms, significant between-study heterogeneity did not support
genotype data pooling. Only 1 study investigated the Cdx2 variant, and the
findings were negative. Current evidence is in favor of an association between 1 
VDR gene polymorphism (BsmI) and the risk of developing melanoma. The current
findings prompt further investigation on this subject and indirectly support the 
hypothesis that sun exposure may have an antimelanoma effect through activation
of the vitamin D system.

PMID: 18816636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1665-75. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.07.024.
Epub 2008 Jul 31.

Intestinal differentiation in zebrafish requires Cdx1b, a functional equivalent
of mammalian Cdx2.

Flores MV(1), Hall CJ, Davidson AJ, Singh PP, Mahagaonkar AA, Zon LI, Crosier KE,
Crosier PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine & Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, The 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The ParaHox transcription factor Cdx2 is an essential
determinant of intestinal phenotype in mammals throughout development,
influencing gut function, homeostasis, and epithelial barrier integrity. Cdx2
expression demarcates the zones of intestinal stem cell proliferation in the
adult gut, with deregulated expression implicated in intestinal metaplasia and
cancer. However, in vivo analysis of these prospective roles has been limited
because inactivation of Cdx2 in mice leads to preimplantation embryonic
lethality. We used the zebrafish, a valuable model for studying gut development, 
to generate a system to further understanding of the role of Cdx2 in normal
intestinal function and in disease states.
METHODS: We isolated and characterized the zebrafish cdx1b ortholog and analyzed 
its function by antisense morpholino gene knockdown.
RESULTS: We showed that zebrafish Cdx1b replaces the role of Cdx2 in gut
development. Evolutionary studies have indicated that the zebrafish cdx2 loci
were lost following the genome-wide duplication event that occurred in teleosts. 
Zebrafish Cdx1b is expressed exclusively in the developing intestine during late 
embryogenesis and regulates intestinal cell proliferation and terminal
differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: This work established an in vivo system to explore further the
activity of Cdx2 in the gut and its impact on processes such as inflammation and 
cancer.

PMID: 18804112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2008 Jan 1;1(5):457-60.

Invasive micropapillary carcinoma of the sigmoid colon: distinct morphology and
aggressive behavior.

Wen P(1), Xu Y, Frankel WL, Shen R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Internal Medicine, Ohio State University Medical
Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

We report a case of invasive micropapillary carcinoma of the sigmoid colon in a
72-year-old female with anemia and abdominal pain. Grossly, the tumor
demonstrated a deeply invasive, ulcerated fungating mass. Microscopically, the
carcinoma was predominantly composed of micropapillae with reversed cell
polarity, abundant neutrophils, and surrounded by clear spaces. Multifocal
lymphovascular invasion was present with extensive lymph node metastasis.
Immunohistochemically, the carcinoma cells were positive for CDX2, CK20 and
monoclonal carcinoembryonic antigen. They were negative for CK7. The
stroma-facing surface of the micropapillae was positive for CD10 and villin,
confirming the inside-out growth pattern characteristic of micropapillary
carcinoma. Work-up for distance metastasis was negative. The patient was alive
and well 1.5 years after sigmoidectomy and postoperative chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2480571
PMID: 18787620  [PubMed]


138. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Jan;17(1):8-11. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318174f012.

Immunoprofile of adenocarcinomas of the endometrium, endocervix, and ovary with
mucinous differentiation.

Park KJ(1), Bramlage MP, Ellenson LH, Pirog EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. parkk@mskcc.org

Primary mucinous tumors of the female genital tract have morphologic features
similar to primary gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas, and distinguishing these
malignancies may be extremely difficult. The purpose of this study was to
characterize the immunostaining patterns of tumors of the female genital tract
that show mucinous differentiation using cytokeratin 7 (CK7), CK20, and CDX2 and 
to evaluate the usefulness of these markers in differentiating these tumors from 
gastrointestinal tract adenocarcinomas and also from each other. A total of 64
cases were collected, including adenocarcinomas of the ovary (n=13), endocervix
(n=16), endometrium (n=34), and vagina (n=1), all of which showed predominant
mucinous differentiation. Intestinal mucinous differentiation was present in 11
of the cases (6 endocervical, 4 ovarian, and 1 vaginal adenocarcinoma). All
tumors were at least focally positive for CK7 with the exception of 3 cases. The 
majority of tumors were negative for CK20 and CDX2. However, 25% of endocervical,
24% of ovarian, and 3% of endometrial adenocarcinomas were positive for CDX2,
CK20, or both. The positivity for CDX2 and CK20 correlated with intestinal
differentiation: 73% of all intestinal mucinous adenocarcinomas and 4% of all
Müllerian mucinous adenocarcinomas showed positivity for the hindgut markers. In 
70% of the tumors positive for CK20/CDX2, the intensity of CK7 stain was stronger
than the intensity of either CK20 or CDX2 stain. In conclusion, immunostaining
for CK7/CK20/CDX2 is helpful in distinguishing Müllerian subtype of mucinous
gynecologic tumors from lower gastrointestinal tract malignancies. In gynecologic
mucinous tumors with intestinal differentiation, the overlap of staining
positivity may be a limiting factor. However, a dominant CK7 staining pattern was
observed.

PMID: 18776815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dig Dis Sci. 2009 May;54(5):996-1002. doi: 10.1007/s10620-008-0459-8. Epub 2008
Aug 27.

Alterations of gastric homeoprotein expression in Helicobacter pylori infection, 
incisural antralisation, and intestinal metaplasia.

Zhu S(1), Xia HH, Yang Y, Ma J, Chen M, Hu P, Gu Q, Liang Y, Lin H, Wong BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: This study was to determine whether gastric expression of homeoproteins 
is altered in Helicobacter pylori infection, incisural antralisation, and
intestinal metaplasia (IM).
METHODS: Gastric biopsy specimens were taken from 98 patients with non-ulcer
dyspepsia for the detection of H. pylori infection; histological examinations;
immunohistochemical staining of CDX2, PDX1, PAX6, and NKX6.1.
RESULTS: Of the patients, 38 were positive for H. pylori infection, 44 had
antral-type mucosa at the incisura, and 22 had IM in the stomach. At the
incisura, the expression of PDX1, NKX6.1, and PAX6 in cytoplasm compartment was
down-regulated in antral-type mucosa compared with that in the transitional- or
body-type mucosa (all P<0.01). The expression of PDX1, PAX6, and NKX6.1 in
cytoplasm at the incisura was down-regulated in H. pylori-infected patients
compared with that in those without H. pylori infection (all P<0.01). CDX2
expression in whole stomach was up-regulated, but PDX1 expression at the incisura
was down-regulated in patients with IM compared with that in those without IM
(all P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Gastric expression of PDX1, PAX 6, and NKX6.1 is down-regulated in
H. pylori infection and incisural antralisation. CDX2 is up-regulated but PDX1 is
down-regulated in the presence of IM.

PMID: 18754095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Nov;32(11):1608-12. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31816d71c4.

Comprehensive evaluation of CDX2 in invasive cervical adenocarcinomas:
immunopositivity in the absence of overt colorectal morphology.

Sullivan LM(1), Smolkin ME, Frierson HF Jr, Galgano MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

CDX2 is a member of the caudal-related homeobox gene family that is expressed
during the normal development of the intestinal tract. In addition to staining
adenocarcinomas of the alimentary system, studies have demonstrated CDX2
positivity in a percentage of ovarian mucinous and endometrioid tumors,
carcinoids, and some adenocarcinomas of other sites such as the urinary bladder, 
prostate, lung, and pancreas. However, CDX2 immunostaining in cervical
adenocarcinomas has not been examined in detail with comparison to important
clinicopathologic characteristics including histopathologic subtype, tumor stage,
and patient follow-up. In this study of 81 invasive cervical adenocarcinomas, 24 
of the cases (30%) demonstrated nuclear positivity. Ten of the 15 (67%)
endometrioid tumors had positive nuclear staining, compared with 7 of the 33
(21%) endocervical "usual-type" carcinomas, and 7 of the 33 (21%) remaining
subtypes (adenosquamous, glassy cell, clear cell, serous, villoglandular,
enteric). The frequency of nuclear staining for the endometrioid subtype was
significantly different compared with that for the endocervical and other
subtypes (P=0.003). Some cases showed granular cytoplasmic staining with or
without corresponding nuclear positivity. Positive nuclear or cytoplasmic
staining for CDX2 did not correlate with disease stage or patient outcome. Our
results indicate that cervical adenocarcinomas can show nuclear immunopositivity 
for CDX2 even in the absence of overt morphologic features of colorectal
differentiation. The frequency and pattern of CDX2 staining in the more common
histologic subtypes of cervical adenocarcinoma (endocervical usual-type and
endometrioid) is parallel to that which is seen for adenocarcinomas of the upper 
gastrointestinal tract and pancreaticobiliary system.

PMID: 18753946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Histopathology. 2008 Aug;53(2):156-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2008.03083.x.

Morules in endometrioid proliferations of the uterus and ovary consistently
express the intestinal transcription factor CDX2.

Houghton O(1), Connolly LE, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Northern
Ireland, UK.

Comment in
    Histopathology. 2009 Mar;54(4):495-7.

AIMS: To undertake an immunohistochemical analysis of squamous elements in
endometrioid proliferations of the uterus and ovary and to compare the
immunophenotype of typical squamous elements and so-called squamous morules.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cases of uterine or ovarian endometrioid glandular lesions
with squamous elements were stained with CDX2, beta-catenin, oestrogen receptor
(ER), CD10, p63 and high-molecular-weight cytokeratin LP34. Thirteen cases had
typical squamous elements and 18 cases morules. Morules typically exhibited
diffuse nuclear CDX2 and beta-catenin immunoreactivity and were positive for CD10
and LP34. They were usually ER- and p63-. In contrast, typical squamous elements 
were usually positive for ER, CD10, p63 and LP34. They were usually CDX2- or
focally positive and exhibited no nuclear immunoreactivity for beta-catenin. Ten 
endometrioid carcinomas not exhibiting squamous differentiation were
immunoreactive for CDX2; one was focally positive. Electron microscopy in two
ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinomas with extensive morular differentiation
showed that the morules exhibited epithelial features, but no overt evidence of
squamous differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Typical squamous elements and morules have an overlapping but
differing immunophenotype. Morules exhibit no firm immunohistochemical or
ultrastructural evidence of squamous differentiation, although immature squamous 
differentiation cannot be excluded. Nuclear beta-catenin positivity is in keeping
with the observation that endometrioid glandular lesions with morules are often
associated with beta-catenin gene mutation. The explanation for diffuse nuclear
positivity with the intestinal transcription factor CDX2 in morules is not clear,
but may be a result of overexpression of nuclear beta-catenin. We suggest that
the term morular metaplasia is used instead of squamous morules.

PMID: 18752499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Nutr. 2008 Sep;138(9):1652-7.

Arginine stimulates cdx2-transformed intestinal epithelial cell migration via a
mechanism requiring both nitric oxide and phosphorylation of p70 S6 kinase.

Rhoads JM(1), Liu Y, Niu X, Surendran S, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA. j.marc.rhoads@uth.tmc.edu

In intestinal cells, arginine (Arg) is 1 of the 2 most potent amino acid
activators of p70(s6k), a key regulator of 5'- terminal oligopyrimidine mRNA
translation, a necessary condition for increased cell migration. To investigate
the mechanism of response to Arg, we used the rat crypt cell line
cdx2-transformed IEC-6 cells (cdx2-IEC) and measured cell migration,
immunocytochemical analysis of p70(s6k) activation in response to Arg, and
production of nitric oxide (NO). When treated with Arg, cdx2-IEC increased in
phosphorylation on Thr-389 of p70(s6k) (pp70(s6k)) compared with control (P <
0.01). Phospho-Thr-421/Ser-424-p70(s6k) was located in the nucleus shortly after 
Arg treatment. Arg enhanced pp70(s6k), cell migration (55% wound coverage), and
NO production. In comparison, the branched-chain amino acid leucine (Leu)
activated pp70(s6k), was a weaker stimulator of migration (23% coverage), and did
not increase NO. A total of 25 micromol/L DETA-NONOate (DETA/NO) did not
significantly enhance phosphorylation of p70(s6k) but enhanced the rate of cell
migration by approximately 25%. Wound coverage with Leu plus DETA/NO (25
micromol/L) was greater than coverage with DETA/NO alone (P < 0.01). These and
our previous studies lead to a model in which Arg must stimulate both pp70(s6k)
(in the nucleus) and NO release to enhance intestinal epithelial cell migration, 
which may be relevant to diseases that involve intestinal villous injury.

PMID: 18716165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Clin Immunol. 2009 Mar;29(2):196-204. doi: 10.1007/s10875-008-9234-z. Epub 2008
Aug 20.

5' regulatory and 3' untranslated region polymorphisms of vitamin D receptor gene
in south Indian HIV and HIV-TB patients.

Alagarasu K(1), Selvaraj P, Swaminathan S, Narendran G, Narayanan PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tuberculosis Research Center, Indian Council of
Medical Research, Chennai, India.

INTRODUCTION: Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms in the 5' regulatory
region (Cdx2 and A-1012G), coding region (FokI), and 3' untranslated region (UTR;
BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI) were studied to find out whether these polymorphisms are
associated with susceptibility to or protection against HIV-1 and development of 
tuberculosis (TB) in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1-infected patients.
STUDY SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The study was carried out in 131 HIV patients without
TB (HIV+ TB-) and 113 HIV patients with TB (HIV+ TB+; includes 82 patients with
pulmonary TB (HIV+ PTB+) and 31 with extra pulmonary TB), 108 HIV-negative
pulmonary TB patients (HIV- PTB+), and 146 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Among the 5' regulatory and coding region polymorphisms, significantly
increased frequency of G/A genotype of Cdx-2 was observed in HIV+ TB- group
compared to controls (p = 0.012, odds ratio (OR) 1.89 95% confidence interval
(CI) 1.14-3.15). In the 3' UTR genotypes, a decreased frequency of b/b genotype
of BsmI in total HIV patients (p = 0.014, OR 0.54 95% CI 0.32-0.89) and increased
frequencies of A/A genotype of ApaI in HIV+ TB+ patients (p = 0.041, OR 1.77 95% 
CI 1.02-3.06) and t/t genotype of TaqI in HIV+ PTB+ patients (p = 0.05, OR 2.32
95% CI 0.99-5.46) were observed compared to controls. Haplotype analysis revealed
significantly increased frequencies of 3' UTR haplotype B-A-t in HIV+ TB+ and
HIV+ PTB+ groups (Pc = 0.030, OR 1.75 95% CI 1.14-2.66) and decreased frequencies
of b-A-T haplotype in total HIV patients (Pc = 0.012, OR 0.46 95% CI 0.27-0.77), 
HIV+ TB- (p = 0.031 OR 0.48 95% CI 0.25-0.89), and HIV+ PTB+ groups (Pc = 0.04,
OR 0.47 95% CI 0.23-0.89) compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that VDR gene 3' UTR haplotype b-A-T may be
associated with protection against HIV infection while B-A-t haplotype might be
associated with susceptibility to development of TB in HIV-1-infected patients.

PMID: 18712587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Arch Surg. 2008 Aug;143(8):807. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.143.8.807-a.

Notice of duplicate publication: "pathogenesis of Barrett esophagus: deoxycholic 
acid up-regulates goblet-specific gene MUC2 in concert with CDX2 in human
esophageal cells" (Arch Surg. 2007;142 [6]:540-545).

Freischlag JA.

Comment on
    J Gastrointest Surg. 2007 Jul;11(7):827-34.
    Arch Surg. 2007 Jun;142(6):540-4; discussion 544-5.

PMID: 18711046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dig Dis Sci. 2009 Mar;54(3):614-20. doi: 10.1007/s10620-008-0389-5. Epub 2008 Aug
16.

Re-evaluation of histogenesis of gastric carcinomas: a comparative
histopathological study between Helicobacter pylori-negative and H.
pylori-positive cases.

Kakinoki R(1), Kushima R, Matsubara A, Saito Y, Okabe H, Fujiyama Y, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science,
Tsukinowa-cho, Seta, Otsu, Shiga, 520-2192, Japan.

Comment in
    Endoscopy. 2010 Jan;42(1):38-41.

We histopathologically re-evaluated the histogenesis of gastric carcinomas from
comparative studies between Helicobacter pylori-positive and H. pylori-negative
cases using the gastritis score from the Updated Sydney System. The incidence of 
H. pylori-negative gastric carcinomas was 3.11% (12/386); they are likely to
develop in the fundic gland mucosa, and show a gastric phenotype by mucin
immunohistochemistry. Even in cases of completely gastric and predominantly
gastric phenotypes, CDX2 protein was expressed in most cases (90.9% of pT1 and
100% of pT2-3), indicating a possibility that intestinalization of carcinoma
cells occurs independently of the background mucosa. Regarding the degree of
gastritis of background mucosa surrounding 143 H. pylori-positive
differentiated-type adenocarcinomas, the mean score ranged from 1.497 to 1.713.
Our data support the hypothesis that intestinal metaplasia is not a precancerous 
but a paracancerous lesion, and most gastric adenocarcinomas develop in mildly to
moderately atrophic mucosa with H. pylori-infection, i.e., ongoing atrophy.

PMID: 18709553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Oct;295(4):G748-59. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00560.2007. Epub 2008 Aug 14.

CaSR stimulates secretion of Wnt5a from colonic myofibroblasts to stimulate CDX2 
and sucrase-isomaltase using Ror2 on intestinal epithelia.

Pacheco II(1), Macleod RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Queen's University, Ontario, Canada.

To understand whether extracellular calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) expression on
colonic myofibroblast cells (18Co) contributed to epithelial homeostasis, we
activated the CaSR with 5 mM Ca(2+), screened by RT-PCR Wnt family members, and
measured their secretion. Transcripts for Wnt 1, 2, 2b, 3a, 4, and 7a were either
absent or unchanged whereas Wnt3 decreased and Wnt5a increased. We assessed Wnt5a
secretion by Western blot. High Ca(2+) (5 mM) substantially increased Wnt5a
secretion; small interfering RNA (siRNA) against the CaSR reduced this to
constitutive amounts. Expression of Wnt5a plasmid but not Wnt1 or Wnt3a increased
caudal homeodomain factor CDX2 transcripts and protein in HT-29 adenocarcinoma
cells. Wnt5a increased activity of a sucrase-isomaltase (SI) promoter in
Caco-2BBE cells. Wnt5a protein stimulation of CDX2 transcripts and protein and SI
reporter were increased by overexpression of wild-type Ror2, a Wnt5a receptor,
and reduced with siRNA against Ror2. CaSR activation of HT-29 cells increased
Ror2 protein expression. Ror2 protein was expressed in mouse jejunum from crypt
base to villus tip and in the colon on surface epithelia. Our results show that
activation of a G protein-coupled receptor, the CaSR, stimulates secretion of
Wnt5a from myofibroblasts. Stimulation of epithelia by the CaSR increased the
expression of a receptor for Wnt5a, the tyrosine kinase Ror2, suggesting
existence of a unique paracrine relationship for CDX2 homoeostasis in the
intestine and revealing new contributions of CaSR-activated myofibroblasts to
intestinal stem cell niche microenvironments.

PMID: 18703641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Surg Pathol. 2009 Aug;17(4):340-2. doi: 10.1177/1066896908322551. Epub 2008
Aug 12.

Colonic adenoma with squamous metaplasia.

Pantanowitz L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baystate Medical Center, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Springfield, Massachusetts 01199, USA. Liron.pantanowitz@bhs.org

Squamous metaplasia arising within colon adenomas is a rare occurrence, with a
0.4% incidence noted predominantly in elderly males. A case of squamous
metaplasia arising in a tubulovillous adenoma of the cecum, associated with
adenocarcinoma, is described. Squamous metaplasia was immunoreactive for
beta-catenin, but negative for cytokeratin 20, CDX2, p63, estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor, p16, and human papilloma virus. Squamous differentiation
may serve as a precursor lesion for squamous neoplasia of the colorectum.

PMID: 18701516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Apr;18(3):435-45. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0234.

Derivation and characterization of two genetically unique human embryonic stem
cell lines on in-house-derived human feeders.

Kumar N(1), Hinduja I, Nagvenkar P, Pillai L, Zaveri K, Mukadam L, Telang J,
Desai S, Mangoli V, Mangoli R, Padgaonkar S, Kaur G, Puri C, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health, Mumbai, India.

This study describes the successful derivation of two human embryonic stem (hES) 
cell lines using 53 frozen and 18 fresh "slow-growing" surplus embryos, obtained 
from collaborating in vitro fertilization clinics, on in-house-derived human
feeder layers. The cell lines have been derived by whole embryo culture followed 
by further expansion of manually dissected inner cell mass from the surrounding
trophoectodermal cells. Immunocytochemical localization of cell surface markers
like SSEA-3, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81, staining for alkaline phosphatase
and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of
pluripotency state markers viz. Oct-4, TERT, Nanog, Rex1, and Sox2 indicate that 
both cell lines possess typical features of embryonic stem cells. Both cell lines
exhibit normal female karyotype after 40 passages in culture. Pluripotent nature 
of the cell lines was confirmed both in vitro and in vivo. Embryoid bodies,
formed in suspension culture, express markers for all three lineages as indicated
by RT-PCR analysis for SOX 1 (ectoderm), HAND 1 (mesoderm), AFP (endoderm), and
CDX2 (trophoectoderm). Teratoma formed in vivo in severe combined immunodeficient
mice revealed cells of all the three embryonic germ layers. Comparison of the STR
and human leukocyte antigen profiles of these cell lines with the existing human 
ES cell lines indicate that they are genetically distinct. The addition of our
hES cell lines contributes usefully to the globally restricted repertoire of
human ES cell lines.

PMID: 18699724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Semin Oncol. 2008 Aug;35(4):365-77. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2008.04.007.

Cytogenetic, molecular genetic, and clinical characteristics of acute myeloid
leukemia with a complex karyotype.

Mrózek K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1228, 
USA. krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu <krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu>

Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring three or more acquired
chromosome aberrations in the absence of the prognostically favorable
t(8;21)(q22;q22), inv(16)(p13q22)/t(6;16)(p13;q22), and t(15;17)(q22;q21)
aberrations form a separate category - AML with a complex karyotype. They
constitute 10% to 12% of all AML patents, with the incidence of complex
karyotypes increasing with the more advanced age. Recent studies using
molecular-cytogenetic techniques (spectral karyotyping [SKY], multiplex
fluorescence in situ hybridization [M-FISH]) and array comparative genomic
hybridization (a-CGH) considerably improved characterization of previously
unidentified, partially identified, or cryptic chromosome aberrations, and
allowed precise delineation of genomic imbalances. The emerging nonrandom pattern
of abnormalities includes relative paucity, but not absence, of balanced
rearrangements (translocations, insertions, or inversions), predominance of
aberrations leading to loss of chromosome material (monosomies, deletions, and
unbalanced translocations) that involve, in decreasing order, chromosome arms 5q,
17p, 7q, 18q, 16q, 17q, 12p, 20q, 18p, and 3p, and the presence of recurrent,
albeit less frequent and often hidden (in marker chromosomes and unbalanced
translocations) aberrations leading to overrepresentation of segments from 8q,
11q, 21q, 22q, 1p, 9p, and 13q. Several candidate genes have been identified as
targets of genomic losses, for example, TP53, CTNNA1, NF1, ETV6, and TCF4, and
amplifications, for example, ERG, ETS2, APP, ETS1, FLI1, MLL, DDX6, GAB2, MYC,
TRIB1, and CDX2. Treatment outcomes of complex karyotype patients receiving
chemotherapy are very poor. They can be improved to some extent by allogeneic
stem cell transplantation in younger patients. It is hoped that better
understanding of genomic alterations will result in identification of novel
therapeutic targets and improved prognosis in patients with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC3640813
PMID: 18692687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 1;322(1):133-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.019. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

Blastomeres of the mouse embryo lose totipotency after the fifth cleavage
division: expression of Cdx2 and Oct4 and developmental potential of inner and
outer blastomeres of 16- and 32-cell embryos.

Suwinska A(1), Czolowska R, Ozdzenski W, Tarkowski AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Institute of Zoology, Faculty of Biology, University
of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Poland.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):308.

Sixteen inner or outer blastomeres from 16-cell embryos and 32 inner or outer
blastomeres from 32-cell embryos (nascent blastocysts) were reaggregated and
cultured in vitro. In 24 h old blastocysts developed from blastomeres derived
from 16-cell embryos the expression of Cdx2 protein was upregulated in outer
cells (new trophectoderm) of the inner cells-derived aggregates and downregulated
in inner cells (new inner cell mass) of the external cells-derived aggregates.
After transfer to pseudopregnant recipients blastocysts originating from both
inner and outer blastomeres of 16-cell embryo developed into normal, fertile
mice, but the implantation rate of embryos formed from inner cell aggregates was 
lower. The aggregates of external blastomeres derived from 32 cell embryo usually
formed trophoblastic vesicles accompanied by vacuolated cells. In contrast, the
aggregates of inner blastomeres quickly compacted but cavitation was delayed.
Although in the latter embryos the Cdx2 protein appeared in the new trophectoderm
within 24 h of in vitro culture, these embryos formed only very small outgrowths 
of Troma1-positive giant trophoblastic cells and none of these embryos was able
to implant in recipient females. In separate experiment we have produced normal
and fertile mice from 16- and 32-cell embryos that were first disaggregated, and 
then the sister outer and inner blastomeres were reaggregated at random. In
blastocysts developed from aggregates, within 24 h of in vitro culture, the
majority of inner and outer blastomeres located themselves in their original
position (internally and externally), which implies that in these embryos
development was regulated mainly by cell sorting.

PMID: 18692038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Aug;132(8):1295-301. doi:
10.1043/1543-2165(2008)132[1295:PIRTRA]2.0.CO;2.

Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor-negative tumors represent a more aggressive
type of adenocarcinomas of distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction.

Gologan A(1), Acquafondata M, Dhir R, Sepulveda AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, McGill University, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

CONTEXT: Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIgR) expression has been found in
gastric mucosa and gastric cancers, but it is not known whether PIgR expression
is related to background intestinal metaplasia nor the patterns of PIgR
expression in tumors arising in the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal (GE)
junction.
OBJECTIVES: To identify clinicopathologic features of tumors associated with PIgR
expression and to determine whether PIgR expression is associated with intestinal
differentiation of tumors and intestinal metaplasia in background mucosa in 3
groups of upper gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas. These groups are (1) gastric
adenocarcinomas, (2) adenocarcinomas of the distal esophagus and GE junction with
background intestinal metaplasia, and (3) adenocarcinomas of the distal esophagus
and GE junction without background intestinal metaplasia.
DESIGN: Expression of PIgR and CDX2 in nonneoplastic mucosa, intestinal
metaplasia, and adenocarcinomas was examined by immunohistochemistry in 42 cases:
14 gastric and 28 from the distal esophagus and GE junction, including 13 with
esophageal or GE junction intestinal metaplasia.
RESULTS: PIgR and CDX2 were expressed in all cases of intestinal metaplasia. PIgR
expression was positive in 40% of group 3 versus 77% of group 2 and 71% of
gastric adenocarcinomas (P = .06), and the expression of CDX2 was similar in all 
tumor groups (80%-83%). Metastatic-positive lymph nodes were more frequent in
PIgR-negative tumors (94% vs 58%, P = .01).
CONCLUSIONS: PIgR is uniformly expressed in intestinal metaplasia and in a
subgroup of adenocarcinomas of the distal esophagus, GE junction, and stomach.
Esophageal and GE junction adenocarcinomas that do not express PIgR show more
frequent lymph node metastasis, suggesting that lack of expression of PIgR
identifies a subgroup of more aggressive adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 18684029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2009 Mar-Apr;12(2):116-26. doi: 10.2350/08-03-0436.1. Epub
2008 Nov 13.

Pediatric columnar lined esophagus vs Barrett's esophagus: is it the time for a
consensus definition.

Cohen MC(1), Ashok D, Gell M, Bishop J, Walker J, Thomson M, Al-Adnani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust,
Western Bank, Sheffield, UK. Marta.Cohen@sch.nhs.uk

We describe the clinical, endoscopic, and histological features of all cases of
Barrett's esophagus (BE) diagnosed at our institution between 2000 and 2007
following the criteria of the British Society of Gastroenterology. This society
defines BE as a segment of columnar metaplasia (CLO) (whether intestinalized or
not) of any length, visible endoscopically above the gastroesophageal junction
and confirmed histologically. The diagnosis was challenged after immunostaining
for Cdx2 (marker of intestinal differentiation). Information was collected with
respect to age, symptoms, treatment, and endoscopic and histological features.
Twelve children (10 males and 2 females) with a median age of 11.7 (2 to 17)
years had been diagnosed with CLO-BE. Histology confirmed BE in 31 of 38
endoscopies. The initial diagnosis was reviewed according to Cdx2 results in 10
of 12 patients: Cdx2 strongly expressed in 4 cases with intestinal metaplasia
(the diagnosis of BE was maintained); was negative in 4 other patients with "CLO"
mucosa (reviewed diagnosis was that of expansion of the gastric cardia into the
distal esophagus); and 2 patients had occasional Cdx2-positive cells showing
cardia-type mucosa with goblet cells (early BE?). The estimated prevalence of
CLO-BE in the pediatric population of South Yorkshire (United Kingdom) is
0.0024%, 0.8% in children referred for endoscopy and 5.5% in the children with
reflux esophagitis. Characterization of the BE and confirmation of intestinal
differentiation may have prognostic implications that can impact the surveillance
program. Our results showed that intestinal differentiation as demonstrated with 
Cdx2 was only seen if goblet cells were present. A consensus definition and
further studies to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the
development of BE at this age are needed.

PMID: 18684017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Aug;83(2):243-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.07.003.

ATM gene mutations result in both recessive and dominant expression phenotypes of
genes and microRNAs.

Smirnov DA(1), Cheung VG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Nov;83(5):657.

The defining characteristic of recessive disorders is the absence of disease in
heterozygous carriers of the mutant alleles. However, it has been recognized that
recessive carriers may differ from noncarriers in some phenotypes. Here, we
studied ataxia telangiectasia (AT), a classical recessive disorder caused by
mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. We compared the gene
and microRNA expression phenotypes of noncarriers, AT carriers who have one copy 
of the ATM mutations, and AT patients with two copies of ATM mutations. We found 
that some phenotypes are more similar between noncarriers and AT carriers
compared to AT patients, as expected for a recessive disorder. However, for some 
expression phenotypes, AT carriers are more similar to the patients than to the
noncarriers. Analysis of one of these expression phenotypes, TNFSF4 level,
allowed us to uncover a regulatory pathway where ATM regulates TNFSF4 expression 
through MIRN125B (also known as miR-125b or miR125b) [corrected] In AT carriers
and AT patients, this pathway is disrupted. As a result, the level of MIRN125B is
lower and the level of its target gene, TNFSF4, is higher than in noncarriers. A 
decreased level of MIRN125B is associated with breast cancer, and an elevated
level of TNFSF4 is associated with atherosclerosis. Thus, our findings provide a 
mechanistic suggestion for the increased risk of breast cancer and heart disease 
in AT carriers. By integrating molecular and computational analyses of gene and
microRNA expression, we show the complex consequences of a human gene mutation.

PMCID: PMC2495067
PMID: 18674748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Sep;32(9):1373-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31816b18c1.

Primary ovarian mucinous tumors with signet ring cells: report of 3 cases with
discussion of so-called primary Krukenberg tumor.

McCluggage WG(1), Young RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Northern
Ireland. glenn.mccluggage@belfasttrust.hscni.net

The distinction between a primary ovarian mucinous carcinoma or even a borderline
mucinous tumor and a metastatic mucinous carcinoma may be difficult. A
constellation of clinical, gross pathologic and morphologic features is used in
this distinction. One of the most important morphologic features suggesting a
metastatic mucinous carcinoma in the ovary is the presence of signet ring cells; 
these are considered rare in primary ovarian mucinous tumors. In this study, we
report 3 primary ovarian mucinous tumors with a component of signet ring cells.
The tumors arose in patients aged 27, 55, and 60, were unilateral, confined to
the ovary and stage IA. They ranged from 9 to 27 cm; 1 was grossly a
multiloculated cystic lesion and 2 were cystic and solid. In one case, the
neoplasm had the architecture of a mucinous adenofibroma but had frankly
malignant cells lining glands and forming solid aggregates of cells. A second
tumor also had the background of an adenofibroma. The third was mostly a mucinous
cystadenoma. In one case, endometriosis was present in the same ovary;
teratomatous elements were not identified in any case. Immunohistochemistry,
performed in 2 cases, showed both to be diffusely positive with CK7 and CA19.9,
including the signet ring cells. CK20 was positive in both cases (1 focal; 1
diffuse). Estrogen receptor and CA125 were diffusely positive and
carcinoembryonic antigen and CDX2 focally positive in 1 case. Chromogranin and
synaptophysin were negative. Investigations to exclude a gastrointestinal
neoplasm in 2 cases were negative. Features favoring a primary rather than a
metastatic neoplasm are unilateral tumor, low stage, background of adenofibroma
or cystadenoma, associated endometriosis in 1 case and an absence of features
which are characteristic of secondary mucinous carcinomas in the ovary, such as
surface tumor deposits, a nodular growth pattern, and lymphovascular permeation. 
Immunohistochemistry is of limited value because of overlapping immunophenotype
between a primary ovarian mucinous tumor and a metastasis from the stomach,
pancreas, biliary tree, appendix, or colorectum, the most likely primary sites
for a secondary exhibiting similar features. Our study illustrates that signet
ring cells occur rarely in a primary ovarian mucinous tumor; even when
conspicuous the features differ from those of the usual Krukenberg tumor. At
least some cases of so-called primary Krukenberg tumor may be similar to our
cases. However, the designation primary Krukenberg tumor should not be used as,
apart from the signet ring cells, a resemblance to a "true" Krukenberg tumor of
the secondary type is limited. The tumors should be classified according to the
underlying background neoplasm with a notation concerning the signet ring cell
component.

PMID: 18670351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Surgery. 2008 Aug;144(2):168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2008.03.010. Epub 2008 May
9.

Defining the transcriptional regulation of the intestinal sodium-glucose
cotransporter using RNA-interference mediated gene silencing.

Balakrishnan A(1), Stearns AT, Rhoads DB, Ashley SW, Tavakkolizadeh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: The sodium glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) is responsible for all
active intestinal glucose uptake. Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 alpha and beta
(HNF 1 alpha and HNF 1 beta) activate the SGLT1 promoter, whereas GATA-binding
protein 5 (GATA-5) and caudal-type homeobox protein 2 (CDX2) regulate
transcription of other intestinal genes. We investigated SGLT1 regulation by
these transcription factors using promoter studies and RNA interference.
METHODS: Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were transiently cotransfected with an
SGLT1-luciferase promoter construct and combinations of expression vectors for
HNF 1 alpha, HNF 1 beta, CDX2, and GATA-5. Caco-2 cells were stably transfected
with knockdown vectors for either HNF 1 alpha or HNF 1 beta. mRNA levels of HNF 1
alpha, HNF 1 beta, and SGLT1 were determined using quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR).
RESULTS: HNF 1 alpha, GATA-5, and HNF 1 beta significantly activated the SGLT1
promoter (P < .05). Cotransfection of GATA-5 with HNF 1 alpha had an additive
effect, whereas HNF 1 beta and CDX2 antagonized HNF 1 alpha and GATA-5. SGLT1
expression was significantly reduced in HNF 1 alpha or HNF 1 beta knockdowns (P <
.001). HNF alpha knockdown significantly reduced HNF 1 beta expression and vice
versa (P < .005).
CONCLUSIONS: HNF 1 alpha and HNF 1 beta are important transcription factors for
endogenous SGLT1 expression by cultured enterocytes. GATA-5 and CDX2 also
regulate SGLT1 promoter activity and show cooperativity with the HNF1s. We,
therefore, propose a multifactorial model for SGLT1 regulation, with interactions
between HNF1, GATA-5, and CDX2 modulating intestinal glucose absorption.

PMCID: PMC2577164
PMID: 18656622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Gastroenterology. 2008 Oct;135(4):1238-1247, 1247.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.06.045. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Multiple regulatory regions control the complex expression pattern of the mouse
Cdx2 homeobox gene.

Benahmed F(1), Gross I, Gaunt SJ, Beck F, Jehan F, Domon-Dell C, Martin E,
Kedinger M, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Cdx2 homeobox gene exerts multiple functions including
trophectoderm specification, antero-posterior patterning, and determination of
intestinal identity. The aim of this study was to map genomic regions that
regulate the transcription of Cdx2, with a particular interest in the gut.
METHODS: Genomic fragments covering 13 kilobase (kb) of the mouse Cdx2 locus were
analyzed in transgenic mice and in cell assays.
RESULTS: No fragment was active in the trophectoderm. Fragments containing the
first intron and extending up to -5-kb upstream of the transcription start site
became active posteriorly at gastrulation and then inactive at midgestation in
every tissue including the endoderm. Specific persistence of activity in the
intestinal endoderm/epithelium beyond midgestation requires extending the genomic
fragment up to -9 kb. We identified a 250-base pair segment around -8.5-kb
binding and responding to endodermal factors, with a stimulatory effect exerted
synergistically by HNF4alpha, GATA6, Tcf4, and beta-catenin. These factors were
able to activate endogenous expression of Cdx2 in nonintestinal Hela cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple regulatory regions control the complex developmental
pattern of Cdx2, including far upstream sequences required for the persistence of
gene expression specifically in the gut epithelium throughout life. Cooperation
between HNF4alpha, GATA6, beta-catenin, and Tcf4 contributes to the
intestine-specific expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18655789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 Aug;130(2):265-73. doi: 10.1309/JKJU9VE1P4WXVCPG.

The distinction of bronchogenic cyst from metastatic testicular teratoma: a light
microscopic and immunohistochemical study.

Roma A(1), Varsegi M, Magi-Galluzzi C, Ulbright T, Zhou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Bronchogenic cyst (BC), a rare developmental abnormality of the primitive foregut
and usually found above the diaphragm, can occur in the retroperitoneum and other
unusual locations where distinction from metastatic teratoma is essential. We
studied 22 BCs and 34 teratomas metastatic to the retroperitoneum in men. Of 22
BCs, 17 (77%) showed well or moderate architectural differentiation toward normal
tracheobronchial structures, whereas none of the teratomas did. In addition, 20
(91%) of the BCs had respiratory-type epithelium and none had enteric-type
epithelium. Immature elements, atypia, and tumor necrosis were absent in BCs. All
BCs expressed cytokeratin (CK) 7, and none expressed CDX-2 in immunohistochemical
analysis. Teratomas had mixed enteric and respiratory-type epithelium. The
majority of the glands were positive for CK7 (33 [97%]), CK20 (34 [100%]), CDX-2 
(34 [100%]), and thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1 (17 [50%]). Coexpression of
CDX-2 and TTF-1 was found in 11 teratomas (32%) but none of the BCs. BCs can be
reliably distinguished from teratomas based on the gross, histologic, and
immunohistochemical features.

PMID: 18628097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2008 Aug;12(4):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2007.11.001.
Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Cdx2, cytokeratin 20, thyroid transcription factor 1, and prostate-specific
antigen expression in unusual subtypes of prostate cancer.

Leite KR(1), Mitteldorf CA, Srougi M, Dall'oglio MF, Antunes AA, Pontes J Jr,
Camara-Lopes LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgical and Molecular Pathology, Hospital Sirio Libanes, São
Paulo 01308-050, Brazil. katiaramos@uol.com.br

There are some unusual histologic variants of prostate carcinoma, including
mucinous, signet-ring cells, and ductal carcinomas that can metastasize in a
problematic way and simulate lung, colorectal, or bladder primaries. Currently,
antibodies that are organ-specific have been used in the routine surgical
pathology practice. Our aim is to study the profile of expression of Cdx2,
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) in prostate
cancer with unusual histologic finding. Twenty-nine prostate adenocarcinomas with
unusual histologic findings were submitted to immunohistochemistry with
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), CK20, Cdx2, and TTF1 antibodies. There were 7
mucinous, 5 ductal, 2 signet-ring cells, and 15 usual acinar adenocarcinomas with
focal mucinous differentiation. To compare the results with usual acinar
adenocarcinomas, we studied 10 primary and their respective lymph node metastases
in a tissue microarray, 2 unusual metastatic adenocarcinomas, and 6 usual acinar 
high-grade carcinomas. For tumors with special histologic finding, Cdx2 was
expressed by 9 (31.0%) mucinous, signet-cell, or with focal mucinous
differentiation. Thyroid transcription factor 1 was moderately positive in
mucinous differentiation areas of 2 (6.9%) adenocarcinomas. Cytokeratin 20 was
expressed by 9 (31.0%) tumors, among them, 3 ductal adenocarcinomas.
Prostate-specific antigen was positive in 28 (96.6%) cases and negative in 1
ductal adenocarcinoma. There was only 1 worrisome ductal adenocarcinoma that was 
strongly CK20 positive and PSA negative. Almost one third of mucinous prostate
carcinomas express Cdx2. Cytokeratin 20 can be positive also in one third of
prostate carcinomas, especially the ductal type. Pathologist should be alert when
evaluating immunohistochemical profiles of unusual histologic findings of
prostate cancer, mostly in distant sites.

PMID: 18620992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2008 Aug;12(4):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2007.10.002.
Epub 2008 Jan 11.

The foamy variant of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Albores-Saavedra J(1), Weimersheimer-Sandoval M, Chable-Montero F,
Montante-Montes de Oca D, Hruban RH, Henson DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Medicas y Nutrición
Salvador Zubirán of Mexico City, Tlalpan 14000, Mexico. alboresjorge@yahoo.com

Foamy gland adenocarcinoma is a variant of pancreatic ductal carcinoma, whose
precursor has not been described. We describe here the morphologic and
immunohistochemical features of the pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) 
lesions associated with invasive foamy pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The staining
properties and morphologic and immunohistochemical features of 3 foamy PanIN
lesions were compared with those of 7 pancreatic foamy gland adenocarcinomas.
Hematoxylin and eosin, Mayer mucicarmine, periodic acid-Schiff, and Alcian blue
stains were available for review in all cases. Immunohistochemical labeling for
cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, carcinoembryonic antigen polyclonal, MUC1, MUC2, CDX2,
p53, and cyclin D1 was performed. The PanIN-1 lesions were found in the
nonneoplastic pancreas and were similar to the PanIN-1 lesions of ordinary
pancreatic ductal carcinoma. The PanIN-2 and -3 lesions were recognized
immediately adjacent to or within the invasive foamy gland carcinoma. In these
lesions, small or markedly dilated ducts were lined by cuboidal and columnar
dysplastic nonfoamy cells and foamy cells. Hobnail cells were present in 2 cases.
The PanIN-1, 2, and 3 lesions and the invasive foamy gland adenocarcinomas
stained with mucicarmine, periodic acid-Schiff, and Alcian blue. The 3 PanIN-2
and -3 lesions and all 7 invasive foamy adenocarcinomas labeled with CK7,
carcinoembryonic antigen polyclonal, and MUC1, whereas only 2 PanIN-2 and -3
lesions and 5 invasive adenocarcinomas showed immunoreactivity for cyclin D1 and 
p53. Three distinctive foamy PanIN lesions were identified within 7 invasive
foamy gland pancreatic adenocarcinomas. The gradual progression of cytological
and architectural abnormalities of the PanIN lesions from PanIN-1 to PanIN-3
excludes neoplastic ductal spread. These foamy PanIN lesions probably represent
cancer precursors.

PMID: 18620991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dig Dis Sci. 2009 Feb;54(2):274-81. doi: 10.1007/s10620-008-0355-2. Epub 2008 Jul
2.

Enhanced expression of resistin-like molecule beta in human colon cancer and its 
clinical significance.

Zheng LD(1), Tong QS, Weng MX, He J, Lv Q, Pu JR, Jiang GS, Cai JB, Liu Y, Hou
XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, Hubei Province, China.

Previous studies have indicated that resistin-like molecule beta (RELM beta), an 
intestinal goblet cell-specific protein, is markedly increased in the intestinal 
tumors of min mice and over-expressed in a human colon cancer cell line. We
hypothesized that RELM beta might be enhanced in human colon cancer. The aim of
this study was to examine the clinical importance of RELM beta expression in
colon cancer patients and to correlate its expression with various
clinicopathological parameters, upstream regulatory molecule expression, tumor
proliferative capacity, and patients' survival. Of the 80 colon cancer patients
studied, 65 (81.25%) tested positive for RELM beta, mainly in the cytoplasm of
colon mucosa. Contrasting sharply with the strongly RELM beta-positive tumors,
normal colon mucous membrane was negative or weakly positive. RELM beta
positivity in colon cancer was correlated with histological grade of
differentiation and lymph node metastasis, but not with age, gender, tumor
location and size, tumor infiltration, Dukes' stage, liver metastasis, and venous
invasion. RELM beta expression was significantly correlated with the expression
of transcription factor CDX-2 (P < 0.01) but not with that of proliferative index
Ki-67 (P > 0.05). The mean postoperative survival time (2.76 years) of RELM
beta-positive patients was significantly longer than that (1.26 years) of RELM
beta-negative patients (P = 0.032). These findings support evidence of the
enhanced RELM beta expression in colon cancer patients and suggest that further
investigation is warranted to explore the role of RELM beta in colon cancer.

PMID: 18594973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mod Pathol. 2008 Nov;21(11):1403-12. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.117. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

Differential diagnostic and functional role of the multi-marker phenotype
CDX2/CK20/CK7 in colorectal cancer stratified by mismatch repair status.

Lugli A(1), Tzankov A, Zlobec I, Terracciano LM.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
alugli@uhbs.ch

The differentiation of colorectal cancer from primary tumors at other sites can
be challenging. Often a panel of immunohistochemical protein markers is needed to
distinguish between these entities. Protein expression differs significantly in
colorectal cancer depending on mismatch repair status and is also heterogeneous
among mismatch repair-proficient or -deficient tumors. The aim of this study was 
to systematically analyze the diagnostic and prognostic role of the commonly used
multi-marker phenotype CK20/CK7/CDX2 on a large series of colorectal cancers
stratified by mismatch repair status. The immunohistochemical analysis of CK20,
CK7 and CDX2 was performed on 1197 mismatch repair-proficient and 223 mismatch
repair-deficient colorectal cancers using a tissue microarray. Multi-marker
combinations of CK20/CK7/CDX2 were explored. Univariate and multivariable
analysis of the markers was evaluated for their association with several
clinico-pathological end points namely T stage, N stage, tumor grade, vascular
invasion, intratumoral lymphocytes and survival. Multi-marker phenotypes with
CK20 and CDX2 negativity were more frequently found in mismatch repair-deficient 
than in mismatch repair-proficient colorectal cancer (19.3 vs 7.5% and 21.6 vs
6.7%, respectively; P<0.001). In both colorectal cancer subsets loss of CK20 was 
associated with higher tumor grade (P<0.001) and with presence of intratumoral
lymphocytes (P<0.001 and P=0.02, respectively). In the proficient mismatch repair
subset CK20 overexpression was an independent adverse prognostic factor (P=0.041)
and CDX2 underexpression was linked to tumor progression. Loss of CDX2 and CK20
is more frequently encountered in mismatch repair-deficient colorectal cancer,
which should be taken into consideration to differentiate between primary and
metastatic colorectal cancer in daily practice. Although associated with lower
tumor grade, CK20 overexpression is an independent adverse prognostic factor in
mismatch repair-proficient colorectal cancer.

PMID: 18587323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):G395-402. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90317.2008. Epub 2008 Jun 26.

Regulatory mechanism governing the diurnal rhythm of intestinal H+/peptide
cotransporter 1 (PEPT1).

Saito H(1), Terada T, Shimakura J, Katsura T, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacy, Kyoto Univ. Hospital, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The intestinal H(+)/peptide cotransporter 1 (PEPT1) plays important roles as a
nutrient and drug transporter. Previously, we reported that rat intestinal PEPT1 
showed a diurnal rhythm and that this rhythm is closely related to the feeding
schedule. Furthermore, we also demonstrated that transcription factors, Sp1,
Cdx2, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-alpha)
contribute to the basal, intestine-specific, and fasting-induced expression of
PEPT1, respectively. In this study, to clarify the molecular mechanism governing 
the diurnal rhythm of PEPT1 expression, we compared expression profiles of these 
transcription factors under two kinds of feeding schedules. The intestinal Sp1
and Cdx2 did not show a circadian accumulation of mRNA or response to the daytime
feeding regimen. Plasma free fatty acids, endogenous PPAR-alpha ligands,
exhibited a robust circadian fluctuation in phase with that of PEPT1. However,
subsequent experiments using PPAR-alpha-null mice revealed the absence of any
association between the circadian rhythm of PEPT1 and PPAR-alpha. We then focused
on the clock genes (Clock, Bmal1, Per1-2, and Cry1) and clock-controlled gene,
albumin D site-binding protein (DBP). A robust and coordinated circadian
expression of the clock genes was observed, and daytime feeding entirely inverted
the phase except for Clock. The expression of DBP was in phase with that of PEPT1
in both groups. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter assays
revealed that DBP has the ability to bind the DBP binding site located in the
distal promoter region of the rat PEPT1 gene and induce the transcriptional
activity. These findings indicate that DBP plays pivotal roles in the circadian
oscillation of PEPT1.

PMID: 18583459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Sep;23(9):1043-7.

Expression of homeodomain protein CDX2 in colorectal adenoma and adenocarcinoma.

Bakaris S(1), Cetinkaya A, Ezberci F, Ekerbicer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology Kahramanmaras Sutcuimam University, School of Medicine
Kahramanmaras, Turkey. sbakaris@yahoo.com

CDX2 is a homeobox domain-containing transcription factor that is important in
the development and differentiation of the intestine. In this study, we examined 
CDX2 expression in normal and neoplastic human colon using a newly isolated
monoclonal antibody. When compared to the intensity observed in adjacent normal
mucosal epithelial cells, strong nuclear staining for CDX2 was observed in 10
(100%) of 10 colonic adenomas, 30 (88.2%) of 34 colorectal adenocarcinomas,
including 17(94.47%) of 18 well-or moderately differentiated tumors and 13(81.2%)
of 16 high-grade tumors. The percentage of CDX2 immunopositive cells was
generally lower in carcinomas than in adenomas (p<0.001) and lower in moderately 
or poorly differentiated tumors than in well-differentiated tumors (p<0.001).
There was an inverse correlation between CDX2 expression and tumor grade, tumor
stage and lymph node metastasis (respectively, p<0.001; p<0.05; p<0.001), but
this was not associated with age, gender, or tumor location and size. These
results indicate that loss of expression of CDX2 protein may play an important
role in the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancers. Down-regulation of CDX2 may
cause dedifferentiation of gastrointestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 18581275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Aug;32(8):1182-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318163a8f8.

Immunohistochemical staining of Reg IV and claudin-18 is useful in the diagnosis 
of gastrointestinal signet ring cell carcinoma.

Sentani K(1), Oue N, Tashiro T, Sakamoto N, Nishisaka T, Fukuhara T, Taniyama K, 
Matsuura H, Arihiro K, Ochiai A, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Signet-ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) is a unique subtype of adenocarcinoma that is
characterized by abundant intracellular mucin accumulation and a crescent-shaped 
nucleus displaced toward one end of the cell. Identification of an SRCC's primary
site is important for better planning of patient management because the treatment
and prognosis differs markedly depending on the origin of the SRCC. In the
present study, we analyzed the immunohistochemical characteristics of 94 cases of
SRCC, including 21 cases of gastric SRCC, 16 of colorectal SRCC, 10 of breast
SRCC, and 47 of pulmonary SRCC, with antibodies against Reg IV and claudin-18,
which we previously identified as gastric cancer-related genes. We also tested
known markers cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, MUC2, MUC5AC, caudal-related
homeobox gene 2 (CDX2), thyroid transcription factor-1, mammaglobin, gross cystic
disease fluid protein 15, and estrogen receptor. All 21 cases of gastric SRCC and
16 cases of colorectal SRCC were positive for Reg IV, and the remaining SRCCs
were negative. Eighteen of 21 (86%) gastric SRCCs and 6 of 16 (38%) colorectal
SRCCs were positive for claudin-18, whereas another SRCCs were negative. In
conclusion, Reg IV staining and claudin-18 staining can aid in diagnosis of
gastrointestinal SRCC.

PMID: 18580680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Development. 2008 Aug;135(15):2511-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.015909. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Increased Cdx protein dose effects upon axial patterning in transgenic lines of
mice.

Gaunt SJ(1), Drage D, Trubshaw RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

To investigate the link between Cdx protein concentration and axial patterning in
embryos, we made lines of mice OE1, OE2 and OE4 that overexpress each of the Cdx 
genes Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4, respectively. The lines carry Cdx transgenes under the
transcriptional control of their own promoter/enhancer elements. Transgenic
embryos show Cdx transcription at 8.5 to 8.7 days within normal spatial domains
for Cdx expression (primitive streak/tailbud), yet, overall, they contain
elevated levels of Cdx proteins. Increased doses of Cdx proteins result in
homeotic shifts in vertebral types along most of the vertebral column, with
transformations being most obvious within the cervical region. Most of the shifts
are anterior-to-posterior transformations and the anterior limits of these are
commonly skull/vertebra 1 (v1) for OE1, v1/v2 for OE2 and v7 for OE4. OE embryos 
display anterior shifts in the expression of a Hoxa7/lacZ reporter within neural,
paraxial and lateral plate mesoderm tissues. Hoxa7/lacZ expression commences at
the normal time in OE1 and OE4 embryos. OE2 embryos display a forward shift in
the gradient of Cdx2 protein along the axis, suggesting that a Cdx morphogen
gradient model could account, at least in part, for the homeotic shifts in
vertebral types. OE mice display additional defects: forelimb deficiencies in
OE1, multiple tail axes, vertebral mis-alignments and axial truncations in OE2.

PMID: 18579683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jul 23;582(17):2555-60. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.024. Epub 
2008 Jun 23.

Cdx2 initiates histodifferentiation of the midgut endoderm.

Stringer EJ(1), Pritchard CA, Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Null mutation or haploinsufficiency of Cdx2 results in the development of
heterotopic lesions with a gastric phenotype in the midgut endoderm. Conversely
transgenic expression of Cdx2 in the stomach causes the endoderm to differentiate
into intestinal-type mucosa. We demonstrate that the mesoderm adjacent to
intestinal heterotopic areas expresses stomach specific Barx1 while the
surrounding mesoderm is Barx1 negative. We conclude that the initiation of gut
histodifferentiation lies in the endodermal expression of Cdx2 and that
endodermal/mesodermal cross-talk involving Barx1 with appropriate feedback loops 
results in the development of the postnatal gut phenotype.

PMID: 18577384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 25;3(6):e2476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002476.

Butyrate transcriptionally enhances peptide transporter PepT1 expression and
activity.

Dalmasso G(1), Nguyen HT, Yan Y, Charrier-Hisamuddin L, Sitaraman SV, Merlin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: PepT1, an intestinal epithelial apical di/tripeptide transporter, is 
normally expressed in the small intestine and induced in colon during chronic
inflammation. This study aimed at investigating PepT1 regulation by butyrate, a
short-chain fatty acid produced by commensal bacteria and accumulated inside
inflamed colonocyte.
RESULTS: We found that butyrate treatment of human intestinal epithelial
Caco2-BBE cells increased human PepT1 (hPepT1) promoter activity in a dose- and
time-dependent manner, with maximal activity observed in cells treated with 5 mM 
butyrate for 24 h. Under this condition, hPepT1 promoter activity, mRNA and
protein expression levels were increased as assessed by luciferase assay,
real-time RT-PCR and Western blot, respectively. hPepT1 transport activity was
accordingly increased by approximately 2.5-fold. Butyrate did not alter hPepT1
mRNA half-life indicating that butyrate acts at the transcriptional level.
Molecular analyses revealed that Cdx2 is the most important transcription factor 
for butyrate-induced increase of hPepT1 expression and activity in Caco2-BBE
cells. Butyrate-activated Cdx2 binding to hPepT1 promoter was confirmed by gel
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation. Moreover, Caco2-BBE cells overexpressing
Cdx2 exhibited greater hPepT1 expression level than wild-type cells. Finally,
treatment of mice with 5 mM butyrate added to drinking water for 24 h increased
colonic PepT1 mRNA and protein expression levels, as well as enhanced PepT1
transport activity in colonic apical membranes vesicles.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results demonstrate that butyrate increases PepT1 
expression and activity in colonic epithelial cells, which provides a new
understanding of PepT1 regulation during chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2423477
PMID: 18575574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):G211-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90250.2008. Epub 2008 Jun 12.

Acid, bile, and CDX: the ABCs of making Barrett's metaplasia.

Souza RF(1), Krishnan K, Spechler SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs North Texas Health Care System and
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, USA.
rhonda.souza@utsouthwestern.edu

Barrett's esophagus, a squamous-to-columnar cell metaplasia that develops as a
result of chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), is a risk factor for
esophageal adenocarcinoma. The molecular events underlying the pathogenesis of
Barrett's metaplasia are poorly understood, but recent studies suggest that
interactions among developmental signaling pathways, morphogenetic factors, and
Caudal homeobox (Cdx) genes play key roles. Strong expression of Cdx genes
normally is found in the intestine but not in the esophagus and stomach. When
mice are genetically engineered so that their gastric cells express Cdx, the
stomach develops a metaplastic, intestinal-type epithelium similar to that of
Barrett's esophagus. Exposure to acid and bile has been shown to activate the Cdx
promoter in certain esophageal cell lines, and Cdx expression has been found in
inflamed esophageal squamous epithelium and in the specialized intestinal
metaplasia of Barrett's esophagus. Barrett's metaplasia must be sustained by stem
cells, which might be identified by putative, intestinal stem cell markers like
leucine-rich repeat-containing G protein-coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5) and
doublecortin and CaM kinase-like-1 (DCAMKL-1). Emerging concepts in tumor biology
suggest that Barrett's cancers may develop from growth-promoting mutations in
metaplastic stem cells or their progenitor cell progeny. This report reviews the 
roles of developmental signaling pathways and the Cdx genes in the development of
normal gut epithelia and the potential mechanisms whereby GERD may induce the
esophageal expression of Cdx genes and other morphogenetic factors that mediate
the development of Barrett's metaplasia. The role of stem cells in the
development of metaplasia and in carcinogenesis and the potential for therapies
directed at those stem cells also is addressed.

PMID: 18556417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):921-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.173. Epub 2008 Jun 8.

Ras-MAPK signaling promotes trophectoderm formation from embryonic stem cells and
mouse embryos.

Lu CW(1), Yabuuchi A, Chen L, Viswanathan S, Kim K, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and 
Dana Faber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

In blastocyst chimeras, embryonic stem (ES) cells contribute to embryonic tissues
but not extraembryonic trophectoderm. Conditional activation of HRas1(Q61L) in ES
cells in vitro induces the trophectoderm marker Cdx2 and enables derivation of
trophoblast stem (TS) cell lines that, when injected into blastocysts, chimerize 
placental tissues. Erk2, the downstream effector of Ras-mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signaling, is asymmetrically expressed in the apical membranes of
the 8-cell-stage embryo just before morula compaction. Inhibition of MAPK
signaling in cultured mouse embryos compromises Cdx2 expression, delays
blastocyst development and reduces trophectoderm outgrowth from embryo explants. 
These data show that ectopic Ras activation can divert ES cells toward
extraembryonic trophoblastic fates and implicate Ras-MAPK signaling in promoting 
trophectoderm formation from mouse embryos.

PMCID: PMC2690707
PMID: 18536715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Pharmacol. 2008 Sep;74(3):744-54. doi: 10.1124/mol.108.045500. Epub 2008 Jun 
3.

Novel polymorphic human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2A3: cloning, functional
characterization of enzyme variants, comparative tissue expression, and gene
induction.

Court MH(1), Hazarika S, Krishnaswamy S, Finel M, Williams JA.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative and Molecular Pharmacogenomics Laboratory, Department of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Tufts University, 136 Harrison Ave., 
Boston, MA 02111, USA. michael.court@tufts.edu

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are critical to the detoxification of
numerous drugs, environmental pollutants, and endogenous molecules. However, as
yet not all of the human UGTs have been cloned and characterized. cDNA clones
from the UGT2A3 gene (located on chromosome 4q13) were isolated using pooled
human liver RNA. Approximately 10% of clones contained a c.1489A>G nucleotide
substitution, yielding proteins with a residue 497 alanine (UGT2A3.2) instead of 
a threonine (UGT2A3.1). The allele frequency of this polymorphism (rs13128286)
was 0.13 in a European-American population as determined by direct DNA
sequencing. Of 81 structurally diverse glucuronidation substrates tested, UGT2A3 
expressed by a baculovirus system selectively glucuronidated bile acids,
particularly hyodeoxycholic acid at the 6-hydroxy position. Apparent K(m) values 
of UGT2A3.1 and UGT2A3.2 for hyodeoxycholic acid 6-glucuronidation were 69 +/- 7 
and 44 +/- 12 microM, respectively. Of 29 different extrahepatic tissues
evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction, UGT2A3 mRNA was most highly
expressed in small intestine (160% of liver), colon (78% of liver), and adipose
tissue (91% of liver). An in silico scan of the proximal UGT2A3
promoter/5'-regulatory region identified transcription factor consensus elements 
consistent with tissue-selective expression in liver (HNF1) and intestine (CXD2),
as well as induction by rifampicin (pregnane X receptor). In LS180 human
intestinal cells, rifampicin increased UGT2A3 mRNA by more than 4.5-fold compared
with vehicle, whereas levels were not significantly affected by the
arylhydrocarbon receptor ligand beta-naphthoflavone. This is the first report
establishing UGT2A3 as a functional enzyme, and it represents significant
progress toward the goal of having a complete set of recombinant human UGTs for
comparative functional analyses.

PMCID: PMC2574548
PMID: 18523138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 3;105(22):7756-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708951105. Epub 2008 May 29.

Cdx gene deficiency compromises embryonic hematopoiesis in the mouse.

Wang Y(1), Yabuuchi A, McKinney-Freeman S, Ducharme DM, Ray MK, Chawengsaksophak 
K, Archer TK, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

Cdx genes (Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) encode a family of caudal-related transcription 
factors that mediate anterior-posterior patterning during embryogenesis through
Hox gene regulation. Homologues in the zebrafish have been shown to play key
roles in blood formation. To define the role of Cdx genes during embryonic
hematopoiesis in a mammalian system, we examined the hematopoietic potential of
Cdx-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in vitro and in vivo. Individual 
Cdx-deficient ESCs exhibited impaired embryonic hematopoietic progenitor
formation and altered Hox gene expression, most notably for Cdx2 deficiency. A
more severe hematopoietic defect was observed with compound Cdx deficiency than
loss of function of any single Cdx gene. Reduced hematopoietic progenitor
formation of ESCs deficient in multiple Cdx genes could be rescued by ectopic
expression of Cdx4, concomitant with partially restored Hox gene expression.
These results reveal an essential and partially redundant role for multiple Cdx
genes during embryonic hematopoiesis in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC2409377
PMID: 18511567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Lancet Oncol. 2008 Jun;9(6):596-9. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(08)70151-7.

Carcinoma of unknown primary with a colon-cancer profile-changing paradigm and
emerging definitions.

Varadhachary GR(1), Raber MN, Matamoros A, Abbruzzese JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA. gvaradha@mdanderson.org

Carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP), which accounts for about 3-5% of all new
cancers, is a challenging heterogeneous entity with an unmet research need.
Traditionally, CUP has been managed with broad-spectrum chemotherapy, but with
the increasing availability of sophisticated diagnostic techniques and the
emergence of new treatments that have been shown to be effective in specific
cancers the one-treatment-fits-all approach to CUP might eventually no longer be 
valid. CUP in association with a colon-cancer profile (CCP-CUP) is an example of 
an emerging, specific CUP subset that seems to benefit from a tailored approach. 
CCP-CUP is identified by CK20 and CDX2-positive and CK7-negative
immunohistochemistry and a clinical course consistent with that of patients known
to have metastatic colon cancer. Our findings suggest that patients with CCP-CUP 
derive substantial benefit from the use of specific treatments developed for
colon cancer and larger clinical trials are warranted to more definitely test
this finding. In the era of molecular profiling, we expect that additional work
with CCP-CUP and other CUP subsets will provide attractive tailored treatment
alternatives, with efficacies that exceed the current one-treatment-fits-all
approach.

PMID: 18510991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Hepatol Res. 2008 Oct;38(10):1006-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2008.00361.x. Epub
2008 May 27.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces the aberrant expression of mucus core
protein-2 in non-neoplastic biliary epithelial cells via the upregulation of CDX2
in chronic cholangitis.

Ikeda H(1), Sasaki M, Ohira S, Ishikawa A, Sato Y, Harada K, Zen Y, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

AIM: Chronic cholangitis, such as hepatolithiasis, is frequently associated with 
goblet cell metaplasia and the aberrant expression of mucus core protein-2
(MUC2). In this study, we clarified the role of inflammatory cytokines in the
expression of MUC2 in lining biliary epithelial cells (BEC) in chronic
cholangitis with an emphasis on CDX2, an intestine-specific transcription factor.
METHODS: We used human hepatolithiatic livers and polycystic kidney (PCK) rats,
an animal model of Caroli's disease, and cultured BEC from PCK rats. As a
control, extrahepatic biliary obstruction and histologically normal livers and
Crj:CD rats were used.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemically, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) was
expressed in periductal inflammatory cells and BEC of the affected intrahepatic
bile ducts with an aberrant expression of MUC2 and CDX2 in hepatolithiasis and
the PCK rats. In cultured BEC, TNF-alpha, interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, and
interferon-gamma induced the expression of CDX2 mRNA, though only TNF-alpha
additionally induced the expression of MUC2 mRNA. The expression of CDX2 mRNA and
the MUC2 protein induced in BEC by TNF-alpha were abolished by pretreatment of
nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: The aberrant expression of CDX2 and MUC2 in the affected bile ducts
showing goblet cell metaplasia was closely associated with TNF-alpha expressed in
periductal infiltrating inflammatory cells and BEC. TNF-alpha induced the
expression of CDX2 and MUC2 in cultured BEC. Taken together, it seems likely that
TNF-alpha plays a role in MUC2 expression via CDX2 upregulation in the bile ducts
with chronic cholangitis and goblet cell metaplasia.

PMID: 18507686  [PubMed]


174. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 15;123(4):838-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23570.

Prediction of the immunogenic potential of frameshift-mutated antigens in
microsatellite instable cancer.

Speetjens FM(1), Lauwen MM, Franken KL, Janssen-van Rhijn CM, van Duikeren S,
Bres SA, van de Velde CJ, Melief CJ, Kuppen PJ, van der Burg SH, Morreau H,
Offringa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Microsatellite instable (MSI) cancers express frameshift-mutated antigens, the
C-terminal polypeptides of which are foreign to the immune system. Consequently, 
these antigens constitute a unique pool of tumor-specific antigens that can be
exploited for patient diagnosis and selective, immune-mediated targeting of
cancers. However, other than their sequence, very little is known about the
characteristics of the majority of these proteins. We therefore developed a
methodology for predicting their immunogenic behavior that is based on a
gene-expression system, in which each of the proteins was fused to a short
C-terminal polypeptide comprising two epitopes that can be readily detected by
T-cells and antibodies, respectively. In this manner, accumulation of the
antigens and processing of peptides derived thereof into MHC can be monitored
systematically. The antigens, which accumulate in the cells in which they are
synthesized, are of primary interest for cancer immunotherapy, because peptide
epitopes derived thereof can be presented by dendritic cells in addition to the
tumor cells themselves. As a result, these antigens constitute the best targets
for a coordinated immune response by both CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells, which increases 
the likelihood that tumor-induced immunity would be detectable against these
antigens in cancer patients, as well as the potential value of these antigens as 
components of anticancer vaccines. Our data indicate that, of 15
frameshift-mutated antigens examined in our study, 4 (TGFbetaR2-1, MARCKS-1,
MARCKS-2 and CDX2-2) are of primary interest, and 4 additional antigens (TAF1B-1,
PCNXL2-2, TCF7L2-2 and Baxalpha+1) are of moderate interest for further tumor
immunological research.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18506693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Reproduction. 2008 Jun;135(6):805-13. doi: 10.1530/REP-07-0478.

Development of single mouse blastomeres into blastocysts, outgrowths and the
establishment of embryonic stem cells.

Lorthongpanich C(1), Yang SH, Piotrowska-Nitsche K, Parnpai R, Chan AW.

Author information: 
(1)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Department of Human Genetics and
Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University School of Medicine,
North East Atlanta, Georgia 30329, USA.

Erratum in
    Reproduction. 2008 Aug;136(2):275.

The recently developed technique of establishing embryonic stem (ES) cell lines
from single blastomeres (BTMs) of early mouse and human embryos has created
significant interest in this source of ES cells. However, sister BTMs of an early
embryo might not have equal competence for the development of different lineages 
or the derivation of ES cells. Therefore, single BTMs from two- and four-cell
embryos of outbred mice were individually placed in sequential cultures to
enhance the formation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and the establishment of
embryonic outgrowth. The outgrowths were then used for the derivation of ES cell 
lines. Based on the expression of ICM (Sox2) and trophectoderm (Cdx2) markers, it
was determined that ICM marker was lacking in blastocysts derived from 12% of
BTMs from two-cell stage and 20% from four-cell stage. Four ES cell lines (5.6%; 
4/72) were established ater culture of single BTMs from two-cell embryos, and
their pluripotency was demonstrated by their differentiation into neuronal cell
types. Our results demonstrate that sister BTMs of an early embryo are not
equally competent for ICM marker expression. However, we demonstrated the
feasibility of establishing ES cells from a single BTM of outbred mice.

PMID: 18502895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Oncology. 2007;73(5-6):357-65. doi: 10.1159/000135351. Epub 2008 May 26.

Expression of Cdx2 and claudin-2 in the multistage tissue of gastric
carcinogenesis.

Xin S(1), Huixin C, Benchang S, Aiping B, Jinhui W, Xiaoyan L, Yu WB, Minhu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Key Laboratory of Nephrology of the Ministry
of Education and the Ministry of Health, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun-Yat Sen
University, Guangzhou, SAR, China.

In this paper, we investigated Cdx2 and claudin-2 expression in pathological
paraffin tissues of sinus ventriculi from gastroscopic biopsy to determine the
correlation between the expressions of these 2 genes during gastric
carcinogenesis by immunochemical ABC technique. Altogether, we analyzed 108
chronic superficial gastritis, 55 chronic atrophic gastritis, 109 intestinal-type
metaplasia, 93 dysplasia and 52 gastric intestinal-type adenocarcinoma samples.
Our results indicated that the percentage of Cdx2-positive cases was 0% (0/108)
for chronic superficial gastritis, 0% (0/55) for chronic atrophic gastritis,
90.83% (99/109) for intestinal-type metaplasia, 51.61% (48/93) for dysplasia and 
61.54% (32/52) for gastric intestinal-type adenocarcinoma, primarily expressed in
the cell nucleus and partly in the cytoplasm (p < 0.05); interestingly, the
percentage for the intestine-type metaplasia was markedly high. The percentage of
claudin-2-positive cases was 0% (0/108) for chronic superficial gastritis, 0%
(0/55) for chronic atrophic gastritis, 0% (0/109) for intestinal-type metaplasia,
35.48% (33/93) for dysplasia and 71.15% (37/52) for gastric intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma, primarily in the cell membrane and gradually increased in the
multistage process of gastric carcinogenesis (p < 0.05). Significant correlations
were found between claudin-2 and Cdx2 protein expression in dysplasia and
intestine-type adenocarcinoma (r = 0.112, p < 0.05). Thus, there may be a
correlation between the expression of claudin-2 and Cdx2 in stages of dysplasia
and cancer.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18500171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Pathol. 2008 Aug;215(4):411-20. doi: 10.1002/path.2369.

Key elements of the BMP/SMAD pathway co-localize with CDX2 in intestinal
metaplasia and regulate CDX2 expression in human gastric cell lines.

Barros R(1), Pereira B, Duluc I, Azevedo M, Mendes N, Camilo V, Jacobs RJ, Paulo 
P, Santos-Silva F, van Seuningen I, van den Brink GR, David L, Freund JN, Almeida
R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal.

Helicobacter pylori infection induces intestinal metaplasia of the stomach, a
preneoplastic lesion associated with an increased risk for gastric cancer
development. Intestinal metaplasia is induced by the intestine-specific
transcription factor CDX2 but the mechanisms responsible for this ectopic
expression have never been described. We hypothesized that the BMP/SMAD pathway
has a role in CDX2 regulation, in this context, for the following reasons: (1)
the BMP pathway is crucial for normal intestinal differentiation and (2) there is
an influx of BMP2 and BMP4-producing cells to the stomach upon Helicobacter
pylori infection. We evaluated the expression of key elements of the BMP pathway 
in human stomach specimens with IM. Growth factor treatments, with BMP2 and BMP4,
were performed in cultured cells and a knock-down experiment of SMAD4 was done
using RNAi. We showed overexpression in IM of BMP2/4, BMPR1A, and SMAD4 in 56% of
IM foci, and pSMAD1/5/8 in 100% of IM foci as compared to adjacent mucosa. In
vitro, treatment of AGS cells with BMP2 and BMP4 increased endogenous CDX2
expression as well as the intestinal differentiation markers MUC2 and
LI-cadherin. On the other hand, SMAD4 knock-down led to decreased endogenous
CDX2, MUC2, and LI-cadherin in AGS. Treatment of the SMAD4 knock-down cells had
no influence on CDX2 expression as opposed to wild-type cells. A 9.3 kb CDX2
promoter could be transactivated by SMAD4 and SMAD1 in a cell-dependent manner.
In conclusion, we identified for the first time that the BMP pathway is active in
intestinal metaplasia and that BMP2 and BMP4 regulate CDX2 expression and promote
intestinal differentiation through the canonical signal transducers.

Copyright (c) 2008 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18498120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Pathol. 2008 Jul;39(7):1072-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.07.019. Epub 2008 
May 20.

Aberrant Cdx2 expression in endometrial lesions with squamous differentiation:
important role of Cdx2 in squamous morula formation.

Wani Y(1), Notohara K, Saegusa M, Tsukayama C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kurashiki Central Hospital, Kurashiki, Japan.
yw7144@kchnet.or.jp

Only a few reports have described Cdx2 expression in endometrial lesions of the
uterus. Our aim was to determine whether Cdx2 expression is related to squamous
differentiation in endometrial lesions. Furthermore, we examined whether there is
any correlation between Cdx2 and beta-catenin, a well-known marker of aberrant
nuclear accumulation in endometrial squamous foci secondary to mutation. We
performed immunohistochemical analysis of 225 cases (29 normal endometrium, 28
nonproliferative conditions, 21 polyps, 46 hyperplasias, and 101 endometrioid
carcinomas) that included 72 cases (4 polyps, 16 hyperplasias, and 52 carcinomas)
showing morular or keratinizing squamous differentiation (SD(+)). Normal
endometrium and nonproliferative conditions showed no staining for Cdx2. Whereas 
there was a low rate of Cdx2 positivity in SD(-) polyps (5.9%) and hyperplasias
(10%), all SD(+) lesions expressed Cdx2 (P < .001). Thirty-eight (73%) of the
SD(+) carcinomas were positive for Cdx2, whereas only 6 SD(-) cases (14.0%) were 
positive (P < .001). Furthermore, the larger the number of squamous foci, the
greater the number of Cdx2-positive cells that was found. The labeling indices of
Cdx2 were significantly higher in morular components than in keratinizing or
glandular ones (P < .001). There was a strong correlation of the labeling indices
of Cdx2 and beta-catenin in squamous foci of hyperplasias and carcinomas. Using
immunofluorescence, we confirmed the coexpression of the 2 markers. The Cdx2
protein is expressed frequently in endometrial lesions with squamous
differentiation, especially morular-type differentiation, and correlates strongly
with nuclear beta-catenin expression. These facts suggest that Cdx2 plays an
important role in squamous morula formation.

PMID: 18495206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;14(10):3223-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4894.

VDR and SRD5A2 polymorphisms combine to increase risk for prostate cancer in both
non-Hispanic White and Hispanic White men.

Torkko KC(1), van Bokhoven A, Mai P, Beuten J, Balic I, Byers TE, Hokanson JE,
Norris JM, Barón AE, Lucia MS, Thompson IM, Leach RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. Kathleen.torkko@ucdenver.edu

PURPOSE: Vitamin D and dihydrotestosterone pathways interact to promote the
growth of prostatic tissue. The nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR) moderates the
actions of vitamin D. 5alpha-Reductase type II (SRD5A2) codes for the enzyme that
converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone in the prostate. This study tested
the interactions of VDR (CDX2, FokI) and SRD5A2 (V89L, A49T) polymorphisms, and
their associations with prostate cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: This genetic association study included 932 non-Hispanic
White (NHW) men and 414 Hispanic White (HW) men from South Texas. Cases had
biopsy-confirmed cancer; controls had normal digital rectal exams and serum
prostate-specific antigen levels of <2.5 ng/mL.
RESULTS: Using logistic regression analyses to test associations with prostate
cancer, only the V89L polymorphism (VV genotype compared with LL/LV) in HW men
was statistically significant [odds ratios (OR), 0.64; 95% confidence intervals
(95% CI), 0.41-0.99]. The interaction terms for FokI and V89L in NHW men and CDX2
and V89L in HW men in the logistic model were significant (P = 0.02 and 0.03,
respectively). When stratified by V89L genotype, the FokI polymorphism (TT/TC
versus CC) was significantly associated with prostate cancer in NHW men with the 
V89L VV genotype (FokI OR, 1.53; 95% CI, 1.06-2.23). The CDX2 polymorphism (GG
versus AG/AA) was significantly associated with prostate cancer only in HW men
with the V89L VV genotype (CDX2 OR, 3.16; 95% CI, 1.39-7.19; interaction term P =
0.02).
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that the SRD5A2 V89L VV genotype interacts with 
VDR FokI TT/CT genotypes in NHW men and VDR CDX2 GG genotypes in HW men to
increase the risk for prostate cancer.

PMID: 18483391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. World J Surg Oncol. 2008 May 9;6:47. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-6-47.

Caecal metastasis from breast cancer presenting as intestinal obstruction.

Birla R(1), Mahawar KK, Orizu M, Siddiqui MS, Batra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, University Hospital of Hartlepool, Hartlepool, 
TS24 9AH, UK. rpbirla@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal metastsasis from the breast cancer are rare. We
report a patient who presented with intestinal obstruction due to solitary caecal
metastasis from infiltrating ductal carcinoma of breast. We also review the
available literature briefly.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 72 year old lady with past history of breast cancer
presented with intestinal obstruction due to a caecal mass. She underwent an
emergency right hemicolectomy. The histological examination of the right
hemicolectomy specimen revealed an adenocarcinoma in caecum staining positive for
Cytokeratin 7 and Carcinoembryonic antigen and negative for Cytokeratin 20, CDX2 
and Estrogen receptor. Eight out of 11 mesenteric nodes showed tumour deposits. A
histological diagnosis of metastatic breast carcinoma was given.
CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of
solitary metastasis to caecum from infiltrating ductal carcinoma of breast.
Awareness of this possibility will aid in appropriate management of such
patients.

PMCID: PMC2396163
PMID: 18471290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 1;123(3):586-93. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23536.

Dairy products, polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor gene and colorectal
adenoma recurrence.

Hubner RA(1), Muir KR, Liu JF, Logan RF, Grainge MJ, Houlston RS; Members of
UKCAP Consortium.

Collaborators: Armitage N, Shepherd V, Elliott C, Watmough P, Barratt S, Birch N,
Gibbons A, Campion G, Logan R, Wright N, Patterson J, Scott A, Reynolds J, Walt
R, Martin H, Bisseker B, Hudson N, Hamlyn A, Thomas M, Durdey P, Green K, Roe A, 
Watson A, Johnston K, Babbs C, Shreeve D, Crampton J, Summerton C, Warnes T,
Isaacs P, Rolland M, Shorthouse A, Heatherington E, Hosie K, Bardhan K, Vellacott
K, Hawthorne A, Thompson-Jones H, Stenson R, Watson P, Lawther H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Section of Cancer Genetics, Sutton SM2 5NG,
United Kingdom. richard.hubner@icr.ac.uk

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) activation inhibits proliferation and angiogenesis in
the colorectal epithelium, and inhibits metastasis of colorectal tumors.
Polymorphisms in the VDR gene alter receptor cellular levels and functioning, and
may confer altered susceptibility to colorectal neoplasia. We aimed to
investigate the influence of VDR polymorphisms and dietary factors impacting on
vitamin D metabolism on colorectal adenoma (CRA) recurrence. Data on dietary
intakes of calcium, vitamin D and dairy products were collected from 853
participants in the United Kingdom Colorectal Adenoma Prevention trial, a
randomized trial of aspirin and folate for CRA recurrence prevention. The VDR
Cdx2, FokI, BsmI, ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms were genotyped in 546 participants 
with available DNA, and gene-diet interaction analyses performed in 480. Dairy
product intake was inversely related to CRA recurrence risk independent of
calcium and vitamin D [relative risk (RR) = 0.64; 95% confidence intervals (CIs):
0.47-0.88, for subjects in the highest compared to lowest intake tertile,
p(trend) = 0.005]. Milk accounted for 60% of dairy product intake, and on
analysis of milk and nonmilk dairy products separately recurrence risk in
individuals in the highest tertile of milk intake was half that of lowest tertile
individuals (RR = 0.52; 95% CI: 0.38-0.72, p(trend) = 3.2 x 10(-5)), whereas
nonmilk dairy products did not influence recurrence. VDR polymorphism genotypes
and haplotypes did not directly alter recurrence risk, but the reduction in risk 
associated with high dairy product intake was confined to individuals with ApaI
aA/AA genotype (p(interaction) = 0.02). These findings indicate dairy products,
and in particular milk, have chemopreventive activity against CRA recurrence.

PMID: 18470879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2008 May;53(6):720-6.

[Unique principles in early mammalian development].

[Article in Japanese]

Hiiragi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine. hiiragi@mpi-muenster.mpg.de

PMID: 18453147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 1;318(1):112-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.008. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) is involved in morula to blastocyst transformation in
the mouse.

Wang H(1), Ding T, Brown N, Yamamoto Y, Prince LS, Reese J, Paria BC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, 1125 MRB IV, 2215 B. Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN-37232-0656,
USA.

It is unknown whether or not tight junction formation plays any role in morula to
blastocyst transformation that is associated with development of polarized
trophoblast cells and fluid accumulation. Tight junctions are a hallmark of
polarized epithelial cells and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) is a known key regulator
of tight junction formation. Here we show that ZO-1 protein is first expressed
during compaction of 8-cell embryos. This stage-specific appearance of ZO-1
suggests its participation in morula to blastocyst transition. Consistent with
this idea, we demonstrate that ZO-1 siRNA delivery inside the blastomeres of
zona-weakened embryos using electroporation not only knocks down ZO-1 gene and
protein expressions, but also inhibits morula to blastocyst transformation in a
concentration-dependent manner. In addition, ZO-1 inactivation reduced the
expression of Cdx2 and Oct-4, but not ZO-2 and F-actin. These results provide the
first evidence that ZO-1 is involved in blastocyst formation from the morula by
regulating accumulation of fluid and differentiation of nonpolar blastomeres to
polar trophoblast cells.

PMCID: PMC2442465
PMID: 18423437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(2):R31. doi: 10.1186/bcr1994. Epub 2008 Apr 17.

Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms and haplotypes and postmenopausal breast
cancer risk.

Abbas S(1), Nieters A, Linseisen J, Slanger T, Kropp S, Mutschelknauss EJ,
Flesch-Janys D, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer
Feld, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Vitamin D receptor (VDR) genotypes may influence breast cancer risk
by altering potential anticarcinogenic effects of vitamin D, but epidemiological 
studies have been inconsistent. Effect modification by serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
(25 [OH]D), the biomarker for vitamin D status in humans, has rarely been
examined.
METHODS: We assessed the effects of two frequently analyzed polymorphisms (FokI
and TaqI) and two potentially functional variants (VDR-5132 and Cdx2) in the VDR 
gene, which thus far have not been analyzed with respect to breast cancer risk,
on postmenopausal breast cancer risk in a population-based, case-control study
including 1,408 patients (cases) and 2,612 control individuals (controls) matched
for year of birth. Odds ratios (ORs) for breast cancer adjusted for potential
confounders were calculated for genotypes and estimated haplotypes.
RESULTS: No differences in serum 25(OD)D concentrations by VDR genotype were
observed. None of the analyzed polymorphisms was associated with overall risk for
postmenopausal breast cancer. However, the TaqI polymorphism was associated with 
a significantly increased risk for oestrogen receptor positive tumours (OR =
1.18, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.00 to 1.38, comparing t allele carriers
with noncarriers) but not for oestrogen receptor negative tumours (OR = 0.88, 95%
CI = 0.69 to 1.13; P for interaction = 0.04). Haplotype analysis revealed the
haplotype FtCA (FokI F, TaqI t, VDR-5132 C, Cdx2 A), which contains the TaqI t
allele, to be associated with a significantly greater breast cancer risk as
compared with the most frequent haplotype FTCG (OR = 1.43, 95% CI = 1.00 to
2.05). No significant interaction between VDR genotypes or haplotypes and 25(OH)D
was observed.
CONCLUSION: Our results support potential effects of VDR polymorphisms on
postmenopausal breast cancer risk and possible differential effects of receptor
status of the tumour. However, further studies focusing on the influence of
polymorphisms and haplotypes on VDR functionality, activity and concentration are
needed.

PMCID: PMC2397533
PMID: 18419802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Sep;10(3):371-9. doi: 10.1089/clo.2007.0002.

Trichostatin A improves histone acetylation in bovine somatic cell nuclear
transfer early embryos.

Iager AE(1), Ragina NP, Ross PJ, Beyhan Z, Cunniff K, Rodriguez RM, Cibelli JB.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Epigenetic aberrancies likely preclude correct and complete nuclear reprogramming
following somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), and may underlie the observed
reduced viability of cloned embryos. In the present study, we tested the effects 
of the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), trichostatin A (TSA), on
development and histone acetylation of cloned bovine preimplantation embryos. Our
results indicated that treating activated reconstructed SCNT embryos with 50 nM
TSA for 13 h produced eight-cell embryos with levels of acetylation of histone H4
at lysine 5 (AcH4K5) similar to fertilized counterparts and significantly greater
than in control NT embryos (p < 0.005). Further, TSA treatment resulted in SCNT
embryos with preimplantation developmental potential similar to fertilized
counterparts, as no difference was observed in cleavage and blastocyst rates or
in blastocyst total cell number (p > 0.05). Measurement of eight selected
developmentally important genes in single blastocysts showed a similar expression
profile among the three treatment groups, with the exception of Nanog, Cdx2, and 
DNMT3b, whose expression levels were higher in TSA-treated NT than in in vitro
fertilized (IVF) embryos. Data presented herein demonstrate that TSA can improve 
at least one epigenetic mark in early cloned bovine embryos. However, evaluation 
of development to full-term is necessary to ascertain whether this effect
reflects a true increase in developmental potential.

PMID: 18419249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Reproduction. 2008 May;135(5):635-47. doi: 10.1530/REP-07-0359.

Expression of genes involved in early cell fate decisions in human embryos and
their regulation by growth factors.

Kimber SJ(1), Sneddon SF, Bloor DJ, El-Bareg AM, Hawkhead JA, Metcalfe AD,
Houghton FD, Leese HJ, Rutherford A, Lieberman BA, Brison DR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of 
Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. susan.kimber@manchester.ac.uk

Little is understood about the regulation of gene expression in human
preimplantation embryos. We set out to examine the expression in human
preimplantation embryos of a number of genes known to be critical for early
development of the murine embryo. The expression profile of these genes was
analysed throughout preimplantation development and in response to growth factor 
(GF) stimulation. Developmental expression of a number of genes was similar to
that seen in murine embryos (OCT3B/4, CDX2, NANOG). However, GATA6 is expressed
throughout preimplantation development in the human. Embryos were cultured in
IGF-I, leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) or heparin-binding EGF-like growth
factor (HBEGF), all of which are known to stimulate the development of human
embryos. Our data show that culture in HBEGF and LIF appears to facilitate human 
embryo expression of a number of genes: ERBB4 (LIF) and LIFR and DSC2 (HBEGF)
while in the presence of HBEGF no blastocysts expressed EOMES and when cultured
with LIF only two out of nine blastocysts expressed TBN. These data improve our
knowledge of the similarities between human and murine embryos and the influence 
of GFs on human embryo gene expression. Results from this study will improve the 
understanding of cell fate decisions in early human embryos, which has important 
implications for both IVF treatment and the derivation of human embryonic stem
cells.

PMID: 18411410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 May;20(5):413-22. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e3282f41b82.

Exploring possible mechanisms for primary bile acid malabsorption: evidence for
different regulation of ileal bile acid transporter transcripts in chronic
diarrhoea.

Balesaria S(1), Pell RJ, Abbott LJ, Tasleem A, Chavele KM, Barley NF, Khair U,
Simon A, Moriarty KJ, Brydon WG, Walters JR.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic diarrhoea resulting from primary idiopathic bile acid
malabsorption (IBAM) is common, but its aetiology is largely unknown. We
investigated possible mechanisms, first looking for common sequence variations in
the cytoplasmic ileal bile acid-binding protein (IBABP, gene symbol FABP6), and
secondly, determining the expression of ileal mucosal transcripts for the apical 
sodium-linked bile acid transporter (ASBT), IBABP, the putative basolateral
transporters, OSTalpha and OSTbeta, and regulatory factors.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was prepared from two cohorts of patients and two control
groups; the promoter and exonic regions of FABP6 were sequenced. In intestinal
biopsies, transcript expression was measured by quantitative real time-PCR, using
ileum from 17 patients and 21 controls.
RESULTS: Sequence variations were identified in FABP6, but overall frequencies
were similar in patients and controls. Transcripts of ASBT and IBABP, but not
OSTalpha and OSTbeta, were expressed at higher levels in ileum than duodenum. The
transcription factors farnesoid-X-receptor (FXR) and liver-receptor-homologue
(LRH-1) were also more abundant in ileum, as was fibroblast growth factor 19
(FGF19), unlike short heterodimer partner (SHP), c-Fos, or CDX2. No significant
differences in mean or median values were found between the groups for any of
these transcripts. However, findings on regression analysis suggested that these 
transporters differ in their regulation, particularly in the relationships of
CDX2, LRH-1 and FXR with OSTalpha.
CONCLUSION: Most cases of IBAM are unlikely to be caused by genetic variation in 
FABP6 or by major differences in transporter transcript expression. Our evidence 
indicates that other factors, such as regulation of expression of the basolateral
bile acid transporter, should be considered as possible causes.

PMID: 18403943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dig Liver Dis. 2008 Jul;40(7):510-22. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2008.02.029. Epub 2008
Apr 9.

Biology of intestinal metaplasia in 2008: more than a simple phenotypic
alteration.

Gutiérrez-González L(1), Wright NA.

Author information: 
(1)Histopathology Unit, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, London,
UK. lydia.gutierrez@cancer.org.uk

This review concentrates on one main aspect of cancerization in the oesophagus
and stomach: principally, intestinal metaplasia. There are at least two other
important pathways that lead to cancer and do not need such a morphological
transformation. One is the gastric type of carcinoma on the Lauren
classification, which arises directly from the stem cell zone and is the signet
ring form of cancer, while the other is spasmolytic polypeptide-expressing
metaplasia (SPEM)--spasmolytic polypeptide (TFF2) expressing metaplasia, where
the gastric glands become filled with TFF2-expressing cells and may also lead to 
gastric dysplasia and cancer. The development of intestinal metaplasia is
complex. Here, we examine intestinal metaplasia in molecular terms, noting the
over-expression of Cdx1, Cdx2, Pdx1, Oct1, TFF3 and the downregulation of
Hedgehog signalling; Runx3 is deactivated by epigenetic silencing, and pathways
such as Wnt and MARK/ERK are involved. These changes start to explain the
principles of the development of intestinal metaplasia and suggest that the
regulation of these genes is of importance in the development of gastric cancer.

PMID: 18400571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;14(7):1947-55. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4147.

Histogenesis of clear cell adenocarcinoma in the urinary tract: evidence of
urothelial origin.

Sung MT(1), Zhang S, MacLennan GT, Lopez-Beltran A, Montironi R, Wang M, Tan PH, 
Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Clear cell adenocarcinoma in the urinary tract is a rare entity with an 
appearance resembling its counterpart in the female genital tract. Although
several theories have been proposed about its origin, its exact histogenesis has 
remained uncertain.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We integrated molecular genetic evaluation by fluorescence
in situ hybridization and X-chromosome inactivation with conventional morphologic
and immunohistochemical analyses in 12 patients with clear cell adenocarcinomas
in the urinary tract.
RESULTS: Concurrent urothelial carcinoma or urothelial carcinoma in situ was
present in six cases (50%) and foci of cystitis glandularis were observed in four
cases (33%). Neither intestinal metaplasia nor Müllerian component was identified
in any case. Cytoplasmic expression of alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase was
demonstrable in 10 of 12 tumors (83%). Moderate to diffuse immunostaining for
cytokeratin 7 was identified in all 12 tumors (100%), whereas only 3 of 12 (25%) 
tumors showed positive immunostaining for cytokeratin 20. Focal uroplakin III
staining was seen in 6 of 12 tumors (50%). In five cases (42%), focal to moderate
CD10 immunoreactivity was observed. Immunostains for OCT4 and CDX2 were
completely negative in all tumors. In UroVysion fluorescence in situ
hybridization assays, all tumors displayed chromosomal alterations similar to
those commonly found in urothelial carcinoma. Identical patterns of nonrandom
X-chromosome inactivation in concurrent clear cell adenocarcinoma and urothelial 
neoplasia were identified in two informative female cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support an urothelial origin for most clear cell
adenocarcinomas of the urinary tract, despite their morphologic resemblance to
certain Müllerian-derived tumors of the female genital tract.

PMID: 18381932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 24;27(32):4497-502. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.78. Epub 2008 Mar
31.

Cdx1, a dispensable homeobox gene for gut development with limited effect in
intestinal cancer.

Bonhomme C(1), Calon A, Martin E, Robine S, Neuville A, Kedinger M, Domon-Dell C,
Duluc I, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 is involved in anteroposterior patterning in embryos and
its expression selectively persists in the intestinal epithelium throughout life.
In human colon cancers, Cdx1 is overexpressed in few cases and lost in the
majority of adenocarcinomas. We used mouse models of gain and loss-of-function to
investigate the role of Cdx1 in intestinal development and cancers. Transgenic
mice overexpressing Cdx1 and knockout mice exhibited a morphologically normal
intestine. Cell proliferation, specification into the four differentiated
lineages and migration along the crypt-villus axis were unchanged compared to
wild-type mice. Changing Cdx1 caused an inverse and dose-dependent modification
of the expression of the paralogous gene Cdx2, indicating that Cdx1 fine-tunes
Cdx2 activity. Transgenenic and knockout mice failed to spontaneously develop
tumours. Overexpressing Cdx1 was without incidence on the frequency of intestinal
tumours induced chemically by azoxymethane treatment or genetically in
Apc(Delta14/+) mice. However, it augmented the severity of the tumours in
Apc(Delta14/+) mice. Inversely, the loss-of-function of Cdx1 in knockout mice was
without incidence on the growth of tumours induced by azoxymethane. We conclude
that Cdx1 is dispensable for intestinal development and that its overexpression
could increase malignancy in early stages of tumourigenesis.

PMID: 18372917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2008 May;20(4):275-83. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2008.01.013. Epub 2008 Mar 19.

A clinicopathological study on the expression of cadherin-17 and caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor (CDX2) in human gastric carcinoma.

Ge J(1), Chen Z, Wu S, Yuan W, Hu B, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, 87 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.

AIMS: To analyse the clinicopathological characteristics of the expression of
cadherin-17 (CDH17) and caudal-related homeobox transcription factor (CDX2) in
human gastric carcinoma, and to evaluate the clinical significance of these two
markers in the histological classification and prognosis of gastric carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CDH17, CDX2 protein expression in paraffin-embedded
specimens gathered from 166 patients with gastric carcinoma were detected by
immunohistochemistry. The association of CDH17, CDX2 protein expression with the 
clinicopathological characteristics, and with the prognosis of gastric carcinoma 
were subsequently assessed.
RESULTS: CDH17, nucleus and cytoplasm CDX2 expression were positively expressed
in 101/166 (60.8%), 59/166 (35.5%) and 57/166 (34.3%) gastric carcinoma patients,
respectively. The expression of both CDH17 and CDX2 is associated with the
intestinal-type gastric carcinoma (P<0.01). Positive expression of CDH17 was
significantly associated with the depth of gastric wall invasion (P=0.04), lymph 
node metastasis (P<0.01) and stages of gastric carcinoma (P=0.01). Positive
expression of CDX2 in the nucleus was mainly found in male patients (P=0.02), in 
early stage (P=0.01) and medullary-type gastric carcinoma (P=0.02). There was a
negative association between nuclear CDX2 expression and lymph node metastasis of
gastric carcinoma (P<0.01). The combined expression of CDH17 and CDX2 was
significantly lower in diffuse-type carcinoma than intestinal- or mixed-type
carcinoma (P<0.01 and P=0.01, respectively). The patients with CDH17 expression
associated with poor prognosis of gastric carcinoma (P<0.01), as opposed to
patients with CDX2 expression (P<0.01). The survival rate of patients with
CDH17+/CDX2- expression was the lowest (P<0.01), and conjoined expressions of
CDH17+/CDX2- and CDH17+/CDX2+ were independent prognostic indicators of gastric
carcinoma (both P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the expression of CDH17 or CDX2 may be an
important feature of gastric carcinoma. A combined detection of CDH17/CDX2
co-expression may benefit us in predicting the prognosis of gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 18353622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 Apr;129(4):571-7. doi: 10.1309/UWK3NAHV31GFHM3J.

CDX2 and villin are useful markers of intestinal metaplasia in the diagnosis of
Barrett esophagus.

Shi XY(1), Bhagwandeen B, Leong AS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomical Pathology, Hunter Area Pathology Service, Newcastle,
Australia.

The identification of intestinal metaplasia (IM) in the esophagus is necessary
for the selection of patients with Barrett esophagus (BE) for surveillance. We
studied 108 esophageal biopsy and resection specimens, clinically diagnosed as
BE, and stained them for CDX2, villin, HepPar-1, and cytokeratin (CK) 7 to
investigate sensitivity for identifying IM. H&E-stained sections showed definite 
goblet cells in 94 cases. CDX2 and villin were positive in all 94 cases. Of 38
cardia- and 9 fundic-type mucosa samples associated with BE, 13 (34%) and 0 (0%) 
displayed CDX2 positivity and 21 (55%) and 1 (11%) displayed villin positivity,
respectively. HepPar-1 was positive in 54 (57%) of 94 cases with IM and negative 
in the associated cardia- and fundic-type mucosa. A full-thickness CK7 staining
pattern was present in 90 (96%) of samples with IM and 22 (58%) and 0 (0%) of the
associated cardia- and fundic-type mucosa, respectively. None of 20 control
samples of morphologically normal gastric mucosa stained for CDX2 or villin. CDX2
and villin are sensitive markers for early-stage IM and can supplement the
histologic identification of this premalignant condition in the esophagus.

PMID: 18343784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Dyn. 2008 Apr;237(4):918-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21480.

Differences in early lineage segregation between mammals.

Kuijk EW(1), Du Puy L, Van Tol HT, Oei CH, Haagsman HP, Colenbrander B, Roelen
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Two lineage segregation events in mammalian development form the trophectoderm,
primitive endoderm, and pluripotent primitive ectoderm. In mouse embryos, Oct4,
Cdx2, Nanog, and Gata6 govern these events, but it is unknown whether this is
conserved between mammals. Here, the expression patterns of these genes and their
products were determined in porcine oocytes and embryos and in bovine embryos.
CDX2 and GATA6 expression in porcine and bovine blastocysts resembled that of
mouse, indicating conserved functions. However, NANOG expression was undetectable
in porcine oocytes and embryos. Some inner cell mass cells in bovine blastocysts 
expressed NANOG protein. OCT4 protein was undetectable in porcine morulae, but
present in both the trophectoderm and the inner cell mass of blastocysts,
suggesting that downregulation of OCT4 in the trophectoderm does not precede
trophectoderm formation. Combined, the results indicate differences in lineage
segregation between mammals.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18330925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Dig Liver Dis. 2008 Sep;40(9):749-54. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2008.01.018. Epub 2008
Mar 10.

Clinicopathological analysis of colorectal cancer liver metastasis and
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: are they just apples and oranges?

Chiu CT(1), Chiang JM, Yeh TS, Tseng JH, Chen TC, Jan YY, Chen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUNDS/AIMS: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and colorectal cancer liver
metastasis are the most primary and secondary adenocarcinoma of the liver,
respectively. A large-scale long-term comparative study of these two cohort
patient is lacking.
METHODS: A total of 166 colorectal cancer liver metastasis patients and 206
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma patients who had undergone curative liver
resection were retrospectively analysed. Among 206 intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma, there were 47 intraductal growth type-intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma and 159 non-intraductal growth type-intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma. The demographics, clinicopathological data,
immunohistochemical study and survival were analysed.
RESULTS: The intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma patients were more
female-predominated, associated with hepatolithiasis, symptomatic, jaundiced, and
with larger tumour size compared with those of colorectal cancer liver
metastasis. Prognostic factors of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma were pathologic
staging, histologic pattern and section margin; whereas prognostic factors of
colorectal cancer liver metastasis were rectal origin, differentiation, section
margin and bilobar distribution. CK7 and CK20 differentiated majority of
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma from colorectal cancer liver metastasis, while
CDX2 and MUC5AC helped to differentiate inconclusive cases. The 1-, 3-, 5- and
10-year survival rates of colorectal cancer liver metastasis were 77%, 31%, 20%
and 14%, compared to 53%, 21%, 13% and 7% of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
(p=.0001). Furthermore, the survival of colorectal cancer liver metastasis was
comparable to staged II intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (p=.8866) and intraductal
growth type-intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (p=.1915).
CONCLUSIONS: Demographics, precipitating factor, clinical manifestations, and
prognostic factors of colorectal cancer liver metastasis and intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma differed remarkably. High incidence of CDX2 and MUC2
expression in colorectal cancer liver metastasis and intraductal growth
type-intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma might explain their similar cytoarchitecture
and survival.

PMID: 18329969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;14(5):1393-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4146.

Germ cell origin of testicular carcinoid tumors.

Abbosh PH(1), Zhang S, Maclennan GT, Montironi R, Lopez-Beltran A, Rank JP,
Baldridge LA, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

PURPOSE: Carcinoids are neuroendocrine tumors and most frequently occur within
tissues derived from the embryonic gut. These tumors can occur in any organ site 
but are rare in the testis. The cell type giving rise to testicular carcinoid is 
unknown. We hypothesized that testicular carcinoid may have a germ cell origin.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We describe our analysis of protein and genetic markers of
germ cell neoplasia, using immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ
hybridization, in four testicular carcinoid tumors.
RESULTS: All four cases of testicular carcinoid tumor arose in a background of
mature teratoma. Isochromosome 12p was identified in carcinoid tumor cells in all
four samples. 12p overrepresentation was also observed in three cases.
Isochromosome 12p and 12p overrepresentation were present in cells of coexisting 
mature teratoma in three cases. Carcinoid tumors showed strong immunoreactivity
for synaptophysin and chromogranin, but no immunoreactivity for OCT4, CD30,
c-kit, TTF-1, and CDX2. Membranous and cytoplasmic staining for beta-catenin was 
detected in three cases.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that testicular carcinoid represents a
phenotypic expression of testicular teratoma and is of germ cell origin.

PMID: 18316560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Mar;32(3):420-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318158a397.

Islet 1 (Isl1) expression is a reliable marker for pancreatic endocrine tumors
and their metastases.

Schmitt AM(1), Riniker F, Anlauf M, Schmid S, Soltermann A, Moch H, Heitz PU,
Klöppel G, Komminoth P, Perren A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Anja.Schmitt@triemli.stzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Tracing the origin of a metastasis of a neuroendocrine carcinoma is a
challenge. The transcription factors Cdx2 and TTF1 have been found to be helpful 
in identifying well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors of gastrointestinal and 
pulmonary origin, respectively. So far, such a marker is lacking for pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (PETs) and metastases thereof. Islet1 (Isl1) is a
transcription factor expressed in pancreatic islet cells. The aim of this study
was (1) to test the specificity and sensitivity of Isl1 as a marker of PETs, and 
(2) to test the specificity and sensitivity of a panel of markers, including
Isl1, Cdx2, and TTF1, for the localization of the primary.
DESIGN: One hundred eighty-eight primary gastroenteropancreatic and pulmonary
endocrine tumors and 49 metastases thereof were examined. Immunohistochemistry
using antibodies directed against Isl1, Cdx2, and TTF1 was performed and the
staining results were scored semiquantitatively.
RESULTS: Isl1 proved to be a highly specific marker for pancreatic endocrine
tumors. In 84 primary PET its specificity was 78.4% (sensitivity 74.3%) and in 18
metastases of PET the specificity reached 100% (sensitivity 77.8%). Strong Cdx2
staining showed a specificity for gastrointestinal origin of 83.9% (sensitivity
82%) in primary tumors and of 100% (sensitivity 40%) in metastases. Including
weakly positive tumors lead to a decreased specificity but an increased
sensitivity. TTF1 expression was detected in 2 PET and 1 ileal primary tumor only
and was absent in all metastases of gastroenteropancreatic endocrine tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Isl1 is a reliable marker of pancreatic endocrine tumors and
metastases thereof. It shows a comparable sensitivity and specificity as Cdx2 as 
a marker of ileal and appendiceal neuroendocrine tumors and their metastases.
TTF1 is very rarely expressed in well-differentiated gastroentero-PETs.
Therefore, the panel of Isl1, Cdx2, and TTF1 seems useful for examining
metastases of well-differentiated endocrine carcinomas of unknown origin.

PMID: 18300808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Curr Opin Hematol. 2008 Mar;15(2):82-7. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3282f3ded0.

New molecular concepts and targets in acute myeloid leukemia.

Buzzai M(1), Licht JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Most patients with acute myeloid leukemia treated with
chemotherapy relapse. It is increasingly recognized that the cause of
chemoresistance and relapse resides within the leukemia stem cell population.
Successful eradication of leukemia stem cells would require a comprehensive
profile of both the acquired molecular lesions and intrinsic features of leukemia
stem cells. This review describes recent work identifying molecular markers that 
may lead to development of novel therapeutics, ultimately aiming to eradicate
leukemia stem cells in acute myeloid leukemia.
RECENT FINDINGS: In recent years, novel specific cell surface antigens have
allowed identification of leukemia stem cells and permitted their distinction
from normal hematopoietic stem cells. Novel concepts of leukemia stem cells and
niche interaction have elucidated the mechanisms that control leukemia stem cell 
survival and chemoresistance. Recent detection of genetic aberrations affecting
regulators of HOX gene expression and chromatin modifying enzymes, such as CDX2
and hDOT1L, respectively, elucidates new key players in stem cell self-renewal
and leukemic transformation.
SUMMARY: The discovery of novel markers and survival pathways for leukemia stem
cells has increased our potential to specifically target and eliminate the
leukemic stem cell compartment, which is likely to improve clinical outcomes in
acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 18300752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 Mar;129(3):416-23. doi: 10.1309/603UQKM7C2KELGJU.

Frequent beta-catenin nuclear labeling in sessile serrated polyps of the
colorectum with neoplastic potential.

Wu JM(1), Montgomery EA, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA.

We obtained 22 sessile serrated adenomas (SSAs) and 19 hyperplastic polyps (HPs) 
and performed immunolabeling for cytokeratins (CKs) 7 and 20, CDX2, beta-catenin,
and p53 to determine the role of these markers in aiding distinction of lesions
with neoplastic potential. Patients with SSAs more frequently had a prior or
coexistent tubular adenoma (P = .004) that was right-sided (P = .00001) and
larger (P = .03). No difference in CK7, CK20, or p53 labeling was found after
correction for colonic location. However, CDX2 labeling was significantly lower
in SSAs (P = .02) and was predominantly confined to the crypt bases, whereas it
was diffusely positive in HPs (P < .001). Surprisingly, aberrant nuclear labeling
for beta-catenin was found in 9 (41%) of the SSAs but in none of the HPs (P <
.002). We propose that beta-catenin and/or CDX2 immunolabeling may have
diagnostic usefulness in the evaluation of serrated polyps. These findings also
suggest that Wnt signaling has a role in SSA development.

PMID: 18285264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Int J Biol Sci. 2008 Feb 6;4(1):48-57.

ParaHox genes in pancreatic cell cultures: effects on the insulin promoter
regulation.

Rosanas-Urgell A(1), Garcia-Fernàndez J, Marfany G.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

The gene encoding PDX1 (pancreatic duodenum homeobox 1), the main transcription
factor regulating the glucose-dependent transactivation of the insulin promoter
in pancreatic beta-cells, clusters with two closely related homeobox genes (Gsh1 
and Cdx2/3), all of them belonging to the ParaHox gene family. The ParaHox gene
evolutionary history in the vertebrate lineage involved duplications of the
cluster and subsequent loss of some members, so that eventually, the human and
murine genomes contain only 6 ParaHox genes. The crucial role of PDX1 in pancreas
development, beta-cell formation and insulin transcription regulation has long
been established. There is some data on CDX2/3 function in alpha-cells, but
remarkably, nothing is known on the role of the other ParaHox genes, which are
also expressed in the endocrine pancreas. Homeobox transcription factors that
belong to the same family show high conservation of the homeodomain and share
similar target sites and oligomeric partners, and thus may act redundantly,
synergistically or antagonistically on the same promoters. Therefore, we explored
the effects of the Parahox proteins (GSH1, GSH2, CDX1, CDX2/3 and CDX4) on the
regulation of the insulin promoter in transfected alpha- and beta- cultured cell 
lines at different glucose concentrations and compared them to those of PDX1.
Noticeably, several ParaHox transcription factors are able to transactivate or
inhibit the insulin promoter, depending on the cell type and glucose
concentration, thus suggesting their possible participation in the regulation of 
similar target genes, such as insulin, either by silencing or activating them, in
the absence of PDX1.

PMCID: PMC2238182
PMID: 18274620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. APMIS. 2008 Jan;116(1):74-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2008.00881.x.

Genetic alterations of the Cdx2 gene in gastric cancer.

Song JH(1), Kim CJ, Cho YG, Chae JS, Cao Z, Nam SW, Lee JY, Park WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Gastric atrophy and intestinal metaplasia are generally considered precancerous
lesions of the stomach; Cdx2 plays an important role in intestinal metaplasia and
gastric carcinogenesis. To elucidate the potential etiological role of the Cdx2
gene in gastric carcinogenesis, we analyzed genetic mutations and allelic loss in
the Cdx2 gene of 95 sporadic gastric cancers. We found two somatic missense
mutations in the Cdx2 gene, P63L in exon 1 and E204K in exon 2, encoding the
caudal-like protein activation region (codon 13-180) and the homeobox domain
(codon 188-243) of the gene, in the gastric cancers. In addition, 9 (25.0%) of 36
informative cases showed allelic loss at D13S220 and/or D13S260. In 11 cases with
a genetic alteration, Cdx2 nuclear staining was observed only in 8 cases of
gastric mucosa with intestinal metaplasia. Loss or reduced expression of the Cdx2
gene in cancer cells was found in two cases with a somatic mutation and in three 
cases with LOH. Interestingly, all of the cases were intestinal-type gastric
cancers. Thus, these results suggest that genetic alterations of the Cdx2 gene
may contribute to the loss of Cdx2 expression and to the development of gastric
cancer, especially in the intestinal-type.

PMID: 18254783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):4944-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-124644. Epub 2008 
Feb 5.

Modulation of murine embryonic stem cell-derived CD41+c-kit+ hematopoietic
progenitors by ectopic expression of Cdx genes.

McKinney-Freeman SL(1), Lengerke C, Jang IH, Schmitt S, Wang Y, Philitas M, Shea 
J, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA;

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 May 15;111(10):4834-5.

Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4 comprise the caudal-like Cdx gene family in mammals, whose
homologues regulate hematopoietic development in zebrafish. Previously, we
reported that overexpression of Cdx4 enhances hematopoietic potential from murine
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Here we compare the effect of ectopic Cdx1, Cdx2,
and Cdx4 on the differentiation of murine ESC-derived hematopoietic progenitors. 
The 3 Cdx genes differentially influence the formation and differentiation of
hematopoietic progenitors within a CD41(+)c-kit(+) population of embryoid body
(EB)-derived cells. Cdx1 and Cdx4 enhance, whereas Cdx2 strongly inhibits, the
hematopoietic potential of CD41(+)ckit(+) EB-derived cells, changes that are
reflected by effects on hematopoietic lineage-specific and Hox gene expression.
When we subject stromal cell and colony assay cultures of EB-derived
hematopoietic progenitors to ectopic expression of Cdx genes, Cdx4 dramatically
enhances, whereas Cdx1 and Cdx2 both inhibit hematopoietic activity, probably by 
blocking progenitor differentiation. These data demonstrate distinct effects of
Cdx genes on hematopoietic progenitor formation and differentiation, insights
that we are using to facilitate efforts at in vitro culture of hematopoietic
progenitors from ESC. The behavior of Cdx genes in vitro suggests how derangement
of these developmental regulators might contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2384126
PMID: 18252864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Pathol Int. 2008 Mar;58(3):156-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2007.02204.x.

Cdx2 transcription factor regulates claudin-3 and claudin-4 expression during
intestinal differentiation of gastric carcinoma.

Satake S(1), Semba S, Matsuda Y, Usami Y, Chiba H, Sawada N, Kasuga M, Yokozaki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

According to the expression of gastric (claudin-18) and intestinal claudins
(claudin-3 and claudin-4), the authors have previously proposed a new phenotypic 
classification of gastric carcinoma (GC): the gastric (G-CLDN), intestinal
(I-CLDN) and unclassified claudin (U-CLDN) phenotypes. The aim of the present
study was to examine the role of Cdx2, the caudal-related transcription factor,
on the regulation of intestinal claudins expression in vitro and in vivo. It was 
confirmed on immunohistochemistry that non-neoplastic gastric mucosa with
intestinal metaplasia (IM) expressed Cdx2 with increased levels of intestinal
claudin expression. In addition, Cdx2 expression was detected in 28 (30%) of 94
GC at the invasive front. Interestingly, Cdx2 expression had a significant
association with the I-CLDN phenotype (P < 0.001), which was almost identical to 
the established gastric and intestinal mucin-based GC classification.
Furthermore, the transfection of a recombinant human CDX2-expressing vector into 
TMK-1 (Cdx2-negative) GC cells specifically elevated the expression of claudin-3 
and claudin-4 at the mRNA (CLDN3, 3.9-fold; CLDN4, 2.8-fold) and protein levels
(claudin-3, 8.6-fold; claudin-4, 9.8-fold), whereas no induction of the other
claudins was detected. These findings suggest that Cdx2 plays an important role
in the regulation of intestinal claudin expression not only in gastric mucosa
with IM but also GC.

PMID: 18251778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Feb;28(2):279-1281.

[Expressions of homeobox transcription factor-2 and E-cadherin in gastric
carcinoma and their clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Ge J(1), Chen ZH, Chen ZK, Yuan WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha 410008, China. gejiedoctor@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of homeobox transcription factor-2
(CDX(2)) and E-cadherin and their relations to the clinicopathological
characteristics of gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on 83 human gastric carcinoma
specimens and 40 normal gastric mucosa specimens for examining the expressions of
CDX(2) and E-cadherin, and the relations of their expression with the tumor
differentiation, infiltration and metastasis were analyzed.
RESULTS: According to the LaurAn classification, the positive expression rate of 
CDX(2) in intestinal type of gastric carcinoma was 56.86%, and 34.38% in the
diffuse type, showing significant difference between the two types (P<0.05). The 
positivity rate of E-cadherin was also significantly different between the two
types (66.67% vs 28.13%, P<0.01). In regard to tumor differentiation, the
positivity of CDX(2) and E-cadherin expressions was significantly different
between moderately to well differentiated tumors and poorly differentiated ones
(P<0.01). The tumors infiltrating mucosal and submucosal layers were
significantly different from those infiltrating the muscular and serous membrane 
layer in the positivity of CDX(2) and E-cadherin expressions (P<0.01), which were
also different for the presence of lymph node metastasis (P<0.05). Regression
analysis did not reveal significant correlations between CDX(2) and E-cadherin
expression in gastric carcinoma (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: The abnormal expression of CDX(2) and E-cadherin plays an important
role in the development of gastric carcinoma, especially the intestinal type.
CDX(2) and E-cadherin may serve as useful markers to predict the prognosis of
patients with gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 18250063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Mar;10(1):133-42. doi: 10.1089/clo.2007.0066.

The effects of trichostatin A on mRNA expression of chromatin structure-, DNA
methylation-, and development-related genes in cloned mouse blastocysts.

Li X(1), Kato Y, Tsuji Y, Tsunoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, College of Agriculture, Kinki University,
Nara, Japan.

Trichostatin A (TSA) is the most potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
known. We previously reported that treatment of mouse somatic cell
nuclear-transferred (SCNT) oocytes with TSA significantly increased the
blastocyst rate, blastocyst cell number, and full-term development. How TSA
enhances the epigenetic remodeling ability of somatic nuclei and the expression
of development-related genes, however, is not known. In the present study, we
compared the expression patterns of nine genes involved in chromatin structure
and DNA methylation, and seven development-related genes in blastocysts developed
from SCNT oocytes treated with and without TSA, and in blastocysts developed in
vivo and in vitro using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. In vivo-recovered blastocysts and blastocysts developed from
TSA-treated SCNT oocytes exhibited similar expression patterns for Hdac1, 2, and 
3, CBP, PCAF, and Dnmt3b genes compared with in vitro-developed blastocysts and
blastocysts developed from SCNT oocytes without TSA treatment. There were
significantly lower expression levels of Hdac1 and Hdac2 transcripts in
TSA-treated and in vivo-recovered blastocysts than in TSA-untreated and in
vitro-developed blastocysts. The finding that TSA treatment of SCNT oocytes
significantly upregulated Sox2 and cMyc transcripts in blastocysts indicated that
both transcripts are TSA-responsive genes. Thus, TSA treatment of mouse SCNT
oocytes decreased the expression of chromatin structure- and DNA
methylation-related genes, and increased the expression of Sox2 and cMyc genes in
blastocysts. Such modifications might be a reason for the high developmental
potential of mouse SCNT oocytes treated with TSA.

PMID: 18241125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Pathol. 2008 Apr;39(4):543-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.08.011. Epub 2008
Jan 30.

Prostatic adenocarcinoma in colorectal biopsy: clinical and pathologic features.

Lane Z(1), Epstein JI, Ayub S, Netto GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD 21231, USA.

Locally advanced prostate carcinoma (PCa) can involve adjacent colorectal tissue.
In such cases, accurate assignment of primary source may prove difficult. Given
the difference in treatment and prognosis between PCa and colorectal carcinoma
(CRCa), an accurate diagnosis is crucial. Surgical pathology files were searched 
for all cases with a diagnosis of PCa on colorectal biopsy between 1987 and 2006.
Histologic and clinical data were available in 23 of the 30 found cases. The
diagnosis of PCa was made for the first time at the time of the colorectal
presentation in 4 men. Three of the 4 underwent colectomy. Among the remaining 19
men with a previously documented diagnosis of PCa, the overall clinical and
endoscopic impression still favored a second primary CRCa in 12 patients. The
latter was due in part to the chronologically distant prior PCa diagnosis (mean, 
6.9 years; range, 2-18 years). None of the colorectal biopsies demonstrated
carcinoma in situ or dysplastic colonic mucosa. PCa architecture in the colonic
biopsies was that of Gleason score of 9 to 10 in 20 cases and Gleason score of 8 
in the remaining 3. Cribriform or microacinar architecture typical of PCa was
seen in 6 cases. Immunostains were positive for prostate-specific antigen, P501S 
(prostein), prostate-specific membrane antigen, and prostate-specific acid
phosphatase, in 16 of 20, 9 of 11, 10 of 11, and 10 of 20 cases, respectively.
Three cases lacked immunohistochemical evidence of prostatic differentiation.
Caudal-type homebox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) and beta-catenin were negative 
in all tested cases (0/11 for both). Although relatively rare, initial
presentation of PCa as a rectal lesion may lead to an erroneous clinical and or
histologic impression of CRCa. Because history of prostate cancer is often
remote, clinical findings may be misleading. Pathologists should consider the
possibility of prostatic origin in poorly differentiated carcinoma encountered on
colorectal biopsy when features such as lack of an in situ component, extrinsic
pattern of involvement, microacinar or solid architecture, and/or prominent
nucleoli, are noted, especially in the absence of nuclear pleomorphism and
mitotic activity. Immunohistochemical studies could help establish the diagnosis.

PMID: 18234278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neoplasia. 2008 Jan;10(1):8-19.

The homeodomain transcription factor Cdx1 does not behave as an oncogene in
normal mouse intestine.

Crissey MA(1), Guo RJ, Fogt F, Li H, Katz JP, Silberg DG, Suh ER, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 600 Clinical Research Building, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA
19104 USA.

The Caudal-related homeobox genes Cdx1 and Cdx2 are intestine-specific
transcription factors that regulate differentiation of intestinal cell types.
Previously, we have shown Cdx1 to be antiproliferative and to promote cell
differentiation. However, other studies have suggested that Cdx1 may be an
oncogene. To test for oncogenic behavior, we used the murine villin promoter to
ectopically express Cdx1 in the small intestinal villi and colonic surface
epithelium. No changes in intestinal architecture, cell differentiation, or
lineage selection were observed with expression of the transgene. Classic
oncogenes enhance proliferation and induce tumors when ectopically expressed.
However, the Cdx1 transgene neither altered intestinal proliferation nor induced 
spontaneous intestinal tumors. In a murine model for colitis-associated cancer,
the Cdx1 transgene decreased, rather than increased, the number of adenomas that 
developed. In the polyps, the expression of the endogenous and the transgenic
Cdx1 proteins was largely absent, whereas endogenous Villin expression was
retained. This suggests that transgene silencing was specific and not due to a
general Villin inactivation. In conclusion, neither the ectopic expression of
Cdx1 was associated with changes in intestinal cell proliferation or
differentiation nor was there increased intestinal cancer susceptibility. Our
results therefore suggest that Cdx1 is not an oncogene in normal intestinal
epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2213897
PMID: 18231635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008;43(2):132-40. doi: 10.1080/00365520701676575.

Cytokeratin and CDX-2 expression in Barrett's esophagus.

van Baal JW(1), Bozikas A, Pronk R, Ten Kate FJ, Milano F, Rygiel AM, Rosmolen
WD, Peppelenbosch MP, Bergman JJ, Krishnadath KK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Molecular Medicine in Amsterdam, University Medical
Center Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.w.p.m.vanbaal-2@umcutrecht.nl

OBJECTIVE: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a premalignant condition of the distal
esophagus. For diagnostic purposes it is important to find biomarkers that can
specifically identify BE, for instance to differentiate BE epithelial cells from 
gastric cardia epithelial cells in brush cytology specimens. The objective of
this study was to determine the specificity of CDX-2 and a set of cytokeratins
(CKs) as specific markers for BE as compared with normal squamous esophageal and 
gastric cardia tissue.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) with specific antibodies against
CDX-2, and a set of CKs was performed on fresh frozen consecutive tissue sections
of normal squamous, gastric cardia and non-dysplastic BE of 80 patients.
RESULTS: IHC results showed CK8, CK18 and CK20 expression in both BE and gastric 
cardia, while CK7 was seen in all BE but also in 26% of gastric cardia biopsies. 
CK10/13 was only expressed in normal squamous epithelium. CDX-2 nuclear staining 
was found in 87.5% of the BE biopsies, whereas normal squamous esophagus and
cardia biopsies were negative.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX-2 in combination with a set of CKs can be used as biomarkers to 
distinguish between BE and normal squamous esophagus. In order to distinguish BE 
from cardia tissue, a combination of CDX-2 and CK7 is most informative.

PMID: 18224560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Pathologe. 2008 Feb;29(1):53-60. doi: 10.1007/s00292-007-0957-z.

[Primary neuroendocrine carcinoma of the liver. From carcinoid tumor to
small-cell hepatic carcinoma: case reports and review of the literature].

[Article in German]

Balta Z(1), Sauerbruch T, Hirner A, Büttner R, Fischer HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinik Bonn. baltazeynep@hotmail.com

Primary hepatic neuroendocrine tumors are rare neoplasms. While primary hepatic
carcinoid tumors (PHCT) are well-differentiated tumors, primary hepatic
small-cell carcinomas (PHSCC) represent the poorly differentiated end of the
spectrum of neuroendocrine carcinomas. The first patient, suffering from PHCT,
has had a follow-up for 32 years and is still alive. Within this time, the tumor 
relapsed 4 times with unchanged histology and immunohistochemistry features. The 
second patient suffered from small-cell carcinoma of the liver. There were no
risk factors for a hepatocellular carcinoma. An extensive preoperative and
postoperative diagnostic investigation could rule out an extrahepatic primary
site. Immunohistochemically the tumor was negative for Hepar-1, AFP, TTF1 and
CDX2 but reacted positively with CD56 and sporadically with the keratins 8, 18
and 20. A neuroendocrine PHSCC was diagnosed. After neoadjuvant cytostatic
treatment the carcinoma was completely extirpated and 18 months after treatment
the patient is healthy.PHCT and PHSCC have to be clearly separated from
hepatocellular and cholangiocellular carcinomas. Exclusion of an extrahepatic
primary site requires an accurate and synoptic analysis of clinical, radiologic
and pathologic findings. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice.

PMID: 18210116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Stem Cells. 2008 Apr;26(4):842-9. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0356. Epub 2008 Jan
10.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1-mediated Wnt signaling promotes the initiation of
trophoblast lineage differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells.

He S(1), Pant D, Schiffmacher A, Meece A, Keefer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland 20742, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate into all three embryonic germ layers 
but rarely into trophectoderm (TE) lineages that contribute to the placenta,
although TE differentiation can be initiated by genetic manipulation of key genes
involved in TE development. We demonstrate that Wnt signaling can initiate TE
lineage differentiation by triggering an appropriate cue, caudal-related homeobox
2 (Cdx2). Overexpression and RNA interference knockdown studies indicate that
Cdx2 induction in response to Wnt3a is mediated by lymphoid enhancer factor 1,
whose expression is regulated by leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and bone
morphogenetic protein. Removal of LIF, along with addition of Wnt3a, stimulated
Cdx2 expression and induced formation of trophoblast stem (TS) cells. These TS
cells were able to differentiate into cells with characteristics of
spongiotrophoblast and trophoblast giant cells. This is, to our knowledge, the
first evidence that TE lineage differentiation can be induced by Wnt signaling in
mouse ES cells.

PMID: 18192238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. BMC Gastroenterol. 2008 Jan 11;8:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-8-1.

Multilayered epithelium in a rat model and human Barrett's esophagus: similar
expression patterns of transcription factors and differentiation markers.

Chen X(1), Qin R, Liu B, Ma Y, Su Y, Yang CS, Glickman JN, Odze RD, Shaheen NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Julius L, Chambers Biomedical/Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, 700 George Street, Durham, NC
27707, USA. lchen@nccu.edu

BACKGROUND: In rats, esophagogastroduodenal anastomosis (EGDA) without
concomitant chemical carcinogen treatment leads to gastroesophageal reflux
disease, multilayered epithelium (MLE, a presumed precursor in intestinal
metaplasia), columnar-lined esophagus, dysplasia, and esophageal adenocarcinoma. 
Previously we have shown that columnar-lined esophagus in EGDA rats resembled
human Barrett's esophagus (BE) in its morphology, mucin features and expression
of differentiation markers (Lab. Invest. 2004;84:753-765). The purpose of this
study was to compare the phenotype of rat MLE with human MLE, in order to gain
insight into the nature of MLE and its potential role in the development of BE.
METHODS: Serial sectioning was performed on tissue samples from 32 EGDA rats and 
13 patients with established BE. Tissue sections were immunohistochemically
stained for a variety of transcription factors and differentiation markers of
esophageal squamous epithelium and intestinal columnar epithelium.
RESULTS: We detected MLE in 56.3% (18/32) of EGDA rats, and in all human samples.
As expected, both rat and human squamous epithelium, but not intestinal
metaplasia, expressed squamous transcription factors and differentiation markers 
(p63, Sox2, CK14 and CK4) in all cases. Both rat and human intestinal metaplasia,
but not squamous epithelium, expressed intestinal transcription factors and
differentiation markers (Cdx2, GATA4, HNF1alpha, villin and Muc2) in all cases.
Rat MLE shared expression patterns of Sox2, CK4, Cdx2, GATA4, villin and Muc2
with human MLE. However, p63 and CK14 were expressed in a higher proportion of
rat MLE compared to humans.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that rat MLE shares similar properties to human
MLE in its expression pattern of these markers, not withstanding small
differences, and support the concept that MLE may be a transitional stage in the 
metaplastic conversion of squamous to columnar epithelium in BE.

PMCID: PMC2267197
PMID: 18190713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochimie. 2008 May;90(5):697-704. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2007.12.002. Epub 2007
Dec 23.

Differential regulation of CDX1 and CDX2 gene expression by deficiency in methyl 
group donors.

Lu X(1), Freund JN, Muller M, Ravey J, Nicolas JP, Gueant JL, Namour F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR-S0724, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy F-54505, France.

The CDX2 and CDX1 homeobox genes have respectively a tumour suppressor and
proliferative role in the intestinal epithelium. We analyzed DNA methylation and 
histones modifications associated with CDX2 and CDX1 promoters in two human colon
cancer cell lines expressing differentially these genes, Caco2/TC7 [CDX2
positive-CDX1 negative] and HT29 [CDX2 negative-CDX1 negative] cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments indicated that CDX2 and CDX1 gene expression
correlated with a histone modifications pattern characterizing active chromatin
(H3K4 trimethylated and H3 acetylated). Bisulfite DNA sequencing and
methylation-specific PCR showed that CDX2 and CDX1 promoters display no
methylation in HT29 cells even though both genes are not expressed. In contrast, 
the CDX1 promoter is methylated in Caco2/TC7. DNA demethylation by 5aza-dC or the
combination of 5aza-dC plus SAHA, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases, restored 
CDX1 expression in Caco2/TC7 cells but these treatments were inefficient on both 
CDX2 and CDX1 in HT29 cells. Thus, in colon cancer cells the changes in chromatin
conformation are heterogeneous and repression of CDX2 and CDX1 in HT29 cells is
not due to epigenetic mechanisms. In vivo, dietary deprivation of methyl groups
in rats upregulated CDX1 mRNA and downregulated to a lesser extent CDX2 mRNA
expression. Moreover, methyl group deprivation downregulated CDX2 protein by
changing its phosphorylation pattern. The changes in CDX2 and CDX1 expression
determined by methyl group deprivation may constitute one of the mechanisms
sustaining the protective role attributed to folate in colon cancer.

PMID: 18187048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. APMIS. 2007 Dec;115(12):1383-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2007.00654.x.

Homeoprotein Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN expression profiles are related to gastric
cancer prognosis.

Bai Z(1), Ye Y, Chen D, Shen D, Xu F, Cui Z, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Surgical Oncology Laboratory,
People's Hospital, Peking University, 100044 Beijing, China.

The aim of the study was to analyze the expression of Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN in
relation to clinicopathological features of gastric cancer tissue biopsies in
order to determine the value of a combined analysis of Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN
expression in distinguishing histological types and prognosis of gastric cancers.
The expression of Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN was studied using immunohistochemistry of
paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 99 patients who underwent radical D2
gastrectomy between 1999 and 2001. Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN expression were detected
in 39.6% (36 of 91) and 70.3% (64 of 91) of gastric cancer cases, respectively.
There was a negative correlation between Cdx2 expression and Lauren
classification (p=0.032), and between nuclear PTEN expression and lymph node
metastasis (p=0.049). Patients with Cdx2-positive, or nuclear PTEN-positive
expression had higher survival rates than those with Cdx2-negative or nuclear
PTEN-negative expression (p<0.001 and p=0.003, respectively). Co-expression of
Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN showed significantly lower levels in diffuse- or mixed-type
cancers than in intestinal-type cancers (p=0.005). Multivariate analysis revealed
that Cdx2 expression was an independent prognostic indicator of gastric cancer
(p=0.014). These data suggest that combined analysis of Cdx2 and nuclear PTEN
expression can have significant value in distinguishing histological types of
gastric cancer and assessing prognosis in patients with gastric cancer.

PMID: 18184409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cell Prolif. 2008 Feb;41 Suppl 1:7-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00484.x.

Alternative sources of pluripotent stem cells: altered nuclear transfer.

Condic ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132-3401, USA. mlcondic@neuro.utah.edu

Altered nuclear transfer (ANT) is one of several methods that have been suggested
for obtaining pluripotent stem cells without destroying human embryos. ANT
proposes to alter the nucleus of a somatic cell and/or the cytoplasm of an
enucleated oocyte such that when the two are combined, they do not produce a
zygote, but rather they form a cell capable of producing pluripotent stem cells
without being an embryo. The ANT proposal raises the serious question of whether 
it is possible to know with confidence that this procedure generates a
non-embryo, rather than merely an embryo with a deficiency. Here I address the
question of how embryos can be distinguished from non-embryos using scientific
criteria and apply these criteria to the two forms of ANT proposed thus far: ANT 
combined with oocyte-assisted reprogramming (ANT-OAR) or with gene deletion
(ANT-GD). I propose that the first globally coordinated event in human
development, the formation of trophoblast and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages via 
Cdx2-Oct3/4 mutual cross-repression, is the earliest act of the embryo qua
embryo; it is an operation intrinsic to an embryo as such, and entities lacking
the power (potentia) for such an act cannot be considered embryos. Thus, I will
argue that formation of trophoblast-ICM lineages is a both necessary and
sufficient criterion for determining whether ANT produces an embryo or a
non-embryonic entity.

PMID: 18181941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cells Tissues Organs. 2008;188(1-2):9-22. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

The origins of human embryonic stem cells: a biological conundrum.

Brink TC(1), Sudheer S, Janke D, Jagodzinska J, Jung M, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics (Molecular Embryology and Aging), Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Human inner cell mass (ICM) cells isolated from in vitro fertilized blastocysts
are the progenitor cells used to establish in vitro stable human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) which are pluripotent and self-renew indefinitely. This long-term
perpetuation of hESCs in the undifferentiated state is thought to be an in vitro 
adaptation of the ICM cells. To investigate at the molecular level how hESCs
acquired their unique properties, transcriptional profiles of isolated ICM cells 
and undifferentiated hESCs were compared. We identified 33 genes enriched in the 
ICM compared to the trophectoderm and hESCs. These genes are involved in
signaling cascades (SEMA7A and MAP3K10), cell proliferation (CUZD1 and MS4A7) and
chromatin remodeling (H1FOO and HRMT1L4). Furthermore, primordial germ
cell-specific genes (SGCA and TEX11) were detected as expressed in the ICM cells 
and not hESCs. We propose that the transcriptional differences observed between
ICM cells and hESCs might be accounted for by adaptive reprogramming events
induced by the in vitro culture conditions which are distinct from that of in
vitro fertilized blastocysts. hESCs are a distinct cell type lacking in the human
embryo but, nonetheless, resemble the ICM in their ability to differentiate into 
cells representative of the endodermal, ectodermal and mesodermal cell lineages.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18160822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2008 Jan;27(1):92-100.

Intestinal-type cervical adenocarcinoma in situ and adenocarcinoma exhibit a
partial enteric immunophenotype with consistent expression of CDX2.

McCluggage WG(1), Shah R, Connolly LE, McBride HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Ireland.
glenn.mccluggage@bll.n-i.nhs.uk

Most cases of cervical adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) and adenocarcinoma are of the
usual or endocervical type. However, intestinal types of AIS and adenocarcinoma
exist. With an intestinal-type adenocarcinoma in the cervix, the question may
arise as to whether one is dealing with a primary cervical neoplasm or direct or 
secondary spread from an intestinal adenocarcinoma. In organs such as the ovary, 
urinary bladder, esophagus, and gallbladder, intestinal-type glandular epithelium
often expresses enteric markers, but this has hardly been studied in the cervix. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether intestinal-type AIS and
adenocarcinoma in the cervix express enteric markers and to ascertain whether
these antibodies are of value in the distinction from a metastatic intestinal
adenocarcinoma. We compared the immunophenotype of these lesions with that of
usual-type AIS and adenocarcinomain the cervix. Cases included were AIS of usual 
type (n = 6), primary cervical adenocarcinoma of usual type (n = 6), AIS of
intestinal type (n = 21), primary cervical adenocarcinoma of intestinal type (n =
3), primary cervical adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells (n = 2), and
colorectal adenocarcinoma involving the cervix (n = 5). All cases were stained
with cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, monoclonal carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), p16,
and CDX2. Staining was categorized as negative, focally positive (<50% cells), or
diffusely positive (50% or more cells). Usual-type AIS was always diffusely CK7
positive, typically diffusely CEA and p16 positive, and always CK20 negative.
CDX2 was positive in 1 case. All usual cervical adenocarcinomas were diffusely
CK7 and p16 positive, and all were immunoreactive with CEA. Five and 2 cases were
CK20 and CDX2 positive, respectively. Intestinal-type AIS was diffusely CK7
positive (all cases) and typically CK20 negative and diffusely CEA and p16
positive. All but 1 case exhibited diffuse nuclear positivity with CDX2. In
addition, usual-type AIS adjacent to intestinal type was CDX2 positive in 13 of
21 cases. The 3 cases of primary cervical intestinal-type adenocarcinoma were
diffusely CK7 positive, focally or diffusely positive with CK20 and CDX2, and
focally positive with CEA. One case was diffusely p16 positive, 1 focal and 1
negative. The foci of signet ring cells in the 2 primary cervical adenocarcinomas
were diffusely CK7 and p16 positive and negative with CK20 and CDX2. Colorectal
adenocarcinomas involving the cervix were typically diffusely positive with CK20,
CEA, and CDX2; negative with CK7; and negative or focally positive with p16.
Intestinal types of cervical AIS and adenocarcinoma exhibit a partial enteric
immunophenotype, usually with diffuse expression of CDX2 and, in some cases,
staining with CK20. They maintain their CK7 immunoreactivity and are usually p16 
positive. Although there is immunophenotypic overlap, focal staining with CK20
together with diffuse CK7 and sometimes p16 positivity helps to distinguish
intestinal types of cervical adenocarcinoma from involvement by a colorectal
adenocarcinoma; CEA and CDX2 are of no value in this regard. CDX2 positivity in
usual-type AIS adjacent to intestinal type and in occasional cases of pure
usual-type AIS may be a reflection of early intestinal differentiation before
this is morphologically apparent. Using a set of cases of AIS diagnosed in a
single institution over a 7-year period (77 usual type; 13 intestinal type),
intestinal type was more likely to be associated with early invasive
adenocarcinoma than usual type (31% vs 17%), suggesting that intestinal
differentiation may be a risk factor for invasion in premalignant cervical
glandular lesions.

PMID: 18156982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Dec;16(12):2752-5.

CDX2 VDR polymorphism and colorectal cancer.

Slattery ML(1), Herrick J, Wolff RK, Caan BJ, Potter JD, Sweeney C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, 375 Chipeta Way, Salt Lake City,
UT 84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Studies suggest that polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene may
influence colorectal cancer risk. In this study, we examine the association of
the CDX2 VDR polymorphism (rs11568820) located in the 5'-untranslated region of
the gene, and VDR haplotypes, including this polymorphism, with colon and rectal 
cancer using data from two large case-control studies of colon (N = 1,574 cases
and 1,970 controls) and rectal (n = 791 cases and 999 controls) cancer. The
frequency of the A allele of the CDX2 polymorphism was 19% among non-Hispanic
white, 21% among Hispanic, 76% among African American, and 47% among Asian
controls. The CDX2 polymorphism was not independently associated with either
colon or rectal cancer, nor did it modify associations of dietary calcium,
vitamin D, or fat with colon or rectal cancer. However, the bLFA haplotype which 
occurred in 6.5% of non-Hispanic white participants and 41.2% of African American
participants was associated with an increased risk of colon cancer, and an odds
ratio of 2.4 [95% confidence intervals (CI), 2.45 (1.38-4.38)]. The BSfG
haplotype was associated with a 1.61 (95% CI, 1.05-2.49) increased risk of rectal
but not colon cancer, whereas the BSFA haplotype was associated with a
significantly reduced risk of rectal (odds ratio, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.52-0.97) but
not colon cancer. These data suggest that haplotype analysis that encompasses
different domains of the VDR gene might further our understanding of associations
between the VDR gene and colon and rectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2659563
PMID: 18086783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mech Dev. 2008 Mar-Apr;125(3-4):270-83. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Tead4 is required for specification of trophectoderm in pre-implantation mouse
embryos.

Nishioka N(1), Yamamoto S, Kiyonari H, Sato H, Sawada A, Ota M, Nakao K, Sasaki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

During pre-implantation mouse development, embryos form blastocysts with
establishment of the first two cell lineages: the trophectoderm (TE) which gives 
rise to the placenta, and the inner cell mass (ICM) which will form the embryo
proper. Differentiation of TE is regulated by the transcription factor
Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2), but the mechanisms which act upstream of Cdx2
expression remain unknown. Here we show that the TEA domain family transcription 
factor, Tead4, is required for TE development. Tead1, Tead2 and Tead4 were
expressed in pre-implantation embryos, and at least Tead1 and Tead4 were
expressed widely in both TE and ICM lineages. Tead4-/- embryos died at
pre-implantation stages without forming the blastocoel. The mutant embryos
continued cell proliferation, and adherens junction and cell polarity were not
significantly affected. In Tead4-/- embryos, Cdx2 was weakly expressed at the
morula stage but was not expressed in later stages. None of the TE specific
genes, including Eomes and a Cdx2 independent gene, Fgfr2, was detected in
Tead4-/- embryos. Instead, the ICM specific transcription factors, Oct3/4 and
Nanog, were expressed in all the blastomeres. Tead4-/- embryos also failed to
differentiate trophoblast giant cells when they were cultured in vitro. ES cells 
with normal in vitro differentiation abilities were established from Tead4-/-
embryos. These results suggest that Tead4 has a distinct role from Tead1 and
Tead2 in trophectoderm specification of pre-implantation embryos, and that Tead4 
is an early transcription factor required for specification and development of
the trophectoderm lineage, which includes expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18083014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Virchows Arch. 2008 Feb;452(2):169-74. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

Mucosal colonization of gastric endocrine tumors mimicking mixed neoplasms.

Luong TV(1), Pilozzi E, Bearzi I, Bordi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Parma, 14 via
Gramsci., 43100, Parma, Italy.

Two cases of gastric tumors showing mixed composition of endocrine cell clusters 
and exocrine glands and originally diagnosed as mixed neoplasms are described. In
both cases, the exocrine glandular component was restricted to the upper third of
the neoplasms being consistently absent in areas of muscular wall invasion and,
in case 2, in nodal metastases. These glands were in close anatomical contiguity 
with the glands of the overlying gastric mucosa or, in case 1, apparently derived
from deep pouch-like invaginations of the mucosa. They showed either lack of
dysplasia (case 1) or mild dysplasia (case 2) with a Ki67 proliferation index
consistently lower than that of the intramucosal glands. The intratumoral glands 
presented intestinal metaplastic features confirmed by intense Cdx2
immunostaining that, conversely, was absent in the endocrine component of the
tumors. The latter showed intense vesicular monoamine transporter 2
immunoreactivity consistent with its origin from the enterochromaffin-like cells 
of the gastric oxyntic mucosa. On the basis of these findings, it is proposed
that the exocrine glands do not represent a true neoplastic component of the
tumors. Although mucosal entrapment by the tumor cannot be ruled out, they more
likely reflect a hitherto unrecognized mechanism of mucosal colonization of
gastric endocrine tumors.

PMID: 18080138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(22):e151. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Polony analysis of gene expression in ES cells and blastocysts.

Rieger C(1), Poppino R, Sheridan R, Moley K, Mitra R, Gottlieb D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Expression profiling of stem cells is challenging due to their small numbers and 
heterogeneity. The PCR colony (polony) approach has theoretical advantages as an 
assay for stem cells but has not been applied to small numbers of cells. An assay
has been developed that is sensitive enough to detect mRNAs from small numbers of
ES cells and from fractions of a single mouse blastocyst. Genes assayed include
Oct3, Rex1, Nanog, Cdx2 and GLUT-1. The assay is highly sensitive so that
multiple mRNAs from a single blastocyst were easily detected in the same assay.
In its present version, the assay is an attractive alternative to conventional
RT-PCR for profiling small populations of stem cells. The assay is also amenable 
to improvements that will increase its sensitivity and ability to analyze many
cDNAs simultaneously.

PMCID: PMC2190707
PMID: 18073198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Gastrointest Surg. 2008 Feb;12(2):400. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Letter to the editors.

Peters JH.

Erratum for
    J Gastrointest Surg. 2007 Jul;11(7):827-34.

PMID: 18071834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):614-29. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Cdx2 acts downstream of cell polarization to cell-autonomously promote
trophectoderm fate in the early mouse embryo.

Ralston A(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, MARS Building, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, 101 College
St., Toronto, ON, Canada.

The first lineage decision during mouse development is the establishment of
trophectoderm and inner cell mass lineages, morphologically distinguishable at
the blastocyst stage. The Caudal-like transcription factor Cdx2 is required for
repression of inner cell mass genes Oct4 and Nanog in the trophectoderm.
Expression of Cdx2 in the trophectoderm is thus one of the earliest known events 
in lineage determination. However, it is not clear whether the Cdx2 expression
pattern is the cause or the consequence of this first lineage decision. Here, we 
show that Cdx2 is initially ubiquitously expressed, and becomes progressively
upregulated in outside, future trophectoderm cells prior to blastocyst formation.
Ubiquitous Cdx2 expression begins around the time of cell polarization, but we
show that cell polarization is independent of zygotic Cdx2. Finally, we show
functionally that Cdx2 is downstream of lineage allocation since Cdx2 mutant
cells, which show cell-autonomous defects in expression of Oct4, Nanog, and the
trophectoderm marker Eomesodermin, do not preferentially contribute to inner cell
mass in chimeric blastocysts. Cdx2 therefore appears to act downstream of the
first lineage decision, suggesting that processes influencing lineage allocation 
or morphogenesis may regulate Cdx2 expression along the inside/outside axis of
the embryo.

PMID: 18067887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Stem Cells. 2008 Feb;26(2):465-73. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Derivation, characterization, and in vitro differentiation of canine embryonic
stem cells.

Hayes B(1), Fagerlie SR, Ramakrishnan A, Baran S, Harkey M, Graf L, Bar M,
Bendoraite A, Tewari M, Torok-Storb B.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Clinical Research Division, 1100
Fairview Avenue North, P.O. Box 19024, Seattle, Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Canine embryonic stem (cES) cell lines were generated to establish a large-animal
preclinical model for testing the safety and efficacy of embryonic stem (ES)
cell-derived tissue replacement therapy. Putative cES cell lines were initiated
from canine blastocysts harvested from natural matings. Times of harvest were
estimated as 12-16 days after the presumed surge in circulating levels of
luteinizing hormone. Four lines established from blastocysts harvested at days
13-14 postsurge satisfied most of the criteria for embryonic stem cells, whereas 
lines established after day 14 did not. One line, Fred Hutchinson dog (FHDO)-7,
has been maintained through 34 passages and is presented here. FHDO-7 cells are
alkaline phosphatase-positive and express both message and protein for the Oct4
transcription factor. They also express message for Nanog and telomerase but do
not express message for Cdx2, which is associated with trophectoderm.
Furthermore, they express a cluster of pluripotency-associated microRNAs (miRs)
(miR-302b, miR-302c, and miR-367) characteristic of human and mouse ES cells. The
FHDO-7 cells grow on feeder layers of modified mouse embryonic fibroblasts as
flat colonies that resemble ES cells from mink, a close phylogenetic relative of 
dog. When cultured in nonadherent plates without feeders, the cells form embryoid
bodies (EBs). Under various culture conditions, the EBs give rise to
ectoderm-derived neuronal cells expressing gamma-enolase and beta 3-tubulin;
mesoderm-derived cells producing collagen IIA1, cartilage, and bone; and
endoderm-derived cells expressing alpha-fetoprotein or Clara cell-specific
protein.

PMID: 18065395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jan;134(1):192-203. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Epithelial: lamina propria lymphocyte interactions promote epithelial cell
differentiation.

Dahan S(1), Roda G, Pinn D, Roth-Walter F, Kamalu O, Martin AP, Mayer L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intestinal lymphoepithelial interactions occur in the
epithelium and the subepithelial space. We asked whether normal, Crohn's disease 
(CD), or ulcerative colitis (UC) lamina propria lymphocytes (LPL) could promote
intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) growth and differentiation.
METHODS: T84 cells were cocultured with isolated LPL. IECs were then lysed and
subjected to measurement of intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) activity;
Western blot analysis for MAPK and Akt activation; and real-time polymerase chain
reaction to assess caudal-related homeoprotein 2 (CDX2) messenger RNA (mRNA)
levels. Tissue sections were immunostained for evidence of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation, CDX2, 
and IAP; and CDX2 mRNA expression was assessed in human colonic biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: IAP activity was increased in T84 cells cocultured for 8 days with
normal LPL (P < .05) and even greater with CD LPL (P < .001). Crypt IECs in
active CD mucosa expressed IAP ex vivo. Phospho-MAPK (extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, p38, and c-Jun-N-terminal kinase) and phospho-Akt
were seen as early as 30 minutes after coculture. MAPK activation was greatest in
T84 cells cocultured with CD LPL. There was a specific increase in Phospho-p38
MAPK and Phospho-Akt staining in the nuclei of crypt IECs in active vs inactive
CD, normal mucosa, and UC mucosa. CDX2 mRNA expression was increased in CD LPL
cocultured T84 cells, which did not correlate with CDX2 protein localization ex
vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: There is cross talk between LPL and IECs, which leads to IEC
differentiation. The differentiation is accelerated in CD mucosa.

PMCID: PMC2975902
PMID: 18045591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Pathology. 2008 Jan;40(1):35-41.

Does HepPar-1 immunoexpression have a role in differential diagnosis of
periampullary cancer?

Gulluoglu MG(1), Karayigit E, Ozden I, Kapran Y, Dizdaroglu F.

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Istanbul University,
Capa, Istanbul, Turkey. mggullu@istanbul.edu.tr

AIMS: Histological subtyping of periampullary carcinomas is considered as a
criterion for prognosis and therapeutic implications of these tumours. We
assessed the immunoexpression rates of HepPar-1, CDX2 and MUC2 antibodies in
different subtypes of periampullary adenocarcinomas (PAC), intestinal and
pancreatobiliary, in order to assess their impact on differential diagnosis of
this group of cancers. The expression of antibodies was also measured in ductal
adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head (DAPH).
METHODS: Sixty-five patients with PAC and DAPH who underwent pancreatic Whipple
resection constituted the study cohort. Of these, 46 (71%) had PAC, and 19 (29%) 
had DAPH. Among PACs, 20 (44%) were intestinal and 26 (56%) were pancreatobiliary
type.
RESULTS: HepPar-1 immunoreactivity was detected in 18 (39%) of all PACs. The rate
of HepPar-1 expression was significantly higher in intestinal type PAC (75%) than
it was in pancreatobiliary type (12%). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy
of HepPar-1 immunoexpression for diagnosing intestinal type PAC were 75% , 89%,
and 83%, respectively. Similarly, the rates of both CDX2 and MUC2 expressions
were significantly higher in intestinal type PAC (80%) than they were in
pancreatobiliary type (8%). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of both
CDX2 and MUC2 immunoexpressions for intestinal type PAC were 80%, 92%, and 87%,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: HepPar-1 antibody was found to be a highly sensitive and specific
marker for distinguishing intestinal type from pancreatobiliary type among PACs. 
In addition to CDX2 and MUC2 antibodies, HepPar-1 immunoexpression seems to have 
a potential role in differential diagnosis of PACs.

PMID: 18038313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. FEBS Lett. 2007 Dec 11;581(29):5691-7. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Arp3 is required during preimplantation development of the mouse embryo.

Vauti F(1), Prochnow BR, Freese E, Ramasamy SK, Ruiz P, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Technical University of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106,
Braunschweig, Germany. f.vauti@tu.bs.de

The role of Arp3 in mouse development was investigated utilizing a gene trap
mutation in the Arp3 gene. Heterozygous Arp3(WT/GT) mice are normal, however,
homozygous Arp3(GT/GT) embryos die at blastocyst stage. Earlier embryonic stages 
appear unaffected by the mutation, probably due to maternal Arp3 protein. Mutant 
blastocysts isolated at E3.5 fail to continue development in vitro, lack
outgrowth of trophoblast-like cells in culture and express reduced levels of the 
trophoblast marker Cdx2, while markers for inner cell mass continue to be
present. The recessive embryonic lethal phenotype indicates that Arp3 plays a
vital role for early mouse development, possibly when trophoblast cells become
critical for implantation.

PMID: 18035060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Feb;294(2):G418-28. Epub 2007 Nov
21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha promotes differentiation of intestinal
epithelial cells in a coculture system.

Lussier CR(1), Babeu JP, Auclair BA, Perreault N, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institute of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, J1H 5N4.

Normal cellular models able to efficiently recapitulate intestinal epithelial
cell differentiation in culture are not yet available. The aim of this work was
to establish and genetically characterize a mesenchymal-epithelial coculture
system to identify transcriptional regulators involved in this process. The
deposition of rat intestinal epithelial cells on human intestinal mesenchymal
cells led to the formation of clustered structures that expanded shortly after
seeding. These structures were composed of polarized epithelial cells with brush 
borders and cell junction complexes. A rat GeneChip statistical analysis
performed at different time points during this process identified hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) as being induced coincidently with the apparition of polarized
epithelial structures. Stable introduction of HNF-4alpha in undifferentiated
epithelial cells alone led to the rapid induction of HNF-1alpha and several
intestinal-specific markers and metabolism-related genes for which mRNA was
identified to be upregulated during epithelial differentiation. HNF-4alpha was
capable to transactivate the calbindin 3 gene promoter, a process that was
synergistically increased in the presence of HNF-1alpha. When
HNF-4alpha-expressing cells were plated on mesenchymal cells, an epithelial
monolayer formed rapidly with the apparition of dome structures that are
characteristics of vectorial ion transport. Forced expression of HNF-1alpha alone
did not result in dome structures formation. In sum, this novel coculture system 
functionally identified for the first time HNF-4alpha as an important modulator
of intestinal epithelial differentiation and offers an innovative opportunity to 
investigate molecular mechanisms involved in this process.

PMID: 18032476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Feb 1;44(3):430-43. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Regulation of NOX1 expression by GATA, HNF-1alpha, and Cdx transcription factors.

Valente AJ(1), Zhou Q, Lu Z, He W, Qiang M, Ma W, Li G, Wang L, Banfi B, Steger
K, Krause KH, Clark RA, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA. valente@uthscsa.edu

NOX1, a member of the NOX family of NADPH oxidases, is expressed primarily in
colon epithelium, where it may function in host defense and growth regulation. We
investigated factors responsible for its transcriptional regulation in vitro and 
its expression in vivo. Analysis of promoter constructs in the CaCo2 cell line
identified a complex element between -422 and -291 critical for promoter
activity. This element contained four sites that bound GATA-4, -5, and -6 in
vitro with varied affinities. One site also bound the caudal-related homeodomain 
proteins Cdx1 and Cdx2, whereas another also bound hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, and Cdx2 also bound to this
region in the intact chromatin of CaCo2 cells. These factors demonstrated
cooperativity when transactivating the NOX1 promoter. NOX1 mRNA was detected in
human colon epithelial cells along the crypt-villus axis. A gradient of NOX1 mRNA
expression was seen in the colons of normal as well as germ-free mice, with
significantly higher levels in distal compared with proximal segments. The
expression gradients of NOX1 mRNA in the colon paralleled those of GATA-6,
HNF-1alpha, and Cdx1. These data indicate that developmental, tissue-restricted
transcription factors play a key role in NOX1 regulation in vivo.

PMID: 18005670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Nov;131(11):1686-90.

Utility of tissue-specific transcription factors thyroid transcription factor 1
and Cdx2 in determining the primary site of metastatic adenocarcinomas to the
brain.

Strickland-Marmol LB(1), Khoor A, Livingston SK, Rojiani A.

Author information: 
(1)University of South Florida Department of Pathology, 12901 Bruce B. Downs
Blvd, MDC Box 11, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. Leah.Strickland-Marmol@med.va.gov

CONTEXT: Brain metastases of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary pose a diagnostic 
dilemma to the surgical pathologist. Although the most common source in these
cases is the lung, determining a primary source is difficult on routinely stained
slides. Immunohistochemical stain panels including differential cytokeratins,
hormone receptors, and breast-specific proteins are commonly used in these cases.
Recently, attention has turned to tissue-specific transcription factors, such as 
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and Cdx2, in the appraisal of metastatic
adenocarcinomas.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the previously unpublished immunohistochemical
expression of the relatively new tissue-specific transcription factor Cdx2 in
metastatic adenocarcinomas to the brain.
DESIGN: We reviewed the surgical pathology files of the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Fla, and retrieved 38 consecutive cases of 
metastatic adenocarcinoma (22 pulmonary, 10 breast, 6 gastrointestinal [2
esophagus/gastroesophageal junction, 4 colorectal]) to the brain with
confirmation of the primary site by chart review and histologic evaluation.
Sections were immunohistochemically stained with antibodies to TTF-1, Cdx2, and
cytokeratins 7 and 20 by standard methods.
RESULTS: Specificities and positive predictive values for Cdx2 and TTF-1 equaled 
100% for metastatic gastrointestinal and pulmonary adenocarcinomas, respectively.
The negative predictive value of Cdx2 was also very high at 97%.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdx2 is a specific and valuable tool for the surgical pathologist
when faced with the common problem of metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary. In conjunction with TTF-1, cytokeratin 7, and cytokeratin 20, Cdx2 can
accurately differentiate the most common sources of metastatic adenocarcinoma to 
the brain.

PMID: 17979487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Development. 2007 Dec;134(23):4219-31. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Stochastic patterning in the mouse pre-implantation embryo.

Dietrich JE(1), Hiiragi T.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Department of Developmental Biology,
Freiburg i. Br., Germany.

Mouse pre-implantation development gives rise to the blastocyst, which is made up
of at least three distinct cell types: the trophectoderm (TE) that surrounds a
cavity, and an inner cell mass (ICM) comprising the primitive endoderm (PE) and
epiblast (EPI). However, the underlying mechanisms involved in patterning the
cleavage-stage embryo are still unresolved. By analyzing the distribution of the 
transcription factors Oct4 (Pou5f1), Cdx2 and Nanog at precisely defined stages
in pre-implantation development, we were able to identify critical events leading
to the divergence of TE, EPI and PE lineages. We found that Oct4 is present in
all cells until late blastocyst, gradually disappearing from the TE thereafter.
The expression patterns of both Cdx2 and Nanog exhibit two specific phases,
culminating in their restriction to TE and EPI, respectively. In the first phase,
starting after compaction, blastomeres show highly variable Cdx2 and Nanog
protein levels. Importantly, the variability in Nanog levels is independent of
position within the morula, whereas Cdx2 variability may originate from
asymmetric cell divisions at the 8-cell stage in a non-stereotypic way.
Furthermore, there is initially no reciprocal relationship between Cdx2 and Oct4 
or between Cdx2 and Nanog protein levels. In the second phase, a definite pattern
is established, possibly by a sorting process that accommodates intrinsic and
extrinsic cues. Based on these results, we propose a model in which early
embryonic mouse patterning includes stochastic processes, consistent with the
highly regulative capacity of the embryo. This may represent a feature unique to 
early mammalian development.

PMID: 17978007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 1;312(1):284-99. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Ets2 is required for trophoblast stem cell self-renewal.

Wen F(1), Tynan JA, Cecena G, Williams R, Múnera J, Mavrothalassitis G, Oshima
RG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive 0612, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The Ets2 transcription factor is essential for the development of the mouse
placenta and for generating signals for embryonic mesoderm and axis formation.
Using a conditional targeted Ets2 allele, we show that Ets2 is essential for
trophoblast stem (TS) cells self-renewal. Inactivation of Ets2 results in TS cell
slower growth, increased expression of a subset of differentiation-associated
genes and decreased expression of several genes implicated in TS self-renewal.
Among the direct TS targets of Ets2 is Cdx2, a key master regulator of TS cell
state. Thus Ets2 contributes to the regulation of multiple genes important for
maintaining the undifferentiated state of TS cells and as candidate signals for
embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2211385
PMID: 17977525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Cancer. 2007 Oct 29;6:70.

Identification of a panel of sensitive and specific DNA methylation markers for
lung adenocarcinoma.

Tsou JA(1), Galler JS, Siegmund KD, Laird PW, Turla S, Cozen W, Hagen JA, Koss
MN, Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cancer Center and Department of Surgery and of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA. tsouwhat@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the number one cancer killer of both men and women in 
the United States. Three quarters of lung cancer patients are diagnosed with
regionally or distantly disseminated disease; their 5-year survival is only 15%. 
DNA hypermethylation at promoter CpG islands shows great promise as a
cancer-specific marker that would complement visual lung cancer screening tools
such as spiral CT, improving early detection. In lung cancer patients, such
hypermethylation is detectable in a variety of samples ranging from tumor
material to blood and sputum. To date the penetrance of DNA methylation at any
single locus has been too low to provide great clinical sensitivity. We used the 
real-time PCR-based method MethyLight to examine DNA methylation quantitatively
at twenty-eight loci in 51 primary human lung adenocarcinomas, 38 adjacent
non-tumor lung samples, and 11 lung samples from non-lung cancer patients.
RESULTS: We identified thirteen loci showing significant differential DNA
methylation levels between tumor and non-tumor lung; eight of these show highly
significant hypermethylation in adenocarcinoma: CDH13, CDKN2A EX2, CDX2, HOXA1,
OPCML, RASSF1, SFPR1, and TWIST1 (p-value << 0.0001). Using the current tissue
collection and 5-fold cross validation, the four most significant loci (CDKN2A
EX2, CDX2, HOXA1 and OPCML) individually distinguish lung adenocarcinoma from
non-cancer lung with a sensitivity of 67-86% and specificity of 74-82%. DNA
methylation of these loci did not differ significantly based on gender, race, age
or tumor stage, indicating their wide applicability as potential lung
adenocarcinoma markers. We applied random forests to determine a good classifier 
based on a subset of our loci and determined that combined use of the same four
top markers allows identification of lung cancer tissue from non-lung cancer
tissue with 94% sensitivity and 90% specificity.
CONCLUSION: The identification of eight CpG island loci showing highly
significant hypermethylation in lung adenocarcinoma provides strong candidates
for evaluation in patient remote media such as plasma and sputum. The four most
highly ranked loci, CDKN2A EX2, CDX2, HOXA1 and OPCML, which show significant DNA
methylation even in stage IA tumor samples, merit further investigation as some
of the most promising lung adenocarcinoma markers identified to date.

PMCID: PMC2206053
PMID: 17967182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Pathol Res Pract. 2008;204(1):1-9. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Low-grade gastric adenomas/dysplasias: phenotypic expression, DNA ploidy pattern,
and LOH at microsatellites linked to the APC gene.

Tanaka A(1), Takemura-Tsukashita S, Kushima R, Sugihara H, Fujiyama Y, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan;
Department of Internal Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu,
Japan.

The adenoma-adenocarcinoma sequence in the colon is generally accepted. Regarding
the stomach, however, opinions about tumorigenesis are different. We analyzed the
phenotypes, DNA ploidy patterns, and microsatellite regions linked to adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene on chromosome 5q of low-grade gastric
adenomas/dysplasias, Vienna Category 3, to investigate whether these lesions have
the potential to become adenocarcinomas. Phenotypes were determined by
immunohistochemical staining with monoclonal antibodies MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CD10,
and Cdx2. DNA ploidy patterns were determined by static cytofluorometry.
Microsatellite analyses were performed using Genescan on genetic analyzer ABI
PRISM 310. None of the 15 cases showed coexisting high-grade adenomas/dysplasias 
or adenocarcinoma. Eighty percent of the cases had the complete intestinal
phenotype, and the remainder showed slight MUC6 positivity for the intestinal
phenotype. All cases were positive for Cdx2 and showed diploid DNA. In addition, 
46.7% of the cases exhibited loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 5q.
Except for one case, 5q-LOH was detected at a single locus in cases with the
complete intestinal phenotype. According to previous studies, most gastric
adenocarcinomas have the gastric phenotype and no 5q-LOH. These results suggest
that low-grade gastric adenomas/dysplasias, Vienna category 3, seldom progress to
gastric adenocarcinomas of the differentiated type.

PMID: 17964080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Am J Clin Pathol. 2007 Nov;128(5):808-16.

Expression of mucins, SIMA, villin, and CDX2 in small-intestinal adenocarcinoma.

Zhang MQ(1), Lin F, Hui P, Chen ZM, Ritter JH, Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Department of Pathology
and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.

Expression of gastrointestinal biomarkers MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, small-intestinal
mucin antigen (SIMA), villin, and CDX2 has been studied in colorectal
adenocarcinoma (CRC). Little is known, however, about their expression in
small-intestinal adenocarcinoma (SIA). We immunohistochemically compared 30 SIAs 
with 48 CRCs for the expression of these biomarkers. The results showed that all 
6 proteins were variably expressed in SIA, but the frequencies of expression were
significantly lower than those for CRC with the exception of MUC1. Specifically, 
positive staining for MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, SIMA, villin, and CDX2 was observed in 
16 (53%), 17 (57%), 12 (40%), 15 (50%), 20 (67%), and 18 (60%) of SIAs and 25
(52%), 43 (90%), 39 (81%), 45 (94%), 47 (98%), and 47 (98%) of CRCs,
respectively. In addition, SIAs more frequently exhibited a focal staining
pattern for MUC2, MUC5AC, SIMA, and villin, whereas more diffuse immunoreactivity
was evident in CRCs. Focal staining for MUC1 and diffuse staining for CDX2 were
common for SIAs and CRCs. Furthermore, poorly differentiated SIAs tended to
express MUC1 more frequently when compared with well- and moderately
differentiated SIAs. These observations further support the notion that SIA is
immunophenotypically distinct from CRC despite their morphologic similarity.

PMID: 17951204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 15;67(20):9721-30.

Mouse model of colonic adenoma-carcinoma progression based on somatic Apc
inactivation.

Hinoi T(1), Akyol A, Theisen BK, Ferguson DO, Greenson JK, Williams BO, Cho KR,
Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Cancer Center, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2200, USA.

Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are pivotal in colorectal 
tumorigenesis. Existing mouse intestinal tumor models display mainly small
intestinal lesions and carcinomas are rare. We defined human CDX2 sequences
conferring colon epithelium-preferential transgene expression in the adult mouse.
Mice carrying a CDX2P-NLS Cre recombinase transgene and a loxP-targeted Apc
allele developed mainly colorectal tumors, with carcinomas seen in 6 of 36 (17%) 
of mice followed for 300 days. Like human colorectal lesions, the mouse tumors
showed biallelic Apc inactivation, beta-catenin dysregulation, global DNA
hypomethylation, and aneuploidy. The predominantly distal colon and rectal
distribution of tumors seen in mice where one Apc allele was inactivated in
epithelial cells from distal ileum to rectum suggests that regional differences
in the intestinal tract in the frequency and nature of secondary genetic and
epigenetic events associated with adenoma outgrowth have a contributing role in
determining where adenomas develop. The presence of large numbers of small
intestine tumors seemed to inhibit colorectal tumor development in the mouse, and
gender-specific effects on tumor multiplicity in the distal mouse colon and
rectum mimic the situation in humans where males have a larger number of advanced
adenomas and carcinomas in the distal colon and rectum than females. The mouse
model of colon-preferential gene targeting described here should facilitate
efforts to define novel factors and mechanisms contributing to human colon tumor 
pathogenesis, as well as work on tumor-promoting environmental factors and agents
and strategies for cancer prevention and treatment.

PMID: 17942902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. C R Biol. 2007 Nov;330(11):821-7. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Multiple-contrast X-ray micro-CT visualization of colon malformations and tumours
in situ in living mice.

Choquet P(1), Calon A, Breton E, Beck F, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN, Constantinesco 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de biophysique et de médecine nucléaire, hôpitaux universitaires de
Strasbourg, hôpital de Hautepierre, 1, avenue Molière, 67098 Strasbourg, France.

The development of new therapeutic approaches against colorectal cancer requires 
preclinical studies in mice. In vivo imaging could greatly facilitate these
trials, but the small size of the animals is a major limitation for the direct
visualization of intestinal tissue. Here we report a method of in vivo imaging of
the mouse intestine based on X-ray micro-computed tomography using multiple
contrast agents. This method was validated in the model of non-cancerous
polyp-like heteroplasia that spontaneously develops in the caecum area of Cdx2+/-
mutant mice and in the model of colon adenocarcinoma induced by administration of
the chemical carcinogen azoxymethane. As a simple and non-invasive method,
multiple-contrast X-ray micro-computed tomography is appropriate for pre-clinical
studies of intestinal diseases in living mice.

PMID: 17923376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Oct;131(10):1561-7.

Panels of immunohistochemical markers help determine primary sites of metastatic 
adenocarcinoma.

Park SY(1), Kim BH, Kim JH, Lee S, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine and
Cancer Research Institute, 28 Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, South
Korea.

CONTEXT: Although identification of the primary tumor in patients with metastatic
adenocarcinoma has a profound clinical impact, diagnosing the organ of origin is 
frequently difficult. Because none of the individual immunohistochemical markers 
used for tissue identification are both site specific and site sensitive,
multiple markers are needed to improve the prediction of primary sites.
OBJECTIVE: To develop an effective approach to immunohistochemically evaluate
metastatic adenocarcinoma for the assignment of a likely primary site of origin.
DESIGN: Expression profiles of CDX2, cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), MUC2, MUC5AC,
SMAD4, estrogen receptor (ER), and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15
(GCDFP-15) were generated in adenocarcinomas from 7 primary sites, followed by
construction of a decision tree and design of multiple-marker panels. Expression 
of these markers was evaluated immunohistochemically in 314 primary
adenocarcinomas (50 cases each of colorectal, gastric, lung, pancreatic, bile
duct, and breast, and 14 cases of ovarian origin) using the tissue array method. 
Results were validated using 60 cases of metastatic adenocarcinoma with known
primaries.
RESULTS: Organ-specific immunostaining profiles using multiple markers provided
high sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value in detecting primary
adenocarcinomas, as follows: colorectal, TTF-1-/CDX2+/CK7-/CK20+ or
TTF-1-/CDX2+/CK7-/CK20-/(CEA+ or MUC2+); ovarian,
CK7+/MUC5AC+/TTF-1-/CDX2-/CEA-/GCDFP-15-; breast,
GCDFP-15+/TTF-1-/CDX2-/CK7+/CK20- or ER+/ TTF-1-/CDX2-/CK20-/CEA-/MUC5AC-; lung, 
TTF-1+ or TTF-1-/CDX2-/CK7+/CK20-/GCDFP-15-/ER-/CEA-/ MUC5AC-;
pancreaticobiliary, TTF-1-/CDX2-/CK7+/ CEA+/MUC5AC+; and stomach,
TTF-1-/CDX2+/CK7+/ CK20-. Overall, these combined phenotypes correctly predicted 
the tester samples (metastatic adenocarcinomas with known primaries) in 75% of
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Determination of tissue-specific immunostaining profiles is valuable
in the diagnostic differentiation of metastatic adenocarcinomas from seven common
primary sites and should help to correctly predict the organ of primary tumor
origin.

PMID: 17922593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Dec;293(6):G1178-89. Epub 2007 Oct 
4.

Effect of retinoic acid on cell proliferation and differentiation as well as on
lipid synthesis, lipoprotein secretion, and apolipoprotein biogenesis.

Grenier E(1), Maupas FS, Beaulieu JF, Seidman E, Delvin E, Sane A, Tremblay E,
Garofalo C, Levy E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
emile.levy@recherche-ste-justine.qc.ca

Dietary vitamin A and its active metabolites are essential nutrients for many
functions as well as potent regulators of gene transcription and growth. Although
the epithelium of the small intestine is characterized by rapid and constant
renewal and enterocytes play a central role in the absorption and metabolism of
alimentary retinol, very little is known about the function of retinoids in the
human gastrointestinal epithelium and mechanisms by which programs engage the
cell cycle are poorly understood. We have assessed the effects of 10 microM 9-
and 13-cis-retinoic acid (RA) on proliferation and differentiation processes,
lipid esterification, apolipoprotein (apo) biogenesis and lipoprotein secretion
along with nuclear factor gene transcription. Treatment of Caco-2 cells with RA
at different concentrations and incubation periods revealed the reduction of
thymidine incorporation in 60% preconfluent or 100% confluent cells.
Concomitantly, RA 1) modulated D-type cyclins by reducing the mitogen-sensitive
cyclin D1 and upregulating cyclin D3 expressions and 2) caused a trend of
increase in p38 MAPK, which triggers CDX2, a central protein in cell
differentiation. RA remained without effect on lipoprotein output and apo
synthesis, even for apo A-I that possesses RARE in its promoter. RA, in
combination with 22-hydroxycholesterol, could induce apo A-I gene expression
without any impact on apo A-I mass. Only the gene expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)beta, retinoic receptor (RAR)beta, and
RARgamma was augmented and no alteration was noted in PPARalpha, PPARgamma, liver
X receptor (LXR)alpha, LXRbeta, and retinoid X receptors. Taken together, these
data highlight RA-induced cell differentiation via specific signaling without a
significant impact on apo A-I synthesis.

PMID: 17916647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Development. 2007 Nov;134(21):3827-36. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Transcription factor TEAD4 specifies the trophectoderm lineage at the beginning
of mammalian development.

Yagi R(1), Kohn MJ, Karavanova I, Kaneko KJ, Vullhorst D, DePamphilis ML,
Buonanno A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda,
MD 20892-2753, USA.

Specification of cell lineages in mammals begins shortly after fertilization with
formation of a blastocyst consisting of trophectoderm, which contributes
exclusively to the placenta, and inner cell mass (ICM), from which the embryo
develops. Here we report that ablation of the mouse Tead4 gene results in a
preimplantation lethal phenotype, and TEAD4 is one of two highly homologous TEAD 
transcription factors that are expressed during zygotic gene activation in mouse 
2-cell embryos. Tead4(-/-) embryos do not express trophectoderm-specific genes,
such as Cdx2, but do express ICM-specific genes, such as Oct4 (also known as
Pou5f1). Consequently, Tead4(-/-) morulae do not produce trophoblast stem cells, 
trophectoderm or blastocoel cavities, and therefore do not implant into the
uterine endometrium. However, Tead4(-/-) embryos can produce embryonic stem
cells, a derivative of ICM, and if the Tead4 allele is not disrupted until after 
implantation, then Tead4(-/-) embryos complete development. Thus, Tead4 is the
earliest gene shown to be uniquely required for specification of the
trophectoderm lineage.

PMID: 17913785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mod Pathol. 2007 Dec;20(12):1286-97. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

CDX2 expression is progressively decreased in human gastric intestinal
metaplasia, dysplasia and cancer.

Liu Q(1), Teh M, Ito K, Shah N, Ito Y, Yeoh KG.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Institute, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 10 Medical Drive, Singapore.

Intestinal metaplasia is a key event in multistep gastric carcinogenesis. CDX2, a
master regulator of intestinal phenotype, was shown to play a tumor-suppressive
role in colon cancer. However, it was reported to be expressed in nearly all
gastric intestinal metaplasia and many gastric cancers. As CDX2 is differentially
expressed in normal stomach and intestine, we sought to relate the CDX2
expression to gastrointestinal differentiation along gastric carcinogenesis. The 
expression of CDX2 protein in gastric intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and cancer
was examined and related to their gastrointestinal differentiation. CDX2
expression was significantly decreased in incomplete intestinal metaplasia, which
expresses both gastric mucins (MUC5AC and MUC6) and intestinal mucin (MUC2),
compared with complete intestinal metaplasia, which expresses intestinal mucin
(MUC2) only. Although incomplete intestinal metaplasia morphologically resembles 
colon, its CDX2 expression was apparently lower than that in the normal colon.
Moreover, CDX2 expression was progressively reduced in gastric dysplasia and
cancer. The CDX2 expression in gastric cancer was also inversely correlated with 
the expression of gastric mucins. As incomplete intestinal metaplasia is
associated with higher risk of gastric cancer, its lower CDX2 expression compared
with that in complete intestinal metaplasia and normal colon epithelium resolved 
the current contradiction between the tumor-suppressive role of CDX2 in the colon
and the high prevalence of CDX2 in intestinal metaplasia. Further decrease of
CDX2 expression in gastric dysplasia and cancer suggests that CDX2 plays a
similar anticarcinogenic role in intestinal metaplasia as it does in colon.
Intestinal metaplasia or dysplasia with low expression of CDX2 may serve as
predictive markers for gastric cancer.

PMID: 17906616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2007 Sep;62(9):966-72.

Lack of association between vitamin D receptor genotypes and haplotypes with
fat-free mass in postmenopausal Brazilian women.

Moreno Lima R(1), Silva de Abreu B, Gentil P, Cesar de Lima Lins T, Grattapaglia 
D, Pereira RW, Jacó de Oliveira R.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Educação Física da Universidade Católica de
Brasília, Brazil.

The relationship between vitamin D receptor (VDR) ApaI, CDX2, BsmI, FokI, and
TaqI polymorphisms and fat-free mass (FFM) were examined in 191 postmenopausal
Brazilian women (mean age 67.87 +/- 5.22 years). Participants underwent FFM
measurements by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). Whole-blood-extracted
genomic DNA was genotyped to the aforementioned polymorphisms and to
ancestry-informative markers through minisequencing, using the SNaPshot Multiplex
System. Association between VDR polymorphisms and FFM variables was assessed by
analysis of covariance. Haplotypes were estimated, and regression-based,
haplotype-specific association tests were carried out with the studied
phenotypes. No departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was detected for any
polymorphism. None of the investigated VDR allelic variations, individually or
analyzed as haplotypes, was associated with FFM phenotypes. The inclusion of
individual African genomic ancestry was used as an attempt to correct for
population stratification. Further studies in larger sample population are
required to confirm these findings.

PMID: 17895434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cell Cycle. 2007 Sep 15;6(18):2241-5. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

HOX gene regulation in acute myeloid leukemia: CDX marks the spot?

Fröhling S(1), Scholl C, Bansal D, Huntly BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. sfrohling@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Gene targeting and overexpression studies have demonstrated the importance of the
clustered homeobox (HOX) genes in hematopoesis. In addition, global HOX gene
dysregulation is found in the majority of cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
and many cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and substantial evidence
exists to suggest that aberrant expression of HOX genes contributes to the
pathogenesis of leukemia. However, although individual HOX genes are rearranged
in rare cases of AML and HOX genes are known transcriptional targets of certain
leukemia-associated fusion proteins, such as those involving the mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) gene, in the majority of cases, the upstream regulators of HOX
genes are unknown. The CDX family of non-clustered homeobox genes are known
developmental regulators of HOX gene expression. We have recently demonstrated
that Cdx4 is expressed in adult murine bone marrow where its expression pattern
follows that of Hox genes. We also demonstrated that CDX2 is expressed in the
majority, and that CDX4 is expressed in almost a quarter, of AML patient samples.
For CDX2, this expression was predominantly monoallelic but was not associated
with coding sequence or promoter mutations, gene amplification, or aberrant
promoter methylation. In addition, stable knockdown of CDX2 resulted in a loss of
proliferation and clonogenicity in AML cell lines, and bone marrow retrovirally
engineered to express either Cdx2 or Cdx4 generated AML in transplant recipients.
Cdx4 was shown to cooperate with the known Hox cofactor Meis1a, and
structure-function experiments confirmed that the transcription factor function
of Cdx4 was required for transformation. Finally, expression of either Cdx2 or
Cdx4 generated a dysregulated Hox gene program in normal hematopoietic
progenitors and in leukemic tissue. Taken together, these studies implicate CDX
proteins as master regulators of HOX gene regulation in AML.

PMID: 17881901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Gastroenterol. 2007 Sep;42(9):719-29. Epub 2007 Sep 25.

Homeobox protein CDX2 reduces Cox-2 transcription by inactivating the DNA-binding
capacity of nuclear factor-kappaB.

Mutoh H(1), Hayakawa H, Sakamoto H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, 329-0431, Japan.

BACKGROUND: While cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is not normally expressed by
epithelial cells lining the human colon, COX-2 protein is aberrantly
overexpressed in premalignant adenomatous polyps and carcinomas of the human
colon. On the other hand, Cdx2 has been identified as a colonic tumor-suppressor 
gene, besides its role in cell differentiation. However, the relationship between
CDX2 attenuation and COX-2 overexpression in colorectal carcinoma has not been
established. Here, we investigated the mechanistic link between CDX2
downregulation and COX-2 upregulation.
METHODS: Gene expression was examined by immunoblotting, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and promoter analysis. Promoter
transactivation was quantified by using a luciferase construct. DNA binding of
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) was examined by electromobility shift analysis.
RESULTS: CDX2 decreased expression of COX-2 mRNA and protein at the
transcriptional level in the human colon cancer Caco-2 cell line. Though p50/p65 
NF-kappaB translocated into nucleus in the presence of CDX2, CDX2 interacted with
p50/p65 NF-kappaB and impeded the formation of an NF-kappaB-DNA complex, required
for promotion of Cox-2 transcription.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that CDX2 inhibits transcription of Cox-2 by
interfering with the binding of NF-kappaB on the NF-kappaB binding site.

PMID: 17876541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Stem Cell Rev. 2007 Jan;3(1):60-5.

The flawed scientific basis of the altered nuclear transfer-oocyte assisted
reprogramming (ANT-OAR) proposal.

Byrnes WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Howard 
University, 520 W Street, NW, Washington, DC 20059, USA. wbyrnes@howard.edu

Comment in
    Stem Cell Rev. 2007 Jan;3(1):66-7.

First put forth in June 2005, the altered nuclear transfer-oocyte assisted
reprogramming (ANT-OAR) proposal has been promoted as an ethically-acceptable
alternative to the embryo-destructive methods now used to obtain embryonic stem
cells. According to its proponents, the goal of ANT-OAR is to use the cloning
process to create a pluripotent stem cell. This would be achieved through
overexpression of the transcription factor Nanog (or a hypothetical substitute)
both in the enucleated egg cell and in the somatic cell prior to transfer of its 
nucleus. Although the ethical acceptability of ANT-OAR has been publicly debated,
its scientific feasibility has not. This paper aims to help rectify this
situation. It argues that ANT-OAR, as currently conceived, cannot realistically
work. It presents evidence from the scientific literature showing that Nanog
cannot single-handedly establish pluripotency in cells, but rather works together
with a network of other transcription factors to maintain pluripotency. It argues
that ANT-OAR is based on a flawed understanding of stem cell biology, and
emphasizes that, in this debate about embryonic stem cells, scientists must
strive to accurately and realistically assess the feasibility of the embryo
research strategies they propose.

PMID: 17873382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Hum Pathol. 2007 Dec;38(12):1836-41. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Colorectal adenocarcinoma involving the prostate: report of 9 cases.

Osunkoya AO(1), Netto GJ, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

We present 9 consult cases, the largest series to date, of colorectal
adenocarcinoma involving the prostate. Mean age of patients at diagnosis was 61
years (range, 42-78 years). Six cases were initially diagnosed on needle biopsy
and the others by transurethral resection. Three cases were diagnosed before
biopsy of the colon, which led to the discovery of a primary colonic tumor. The
mean interval between the detection of the primary colonic tumor and prostatic
involvement in the other 6 cases was 30 months (range, 1-52 months). At
diagnosis, the stages of colorectal carcinomas were pT1 (n=2), pT2 (n=2), pT3
(n=2), and pT4 (n=3). Two cases involved the prostate after the recurrence of
rectal adenocarcinoma at the anastomotic site of the previous colonic resection. 
In most cases, the tumors were typical moderately differentiated with occasional 
poorly differentiated foci. Other histologic features included desmoplastic
stromal reaction (100%, n=9), necrosis (77.8%, n=7), chronic inflammatory
response (77.8%, n=7), cribriform pattern (66.7%, n=6), villous architecture
(22.2%, n=2), mucin production (22.2%, n=2), signet-ring cells (11.1%, n=1), and 
perineural invasion (11.1%, n=1). Immunohistochemical stains were positive for
beta-catenin in 6 of 6 cases, CDX2 in 6 of 6 cases, carcinoembryonic antigen in 7
of 7 cases, CK20 in 5 of 6 cases, high-molecular-weight cytokeratin in 5 of 6
cases, and alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase in 3 of 6 cases. Stains were negative in
all cases for prostate-specific antigen, P501S (prostein), and CK7. Six patients 
(66.7%) died of disease within an average of 34 months (range, 8-88 months) after
diagnosis of prostatic involvement. There are critical therapeutic and prognostic
implications for distinguishing between prostatic adenocarcinoma and colorectal
carcinoma involving the prostate. Colorectal adenocarcinoma should be considered 
on prostate sampling when carcinoma exhibits either "dirty" necrosis, tall
columnar epithelium with mucin production, mucin-positive signet-ring cells,
villous architecture, or associated inflammation. Immunohistochemical stains for 
beta-catenin, CDX2, carcinoembryonic antigen, high-molecular-weight cytokeratin, 
prostate-specific antigen, P501S (prostein), CK20, and CK7 can be helpful in
making a definitive diagnosis.

PMID: 17868775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):309-19. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Overexpression of CDX2 perturbs HOX gene expression in murine progenitors
depending on its N-terminal domain and is closely correlated with deregulated HOX
gene expression in human acute myeloid leukemia.

Rawat VP(1), Thoene S, Naidu VM, Arseni N, Heilmeier B, Metzeler K, Petropoulos
K, Deshpande A, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Bohlander SK, Spiekermann K, Hiddemann W,
Feuring-Buske M, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Germany.

The mechanisms underlying deregulation of HOX gene expression in AML are poorly
understood. The ParaHox gene CDX2 was shown to act as positive upstream regulator
of several HOX genes. In this study, constitutive expression of Cdx2 caused
perturbation of leukemogenic Hox genes such as Hoxa10 and Hoxb8 in murine
hematopoietic progenitors. Deletion of the N-terminal domain of Cdx2 abrogated
its ability to perturb Hox gene expression and to cause acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) in mice. In contrast inactivation of the putative Pbx interacting site of
Cdx2 did not change the leukemogenic potential of the gene. In an analysis of 115
patients with AML, expression levels of CDX2 were closely correlated with
deregulated HOX gene expression. Patients with normal karyotype showed a 14-fold 
higher expression of CDX2 and deregulated HOX gene expression compared with
patients with chromosomal translocations such as t(8:21) or t(15;17). All
patients with AML with normal karyotype tested were negative for CDX1 and CDX4
expression. These data link the leukemogenic potential of Cdx2 to its ability to 
dysregulate Hox genes. They furthermore correlate the level of CDX2 expression
with HOX gene expression in human AML and support a potential role of CDX2 in the
development of human AML with aberrant Hox gene expression.

PMID: 17855634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2007 Dec;42(12):1460-5.

Bile acids induce overexpression of homeobox gene CDX-2 and vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) in human Barrett's esophageal mucosa and adenocarcinoma cell
line.

Burnat G(1), Rau T, Elshimi E, Hahn EG, Konturek PC.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,
Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is an acquired precancerous condition that
develops from mucosal injury incurred after chronic gastroesophageal acid and
bile reflux. The mechanism of progression of carcinogenesis in BE is still not
fully understood. Recently, the role of bile acids and the homeobox gene
transcription factor CDX-2 has been suggested in the pathogenesis of BE. The aims
of the present study were 1) to compare the mRNA and protein expression of CDX-2 
in biopsies obtained from patients with BE and normal squamous epithelium and 2) 
to study the effect of two different bile salts, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and 
deoxycholic acid (DCA), on the mRNA expression of CDX-2 and vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) in Barrett's the adenocarcinoma cell line (OE-33).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: CDX-2 expression was measured in Barrett's mucosa and
normal esophageal mucosa obtained from 15 patients with BE histologically
diagnosed by immunohistochemistry, Western blot, and quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In in vitro experiments, OE-33 
cells were incubated with DCA (100 microM) and UDCA (100 microM) in neutral and
shortly acidified media (pulse acidification). The expression of CDX-2 and VEGF
was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Both mRNA and protein expression of CDX-2 were significantly
up-regulated in Barrett's mucosa as compared to normal esophageal mucosa. In
neutral medium, OE-33 cells showed an increase in CDX-2 expression after
incubation with DCA or UDCA. After short acidification of the medium, expression 
of CDX-2 in OE-33 cells was significantly higher than that in cells incubated in 
neutral pH. The addition of DCA and UDCA did not cause any further alteration in 
CDX-2 expression. In neutral and acidified medium, VEGF mRNA expression was only 
significantly up-regulated by DCA, but not by UDCA.
CONCLUSIONS: Bile acids, especially in acidic medium, increase expression of
CDX-2. DCA appears to be a stronger stimulant of the expression of VEGF than UDCA
in the Barrett's carcinoma cell line, indicating a stronger carcinogenic
potential of this bile salt.

PMID: 17852856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Histochem Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;128(5):445-55. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Hyperplastic polyps and sessile serrated 'adenomas' of the colon and rectum
display gastric pyloric differentiation.

Mochizuka A(1), Uehara T, Nakamura T, Kobayashi Y, Ota H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Japan.

The serrated polyp-neoplasia pathway is a novel concept that has been
demonstrated to differ from the conventional adenoma-carcinoma pathway. To
characterize the phenotypic patterns of differentiation in colorectal serrated
polyps, we examined the immunohistochemical expression profile of gastric
(MUC5AC, TFF1, MUC6, GlcNAcalpha1 --> 4Gal --> R, and PDX1) and intestinal (MUC2,
TFF3, and CDX2) epithelial markers in 15 hyperplastic polyps (HPs), 29 sessile
serrated adenomas (SSAs),12 traditional serrated adenomas (TSAs), and 16
conventional adenomas (CAs). MUC5AC and TFF1 were upregulated in the HPs, SSAs,
and TSAs. MUC6 was expressed in the HPs and SSAs. GlcNAcalpha1 --> 4Gal --> R was
expressed only in the SSAs. Although MUC2 expression was preserved, TFF3 was
downregulated in the HPs, SSAs, and TSAs. PDX1 was upregulated in the HPs, SSAs, 
and TSAs. On the other hand, CDX2 was downregulated in the HPs and SSAs. The
colorectal serrated polyps showed higher expression of gastric makers than CAs.
The HPs and SSAs showed gastric and intestinal mixed phenotype expression with
gastric pyloric organoid differentiation and almost identical, but different from
the TSAs, marker profile. PDX1 up-regulation and CDX2 down-regulation could be
important for the induction of a gastric pyloric pattern of cell differentiation 
in colorectal serrated polyps.

PMID: 17851679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochem J. 2007 Dec 15;408(3):317-26.

The epigenetic signature of CFTR expression is co-ordinated via chromatin
acetylation through a complex intronic element.

Paul T(1), Li S, Khurana S, Leleiko NS, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene is a tightly 
regulated and differentially expressed transcript in many mucosal epithelial cell
types. It appears that DNA sequence variations alone do not explain CFTR-related 
gastrointestinal disease patterns and that epigenetic modifiers influence CFTR
expression. Our aim was to characterize the native chromatin environment in
cultured cells for intestinal CFTR expression by determining the relationship
between histone acetylation and occupation of CFTR by multiple transcription
factors, through a common regulatory element. We used HDAC (histone deacetylase) 
inhibition and ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analyses to define regions
associated with acute acetylation of histone at the CFTR locus. We identified a
region within the first intron associated with acute acetylation of histone H4 as
an epigenetic signature corresponding to an intestine-specific enhancer element
for CFTR. DHS (DNase I-hypersensitivity) assays and ChIP were used to specify
control elements and occupation by regulatory factors. Quantitative ChIP
procedures indicate that HNF1alpha (hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha) and Cdx2
(caudal homeobox protein 2) occupy and regulate through a novel intronic enhancer
element of CFTR and that Tcf4 (T-cell factor 4) overlaps the same DNA element.
RNAi (RNA interference) of Tcf4 and HNF1alpha decreased intestinal cell CFTR
expression, identifying these as positive regulatory factors and CFTR as a target
for Wnt signalling. We have linked the acetylation signature of nucleosomal
histones to active intestinal CFTR expression and occupation by transcription
factors HNF1alpha, Cdx2 and Tcf4 which converge to modify chromatin architecture.
These studies suggest the therapeutic potential of histone modification
strategies, such as inhibition of HDAC activity, to treat CFTR-associated disease
by selectively enhancing CFTR expression.

PMCID: PMC2267364
PMID: 17848139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Inorg Chem. 2007 Oct 1;46(20):8291-301. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Cadmium(II) complexes of (arylazo)imidazoles: synthesis, structure,
photochromism, and density functional theory calculation.

Sarker KK(1), Sardar D, Suwa K, Otsuki J, Sinha C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Inorganic Chemistry Section, Jadavpur University,
Kolkata 7000 032, India.

Reaction between CdX2 and 1-alkyl-2-(phenylazo)imidazole (RaaiR') has isolated
complexes of composition Cd(RaaiR')2X2 in MeOH or MeCN. Crystallization of
Cd(RaaiR')2I2 from N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) has separated [Cd(RaaiR')I2.DMF], 
while Cd(RaaiR')2X2 (X = Cl and Br) remains unchanged in its composition upon
crystallization under identical conditions. The structure has been established by
spectral (UV-vis and 1H NMR) data and confirmation in the latter case by a
single-crystal X-ray diffraction study of [Cd(TaiMe)I2.DMF] [where TaiMe =
1-methyl-2-(p-tolylazo)imidazole]. UV-light irradiation in a MeCN solution of
Cd(RaaiR')2I2 and [Cd(RaaiR')I2.DMF] shows trans-to-cis isomerization of
coordinated azoimidazole. The reverse transformation, cis-to-trans, is very slow 
with visible light irradiation. Quantum yields (phit-->c) of trans-to-cis
isomerization are calculated, and the free ligand shows higher phi values than
their cadmium(II) iodo complexes. The cis-to-trans isomerization is a thermally
induced process. The activation energy (Ea) of cis-to-trans isomerization is
calculated by a controlled-temperature experiment. The effects of the anions
(Cl-, Br-, I-, and ClO4-) and the number of coordinated azoimidazoles (RaaiR')
[Cd(RaaiR') or Cd(RaaiR')2] on the rate and quantum yields of photochromism are
established in this work. A slow rate of photoisomerization of
[Cd(RaaiR')4](ClO4)2 compared to Cd(RaaiR')I2 or Cd(RaaiR')2X2 may be associated 
with the increased mass and rotor volume of the complexes. The rate of
isomerization is also dependent on the nature of X and follows the sequence
Cd(RaaiR')2Cl2 < Cd(RaaiR')2Br2 < Cd(RaaiR')2I2. It may be related to the size
and electronegativity of halide, which reduces the effective molar association in
the order of I < Br < Cl and hence the rate. Gaussian 03 calculations of
representative complexes and free ligands are used to explain the difference in
the rates and quantum yields of photoisomerization.

PMID: 17824607  [PubMed]


250. Diagn Pathol. 2007 Sep 5;2:35.

Primary colorectal small cell carcinoma: a clinicopathological and
immunohistochemical study of 10 cases.

El Demellawy D(1), Khalifa MA, Ismiil N, Wong S, Ghorab Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center, 2075 Bayview
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. dina_eldemellawy@rogers.com

Colorectal small cell carcinoma (SmCC) is a rare tumor with an aggressive course.
The aim of this study is to summarize our experience with this tumor and to
highlight its immunohistochemical profile. Ten cases of colorectal SmCC were
identified in our files and a panel of immunostains was performed. Follow up was 
available for the average of 3 years, during which 7 patients died and 3 were
alive with disease. All cases were positive for LMWK, CK 19 and pancytokeratin
but were negative for TTF-1 and CA 125. EGFR was positive in 7 cases. TTF-1
negative staining may be valuable in differentiating it from its pulmonary
counterpart. CDX2, mCEA, CD56, synaptophysin, NSE and chromogranin can help
differentiate it from non-endocrine poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The
expression of EGFR in a subset of patients has not been reported earlier and has 
to be evaluated in larger series to assess its role in the planning of targeted
biologic therapy.

PMCID: PMC2034542
PMID: 17803816  [PubMed]


251. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Sep;31(9):1323-9.

Primary mucin-producing urothelial-type adenocarcinoma of prostate: report of 15 
cases.

Osunkoya AO(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Prostatic urothelial-type adenocarcinoma arises through a process of glandular
metaplasia of the prostatic urethral urothelium and subsequent in situ
adenocarcinoma sometimes associated with villous adenoma. These prostatic
adenocarcinomas are analogous to nonurachal adenocarcinomas arising in the
bladder from cystitis glandularis. Only 2 cases of urothelial-type adenocarcinoma
from an institution other than our own have been previously described. The
distinction between adenocarcinoma from another organ secondarily involving the
prostate, usual adenocarcinoma of the prostate, and prostatic urothelial-type
adenocarcinoma can present a significant diagnostic challenge and has significant
therapeutic implications. Fifteen cases of prostatic urothelial-type
adenocarcinoma were retrieved from the consult files of one of the authors. Mean 
patient age at diagnosis was 72 years (range 58 to 93 y). All men had negative
colonoscopies, clinically excluding a colonic primary. Bladder primaries were
ruled out clinically or pathologically in radical resection specimens. Follow-up 
was available on all men with a mean of 50.3 months (range 2 to 161 mo). All men 
presented with urinary obstruction symptoms with 3 (20%) also having mucusuria
and 2 (13.3%) also having hematuria. Four men (26.7%) developed metastatic
disease and 8 (53.3%) died of disease. In 8/15 (53%) cases, glandular metaplasia 
of the prostatic urethra and contiguous transition to adenocarcinoma were
identified. Multiple histologic patterns were observed including dissection of
the stroma by mucin pools 15/15 (100%), villous features 7/15 (47%), necrosis
2/15 (13.3%), signet ring cells 3/15 (20%), perineural invasion 1/15 (6.7%),
focal squamous differentiation 1/15 (6.7%), and a granulomatous inflammatory
response 1/15 (6.7%). Immunohistochemical stains were negative for prostate
specific antigen, prostate specific acid phosphatase, CDX2, and beta-catenin in
all cases. Stains were positive for high molecular weight cytokeratin in 12/12
cases (100%), and CK7 and CK20 in 10/12 cases (83.3%). Prostatic urothelial-type 
adenocarcinoma is a rare aggressive cancer arising in the prostate. The
differential diagnosis includes conventional prostatic mucinous adenocarcinoma
and secondary infiltration from a colonic or bladder adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry for prostate specific antigen, prostate specific acid
phosphatase, and high molecular weight cytokeratin along with morphology can help
rule out conventional prostate carcinoma. beta-catenin, CDX2, and clinical
studies are needed to rule out colonic adenocarcinoma. As prostatic
urothelial-type adenocarcinoma is entirely analogous to bladder adenocarcinoma in
both, its morphology and immunophenotype, only clinical studies or in some cases 
pathologic examination of the cystoprostatectomy specimen can exclude
infiltration from a primary bladder adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 17721186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Ital J Anat Embryol. 2007 Apr-Jun;112(2):81-92.

Validation study of a cell culture model of colorectal cancer.

Luca T(1), Privitera G, Lo Monaco M, Prezzavento C, Castorina S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy GF Ingrassia, University of Catania.

Colorectal cancer is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in Western
populations. Due to the fact that epithelial cells of colon have an important
role in the pathophysiology of cancer, we set up a mechanical method combined
with an enzymatic digestion of surgical resections derived from our Clinical
Centre to obtain tumoral colon epithelium cell cultures. The cells proliferated
under the chosen culture conditions and were maintained for several weeks,
including subcultivation steps. We characterised the cell morphology by light and
phase contrast microscopes and by immunoistochemistry analysis. Moreover, we also
demonstrated the preservation of the secretory function of the cultured cells
over the time. This validated model of primary epithelial cells from colon cancer
will be used to understand the biological and pathological features of human
tumoral colonic cells. This will be done by studying the expression of specific
proteins in the tumor and analysing mutations of specific genes in each patient
to relate each genetic signature to a precise pharmacological response.

PMID: 17687873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Aug;131(8):1304-11.

Immunophenotypic characterization of anal gland carcinoma: loss of p63 and
cytokeratin 5/6.

Lisovsky M(1), Patel K, Cymes K, Chase D, Bhuiya T, Morgenstern N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Long Island Jewish Medical Center and Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, NY, USA. mlisovsk@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Oct;132(10):1547-8.

Anal gland carcinoma (AGC) is a rare perianal invasive cancer composed of tubular
glands lined by cuboidal epithelium. The clinical features and histogenesis of
AGC are not well understood and its origin from anal glands is often difficult to
prove. Little is known about immunophenotypic features of AGC that could be
useful in establishing the diagnosis. This study evaluated the
immunohistochemical profile of 2 cases of AGC in comparison to anal glands from
11 hemorrhoidectomy specimens. Sections from the specimens were routinely
processed and immunostained using commercial antibodies to cytokeratin (CK) 7,
CK20, CK5/ 6, p63, CDX2, smooth muscle actin, calponin, heavy chain smooth muscle
myosin, p53, and p16. In case 1 of AGC, radiation and chemotherapy preceded an
abdominoperineal resection. In biopsies from this case, the neoplastic anal
glands had a tubular pattern, whereas most glands in the resection specimen
exhibited mucinous features. The histologic pattern in case 2 was tubular. Normal
anal glands showed immunoreactivity for myoepithelial and basal cell markers
CK5/6 and p63 in basal and parabasal cell layers and for CK7 in superficial cell 
layers. In contrast, both cases of AGC were negative for CK5/6 and p63 and were
diffusely positive for CK7. Normal glands and both cases of AGC were negative for
the intestinal differentiation marker CDX2, CK20, smooth muscle actin, calponin, 
smooth muscle myosin heavy chain, p16, and p53. Our data suggest that loss of p63
and CK5/6 expression is a feature of AGC. Anal gland carcinoma shares negativity 
for CDX2 and CK7+/CK20- profile with normal anal glands. No evidence of
myoepithelial cells was found in normal or malignant anal glands. These data may 
be useful in establishing the diagnosis of AGC.

PMID: 17683193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Anal Chem. 2007 Sep 1;79(17):6496-506. Epub 2007 Aug 4.

Determination of the Cd-bearing phases in municipal solid waste and biomass
single fly ash particles using SR-microXRF spectroscopy.

Camerani MC(1), Somogyi A, Vekemans B, Ansell S, Simionovici AS, Steenari BM,
Panas I.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Analysis, Eka Chemicals AB, S-445 80 Bohus, Sweden, DiffAbs Beamline,
Synchrotron Soleil, BP 48, 91192, Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France.
caterina.camerani@eka.com

By using an excitation energy of 27.0 keV, synchrotron radiation-induced
micro-X-ray fluorescence (SR-microXRF) is employed to extract information
regarding the composition and distribution of Cd-bearing phases in municipal
solid waste (MSW) and biomass fly ashes. Significance of observation is based on 
statistics of totally more than 100 individual MSW and biomass fly ash particles 
from a fluidized bed combustion (FBC) plant. Cd concentrations in the
parts-per-million range are determined. In general, although previous leaching
studies have indicated Cd to be predominant in the smaller-size ash particles, in
the present study Cd is more evenly distributed throughout all the particle
sizes. For MSW fly ashes, results indicate the presence of Cd mainly as CdBr2
hot-spots, whereas for biomass fly ashes, which exhibit lower CdX2 concentration,
a thin Cd layer on/in the particles is reported. For both ashes, Ca-containing
matrixes are found to be the main Cd-bearing phases. Support for this observation
is found from independent first-principles periodic density functional theory
calculations. The observations are condensed into a schematic mechanism for Cd
adsorption on the fly ash particles.

PMID: 17676816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Aug;31(8):1238-45.

Filiform serrated adenomas: a clinicopathologic and immunophenotypic study of 18 
cases.

Yantiss RK(1), Oh KY, Chen YT, Redston M, Odze RD.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Pathology, New
York, NY 10021, USA. rhy2001@med.cornell.edu

In this study, we describe a previously uncharacterized type of adenomatous polyp
of the colorectum that shows prominent, thin, elongated projections of neoplastic
epithelium with a serrated contour, which we have termed "filiform serrated
adenoma" (SA). Routinely processed polypectomy specimens from 18 patients with
filiform SA and 23 controls with traditional (nonfiliform) SA were evaluated for 
their clinical and pathologic features, and immunohistochemically stained for a
variety of markers (O-methylguanine methyltransferase, MLH1, MSH2, CDX2, nuclear 
beta-catenin, p53, and Ki-67) designed to evaluate their molecular and
proliferative characteristics. DNA was extracted from the paraffin-embedded
materials, amplified by polymerase chain reaction, and analyzed for
microsatellite instability, BRAF, K-ras, and p53 mutational status. Five cases
contained sufficient non-neoplastic tissue for dissection and DNA extraction,
allowing analysis of loss of heterozygosity. The study group consisted of 7 males
and 11 females of mean age 64 years (range: 42 to 89 y). All 18 filiform SAs were
located in the left colon, including 15 (83%) that occurred in the rectum,
compared with 43% of the control group (P=0.03). Filiform SAs were also larger
(1.6 cm) than SAs (mean: 1.2 cm, P=0.02), but no other clinical differences were 
noted. Most (56%) filiform SAs contained marked stromal edema and tall
nonmucinous cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (61%). High-grade
dysplasia was present in 4/18 (22%) cases. Four (22%) filiform SAs also contained
nonserrated adenomatous elements with a villous (3 cases) or tubular (1 case)
growth pattern. Two (11%) cases contained adjacent areas of sessile SAs and 4
(22%) had hyperplastic areas. None of the polyps in the control group showed
stromal edema, high-grade dysplasia, or mixed elements. Polyps in both groups
demonstrated comparable staining patterns for O-methylguanine methyltransferase, 
MLH-1, MSH-2, CDX2, beta-catenin, and Ki-67, and none showed increased nuclear
p53 expression. Low-frequency microsatellite instability was present in 5/12
(42%) filiform SAs, 7/12 (58%) were microsatellite stable. Mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway abnormalities were present in 71% of the cases [7/14 (50%)
with BRAF and 3/14 (21%) with K-ras mutations]. Four cases showed silent p53
mutations upon direct sequencing and 4 revealed loss of heterozygosity at the
loci evaluated, including 1 at D5S346 [adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene], 1 
at D17S250 (p53 gene), and 2 at MYCL (chromosome 1p34). We conclude that filiform
SA potentially represents an unusual variant of SA with a predilection for the
left colon, particularly the rectum.

PMID: 17667549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Toxicol Pathol. 2007 Aug;35(5):636-48.

Animal models of stomach carcinogenesis.

Tsukamoto T(1), Mizoshita T, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. ttsukamt@aichi-cc.jp

Although incidences of stomach cancer have decreased over the past several
decades, the disease remains an important public health problem. To identify
pathological and molecular biochemical mechanisms, various experimental animal
models have been established in rats and mice with chemical carcinogens including
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) and N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU).
Helicobacter pylori(H. pylori) is one of the most important factors for human
stomach disorders, including neoplasia, and the H. pylori-infected and
carcinogen-treated Mongolian gerbil (MG) has proven very useful for analyses of
underlying processes. The findings with this model support the hypothesis that
intestinal metaplasia is important not as a precancerous lesion but rather as a
paracancerous condition and that intestinalization of stomach cancer progresses
with chronic inflammation. Furthermore, dose-dependent enhancing effects of salt 
on stomach carcinogenesis could be demonstrated in MGs treated with MNU and H.
pylori modifying surface mucous gel layer. H. pylori itself only causes chronic
inflammation and acts as a promoter of stomach carcinogenesis in experimental
models. Based on the precise pathological diagnosis of stomach lesions such as
noncancerous heterotopic proliferative glands (HPG) and adenocarcinomas, a basis 
for understanding mechanisms of carcinogenesis has been established on which
chemoprevention can be modeled.

PMID: 17654405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Virchows Arch. 2007 Sep;451(3):649-57. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Prognostic factors for ampullary adenocarcinomas: tumor stage, tumor histology,
tumor location, immunohistochemistry and microsatellite instability.

Sessa F(1), Furlan D, Zampatti C, Carnevali I, Franzi F, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Human Morphology, University of 
Insubria, Varese, Italy. fausto.sessa@uninsubria.it

Prognostic factors for ampullary carcinomas (ACs) are poorly defined. Fifty three
resected ACs were analyzed for CDX2, MUC1, MUC5AC, MUC6, MUC2, and for mismatch
repair proteins (hMLH1, hMSH2, PMS2, hMSH6) using immunohistochemistry.
Microsatellite instability (MSI) status was evaluated by fluorescently labeled
PCR using an automated sequencer. Univariate and multivariate analysis was
performed for clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and molecular parameters. 
CDX2 was found in 32 out of 53 (60%) ACs with a significantly higher frequency
among intestinal ACs compared with biliopancreatic (BP) ACs. The MUC1, MUC5AC,
MUC6, MUC2 apomucins were expressed in 75, 43, 39, and 28% of ACs, respectively, 
with a significantly higher coexpression of MUC1/MUC5AC in BP ACs. MSI and loss
of expression of hMLH1/PMS2 or hMSH2/hMSH6 proteins were observed only in
intestinal ACs. Factors significantly correlated with improved survival in the
univariate analysis were: low stage, absence of lymph nodes metastases, negative 
surgical margins (R0 status), and presence of MSI. In the multivariate analysis, 
stage was the only independent prognostic factor of survival. We conclude that
stage is the only independent prognostic factor of survival in the multivariate
analysis, whereas histological criteria and the immunohistochemical expression of
apomucins and CDX2 are helpful in the classification and understanding of the
histogenesis of ACs.

PMID: 17653761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Pathol Int. 2007 Aug;57(8):517-22.

Gastric adenocarcinoma with chief cell differentiation.

Tsukamoto T(1), Yokoi T, Maruta S, Kitamura M, Yamamoto T, Ban H, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. ttsukamt@aichi-cc.jp

Erratum in
    Pathol Int. 2007 Nov;57(11):757.

A case of adenocarcinoma with chief cell differentiation, a novel entity in the
stomach, is presented. An 82-year-old woman who had undergone distal gastrectomy,
was scheduled for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to clarify mechanical ileus. A
protruding tumor 16 x 14 x 9 mm in size was found in the cardia of the remnant
stomach. Histological examination indicated a well-differentiated tubular
adenocarcinoma composed of basophilic columnar or cuboidal cells with occasional 
coarse eosinophilic granules. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed strong
expression of pepsinogens I and II and Runt-related transcription factor gene 3
(RUNX3), characteristic for chief cells, and MUC6 typical for mucous neck cells. 
However, the tumor cells were negative for the proton pump alpha subunit, a
marker for parietal cells. Cdx2 and defensin-5 were not present, confirming the
lack of an intestinal phenotype. The cancer cells shared characteristics of a
chief cell and a mucous neck cell, resembling an ancestor of these two cell
types, so-called 'primitive chief cell' in fundic gland. In line with these data,
the cancer was diagnosed as an adenocarcinoma with chief cell differentiation.

PMID: 17610477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Jun;16(3):393-402.

Simultaneous differentiation of endothelial and trophoblastic cells derived from 
human embryonic stem cells.

Peiffer I(1), Belhomme D, Barbet R, Haydont V, Zhou YP, Fortunel NO, Li M,
Hatzfeld A, Fabiani JN, Hatzfeld JA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Laboratory, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
94801 Villejuif Cedex, France. peiffeisa@yahoo.fr

Here we present a simple two-step in vitro model of vascularized trophoblastic
tissue derived from human embryonic stem (hES) cells. The first step is the
formation of cystic embryoid bodies (EBs) in suspension in a semisolid methyl
cellulose medium, within which an endothelial platelet/endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (PECAM-1(+)) cell network develops. In a second step, deposition of
these EBs on the bottom of nontreated, polystyrene tissue culture plates, leads
by centrifugal outgrowth of the EB to the emergence of an adherent cell layer,
with which a PECAM-1(+) network is associated. Cells of this adherent layer
expressed VE-cadherin (CD144), PECAM-1 (CD31), and alpha-fetoprotein (alpha-FP). 
Trophoblastic differentiation was strongly suggested by the secretion of
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) and by the presence of the
cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast marker GB25. The INSL4 gene, a cyto and
syncytio-trophoblast marker, was also highly expressed in the adherent layer, as 
well as other trophoblast genes such as CGA, CDX1, CDX2, and HAND1, compared to
hES cell gene expression taken as reference. In contrast, expression of
self-renewal genes, such as TERT, POU5F1, ZFP42, GDF3, and NODAL were decreased. 
No ectodermal or endodermal genes were expressed, but the mesodermal genes
PECAM-1 and GATA2 were. The possibility of removing the EBs during the second
step would permit analysis of their relative contribution to angiogenesis or
possible hemangioblast formation, compared to that of the trophoblastic adherent 
layer. This primitive vascularized trophoblastic model could also provide a tool 
to study early steps of normal and pathological placental development.

PMID: 17610369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 3;7:80.

Extra-embryonic endoderm cells derived from ES cells induced by GATA factors
acquire the character of XEN cells.

Shimosato D(1), Shiki M, Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
dsk-s@cdb.riken.jp <dsk-s@cdb.riken.jp>

BACKGROUND: Three types of cell lines have been established from mouse
blastocysts: embryonic stem (ES) cells, trophoblast stem (TS) cells, and
extra-embryonic endoderm (XEN) cells, which have the potential to differentiate
into their respective cognate lineages. ES cells can differentiate in vitro not
only into somatic cell lineages but into extra-embryonic lineages, including
trophectoderm and extra-embryonic endoderm (ExEn) as well. TS cells can be
established from ES cells by the artificial repression of Oct3/4 or the
upregulation of Cdx2 in the presence of FGF4 on feeder cells. The relationship
between these embryo-derived XEN cells and ES cell-derived ExEn cell lines
remains unclear, although we have previously reported that overexpression of
Gata4 or Gata6 induces differentiation of mouse ES cells into extra-embryonic
endoderm in vitro.
RESULTS: A system in which GATA factors were conditionally activated revealed
that the cells continue to proliferate while expressing a set of extra-embryonic 
endoderm markers, and, following injection into blastocysts, contribute only to
the extra-embryonic endoderm lineage in vivo. Although the in vivo contribution
is limited to cells of parietal endoderm lineage, Gata-induced extra-embryonic
endoderm cells (gExEn) can be induced to differentiate into visceral
endoderm-like cells in vitro by repression of Gata6. During early passage, the
propagation of gExEn cells is dependent on the expression of the Gata6 transgene.
These cells, however, lose this dependency following establishment of endogenous 
Gata6 expression.
CONCLUSION: We show here that Gata-induced extra-embryonic endoderm cells derived
from ES cells mimic the character of XEN cells. These findings indicate that Gata
transcription factors are sufficient for the derivation and propagation of
XEN-like extra-embryonic endoderm cells from ES cells.

PMCID: PMC1933422
PMID: 17605826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Oncogene. 2008 Jan 3;27(1):107-15. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

The intestine-specific homeobox gene Cdx2 decreases mobility and antagonizes
dissemination of colon cancer cells.

Gross I(1), Duluc I, Benameur T, Calon A, Martin E, Brabletz T, Kedinger M,
Domon-Dell C, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

The gravity of colorectal cancer is mainly due to the capacity of tumor cells to 
migrate out of the tumor mass to invade the stroma and disseminate as metastases.
The acquisition of a migratory phenotype also occurs during wound healing. Here, 
we show that several features characterizing invasive colon tumor cells are
shared by migrating cells during wound repair in vitro. In particular, the
expression of the intestine-specific transcription factor Cdx2, a key gene for
intestinal identity downregulated in invasive cancer cells, is reduced during
wound healing in vitro. Transcription factors involved in epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition such as Snail and Slug are upregulated during wound healing and are
able to repress Cdx2 transcription. In vitro, forced expression of Cdx2 in human 
colon cancer cell lines retarded wound repair and reduced migration, whereas
inhibition of Cdx2 expression by RNA interference enhanced migration. In vivo,
forced expression of Cdx2 opposed tumor cells spreading in nude mice xenografted 
at three different sites. These data provide evidence that Cdx2 antagonizes the
process of tumor cell dissemination, and they suggest that this homeobox gene
might represent a new therapeutic target against metastatic spreading of colon
cancer.

PMID: 17599044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Gut. 2007 Dec;56(12):1688-95. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Different effects of the Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeobox genes in a murine model of
intestinal inflammation.

Calon A(1), Gross I, Lhermitte B, Martin E, Beck F, Duclos B, Kedinger M, Duluc
I, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, 3 Avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

AIMS: The CDX1 and CDX2 homeoproteins are intestine-specific transcription
factors regulating homeostasis. We investigated their relevance in
experimentally-induced intestinal inflammation.
METHODS: The response to intestinal inflammation induced by dextran sodium
sulfate (DSS) was compared in wild type, Cdx1(-/-) and Cdx2(+/-) mice. Intestinal
permeability was determined in wild type and Cdx2(+/-) mice. Protein-protein
interactions were investigated by co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pulldown, and
their functional consequences were assessed using Luciferase reporter systems.
RESULTS: Heterozygous Cdx2(+/-) mice, but not Cdx1(-/-) mice, were hypersensitive
to DSS-induced acute inflammation as all these mice showed blood in the stools at
day 1 of DSS treatment. Hypersensitivity was associated to a 50% higher
intestinal permeability. In Cdx2(+/-) mice, the colonic epithelium was repaired
during the week after the end of DSS treatment, whereas two weeks were required
for wild type animals. Subsequently, no colonic tumour was observed in Cdx2(+/-) 
mice subjected to 5 repeated cycles of DSS, in contrast to the 2.7 tumours found 
per wild type mouse. Based on the fact that Smad3(+/-) mice, like Cdx2(+/-) mice,
better repair the damaged intestinal epithelium, we found that the CDX2 protein
interacts with SMAD3, independently of SMAD4, resulting in a 5-fold stimulation
of SMAD3 transcriptional activity. CDX1 also interacted with SMAD3 but it
inhibited by 10-fold the SMAD3/SMAD4-dependent transcription.
CONCLUSION: The Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeobox genes have distinct effects on the outcome
of a pro-inflammatory challenge. This is mirrored by different functional
interactions of the CDX1 and CDX2 proteins with SMAD3, a major element of the
TGFbeta signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2095714
PMID: 17595234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jun 21;13(23):3189-98.

Phenotypic classification of gastric signet ring cell carcinoma and its
relationship with clinicopathologic parameters and prognosis.

Tian MM(1), Zhao AL, Li ZW, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University School of Oncology and Beijing
Cancer Hospital, No.52. Fucheng Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100036, China.

AIM: To distinguish subtypes of gastric signet ring cell (SRC) carcinoma by
investigating the expression of gastric and intestinal phenotypic markers, and to
study the significance of phenotypic classification in predicting tumor
progression and outcome.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed in 66 cases of SRC carcinoma with
MUC2, VILLIN, CDX2, Li-cadherin antibodies as intestinal phenotype markers and
MUC5AC, HGM, MUC6 antibodies as gastric phenotype markers, and the relationship
was analyzed between the phenotypic expression pattern and clinicopathologic
parameters, as well as the 3-year survival rate.
RESULTS: Expression of intestinal phenotypic markers was positively associated
with tumor size, wall invasion, vascular invasion, lymph node metastasis and
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stage. Cases expressing one or more intestinal
markers had a significant lower survival rate than cases expressing none of the
intestinal markers.
CONCLUSION: The SRC carcinomas expressing intestinal phenotype markers exhibited 
a high proliferative potential, bad biological behaviors and poor prognosis.
Examination of phenotype expression may be useful in distinguishing histological 
type and in predicting the prognosis of gastric SRC carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4436604
PMID: 17589897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Arch Surg. 2007 Jun;142(6):540-4; discussion 544-5.

Pathogenesis of Barrett esophagus: deoxycholic acid up-regulates goblet-specific 
gene MUC2 in concert with CDX2 in human esophageal cells.

Hu Y(1), Jones C, Gellersen O, Williams VA, Watson TJ, Peters JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Surg. 2008 Aug;143(8):807.

HYPOTHESIS: Bile acid exposure can induce caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2)
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression, a transcription factor that plays a crucial role
in the development of Barrett esophagus. We investigated mucin 2 (MUC2) and CDX2 
mRNA expression before and after treatment with deoxycholic acid in 4 human
esophageal cell lines.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Four human esophageal cell lines-(1) normal
squamous cells immortalized by SV40 (Het-1A), (2) adenocarcinoma (SEG-1), and (3 
and 4) squamous cell carcinoma (HKESC-1 and HKESC-2)-were exposed in culture for 
1 to 24 hours to 100 microM to 1000 microM deoxycholic acid. Total RNA was
extracted before and after bile acid treatment and reverse transcribed to
complementary DNA.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: MUC2 and CDX2 mRNA expression as determined by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: MUC2 mRNA expression was absent before deoxycholic acid exposure in all 
4 cell lines. MUC2 expression increased in a dose- and time-dependent manner with
deoxycholic acid in all cell lines. Deoxycholic acid activated MUC2
up-regulation, which correlated directly with CDX2 up-regulation in all 4 cell
lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Bile acids up-regulate both intestinal differentiation factor CDX2
and goblet cell-specific gene MUC2 in normal esophageal and cancer cell lines.
Further, bile acid-stimulated MUC2 up-regulation correlates directly with CDX2
up-regulation. The simultaneous up-regulation of both CDX2 and MUC2 after bile
acid exposure provides molecular evidence of the role of bile acid in the
pathogenesis of Barrett esophagus.

PMID: 17576890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Genet Mol Res. 2007 May 22;6(2):316-24.

A multiplex single-base extension protocol for genotyping Cdx2, FokI, BsmI, ApaI,
and TaqI polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor gene.

Lins TC(1), Nogueira LR, Lima RM, Gentil P, Oliveira RJ, Pereira RW.

Author information: 
(1)Pós-Graduação em Ciências Genômicas e Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica de 
Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brasil.

The well-described role of the vitamin D endocrine system in bone metabolism
makes its receptor a widely investigated candidate gene in association studies
looking for the genetic basis of complex bone-related phenotypes. Most
association studies genotype five polymorphic sites along the gene using PCR-RFLP
and allele-specific amplification methods, which may not be the better choice in 
large case/control or cross-sectional studies. In this case, genotyping SNPs in
parallel and using automated allele-calling methods are important to decrease
genotyping errors due to manual data handling and save sample in cases where the 
amount of DNA is limited. The aim of this study was to present a straightforward 
method based on multiplex PCR amplification followed by multiplex single-base
extension as a simple way to genotype five vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms 
in parallel, which may be implemented in medium- to large-scale case/control or
cross-sectional studies. The results regarding method feasibility and
optimization are presented by genotyping eight paternity trios and seven samples 
of Brazilian postmenopausal women who took part in an ongoing association study
carried out by members of our group.

PMID: 17573662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cancer. 2007 Aug 25;111(4):259-68.

Immunocytochemical diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma and identification of
carcinomas of unknown primary metastatic to the liver on fine-needle aspiration
cytologies.

Onofre AS(1), Pomjanski N, Buckstegge B, Böcking A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytopathology, Heinrich-Heine University, Duesseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Difficulties with cytologic diagnoses on fine-needle aspiration
cytology (FNAC) of the liver can be overcome by the application of
immunocytochemical panels applied on smears. The aim of the current study was to 
analyze the performance of a panel of monoclonal antibodies to differentiate
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) from metastatic carcinoma (MC) or regenerative
nodules, and to identify the to date unknown primary sites of carcinomas that had
metastasized to the liver.
METHODS: In a validating cohort study, 108 FNACs coin lesions in the liver were
routinely evaluated applying immunocytochemistry as an ancillary method. All
patients had confirmatory histologic and/or clinical follow-up. A total of 23
HCCs were analyzed for the distinction from MC or regenerative nodules applying a
panel of HepPar1, alpha-fetoprotein, BerEP4, CD31, CD68, and Ki-67. A total of 85
cases of unknown primary tumor metastatic to the liver were used to identify the 
tumor sites applying a panel of CK5/6, CK7, CK20, CA 125, thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1), and Cdx2.
RESULTS: Typing accuracy to differentiate HCC from MC or regenerative nodules was
100% and 90.3%, respectively, to identify the primary tumor site of MC. In 23
cases, the site of the primary tumor remained clinically unknown.
CONCLUSIONS: The application of immunocytochemical panels on the same slide used 
for microscopic diagnosis is a useful tool in the routine assessment of FNACs of 
the liver to discriminate HCCs from MC or regenerative nodules and for the
identification of primary sites of MC. Their performance should be confirmed in a
larger series of cases.

PMID: 17567831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Jun;22(6):901-7.

Predictors for squamous re-epithelialization of Barrett's esophagus after
endoscopic biopsy.

Amano Y(1), Kushiyama Y, Yuki T, Takahashi Y, Chinuki D, Ishimura N, Furuta K,
Ishihara S, Adachi K, Maruyama R, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, Shimane University Hospital,
Izumo-shi, Shimane, Japan. amano@med.shimane-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Jun;22(6):771-2.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Acid suppressive therapy has been reported to regress
Barrett's esophagus. However, it is still controversial as to whether all
Barrett's esophagus patients respond to this therapy. The factors that might
facilitate newly developed squamous re-epithelialization after biopsy excision of
Barrett's mucosa were evaluated to identity individuals who may favorably respond
to the regression therapy.
METHODS: Two hundred and forty-seven biopsy sites from 185 patients with
Barrett's esophagus were examined by endoscopy to investigate possible squamous
re-epithelialization of Barrett's mucosa after endoscopic biopsy. Before
endoscopic examination, all participants were requested to answer questionnaires 
concerning sociodemographic characteristics, lifestyle habits and drugs usage.
The mucin phenotype, Cdx2 expression, cyclooxygenase-2 expression, cellular
proliferation and apoptosis of Barrett's mucosa were immunohistochemically
investigated in the biopsy samples taken from Barrett's esophagus. The influence 
of these factors on the newly developed squamous re-epithelialization of
Barrett's mucosa after endoscopic biopsy excision was evaluated.
RESULTS: By multivariate analysis, the independent factors that favored squamous 
re-epithelialization were the gastric mucin predominant phenotype of Barrett's
mucosa and the absence of Cdx2 protein expression. In Barrett's mucosa with the
gastric predominant mucin phenotype, proton pump inhibitor administration, the
absence of reflux esophagitis and a low proliferating cell nuclear antigen index 
were found to be independent predictors for squamous re-epithelialization.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of the intestinal predominant mucin phenotype was a
positive predictor for newly developed squamous re-epithelialization at the site 
of biopsy of Barrett's mucosa. Only Barrett's esophagus with the gastric
predominant mucin phenotype may predict a favorable response to acid suppressive 
therapy.

PMID: 17565646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Jun;60(6):615-21.

Indefinite for non-invasive neoplasia lesions in gastric intestinal metaplasia:
the immunophenotype.

Cassaro M(1), Rugge M, Tieppo C, Giacomelli L, Velo D, Nitti D, Farinati F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Medicine & Special Therapies, University of Padova,
II Pathology Unit, Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In the Padova International Classification, gastric precancerous
lesions are labelled as "indefinite for non-invasive neoplasia" (Indef-NiN)
cytohistological alterations mimicking non-invasive neoplasia (NiN), but lacking 
all the attributes required for a definite NiN categorisation.
AIM: To apply a panel of immunohistochemical (IHC) markers of cell proliferation 
(Mib1), intestinal differentiation (Cdx2), apoptosis (pro-caspase 3) and cell
immortalisation (hTERT) to compare the IHC profiles of a series of precancerous
lesions arising in gastric intestinalised (ie, IM-positive) glands.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: By applying the histological criteria consistently
provided by both the Padova Classification and the World Health Organization
International Agency, 112 consecutive cases were considered: intestinal
metaplasia (IM; n = 54), Indef-NiN in IM-positive gastric glands (n = 28) and
low-grade (LG) NiN (n = 30). In each histological category, the expression of the
marker was separately scored in superficial, proliferative and coil compartments.
RESULTS: In all glandular compartments, Mib1, Cdx2, hTERT and pro-caspase 3 were 
consistently more expressed in LG-NiN than in either IM or Indef-NiN lesions
(analysis of variance: p<0.001). Significant ORs (calculated by ordinal logistic 
regression analysis for each glandular compartment) associated IM, Indef-NiN and 
LG-NiN with the expression of the considered markers.
CONCLUSIONS: A consistent overexpression (unrestricted to the proliferative zone)
of IHC markers of cell proliferation, intestinal differentiation, decreased
apoptosis and cell immortalisation differentiates LG-NiN from both (simple) IM
and Indef-NiN (arising in IM). An increased proliferative activity in the
proliferative zone discriminates Indef-NiN lesions (ie, hyperproliferative IM)
from IM. Such divergent IHC profiles may provide a rationale for scheduling
follow-up protocols more properly tailored on the patient's risk for cancer.

PMCID: PMC1955067
PMID: 17557866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22638-50. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

The human mucin MUC4 is transcriptionally regulated by caudal-related homeobox,
hepatocyte nuclear factors, forkhead box A, and GATA endodermal transcription
factors in epithelial cancer cells.

Jonckheere N(1), Vincent A, Perrais M, Ducourouble MP, Male AK, Aubert JP, Pigny 
P, Carraway KL, Freund JN, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U560, Place de Verdun, Lille, F-59045, France.

The human gene MUC4 encodes a large transmembrane mucin that is developmentally
regulated and expressed along the undifferentiated pseudostratified epithelium,
as early as 6.5 weeks during fetal development. Immunohistochemical analysis of
Muc4 expression in developing mouse lung and gastrointestinal tract showed a
different spatio-temporal pattern of expression before and after
cytodifferentiation. The molecular mechanisms governing MUC4 expression during
development are, however, unknown. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), forkhead box
A (FOXA), GATA, and caudal-related homeobox transcription factors (TFs) are known
to control cell differentiation of gut endoderm derived-tissues during embryonic 
development. They also control the expression of cell- and tissue-specific genes 
and may thus control MUC4 expression. To test this hypothesis, we studied and
deciphered the molecular mechanisms responsible for MUC4 transcriptional
regulation by these TFs. Experiments using small interfering RNA, cell
co-transfection, and site-directed mutagenesis indicated that MUC4 is regulated
at the transcriptional level by CDX-1 and -2, HNF-1 alpha and -1 beta, FOXA1/A2, 
HNF-4 alpha and -4 gamma, and GATA-4, -5, and -6 factors in a cell-specific
manner. Binding of TFs was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
gel-shift assays. Altogether, these results demonstrate that MUC4 is a target
gene of endodermal TFs and thus point out an important role for these TFs in
regulating MUC4 expression during epithelial differentiation during development, 
cancer, and repair.

PMID: 17553805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Oncol Rep. 2007 Jul;18(1):87-92.

CDX2 as a useful marker of colorectal adenocarcinoma metastases to lung in
pre-operative biopsy specimens.

Tanaka S(1), Saito K, Ito T, Tajima K, Mogi A, Shitara Y, Sano T, Kuwano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgical Science, Gunma Graduate School of Medicine,
Gunma 371-8511, Japan. tanakasi@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp

Although distinguishing metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma from primary lung
adenocarcinoma is often difficult, pre- or intra-operative identification is very
important, as the resection areas for each diagnosis differ substantially. CDX2, 
a recently cloned homeobox gene, represents a highly specific and sensitive
marker of colorectal adenocarcinoma. We evaluated CDX2 expression using pre- and 
intra-operative biopsy specimens. The study examined 50 consecutive colorectal
adenocarcinoma metastases to the lung, including 20 biopsy specimens and 66
resected specimens, and 21 primary lung adenocarcinomas. All specimens were
immunohistochemically stained for CDX2, cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20 and thyroid
transcription factor (TTF)-1, and scored in a semi-quantitative manner. Mean
staining score in biopsy specimens was significantly higher for CDX2 than for
CK20. Sensitivities for CDX2 and CK7-/20+ in biopsy specimens were 95.0 and
65.0%, respectively. If CDX2 immunostaining had not been performed, 8 biopsy
specimens (40%), and 20 resected specimens (30.3%) might have been diagnosed as
equivocal cases either as primary lung cancer or metastatic colorectal cancer,
using other markers. These results suggest that positive CDX2 staining represents
a highly sensitive and specific marker of metastatic colorectal carcinoma in both
biopsy and resected specimens, and is superior to staining for the CK7-/20+
phenotype.

PMID: 17549351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2007 Jul;23(4):440-5.

Novel findings in the pathogenesis of esophageal columnar metaplasia or Barrett's
esophagus.

Krishnadath KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. k.k.krishnadath@amc.uva.nl

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In esophageal metaplasia the transdifferentiation of the
epithelium is the result of longstanding gastroesophageal reflux disease that
causes inflammation of the esophageal squamous mucosa, and occasionally is
followed by replacement of the squamous epithelium by a columnar type of mucosa. 
For a long time, the molecular mechanisms involved in metaplasia were poorly
understood. This review focuses on several recent findings on the molecular
mechanisms involved in esophageal columnar metaplasia.
RECENT FINDINGS: Our recent findings on bone morphogenetic protein 4 and other
recent discoveries in the field of cell signaling that take place during the
sequence of inflammation and epithelial transdifferentiation are highlighted. In 
this process, several embryonic pathways that were silenced in the adult
esophagus, and factors that are normally involved in the homeostasis of the large
intestine, seem to be induced. These factors may mediate transdifferentiation of 
the esophageal epithelium.
SUMMARY: Although there are many aspects that need further investigation, it
seems that in columnar metaplasia of the esophagus inductive morphogenes such as 
bone morphogenetic protein 4 are important for development and differentiation.
Development of specialized intestinal type of metaplasia is the result of a
succession of events, in which the effect of stromal factors is followed by
expression of intestine-specific factors.

PMID: 17545783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Cancer. 2007 Sep 15;121(6):1219-26.

Epigenetic silencing of CDX2 is a feature of squamous esophageal cancer.

Guo M(1), House MG, Suzuki H, Ye Y, Brock MV, Lu F, Liu Z, Rustgi AK, Herman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cancer Biology Program, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

CDX2, a mammalian homologue of the homeobox gene 'caudal,' is expressed in gut
epithelia and plays an important role in establishing the intestinal phenotype
during development. Mice heterozygously disrupted for CDX2 develop disorganized
polypoid hamartomas with glandular epithelium and stratified squamous metaplasia 
resembling foregut mucosa. Since no genetic disruptions of CDX2 have been
reported to explain loss of gene function, we examined whether epigenetic
mechanisms altered CDX2 expression. Eleven of 17 squamous esophageal cancer cell 
lines lacked expression of CDX2 that was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, while all colorectal cancer cell lines expressed CDX2.
Loss of expression was associated with DNA methylation in the 5' region of CDX2
determined by methylation specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing. Methylation of
CDX2 was rare in primary colorectal (1 of 44 tumors, 2%) and esophageal
adenocarcinoma neoplasms (2 of 43 tumors, 5%), but was common in esophageal
squamous carcinoma (24 of 45 tumors, 49%). No CDX2 methylation was found in
normal tissues. Using semi-quantitative RT-PCR, expression of CDX2 was found in
low level in normal esophagus, at higher levels in primary adenocarcinoma of the 
esophagus, but not in primary squamous cancers of the esophagus. Restoration of
CDX2 in silenced cell lines resulted in expression of the CDX2 target gene MUC2, 
a gene important in glandular differentiation. Our results suggest that the
inactivation of CDX2 in esophageal cancer associated with DNA methylation may be 
an important determinant of the squamous or non-adenomatous phenotype.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17534889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Jun;31(6):961-9.

Mucinous cells in type 1 pulmonary congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation as 
mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma precursors.

Lantuejoul S(1), Nicholson AG, Sartori G, Piolat C, Danel C, Brabencova E,
Goldstraw P, Brambilla E, Rossi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lung Cancer Research Group, INSERM U578, CHU A
Michallon, Grenoble, France. SLantuejoul@chu-grenoble.fr

Type 1 congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM), the most frequent
malformation of the lung, is the only type to present intracystic mucinous cell
clusters, which may form beyond the cysts extracystic mucinous proliferation
resembling mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinomas (BACs). As mucinous BACs are
increasingly described in the literature in young patients with CCAM, we
hypothesized that type 1 CCAM mucinous cells could represent BAC precursors. We
reviewed 7 cases of type 1 CCAM including 6 with intracystic mucinous cell
clusters, 3 with extracystic mucinous proliferations, and 4 with mucinous BAC or 
mixed adenocarcinoma with predominant BAC. K-ras mutations at codon 12 were
detected in 3/3 intracystic mucinous cell clusters, in 2/3 extracystic mucinous
proliferations, and in 3/4 BAC. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at p16(INK4) locus, 
with microsatellite alterations in 3 cases, was observed in 2/3 intracystic
mucinous cell clusters, in 2/3 extracystic mucinous proliferations, and in all
BAC. Two extracystic mucinous proliferations showed LOH at FHIT and Rb loci,
respectively. P16(INK4) expression was lost in 2 intracystic mucinous cell
clusters, 1 extracystic mucinous proliferation, and 1 BAC. Neither epidermal
growth factor receptor mutation on exons 18, 19, and 21 nor P53 accumulation was 
observed. All lesions expressed MUC5AC, but were negative for MUC2, CDX2, and
TTF-1. In conclusion, type 1 CCAM mucinous cells share the same differentiation
profile with corresponding mucinous BAC, consistent with a common bronchial
origin. Moreover, the high frequency of K-ras mutation and LOH and/or
microsatellite alterations at p16(INK4) locus presented by these mucinous cells
justifies their consideration as BAC precursors.

PMID: 17527088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Jun;31(6):854-69.

Ovarian mucinous tumors associated with mature cystic teratomas: morphologic and 
immunohistochemical analysis identifies a subset of potential teratomatous origin
that shares features of lower gastrointestinal tract mucinous tumors more
commonly encountered as secondary tumors in the ovary.

Vang R(1), Gown AM, Zhao C, Barry TS, Isacson C, Richardson MS, Ronnett BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. rvang1@jhmi.edu

Most primary ovarian mucinous tumors are of surface epithelial-stromal origin and
exhibit diffuse expression of cytokeratin 7 (CK7) combined with variable
expression of cytokeratin 20 (CK20); this immunoprofile distinguishes them from
most lower gastrointestinal tract tumors secondarily involving the ovaries. The
uncommon ovarian mucinous tumors of germ cell (teratomatous) origin have not been
extensively evaluated to determine the utility of these markers and other markers
of intestinal differentiation for distinguishing these tumors from metastatic
gastrointestinal tract mucinous tumors. Immunohistochemical expression of CK7,
CK20, CDX2, and villin was assessed in 44 ovarian mucinous tumors associated with
a mature cystic teratoma. All cases lacked evidence of a nonovarian primary
mucinous tumor. All mucinous tumors were unilateral; 6 cases had bilateral
teratomas. All tumors displayed gastrointestinal-type mucinous differentiation,
with epithelium that was commonly goblet cell-rich or hypermucinous; 21 were
associated with pseudomyxoma ovarii and 3 of these had pseudomyxoma peritonei.
Tumor architecture ranged from purely cystadenomatous (n=24), to proliferative
(n=13), to carcinomatous (n=6); some tumors had admixtures of these patterns. One
tumor had a goblet cell carcinoidlike pattern with pseudomyxoma ovarii. Three
carcinomas had a signet ring cell component. Cystadenomatous tumors without
pseudomyxoma ovarii (n=15) exhibited all possible CK7/CK20 coordinate expression 
profiles with nearly equal frequency. All proliferative tumors without
pseudomyxoma ovarii (n=8) expressed CK7, most often in combination with CK20
expression. All cystadenomatous and proliferative tumors with pseudomyxoma ovarii
(n=9 and n=5) were CK7-/CK20+. All carcinomatous tumors had pseudomyxoma ovarii; 
3 were CK7-/CK20+, 2 were CK7+/CK20+, and 1 was CK7+/CK20-. The presence of
pseudomyxoma ovarii was significantly associated with a CK7-/CK20+ profile (86%
with pseudomyxoma ovarii vs. 13% without, P<0.0001), CDX2 positivity (79% vs. 0%,
P<0.0001), and villin positivity (57% vs. 5%, P=0.0009). A subset of mucinous
tumors associated with mature cystic teratomas exhibiting morphologic and
immunohistochemical features of lower intestinal tract-type mucinous tumors may
be teratomatous in origin. In practice, the more common diagnosis of secondary
involvement by a lower intestinal tract mucinous tumor should be addressed in the
pathology report and in subsequent clinical evaluation; interpretation as a true 
primary ovarian mucinous tumor of teratomatous origin can be considered as an
alternative diagnosis when evaluation and follow-up fail to identify a nonovarian
source of the mucinous tumor. Those tumors having CK7 expression with or without 
CK20 expression may be derived from upper gastrointestinal tract-type or
sinonasal-type teratomatous elements but could be independent tumors of surface
epithelial-stromal origin.

PMID: 17527072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int J Cancer. 2007 Sep 15;121(6):1182-9.

Re-expression of sonic hedgehog and reduction of CDX2 after Helicobacter pylori
eradication prior to incomplete intestinal metaplasia.

Shiotani A(1), Uedo N, Iishi H, Tatsuta M, Ishiguro S, Nakae Y, Kamada T, Haruma 
K, Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kawasaki
Medical School, Okayama, Japan. shiotani@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

Loss of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and aberrant CDX2 expression are early changes
correlating with the presence of intestinal metaplasia that occur in the gastric 
mucosa prior to neoplastic transformation. The aim of this study was to compare
the improvement in corpus gastritis with Shh and CDX2 expression after H. pylori 
eradication between subjects at high risk for gastric cancer and controls. The
usefulness of serum pepsinogen levels as a predictor of resolved corpus gastritis
was also examined. Seventy patients with endoscopic resection for early gastric
cancer and 30 controls were studied. Expression of Shh and CDX2 were evaluated by
immunostaining. Serum levels of pepsinogen I before eradication in the patients
scored as having improvement of corpus atrophy were significantly higher than in 
the patients without improvement (<0.01). Residual inflammation at the corpus
lesser curve was more frequently detected in the cancer group than in the
controls (OR 4.6 95% C.I. 1.6-13.5) and in the mucosa with incomplete intestinal 
metaplasia rather than in those without incomplete intestinal metaplasia (OR 7.6 
95% C.I. 2.4-24.3). Atrophy, expression of Shh and CDX2 at the corpus lesser
curve significantly improved in mucosa without incomplete intestinal metaplasia
(p < 0.01), but not in mucosa with incomplete intestinal metaplasia. In
conclusion, H. pylori eradication prior to development of incomplete intestinal
metaplasia improves corpus gastritis and may prevent gastric cancer. Pepsinogen I
may be a useful marker in patients with a residual higher risk of gastric cancer 
after H. pylori eradication.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17520681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jun;42(6):777-8.

Colon carcinoma metastasis to the intrapancreatic tract of the common biliary
duct: a first case report.

Morelli L(1), Faraci R, Piscioli I, Pusiol T, Del Nonno F, Licci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, S. Maria del Carmine Hospital, Rovereto, Italy.
luca.morelli@apss.tn.it

Jaundice, a common feature of advanced colon cancer, is usually due to liver
parenchyma metastasis, but it can sometimes be caused by extrahepatic biliary
obstruction. This rare event is related to metastasis to the lymph nodes placed
behind the duodenum, along the choledochus or the vena porta, extrinsically
compressing the common duct. Stenosis of the common bile duct secondary to
parietal metastatic involvement is extremely rare. We report on a case of colon
carcinoma metastasis to the intrapancreatic tract of the common bile duct, with a
review of the literature.

PMID: 17506002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007 Jun 30;74(1):74-85. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Depolarization and decreased surface expression of K+ channels contribute to
NSAID-inhibition of intestinal restitution.

Freeman LC(1), Narvaez DF, McCoy A, von Stein FB, Young S, Silver K, Ganta S,
Koch D, Hunter R, Gilmour RF, Lillich JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS
66506, United States.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) contribute to gastrointestinal
ulcer formation by inhibiting epithelial cell migration and mucosal restitution; 
however, the drug-affected signaling pathways are poorly defined. We investigated
whether NSAID inhibition of intestinal epithelial migration is associated with
depletion of intracellular polyamines, depolarization of membrane potential
(E(m)) and altered surface expression of K(+) channels. Epithelial cell migration
in response to the wounding of confluent IEC-6 and IEC-Cdx2 monolayers was
reduced by indomethacin (100 microM), phenylbutazone (100 microM) and NS-398 (100
microM) but not by SC-560 (1 microM). NSAID-inhibition of intestinal cell
migration was not associated with depletion of intracellular polyamines.
Treatment of IEC-6 and IEC-Cdx2 cells with indomethacin, phenylbutazone and
NS-398 induced significant depolarization of E(m), whereas treatment with SC-560 
had no effect on E(m). The E(m) of IEC-Cdx2 cells was: -38.5+/-1.8 mV under
control conditions; -35.9+/-1.6 mV after treatment with SC-560; -18.8+/-1.2 mV
after treatment with indomethacin; and -23.7+/-1.4 mV after treatment with
NS-398. Whereas SC-560 had no significant effects on the total cellular
expression of K(v)1.4 channel protein, indomethacin and NS-398 decreased not only
the total cellular expression of K(v)1.4, but also the cell surface expression of
both K(v)1.4 and K(v)1.6 channel subunits in IEC-Cdx2. Both K(v)1.4 and K(v)1.6
channel proteins were immunoprecipitated by K(v)1.4 antibody from IEC-Cdx2
lysates, indicating that these subunits co-assemble to form heteromeric K(v)
channels. These results suggest that NSAID inhibition of epithelial cell
migration is independent of polyamine-depletion, and is associated with
depolarization of E(m) and decreased surface expression of heteromeric K(v)1
channels.

PMCID: PMC3269908
PMID: 17499219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cancer Sci. 2007 Jun;98(6):790-4.

Helicobacter pylori infection-negative gastric cancer in Japanese hospital
patients: incidence and pathological characteristics.

Kato S(1), Matsukura N, Tsukada K, Matsuda N, Mizoshita T, Tsukamoto T, Tatematsu
M, Sugisaki Y, Naito Z, Tajiri T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Nippon Medical School Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
katoshun@nms.ac.jp

We used Helicobacter pylori sero-positivity and mucosal atrophy as detected by
the serum pepsinogen method to identify H. pylori infection-negative gastric
cancer patients with or without atrophy. One hundred and six of 748 (14.2%)
primary gastric cancer patients were infection-negative by a serum antibody
detection system. Further, 121 (16.2%) of the 748 were negative for gastric
mucosal atrophy by the pepsinogen method, of whom 15/748 (2.0%) were H.
pylori-negative by pepsinogen I level (>70 ng/mL) and pepsinogen I/II ratio
(>3.0). Twenty-seven of 782 (3.6%) gastric cancer patients were H.
pylori-negative by antibodies and severe atrophy as determined by pepsinogen I
level (<30 ng/mL) and pepsinogen I/II ratio (<2.0). H. pylori-negative gastric
cancer patients with severe atrophy likely had a previous infection. These
results indicate that the actual number of H. pylori-negative patients is 2.0% at
minimum and 10.6% (14.2% minus 3.6%) at maximum in the general Japanese
population. Five of 15 (33%) cases displaying neither anti-H. pylori antibodies
nor atrophy were intestinal-type and 10 (67%) were diffuse-type adenocarcinomas. 
Thirteen surgical patients with primary gastric cancer displaying neither
antibodies nor mucosal atrophy were further analyzed for pathological and
phenotypic characteristics. The mucin phenotype was divided into four gastric,
five gastric and intestinal, two intestinal and two null types, independent of
histological classification. Intestinal phenotype elements were detected by Cdx2 
immunohistochemical methods in nine of 13 (70%) cases examined. We conclude that 
a small fraction of gastric cancer patients displayed multifactorial
carcinogenesis without H. pylori infection, indicating that gastric cancer risk
still exists in the absence of H. pylori infection, at an incidence of 2.0% at
minimum and 10.6% at maximum in the general Japanese population.

PMID: 17470129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Sep;28(9):1885-92. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

A functional role of Cdx2 in beta-catenin signaling during transdifferentiation
in endometrial carcinomas.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Wani Y, Okayasu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Nuclear beta-catenin is required for changes in morphology from glandular to
morular phenotypes of endometrial carcinoma (Em Ca) cells, with activation of
p14(ARF)/p53/p21(Waf1) and alteration of p16(INK4A)/pRb pathways. Having
demonstrated previously that the homeodomain transcription factor Cdx2 increases 
markedly during intestinal epithelial cell differentiation, we have examined its 
effects in beta-catenin signaling during transdifferentiation of Em Ca cells. In 
clinical cases, Cdx2 immunoreactivity, along with increased mRNA signals, was
found to overlap with nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and p21(Waf1) in
morules, demonstrating an inverse correlation with cell proliferation. In cell
lines, over-expression of active form beta-catenin resulted in a significant
increase in endogenous Cdx2 expression at both mRNA and protein levels.
Furthermore, the Cdx2 promoter was activated by T-cell factor 4 (TCF4)
-independent activated beta-catenin, as well as Cdx2 itself, through the region
from -39 to +9 bp relative to transcription start site. Cells over-expressing
exogenous Cdx2 showed high levels of p21(Waf1) expression due to stabilization of
the mRNA status, resulting in significant decrease in the proliferation rate, in 
contrast to the lack of apparent changes in morphology. Moreover, transfected
Cdx2 could inhibit beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcriptional activation of
target genes, including p14(ARF) and cyclin D1, probably through indirect
mechanisms. These data suggest that over-expression of Cdx2 mediated by nuclear
beta-catenin and Cdx2 itself can cause an inhibition of Em Ca cell proliferation 
through up-regulation of p21(Waf1) expression, modulating
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transcription. We therefore conclude that an
association between Cdx2 and beta-catenin signaling may participate in induction 
of transdifferentiation of Em Ca cells.

PMID: 17468517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):G54-65. Epub 2007 Apr
26.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 induce E-cadherin adhesion
activity by reducing beta- and p120-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation.

Ezaki T(1), Guo RJ, Li H, Reynolds AB, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology/650 CRB, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are regulators of
intestine-specific gene expression. They also regulate intestinal cell
differentiation and proliferation; however, these effects are poorly understood. 
Previously, we have shown that expression of Cdx1 or Cdx2 in human Colo 205 cells
induces a mature colonocyte morphology characterized by the induction of a
polarized, columnar shape with apical microvilli and strong cell-cell adhesion.
To elucidate the mechanism underlying this phenomenon, we investigated the
adherens junction complex. Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression reduced Colo 205 cell
migration and invasion in vitro, suggesting a physiologically significant change 
in cadherin function. However, Cdx expression did not significantly effect
E-cadherin, alpha-, beta-, or gamma-catenin, or p120-catenin protein levels.
Additionally, no alteration in their intracellular distribution was observed. Cdx
expression did not alter the coprecipitation of beta-catenin with E-cadherin;
however, it did reduce p120-catenin-E-cadherin coprecipitation. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of beta- and p120-catenin is known to disrupt E-cadherin-mediated
cell adhesion and is associated with robust p120-catenin/E-cadherin interactions.
We specifically investigated beta- and p120-catenin for tyrosine phosphorylation 
and found that it was significantly diminished by Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression. We
restored beta- and p120-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation in Cdx2-expressing cells
by knocking down the expression of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B and noted a
significant decline in cell-cell adhesion. We conclude that Cdx expression in
Colo 205 cells induces E-cadherin-dependent cell-cell adhesion by reducing beta- 
and p120-catenin tyrosine phosphorylation. Ascertaining the mechanism for this
novel Cdx effect may improve our understanding of the regulation of cell-cell
adhesion in the colonic epithelium.

PMID: 17463179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007 Jul;11(7):827-34.

The pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus: secondary bile acids upregulate
intestinal differentiation factor CDX2 expression in esophageal cells.

Hu Y(1), Williams VA, Gellersen O, Jones C, Watson TJ, Peters JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Rochester, 601 Elmwood Ave, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Erratum in
    J Gastrointest Surg. 2008 Feb;12(2):400.

Comment in
    Arch Surg. 2008 Aug;143(8):807.

INTRODUCTION: Clinical evidence strongly suggests that bile acids are important
in the development of Barrett's esophagus, although the mechanism remains
unknown. Caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2) is a transcription factor recently
implicated in early differentiation and maintenance of normal intestinal
epithelium and is suggested to play a key role in the pathogenesis of intestinal 
metaplasia in Barrett's esophagus.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of primary and
secondary bile acids on CDX2 mRNA expression in human esophageal cells.
METHODS: Human esophageal cells: (1) squamous, immortalized by SV40 (Het-1A); (2)
adenocarcinoma (SEG-1); and (3) squamous cell carcinoma (HKESC-1 & HKESC-2), were
exposed in cell culture for 1-24 h to 100-1,000 microM deoxycholic,
chenodeoxycholic, and glycocholic acids. Total RNA was extracted before and after
bile acid treatment and reverse transcribed to cDNA. CDX2 mRNA expression was
determined by both quantitative real-time and reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: CDX2 mRNA expression was absent before bile acid exposure in all cell
lines. CDX2 expression increased in a dose- and time-dependent fashion with
deoxycholic and chenodeoxycholic, but not glycocholic, acid in all four cell
lines. The maximal induction of CDX2 expression was seen in SEG-1 adenocarcinoma 
cells. Expression in Het-1A cells also increased significantly as did expression 
in HKESC-1,2 cells, although to a lesser extent than in adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that secondary bile acid stimulation upregulates
CDX2 gene expression in both normal and cancer cell lines. They further support
the role of bile acids in the pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus and link the
clinical evidence of a high prevalence of luminal bile acids in Barrett's to
expression of the gene thought to be responsible for the phenotypic expression of
intestinal metaplasia.

PMID: 17458588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Diabetologia. 2007 Jun;50(6):1228-38. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells towards a pancreatic cell 
fate.

Shim JH(1), Kim SE, Woo DH, Kim SK, Oh CH, McKay R, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, West Building/Room 304, Science Campus, 1 Anam-dong 5-ga,
Sungbuk-goo, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The relative lack of successful pancreatic differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) may suggest that directed differentiation of
hESCs into definitive endoderm and subsequent commitment towards a pancreatic
fate are not readily achieved. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
sequential exposure of hESCs to epigenetic signals that mimic in vivo pancreatic 
development can efficiently generate pancreatic endodermal cells, and whether
these cells can be further matured and reverse hyperglycaemia upon
transplantation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The hESCs were sequentially treated with serum, activin
and retinoic acid (RA) during embryoid body formation. The patterns of gene
expression and protein production associated with embryonic germ layers and
pancreatic endoderm were analysed by RT-PCR and immunostaining. The developmental
competence and function of hESC-derived PDX1-positive cells were evaluated after 
in vivo transplantation.
RESULTS: Sequential treatment with serum, activin and RA highly upregulated the
expression of the genes encoding forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2), SRY-box
containing gene 17 (SOX17), pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) and
homeobox HB9 (HLXB9). The population of pancreatic endodermal cells that produced
PDX1 was significantly increased at the expense of ectodermal differentiation,
and a subset of the PDX1-positive cells also produced FOXA2, caudal-type homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2), and nestin (NES). After transplantation, the
PDX1-positive cells further differentiated into mature cell types producing
insulin and glucagon, resulting in amelioration of hyperglycaemia and weight loss
in streptozotocin-treated diabetic mice.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our strategy allows the progressive differentiation
of hESCs into pancreatic endoderm capable of generating mature pancreatic cell
types that function in vivo. These findings may establish the basis of further
investigations for the purification of transplantable islet progenitors derived
from hESCs.

PMID: 17457565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Prostate. 2007 Jun 15;67(9):911-23.

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms and haplotypes, interactions with
plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, and prostate cancer risk.

Mikhak B(1), Hunter DJ, Spiegelman D, Platz EA, Hollis BW, Giovannucci E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is required for actions of vitamin D.
The binding of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D to the VDR on prostatic epithelial cells
prompts the regulation of cancer-related genes.
METHODS: We conducted a nested case-control study in the Health Professionals
Follow-up Study to investigate the role of the VDR Cdx2, Fok1, and Bsm1 gene
polymorphisms and associated haplotypes and their interaction with plasma vitamin
D metabolites in relation to prostate cancer (PC) risk.
RESULTS: No association was found between these SNPs or their associated
haplotypes and all PC subtypes except that haplotype 2 (A-f-b) with Cdx2 A, Fok1 
f, and Bsm1 b alleles and haplotype 3 (A-F-B) with Cdx2 A, Fok1 F and Bsm1 B
alleles compared to the most common haplotype (A-F-b), were associated with
reduced risk of aggressive PC (high stage or Gleason sum > or =7; P = 0.02), both
with two alleles suspected of being low risk. Carriers of the variant Cdx2 A
allele who were deficient in plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D (< or =15 ng/ml) compared
to non-carriers with normal 25-hydroxyvitamin D, had a lower risk of total and
poorly differentiated PCs (Gleason sum > or =7) (P for interaction = 0.02 and
0.04, respectively). Plasma 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D deficiency (< or =26 pg/ml)
was associated with a threefold risk of poorly differentiated PC (P for
interaction = 0.01) when comparing carriers of the Cdx2 A allele to non-carriers 
with normal 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D.
CONCLUSION: In this population of men, none of the VDR polymorphisms studied was 
associated with susceptibility to PC.

PMID: 17440943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007 Jul;11(7):869-74.

Duodenal-content reflux into the esophagus leads to expression of Cdx2 and Muc2
in areas of squamous epithelium in rats.

Pera M(1), Pera M, de Bolós C, Brito MJ, Palacín A, Grande L, Cardesa A, Poulsom 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Hospital Universitario del Mar, IMIM,
Passeig Marítim 25-29, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. pera@imas.imim.es

The molecular events responsible for the transdifferentiation of epithelial cells
of the esophagus to a columnar cell type are not well understood. Cdx2 has been
detected in Barrett's esophagus, so we sought evidence of Cdx2 expression during 
the process of transdifferentiation of the esophageal squamous epithelium into a 
glandular phenotype. Thirty-two rats underwent an esophago-jejunostomy to produce
esophagitis of 20, 25, 30, or 35 weeks of duration. The spectrum of esophageal
lesions induced by chronic reflux was examined for expression of Cdx2 and Muc2 by
immunohistochemistry. Five animals developed glandular metaplasia and
adenosquamous carcinoma, two developed only glandular metaplasia, and two had
adenosquamous carcinoma alone. Nuclear Cdx2 expression was detected in 57% (four 
of seven) and 43% (three of seven) of foci of glandular metaplasia and
adenosquamous carcinomas, respectively. Cdx2 staining was detectable in some
squamous and some mucus secreting cells. Perinuclear and perivacuolar staining of
Muc2 was detected focally in 71% (five of seven) and 57% (four of seven) of areas
with glandular metaplasia and adenosquamous carcinoma, respectively. We show that
duodenal-content reflux into the esophagus switches on the expression of Cdx2
protein in esophageal keratinocytic cells, promoting a mucinous
transdifferentiation process with secretion of intestinal mucin Muc2.

PMID: 17440788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Apr;131(4):599-603.

Distinguishing prostatic from colorectal adenocarcinoma on biopsy samples: the
role of morphology and immunohistochemistry.

Owens CL(1), Epstein JI, Netto GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.

CONTEXT: Poorly differentiated carcinoma on prostate or colorectal biopsy can
occasionally present a diagnostic challenge in determining tumor source
especially in locally advanced colorectal carcinoma (CRCa) or prostate carcinoma 
(PCa). Such determination can affect prognosis and therapy.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of morphology and immunohistochemistry in the
previously mentioned setting.
DESIGN: Surgical pathology and consultation records. Hematoxylin-eosin sections
were reviewed in 16 cases (11 PCa, 5 CRCa). Immunohistochemistry for 9 markers
was performed in 15 cases.
RESULTS: Dirty necrosis, seen in 5 (100%) of 5 CRCa and 2 (18%) of 11 PCa cases, 
and the presence of columnar cells with basal nuclei, seen in 5 (100%) of 5 CRCa 
and 1 (9%) of 11 PCa cases, appear to be the most useful morphologic parameters. 
Immunohistochemistry confirmed the value of prostate-specific antigen (PSA),
CDX2, cytokeratin (CK) 20, and beta-catenin in the differential of CRCa (0% PSA+,
60% CDX2+, 80% CK20+, and 100% beta-catenin+) versus PCa (80% PSA+, 0% CDX2+, 10%
CK20+, and 0% beta-catenin+). P501S had a similar sensitivity as PSA in detecting
PCa (80%). Two (20%) of 10 PCa cases were positive for 1 of the 2 markers but not
the other. P501S was negative in all 5 cases of CRCa.
CONCLUSIONS: P501S is a useful marker in this setting when included together with
PSA, CDX2, CK20, and beta-catenin. P501S labels a subset of PCa cases that are
negative for PSA. Dirty necrosis and/or columnar cells with basal nuclei could
also be of help.

PMID: 17425391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Lab Invest. 2007 Jun;87(6):559-71. Epub 2007 Apr 9.

Interaction of Toll-like receptors with bacterial components induces expression
of CDX2 and MUC2 in rat biliary epithelium in vivo and in culture.

Ikeda H(1), Sasaki M, Ishikawa A, Sato Y, Harada K, Zen Y, Kazumori H, Nakanuma
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

The mechanism of transformation of biliary epithelium leading to intestinal
metaplasia, which is significantly involved in biliary diseases, remains unclear.
CDX2, an intestine-specific transcription factor, is thought to regulate
intestinal mucin MUC2 (mucus core protein) expression. We took advantage of
polycystic kidney (PCK) rats as a model of chronic suppurative cholangitis with
intestinal metaplasia and of cultured biliary epithelial cells (BECs) from PCK
rats to clarify the causal relation between bacterial components such as
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and the development of intestinal 
metaplasia of bile ducts. Histological, immunohistochemical, and in situ
hybridization studies were conducted in PCK rat livers. In cultured BECs, CDX2
and MUC2 were expressed following treatment with PAMPs and inhibitors
(anti-Toll-like receptor (TLR)2/TLR4 antibody, nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) 
inhibitor MG132). Chronic suppurative cholangitis with intestinal metaplasia
developed as the PCK rats aged, and intestinal metaplasia and aberrant CDX2 and
MUC2 expression developed in parallel. Intraluminal bacteria and the expression
of TLR2 and TLR4 in BECs were demonstrated in the bile ducts, showing chronic
suppurative cholangitis. In cultured BECs, treatment with PAMPs induced
upregulation of CDX2 and MUC2 expression, and this effect was abolished by
pretreatment with anti-TLR2 and anti-TLR4 antibody and MG132. A knockdown of CDX2
by CDX2 small interfering RNA inhibited MUC2 expression in cultured BECs induced 
by PAMPs, and transfection of CDX2 expression vector induced MUC2 expression. In 
conclusion, bacterial components may induce upregulation of the CDX2 expression
followed by MUC2 expression via TLR and the NF-kappaB system in cultured BECs,
and could be related to the development of intestinal metaplasia of the bile
ducts.

PMID: 17417665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2007 Apr;41(4):375-9.

CDX2 expression in columnar metaplasia of the remnant esophagus in patients who
underwent esophagectomy.

Bax D(1), Siersema PD, Moons LM, Dekken Hv, Tilanus HW, Kusters JG, Kuipers EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC--University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Patients who have undergone esophagectomy with gastric tube
reconstruction often have complaints of gastro-esophageal reflux. A subset of
these patients will develop columnar epithelium in the remnant esophagus, which
can be of the gastric or intestinal type (Barrett esophagus).
GOALS: To determine whether gastric-type mucosa (GM) in the esophagus is a
precursor stage of intestinal metaplasia (IM).
STUDY: The medical records of 613 patients having undergone esophagectomy were
reviewed for the endoscopic presence of segments with columnar mucosa in the
remnant esophagus. Of them, 45 patients underwent endoscopic follow-up at least 6
months after resection. The presence of IM in the remnant esophagus was
determined histologically in archival biopsy samples. Intestinal characteristics 
were identified by immunohistochemistry for CDX2, MUC2, and cytokeratins 7 and
20. CDX2 transcription was assessed by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: In 18 of 45 patients (40%) GM was identified, and 7 of these patients
also had foci of IM. CDX2 and MUC2 expression was observed in IM, and in 2
patients, CDX2 expression was also observed in gastric-type glands at a distance 
from intestinal glands. CDX2 transcription was identified in 2 patients without
IM.
CONCLUSIONS: In the majority of patients after esophageal resection, expression
of CDX2 and MUC2 in the remnant esophagus was only detectable in IM, but CDX2 was
also observed in 4 cases with only GM. This could indicate that induction of
formation of GM and IM may share a common pathway, eventually leading to the
development of specialized intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 17413605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Thorac Oncol. 2007 Feb;2(2):115-20.

Primary lung cancer presenting with gastrointestinal tract involvement:
clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features in a series of 18 consecutive 
cases.

Rossi G(1), Marchioni A, Romagnani E, Bertolini F, Longo L, Cavazza A, Barbieri
F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pathologic Anatomy, Azienda Policlinico, Modena, Italy.
rossi.giulio@policlinico.mo.it

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer initially manifesting as gastrointestinal (GI)-tract
metastasis is exceedingly rare, representing a diagnostic challenge and a
late-stage disease sign. The clinicopathologic characteristics of the largest
series of lung carcinomas initially presenting with GI involvement were
described, focusing on differential diagnosis and therapeutic options.
METHODS: Eighteen consecutive cases of lung cancer (11 surgical specimens and 7
biopsies) initially diagnosed on GI histologic samples were identified during
routine pathologist practice. All cases were immunostained with thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2), and
cytokeratins 7 (CK7) and 20 (CK20). Clinical and radiological data were obtained 
in all cases.
RESULTS: There were 10 women and 8 men with a mean age of 68.5 years. The small
bowel was the most common GI involved site (12 cases), followed by the stomach
(four) and large intestine (two). Only half of cases were correctly diagnosed on 
GI biopsies. Fourteen patients died shortly from disease (mean follow-up, 3
months); two are still alive with multiple metastases, and two patients with the 
GI tract as the unique site of metastasis underwent pulmonary lobectomy and
chemotherapy and are alive without evidence of disease. At morphology, there were
10 large cell undifferentiated carcinomas and eight adenocarcinomas. All cases
were immunostained for CK7 and 89% for TTF-1, whereas CK20 and CDX2 were
completely negative.
CONCLUSION: Lung cancer presenting as GI-tract metastasis is probably more
frequent than expected, and pathologists should always keep in mind this
possibility when dealing with undifferentiated GI carcinoma. Immunostaining with 
TTF-1, CDX2, CK7, and CK20 is helpful in highlighting lung primary. Although GI
metastasis from lung cancer is associated with dismal outcomes, pulmonary
resection coupled with chemotherapy might represent a therapeutic option in
selected patients with a solitary GI-tract metastasis.

PMID: 17410025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):865-8.

HOX deregulation in acute myeloid leukemia.

Rice KL(1), Licht JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):1037-48.

The deregulation of homeobox (HOX) genes in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and the 
potential for these master regulators to perturb normal hematopoiesis is well
established. To date, overexpression of HOX genes in AML has been attributed to
specific chromosomal aberrations and abnormalities involving mixed-lineage
leukemia (MLL), an upstream regulator of HOX genes. The finding reported in this 
issue of the JCI by Scholl et al. that caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 
2 (CDX2), which is capable of affecting HOX gene expression during embryogenesis,
is overexpressed in 90% of patients with AML and induces a transplantable AML in 
murine models provides an alternative mechanism for HOX-induced leukemogenesis
and yields important insights into the hierarchy of HOX gene regulation in AML
(see the related article beginning on page 1037).

PMCID: PMC1838955
PMID: 17404613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. BioDrugs. 2007;21(2):79-83.

Ethics and embryonic stem cell research: altered nuclear transfer as a way
forward.

Hurlbut WB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute at Stanford, Stanford University Medical Center,
Stanford, California 94305-5020, USA.

Ethical controversy in stem cell research arises because current methods to
produce embryonic stem cell lines require the destruction of living human
embryos. For this reason, there is increasing interest in developing alternative,
non-embryonic sources of pluripotent stem cells. This effort is especially
important in the US due to the prevailing policy against federal funding of
embryo-destructive research. Altered nuclear transfer (ANT) is one of several
potential methods to develop alternative sources of pluripotent stem cells. This 
approach employs the technique of somatic cell nuclear transfer, but the somatic 
cell nucleus or egg cytoplasm (or both) are first altered before the somatic cell
nucleus is transferred into the oocyte. This alteration precludes the coordinated
organization and developmental potential that is necessary for the resulting
biological entity to be an embryo, but it still allows the entity to generate
pluripotent stem cells. Proof-of-principle for one variant of ANT has been
established in mice by silencing the functional expression of the gene Cdx2 in
the somatic cell nucleus prior to its transfer into an enucleated egg. From the
resulting non-embryonic laboratory construct, fully functional pluripotent stem
cells were procured. Other more recent studies have suggested the possibility of 
achieving the same results by preemptively silencing maternally derived Cdx2
messenger RNA in the egg before the act of nuclear transfer. The procedure would 
produce the equivalent of a tissue culture of pluripotent stem cells. In contrast
to the use of embryos 'left over' from clinical in vitro fertilization, ANT could
produce pluripotent stem cell lines with an unlimited range of specifically
selected and controlled genotypes. Such flexibility would greatly facilitate the 
study of disease, drug development, and toxicology testing, and may allow the
production of therapeutically useful pluripotent stem cells that are
immune-compatible. If developed to the point of scientific reliability, ANT would
be a valuable research tool for the study of other aspects of cell development
and differentiation, including gene expression patterns, imprinting, and
cell-cell signaling. ANT would also help to clarify definitions and boundaries
that distinguish true organisms from 'biological artifacts' and, thereby, provide
moral precedent to guide future progress in developmental biology.

PMID: 17402791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Stem Cells. 2007 Jun;25(6):1529-38. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Collagen IV induces trophoectoderm differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Schenke-Layland K(1), Angelis E, Rhodes KE, Heydarkhan-Hagvall S, Mikkola HK,
Maclellan WR.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, UCLA School of Medicine, 675 C.E. Young
Dr., MRL 3-645, Los Angeles, California 90095-1760, USA.

The earliest segregation of lineages in the developing embryo is the commitment
of cells to the inner cell mass or the trophoectoderm in preimplantation
blastocysts. The exogenous signals that control commitment to a particular cell
lineage are poorly understood; however, it has been suggested that extracellular 
"niche" and extracellular matrix, in particular, play an important role in
determining the developmental fate of stem cells. Collagen IV (ColIV) has been
reported to direct embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation to mesodermal
lineages in both mouse and human ES cells. To define the effects of ColIV on ES
cell differentiation and to identify the resulting heterogeneous cell types, we
performed microarray analyses and determined global gene expression. We observed 
that ColIV induced the expression of mesodermal genes specific to hematopoietic, 
endothelial, and smooth muscle cells and, surprisingly, also a panel of
trophoectoderm-restricted markers. This effect was specific to collagen IV, as no
trophoblast differentiation was seen on collagen I, laminin, or fibronectin.
Stimulation with basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) or FGF4 increased the
number of trophoectodermal cells. These cells were isolated under clonal
conditions and successfully differentiated into a variety of trophoblast
derivatives. Interestingly, differentiation of ES cells to trophoblastic lineages
was only seen in ES cell lines maintained on embryonic feeder layers and was
caudal-type homeobox protein 2 (Cdx2)-dependent, consistent with Cdx2's
postulated role in trophoectoderm commitment. Our data suggest that, given the
appropriate extracellular stimuli, mouse embryonic stem cells can differentiate
into trophoectoderm. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at
the end of this article.

PMID: 17363553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2007 May 15;308(3):308-21.

Evidence for positive and negative regulation of the mouse Cdx2 gene.

Wang WC(1), Shashikant CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy and Animal Science, College of Agricultural Sciences, The 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The caudal family of transcription factors specifies posterior structures during 
mouse development. We describe the cis-regulatory regions that control mouse Cdx2
expression in the posterior neural tube and mesoderm. An 11.4 kb genomic fragment
directs reporter gene expression in a pattern reflecting endogenous Cdx2
expression. A crucial enhancer is located in a 1 kb fragment upstream of the Cdx2
transcriptional start site. This enhancer by itself directs reporter gene
expression to more anterior levels in the neural tube compared to the endogenous 
Cdx2 expression, suggesting the presence of negative regulatory elements outside 
the 1 kb fragment. A second enhancer, located in the first intron directs robust 
expression to the posterior two-thirds of the developing embryo in a pattern that
is ectopic to Cdx2 expression. The intronic enhancer activity is silenced in the 
context of the larger 11.4 kb reporter construct. Intron 1 contains two
independent enhancers that specifically direct expression to mesoderm (MSE) and
neural tube (NSE). Phylogenetic comparison of vertebrate Cdx2 sequences indicates
several conserved regions of sequences within the three-enhancer regions. A
transcription factor database search suggests potential binding sites for factors
involved in FGF and Wnt signaling pathways.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17358012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Histol Histopathol. 2007 Jun;22(6):641-9.

Down regulation of gastric and intestinal phenotypic expression in Epstein-Barr
virus-associated stomach cancers.

Hirano N(1), Tsukamoto T, Mizoshita T, Koriyama C, Akiba S, Campos F,
Carrasquilla G, Carrascal E, Cao X, Toyoda T, Ban H, Miki K, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

AIMS: We have previously demonstrated the importance of gastric and intestinal
phenotypic expression for stomach carcinogenesis. In this study, we focused on
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated stomach cancers, with special attention to
Cdx2.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated the expression of gastric and intestinal
phenotypic markers by immunohistochemistry in 35 EBV-positive [EBV (+)] and 75
EBV-negative [EBV (-)] stomach cancers in Colombia. The lesions were divided
phenotypically into gastric (G), gastric-and-intestinal mixed (GI), intestinal
(I), and null (N) phenotypes. In the EBV (+) cases, the lesions were divided
phenotypically into 9 G (25.7%), 1 GI (2.9%), 3 I (8.6%), and 22 N (62.9%) types.
Similarly, the EBV (-) lesions were also classified phenotypically as 15 G
(20.0%), 19 GI (25.3%), 24 I (32.0%), and 17 N (22.7%) types. The proportion of N
type EBV (+) lesions was higher than for their EBV (-) counterparts (P<0.0001).
The expression of Cdx2 and MUC2 was also found to be significantly lower in EBV
(+) than in EBV (-) stomach cancers (P=0.0001; P<0.0001). Cdx2 expression in the 
intestinal metaplastic glands present in non-neoplastic mucosa surrounding EBV
(+) lesions was also significantly lower than in EBV (-) tumors (P=0.016) despite
no evidence of EBV infection.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV (+) stomach cancers are characterized by low expression of
intestinal phenotype markers, including Cdx2, and only occasional gastric
phenotypic expression.

PMID: 17357094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):1037-48. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

The homeobox gene CDX2 is aberrantly expressed in most cases of acute myeloid
leukemia and promotes leukemogenesis.

Scholl C(1), Bansal D, Döhner K, Eiwen K, Huntly BJ, Lee BH, Rücker FG, Schlenk
RF, Bullinger L, Döhner H, Gilliland DG, Fröhling S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):865-8.

The homeobox transcription factor CDX2 plays an important role in embryonic
development and regulates the proliferation and differentiation of intestinal
epithelial cells in the adult. We have found that CDX2 is expressed in leukemic
cells of 90% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) but not in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells derived from normal individuals. Stable
knockdown of CDX2 expression by RNA interference inhibited the proliferation of
various human AML cell lines and strongly reduced their clonogenic potential in
vitro. Primary murine hematopoietic progenitor cells transduced with Cdx2
acquired serial replating activity, were able to be continuously propagated in
liquid culture, generated fully penetrant and transplantable AML in BM transplant
recipients, and displayed dysregulated expression of Hox family members in vitro 
and in vivo. These results demonstrate that aberrant expression of the
developmental regulatory gene CDX2 in the adult hematopoietic compartment is a
frequent event in the pathogenesis of AML; suggest a role for CDX2 as part of a
common effector pathway that promotes the proliferative capacity and self-renewal
potential of myeloid progenitor cells; and support the hypothesis that CDX2 is
responsible, in part, for the altered HOX gene expression that is observed in
most cases of AML.

PMCID: PMC1810574
PMID: 17347684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Oncol Rep. 2007 Apr;17(4):753-60.

Dysregulated expression of HOX and ParaHOX genes in human esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.

Takahashi O(1), Hamada J, Abe M, Hata S, Asano T, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Miyamoto
M, Kondo S, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Homeobox genes function as master regulators in embryonic morphogenesis. We
hypothesized that homeobox genes are essential to maintain tissue- or
organ-specificity even in adult body and that the dysregulated expression of
homeobox genes results in tumor development and progression. To better understand
the roles of homeobox genes in development and progression of esophageal cancer, 
we analyzed the expression patterns of 39 HOX genes and 4 ParaHOX (CDX1, CDX2,
CDX4 and PDX1) genes in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and normal
esophageal mucosa tissues. A total of 48 primary ESCC tissues and 7 normal
esophageal mucosa tissues were resected from patients who underwent radical
surgery without any preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The expression of 
HOX and ParaHOX genes were analyzed by a quantitative real-time RT-PCR method and
immunohistochemistry. The expression levels of 24 HOX genes, CDX1, CDX2 and PDX1 
were significantly higher in ESCC compared to normal mucosa (p<0.01, Mann-Whitney
U test). The Immunohistochemical study revealed that HOXA5 and D9 proteins were
more cytoplasmic in ESCC than normal mucosa cells. Our data indicate that the
disordered expression of HOX and ParaHOX genes are involved in the development of
ESCC or its malignancy.

PMID: 17342311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Oncol Rep. 2007 Apr;17(4):721-9.

Co-expression of gastric and biliary phenotype in pyloric-gland type adenoma of
the gallbladder: immunohistochemical analysis of mucin profile and CD10.

Nagata S(1), Ajioka Y, Nishikura K, Watanabe G, Inoue T, Yamaguchi K, Watanabe H,
Tanaka M, Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
shnagata@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Pyloric-gland type adenoma of the gallbladder is formed by proliferation of
glands resembling pyloric glands, morphologically. No previous report has
described the cellular phenotype and differentiation of pyloric-gland type
adenoma of the gallbladder, using CD10 as a marker of proper biliary phenotype.
Immunostainings were performed for mucin markers such as MUC5AC, human gastric
mucin (HGM) for gastric foveolar type epithelium, MUC6, M-GGMC-1 for
pyloric-gland type and MUC2 for intestinal goblet-cell type, and for CD10 as a
proper biliary type marker on 58 pyloric-gland type adenomas of the gallbladder, 
as well as for p53, Ki-67 and CDX2. The percentage (X) of reactive cells in
relation to the total number of tumor cells was estimated semi-quantitatively,
and divided into four categories: X=0% (negative), 0%<X<10%, 10%<or=X<30%, and
X>or=30%. CDX2 expression was considered to be positive when the percentage of
positively stained cells was >or=10%. Out of the 58 pyloric-gland type adenomas, 
>or=30% of adenoma cells were positive for MUC5AC in 22 (38%) tumors, HGM in 29
(50%), MUC6 in 58 (100%), M-GGMC-1 in 54 (93%), MUC2 in none (0%), and CD10 in 20
(34%). MUC6 (P<0.001) and M-GGMC-1 (P<0.001) mucins were detected more frequently
in pyloric-gland type adenomas, and CD10 expression was significantly decreased, 
compared with normal gallbladder epithelium (P=0.006). P53 overexpression was not
found in any of the 58 tumors, including two adenomas with carcinomatous foci.
The mean number of Ki-67-positive cells was 10.3+/-5.8%. CDX2 expression was
judged as negative in all 58 pyloric-gland type adenomas. In pyloric-gland type
adenomas of the gallbladder, expression of pyloric-gland type mucins was observed
with a high frequency, whereas intestinal goblet-cell mucins were rarely seen. In
addition, co-expression of gastric foveolar type mucins and CD10 was also
demonstrated. Pyloric-gland type adenomas of the gallbladder show a
differentiation toward pyloric glands in terms of immunohistochemistry, as well
as morphology, accompanied by co-expression of gastric foveolar and native
biliary phenotypes.

PMID: 17342306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Digestion. 2006;74(3-4):187-98. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Celecoxib inhibits Cdx2 expression and prevents gastric cancer in Helicobacter
pylori-infected Mongolian gerbils.

Futagami S(1), Suzuki K, Hiratsuka T, Shindo T, Hamamoto T, Tatsuguchi A, Ueki N,
Shinji Y, Kusunoki M, Wada K, Miyake K, Gudis K, Tsukui T, Sakamoto C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Nippon Medical School,
Tokyo, Japan. seiji-f@nms.ac.jp

Comment in
    Digestion. 2006;74(3-4):184-6.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The aim of this study was to see whether administration of
celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, prior to the appearance of intestinal
metaplasia could prevent the development of gastric cancer in Helicobacter
pylori-infected Mongolian gerbils.
METHODS: Fifty-two Mongolian gerbils were divided into 3 groups and given 5
biweekly doses of N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU; 30 ppm). At week 12, group 2 (n = 
20) and group 3 (n = 22) gerbils were then given an injection of H. pylori, while
group 1 controls (n = 10) received Brucella broth alone. In addition, 7 weeks
after H. pylori inoculation, at week 19, group 3 gerbils also received a 36-week 
administration course of celecoxib (1,500 ppm) in their diet. The incidence of
gastric adenocarcinoma was determined at week 54 by histological analysis. COX-2 
and Cdx2 protein expression and COX activity were evaluated for each group. The
extent of intestinal metaplasia, Cdx2 and MUC2 expression, and the apoptotic
index were evaluated semi-quantitatively by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The incidence of gastric adenocarcinoma was: group 1, 0% (0/10); group
2, 65% (13/20), and group 3, 23% (5/22; p < 0.05). Continuous celecoxib
administration significantly reduced COX activity and COX-2 protein expression,
Cdx2 and MUC2 protein immunoreactivity, and the extent of Alcian blue periodic
acid-Schiff-positive intestinal metaplasia in H. pylori-infected gerbils.
Celecoxib also induced apoptosis in these gerbils. Significant inhibition of Cdx2
expression in group 3 gerbils was also shown by Western blot analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Prior to the first appearance of intestinal metaplasia, timely
administration of celecoxib prevents gastric cancer occurrence by disrupting the 
progression of intestinal metaplasia into gastric carcinoma through its
inhibition of Cdx2 expression in MNU-pretreated H. pylori-infected Mongolian
gerbils.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 17341852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Development. 2007 Apr;134(7):1357-68. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

Timing of the onset of a developmental cell death is controlled by
transcriptional induction of the C. elegans ced-3 caspase-encoding gene.

Maurer CW(1), Chiorazzi M, Shaham S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Temporal control of programmed cell death is necessary to ensure that cells die
at only the right time during animal development. How such temporal regulation is
achieved remains poorly understood. In some Caenorhabditis elegans somatic cells,
transcription of the egl-1/BH3-only gene promotes cell-specific death. The EGL-1 
protein inhibits the CED-9/Bcl-2 protein, resulting in the release of the caspase
activator CED-4/Apaf-1. Subsequent activation of the CED-3 caspase by CED-4 leads
to cell death. Despite the important role of egl-1 transcription in promoting
CED-3 activity in cells destined to die, it remains unclear whether the temporal 
control of cell death is mediated by egl-1 expression. Here, we show that egl-1
and ced-9 play only minor roles in the death of the C. elegans tail-spike cell,
demonstrating that temporal control of tail-spike cell death can be achieved in
the absence of egl-1. We go on to show that the timing of the onset of tail-spike
cell death is controlled by transcriptional induction of the ced-3 caspase. We
characterized the developmental expression pattern of ced-3, and show that, in
the tail-spike cell, ced-3 expression is induced shortly before the cell dies,
and this induction is sufficient to promote the demise of the cell. Both ced-3
expression and cell death are dependent on the transcription factor PAL-1, the C.
elegans homolog of the mammalian tumor suppressor gene Cdx2. PAL-1 can bind to
the ced-3 promoter sites that are crucial for tail-spike cell death, suggesting
that it promotes cell death by directly activating ced-3 transcription. Our
results highlight a role that has not been described previously for the
transcriptional regulation of caspases in controlling the timing of cell death
onset during animal development.

PMID: 17329362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Hum Pathol. 2007 Jun;38(6):857-63. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the stomach: histogenesis and progression in
association with intestinal phenotype.

Kumashiro Y(1), Yao T, Aishima S, Hirahashi M, Nishiyama K, Yamada T, Takayanagi 
R, Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is an extrahepatic tumor characterized by morphological
similarities to hepatocellular carcinoma. The lesions contain a tubular
adenocarcinoma that seems to develop "hepatoid" features, but the relation
between the tubular adenocarcinomatous and the hepatoid components remains
unclear. We compared the cellular phenotypes of 23 cases of hepatoid
adenocarcinoma of the stomach having tubular adenocarcinomatous components with
69 cases of non-hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Afterward, we examined
the expression of CDX2 and p53 in the tubular adenocarcinomatous and hepatoid
components of hepatoid adenocarcinoma. Both components of hepatoid adenocarcinoma
were classified into 4 phenotypic categories according to the immunohistochemical
results for CD10, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6. The complete intestinal phenotype
(CD10+, MUC5AC-, MUC6-) was most frequently observed in the adenocarcinomatous
and hepatoid components (61% and 65%, respectively). In contrast, no gastric
phenotype (MUC5AC+, MUC6+, MUC2-, CD10-) was observed in any of the hepatoid
adenocarcinoma components. The positivity for p53 protein in the
adenocarcinomatous and hepatoid components was concordant. The expression of CDX2
with early differentiation and maintenance of intestinal epithelial cells was
observed in all of the adenocarcinomatous components, whereas 9 of the 23
hepatoid components (39%) were negative for CDX2. These findings suggest that
hepatoid adenocarcinoma arises from an adenocarcinoma with an intestinal
phenotype and that its hepatoid component is in some way related to reduced CDX2 
expression.

PMID: 17320150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Dig Liver Dis. 2007 Apr;39(4):305-11. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

COX-2, CDX2, and CDC2 immunohistochemical assessment for dysplasia-carcinoma
progression in Barrett's esophagus.

Villanacci V(1), Rossi E, Zambelli C, Galletti A, Cestari R, Missale G, Casa DD, 
Bassotti G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Pathology, Spedali Civili, University of Brescia, Italy.
villanacci@spedalicivili.brescia.it

BACKGROUND: Immunohistochemical changes associated with development of cancer in 
Barrett's esophagus offer potential areas of intervention to prevent and manage
esophageal cancer.
AIMS: To assess the role of cyclooxygenase 2, caudal-type homeobox transcription 
factor 2 and cell division cycle 2/cyclin-dependent kinase 1 in the Barrett's
metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Specimens from 46 patients with Barrett's esophagus (39%
without dysplasia, 33% with dysplasia and 28% with adenocarcinoma) were stained
for cyclooxygenase 2, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2 and cell
division cycle 2.
RESULTS: Cyclooxygenase 2: No expression differences between groups were found,
except for adenocarcinomas (p=0.04). Caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2:
Nuclear positivity decreased from Barrett's esophagus without dysplasia (71.6%), 
to Barrett's esophagus with low grade dysplasia (35.3%), to Barrett's esophagus
with high grade dysplasia (17.14%); in adenocarcinoma these percentages were
intermediate between high and low grade dysplasia (30.5%). Cell division cycle 2:
Expression on deeper glandular structures was 40% in Barrett's esophagus without 
dysplasia, 55.47% in Barrett's esophagus with dysplasia, and 63.84% in
adenocarcinoma, with no statistical differences between groups. Concerning cells 
of the superficial layer, Barrett's esophagus with low grade dysplasia expressed 
focal positivity (p=0.0001 vs. no dysplasia); Barrett's esophagus with high grade
dysplasia displayed diffuse positivity (p=0.0001 vs. no dysplasia and low grade
dysplasia). A diffuse positivity was found in Barrett's esophagus with
adenocarcinoma (p=0.0001 vs. no dysplasia and low grade dysplasia).
CONCLUSIONS: Further evaluation of cyclooxygenase 2, cell division cycle 2 and
caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2, in association with morphology,
might help to improve the accuracy of diagnosis and be useful for the
clinical-pathological assessment of patients with Barrett's esophagus.

PMID: 17307036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 12;26(32):4725-9. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

CDX2 promotes anchorage-independent growth by transcriptional repression of
IGFBP-3.

Chun SY(1), Chen F, Washburn JG, MacDonald JW, Innes KL, Zhao R, Cruz-Correa MR, 
Dang LH, Dang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0682, USA.

CDX2 is a Drosophila caudal-related homeobox transcription factor that is
important for the establishment and maintenance of intestinal epithelial cells.
We have reported that CDX2 promotes tumorigenicity in a subset of human
colorectal cancer cell lines. Here, we present evidence that CDX2 negatively
regulates the well-documented growth inhibitor insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-3 (IGFBP-3). Specifically, CDX2 binds to the IGFBP-3 gene promoter and
can repress IGFBP-3 transcription, protein expression and secretion. Furthermore,
inhibition of IGFBP-3 partially rescues the decreased anchorage-independent
growth phenotype observed in CDX2 knockout cells. These data demonstrate for the 
first time that (1) CDX2 can function as a transcriptional repressor, and (2) one
mechanism by which CDX2 promotes anchorage-independent growth is by
transcriptional repression of IGFBP-3.

PMID: 17297462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Mar;22(3):389-94.

Expression of the caudal-type homeodomain transcription factor CDX2 is related to
clinical outcome in biliary tract carcinoma.

Chang YT(1), Hsu C, Jeng YM, Chang MC, Wei SC, Wong JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The caudal-type homeodomain transcriptional factor CDX2, a
member of the caudal-related homeobox gene family, plays a crucial role in the
regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation in the gut. Recent studies
have reported that expression of CDX2 was an independent marker of outcome in
patients with resected adenocarcinoma of ampulla of Vater, gastric cancer, and
colon cancer. The clinicopathological significance of CDX2 expression has
hitherto remained unclear in biliary tract carcinoma (BTC). The aim of this study
was to determine whether CDX2 expression in BTC indicates clinical outcome.
METHODS: The expression of CDX2 was investigated immunohistochemically in
surgically resected specimens from 164 patients with BTC, including 74
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, 49 extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, and 41
gallbladder carcinomas. The correlation between expression of CDX2 and
clinicopathological factors, including overall survival, tumor location, tumor
stage, and degree of tumor differentiation, was examined in patients with BTC.
RESULTS: In total, 27 of the 164 (16.46%) patients with BTC expressed CDX2. The
frequency of CDX2 expression was much higher in the extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas (22.45%) and gallbladder carcinomas (29.27%) than in the
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (5.41%), the difference being statistically
significant (P = 0.002). Factors influencing survival on univariate analysis were
tumor stage (P < 0.00001), degree of tumor differentiation (P = 0.0002), and CDX2
expression (P = 0.01). On multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional hazard
model, CDX2 expression and tumor stage were independent prognostic factors in
patients with BTC.
CONCLUSION: Expression of CDX2 was an independent indicator of outcome in
patients with BTC in addition to tumor stage and tumor differentiation. The
mechanism by which CDX2 expression influences behavior of biliary tract carcinoma
needs further investigation.

PMID: 17295772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem J. 2007 May 1;403(3):593-601.

The beta-cell specific transcription factor Nkx6.1 inhibits glucagon gene
transcription by interfering with Pax6.

Gauthier BR(1), Gosmain Y, Mamin A, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Unit, Geneva University Hospital, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The transcription factor Nkx6.1 is required for the establishment of functional
insulin-producing beta-cells in the endocrine pancreas. Overexpression of Nkx6.1 
has been shown to inhibit glucagon gene expression while favouring insulin gene
activation. Down-regulation resulted in the opposite effect, suggesting that
absence of Nkx6.1 favours glucagon gene expression. To understand the mechanism
by which Nkx6.1 suppresses glucagon gene expression, we studied its effect on the
glucagon gene promoter activity in non-islet cells using transient transfections 
and gel-shift analyses. In glucagonoma cells transfected with an Nkx6.1-encoding 
vector, the glucagon promoter activity was reduced by 65%. In BHK21 cells, Nkx6.1
inhibited by 93% Pax6-mediated activation of the glucagon promoter, whereas
Cdx2/3 and Maf stimulations were unaltered. Although Nkx6.1 could interact with
both the G1 and G3 element, only the former displayed specificity for Nkx6.1.
Mutagenesis of the three potential AT-rich motifs within the G1 revealed that
only the Pax6-binding site preferentially interacted with Nkx6.1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed interaction of Nkx6.1 with the glucagon promoter
and revealed a direct competition for binding between Pax6 and Nkx6.1. A weak
physical interaction between Pax6 and Nkx6.1 was detected in vitro and in vivo
suggesting that Nkx6.1 predominantly inhibits glucagon gene transcription through
G1-binding competition. We suggest that cell-specific expression of the glucagon 
gene may only proceed when Nkx6.1, in combination with Pdx1 and Pax4, are
silenced in early alpha-cell precursors.

PMCID: PMC1876377
PMID: 17263687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Pathol. 2007 Feb;170(2):733-44.

The microenvironment controls CDX2 homeobox gene expression in colorectal cancer 
cells.

Benahmed F(1), Gross I, Guenot D, Jehan F, Martin E, Domon-Dell C, Brabletz T,
Kedinger M, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, 3 Avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene CDX2 plays a major role in development, especially in the gut, 
and it also acts as a tumor suppressor in the adult colon. Using orthotopic and
heterotopic xenografts of human primary colorectal tumor cells and cell lines in 
nude mice, we addressed the effect of the microenvironment on CDX2 expression. In
cells expressing CDX2 at a high level in culture, this level was maintained in
subcutaneous grafts but was reduced when implanted into the cecum wall.
Reciprocally, in cells with low CDX2 expression in culture, the level remained
low in grafts into the cecum wall but was stimulated subcutaneously. In vitro
co-cultures showed that CDX2 expression was activated in cells grown on layers of
skin fibroblasts but not on intestinal fibroblasts. The stimulation was
transcriptional, as assessed by transfection experiments with reporter plasmids
containing the murine Cdx2 promoter. Together, these data demonstrate
experimentally that CDX2 expression is adaptable and strongly dependent on the
microenvironment surrounding the tumor cells. We exclude a role of the Notch
pathway in this regulation. The regulation of CDX2 by the microenvironment might 
be relevant during the process of metastatic dissemination when the gene is
transiently turned down in invasive cells.

PMCID: PMC1851857
PMID: 17255339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2007 Feb;11(1):34-8.

Intraductal growth-type mucin-producing peripheral cholangiocarcinoma associated 
with biliary papillomatosis.

Güllüoglu MG(1), Ozden I, Poyanli A, Cevikbas U, Ariogul O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University,
34390 Istanbul, Turkey. mggullu@istanbul.edu.tr

A 64-year-old woman with upper abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting was admitted.
The magnetic resonance imaging revealed marked dilation and "crowding" of the
segment 4 bile ducts with an area suspicious for a stone or tumor.
Ultrasonography-guided percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography revealed
multiple filling defects in the segment 4 bile ducts, the left and common hepatic
ducts. A left hepatectomy and cholecystectomy was performed. Dilated bile ducts
containing mucinous material and a mass in the cystically dilated bile ducts of
segment 4 were detected in the gross examination. It showed continuity within the
surrounding dilated bile ducts. The dilated bile ducts of the segments 2 and 3
contained mucinous material without any apparent mass formation. Microscopically,
the bile ducts were lined by biliary epithelium displaying simple and complex
papillary structures with moderate to severe degree of dysplastic changes. The
mass was composed of complex papillary structures filling the bile duct with a
few foci of invasion. The papillary structures were composed of mucin-producing
columnar cells as well as cells with oncocytic appearance. Patchy cytokeratin 7, 
cytokeratin 19, hepatocyte paraffin 1, MUC2, and CDX2 immunopositivities were
observed. Biliary papillomatosis, mucin-producing intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma, and intraductal papillary-type peripheral cholangiocarcinoma 
are in the same disease spectrum of papillary biliary neoplasm and termed as
intraductal papillary neoplasm of the liver. Mucinous hypersecretion and signs of
mucobilia are considered specific and should raise the suspicion of lesions in
this spectrum.

PMID: 17240305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2007 Feb;11(1):3-9.

Intestinal type adenocarcinoma: a previously unrecognized histologic variant of
ductal carcinoma of the pancreas.

Albores-Saavedra J(1), Simpson K, Dancer YJ, Hruban R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA 71130, USA. jalbor@lsuhsc.edu

Adenocarcinomas with intestinal differentiation have been described in a wide
variety of anatomical sites. To our knowledge, however, ductal adenocarcinomas
with intestinal phenotype have not been described in the pancreas. We report here
11 ductal carcinomas of the pancreas that were morphologically similar to colonic
adenocarcinomas. These pancreatic carcinomas of intestinal type represented 10%
of 110 consecutively removed ductal carcinomas of the pancreas. All intestinal
type carcinomas expressed cytokeratin 7, carcinoembryonic antigen, CDX2, and
MUC2. The pattern of reactivity of cytokeratin 7 and carcinoembryonic antigen was
diffuse, whereas that of mucin 2 staining and CDX2 nuclear labeling was focal and
confined predominantly to goblet cells and less frequently to columnar cells. Six
carcinomas contained collections of endocrine cells admixed with the columnar and
goblet cells. Five carcinomas were associated with high-grade pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia of intestinal type. Six patients were female and 5 were
male. Their ages ranged from 52 to 76 years (mean age, 61 years). The clinical
presentation did not differ from that of the conventional ductal carcinomas. All 
carcinomas originated in the head of the pancreas, and 5 had metastasized to the 
regional lymph nodes at the time of surgical resection. Only 1 patient survived 5
years. Three patients are disease free from 2.8 to 8.9 months after surgery. Six 
patients died as a direct result of the carcinomas, and 1 was lost to follow-up. 
More studies are needed to determine the biologic behavior of this distinctive
histologic variant of ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.

PMID: 17240300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2007 Jan;104(1):10-6.

[Role of bile acids on Barrett's esophagus].

[Article in Japanese]

Kazumori H(1), Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Izumo City General Medical Center, School of 
Medicine, Shimane University, Japan.

PMID: 17230000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Cutan Pathol. 2007 Jan;34(1):49-54.

Metastatic hidradenocarcinoma with demonstration of Her-2/neu gene amplification 
by fluorescence in situ hybridization: potential treatment implications.

Nash JW(1), Barrett TL, Kies M, Ross MI, Sneige N, Diwan AH, Lazar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Dermatology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

A 44-year-old man was referred for a right chest nodule of 3 months duration. A
'benign' nodule had been excised from this location 8 years prior. On
examination, palpable nodes were noted in the right axilla. Radiographic studies 
were significant only for right axillary lymphadenopathy. Histologically, a
nodular dermal proliferation composed of poorly differentiated epithelioid cells 
in nests and focally forming ducts with pseudopapillary architecture comprised
the primary tumor. Features of a clear cell hidradenoma were noted focally.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed reactivity for HMW cytokeratins, CK5 
and CK7, p53, p63, CEA (focal), androgen receptor, EGFR, estrogen receptor (ER), 
MUC5AC, and strong/diffuse membranous staining for Her-2/neu. Negative stains
included villin, TTF-1, CDX2, S-100 protein, vimentin, gross cystic disease fluid
protein 15 (GCDFP-15), mammoglobulin, and MUC2. A wide local excision and
axillary node dissection was performed. Metastatic tumor involved nine of 28
nodes. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated
chromosomal amplification of the Her-2/neu locus within the tumor and a nodal
metastasis. The patient has completed adjuvant and radiotherapy, including
trastuzumab, and is asymptomatic. We believe this to be the first demonstration
of Her-2/neu amplification in a malignant skin adnexal tumor. In analogy to
breast carcinoma, these findings suggest the applicability of trastuzumab for
patients with metastatic adnexal carcinomas demonstrating Her-2/neu
amplification.

PMID: 17214855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Med Sci (Paris). 2007 Jan;23(1):7-8.

[CDX2: a transcription factor with multiple tasks for epithelial cells of the
digestive tract].

[Article in French]

Boudreau F(1), Rivard N, Gendron FP, Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et de biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Chaire de recherche du Canada en physiopathologie
intestinale, Université de Sherbrooke, 12e Avenue Nord, Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke
(Québec), J1H 5N4 Canada.

PMID: 17212918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2006 Dec;24 Suppl 4:71-80.

Helicobacter pylori-induced atrophic gastritis progressing to gastric cancer
exhibits sonic hedgehog loss and aberrant CDX2 expression.

Shiotani A(1), Iishi H, Uedo N, Ishihara R, Ishiguro S, Tatsuta M, Nakae Y,
Kumamoto M, Hinoi T, Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Health Administration Center, Wakayama University, Wakayama, Japan.
shiotani@center.wakayama-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The loss of sonic hedgehog is an early change that occurs in the
mucosa prior to neoplastic transformation and correlates with the type of
intestinal metaplasia. Aberrant expression of CDX has also been shown to
correlate with the development of intestinal metaplasia.
AIM: To examine CDX2 expression in the non-cancerous mucosa of patients with
gastric cancer and compared it to CDX2 expression in controls with intestinal
metaplasia.
METHODS: Sixty patients who had undergone endoscopic mucosal resection for early 
gastric cancer and 60 gender- and age-matched controls were studied. Two
specimens each were obtained from the greater and lesser curves of the corpus and
from the greater curve of the antrum. Expression of CDX2 and sonic hedgehog were 
evaluated by immunostaining.
RESULTS: Gastric cancer was associated with a higher frequency of incomplete
intestinal metaplasia (OR = 8.3; 95%CI, 3.7-18.9, P < 0.001). CDX2 negatively
correlated with sonic hedgehog expression, however, multivariate analysis
revealed that CDX2 correlated with the intestinal metaplasia scores. Sonic
hedgehog indices were lower and CDX2 staining in the corpus lesser curve was
higher in the cancer group than in the controls. Sonic hedgehog indices in the
corpus decreased and CDX2 indices in both areas increased in patients in the
ascending order of those without intestinal metaplasia, those with complete
intestinal metaplasia and those with incomplete intestinal metaplasia (P <
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of sonic hedgehog expression and aberrant expression of CDX2
correlates with the type of intestinal metaplasia and may play a role in
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17209848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jan;1769(1):41-8. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Transcriptional regulation of the Drosophila caudal homeobox gene by bHLH-PAS
proteins.

Choi YJ(1), Kwon EJ, Park JS, Kang HS, Kim YS, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Science, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Korea.

Caudal-related homeobox transcription factors are involved in the definition of
the anteroposterior axis and intestinal development. Recent reports indicate that
dysregulation of CDX1 and CDX2, the human homologues of Drosophila caudal, are
associated with several types of cancer. Very little is known, however, about the
regulatory mechanisms that direct the caudal-related homeobox gene expression. In
this study, we have identified the binding sites for bHLH-PAS proteins, referred 
to as CNS midline element (CME), in the 5'-flanking region of the Drosophila
caudal gene. Analyses using transgenic flies carrying a caudal-lacZ fusion gene
bearing a wild-type or mutant CME indicate that the CME sites are required for
caudal gene expression in vivo. We also determined that the caudal promoter
activity can be regulated by Trachealess (Trh)/Tango (Tgo) bHLH-PAS proteins, via
the CME sites. Our results suggest that the Drosophila caudal gene is a target of
the Trh/Tgo bHLH-PAS proteins.

PMID: 17207870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2006 Dec;24(11-12):1613-21.

Does CDX2 expression predict Barrett's metaplasia in oesophageal columnar
epithelium without goblet cells?

Kerkhof M(1), Bax DA, Moons LM, van Vuuren AJ, van Dekken H, Steyerberg EW,
Kuipers EJ, Kusters JG, Siersema PD; Cybar Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasus MC- University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Intestinal metaplasia (Barrett's oesophagus), but not cardiac-type
mucosa in columnar-lined oesophagus, is regarded as premalignant. As intestinal
metaplasia and cardiac-type mucosa are endoscopically indiscernible, it is
difficult to take targeted samples from columnar-lined oesophagus with
consequently a risk of having undetected intestinal metaplasia.
AIM: To investigate whether the intestinal markers CDX2, MUC2 and villin can
predict the presence of undetected intestinal metaplasia in columnar-lined
oesophagus. Methods Presence of intestinal metaplasia or cardiac-type mucosa was 
identified in 122 biopsy sets of columnar-lined oesophagus from 61 patients,
collected at two subsequent follow-up upper endoscopies. CDX2, MUC2 and villin
expression were determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: All intestinal metaplasia samples (55) were positive for CDX2 and MUC2
and 32 of 55 for villin. CDX2 expression was detected in 23 of 67 (34%) samples
with only cardiac-type mucosa. Detection of CDX2 in cardiac-type mucosa increased
the likelihood of finding intestinal metaplasia in another biopsy set of
columnar-lined oesophagus (odds ratio 3.5, 95% CI = 1.2-10, P = 0.02). MUC2 was
positive in 13 of 23 (57%) of CDX2-positive cardiac-type mucosa samples, whereas 
villin was detected in seven of 23 (30%).
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 expression in cardiac-type mucosa might be able to predict the 
presence of undetected intestinal metaplasia in columnar-lined oesophagus, and
thus may be a putative marker for the presence of intestinal metaplasia in the
absence of goblet cells.

PMID: 17206949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Int Braz J Urol. 2006 Nov-Dec;32(6):681-7; discussion 687-8.

Urothelial-type adenocarcinoma of the prostate mimicking metastatic colorectal
adenocarcinoma.

Adley BP(1), Maxwell K, Dalton DP, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. b-adley@northwestern.edu

Adenocarcinoma arising in urinary bladder or prostatic urethra is uncommon. When 
they occur, the tumor can be mistaken for metastatic lesions, especially from the
colon. Here we report the fifth case of a primary urothelial-type adenocarcinoma 
arising in the prostate which showed enteric differentiation. The patient was a
55 year-old male whose prostatic needle core biopsy showed a high grade
adenocarcinoma which was initially thought to be metastatic colon cancer. A
follow-up colonoscopy was unremarkable. Subsequent prostatectomy revealed a high 
grade adenocarcinoma which was positive for cytokeratins 7 and 20,
carcinoembryonic antigen, CDX2, and high molecular weight cytokeratin, and
negative for prostate specific antigen, prostate specific acid phosphatase and
AMACR. A diagnosis of urothelial-type adenocarcinoma of the prostate was
rendered. We review the literature regarding this entity, and discuss the
differential diagnosis, emphasizing utility of immunohistochemistry in making the
diagnosis. Finally, we speculate on the behavior of these rare tumors.

PMID: 17201946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Regul Pept. 2007 Apr 5;140(1-2):81-7. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Regulation of TFF3 expression by homeodomain protein CDX2.

Shimada T(1), Koike T, Yamagata M, Yoneda M, Hiraishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Dokkyo Medical University, Mibu, Tochigi
321-0293, Japan. tshimada@dokkyomed.ac.jp

Although trefoil factor family 3 (TFF3) plays an important role in protecting the
intestinal mucosa, the regulatory mechanisms of its expression are not fully
understood. Since homeodomain protein CDX2 has been reported to be critically
involved in the development and differentiation of intestinal epithelium, we
examined whether CDX2 affects the expression of TFF3. The transcription of human 
TFF3 reporter genes was significantly up-regulated by the transient
overexpression of CDX2 in COS-7 cells and AGS gastric cells. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay revealed the presence of at least two CDX-binding sites
within the human TFF3 promoter. Deletion analysis showed the relative importance 
of the proximal CDX-binding site at -63. We also detected the up-regulation of
endogenous TFF3 mRNA expression in AGS cells stably transfected with CDX2
expression vectors. These results suggest that CDX2 plays a key role in the
expression of TFF3 in the intestine and perhaps in intestinal metaplasia of the
stomach.

PMID: 17182120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Dec;15(12):2549-52.

Vitamin D receptor genotypes/haplotypes and prostate cancer risk.

Cicek MS(1), Liu X, Schumacher FR, Casey G, Witte JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Ohio, USA.

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene has been associated with prostate cancer,
although previous results are somewhat equivocal. To further study this, we did a
family-based case-control study (N = 918) of the association between prostate
cancer and six common VDR variants: Cdx2, FokI, BsmI, ApaI, TaqI, and the poly-A 
microsatellite. Looking at each variant alone, only FokI and ApaI were associated
with disease. The FokI FF genotype was inversely associated with prostate cancer 
among men with less advanced disease (i.e., Gleason score <7 and tumor stage
<T2c), where the odds ratio OR was 0.56 [95% confidence interval (95% CI),
0.31-1.01; P = 0.05]. ApaI, carrying one or two copies of the A allele, exhibited
a weak inverse association with disease (OR, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.39-1.03; P = 0.06); 
this association was strengthened in Caucasian men with more advanced disease
(OR, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.21-0.93; P = 0.03). We observed inverse associations between
disease and the four-locus FBAt haplotype (OR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.30-0.76; P =
0.002) and the fbaT haplotype (OR, 0.60; 95% CI, 0.38-0.95; P = 0.03; i.e., in
comparison with the FbaT haplotype). These were stronger among men with more
advanced disease: for FBAt, the OR was 0.31 (95% CI, 0.16-0.61; P = 0.0008); for 
fbaT, the OR was 0.32 (95% CI, 0.16-0.64; P = 0.001). These observations support 
a role for VDR variants in prostate cancer risk but suggest that any potential
causal variant(s) may reside on the haplotypes reported here. This would help
explain the somewhat equivocal results for VDR genotype-level associations with
prostate cancer.

PMID: 17164384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Histol Histopathol. 2007 Mar;22(3):273-84.

Gastric and intestinal phenotypic correlation between exocrine and endocrine
components in human stomach tumors.

Takenaka Y(1), Tsukamoto T, Mizoshita T, Ogasawara N, Hirano N, Otsuka T, Ban H, 
Nakamura T, Yamamura Y, Kaminishi M, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

We have previously suggested that an origin of a stomach cancer is from a
progenitor cell specializing toward exocrine cell (Exo-cell) lineages. To clarify
whether our hypothesis is correct or not, we analyzed the expression of Exo-cell 
and endocrine cell (End-cell) markers in a series of lesions for comparison. We
evaluated chromogranin A (CgA) expression in 37 early and 73 advanced stomach
cancers, in 30 stomach adenomas, in 8 carcinoid tumors, and in 4 endocrine cell
carcinomas (ECCs) with assessment of gastric and/or intestinal (G/I) phenotypes
in both Exo-cell and End-cell by immunohistochemistry. CgA expression was
observed in 10.8% of the early and 16.4% of the advanced stomach cancers,
respectively. The End-cell G/I phenotypes were in line with the Exo-cell
counterparts in the CgA-positive stomach cancerous areas, and there was strong
association between Cdx2 expression and the intestinal End-cell markers. All of
the adenoma cases had the intestinal Exo-cell phenotypic expression, with the
positive link between Exo-cell and End-cell G/I phenotypes. All stomach
carcinoids had CgA expression but no expression of Exo-cell markers. In
conclusion, most stomach cancers might develop from a progenitor cell
specializing towards Exo-cell lineages, but some cases possessed both Exo-cell
and End-cell markers with maturely differentiated phenotypes. In such cases,
Exo-cell and End-cell phenotypes were found to correlate strongly, suggesting the
possibility of histogenesis from "cancer stem cells".

PMID: 17163401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Histol Histopathol. 2007 Mar;22(3):251-60.

Loss of MUC2 expression correlates with progression along the adenoma-carcinoma
sequence pathway as well as de novo carcinogenesis in the colon.

Mizoshita T(1), Tsukamoto T, Inada KI, Hirano N, Tajika M, Nakamura T, Ban H,
Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

AIMS: We have previously demonstrated links between clinicopathological findings 
and phenotypes using several gastric and intestinal phenotypic markers in stomach
and pancreatic cancers. However, the clinicopathological significance of the
phenotype and Cdx2 expression has hitherto remained unclear in colorectal
carcinogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined the correlation between gastric and intestinal
phenotypic expression in 91 primary early carcinomas of the colon. MUC2
expression demonstrated a significant decrease from tubular/tubulovillous
adenomas with moderate atypia, through intramucosal carcinomas, to cancers with
submucosal invasion (P<0.0001). Intramucosal de novo carcinomas (flat type
carcinomas without adenomatous components) exhibited a greater decrease of MUC2
than intramucosal lesions with adenomatous components. Expression of MUC5AC also 
decreased significantly with progression according to the tubular/tubulovillous
adenoma-carcinoma sequence, carcinomas with villous adenomatous components having
a higher level compared with their tubular adenomatous counterparts, suggesting
differences in the pathway of malignant transformation. Cdx2 nuclear expression
was maintained in all of the adenomas and early carcinomas examined.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the reduction of MUC2 expression may be
associated with the occurrence and progression of colorectal carcinomas in both
adenoma-carcinoma sequence pathway and de novo carcinogenesis. Tumor-suppressive 
effects of Cdx2 may be preserved during early stages of colorectal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17163399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(1):175-85. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

Functional interaction between the homeoprotein CDX1 and the transcriptional
machinery containing the TATA-binding protein.

Calon A(1), Gross I, Davidson I, Kedinger M, Duluc I, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682 and University Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

We have previously reported that the CDX1 homeoprotein interacts with the
TATA-box binding protein (TBP) on the promoter of the glucose-6-phosphatase
(G6Pase) gene. We show here that CDX1 interacts with TBP via the homeodomain and 
that the transcriptional activity additionally requires the N-terminal domain
upstream of the homeodomain. CDX1 interacting with TBP is connected to members of
the TFIID and Mediator complexes, two major elements of the general
transcriptional machinery. Transcription luciferase assays performed using an
altered-specificity mutant of TBP provide evidence for the functionality of the
interaction between CDX1 and TBP. Unlike CDX1, CDX2 does not interact with TBP
nor does it transactivate the G6Pase promoter. Swapping experiments between the
domains of CDX1 and CDX2 indicate that, despite opposite functional effects of
the homeoproteins on the G6Pase promoter, the N-terminal domains and homeodomains
of both CDX1 and CDX2 have the intrinsic ability to activate transcription and to
interact with TBP. However, the carboxy domains define the specificity of CDX1
and CDX2. Thus, intra-molecular interactions control the activity and partner
recruitment of CDX1 and CDX2, leading to different molecular functions.

PMCID: PMC1802564
PMID: 17158164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Science. 2006 Dec 1;314(5804):1367-9.

Developmental biology. Fraud investigation clouds paper on early cell fate.

Vogel G.

Comment on
    Science. 2006 Feb 17;311(5763):992-6.

PMID: 17138872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006 Oct;130(10):1522-6.

Expression of the intestinal transcription factor CDX2 in carcinoid tumors is a
marker of midgut origin.

Jaffee IM(1), Rahmani M, Singhal MG, Younes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, and The Methodist
Hospital, Houston, Tex 77030 , USA.

CONTEXT: Carcinoid tumors are classified according to their site of origin into
foregut, midgut, or hindgut carcinoids, which have different presentations and
prognosis. The intestinal transcription factor CDX2 has been found to be
expressed in most intestinal adenocarcinomas but in less than one half of the
gastrointestinal carcinoids according to 1 study.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether CDX2 expression in carcinoid tumors varies by the
site of origin and whether CDX2 expression is retained in metastatic disease.
Design.-Sections of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue from 36 primary
carcinoid tumors and 5 cases of metastatic carcinoid to the liver were
immunohistochemically stained for CDX2. The percent of cells with nuclear
immunoreactivity and the intensity of staining were assessed.
RESULTS: All 18 foregut carcinoids (10 pulmonary and 8 gastric) were negative
(0%) for CDX2. All 11 midgut carcinoids (100%) were positive for CDX2 with
moderate to strong staining in more than 50% of the cells. Only 2 (29%) of 7 of
hindgut carcinoids were CDX2-positive with the 2 positive cases showing weak to
moderate staining intensity in less than 10% of the cells. Expression of CDX2 in 
more than 50% of tumor cells was seen only in midgut carcinoids (P < .001). CDX2 
expression in metastatic tumors was consistent with the site of origin.
CONCLUSIONS: Midgut carcinoid tumors and their metastases are distinct from
foregut and hindgut carcinoids in that they express high levels of CDX2.
Additional studies are needed to determine whether CDX2 immunostaining may be
helpful in determining the primary site of metastatic carcinoid tumors of unknown
origin.

PMID: 17090195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Hum Pathol. 2007 Feb;38(2):373-7. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Synchronous adenocarcinomas of intestinal type of the inner nose and the colon.

Donhuijsen K(1), Hannig H, Schroeder HG, Korinth D, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Hospital Braunschweig D-38114 Braunschweig, Germany.
k.donhuijsen@klinikum-braunschweig.de

Intestinal types of adenocarcinoma of the inner nose and colorectal
adenocarcinoma present a stupendous similarity of morphological and
immunohistochemical features. The previously unpublished observation of a
synchronous manifestation of both adenocarcinoma enabled us to compare the tumors
using molecular and immunohistochemical methods. Polymerase chain reaction was
performed in order to investigate microsatellite instability. Mutation of p53 and
K-ras was examined by direct DNA sequencing. Chromosomal imbalances were
investigated by comparative genomic hybridization. Histology and
immunohistochemical reactions were nearly identical. PCR results revealed no
microsatellite instability or loss of heterozygosity in any of the tumors. A p53 
mutation in exon 5 could be detected in the colon tumor but not in the sinonasal 
carcinoma, while a K-ras mutation was only present in the tumor of the inner
nose. The comparative genomic hybridization method revealed different chromosomal
imbalances in the different tumors. Thus, the molecular pathologic data proved
the presence of 2 independent primary adenocarcinomas of the intestinal type.

PMID: 17084438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Science. 2006 Oct 27;314(5799):592.

Editorial expression of concern.

Kennedy D.

Comment on
    Science. 2006 Feb 17;311(5763):992-6.

PMID: 17068242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):500-10. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Analysis of Oct4-dependent transcriptional networks regulating self-renewal and
pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells.

Babaie Y(1), Herwig R, Greber B, Brink TC, Wruck W, Groth D, Lehrach H, Burdon T,
Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute, Department of Gene Function and Development, Roslin,
Midlothian, United Kingdom.

The POU domain transcription factor OCT4 is a key regulator of pluripotency in
the early mammalian embryo and is highly expressed in the inner cell mass of the 
blastocyst. Consistent with its essential role in maintaining pluripotency, Oct4 
expression is rapidly downregulated during formation of the trophoblast lineage. 
To enhance our understanding of the molecular basis of this differentiation event
in humans, we used a functional genomics approach involving RNA
interference-mediated suppression of OCT4 function in a human ESC line and
analysis of the resulting transcriptional profiles to identify OCT4-dependent
genes in human cells. We detected altered expression of >1,000 genes, including
targets regulated directly by OCT4 either positively (NANOG, SOX2, REX1, LEFTB,
LEFTA/EBAF DPPA4, THY1, and TDGF1) or negatively (CDX2, EOMES, BMP4, TBX18,
Brachyury [T], DKK1, HLX1, GATA6, ID2, and DLX5), as well as targets for the
OCT4-associated stem cell regulators SOX2 and NANOG. Our data set includes
regulators of ACTIVIN, BMP, fibroblast growth factor, and WNT signaling. These
pathways are implicated in regulating human ESC differentiation and therefore
further validate the results of our analysis. In addition, we identified a number
of differentially expressed genes that are involved in epigenetics, chromatin
remodeling, apoptosis, and metabolism that may point to underlying molecular
mechanisms that regulate pluripotency and trophoblast differentiation in humans. 
Significant concordance between this data set and previous comparisons between
inner cell mass and trophectoderm in human embryos indicates that the study of
human ESC differentiation in vitro represents a useful model of early embryonic
differentiation in humans.

PMID: 17068183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16924-9. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Cdx4 dysregulates Hox gene expression and generates acute myeloid leukemia alone 
and in cooperation with Meis1a in a murine model.

Bansal D(1), Scholl C, Fröhling S, McDowell E, Lee BH, Döhner K, Ernst P,
Davidson AJ, Daley GQ, Zon LI, Gilliland DG, Huntly BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

HOX genes have emerged as critical effectors of leukemogenesis, but the
mechanisms that regulate their expression in leukemia are not well understood.
Recent data suggest that the caudal homeobox transcription factors CDX1, CDX2,
and CDX4, developmental regulators of HOX gene expression, may contribute to HOX 
gene dysregulation in leukemia. We report here that CDX4 is expressed normally in
early hematopoietic progenitors and is expressed aberrantly in approximately 25% 
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient samples. Cdx4 regulates Hox gene
expression in the adult murine hematopoietic system and dysregulates Hox genes
that are implicated in leukemogenesis. Furthermore, bone marrow progenitors that 
are retrovirally engineered to express Cdx4 serially replate in methylcellulose
cultures, grow in liquid culture, and generate a partially penetrant,
long-latency AML in bone marrow transplant recipients. Coexpression of the Hox
cofactor Meis1a accelerates the Cdx4 AML phenotype and renders it fully
penetrant. Structure-function analysis demonstrates that leukemic transformation 
requires intact Cdx4 transactivation and DNA-binding domains but not the putative
Pbx cofactor interaction motif. Together, these data indicate that Cdx4 regulates
Hox gene expression in adult hematopoiesis and may serve as an upstream regulator
of Hox gene expression in the induction of acute leukemia. Inasmuch as many human
leukemias show dysregulated expression of a spectrum of HOX family members, these
collective findings also suggest a central role for CDX4 expression in the
genesis of acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC1636555
PMID: 17068127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hepatology. 2006 Nov;44(5):1333-43.

Biliary papillary tumors share pathological features with intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas.

Zen Y(1), Fujii T, Itatsu K, Nakamura K, Minato H, Kasashima S, Kurumaya H,
Katayanagi K, Kawashima A, Masuda S, Niwa H, Mitsui T, Asada Y, Miura S, Ohta T, 
Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Recently, attention has been drawn to papillary neoplasm of the pancreatobiliary 
systems. In the pancreas, the disease entity of intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm (IPMN-P) is widely recognized. In contrast, the pathological
characteristics of biliary papillary tumors, such as biliary papilloma(tosis) and
papillary cholangiocarcinoma, have not yet been well documented. In this study,
we compared the pathological features and post-operative prognosis among biliary 
papillary tumors (10 cases of biliary papilloma(tosis) and 22 cases of papillary 
cholangiocarcinoma), conventional non-papillary cholangiocarcinoma (15 cases),
and IPMN-P (31 cases). Macroscopically, all biliary papillary tumors were
characterized by the prominent intraductal papillary proliferation, and
macroscopic mucin-hypersecretion was seen in 9 of 32 cases (28%). Histologically,
biliary papillary tumors consisted of three types of tumor cells
(pancreaticobiliary, intestinal and gastric types), whereas only the
pancreaticobiliary type was observed in non-papillary cholangiocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemically, biliary papillary tumors were characterized by the common 
expression of MUC2, CDX2 and cytokeratin 20. In addition, biliary papillary
tumors could be associated with two types of invasive lesions: tubular
adenocarcinoma (9 cases) and mucinous carcinoma (5 cases). Patients with tubular 
adenocarcinoma had a poor prognosis compared to non-invasive papillary tumor or
papillary tumor with mucinous carcinoma. These pathological characteristics and
the survival status of biliary papillary tumors were different from those of
non-papillary cholangiocarcinoma, and rather closely resembled those of IPMN-P.
In conclusion, biliary papillary tumors may be the biliary counterpart
(intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct) of IPMN-P.

PMID: 17058219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Physiol Genomics. 2006 Dec 13;28(1):84-96. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Large-scale transcriptional analysis of bovine embryo biopsies in relation to
pregnancy success after transfer to recipients.

El-Sayed A(1), Hoelker M, Rings F, Salilew D, Jennen D, Tholen E, Sirard MA,
Schellander K, Tesfaye D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The purpose of this work is to address the relationship between transcriptional
profile of embryos and the pregnancy success based on gene expression analysis of
blastocyst biopsies taken prior to transfer to recipients. Biopsies (30-40% of
the intact embryo) were taken from in vitro-produced day 7 blastocysts (n = 118),
and 60-70% were transferred to recipients after reexpansion. Based on the success
of pregnancy, biopsies were pooled in three groups (each 10 biopsies) namely:
those resulting in no pregnancy (G1), resorbed embryos (G2), and those resulting 
in calf delivery (G3). Gene expression analysis of these groups was performed
using home-made bovine preimplantation-specific cDNA array (219 clones) and
BlueChip (with approximately 2,000 clones). Microarray data analysis results
revealed a total of 52 and 58 genes were differentially regulated during
comparison between G1 vs. G3 and G2 vs. G3. Biopsies resulted in calf delivery
were enriched with genes necessary for implantation (COX2 and CDX2), carbohydrate
metabolism (ALOX15), growth factor (BMP15), signal transduction (PLAU), and
placenta-specific 8 (PLAC8). Biopsies from embryos resulting in resorption are
enriched with transcripts involved protein phosphorylation (KRT8), plasma
membrane (OCLN), and glucose metabolism (PGK1 and AKR1B1). Biopsies from embryos 
resulting in no pregnancy are enriched with transcripts involved inflammatory
cytokines (TNF), protein amino acid binding (EEF1A1), transcription factors
(MSX1, PTTG1), glucose metabolism (PGK1, AKR1B1), and CD9, which is an inhibitor 
of implantation. In conclusion, we generated direct candidates of
blastocyst-specific genes which may play an important role in determining the
fate of the embryo after transfer.

PMID: 17018689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Hum Pathol. 2007 Jan;38(1):66-71. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

A close relationship between intestinal metaplasia and Cdx2 expression in human
gallbladders with cholelithiasis.

Sakamoto H(1), Mutoh H, Ido K, Satoh K, Hayakawa H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0 431, Japan.

We previously reported a case of a human gallbladder with cholelithiasis
consisting of intestinal metaplasia with the expression of caudal-related
homeobox transcription factor (Cdx2). However, it is unclear how often intestinal
metaplasia and Cdx2 expression occur in human, nontumorous gallbladders with
cholelithiasis. We studied the incidence of intestinal metaplasia and Cdx2
expression in human gallbladders with cholelithiasis. Gallbladders were resected 
under laparoscopy from 103 patients with cholelithiasis between September 2003
and March 2005. The mean age of the patients was 59.6 +/- 15.0 years (range,
22-92 years). We retrospectively reviewed these cases to look for the presence of
intestinal metaplasia and the expression of Cdx2. In addition, the
characteristics of intestinal metaplasia were examined by immunostaining for
Muc2, chromogranin A, and serotonin. Intestinal metaplasia was found in 11.7%
(12/103) of the gallbladders with cholelithiasis. The mean ages of patients with 
and without intestinal metaplasia were 60.8 +/- 15.4 and 59.4 +/- 14.9 years,
respectively. Cdx2, Muc2, chromogranin A, and serotonin were expressed in 91.7%
(11/12), 91.7% (11/12), 83.3% (10/12), and 50.0% (6/12) in intestinal metaplastic
mucosa, respectively. Only one case (1.1%) that expressed Cdx2 without intestinal
metaplasia did not express Muc2, chromogranin A, and serotonin. We found that
10.7% (11/103) of nontumorous gallbladders resected because of cholelithiasis
under laparoscopy revealed intestinal metaplasia with Cdx2 expression.

PMID: 16996572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Feb;28(2):488-96. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Regulation of Cdx2 expression by promoter methylation, and effects of Cdx2
transfection on morphology and gene expression of human esophageal epithelial
cells.

Liu T(1), Zhang X, So CK, Wang S, Wang P, Yan L, Myers R, Chen Z, Patterson AP,
Yang CS, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Susan Lehman Cullman Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Chemical
Biology, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, 164 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2) has been suggested as an early marker of
Barrett's esophagus (BE), which is the premalignant lesion of esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). However, the mechanism of ectopic Cdx2 expression in the
esophageal epithelial cells and its role in the development of BE remained
unclear. RT-PCR, pyrosequencing and methylation-specific PCR were used to
determine expression and promoter methylation of Cdx2 in human esophageal
epithelial cells (HET1A and SEG1) after treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(DAC), acid, bile acids and their combination. HET1A cells with stable
transfection of Cdx2 were characterized for morphology and gene expression
profiles with Affymetrix array. We found Cdx2 was expressed in most human EAC
cell lines, but not in squamous epithelial cell lines. DAC-induced demethylation 
and expression of Cdx2 in HET1A and SEG1 cells, and treatment with a DNA
methylating agent counteracted the effect of DAC. Treatment of HET1A and SEG1
cells with acid, bile acids or both also resulted in promoter demethylation and
expression of Cdx2. HET1A cells with stable transfection of human Cdx2 formed
crypt-like structures in vitro. Microarray analysis and quantitative real-time
PCR showed that stable transfection of Cdx2 up-regulated differentiation markers 
of intestinal columnar epithelial cells and goblet cells in HET1A cells. This may
be partially due to modulation of Notch signaling pathway, as western blotting
confirmed down-regulation of Hes1 and up-regulation of Atoh1 and Muc2. Our data
suggest that exposure to acid and/or bile acids may activate Cdx2 expression in
human esophageal epithelial cells through promoter demethylation, and ectopic
Cdx2 expression in esophageal squamous epithelial cells may contribute to
intestinal metaplasia of the esophagus.

PMID: 16990345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 15;299(2):478-88. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

FGF signal transduction and the regulation of Cdx gene expression.

Keenan ID(1), Sharrard RM, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of York, York, YO10 5YW, UK.

Cdx homeodomain transcription factors play important roles in the development of 
the vertebrate body axis and gut epithelium. Signaling involving FGF, wnt and
retinoic acid ligands has been implicated in the regulation of individual Cdx
genes. In this study we examine the requirement for FGF-dependent signal
transduction pathways in the regulation of Cdx gene expression. In the amphibian 
Xenopus laevis the earliest expression of Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 is within the
developing mesoderm. We show that a functional FGF signaling pathway is required 
for the normal expression of all three amphibian Cdx genes during gastrula
stages. We show that FGF stimulation activates signaling through both the MAP
kinase pathway and the PI-3 kinase pathway in Xenopus tissue explants. However,
our analysis of these pathways in gastrula stage embryos indicates that the MAP
kinase pathway is required for Cdx gene expression, whereas the PI-3 kinase
pathway is not. We show that FGF and wnt signaling can interact in the regulation
of Cdx genes and during gastrula stages the normal expression of the Cdx genes
requires the activity of both pathways. Furthermore, we show that wnt mediated
Cdx regulation is independent of the MAP kinase pathway.

PMID: 16982047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;8(10):1114-23. Epub 2006 Sep 17.

Sall4 modulates embryonic stem cell pluripotency and early embryonic development 
by the transcriptional regulation of Pou5f1.

Zhang J(1), Tam WL, Tong GQ, Wu Q, Chan HY, Soh BS, Lou Y, Yang J, Ma Y, Chai L, 
Ng HH, Lufkin T, Robson P, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60
Biopolis Street, Singapore 138672.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent cells that can self-renew or
differentiate into many cell types. A unique network of transcription factors and
signalling molecules are essential for maintaining this capability. Here, we
report that a spalt family member, Sall4, is required for the pluripotency of ES 
cells. Similarly to Oct4, a reduction in Sall4 levels in mouse ES cells results
in respecification, under the appropriate culture conditions, of ES cells to the 
trophoblast lineage. Sall4 regulates transcription of Pou5f1 which encodes Oct4. 
Sall4 binds to the highly conserved regulatory region of the Pou5f1 distal
enhancer and activates Pou5f1 expression in vivo and in vitro. Microinjection of 
Sall4 small interfering (si) RNA into mouse zygotes resulted in reduction of
Sall4 and Oct4 mRNAs in preimplantation embryos and significant expansion of Cdx2
expression into the inner cell mass. These results demonstrate that Sall4 is a
transcriptional activator of Pou5f1 and has a critical role in the maintenance of
ES cell pluripotency by modulating Oct4 expression. The data also indicates that 
Sall4 is important for early embryonic cell-fate decisions.

PMID: 16980957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mod Pathol. 2006 Nov;19(11):1421-8. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Immunohistochemical expression of CDX2 in primary ovarian mucinous tumors and
metastatic mucinous carcinomas involving the ovary: comparison with CK20 and
correlation with coordinate expression of CK7.

Vang R(1), Gown AM, Wu LS, Barry TS, Wheeler DT, Yemelyanova A, Seidman JD,
Ronnett BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. rvang1@jhmi.edu

Recent studies have demonstrated conflicting results regarding the value of CDX2 
for distinguishing primary ovarian mucinous tumors from metastatic mucinous
carcinomas in the ovary. Utility of coordinate expression of cytokeratins 7 and
20 is restricted to distinction of ovarian mucinous tumors from lower
gastrointestinal tract metastases and data comparing coordinate expression of all
three markers is limited. Immunohistochemical studies were performed to compare
expression of CDX2 and cytokeratin 20, both markers of intestinal
differentiation, in conjunction with coordinate expression of cytokeratin 7, in
90 mucinous tumors involving the ovary: 42 primary ovarian mucinous tumors (31
atypical proliferative (borderline) mucinous tumors (gastrointestinal type), 11
mucinous carcinomas) and 48 metastatic mucinous carcinomas of upper
(pancreaticobiliary tract: 14; stomach: five) and lower (colon and rectum: 25;
appendix: four) gastrointestinal tract origin. Primary ovarian tumors expressed
CDX2 (40%) less frequently than cytokeratin 20 (83%) (P<0.0001). CDX2 expression 
in primary ovarian tumors (40%) was lower than CDX2 expression in metastatic
carcinomas of both upper (74%; P=0.016) and lower gastrointestinal tract origin
(90%; P<0.0001). Cytokeratin 20 expression was similar in primary ovarian tumors 
(83%) and metastases of upper (89%; P=0.071) and lower gastrointestinal tract
origin (93%; P=0.29). Thus, as a single marker CDX2 offers some advantage over
cytokeratin 20 because it is less frequently positive in primary ovarian tumors. 
In the almost universally cytokeratin 7-positive primary ovarian tumors and
metastases of upper gastrointestinal tract origin, CDX2 coordinate expression was
less common in primary ovarian tumors (36%) than in metastases of upper
gastrointestinal tract origin (63%) (P=0.022) whereas cytokeratin 20 coordinate
expression was identical in both tumor types (79%). In the almost universally
cytokeratin 7-negative metastases of lower gastrointestinal tract origin,
coordinate expression of CDX2 (83%) and cytokeratin 20 (86%) were equivalent
(P=1.00). CDX2 was comparable to cytokeratin 20 in distinguishing metastases of
lower gastrointestinal tract origin (usually cytokeratin 7-negative and
CDX2/cytokeratin 20 positive) from primary ovarian tumors and metastases of upper
gastrointestinal tract origin (usually cytokeratin 7-positive and
CDX2/cytokeratin 20 variable). CDX2 provided some advantage over cytokeratin 20
for distinguishing primary ovarian mucinous tumors from metastases of upper but
not lower gastrointestinal tract origin; however, the advantage in the former was
limited due to the occurrence of shared coordinate expression profiles in both
tumor types. Cytokeratin 7 provides the predominant discriminatory value among
these markers yet is limited to distinction of primary ovarian tumors from
metastases of lower gastrointestinal tract origin.

PMID: 16980943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):G335-43. Epub 2006 Sep
14.

Polyamines are required for phospholipase C-gamma1 expression promoting
intestinal epithelial restitution after wounding.

Rao JN(1), Liu L, Zou T, Marasa BS, Boneva D, Wang SR, Malone DL, Turner DJ, Wang
JY.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Group, Department of Surgery, and 2Department of Pathology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Intestinal mucosal restitution occurs by epithelial cell migration, rather than
by proliferation, to reseal superficial wounds after injury. Polyamines are
essential for the stimulation of intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) migration
during restitution in association with their ability to regulate Ca2+
homeostasis, but the exact mechanism by which polyamines induce cytosolic free
Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]cyt) remains unclear. Phospholipase C (PLC)-gamma1
catalyzes the formation of inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate (IP3), which is
implicated in the regulation of [Ca2+]cyt by modulating Ca2+ store mobilization
and Ca2+ influx. The present study tested the hypothesis that polyamines are
involved in PLC-gamma1 activity, regulating [Ca2+]cyt and cell migration after
wounding. Depletion of cellular polyamines by alpha-difluoromethylornithine
inhibited PLC-gamma1 expression in differentiated IECs (stable Cdx2-transfected
IEC-6 cells), as indicated by substantial decreases in levels of PLC-gamma1 mRNA 
and protein and its enzyme product IP3. Polyamine-deficient cells also displayed 
decreased [Ca2+]cyt and inhibited cell migration. Decreased levels of PLC-gamma1 
by treatment with U-73122 or transfection with short interfering RNA specifically
targeting PLC-gamma1 also decreased IP3, reduced resting [Ca2+]cyt and Ca2+
influx after store depletion, and suppressed cell migration in control cells. In 
contrast, stimulation of PLC-gamma1 by
2,4,6-trimethyl-N-(meta-3-trifluoromethylphenyl)-benzenesulfonamide induced IP3, 
increased [Ca2+]cyt, and promoted cell migration in polyamine-deficient cells.
These results indicate that polyamines are absolutely required for PLC-gamma1
expression in IECs and that polyamine-mediated PLC-gamma1 signaling stimulates
cell migration during restitution as a result of increased [Ca2+]cyt.

PMID: 16973916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4119-29. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

A dynamic expression survey identifies transcription factors relevant in mouse
digestive tract development.

Choi MY(1), Romer AI, Hu M, Lepourcelet M, Mechoor A, Yesilaltay A, Krieger M,
Gray PA, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tissue-restricted transcription factors (TFs), which confer specialized cellular 
properties, are usually identified through sequence homology or cis-element
analysis of lineage-specific genes; conventional modes of mRNA profiling often
fail to report non-abundant TF transcripts. We evaluated the dynamic expression
during mouse gut organogenesis of 1381 transcripts, covering nearly every known
and predicted TF, and documented the expression of approximately 1000 TF genes in
gastrointestinal development. Despite distinctive structures and functions, the
stomach and intestine exhibit limited differences in TF genes. Among
differentially expressed transcripts, a few are virtually restricted to the
digestive tract, including Nr2e3, previously regarded as a photoreceptor-specific
product. TFs that are enriched in digestive organs commonly serve essential
tissue-specific functions, hence justifying a search for other tissue-restricted 
TFs. Computational data mining and experimental investigation focused interest on
a novel homeobox TF, Isx, which appears selectively in gut epithelium and mirrors
expression of the intestinal TF Cdx2. Isx-deficient mice carry a specific defect 
in intestinal gene expression: dysregulation of the high density lipoprotein
(HDL) receptor and cholesterol transporter scavenger receptor class B, type I
(Scarb1). Thus, integration of developmental gene expression with biological
assessment, as described here for TFs, represents a powerful tool to investigate 
control of tissue differentiation.

PMID: 16971476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Gut. 2006 Oct;55(10):1384-6.

Another important function for an old friend! The role of iron in colorectal
carcinogenesis.

Butterworth JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shrewsbury and Telford Hospital NHS Trust,
Shrewsbury, Shropshire SY3 8XQ, UK. j.r.butterworth@btinternet.com

Comment on
    Gut. 2006 Oct;55(10):1449-60.

PMCID: PMC1856437
PMID: 16966697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):1359-73. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

Leptin transcriptionally enhances peptide transporter (hPepT1) expression and
activity via the cAMP-response element-binding protein and Cdx2 transcription
factors.

Nduati V(1), Yan Y, Dalmasso G, Driss A, Sitaraman S, Merlin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

PepT1 is an intestinal epithelial apical membrane transporter that is expressed
in the small intestine, with little or no expression in the normal colon.
However, we previously demonstrated that colonic PepT1 may be expressed during
chronic inflammation. To begin elucidating inflammatory hPepT1 signaling, we
herein investigated the long term leptin treatments, on PepT1 expression and
activity in Caco2-BBE cells, and began to reveal the involved signaling pathways.
We successfully cloned the 723-bp hPepT1 promoter region and identified the human
transcription initiation site 86 bp upstream from the translation start site.
Leptin treatment dose- and time-dependently increased hPepT1 promoter and
transport activities in Caco2-BBE cells, with maximal activity observed in cells 
treated with 100 nM leptin for 8 h. Under these conditions, we observed 2-fold
increases in hPepT1 mRNA and protein expression, as well as increased transport
activity. Our molecular analyses of possible signal-transduction pathways
revealed that leptin treatment enhanced the intracellular levels of cAMP and
phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) protein in Caco2-BBE 
cells, whereas our deletion, mutation, and CDX2 overexpression analyses
demonstrated that interaction of the Cdx2 and phosphorylated CREB transcription
factors was essential for leptin-induced hPepT1 transcription in Caco2-BBE cells.
Our results indicate that leptin, which is increased in inflamed colonic mucosa, 
triggers colonic expression of hPepT1 via the CREB and Cdx2 transcription
factors. These findings provide important new insights into the mechanisms of
intestinal inflammation and may suggest new therapeutic modalities in the future.

PMID: 16963449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Int J Surg Pathol. 2006 Jul;14(3):247-51.

A primary pure yolk sac tumor of the lung exhibiting CDX-2 immunoreactivity and
increased serum levels of alkaline phosphatase intestinal isoenzyme.

Pelosi G(1), Petrella F, Sandri MT, Spaggiari L, Galetta D, Viale G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, European Institute of Oncology and University of Milan 
School of Medicine, Milan, Italy. giuseppe.pelosi@ieo.it

Malignant extragonadal germ cell tumors primary to the lung are quite uncommon
lesions, but pure yolk sac tumor is even more exceptional. This is believed to be
the first reported case of yolk sac tumor of the lung in which an intense and
diffuse immunoreactivity for CDX2, a marker of intestinal differentiation
reportedly expressed also in gonadal yolk sac tumor, was associated with
increased serum levels of the alkaline phosphatase intestinal isoform. Nine
months after radical surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy, the patient is alive and 
well without evidence of recurrent or metastatic disease and with serum levels of
the alkaline phosphatase intestinal isoform within normal limits. The pathologist
should be aware of yolk sac tumor arising in the lung and that alkaline
phosphatase intestinal isoform could become an additional serum marker for such a
tumor.

PMID: 16959714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Gastric Cancer. 2006;9(3):156-66.

Gastric-and-intestinal mixed-type intestinal metaplasia: aberrant expression of
transcription factors and stem cell intestinalization.

Tsukamoto T(1), Mizoshita T, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8681, Japan.

Helicobacter pylori plays a causative role in the development of chronic atrophic
gastritis, intestinal metaplasia (IM), and stomach cancer. Although IM has long
attracted attention as a putative preneoplastic lesion for stomach cancers, its
clinicopathologic significance has yet to be clarified in detail. Using gastric
and intestinal epithelial cell markers, IM was here divided into two major types:
a gastric-and-intestinal (GI) mixed type and a solely intestinal (I) type. In the
former, gastric and intestinal phenotypic markers appeared not only at the
glandular but also at the cellular level. Furthermore, neuroendocrine cells also 
showed intestinalization along with their exocrine counterparts. In animal
models, GI-type IM was found to appear first, followed by the solely I type.
Summarizing these data, it was suggested that IM might be caused by the gradual
intestinalization of stem cells from the GI to the I type. The molecular
mechanisms of IM include the ectopic expression of CDX1, CDX2, OCT-1, and members
of the Erk pathway. Suppression of the expression of gastric transcription
factors such as SOX2, genes that are involved in the Sonic hedgehog pathway, and 
RUNX3, a tumor suppressor gene, could be additional relevant alterations. The
expression of PDX1 may also be associated with pseudopyloric gland metaplasia and
IM. Detailed analysis of gene regulation may shed light on the molecular bases of
gastric lesions, leading to strategies for chemoprevention.

PMID: 16952033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mod Pathol. 2006 Nov;19(11):1395-401. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Divergent pathway of intestinal metaplasia and cystitis glandularis of the
urinary bladder.

Sung MT(1), Lopez-Beltran A, Eble JN, MacLennan GT, Tan PH, Montironi R, Jones
TD, Ulbright TM, Blair JE, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Intestinal metaplasia has been proposed to be a precursor lesion of
adenocarcinoma in the urinary bladder. CDX2 is a transcription factor that is
encoded by a homeotype gene that plays an essential role in the differentiation
and proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells. Hepatocyte-specific antigen
(Hep) has also been shown to be a useful marker of intestinal metaplasia. Tissues
from 46 patients, including 22 cases of intestinal metaplasia of the urinary
bladder, 11 cases of typical cystitis glandularis, and 13 cases containing both
lesions, were selected and immunohistochemical stains for CDX2, Hep, cytokeratin 
20 (CK20), and cytokeratin 7 (CK7) were performed. Nuclear staining for CDX2 was 
observed in 29 of 35 (83%) cases of intestinal metaplasia of the urinary bladder.
In contrast, nuclear staining for CDX2 was not observed in any case of typical
cystitis glandularis; however, seven of 24 (29%) cases showed aberrant
cytoplasmic expression in a mean of 37% of cells. CK20 was expressed in 28 of 35 
(80%) cases of intestinal metaplasia, but was observed in only one of 24 (4%)
cases of cystitis glandularis in 15% of cells. CK7 was expressed in only six of
35 (17%) cases of intestinal metaplasia, whereas expression of CK7 was observed
in all cases (100%) of typical cystitis glandularis with a mean percentage of
positively staining cells of 63%. The mean percentages of positively staining
cells in intestinal metaplasia with CDX2, CK20, and CK7 were 55, 49, and 53%,
respectively. All examples of both intestinal metaplasia and typical cystitis
glandularis were uniformly negative for Hep. In the urinary bladder, intestinal
metaplasia and typical cystitis glandularis have sharply contrasting
immunoprofiles. Additionally, the absence of Hep staining in intestinal
metaplasia of the urinary bladder, despite its morphologic resemblance to normal 
colonic mucosa and intestinal metaplasia in other organs, may signify the
presence of unique metaplastic pathways in the urinary bladder.

PMID: 16951671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Feb;28(2):390-7. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

Polymorphisms in the MTHFR and VDR genes and skin cancer risk.

Han J(1), Colditz GA, Hunter DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Harvard Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
jiali.han@channing.harvard.edu

Folate and vitamin D have been shown to be influenced by ultraviolet (UV)
radiation. UVA radiation can break down plasma folate, whereas vitamin D can be
synthesized in UVB-exposed skin. Folate metabolism is involved in DNA synthesis
and repair, and vitamin D processes anti-proliferative effects. The functions of 
both nutrients are implicated in skin carcinogenesis. We evaluated genetic
polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene (C677T and 
A1298C) and the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene (Fok1, Bsm1 and Cdx2) with skin
cancer risk in a nested case-control study within the Nurses' Health Study [219
melanoma, 286 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), 300 basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and
873 controls]. No significant associations were observed for the two MTHFR
polymorphisms on skin cancer risk. We observed an interaction between the C677T
polymorphism and total folate intake on SCC risk (P, interaction=0.04); the
highest risk was observed among women with TT genotype and low folate intake
(OR=2.14; 95% CI=1.01-4.50). The VDR Bsm1 BB genotype was significantly
associated with an increased SCC risk (OR=1.51; 95% CI=1.00-2.28). An interaction
between the Bsm1 polymorphism and total vitamin D intake on SCC was observed,
with the highest risk seen in women with the BB genotype and high vitamin D
intake (OR=2.38; 95% CI=1.22-4.62) (P, interaction=0.08). This study suggests a
possible role of the polymorphisms in MTHFR and VDR interacting with dietary
intakes of folate and vitamin D in skin cancer development, especially for SCC.
Due to a large number of comparisons and tests, the possible associations should 
be interpreted with caution and confirmed by other studies.

PMID: 16950800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Hum Pathol. 2007 Jan;38(1):72-8. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Expression of CDX2 in benign tissue and adenocarcinoma of the prostate.

Herawi M(1), De Marzo AM, Kristiansen G, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Numerous studies have claimed that CDX2 is relatively specific and sensitive in
establishing a gastrointestinal origin in metastatic tumors of unknown origin. We
have recently seen 2 cases of prostatic adenocarcinoma (PCa) on needle biopsies
with diffuse strong nuclear staining for CDX2 sent for consultation. One case was
a prostatic duct adenocarcinoma in a man with a prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
value of 327 ng/mL, and the other was a PCa with a Gleason score (GS) of 4 + 4 = 
8 in a man with a PSA value of 15 ng/mL. An adenocarcinoma with GS 3 + 3 = 6 from
the contralateral side did not express CDX2. Because documented examples of this 
phenomenon are rare, we investigated the immunoexpression of CDX2, using tissue
microarrays (TMAs). Three slides of TMAs were used to stain 708 tissue samples
(0.6 mm in diameter) containing either benign or malignant prostate tissue, as
well as control tissues from various anatomical sites including colon. In total, 
195 samples of primary PCa with GS of 6 (n = 41), 7 (n = 21), and 8 (n = 8); 195 
samples of benign prostate tissue; and 185 samples of metastatic PCa were
studied. Of 70 radical prostatectomy specimens examined for PCa in TMAs, 4 (5.7%)
were positive for CDX2, showing Gleason score of 6 (n = 3) and Gleason score of 7
(n = 1). Focal moderate positive staining was seen in benign prostate tissue in 7
(11.7%) of 60 radical prostatectomy specimens. None of the metastatic PCa
expressed CDX2. CDX2 may uncommonly be focally expressed in benign prostatic
glands. Staining in PCa is less common and appears independent of GS and is
usually patchy and focal and of lesser intensity than in colonic tissue. However,
rarely strong and diffuse staining may be seen. Positive CDX2 staining in
high-grade prostate cancer (ductal, cribriform, and solid) may be confused with
secondary carcinoma of colonic origin. Routine histopathology, positive PSA
immunostaining, and clinical findings can help confirm the correct diagnosis.

PMID: 16949907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Horm Metab Res. 2006 Jul;38(7):452-4.

Metabolic learning in the intestine: adaptation to nutrition and luminal factors.

Schmitz G(1), Langmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany. gerd.schmitz@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

There is increasing evidence that the magnitude and potential of intestinal
nutrient absorption (sugars, fatty acids, cholesterol and triglycerides) and
intestinal defense function are regulated by metabolic learning phenomena, and
are influenced by dietary energy content and exercise. Metabolic overload
syndromes, mainly obesity, and chronic malabsorption disorders such as
inflammatory bowel disease and celiac disease have been defined as extreme
phenotypes. Metabolic learning processes depend on developmental and
transcriptional control systems of intestinal epithelial cell differentiation.
The physiological differentiation zone of enterocytes is linked to the
beta-catenin system, apolipoprotein apoA-IV and the master transcription factors 
Cdx2, HNF1alpha, and GATA4. In addition to these developmental regulatory
transcription factors, nuclear receptors including RXR, LXR, PPAR, PXR, and CAR
have been implicated in the generation of more absorptive enterocytes with a more
differentiated phenotype on the one hand, and dedifferentiated cells with reduced
capacity of detoxification and defense causing loss of junction control and
barrier defects on the other. Large-scale analysis of gene expression profiles
and identification of key pathways and master regulatory transcription factors
will help dissect the role of nutritional and environmental factors as well as
pharmacological intervention on mucosal homeostasis and disease, with potential
applications for diagnosis and therapy.

PMID: 16933181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Genes Cells. 2006 Sep;11(9):1115-23.

NANOG maintains self-renewal of primate ES cells in the absence of a feeder
layer.

Yasuda SY(1), Tsuneyoshi N, Sumi T, Hasegawa K, Tada T, Nakatsuji N, Suemori H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Nanog is a homeodomain transcription factor that is expressed specifically in
undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells and has been shown to be essential in 
the maintenance of pluripotency in mouse ES cells. To examine the function of
NANOG in primate ES cells, we generated transgenic monkey ES cell lines
expressing three- to seven-fold higher levels of NANOG protein compared to
wild-type ES cells. These NANOG over-expressing cell lines retained their
undifferentiated state in the absence of a feeder layer, as shown by expression
of undifferentiated ES cell markers such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and OCT-4.
We also demonstrated that in vitro differentiation of transgenic cell lines was
mostly restricted to the ectodermal lineage, as examined by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Knockdown experiments using
NANOG small interfering (si) RNA resulted in induction of differentiation markers
such as AFP, GATA4 and GATA6 for the endoderm and CDX2 for the trophectoderm.
These results suggest that NANOG plays a crucial role in maintaining the
pluripotent state of primate ES cells.

PMID: 16923129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Ann Intern Med. 2006 Aug 15;145(4):255-64.

The association between common vitamin D receptor gene variations and
osteoporosis: a participant-level meta-analysis.

Uitterlinden AG(1), Ralston SH, Brandi ML, Carey AH, Grinberg D, Langdahl BL,
Lips P, Lorenc R, Obermayer-Pietsch B, Reeve J, Reid DM, Amedei A, Bassiti A,
Bustamante M, Husted LB, Diez-Perez A, Dobnig H, Dunning AM, Enjuanes A,
Fahrleitner-Pammer A, Fang Y, Karczmarewicz E, Kruk M, van Leeuwen JP, Mavilia C,
van Meurs JB, Mangion J, McGuigan FE, Pols HA, Renner W, Rivadeneira F, van
Schoor NM, Scollen S, Sherlock RE, Ioannidis JP; APOSS Investigators; EPOS
Investigators; EPOLOS Investigators; FAMOS Investigators; LASA Investigators;
Rotterdam Study Investigators; GENOMOS Study.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Ann Intern Med. 2006 Dec 19;145(12):936. Amidei, Antonietta [corrected to Amedei,
Antonietta].

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2006 Aug 15;145(4):302-4.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene have been
implicated in the genetic regulation of bone mineral density (BMD). However, the 
clinical impact of these variants remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relation between VDR polymorphisms, BMD, and
fractures.
DESIGN: Prospective multicenter large-scale association study.
SETTING: The Genetic Markers for Osteoporosis consortium, involving 9 European
research teams.
PARTICIPANTS: 26,242 participants (18,405 women).
MEASUREMENTS: Cdx2 promoter, FokI, BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI polymorphisms; BMD at the
femoral neck and the lumbar spine by dual x-ray absorptiometry; and fractures.
RESULTS: Comparisons of BMD at the lumbar spine and femoral neck showed
nonsignificant differences less than 0.011 g/cm2 for any genotype with or without
adjustments. A total of 6067 participants reported a history of fracture, and
2088 had vertebral fractures. For all VDR alleles, odds ratios for fractures were
very close to 1.00 (range, 0.98 to 1.02) and collectively the 95% CIs ranged from
0.94 (lowest) to 1.07 (highest). For vertebral fractures, we observed a 9% (95%
CI, 0% to 18%; P = 0.039) risk reduction for the Cdx2 A-allele (13% risk
reduction in a dominant model).
LIMITATIONS: The authors analyzed only selected VDR polymorphisms. Heterogeneity 
was detected in some analyses and may reflect some differences in collection of
fracture data across cohorts. Not all fractures were related to osteoporosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The FokI, BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI VDR polymorphisms are not associated 
with BMD or with fractures, but the Cdx2 polymorphism may be associated with risk
for vertebral fractures.

PMID: 16908916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Stem Cells. 2006 Dec;24(12):2618-26. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Gut-like structures from mouse embryonic stem cells as an in vitro model for gut 
organogenesis preserving developmental potential after transplantation.

Torihashi S(1), Kuwahara M, Ogaeri T, Zhu P, Kurahashi M, Fujimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Molecular Cell Biology, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. storiha@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Recently, we reported the formation of gut-like structures from mouse ESCs in
vitro. To determine whether ESCs provide an in vitro model of gastrointestinal
(GI) tracts and their organogenesis, we investigated the morphological features, 
formation process, cellular development, and regional location within the GI
tract by immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. We also examined the developmental
potential by transplantation into kidney capsules. The results demonstrated that 
Id2-expressing epithelium developed first, alpha-smooth muscle actin appeared
around the periphery, and finally, the gut-like structures were formed into a
three-layer organ with well-differentiated epithelium. A connective tissue layer 
and musculature with interstitial cells of Cajal developed, similar to
organogenesis of the embryonic gut. Enteric neurons appeared underdeveloped, and 
blood vessels were absent. Many structures expressed intestinal markers Cdx2 and 
5-hydroxytryptamine but not the stomach marker H(+)/K(+) ATPase. Transplants
obtained blood vessels and extrinsic nerve growth from the host to prolong life, 
and even grafts of premature structures did not form teratoma. In conclusion,
gut-like structures were provided with prototypical tissue components of the GI
tract and are inherent in the intestine rather than the stomach. The formation
process was basically same as in gut organogenesis. They maintain their
developmental potential after transplantation. Therefore, gut-like structures
provide a unique and useful in vitro system for development and stem cell studies
of the GI tract, including transplantation experiments.

PMID: 16888283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Anticancer Res. 2006 Jul-Aug;26(4B):3105-10.

Immunohistochemical expression of 14-3-3 sigma protein in intraductal
papillary-mucinous tumor and invasive ductal carcinoma of the pancreas.

Okada T(1), Masuda N, Fukai Y, Shimura T, Nishida Y, Hosouchi Y, Kashiwabara K,
Nakajima T, Kuwano H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of General Surgical Science, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-39-22, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

BACKGROUND: 14-3-3 sigma (sigma) has been shown to be overexpressed in pancreatic
cancers by a c-DNA microarray technique. However, the expression of 14-3-3 sigma 
in intraductal papillary-mucinous tumor (IPMT) of the pancreas remains unclear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To evaluate the biological importance of 14-3-3 sigma
expression in pancreatic carcinogenesis, immunohistochemistry for 14-3-3 sigma,
CDX2, MUC1, MUC2, p53, p16 and Ki-67 was carried out on 33 IPMTs and the results 
were compared with those for 14 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs).
RESULTS: The frequency of 14-3-3 sigma immunoreactivity was 70% and 100% in IPMT 
and IDC, respectively. The frequency of MUCI and Ki-67 immunoreactivity was
significantly higher in IDC than IPMT. In IPMT, dark columnar cell types
prevailed over clear columnar cell types in terms of the frequency of the Ki-67
labeling index.
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of 14-3-3 sigma was confirmed in both IDC and
IPMT. Therefore, this overexpression might occur in the early stages of
pancreatic carcinogenesis. Moreover, IPMT composed of dark columnar cells might
be a potentially more advanced form than that made up of clear columnar cells.

PMID: 16886641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Clin Invest. 2006 Aug;116(8):2122-31.

Fatty acid amide hydrolase deficiency limits early pregnancy events.

Wang H(1), Xie H, Guo Y, Zhang H, Takahashi T, Kingsley PJ, Marnett LJ, Das SK,
Cravatt BF, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2006 Aug;116(8):2087-90.

Synchronized preimplantation embryo development and passage through the oviduct
into the uterus are prerequisites for implantation, dysregulation of which often 
leads to pregnancy failure in women. Cannabinoid/endocannabinoid signaling via
cannabinoid receptor CB1 is known to influence early pregnancy. Here we provide
evidence that a critical balance between anandamide synthesis by
N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine-selective phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD) and its
degradation by fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) in mouse embryos and oviducts
creates locally an appropriate "anandamide tone" for normal development of
embryos and their oviductal transport. FAAH inactivation yielding higher
anandamide or experimentally induced higher cannabinoid
[(-)-Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol] levels constrain preimplantation embryo
development with aberrant expression of Cdx2, Nanog, and Oct3/4, genes known to
direct lineage specification. Defective oviductal embryo transport arising from
aberrant endocannabinoid signaling also led to deferred on-time implantation and 
poor pregnancy outcome. Intercrossing between wild-type and Faah-/- mice rescued 
developmental defects, not oviductal transport, implying that embryonic and
maternal FAAH plays differential roles in these processes. The results suggest
that FAAH is a key metabolic gatekeeper, regulating on-site anandamide tone to
direct preimplantation events that determine the fate of pregnancy. This study
uncovers what we believe to be a novel regulation of preimplantation processes,
which could be clinically relevant for fertility regulation in women.

PMCID: PMC1523389
PMID: 16886060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;23(4):397-401.

[Relationship between the polymorphism of start codon and CDX2 site in vitamin D 
receptor gene and the effect of calcium supplementation on bone mineral density
of postmenopausal women].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang ZL(1), He JW, Huang QR, Qin YJ, Hu YQ, Li M, Zhang H, Liu YJ, Hu WW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Preventing and Treating Osteoporosis, Osteoporosis Research Unit,
the Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200233, P. R.
China. ZZL2002@medmail.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of polymorphisms of start codon (Fok I 
site) and CDX2 binding site in vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) concerned with the
effect of calcium supplementation on bone mineral density (BMD) and bone turnover
markers of postmenopausal women.
METHODS: Two hundreds unrelated postmenopausal women of Han ethnicity in Shanghai
were randomly divided into 2 groups of 100 women: high calcium group (1000 mg
element calcium and 400 units of vitamin D were given daily for 12 months) and
low calcium group (300 mg element calcium and 300 units of vitamin D were given
daily for 12 months). BMD and bone turnover markers were measured at baseline and
12 months after calcium supplementation. VDR gene Fok I and CDX2 polymorphisms
were analyzed using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and allele-specific multiplex PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: One hundred and seventy-one women completed 12-month study period. The
frequency of VDR Fok I genotypes was 48.0 % for Ff, 31.0 % for FF, and 21.0 % for
ff, and the frequency of CDX2 genotypes was 56.7 % for AG, 25.7% for GG, and
17.6% for AA. The frequencies distribution of Fok I and CDX2 alleles in the
entire population or in two subgroups all followed the Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium. No significant difference of baseline BMD and bone turnover markers 
in Fok I genotypes or CDX2 genotypes was observed in the entire population or in 
two subgroups. Moreover, regardless of calcium supplementation given for 12
months, no significant association was found between Fok I or CDX2 polymorphisms 
and the endpoint values or percentage changes of any BMD and bone turnover
markers in either high calcium group or low calcium group.
CONCLUSION: There is no significant relationship between VDR gene Fok I or CDX2
polymorphisms and the effect of high or low doses calcium supplementation on BMD 
and bone turnover markers in Shanghai postmenopausal women of Han ethnicity.

PMID: 16883525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dis Esophagus. 2006;19(4):260-6.

Cdx-2 expression in squamous and metaplastic columnar epithelia of the esophagus.

Vallböhmer D(1), DeMeester SR, Peters JH, Oh DS, Kuramochi H, Shimizu D, Hagen
JA, Danenberg KD, Danenberg PV, DeMeester TR, Chandrasoma PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 90033, 
USA.

The molecular pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus is poorly understood. Evidence 
suggests that at a phenotypic level, the metaplastic process begins with the
transformation of squamous epithelium in the distal esophagus to cardiac mucosa, 
which subsequently becomes intestinalized. The homeobox gene Cdx-2 has been shown
to be an important transcriptional regulator of embryonic differentiation and
maintenance of adult intestinal type epithelium. We hypothesized that Cdx-2 gene 
expression levels increase with the phenotypic transformation of normal squamous 
mucosa to the intestinalized columnar mucosa of Barrett's esophagus. Endoscopic
biopsies were obtained at the gastroesophageal junction in patients with symptoms
of gastroesophageal reflux disease and classified according to histology: normal 
squamous mucosa (n = 62), cardiac mucosa (n = 19), oxynto-cardiac mucosa (n =
14), and intestinal metaplasia (n = 15). Duodenal biopsies (n = 26) served as the
columnar control. After laser capture microdissection and RNA isolation, gene
expression levels of Cdx-2 were measured in each tissue type by quantitative
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Consistent with its known
function, Cdx-2 gene expression levels were highest in duodenal mucosa and nearly
absent in squamous epithelium. There was a stepwise increase in Cdx-2 gene
expression from cardiac to Barrett's epithelium (P < 0.001). Expression levels of
Cdx-2 in cardiac and oxynto-cardiac mucosa were 40-70 times higher and Barrett's 
mucosa 400 times higher than that found in squamous epithelium. Relative
expression of the homeobox gene Cdx-2, known to induce differentiation of
intestinal type epithelium, increases in a stepwise fashion during the phenotypic
transformation of distal esophageal squamous mucosa to cardiac columnar mucosa
and to the intestinalized columnar mucosa of Barrett's esophagus. Therefore,
Cdx-2 may be a potential biomarker to detect the early transition to Barrett's
esophagus.

PMID: 16866857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Genes Dev. 2006 Jul 15;20(14):1880-4.

Geminin is essential to prevent endoreduplication and to form pluripotent cells
during mammalian development.

Gonzalez MA(1), Tachibana KE, Adams DJ, van der Weyden L, Hemberger M, Coleman N,
Bradley A, Laskey RA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, UK. 
mg322@hutchison-mrc.cam.ac.uk

In multicellular eukaryotes, geminin prevents overreplication of DNA in
proliferating cells. Here, we show that genetic ablation of geminin in the mouse 
prevents formation of inner cell mass (ICM) and causes premature
endoreduplication at eight cells, rather than 32 cells. All cells in
geminin-deficient embryos commit to the trophoblast cell lineage and consist of
trophoblast giant cells (TGCs) only. Geminin is also down-regulated in TGCs of
wild-type blastocysts during S and gap-like phases by proteasome-mediated
degradation, suggesting that loss of geminin is part of the mechanism regulating 
endoreduplication.

PMCID: PMC1522086
PMID: 16847348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Gastroenterology. 2006 Jul;131(1):246-58.

Gastric inflammation, metaplasia, and tumor development in gastrin-deficient
mice.

Friis-Hansen L(1), Rieneck K, Nilsson HO, Wadström T, Rehfeld JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. lfh@rh.dk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gastrin deficiency and proton pump inhibitor treatment cause
achlorhydria, which predisposes to disease. To elucidate the underlying molecular
biology, we examined the changes in gastric gene expression in both types of
achlorhydria. We also explored the associated changes in the gastric microflora
and the long-term consequences of gastrin-deficient achlorhydria.
METHODS: Expression profiles were generated from gastric RNA from wild-type mice,
gastrin knockout (KO) mice, gastrin KO mice after 1 week of gastrin infusion, and
wild-type mice treated for 1 month with a proton pump inhibitor. The results were
confirmed using real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Selective media were used to characterize the gastric microflora.
RESULTS: The number of gastric bacteria was increased in both gastrin KO and
PPI-treated mice. The expression profiles revealed activation of immune defense
genes, interferon-regulated response genes, and intestinal metaplasia of the
gastric mucosa. In young gastrin-deficient mice, gastrin infusions reversed the
changes. Over time, the changes accumulated, became irreversible, and progressed 
into metaplasia and polyp development. Finally, the study showed that gastrin
regulated the expression of genes encoding extracellular matrix proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Independently of gastrin, achlorhydria is associated with gastric
bacterial overgrowth and intestinal gene expression patterns and is associated
with predisposition to disease. Gastrin is therefore essential for prevention of 
gastric disease, mainly through control of acid secretion but to a lesser extent 
also through control of gastric gene expression. The gastrin-deficient mouse
serves as a useful new model for gastric metaplasia and neoplasia.

PMID: 16831607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Differentiation. 2006 Jul;74(6):313-21.

The intestine-specific homeobox gene Cdx2 induces expression of the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor Math1.

Mutoh H(1), Sakamoto H, Hayakawa H, Arao Y, Satoh K, Nokubi M, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachimachi, Kawachigun, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Math1, which is transiently
expressed in proliferating neural precursors in multiple domains of the
developing nervous system, is also related to the cell fate decision of
enteroendocrine, goblet, and Paneth cells in the intestine. On the other hand,
the transcription factor Cdx2, which is normally confined to intestinal
epithelial cells, is related to the differentiation of these cells. Therefore, we
investigated the relationship between Math1 and Cdx2 in intestinal epithelial
cells. The Math1 and Cdx2 expressions in normal intestinal mucosa and intestinal 
metaplastic mucosa from mouse and human stomachs, as well as an intestinal
crypt-derived cell line, were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Northern blotting, and Math1 enhancer
element was analyzed by luciferase reporter assays. Math1-positive epithelial
cells co-expressing Cdx2 were found in normal intestinal mucosa from humans and
mice. Furthermore, Math1-producing epithelial cells that showed positive
immunostaining for Cdx2 were also observed in intestinal metaplastic mucosa from 
human and Cdx2 transgenic mouse stomachs, although they were not detected in
normal gastric mucosa of humans and mice. Expression of Cdx2 stimulated
endogenous Math1 mRNA expression in the intestinal crypt-derived cell line IEC-6,
corroborating observations in Cdx2-expressing intestinal metaplastic mucosa.
Furthermore, expression of Cdx2 in IEC-6 cells conferred the ability to express a
Math1 reporter gene containing a Math1 enhancer. Based on these results, we
hypothesize that Cdx2 is involved in activating Math1 expression in intestinal
epithelial cells.

PMID: 16831200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2006 Aug;41(8):880-6.

CDX2 expression is increased in gastric cancers with less invasiveness and
intestinal mucin phenotype.

Ha Kim G(1), Am Song G, Youn Park D, Han Lee S, Hyun Lee D, Oh Kim T, Jae Jo H,
Heo J, Hwan Kang D, Cho M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University College of
Medicine, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: CDX2 is an intestinal transcription factor that might be involved in
the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial
cells. It is well known that both gastric and intestinal phenotypic cell markers 
are expressed in gastric cancers. The aims of this study were to analyze the CDX2
expression and its relationship with the patients' clinicopathological
characteristics and the mucin phenotypes by performing immunohistochemistry.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 259 gastric cancer cases (122 early and 137
advanced cancers) were evaluated histologically and phenotypically. CDX2
expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Increased CDX2 expression correlated with a higher proportion of
intestinal-type cancers of Lauren and early gastric cancers (p<0.001 and p<0.001,
respectively) and a lower proportion of perineural invasion and lymph node
metastasis (p<0.001 and p=0.003, respectively). Increased expressions of
intestinal mucin (MUC-2, CD10) and decreased gastric mucin (MUC5AC) were
associated with an increased CDX2 expression (p<0.001, p=0.045 and p=0.004,
respectively). MUC6 expression was not associated with CDX2 expression. There was
a significantly increased CDX2 expression in the intestinal phenotype compared
with the other phenotypes (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that CDX2 might be a useful marker in
predicting the clinical outcome for patients with gastric cancers.

PMID: 16803685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2006 Dec;132(12):805-10. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

Expression of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and homeodomain protein CDX2 in
cholangiocarcinoma.

Jinawath A(1), Akiyama Y, Yuasa Y, Pairojkul C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8519, 
Japan.

PURPOSE: The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 pathway plays
important roles in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and cell
survival. The caudal-related homeobox protein CDX2 is essential for the
development of the intestine, and is related to gastric and gallbladder cancers
with the intestinal phenotype. However, the roles of ERK1/2 phosphorylation
(pERK1/2) and CDX2 in cholangiocarcinogenesis remain unknown.
METHODS: We investigated the expression of pERK1/2, CDX2 and MUC2 in Thai
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) specimens by means of immunohistochemical staining, and 
compared the expression of these proteins with clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: The pERK1/2 protein was expressed in 29 of 59 (49.2%) CCA cases.
Interestingly, in tubular-type CCA, the frequency of pERK1/2 expression was
associated with a higher grade of differentiation (P = 0.001). CDX2 expression
was observed in 22 of the 59 (37.3%) CCA cases, showed a relationship with MUC2
expression (P = 0.001), and was much higher in papillary-type than tubular-type
CCA (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: These results imply that pERK1/2 may be important for the
differentiation of tubular-type CCA, while CDX2 is related to the intestinal
phenotype of papillary-type CCA.

PMID: 16794828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2006 Jul;16(7):527-36.

The caudal-related homeodomain protein Cdx2 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha 
cooperatively regulate the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 gene promoter.

Gregory PA(1), Gardner-Stephen DA, Rogers A, Michael MZ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA 5042, Australia.

The gastrointestinal tract, contains several UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 
of the UGT1A and UGT2B subfamilies. UGT2B7 is one particular enzyme expressed
throughout the gastrointestinal tract that possesses broad substrate specificity 
towards orally administered drugs. Because the caudal-related homeodomain protein
2 (Cdx2) regulates many gastrointestinal properties, we sought to determine
whether it could regulate the UGT2B7 promoter in the colon-derived cell line
Caco-2. Levels of Cdx2 and UGT2B7 were measured in differentiated and
non-differentiated Caco-2 cells by the quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
The capacity of the UGT2B7 gene promoter to drive expression of the luciferase
reporter gene was assessed by transfection into Caco-2 cells, with transcription 
factor expression plasmids. Mutation of putative transcription factor binding
sites and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to define important
regulatory regions of the UGT2B7 gene promoter. The levels of Cdx2 and UGT2B7
mRNAs were co-ordinately increased in differentiated Caco2 cells compared to
non-differentiated cells. Cdx2 activates the UGT2B7 proximal promoter by binding 
to two adjacent sites. Promoter activation requires Cdx2 binding to both sites
wherein these proteins interact to form a putative functional dimer. Dimerization
was shown to be dependent on redox state using extracts depleted of
dithiothreitol. In addition, Cdx2 was shown to cooperatively activate the UGT2B7 
promoter in conjunction with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha), a
mechanism previously observed to regulate other intestine-specific genes. The
present study is the first to define transcription factors involved in the
control of intestinal UGT2B expression. The demonstration that Cdx2 and HNF1alpha
are important regulators of UGT2B7 expression will aid in defining pathways for
coordinate control of drug metabolism in the gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 16788384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2006 Jun;14(2):249-50.

CDX2 expression and lung cancer.

Rossi G, Cavazza A.

Comment on
    Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2005 Mar;13(1):55-60.

PMID: 16785799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Hum Pathol. 2006 Jul;37(7):809-15.

Invasive colorectal micropapillary carcinoma: an aggressive variant of
adenocarcinoma.

Kim MJ(1), Hong SM, Jang SJ, Yu E, Kim JS, Kim KR, Gong G, Ro JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, Seoul 138-730, South Korea.

Micropapillary carcinoma (MC) has been well described in other organs, including 
breast, urinary bladder, lung, ovary, and salivary gland, but has not been
described in the large intestine. We compared the clinicopathologic and
immunohistochemical findings of MC with those of conventional adenocarcinoma in
the large intestine. Fifty-five cases of adenocarcinoma with an MC component were
identified among 585 consecutive cases of colorectal cancer at the Asan Medical
Center between January 2003 and June 2004 and were compared with 119 cases of
conventional adenocarcinoma of colorectum without an MC component. Arrayed tissue
blocks were constructed and immunostained for cytokeratin 7 and 20 and CDX2. We
also compared the results of MLH-1, MSH-2, p53, and carcinoembryonic antigen
immunostainings between the 2 groups. The grade of both MC and conventional
adenocarcinoma was mostly moderately differentiated. The proportion of MC ranged 
from 5% to 80%. The presence but not extent of MC in the primary tumors was
associated with more frequent lymphovascular invasion and lymph node (LN)
metastases, a greater mean number of positive LNs, and a higher tumor stage with 
more frequent distant metastases, compared with conventional adenocarcinoma (P < 
.05). Cytokeratin 7 staining was occasionally observed in both MC (9.1%, 5/55
cases) and conventional adenocarcinoma (13.4%, 16/119 cases). Although MLH-1 and 
CDX2 expression tended to be lower in conventional adenocarcinoma, none of the
immunohistochemical results was significantly different between 2 groups.
Recognition of MC component is important as MC appeared to be an aggressive
variant of colonic adenocarcinoma and presented at a higher stage, with frequent 
lymphovascular invasion, LN metastasis, and distant metastasis, compared with
conventional adenocarcinoma. The proportion of MC component did not impact the
prognosis, and the immunoprofiles of MC were not significantly different from
those of conventional adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 16784979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;35(4):228-31.

[Role of CDX2 immunostaining in diagnosis of gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang C(1), Zhou XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Friendship Hospital of the Capital University
of Medicine Science, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of CDX2 in normal and tumor tissues, and to
evaluate the value of CDX2 immunostaining in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal
adenocarcinoma.
METHOD: Seventy-six samples of normal tissue and 612 samples of tumor tissue were
studied by tissue microarray technology and immunohistochemistry for CDX2.
RESULTS: CDX2 was strongly expressed in surface epithelium of 13 samples of
normal intestine and in ductal epithelium of 8 samples of normal pancreas, as
well as in 47 samples (92.2%) of colonic adenocarcinoma and 58 samples (66.9%) of
gastric adenocarcinoma. As for other tumor types, there was only weak or patchy
CDX2 positivity. The positivity rates were as follows: ovarian mucinous
adenocarcinoma 15.6% (10/64), pancreatic cancer 33.3% (3/9), thyroid cancer 27.3%
(3/11) and extrahepatic biliary cancer 25% (4/16). On the other hand, primary
tumors of breast, prostate, kidney, adrenal and liver were negative for CDX2.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 is expressed mainly in normal epithelium of intestinal tract
and small pancreatic ducts, as well as in primary adenocarcinoma of
gastrointestinal tract. CDX2 may thus play an important role in distinguishing
primary non-intestinal adenocarcinoma from metastatic adenocarcinoma of gastric
or colorectal primary.

PMID: 16776981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):835-41. Epub 2006 Jun 11.

Epigenetic characterization of the early embryo with a chromatin
immunoprecipitation protocol applicable to small cell populations.

O'Neill LP(1), VerMilyea MD, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) defines the genomic distribution of proteins
and their modifications but is limited by the cell numbers required (ideally
>10(7)). Here we describe a protocol that uses carrier chromatin and PCR,
'carrier' ChIP (CChIP), to permit analysis of as few as 100 cells. We assayed
histone modifications at key regulator genes (such as Nanog, Pou5f1 (also known
as Oct4) and Cdx2) by CChIP in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and in inner cell 
mass (ICM) and trophectoderm of cultured blastocysts. Activating and silencing
modifications (H4 acetylation and H3K9 methylation) mark active and silent
promoters as predicted, and we find close correlation between values derived from
CChIP (1,000 ES cells) and conventional ChIP (5 x 10(7) ES cells). Studies on
genes silenced in both ICM and ES cells (Cdx2, Cfc1, Hhex and Nkx2-2, also known 
as Nkx) show that the intensity of silencing marks is relatively diminished in ES
cells, indicating a possible relaxation of some components of silencing on
adaptation to culture.

PMID: 16767102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Pathologe. 2006 Jul;27(4):244-50.

[The importance of immunohistochemistry for the diagnosis of
cholangiocarcinomas].

[Article in German]

Länger F(1), von Wasielewski R, Kreipe HH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Medizinische Hochschule, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1,
30625, Hannover. Laenger.Florian@mh-hannover.de

The correct diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is often confounded
by the small size of the diagnostic specimen and the wide morphological range of 
carcinomas metastasising to the liver. Expression analysis of cytokeratins,
glycoproteins, mucoproteins, adhesion molecules, receptors and transcription
factors has been shown to be a valuable adjunct in the typing of carcinomas. For 
this study, the expression pattern of 30 well documented antibodies to CC and the
most common metastatic adenocarcinomas of the liver were studied. CC show a
rather distinct immunophenotype with co-expression of CK7, CK17, CD7 and a lack
of CDX2. Although this pattern allows the separation of CC from most metastatic
carcinomas, pancreatic carcinomas show a broad overlap with this expression
pattern.

PMID: 16758167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cancer Lett. 2007 Mar 18;247(2):197-203. Epub 2006 May 30.

Frequent rearrangements and amplification of the CDX2 homeobox gene in human
sporadic colorectal cancers with chromosomal instability.

Subtil C(1), Guérin E, Schneider A, Chenard MP, Martin E, Domon-Dell C, Duluc I, 
Brabletz T, Kedinger M, Duclos B, Gaub MP, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U682, University Louis Pasteur, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

The expression of the CDX2 gene, a crucial regulator of gut homeostasis, is
altered in human colorectal cancers in parallel with de-differentiation. Here, we
have investigated the chromosomal status of CDX2 in human sporadic colorectal
cancers with the phenotype of chromosomal instability. Allelic imbalance
determination showed frequent rearrangements at the CDX2 locus. The
rearrangements correlated with CDX2 gene amplification, as assessed by
quantitative PCR analysis. However, they were not predictive of the Cdx2 protein 
pattern. These data suggest that mechanisms other than structural alterations at 
the CDX2 locus account for the change of expression in colorectal cancers.

PMID: 16730885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 May 25;6:24.

In vitro culture of embryonic mouse intestinal epithelium: cell differentiation
and introduction of reporter genes.

Quinlan JM(1), Yu WY, Hornsey MA, Tosh D, Slack JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology & Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

BACKGROUND: Study of the normal development of the intestinal epithelium has been
hampered by a lack of suitable model systems, in particular ones that enable the 
introduction of exogenous genes. Production of such a system would advance our
understanding of normal epithelial development and help to shed light on the
pathogenesis of intestinal neoplasia. The criteria for a reliable culture system 
include the ability to perform real time observations and manipulations in vitro,
the preparation of wholemounts for immunostaining and the potential for
introducing genes.
RESULTS: The new culture system involves growing mouse embryo intestinal explants
on fibronectin-coated coverslips in basal Eagle's medium+20% fetal bovine serum. 
Initially the cultures maintain expression of the intestinal transcription factor
Cdx2 together with columnar epithelial (cytokeratin 8) and mesenchymal (smooth
muscle actin) markers. Over a few days of culture, differentiation markers appear
characteristic of absorptive epithelium (sucrase-isomaltase), goblet cells
(Periodic Acid Schiff positive), enteroendocrine cells (chromogranin A) and
Paneth cells (lysozyme). Three different approaches were tested to express genes 
in the developing cultures: transfection, electroporation and adenoviral
infection. All could introduce genes into the mesenchyme, but only to a small
extent into the epithelium. However the efficiency of adenovirus infection can be
greatly improved by a limited enzyme digestion, which makes accessible the
lateral faces of cells bearing the Coxsackie and Adenovirus Receptor. This
enables reliable delivery of genes into epithelial cells.
CONCLUSION: We describe a new in vitro culture system for the small intestine of 
the mouse embryo that recapitulates its normal development. The system both
provides a model for studying normal development of the intestinal epithelium and
also allows for the manipulation of gene expression. The explants can be cultured
for up to two weeks, they form the full repertoire of intestinal epithelial cell 
types (enterocytes, goblet cells, Paneth cells and enteroendocrine cells) and the
method for gene introduction into the epithelium is efficient and reliable.

PMCID: PMC1489925
PMID: 16725020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Inorg Biochem. 2006 Aug;100(8):1299-307. Epub 2006 Mar 27.

Characterization and crystal structure of cadmium(II) halide complexes with amino
acids and their derivatives: VII. Crystal structures of
aquadibromo(3-aminopropanoic acid)cadmium(II), dichloro(4-aminobutanoic
acid)cadmium(II), diaquabis(aminohexanoic acid)cadmium(II)
tetrachlorocadmium(II), and dibromo(azetidine-3-carboxylic acid)cadmium(II).

Kuriyama S(1), Inomata Y, Arai Y, Howell FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, Sophia University,
7-1 Kioicho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8554, Japan.

Seven cadmium complexes: [CdX2(Hapro)(H2O)n] (X: Cl(1), Br(2)), [CdX2(Hgaba)] (X:
Cl(3), Br(4)), [Cd(Hahex)2(H2O)2][CdCl4] (5), and [CdX2(Haze-3)](H2O)n (X: Cl(6),
Br(7)) have been prepared and investigated by means of IR and FT Raman spectra.
The crystal and molecular structures of 2, 3, 5 and 7 were determined by a
single-crystal X-ray diffraction method. In complex 2, the cadmium atom is in a
distorted octahedral geometry, ligated by two carboxyl oxygen atoms of Hapro, a
water molecule, and three bromine atoms; one is terminal and each of the other
two is bridging two cadmium atoms to make a polymer. The structure of 3 consists 
of one-dimensional polymers bridged by two chlorine atoms and a carboxyl group.
The carboxyl oxygen atoms of Hgaba coordinate forkedly to two cadmium atoms. The 
cadmium atom of [Cd(Hahex)2(H2O)2]2+ in complex 5 is in a distorted octahedral
geometry, ligated by four carboxyl oxygen atoms of two molecules of Hahex and by 
two water molecules. [Cd(Hahex)2(H2O)2]2+ exists between two layers which are
formed of infinite [CdCl4]2- chains. The carboxyl oxygen atoms of Hahex
coordinate to the same cadmium atom. In complex 7, the cadmium atom is ligated by
two carboxyl oxygen atoms and four bridging bromine atoms to make a polymer.

PMID: 16684568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Jan 24;86(4):247-9.

[Expression and significance of caudal type transcription factor-2 in gastric
mucosa at different stages of gastric carcinogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen HX(1), Chen MH, Song X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression and significance of caudal type
transcription factor-2 (Cdx2) in gastric mucosa at different stages of
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: By using ABC immunohistochemistry, the expression of Cdx2 was detected
in the biopsy specimens of 104 cases of chronic superficial gastritis, 98 cases
of chronic atrophic gastritis, 112 cases of intestinal metaplasia, 106 cases of
dysplasia and 97 cases of intestinal-type gastric carcinoma.
RESULTS: Cdx2 was expressed in the specimens of intestinal metaplasia with an
expression rate of 86.6% (97/112), significantly higher than those in dysplasia
(58.5%, 62/106) and intestinal-type gastric carcinoma (56.9%, 53/93) (both P <
0.01), while was not expressed in the specimens of chronic superficial gastritis 
and chronic atrophic gastritis. No significant difference was found between the
expression rate of Cdx2 was between the specimens of dysplasia and those of
intestinal-type gastric carcinoma (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Cdx2 may be a novel marker of intestinal metaplasia and may play an
important role in the carcinogenesis of the intestinal-type gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 16677504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Gastroenterology. 2006 Apr;130(4):1191-206.

Bile acids induce ectopic expression of intestinal guanylyl cyclase C Through
nuclear factor-kappaB and Cdx2 in human esophageal cells.

Debruyne PR(1), Witek M, Gong L, Birbe R, Chervoneva I, Jin T, Domon-Cell C,
Palazzo JP, Freund JN, Li P, Pitari GM, Schulz S, Waldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although progression to adenocarcinoma at the gastroesophageal
junction reflects exposure to acid and bile acids associated with reflux,
mechanisms mediating this transformation remain undefined. Guanylyl cyclase C
(GC-C), an intestine-specific tumor suppressor, may represent a mechanism-based
marker and target of transformation at the gastroesophageal junction. The present
studies examine the expression of GC-C in normal tissues and tumors from
esophagus and stomach and mechanisms regulating its expression by acid and bile
acids.
METHODS: Gene expression was examined by reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction, promoter analysis, immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting, and functional
analysis. Promoter transactivation was quantified by using luciferase constructs 
and mutational analysis. DNA binding of transcription factors was examined by
electromobility shift analysis.
RESULTS: GC-C mRNA and protein were ectopically expressed in approximately 80% of
adenocarcinomas arising in, but not in normal, esophagus and stomach. Similarly, 
in OE19 human esophageal cancer cells, deoxycholate and acid induced expression
of GC-C. This was associated with the induction of expression of Cdx2, a
transcription factor required for GC-C expression. In turn, induction of Cdx2
expression by deoxycholate was mediated by binding sites in the proximal promoter
for nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB). Furthermore, deoxycholate increased
NF-kappaB activity, associated with nuclear translocation and Cdx2 promoter
binding of the NF-kappaB subunit p50. Moreover, a dominant negative construct for
NF-kappaB prevented deoxycholate-induced p50 nuclear translocation and activation
of the Cdx2 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Transformation associated with reflux at the gastroesophageal
junction reflects activation by bile acid and acid of a transcriptional program
involving NF-kappaB and Cdx2, which mediate intestinal metaplasia and ectopic
expression of GC-C.

PMID: 16618413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 May 28;71(11):1581-8. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

The transcription factor Cdx2 regulates the intestine-specific expression of
human peptide transporter 1 through functional interaction with Sp1.

Shimakura J(1), Terada T, Shimada Y, Katsura T, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

H(+)/peptide cotransporter 1 (PEPT1, SLC15A1) localized at the brush-border
membranes of intestinal epithelial cells plays important roles in the intestinal 
absorption of small peptides and a variety of peptidemimetic drugs. We previously
demonstrated that transcription factor Sp1 functions as a basal transcriptional
regulator of human PEPT1. However, the factor responsible for the
intestine-specific expression of PEPT1 remains unknown. In the present study, we 
investigated the effect of the intestinal transcription factors on the
transcription of the PEPT1 gene and found that only Cdx2 markedly trans-activated
the PEPT1 promoter. However, the promoter region responsible for this effect
lacked a typical Cdx2-binding sequence, but instead, possessed some Sp1-binding
sites. In vitro experiments using Caco-2 cells showed that (1) mutation of the
Sp1-binding site diminished the effect of Cdx2, (2) co-expression of Cdx2 and Sp1
synergistically trans-activated the PEPT1 promoter and (3) Sp1 protein was
immunoprecipitated with Cdx2 protein. These results raise the possibility that
Cdx2 modulates the PEPT1 promoter by interaction with Sp1. The significance of
Cdx2 in vivo for PEPT1 regulation was shown by the determination of mRNA levels
of Cdx2 and PEPT1 in human tissue. In gastric samples, some with intestinal
metaplasia, the levels of PEPT1 and Cdx2 mRNA were highly correlated. Taken
together, the present study suggests that Cdx2 plays a key role in the
transcriptional regulation of the intestine-specific expression of PEPT1,
possibly through interaction with Sp1.

PMID: 16616718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;23(2):129-33.

Association of bone metabolism related genes polymorphisms with the effect of
raloxifene hydrochloride on bone mineral density and bone turnover markers in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.

Zhang ZL(1), He JW, Qin YJ, Huang QR, Liu YJ, Hu YQ, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Preventing and Treating Osteoporosis, Osteoporosis Research Unit,
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200233
P.R.China. ZZL2002@medmail.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of bone metabolism related genes
polymorphisms with the effect of raloxifene hydrochloride(RLX) on bone mineral
density (BMD) and bone turnover markers in postmenopausal women with
osteoporosis.
METHODS: A total of 68 unrelated postmenopausal women with osteoporosis of Han
ethnicity aged 47-74 years were randomly divided into 2 groups of 34 women: RLX
group (60 mg were given daily for 12 months) and placebo group. BMD and bone
turnover markers were measured at baseline, 6 and 12 months after treatment. The 
polymorphisms of Xba I and Pvu II sites in estrogen receptor 1 gene(ESR1), Ras I 
site in ESR2 gene, and start codon (Fok I) and CDX2 binding sites in vitamin D
receptor gene (VDR) were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 58 patients completed 12 months of study period. By the end
of study, the increased percentage of BMD in lumbar spine 2-4 (L2-4), total hip, 
and trochanter were found significantly different between RLX group and placebo
group(P<0.05), and the decreased percentage of C-telopeptide and osteocalcin were
significantly different between the two groups (P<0.01). The BMD of total hip and
trochanter of women with FF genotypes of VDR Fok I site were decreased by
1.98%+/-4.86% and 2.26%+/-4.73% respectively in the RLX group, but those of women
with Ff/ff genotypes were increased by 2.52%+/-2.75% and 2.74 %+/-2.97%,
respectively(P<0.05). Moreover, the total hip BMD of women with PP/Pp genotypes
of ESR1 Pvu II site was increased by 2.12%+/-2.78%, and of women with pp genotype
it was decreased by 1.34%+/-3.73%(P<0.05). However, no significant association
was observed of the polymorphisms of five sites with the changes of BMD and bone 
turnover markers in the placebo group.
CONCLUSION: The effect of RLX on BMD in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis is
regulated by the polymorphisms of Fok I of VDR gene and Pvu II of ESR1 gene. The 
study is valuable to select this drug according to genotype of patients in
clinical.

PMID: 16604479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cancer. 2006 Apr 25;108(2):114-8.

Immunocytochemical detection using CDX2: An aid for discerning tumor involvement 
in ascites cytology.

Kobayashi M(1), Ueyama Y, Nakanishi H, Ishida H, Takahashi E, Nakamura S,
Koshikawa T, Yatabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnosis, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although ascites cytology is important for therapeutic strategies, it
is difficult to distinguish cancer infiltration from reactive mesothelial
proliferation in some patients. In this study, the authors applied CDX2
immunocytochemistry to improve diagnostic accuracy.
METHODS: The authors examined the distribution of CDX2 expression in carcinoma
specimens using paraffin-embedded tissues from various organs from 549 cancer
patients. CDX2 immunostaining was applied to the 116 ascites specimens.
RESULTS: CDX2 expression was detected in a restricted range of cancers, with the 
vast majority of them originating from the gastrointestinal tract and pancreas.
When applied to ascites specimens, no positive reactions were detected in any of 
the 81 cytology-negative and molecular genetic analysis-negative specimens. By
contrast, 28 of 35 specimens diagnosed as suspicious for malignancy or malignancy
showed a positive reaction. Furthermore, the authors found that a
nuclear-positive reaction was easily evaluated, even with a high level of
background staining, and single cancer cells in 10(6) normal cells could be
detected.
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that CDX2 is a specific and sensitive marker to
detect gastrointestinal and pancreatic malignancies in ascites cytology.

Copyright 2006 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 16541450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. N Engl J Med. 2006 Mar 16;354(11):1208-9; author reply 1208-9.

Politically correct human embryonic stem cells?

Jaenisch R, Meissner A.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Dec 1;353(22):2321-3.

PMID: 16540629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 15;176(6):3642-51.

Functional characterization of the CCL25 promoter in small intestinal epithelial 
cells suggests a regulatory role for caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) transcription 
factors.

Ericsson A(1), Kotarsky K, Svensson M, Sigvardsson M, Agace W.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Section, Stem Cell Center, Biomedical Centre I-13, Lund University,
S-22184 Lund, Sweden.

The chemokine CCL25 is selectively and constitutively expressed in the small
intestinal epithelium and plays an important role in mediating lymphocyte
recruitment to this site. In this study, we demonstrate that CCL25 expression in 
murine small intestinal epithelial cells is independent of signaling through the 
lymphotoxin beta receptor and is not enhanced by inflammatory stimuli, pathways
involved in driving the expression of most other chemokines. We define a
transcriptional start site in the CCL25 gene and a region -141 to -5 proximal of 
exon 1 that is required for minimal promoter activity in the small intestinal
epithelial cell lines, MODE-K and mICc12. These cell lines expressed far less
CCL25 mRNA than freshly isolated small intestinal epithelial cells indicating
that they are missing important factors driving CCL25 expression. The CCL25
promoter contained putative binding sites for the intestinal
epithelial-associated Caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) transcription factors Cdx-1
and Cdx-2, and small intestinal epithelial cells but not MODE-K and mICc12 cells 
expressed Cdx-1 and Cdx-2. EMSA analysis demonstrated that Cdx proteins were
present in nuclear extracts from freshly isolated small intestinal epithelial
cells but not in MODE-K or mICcl2 cells, and bound to putative Cdx sites within
the CCL25 promoter. Finally, cotransfection of MODE-K cells with Cdx
transcription factors significantly increased CCL25 promoter activity as well as 
endogenous CCL25 mRNA levels. Together these results demonstrate a unique pattern
of regulation for CCL25 and suggest a role for Cdx proteins in regulating CCL25
transcription.

PMID: 16517733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. FEBS Lett. 2006 Mar 20;580(7):1801-6. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Normal specification of the extraembryonic lineage after somatic nuclear
transfer.

Kishigami S(1), Hikichi T, Van Thuan N, Ohta H, Wakayama S, Bui HT, Mizutani E,
Wakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genomic Reprogramming, Center for Developmental Biology RIKEN
Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Kobe 650-0047, Japan. kiskigami@cdb.riken.jp

To examine the establishment and maintenance of trophectoderm (TE) lineage in
somatic cloned blastocysts, the expression of Cdx2, a key molecule for
specification of TE fate, was immunohistochemically examined simultaneously with 
Oct4 expression. Cloned mouse embryos were made by nuclear transfer using cumulus
cells, tail-tip fibroblasts, and embryonic stem cells. After 96 h of culture, the
rates of Oct4-expressing blastocysts were as low as 50% and 60% for cumulus and
fibroblast clones, respectively. However, regardless of Oct4 expression, the
majority of those cloned blastocysts (> 90%) normally expressed Cdx2. Thus, even 
though somatic cloned embryos have reduced potential to produce the inner cell
mass lineage, the TE lineage can be established and maintained.

PMID: 16513118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2005 Feb;22(1):88-104.

Immunohistochemistry in diagnostic surgical pathology of the prostate.

Hameed O(1), Humphrey PA.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Department of Pathology
and Immunology, Washington University Medical Center, St Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) can play an important role in diagnostic surgical
pathology of the prostate. Basal cell markers, such as the 34betaE12 antibody and
antibodies directed against cytokeratin 5 and 6 or p63, are very useful for
demonstration of basal cells as their presence argues against a diagnosis of
invasive prostatic carcinoma (PC). However, several benign mimickers of PC,
including atrophy, atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), nephrogenic adenoma,
and mesonephric hyperplasia, can stain negatively with these markers, and thus, a
negative basal cell marker immunostain alone does not exclude a diagnosis of
benignancy. Although there are examples in the literature of high grade PC that
stain focally with some of the basal cell markers, these cases are usually
readily diagnosed based on H&E appearances and are unlikely to be confused with
these benign mimickers. Alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme-A racemase (AMACR) is a
sensitive marker of PC (except for a few uncommon variants: atrophic, foamy
gland, and pseudohyperplastic variants), and its detection by immunohistochemical
staining in atypical prostatic lesions can be very useful in confirming an
impression of adenocarcinoma. AMACR expression can also be identified in high
grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), prostatic atrophy, AAH, and
benign prostatic glands, and accordingly, a diagnosis of PC should not be based
solely on a positive AMACR immunostain, especially when the luminal staining is
weak and/or noncircumferential. The use of AMACR/basal cell antibody cocktails
has been found to greatly facilitate the distinction between PC and its benign
mimickers, especially when only limited tissue is available for staining.
Prostate specific antigen (PSA) and prostate specific acid phosphatase (PSAP) are
both quite sensitive and fairly specific markers of PC (there are a few
nonprostatic tumors that can express one or both), and are both very helpful in
establishing or confirming the diagnosis of PC when the differential diagnosis
includes other tumors that can involve the prostate such as urinary bladder
urothelial carcinoma. 34betaE12, p63, thrombomodulin, and uroplakin III are
additional urothelial associated markers useful in this differential diagnosis.
CDX2 and villin are useful markers to diagnostically separate colonic
adenocarcinoma from PC. AMACR positivity and negative basal cell marker reactions
are useful to confirm the presence of residual PC after hormonal or radiation
therapy. Pan-cytokeratin, PSA, and PSAP can also highlight subtle infiltrates of 
PC with hormonal or radiation therapy effect. PSA and PSAP immunohistochemical
stains are valuable in confirming metastatic carcinoma as being of prostatic
origin and should always be utilized in the diagnostic evaluation of metastatic
adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin in males.

PMID: 16512601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006 Feb;21(2):438-42.

CDX-2 homeobox gene expression in human gastric carcinoma and precursor lesions.

Kim HS(1), Lee JS, Freund JN, Min KW, Lee JS, Kim W, Juhng SW, Park CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seonam University, College of Medicine, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have demonstrated that CDX-2 is expressed in the
intestinal metaplasia of the stomach and intestinal-type gastric cancer. To
address the role of CDX-2 in carcinogenesis of gastric carcinomas of intestinal
type, the expression of CDX-2 in gastric carcinoma and precursor lesions were
examined using immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: A total of 160 specimens diagnosed as gastric carcinomas or non-invasive
neoplasia from 158 patients were analyzed for CDX-2 expression by immunochemical 
methods. Patients were classified into histopathologic subgroups according to the
Padova international classification: 60 cases of low-grade non-invasive
neoplasia, 55 cases of high grade, and 45 cases of invasive intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma. The CDX-2 expression in non-neoplastic gastric mucosa including
intestinal metaplasia was also evaluated in the areas included in the histologic 
sections.
RESULTS: The CDX-2 expression was localized in the epithelial cell nuclei in the 
area of intestinal metaplasia with or without dysplasia and carcinoma, consistent
with its role as a transcriptional regulator. No CDX-2 reactivity was noted in
the normal mucosa in all cases. The CDX-2 expression was detected in 73.3% of
low-grade cases, 85.5% of high-grade cases and 91.1% of intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma cases. In the gastric mucosa with intestinal metaplasia, 89.7% of 
the samples were positive. The CDX-2-expressing cells in intestinal metaplasia
were more prevalent than in dysplasia and carcinoma. Expression of CDX-2 showed a
statistically significant positive correlation with increasing grade of dysplasia
and carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that CDX-2 expression in stomach cancer may
be a marker of the progression of gastric carcinogenesis, and that its activation
may represent an early event.

PMID: 16509871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. APMIS. 2006 Jan;114(1):50-4.

Altered expression of CDX2 in colorectal cancers.

Choi BJ(1), Kim CJ, Cho YG, Song JH, Kim SY, Nam SW, Lee SH, Yoo NJ, Lee JY, Park
WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seocho-gu.

CDX2 is a caudal-related homeobox transcription factor whose expression in the
adult is normally restricted to the intestinal epithelium; it is implicated in
the development and maintenance of the intestinal mucosa. The specific aim of
this study was to elucidate the potential etiological role of CDX2 protein in
colorectal carcinogenesis. We have analyzed the expression pattern of CDX2
protein in relation to the phenotype of 123 sporadic colorectal cancers by
immunohistochemistry using tissue microarray. Strong CDX2 immunostaining was seen
in the nuclei of corresponding normal intestinal epithelium. Interestingly, loss 
of CDX2 immunostaining was observed in 29 (23.6%) of 123 colorectal
adenocarcinomas and its expression was correlated with the differentiation grade 
of the carcinoma (Chi-Square test, p<0.01). Clinically, CDX2 protein was
immunopositive in 11 (91.7%) of 12 cases corresponding to stage A, 40 (85.1%) of 
47 corresponding to stage B, 39 (69.6%) of 56 corresponding to stage C, and 4
(50.0%) of 8 corresponding to stage D. Statistically, CDX2 protein expression was
related to tumor stage (Bartholomew test, p<0.05) and lymph node metastasis
(Chi-Square test, p<0.05). These results indicate that loss of expression of CDX2
protein may play an important role in the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancers and
that CDX2 expression represents a highly significant marker, which is able to
identify a subset of patients at high risk.

PMID: 16499661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Korean J Intern Med. 2005 Dec;20(4):317-24.

Relationships between the expressions of CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA and clinicopathologic
features in colorectal cancers.

Kim GH(1), Lee DH, Kim HW, Cheong JY, Seo SB, Heo J, Kang DH, Song GA, Cho M,
Yang US, Park DY, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University College of
Medicine, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: CDX1 and CDX2 are members of the caudal-type homeobox gene family and
control the proliferation and differentiation of intestinal mucosal cells. Their 
expressions are commonly reduced in colorectal cancer, but reports about the
relationships between their expressions and clinicopathologic features are rare. 
The aim of this study was to examine the expressions of CDX1 and CDX2 mRNAs in
colorectal cancers and to assess the relationships between their expressions and 
clinicopathologic features.
METHODS: CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA expressions were analyzed by real-time polymerase
chain reaction in 48 colorectal cancers and in adjacent non-tumorous normal
mucosal tissue.
RESULTS: CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA expressions were significantly reduced in colorectal 
cancer tissues versus normal mucosal tissues (p=0.001, p=0.042, respectively). As
compared with paired normal mucosal tissues, colorectal tissues showed reduced
CDX1 mRNA expression in 64.6% (31/48) and reduced CDX2 mRNA expression in 66.7%
(32/48) of cases. A statistically significant positive correlation was found
between the expressions of CDX1 mRNA and CDX2 mRNA in colorectal cancer (r=0.543,
p<0.001). However, the expressions of CDX1 and CDX2 mRNAs were not related to
age, sex, cancer location, differentiation, lymphatic or vascular invasion, lymph
node metastasis, stage or serum carcinoembryonic antigen level.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX1 and CDX2 mRNA expressions were found to be significantly
reduced in colorectal cancers but these expressional changes were not found to be
related to clinicopathologic features.

PMCID: PMC3891078
PMID: 16491830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Reprod Dev. 2006 May;73(5):559-67.

Regulation of the ovine interferon-tau gene by a blastocyst-specific
transcription factor, Cdx2.

Imakawa K(1), Kim MS, Matsuda-Minehata F, Ishida S, Iizuka M, Suzuki M, Chang KT,
Echternkamp SE, Christenson RK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
akaz@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Expression of ovine interferon-tau (oIFNtau), a factor essential for the process 
of maternal recognition of pregnancy in ruminant ungulates, is restricted to the 
trophoblast. However, the molecular mechanisms by which oIFNtau expression is
restricted to the trophectoderm have not been fully elucidated. The objective of 
this study was to determine whether oIFNtau gene transcription could be regulated
through Cdx2 expression, a transcription factor implicated in the control of cell
differentiation in the trophectoderm. Human choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells were
co-transfected with an oIFNtau (-654 base pair, bp)-luciferase reporter
(-654-oIFNtau-Luc) construct and several transcription factor expression
plasmids. Compared to -654-oIFNtau-Luc alone, transcription of the
-654-oIFNtau-Luc increased more than 30 times when this construct was
co-transfected with Cdx2, Ets-2, and c-jun. The degree of transcription decreased
to 1/4 levels when the upstream region was reduced to -551 bp, and became minimal
with further deletions; this was confirmed with the use of the reporter
constructs with mutated c-jun, Ets-2, and/or Cdx2 sites. In trophoblast unrelated
NIH3T3 cells, which do not support IFNtau gene transcription, the oIFNtau-Luc
transcription was enhanced approximately eightfold when the cells were
co-transfected with the Cdx2/Ets-2 or Cdx2/Ets-2/c-jun expression plasmids. These
findings were confirmed by gel-shift assays examining Cdx binding site on the
oIFNtau gene's upstream region, by immunohistochemical study identifying the
presence of Cdx2 in day 15 and 17 ovine conceptuses, and by Western blot
detecting Cdx2 in day 17 conceptuses. Our results indicate that oIFNtau gene
transcription is regulated by Cdx2, and suggest that Cdx2 could be a key molecule
in determining oIFNtau gene transcription by the trophectoderm.

Mol. Reprod. Dev. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16489630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Science. 2006 Feb 17;311(5763):992-6.

Cdx2 gene expression and trophectoderm lineage specification in mouse embryos.

Deb K(1), Sivaguru M, Yong HY, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Retraction in
    Roberts RM, Sivaguru M, Yong HY. Science. 2007 Jul 27;317(5837):450.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2014 Dec 5;:NOT-OD-15-034.
    Science. 2006 Oct 27;314(5799):592.
    Science. 2006 Dec 1;314(5804):1367-9.

Controversy exists as to whether individual blastomeres from two-cell-stage mouse
embryos have identical developmental properties and fate. We show that the
transcription factor Cdx2 is expressed in the nuclei of cells derived from the
late-dividing but not the first-dividing blastomere of two-cell embryos and, by
lineage tracing and RNA interference knock-down experiments, that this lagging
cell is the precursor of trophectoderm. Cdx2 mRNA is localized toward the vegetal
pole of oocytes, reorients after fertilization, and becomes concentrated in the
late-dividing, two-cell-stage blastomere. The asymmetrical distribution of Cdx2
gene products in the oocyte and embryo defines the lineage to trophectoderm.

PMID: 16484492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Mar 31;342(1):66-72. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Cdx2 modulates proliferation in normal human intestinal epithelial crypt cells.

Escaffit F(1), Paré F, Gauthier R, Rivard N, Boudreau F, Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Que., Canada J1H 
5N4.

The homeobox gene Cdx2 is involved in the regulation of the expression of
intestine specific markers such as sucrase-isomaltase and lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase. Previous studies performed with immortalized or transformed intestinal
cell lines have provided evidence that Cdx2 can promote morphological and
functional differentiation in these experimental models. However, no data exist
concerning the implication of this factor in normal human intestinal cell
physiology. In the present work, we have investigated the role of Cdx2 in normal 
human intestinal epithelial crypt (HIEC) cells that lack this transcription
factor. The establishment of HIEC cells expressing Cdx2 in an inducible manner
shows that forced expression of Cdx2 significantly alters the proliferation of
intestinal crypt cells and stimulates dipeptidylpeptidase IV expression but is
not sufficient to trigger intestinal terminal differentiation. These observations
suggest that Cdx2 requires additional factors to activate the enterocyte
differentiation program in normal undifferentiated cells.

PMID: 16480684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Ai Zheng. 2006 Feb;25(2):185-9.

[Expression of intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 in different subtypes
of intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu GS(1), Gong J, Cheng P, Zhang J, Chang Y, Qiang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is thought as the precancerous
lesion of gastric carcinoma, and CDX2 gene plays important roles in development
and differentiation of intestinal epithelium, and maintenance of intestinal
phenotype. Recent studies found that CDX2 were expressed aberrantly in IM of
chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG) and some gastric carcinomas, which implied that 
CDX2 may play an important role in IM formation and gastric carcinogenesis. This 
study was to investigate the roles of CDX2 in the development and progression of 
IM and gastric carcinogenesis, and determine the correlation of IM to gastric
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: A tissue microarray containing 46 cases of CAG with IM, 40 cases of
gastric carcinoma, and 32 cases of IM foci in paracancerous tissues was
constructed. High iron diamine/alcian blue (HID/AB) and HE staining were used to 
classify IM and gastric carcinoma, and the expression of CDX2 protein and mRNA in
different gastric lesions was assessed with immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization, respectively.
RESULTS: The proportion of type III IM was significantly higher in IM foci in
paracancerous tissues than in CAG with IM (56.25% vs. 21.74%, P<0.01). The
positive rates of CDX2 protein were 69.56% in IM foci in CAG, 53.13% in IM foci
in paracancerous tissues, and 42.50% in gastric carcinomas, and the positive
rates of CDX2 mRNA were 63.04%, 46.87%, and 35.00%, respectively. The positive
rates were significantly lower in gastric cancer than in IM in CAG (P<0.01), but 
there was no significant difference between gastric cancer and IM foci in
paracancerous tissues (P>0.05). The expression of CDX2 protein and mRNA was
significantly higher in intestinal-type gastric cancer than in diffuse-type
gastric cancer (54.55% vs. 27.78%, 45.45% vs. 22.22%, P<0.05). The expression of 
CDX2 protein was significantly lower in type III IM than in type I IM (46.42% vs.
79.31%, P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 may play important roles in the development and progression of 
IM and gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16480583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Microbes Infect. 2006 Apr;8(4):1064-74. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Helicobacter pylori regulates the expression of inhibitors of DNA binding (Id)
proteins by gastric epithelial cells.

Manzo BA(1), Crabtree JE, Fiona Campbell M, Tweedle D, Potten CS, Bajaj-Elliott
M, Sanderson IR, Wilson JW.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Gastroenterology, Institute of Cell and Molecular
Sciences, Barts and The London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of London, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AT,UK.

Id transcription factors control proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis by 
inhibiting the DNA binding of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.
Increased expression of Id proteins promotes proliferation, inhibits
differentiation, and is associated with intestinal tumorigenesis. We aimed to
determine how Helicobacter pylori may alter the expression of Id proteins by
gastric epithelial cells: it was hypothesised that H. pylori, a known carcinogen,
would result in increased expression of one or more Id family members. In vitro
and in vivo models of infection were employed, including treatment of AGS gastric
epithelial cells with wild-type H. pylori strains, 60190 and SS1, and Mongolian
gerbils infected with H. pylori SS1. A small cohort of human gastric mucosal
biopsies was also examined. Treatment of AGS cells with H. pylori resulted in
down-regulation of Id1 and Id3. Unexpectedly, expression of the main target of Id
proteins, the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E2A, was also
suppressed, with an associated decrease in E-box binding activity. In contrast,
H. pylori induced the expression of the CDK inhibitor p21(WAF-1/cip1), and the
homeobox transcription factor, Cdx2, an early marker of intestinal metaplasia of 
the stomach epithelium. Gastric epithelium from H. pylori-infected gerbils
demonstrated similar changes, with decreased Id2, Id3 and E2A, and elevated
p21(WAF-1/cip1) expression. In human gastric epithelium also, H. pylori infection
was associated with reduced Id and E2A expression. In conclusion, H. pylori
alters the expression of Id proteins, in vitro and in vivo; it is hypothesised
that these changes contribute to H. pylori-associated pathologies.

PMID: 16473539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Stem Cells. 2006 Jun;24(6):1467-75. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells after RNA interference-mediated
silencing of OCT4 and Nanog.

Hough SR(1), Clements I, Welch PJ, Wiederholt KA.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Division, Gene Regulation Group, Invitrogen
Corporation, Carlsbad, California 92008, USA. shelley.hough@invitrogen.com

RNA interference (RNAi) holds great promise as a tool to study the basic biology 
of stem cells or to direct differentiation in a specific manner. Barriers to
achieving efficient and specific gene silencing in RNAi experiments include
limitations in transfection efficiency and in the efficacy and specificity of
RNAi silencing effectors. Here, we combine methods of efficient lipid-mediated
delivery with chemically modified RNAi compounds to silence genes related to
pluripotency, in order to direct differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.
After transfection of embryonic stem cells with OCT4- or Nanog-targeted RNAi
compounds, levels of OCT4 or Nanog transcript and protein were reduced
accordingly. Reduction in OCT4 expression correlated with induction of
trophectoderm genes Cdx2, Hand1, and PL-1, with formation of cells with
trophoblast giant cell phenotype after 6 days. Reduction in Nanog expression
correlated with induction of extraembryonic endoderm genes GATA4, GATA6, and
laminin B1, with subsequent generation of groups of cells with parietal endoderm 
phenotype. Our results indicate that transient inhibition of OCT4 or Nanog by
RNAi compounds is sufficient to induce differentiation toward extraembryonic
lineages, which supports the model that these transcription factors function in a
dose-dependent manner to influence cell fate.

PMID: 16456133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Virchows Arch. 2006 Feb;448(2):228-31. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

Oncocytic adenocarcinoma of the rectum arising on a villous adenoma with
oncocytic features.

Piana S(1), Asioli S, Foroni M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Viale Risorgimento 80,
42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy. SIMONETTA.PIANA@ASMN.RE.IT

Rectal adenocarcinoma with diffuse oncocytic features is a very rare lesion,
having been reported only once in the English literature. We describe a case of
oncocytic adenocarcinoma of the rectum, associated with a villous adenoma,
arising on a 66-year-old man. On histological examination, the adenocarcinoma was
composed of neoplastic glands lined by a strongly eosinophilic, granular
epithelium that deeply infiltrated the rectal wall. Some basophilic
calcifications were present in the gland lumina. Superficially, a villous adenoma
with high-grade dysplasia was evident; adenomatous cells showed focal
eosinophilic changes, consisting of a large granular cytoplasm, an oval atypical 
nucleus, and a prominent nucleolus. Immunohistochemically, neoplastic glands
reacted strongly with antimitochondria antibody, carcinoembryonic antigen,
cytokeratin 20, p53, and CDX2. Molecular alterations observed in oncocytic
changes and their significance with regards to neoplastic transformation are
briefly discussed.

PMID: 16450120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Dec;14(6):697-711.

Transforming growth factor-beta induces differentiation of the labyrinthine
trophoblast stem cell line SM10.

Selesniemi K(1), Reedy M, Gultice A, Guilbert LJ, Brown TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology, and Physiology, Wright State
University School of Medicine, Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA.

The mammalian placenta consists of different trophoblast cell types that assist
in the variety of functions required for the maintenance of pregnancy. In
rodents, labyrinthine trophoblasts of the placenta are especially important,
because they are capable of differentiating into fused labyrinthine cells, which 
form the feto-maternal exchange surface. Even though the molecular signals
triggering labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation are poorly understood,
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been shown to be present in the
placental environment and alter trophoblast development. In this study, we
investigated the effects of TGF-beta on the differentiation of the labyrinthine
trophoblast stem cell lines SM10 and HRP-1. RT-PCR analyses demonstrated that
while the molecular expression of labyrinthine-specific lineage markers (Esx1,
Tfeb, and Tec) was maintained in TGF-beta-treated SM10 and HRP-1 cells, TGF-beta 
induced the down-regulation of trophoblast stem cell markers Id2 and Cdx2. In
contrast, TGF-beta induced the expression of a marker of differentiated
labyrinthine trophoblasts, Gcm1, only in the SM10 cell line. Furthermore, we
demonstrated an increased glucose uptake in the TGF-beta-treated SM10 cells,
indicative of functional differentiation. Finally, cell fusion in
TGF-beta-treated SM10 and HRP-1 cells was investigated by western blotting
analysis of placental alkaline phosphatase and cadherin-11 and by microscopic
analyses of cell morphology using green fluorescent protein (GFP) and rhodamine
phalloidin staining. The western blotting and morphological analyses indicate
TGF-beta-induced cell fusion and morphological differentiation in the SM10 cell
line. The SM10 cell line will provide a new and unique model for detailed
analysis of TGF-beta-induced molecular events associated with labyrinthine
trophoblast differentiation and function.

PMID: 16433625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;8(2):195-202. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

The Polycomb group protein Eed protects the inactive X-chromosome from
differentiation-induced reactivation.

Kalantry S(1), Mills KC, Yee D, Otte AP, Panning B, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and the Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) encodes an evolutionarily conserved set of
chromatin-modifying proteins that are thought to maintain cellular
transcriptional memory by stably silencing gene expression. In mouse embryos that
are mutated for the PcG protein Eed, X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is not
stably maintained in extra-embryonic tissues. Eed is a component of a
histone-methyltransferase complex that is thought to contribute to stable
silencing in undifferentiated cells due to its enrichment on the inactive
X-chromosome in cells of the early mouse embryo and in stem cells of the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineage. Here, we demonstrate that the inactive
X-chromosome in Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells and in cells of the
trophectoderm-derived extra-embryonic ectoderm in Eed(-/-) embryos remain
transcriptionally silent, despite lacking the PcG-mediated histone modifications 
that normally characterize the facultative heterochromatin of the inactive
X-chromosome. Whereas undifferentiated Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells maintained
XCI, reactivation of the inactive X-chromosome occurred when these cells were
differentiated. These results indicate that PcG complexes are not necessary to
maintain transcriptional silencing of the inactive X-chromosome in
undifferentiated stem cells. Instead, PcG proteins seem to propagate cellular
memory by preventing transcriptional activation of facultative heterochromatin
during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1400591
PMID: 16415857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):145-7.

Medicine: politic stem cells.

Weissman IL.

Comment on
    Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):212-5.
    Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):216-9.

PMID: 16407938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):419-28. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

The Cdx4 mutation affects axial development and reveals an essential role of Cdx 
genes in the ontogenesis of the placental labyrinth in mice.

van Nes J(1), de Graaff W, Lebrin F, Gerhard M, Beck F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht.

Caudal related homeobox (Cdx) genes have so far been shown to be important for
embryonic axial elongation and patterning in several vertebrate species. We have 
generated a targeted mutation of mouse Cdx4, the third member of this family of
transcription factor encoding genes and the last one to be inactivated
genetically. Cdx4-null embryos were born healthy and appeared morphologically
normal. A subtle contribution of Cdx4 to anteroposterior (AP) vertebral
patterning was revealed in Cdx1/Cdx4 and Cdx2/Cdx4 compound mutants. Neither
Cdx4-null nor Cdx1/Cdx4 double mutants are impaired in their axial elongation,
but a redundant contribution of Cdx4 in this function was unveiled when combined 
with a Cdx2 mutant allele. In addition, inactivation of Cdx4 combined with
heterozygous loss of Cdx2 results in embryonic death around E10.5 and reveals a
novel function of Cdx genes in placental ontogenesis. In a subset of Cdx2/Cdx4
compound mutants, the fully grown allantois failed to fuse with the chorion. The 
remaining majority of these mutants undergo successful chorio-allantois fusion
but fail to properly extend their allantoic vascular network into the chorionic
ectoderm and do not develop a functional placental labyrinth. We present evidence
that Cdx4 plays a crucial role in the ontogenesis of the allantoic component of
the placental labyrinth when one Cdx2 allele is inactivated. The axial patterning
role of Cdx transcription factors thus extends posteriorly to the
epiblast-derived extra-embryonic mesoderm and, consequent upon the evolution of
placental mammals, is centrally involved in placental morphogenesis. The relative
contribution of Cdx family members in the stepwise ontogenesis of a functional
placenta is discussed, with Cdx2 playing an obligatory part, assisted by Cdx4.
The possible participation of Cdx1 was not documented but cannot be ruled out
until allelic combinations further decreasing Cdx dose have been analyzed. Cdx
genes thus operate in a redundant way during placentogenesis, as they do during
embryonic axial elongation and patterning, and independently from the previously 
reported early Cdx2-specific role in the trophectoderm at implantation.

PMID: 16396910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Apr;6(4):426-32. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Spatio-temporal patterns of intestine-specific transcription factor expression
during postnatal mouse gut development.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, 750 Welch Road, Suite 116, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The small intestine matures from a primitive tube into morphologically and
functionally distinct regions during gut development. Maximal expression of the
genes encoding the digestive enzymes lactase-phlorizin hydrolase and
sucrase-isomaltase is spatially restricted to distinct segments along the
anterior-posterior axis of the small intestine and is temporally regulated during
postnatal maturation. Transcription factors capable of interacting with the
intestinal lactase and sucrase gene promoters are candidate regulators of
spatio-temporal patterning during gut development and maturation. We aimed to
quantitatively examine and compare the relative expression levels of a set of
intestine-specific transcription factors along the anterior-posterior gut axis
during postnatal maturation. Our analysis was focused on the transcription
factors capable of regulating the intestinal lactase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes. A real-time PCR protocol was used to quantitatively examine and compare
spatially and temporally the relative transcript abundance levels for
intestine-specific factors during postnatal intestinal maturation. Distinct
spatial expressions patterns were detected along the length of the small
intestine for PDX-1, Cdx-2, GATA-4, GATA-5, GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta and CDP
transcription factor genes. There is a general decline in transcript abundance
for the factor genes during postnatal maturation. Defining the spatio-temporal
expression patterns for intestine-specific transcription factor genes contributes
to investigation of the roles that factor gradients play in mediating gut
development and differentiation.

PMID: 16377257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Endocrinology. 2006 Apr;147(4):1950-8. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Redundant and synergistic effect of Cdx-2 and Brn-4 on regulating proglucagon
gene expression.

Wang P(1), Liu T, Li Z, Ma X, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Ontario, Canada.

Cdx-2 and Brn-4 are recognized as transcriptional activators for the proglucagon 
gene. These two homeodomain (HD) proteins are able to interact with the
correspondent motifs on the G1 enhancer element of proglucagon promoter,
separated by only 8 bp. We have examined Brn-4 expression in
proglucagon-producing cells, isolated hamster Brn-4 cDNA, and localized its
activation domain. Ectopic expression of either Cdx-2 or Brn-4 in the pancreatic 
B cell line In111 provoked it to express proglucagon mRNA, whereas ectopically
expressing both of them further stimulated proglucagon mRNA expression in this
cell line. Furthermore, Brn-4 was found to synergize with Cdx-2 in activating
proglucagon promoter, and the Brn-4 activation domain was not required for this
synergistic activation. When the binding site for either Cdx-2 or Brn-4 was
mutated, the synergistic activation by these two HD proteins was significantly
attenuated, but not abolished. We propose that both cooperative DNA binding and
mutual recruitment between Cdx-2 and Brn-4 are involved in this synergistic
activation and have detected physical interaction between Cdx-2 and Brn-4 by
glutathione-S-transferase-fusion protein pull-down assay. Our observations
suggest that Cdx-2 and Brn-4, two HD proteins that belong to two different
families, exert a synergistic and redundant effect on proglucagon gene
expression.

PMID: 16373422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2005;12(6):463-6.

Hepatolithiasis and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: carcinogenesis based on
molecular mechanisms.

Kuroki T(1), Tajima Y, Kanematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplantation and Digestive Surgery, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, 852-8501,
Japan.

Hepatolithiasis is more frequently seen in East Asian countries than in Western
countries, and it is well known to represent a high-risk state for intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is an aggressive tumor that
shows a dismal outcome even after resection. Cancer results from multistep
carcinogenesis; however, the precise molecular mechanisms involved in the genetic
alterations in cancer remain unknown. The accumulation of alterations in
cancer-related genes leads to disruptions in cell-cycle regulation and also to
continuous cell proliferation. The present review provides an overview of
cancer-related genes in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinogenesis arising in
hepatolithiasis. Further study of molecular mechanisms in hepatolithiasis-related
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, and the delineation of the influence of the
genes involved should lead to our understanding of cholangiocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 16365819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Calcif Tissue Int. 2005 Dec;77(6):339-47. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Effects of the Cdx-2 polymorphism of the vitamin D receptor gene and lifestyle
factors on bone mineral density in a representative sample of Japanese women: the
Japanese Population-based Osteoporosis (JPOS) Study.

Morita A(1), Iki M, Dohi Y, Ikeda Y, Kagamimori S, Kagawa Y, Yoneshima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Kinki University School of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Japan. akemi@med.kindai.ac.jp

Using a large-scale representative sample of the Japanese female population, we
examined the effects of a single nucleotide polymorphism within a binding site of
Cdx-2 in the promoter region of the vitamin D receptor gene on bone mineral
density (BMD), and the interactions between this polymorphism and lifestyle
factors on BMD. Fifty women were randomly selected from each of the 5-year
age-stratified populations (15-79 years) in each of three chosen municipalities
as a part of the Japanese Population-based Osteoporosis Study. BMD at the lumbar 
spine, hip, and distal forearm was measured using dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry at baseline and again in a follow-up study conducted 3 years
later. Information on lifestyle factors was collected in a questionnaire and
followed up in interviews. The G-to-A polymorphism within the Cdx-2 binding site 
was determined by a TaqMan allelic discrimination assay. At baseline, 1,340 women
were analyzed. The baseline BMD in the ultradistal forearm in premenopausal women
with the GG genotype was significantly lower than in those with other genotypes. 
There was no association between the Cdx-2 genotype and the change in BMD at any 
of the skeletal sites. We found significant associations between daily milk
consumption and baseline BMD at some skeletal sites but only in subjects with the
GG genotype. In conclusion, the Cdx-2 polymorphism alone did not have a
substantial effect on BMD in Japanese women. However, this polymorphism might
have some effect in women with low calcium intake.

PMID: 16362455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;11(24 Pt 1):8549-56.

The putative tumor suppressor Cdx2 is overexpressed by human colorectal
adenocarcinomas.

Witek ME(1), Nielsen K, Walters R, Hyslop T, Palazzo J, Schulz S, Waldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

PURPOSE: The current paradigm suggests that the homeodomain transcription factor 
Cdx2, which directs the development and maintenance of the intestinal epithelium,
is a tumor suppressor in the colon and rectum. Although a cardinal property of
tumor suppressors is their inactivation during carcinogenesis, the expression of 
Cdx2 in colorectal tumors has not been compared with that in normal mucosa. Here,
Cdx2 expression and function was quantified in tumors and matched normal mucosa
from patients with colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Cdx2 expression was quantified by reverse transcription-PCR,
immunoblot analysis, and immunohistochemistry. Transcriptional activity was
explored by quantifying expression of an endogenous downstream target of Cdx2,
guanylyl cyclase C (GCC), in tissues by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
and expression of exogenous Cdx2-specific luciferase promoter constructs in
epithelial cells isolated from tumors and normal mucosa.
RESULTS: Most (>80%) colorectal tumors overexpressed Cdx2 mRNA and protein
compared with normal mucosa, with median fold increases of 3.6 and 1.4,
respectively (P<0.002). Concomitantly, immunohistochemistry revealed elevated
levels of Cdx2 in nuclei of tumor cells compared with normal epithelial cells.
Further, tumors exhibited increased expression of GCC compared with normal
mucosa. Moreover, cells isolated from tumors overexpressed a Cdx2-specific
luciferase promoter construct compared with normal mucosal cells.
CONCLUSION: These observations show, for the first time, the structural and
functional overexpression of Cdx2 by human colorectal tumors compared with
matched normal mucosa. They suggest that loss of Cdx2 expression or
transcriptional activity is an infrequent event during tumorigenesis, which does 
not contribute to molecular mechanisms underlying initiation and progression of
most colorectal tumors.

PMID: 16361536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Gastrointest Surg. 2005 Dec;9(9):1253-60; discussion 1260-1.

Barrett's epithelium after antireflux surgery.

Zaninotto G(1), Cassaro M, Pennelli G, Battaglia G, Farinati F, Ceolin M,
Costantini M, Ruol A, Guirroli E, Rizzetto C, Portale G, Ancona E, Rugge M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, University of Padova School of Medicine, Italy.

Comment in
    Adv Anat Pathol. 2006 May;13(3):127-30.

Barrett's epithelium (BE), defined as endoscopically visible, histologically
proved intestinal-type epithelium in the esophagus, is considered the ultimate
consequence of long-standing gastro(duodeno)esophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Recent reports suggest that effective antireflux therapy may promote the
regression of this metaplastic process. This study aimed to establish whether
antireflux surgery (laparoscopic fundoplication) can induce any endoscopic and/or
histologic changes in BE. Thirty-five consecutive cases of BE (11 short-segment
[SBE] and 24 long-segment [LBE]) were considered. All patients underwent
extensive biopsy sampling before and after surgery (mean follow-up, 28 months;
range, 12-99 mo). In all cases, (a) intestinal metaplasia (IM) extension (H&E),
(b) IM phenotype (high-iron diamine [HID]), and (c) Cdx2 immunohistochemical
expression were histologically scored in the biopsy material obtained before and 
after fundoplication. After surgery, a significant decrease in IM extension and a
shift from incomplete- to complete-type IM were documented in SBE. No significant
changes occurred in the LBE group in terms of IM extension or histochemical
phenotype. A drop in the immunohistochemical expression of Cdx2 protein was also 
only documented in the SBE group. Antireflux surgery significantly modifies the
histologic phenotype of SBE, but not of LBE.

PMID: 16332481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 30;25(14):2048-59.

CDX2 does not suppress tumorigenicity in the human gastric cancer cell line
MKN45.

Dang LH(1), Chen F, Knock SA, Huang EH, Feng J, Appelman HD, Dang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0682, USA.

CDX2 is a Drosophila caudal-related homeobox transcription factor that is
expressed specifically in the intestine. In mice, ectopic expression of CDX2 in
the gastric mucosa gives rise to intestinal metaplasia and in one model, gastric 
carcinoma. In humans, increased CDX2 expression is associated with gastric
intestinal metaplasia and tubular adenocarcinomas. These patterns of expression
have shown that CDX2 is important for the initiation of intestinal metaplasia in 
the gastric mucosa, but the role of CDX2 in established gastric cancer remains
unclear. We sought to determine whether CDX2 contributes to tumorigenic potential
in established gastric cancer. The CDX2 gene in MKN45 gastric carcinoma cells was
disrupted using targeted homologous recombination. The resulting CDX2-/- cells
are essentially identical to their parental cells, with the exception of CDX2
ablation. We found no significant differences in the proliferation of CDX2-/-
cells compared to CDX2+/+ cells, in vitro or in vivo. Molecular analyses show
that loss of CDX2 predominantly altered the expression of genes involved in
intestinal glandular differentiation and adhesion. However, there were no
microscopic differences in tumor differentiation. We conclude that disruption of 
CDX2 in MKN45 cells does not significantly affect their tumorigenic potential.

PMID: 16331267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):917-29.

Interaction between Oct3/4 and Cdx2 determines trophectoderm differentiation.

Niwa H(1), Toyooka Y, Shimosato D, Strumpf D, Takahashi K, Yagi R, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.
niwa@cdb.riken.jp

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):757-60.

Trophectoderm (TE), the first differentiated cell lineage of mammalian
embryogenesis, forms the placenta, a structure unique to mammalian development.
The differentiation of TE is a hallmark event in early mammalian development, but
molecular mechanisms underlying this first differentiation event remain obscure. 
Embryonic stem (ES) cells can be induced to differentiate into the TE lineage by 
forced repression of the POU-family transcription factor, Oct3/4. We show here
that this event can be mimicked by overexpression of Caudal-related homeobox 2
(Cdx2), which is sufficient to generate proper trophoblast stem (TS) cells. Cdx2 
is dispensable for trophectoderm differentiation induced by Oct3/4 repression but
essential for TS cell self-renewal. In preimplantation embryos, Cdx2 is initially
coexpressed with Oct3/4 and they form a complex for the reciprocal repression of 
their target genes in ES cells. This suggests that reciprocal inhibition between 
lineage-specific transcription factors might be involved in the first
differentiation event of mammalian development.

PMID: 16325584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):757-60.

The battlefield of pluripotency.

Smith A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Development in Stem Cell Biology, Institute for Stem Cell Research,
School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, King's Buildings, West
Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JQ, United Kingdom. austin.smith@ed.ac.uk

Comment on
    Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):917-29.

How embryonic stem cells maintain the potential to differentiate into multiple
cell lineages is still unclear. In this issue of Cell, Niwa et al. (2005) show
that a duel between the transcription factors Oct3/4 and Cdx2 can restrict
embryonic stem cells to either embryonic or placental fate. The vulnerability of 
lineage potential to transcriptional perturbation may reflect an essential
feature of pluripotency.

PMID: 16325569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. N Engl J Med. 2005 Dec 1;353(22):2321-3.

Politically correct human embryonic stem cells?

Solter D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2006 Mar 16;354(11):1208-9; author reply 1208-9.

PMID: 16319380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 6;25(15):2264-72.

CDX2 has tumorigenic potential in the human colon cancer cell lines LOVO and
SW48.

Dang LH(1), Chen F, Ying C, Chun SY, Knock SA, Appelman HD, Dang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0682, USA.

CDX2 is a Drosophila caudal-related homeobox transcription factor that is
important for the establishment and maintenance of intestinal epithelial cells.
CDX2 is a marker of colon cancer, with strong staining in up to 90% of colonic
adenocarcinomas. CDX2 heterozygous-null mice develop colonic neoplasms, which
have suggested that CDX2 is a tumor suppressor. However, CDX2 has not been
reported to affect xenograft growth. Furthermore, CDX2 is rarely mutated in colon
cancer, which has led to suggestions that it may play only a minor role as a
tumor suppressor in colon cancer. To understand the functional contributions of
CDX2 to colon cancer, we disrupted CDX2 in LOVO and SW48 human colon cancer cell 
lines by targeted homologous recombination. Consistent with the literature,
disruption of CDX2 enhanced anchorage-dependent cell proliferation. However,
homozygous loss of CDX2 led to significant inhibition of anchorage-independent
growth in LOVO cells, and cell lethality in SW48 cells. Further analyses revealed
that disruption of CDX2 led to anchorage-independent G1 to S growth arrest and
anoikis. In vivo xenograft studies confirmed that disruption of CDX2 inhibited
LOVO tumor growth. These data demonstrate that CDX2 mediates
anchorage-independent growth and survival. Thus, CDX2 has tumorigenic potential
in the human colon cancer cell lines LOVO and SW48.

PMID: 16314840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 1;289(1):55-63. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Cdx4 is a direct target of the canonical Wnt pathway.

Pilon N(1), Oh K, Sylvestre JR, Bouchard N, Savory J, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

There is considerable evidence that the Cdx gene products impact on vertebral
patterning by direct regulation of Hox gene expression. Data from a number of
vertebrate model systems also suggest that Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4 are targets of
caudalizing signals such as RA, Wnt and FGF. These observations have lead to the 
hypothesis that Cdx members serve to relay information from signaling pathways
involved in posterior patterning to the Hox genes. Regulation of Cdx1 expression 
by RA and Wnt in the mouse has been well characterized; however, the means by
which Cdx2 and Cdx4 are regulated is less well understood. In the present study, 
we present data suggesting that Cdx4 is a direct target of the canonical Wnt
pathway. We found that Cdx4 responds to exogenous Wnt3a in mouse embryos ex vivo,
and conversely, that its expression is down-regulated in Wnt3a(vt/vt) embryos and
in embryos cultured in the presence of Wnt inhibitors. We also found that the
Cdx4 promoter responds to Wnt signaling in P19 embryocarcinoma cells and have
identified several putative LEF/TCF response elements mediating this effect.
Consistent with these data, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays from either
embryocarcinoma cells or from the tail bud of embryos revealed that LEF1 and
beta-catenin co-localize with the Cdx4 promoter. Taken together, these results
suggest that Cdx4, like Cdx1, is a direct Wnt target.

PMID: 16309666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Pflugers Arch. 2006 Mar;451(6):749-59. Epub 2005 Nov 24.

Intestinal apoptotic changes linked to metabolic status in fasted and refed rats.

Habold C(1), Foltzer-Jourdainne C, Le Maho Y, Lignot JH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Ecologie et Physiologie Energétiques, CNRS, 23 Rue Becquerel, 67087
Strasbourg Cedex 2, France. caroline.habold@c-strasbourg.fr

Intestinal apoptosis and expression of apoptosis inducers--the cytokines
TNFalpha, TGFbeta1--and the intestinal transcription factor Cdx2, were studied
according to two different metabolic and hormonal phases which characterize
long-term fasting: the long period of protein sparing during which energy
expenditure is derived from lipid oxidation (phase II), and the later phase
characterized by a rise in body protein utilization and plasma corticosterone
(phase III). Apoptosis was further studied in 2, 6, and 24 h refed rats.
Morphological apoptotic events were observed by environmental and conventional
scanning electron microscopy and a TUNEL test was used to characterize the final 
stages of apoptotic death. The gene and protein expressions of TNFalpha,
TGFbeta1, and Cdx2 were measured. Apoptotic events and TNFalpha, TGFbeta1, and
Cdx2 gene and protein expressions did not vary significantly during phase II as
compared to the normally fed animals. However, a phase III fasting induced a
delay in intestinal epithelial apoptosis, along with a 92, 58, and 25% decrease
in TNFalpha, TGFbeta1, and Cdx2 mRNAs, respectively. The amounts of TNFalpha,
TGFbeta1, and Cdx2 proteins decreased by 70, 36, and 25%, respectively. Apoptosis
was restored rapidly after a 2 h refeeding following the phase III, accompanied
by a significant increase in TNFalpha, TGFbeta1, and Cdx2 mRNA and the protein
levels, compared to the phase III fasting values. The concomitant decreases in
cytokines and Cdx2 and in apoptotic cells during phase III suggest the
preservation of enterocytes during this critical fasting period in order to
optimize nutrient absorption as soon as food is available and thus, to rapidly
restore body mass.

PMCID: PMC2098874
PMID: 16307225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2006 Jan;25(1):83-9.

Ovarian atypical proliferative (borderline) mucinous tumors: gastrointestinal and
seromucinous (endocervical-like) types are immunophenotypically distinctive.

Vang R(1), Gown AM, Barry TS, Wheeler DT, Ronnett BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Ovarian atypical proliferative (borderline) mucinous tumors of gastrointestinal
and seromucinous types are considered subtypes within the mucinous tumor category
despite the presence of distinctive clinicopathologic features that seromucinous 
tumors share with pure serous tumors. Immunophenotypic differences have not been 
extensively investigated. Immunohistochemical studies were performed to compare
the expression patterns of cytokeratins 7 and 20 (CK7, CK 20), estrogen and
progesterone receptors (ER, PR), CA-125, mesothelin, and WT-1 in 28 tumors of
gastrointestinal type and 12 tumors of seromucinous type. Both gastrointestinal
and seromucinous type tumors had a high frequency of CK7 expression (93% and
100%, respectively). The gastrointestinal type tumors were characterized by
frequent expression of CK20 (86%) and CDX2 (39%), infrequent expression of CA-125
(11%) and mesothelin (7%), and lack of expression of ER, PR, and WT-1. In
contrast, the seromucinous type tumors were characterized by frequent expression 
of ER (100%), PR (67%), CA-125 (92%), and mesothelin (83%), infrequent expression
of WT-1 (8%), and lack of expression of CK20 and CDX2. The gastrointestinal and
seromucinous types of atypical proliferative mucinous tumors are
immunophenotypically distinctive tumors. The former are characterized by
expression of markers of gastrointestinal-type differentiation (CK20 and CDX2),
whereas the latter are characterized by expression of "müllerian-type" markers
(ER, PR, CA-125, and mesothelin). Expression of the latter markers in the
seromucinous tumors, which also are expressed in pure serous tumors, and lack of 
expression of gastrointestinal-type markers, combined with the clinicopathologic 
features these tumors share with pure serous tumors, support the concept that
this subtype is more closely related to serous than gastrointestinal type
mucinous tumors and justify the designation "seromucinous."

PMID: 16306790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Surgery. 2005 Nov;138(5):924-31.

Increased CDX2 and decreased PITX1 homeobox gene expression in Barrett's
esophagus and Barrett's-associated adenocarcinoma.

Lord RV(1), Brabender J, Wickramasinghe K, DeMeester SR, Holscher A, Schneider
PM, Danenberg PV, DeMeester TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
rvlord@stvincents.com.au

BACKGROUND: The CDX2 (caudal-related homeobox gene 2) and PITX1 (pituitary
homeobox 1) genes have essential roles in human development. Forced expression of
Cdx2 alone in the murine stomach results in gastric intestinal metaplasia (IM).
This study was undertaken to investigate the expression pattern of these critical
morphogenesis genes in the Barrett's multistage carcinogenesis model.
METHODS: CDX2 and PITX1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression levels, relative to the
control gene beta-actin, were measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction in specimens of Barrett's IM (n = 21), dysplasia (n = 18),
adenocarcinoma (n = 20), and matching normal squamous esophagus tissues (n = 39) 
collected from 19 patients with Barrett's esophagus and 20 patients with
esophageal adenocarcinoma. CDX2 protein expression was assessed by
immunohistochemistry in specimens of normal squamous esophagus (n = 13), IM (n = 
10), dysplasia (n = 8,) and adenocarcinoma (n = 5).
RESULTS: The median relative CDX2 mRNA expression was approximately 200 times
higher in Barrett's esophagus tissues (0.83) than in matching normal squamous
esophagus (0.004) in the patients with Barrett's esophagus (P < .001). The mRNA
expression in cancer tissues (0.49) was also higher than in matching normal
squamous esophagus specimens (0.009, P < .001). There was no significant
difference between the mRNA expression levels in Barrett's esophagus and
adenocarcinoma. There was no CDX2 protein expression in normal squamous
esophagus, but moderate to strong protein expression was seen in all Barrett's
tissues and in a majority of the dysplasia and adenocarcinoma cells. Relative
median PITX1 mRNA expression was decreased in Barrett's esophagus (8.02 for all
specimens), compared with normal esophagus specimens (47.46 for all specimens, P 
< .001), and was further reduced in cancer specimens (2.21), compared with either
Barrett's esophagus or normal esophagus (both P < .001). Wilcoxon testwas used
for all P values shown.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 mRNA and CDX2 protein expression are upregulated in Barrett's
IM tissues, compared with normal squamous esophagus, and remain elevated in
dysplasia and adenocarcinoma tissues. In contrast, PITX1 mRNA expression is
decreased in Barrett's esophagus, compared with matching normal squamous
esophagus specimens, and is further decreased in Barrett's-associated cancer.
These descriptive findings suggest a possible role for these genes in the
Barrett's metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence.

PMID: 16291394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Apr;290(4):G782-92. Epub 2005 Nov
10.

TRPC1 functions as a store-operated Ca2+ channel in intestinal epithelial cells
and regulates early mucosal restitution after wounding.

Rao JN(1), Platoshyn O, Golovina VA, Liu L, Zou T, Marasa BS, Turner DJ, Yuan JX,
Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
21201, USA.

An increase in cytosolic free Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](cyt)) results from
Ca(2+) release from intracellular stores and extracellular Ca(2+) influx through 
Ca(2+)-permeable ion channels and is crucial for initiating intestinal epithelial
restitution to reseal superficial wounds after mucosal injury. Capacitative
Ca(2+) entry (CCE) induced by Ca(2+) store depletion represents a major Ca(2+)
influx mechanism, but the exact molecular components constituting this process
remain elusive. This study determined whether canonical transient receptor
potential (TRPC)1 served as a candidate protein for Ca(2+)-permeable channels
mediating CCE in intestinal epithelial cells and played an important role in
early epithelial restitution. Normal intestinal epithelial cells (the IEC-6 cell 
line) expressed TRPC1 and TPRC5 and displayed typical records of whole cell
store-operated Ca(2+) currents and CCE generated by Ca(2+) influx after depletion
of intracellular stores. Induced TRPC1 expression by stable transfection with the
TRPC1 gene increased CCE and enhanced cell migration during restitution.
Differentiated IEC-Cdx2L1 cells induced by forced expression of the Cdx2 gene
highly expressed endogenous TRPC1 and TRPC5 and exhibited increased CCE and cell 
migration. Inhibition of TRPC1 expression by small interfering RNA specially
targeting TRPC1 not only reduced CCE but also inhibited cell migration after
wounding. These findings strongly suggest that TRPC1 functions as store-operated 
Ca(2+) channels and plays a critical role in intestinal epithelial restitution by
regulating CCE and intracellular [Ca(2+)](cyt).

PMID: 16282360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(8):901-8.

cdx4/lacZ and cdx2/lacZ protein gradients formed by decay during gastrulation in 
the mouse.

Gaunt SJ(1), Drage D, Trubshaw RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK.
stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

Expression of the mouse caudal genes cdx4 and cdx2 is examined by use of lacZ
reporter constructs expressed in transgenic mouse embryos. During early
gastrulation, up to at least 8.5 days of development, reporter mRNA distributions
are apparently similar to those of endogenous cdx mRNAs. By 8.25 to 8.8 days,
cdx/lacZ protein activities have become distributed as posterior-to-anterior
gradients along the neural and mesoderm tissues. The gradients form by decay of
activity as cells become distanced from the regressing tailbud. In situ
hybridization studies indicate that the decay is primarily in cdx/lacZ protein
activities rather than mRNAs. As gastrulation proceeds, the locations of the
gradients regress progressively posteriorly along the growing axis. Our results
indicate how cdx4 and cdx2 protein gradients might be generated by decay during
normal development. The smoothness of the gradients that we detect shows that
there cannot be extensive mixing of cells once they leave the tailbud to
contribute to the growing axis. An enhancer element located in the first intron
of the cdx4 gene is essential for correct transgene expression.

PMID: 16281167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2005 Dec;13(4):342-6.

Potential diagnostic utility of CDX-2 immunophenotyping in extramammary Paget's
disease.

Zeng HA(1), Cartun R, Ricci A Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hartford Hospital, CT 06102, 
USA.

Extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD) is a rare condition whose importance is
amplified by its association with either cutaneous or internal malignancy.
Recently it has been shown that EMPD is not a single disease but can be divided
into cutaneous and endodermal subtypes. The authors studied 12 new cases of
immunohistochemically well-characterized EMPD, including HER-2/neu and CDX-2
immunophenotyping. The latter represents a novel application of this nuclear
transcription factor, considered to be a relatively specific IHC marker for
gastrointestinal-type epithelium. Cutaneous EMPD, accounting for 10 of the 12
(83%) cases, was CDX2-/HER2+; endodermal EMPD, accounting for 2 of the 12 (17%)
cases, was CDX2+/HER2-. Four of the 12 cases (33%) were associated with a
malignancy (two cutaneous adenocarcinomas, two colorectal carcinomas). The two
cases of cutaneous adenocarcinoma occurred in the cutaneous group (2/10 [20%]),
while the two cases of rectal carcinoma (one invasive, one in situ) occurred in
the endodermal group (2/2 [100%]). Since EMPD subtypes have specific implications
with regard to cancer risk, immunophenotyping should be performed in all cases.
CDX-2 immunoreactivity may be useful in the subtyping of EMPD.

PMID: 16280663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Pathol. 2005 Dec;207(4):396-401.

OCT-1 is over-expressed in intestinal metaplasia and intestinal gastric
carcinomas and binds to, but does not transactivate, CDX2 in gastric cells.

Almeida R(1), Almeida J, Shoshkes M, Mendes N, Mesquita P, Silva E, Van Seuningen
I, Reis CA, Santos-Silva F, David L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), R Dr Roberto Frias s/n, 4200 Porto, Portugal. ralmeida@ipatimup.pt

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is a preneoplastic lesion of the stomach in which
there is transdifferentiation of the gastric mucosa to an intestinal phenotype.
The caudal-related homeobox gene CDX2 encodes an intestine-specific transcription
factor crucial for the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of
intestinal cells. In addition, CDX2 is involved in the induction of IM in the
stomach. The aim of this study was to access the putative involvement of OCT-1 in
the induction of CDX2 expression de novo in gastric mucosa leading to the onset
of IM. OCT-1 protein expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 31
biopsies with chronic gastritis, 15 biopsies with foci of IM and adjacent gastric
mucosa and 42 gastric carcinomas. Furthermore, we evaluated OCT-1 binding by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and activation of the CDX2 promoter by
co-transfecting a CDX2 promoter/reporter construct with an OCT-1 expression
vector in two gastric carcinoma cell lines, GP220 and MKN45. Our results show
that OCT-1 is expressed in chronic gastritis, particularly when it is adjacent to
IM and is expressed in 87% of IM foci. Furthermore, 74% of the gastric carcinomas
were positive for OCT-1 and a strong association was observed between OCT-1
expression and intestinal-type carcinoma. We identified that OCT-1 binds to the
CDX2 promoter, although we could not see a transactivation effect in gastric
carcinoma cell lines. In conclusion, we observed increased OCT-1 expression in IM
and in intestinal gastric carcinomas and identified the capacity of OCT-1 to bind
to the CDX2 promoter, although we could not demonstrate a direct effect of OCT-1 
in the transactivation of CDX2.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 16278805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem J. 2006 Mar 15;394(Pt 3):617-26.

Human acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase 2 gene expression in intestinal Caco-2
cells and in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Song BL(1), Wang CH, Yao XM, Yang L, Zhang WJ, Wang ZZ, Zhao XN, Yang JB, Qi W,
Yang XY, Inoue K, Lin ZX, Zhang HZ, Kodama T, Chang CC, Liu YK, Chang TY, Li BL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Humans express two ACAT (acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase) genes, ACAT1 and
ACAT2. ACAT1 is ubiquitously expressed, whereas ACAT2 is primarily expressed in
intestinal mucosa and plays an important role in intestinal cholesterol
absorption. To investigate the molecular mechanism(s) responsible for the
tissue-specific expression of ACAT2, we identified five cis-elements within the
human ACAT2 promoter, four for the intestinal-specific transcription factor CDX2 
(caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2), and one for the transcription
factor HNF1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha). Results of luciferase
reporter and electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that CDX2 and HNF1alpha
exert a synergistic effect, enhancing the ACAT2 promoter activity through binding
to these cis-elements. In undifferentiated Caco-2 cells, the ACAT2 expression is 
increased when exogenous CDX2 and/or HNF1alpha are expressed by co-transfection. 
In differentiated Caco-2 cells, the ACAT2 expression significantly decreases when
the endogenous CDX2 or HNF1alpha expression is suppressed by using RNAi (RNA
interference) technology. The expression levels of CDX2, HNF1alpha, and ACAT2 are
all greatly increased when the Caco-2 cells differentiate to become
intestinal-like cells. These results provide a molecular mechanism for the
tissue-specific expression of ACAT2 in intestine. In normal adult human liver,
CDX2 expression is not detectable and the ACAT2 expression is very low. In the
hepatoma cell line HepG2 the CDX2 expression is elevated, accounting for its
elevated ACAT2 expression. A high percentage (seven of fourteen) of liver samples
from patients affected with hepatocellular carcinoma exhibited elevated ACAT2
expression. Thus, the elevated ACAT2 expression may serve as a new biomarker for 
certain form(s) of hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC1383711
PMID: 16274362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Oncol Rep. 2005 Dec;14(6):1559-64.

Decrease in size of azoxymethane induced colon carcinoma in F344 rats by 180-day 
fermented miso.

Ohuchi Y(1), Myojin Y, Shimamoto F, Kashimoto N, Kamiya K, Watanabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, Hiroshima Prefectural Women's University, 1-1-71
Ujina-higashi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8558, Japan.

The present study was designed to investigate the effects of fermented miso
(fermented soybean paste) on the induction of colon tumors by azoxymethane (AOM) 
in male F344 rats. A total of 91 rats, 6 weeks of age, were divided into 5 groups
and given weekly subcutaneous injections of AOM (15 mg/kg body wt) for 3 weeks.
The animals were placed on diets one week before the first AOM dose: commercial
normal control MF diet or a diet containing 10% 2-year, 180-day fermented, or
3-4-day fermented miso. There were no differences in body and organ weights, and 
no aberrant crypt foci (ACF) among carcinogen-treated groups at week 25. The
rates of tumor incidence were 45%, 85%, 75% and 60% with the 2-year, 180-day, and
3-4-day fermented miso and MF, respectively, and those for colon tumors were 34%,
55%, 60% and 55%, respectively. The size of well-differentiated adenocarcinomas
and total (well differentiated and signet ring cell) adenocarcinomas in the
180-day fermented miso group was significantly smaller than that in the 2-year
fermented miso and MF+AOM groups. Nuclear staining of beta-catenin in colon
tumors was increased for the 3-4-day fermented miso compared to the 180-day
fermented miso. Cdx2 staining tendency was decreased in colon tumors and
adenocarcinomas compared to normal mucosa and ACF, which stained in 100% of
cases. In addition, the PCNA index was significantly reduced in the 180-day group
compared with those groups receiving the 3-4-day fermented miso and MF diet. The 
germinal region was also decreased. The present results indicate that dietary
supplementation with 180-day fermented dietary miso could act as a
chemopreventive agent for colon carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16273256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Pathol Res Pract. 2005;201(8-9):573-7.

Expression of CDX2 and MUC2 in Barrett's mucosa.

Steininger H(1), Pfofe DA, Müller H, Haag-Sunjic G, Fratianu V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Municipal Hospital of Friedrichshafen, Germany.
pathologie-fn@t-online.de

Barrett's mucosa is a risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma and should be
detected at an early stage. It is defined by the presence of columnar epithelium 
with goblet cells in the lower esophagus, but histologic diagnosis can be
uncertain in the absence of distinct goblet cells. We investigated 55 biopsies
from 48 patients with endoscopically plain Barrett's esophagus and performed
immunohistochemistry for CDX2 and MUC2. In addition, alcian blue (pH 2,5)/PAS
staining was done. In histologically unequivocal Barrett's mucosa, nuclear
expression of CDX2 in goblet cells and many columnar cells, as well as
cytoplasmic positivity for MUC2 in goblet cells, could be observed. Alcian blue
(pH 2,5)/PAS stained acidic mucins in goblet cells and in some non-goblet
columnar cells. In six cases, no definite Barrett's mucosa was present, and no
expression of MUC2 could be observed. In these biopsies, there was granular
cytoplasmic and/or focal nuclear staining for CDX2 in non-goblet columnar
epithelial cells, indicating their intestinal differentiation. We suggest that
this peculiar mucosa is the precursor of unequivocal Barrett's mucosa and would
designate it early Barrett's mucosa. Alcian blue for acidic mucins is
inconsistent in this epithelium and does not reliably indicate early intestinal
differentiation.

PMID: 16259110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 6;281(1):638-47. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

The related retinoblastoma (pRb) and p130 proteins cooperate to regulate
homeostasis in the intestinal epithelium.

Haigis K(1), Sage J, Glickman J, Shafer S, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

pRb, p107, and p130 are related proteins that play a central role in the
regulation of cell cycle progression and terminal differentiation in mammalian
cells. Nevertheless, it is still largely unclear how these proteins achieve this 
regulation in vivo. The intestinal epithelium is an ideal in vivo system in which
to study the molecular pathways that regulate proliferation and differentiation
because it exists in a constant state of development throughout an animal's
lifetime. We studied the phenotypic effects on the intestinal epithelium of
mutating Rb and p107 or p130. Although mutating these genes singly had little or 
no effect, loss of pRb and p107 or p130 together produced chronic hyperplasia and
dysplasia of the small intestinal and colonic epithelium. In Rb/p130 double
mutants this hyperplasia was associated with defects in terminal differentiation 
of specific cell types and was dependent on the increased proliferation seen in
the epithelium of mutant animals. At the molecular level, dysregulation of the Rb
pathway led to an increase in the expression of Math1, Cdx1, Cdx2, transcription 
factors that regulate proliferation and differentiation in the intestinal
epithelium. The absence of Cdx1 function in Rb/p130 double mutant mice partially 
reverted the histologic phenotype by suppressing ectopic mitosis in the
epithelium. These studies implicate the Rb pathway as a regulator of epithelial
homeostasis in the intestine.

PMID: 16258171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Feb;290(2):G310-8. Epub 2005 Oct
20.

The CDX2 transcription factor regulates furin expression during intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation.

Gendron FP(1), Mongrain S, Laprise P, McMahon S, Dubois CM, Blais M, Asselin C,
Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada J1H5N4.

CDX2, a member of the caudal family of transcription factors, is involved in
enterocyte lineage specification. CDX2 activates many intestine-specific genes,
such as sucrase-isomaltase and lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH), and adhesion
proteins, namely, LI-cadherin and claudin-2. In this study, we show that the
proprotein convertase furin, involved in proteolytic maturation of proprotein
substrates including LPH and cell surface proteins, is a CDX2 target. Indeed,
expression of the rat furin homolog was induced 1.5-fold, as determined by
microarray experiments that compared control with CDX2-expressing intestinal
epithelial cells (IEC-6). As determined by transient transfection assays in
Caco-2/15 cells, the furin P1 promoter 1.3-kb fragment between SacI and NheI was 
essential for CDX2 transcriptional activation. Electrophoretic mobility
shift/supershift assays followed by site-specific mutagenesis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation identified the CDX DNA-binding site (CBS)2 sequence from nt
-1827 to -1821 as the major CBS involved in furin P1 promoter activation.
Increased furin mRNA and protein expression correlated with both CDX2 expression 
and intestinal epithelial cell differentiation. In addition, furin mRNAs were
detected predominantly in differentiated epithelial cells of the villus, as
determined by in situ hybridization. Treatment of Caco-2/15 cells with a furin
inhibitor led to inhibition of LPH activity. Morphological differentiation of
enterocyte-like features in Caco-2/15 such as epithelial cell polarity and
brush-border formation were strongly attenuated by furin inhibition. These
results suggest that CDX2 regulates furin expression in intestinal epithelial
cells. Furin may be important in modulating the maturation and/or activation of
key factors involved in enterocyte differentiation.

PMID: 16239403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Surg Oncol. 2005 Nov 1;92(2):89-98; discussion 99.

Molecular alterations during development of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Bax DA(1), Siersema PD, Van Vliet AH, Kuipers EJ, Kusters JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC - University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma has risen significantly over the last 
decades. During esophageal carcinogenesis many molecular alterations occur that
disrupt essential cellular processes, directing the cell to a rapidly
proliferating, immortal state. The chronic inflammation that is present in
Barrett's esophagus creates an environment in which such molecular alterations
are both induced and tolerated. Here, the novel insights in the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the development of esophageal adenocarcinoma are
reviewed, focusing on the role of inflammation, angiogenesis, apoptosis
inhibition, loss of cell cycle control, and loss of cell-cell adhesion. These
novel developments will open new perspectives for diagnosis, treatment, and
prevention of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16231373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):212-5. Epub 2005 Oct 16.

Generation of nuclear transfer-derived pluripotent ES cells from cloned
Cdx2-deficient blastocysts.

Meissner A(1), Jaenisch R.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):145-7.

The derivation of embryonic stem (ES) cells by nuclear transfer holds great
promise for research and therapy but involves the destruction of cloned human
blastocysts. Proof of principle experiments have shown that 'customized' ES cells
derived by nuclear transfer (NT-ESCs) can be used to correct immunodeficiency in 
mice. Importantly, the feasibility of the approach has been demonstrated recently
in humans, bringing the clinical application of NT-ESCs within reach. Altered
nuclear transfer (ANT) has been proposed as a variation of nuclear transfer
because it would create abnormal nuclear transfer blastocysts that are inherently
unable to implant into the uterus but would be capable of generating customized
ES cells. To assess the experimental validity of this concept we have used
nuclear transfer to derive mouse blastocysts from donor fibroblasts that carried 
a short hairpin RNA construct targeting Cdx2. Cloned blastocysts were
morphologically abnormal, lacked functional trophoblast and failed to implant
into the uterus. However, they efficiently generated pluripotent embryonic stem
cells when explanted into culture.

PMID: 16227971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Stem Cells. 2006 Jan;24(1):139-44. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

The caudal-related protein cdx2 promotes trophoblast differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Tolkunova E(1), Cavaleri F, Eckardt S, Reinbold R, Christenson LK, Schöler HR,
Tomilin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Besides holding great promise in clinics, embryonic stem (ES) cells represent a
valuable tool for studying regulation of early developmental processes, such as
cell differentiation in preimplantation embryos. The caudal-related homeobox
protein Cdx2 is a transcriptional regulator essential for trophoblast lineage,
functioning as early as implantation. Using an inducible system, we show that
gain of Cdx2 function in ES cells triggers trophoblast-like morphological
differentiation, accompanied by ploidy increase, onset of expression of
trophoblast-specific markers, and loss of pluripotency-associated gene
expression. These data provide an insight into the genetic network that controls 
lineage specification and functioning in early mammalian development.

PMID: 16210407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Sep;124(3):361-70.

CDX2 and MUC2 protein expression in extrahepatic bile duct carcinoma.

Hong SM(1), Cho H, Moskaluk CA, Frierson HF Jr, Yu E, Ro JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, USA.

Although CDX2-mediated intestinal metaplasia and its association with gastric and
esophageal carcinoma have been well described, its function in extrahepatic bile 
duct (EBD) carcinoma remains unclear. CDX2 and MUC2 expression were examined in
193 EBD carcinomas, and observed in 37.3% and 42.0%, respectively. Both CDX2 and 
MUC2 were observed in 27.4%. CDX2 (P<.001) and MUC2 (P<.001) were correlated with
histologic subtypes and present, respectively, in all intestinal-type
adenocarcinomas and mucinous carcinomas, 12 (71%) and 13 (76%) of 17 papillary
carcinomas, 2 (40%) and 2 (40%) of 5 adenosquamous carcinomas, and 28.4% and
33.5% of adenocarcinomas, not otherwise specified. CDX2 was observed more
frequently in tumors with papillary growth (P=.03) and no vascular invasion
(P=.04), whereas MUC2 was more common in cases with low stage (P=.01) and no
vascular invasion (P<.001). Patients with CDX2+/MUC2+ tumors had significantly
better overall survival in univariate but not multivariate analysis than patients
with other tumors (P<.05). Expression of CDX2 and MUC2 supports that intestinal
differentiation is present in specific subtypes of EBD carcinomas, and their
expression status correlates with patients' overall survival.

PMID: 16191504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Pathol Int. 2005 Oct;55(10):611-8.

Colonic and small-intestinal phenotypes in gastric cancers: relationships with
clinicopathological findings.

Mizoshita T(1), Tsukamoto T, Tanaka H, Takenaka Y, Kato S, Cao X, Joh T,
Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya City University Medical School, Japan.

The clinicopathological significance of colonic and small-intestinal phenotypes
has hitherto remained unclear in gastric cancers. The purpose of the present
study was therefore to examine 86 gastric carcinomas histologically and
phenotypically using several phenotypic markers, including colon-specific
carbonic anhydrase 1 (CA1) and sucrase as small-intestine specific marker. Of 86 
gastric cancers, sucrase and CA1 expression was observed in 12 (14.0%) and only
in two cases (2.3%), respectively, associated with other intestinal markers such 
as villin and mucin core protein (MUC)2. In the sucrase cases, expression
appeared independent of the stage. However, CA1 expression was observed only in
two advanced cases. No association was observed between colonic and
small-intestinal phenotypes, and lymph node metastasis and postoperative survival
in the advanced gastric cancer cases with intestinal phenotypic expression. Cdx2 
appeared to be linked to upregulation of both CA1 and sucrase. In conclusion, the
data suggest that colonic phenotype occurs rarely in gastric carcinogenesis.
Colonic and small-intestinal phenotypes appear with expression of several
intestinal phenotypic markers under the control of Cdx2 and presumably other
related transcription factors.

PMID: 16185290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2005 Sep;46(3):204-10.

[Expression of Cdx2 protein in colorectal cancer].

[Article in Korean]

Pack JH(1), Kim TD, Oh HA, Lee EJ, Kim JW, Jang BI, Kim TN, Jung MK, Bae YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University College of Medicine,
Daegu, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The caudal-related homeobox transcription factor, Cdx2, plays an
important role in proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial
cells. Its expression is confined to normal and neoplastic intestinal epithelium.
We evaluated Cdx2 expression in advanced colorectal cancers to determine the
correlation between Cdx2 expression and clinicopathologic characteristics.
METHODS: Four hundreds twenty consecutive colorectal cancers were included in the
study. Cdx2 expression was investigated by immunohistochemistry using tissue
microarrays constructed from surgically resected specimens. 145 invasive breast
cancers, normal tissues from gastric mucosa, liver, lung, kidney and ovary were
used as control. Nuclear staining was considered to be positive and the result
was divided into 3 categories.
RESULTS: In the colorectal cancers, Cdx2 was expressed in 380 of 420 (90.5%)
cases, and 349 of 380 (83%) cases showed strong and diffuse staining and 31 of
420 (7.5%) cases showed weakly positive staining. Forty patients (9.5%) of
colorectal cancer were negative for Cdx2. All of the invasive breast cancers and 
all non-neoplastic control tissues except the regions of intestinal metaplasia in
gastric mucosa, which showed strong Cdx2 expression, were negative for Cdx2. Loss
of Cdx2 expression was observed more frequently in cases with deeper invasion
(p<0.05), lymph node metastasis (p<0.05), poor histologic differentiation
(p<0.001), and distant metastasis (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Cdx2 could be a highly sensitive marker to detect metastasis from
intestine and might be useful as a novel prognostic marker in colorectal cancers.

PMID: 16179840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(7):867-71.

Cdx2 specifies the differentiation of morphological as well as functional
absorptive enterocytes of the small intestine.

Mutoh H(1), Satoh K, Kita H, Sakamoto H, Hayakawa H, Yamamoto H, Isoda N, Tamada 
K, Ido K, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.
muto@jichi.ac.jp

Many transcription factors are involved in the molecular control of intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation. We report in this study that the transcription
factor Cdx2 functions to define absorptive enterocytes during intestinal
epithelial differentiation. Cdx2 is expressed in the villi of the normal small
intestine. Intestinal metaplasia, which expresses Cdx2, occurs as a pathological 
condition in gastric mucosa. We have previously established Cdx2 transgenic mice 
expressing Cdx2 exclusively in the gastric epithelium. In this study using Cdx2
transgenic mice, we show that Cdx2 plays a key role in the differentiation of
intestinal absorptive enterocytes. The gastric mucosa of Cdx2 transgenic mice was
morphologically completely changed into intestinal metaplastic mucosa. Absorptive
enterocytes had microvilli which were observed by electron microscope. The
intestinal metaplastic mucosa of Cdx2 transgenic mice expressed sucrase and
peptide transporter PepT1. Disaccharidase and leucine aminopeptidase activities
were observed in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa. Glucose and amino acids were 
absorbed from Cdx2 transgenic mouse stomach with intestinal metaplasia. Finally
we generated mice whose intestine was extensively excised. Cdx2 transgenic mice
with intestinal metaplasia survived even after extensive intestinal excision. We 
successfully demonstrated that Cdx2 induced not only morphological but also
functional absorptive enterocytes in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa in vivo.
Our results suggest that Cdx2 is necessary and sufficient by itself to specify
the development of intestinal absorptive enterocytes, whereas other factors which
are expressed in the small intestine are not always necessary for the
differentiation of functional absorptive enterocytes.

PMID: 16172983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Sep;14(9):2113-7.

The molecular signature of normal squamous esophageal epithelium identifies the
presence of a field effect and can discriminate between patients with Barrett's
esophagus and patients with Barrett's-associated adenocarcinoma.

Brabender J(1), Marjoram P, Lord RV, Metzger R, Salonga D, Vallböhmer D, Schäfer 
H, Danenberg KD, Danenberg PV, Selaru FM, Baldus SE, Hölscher AH, Meltzer SJ,
Schneider PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral and Vascular Surgery, University of Cologne, Germany.
jan.brabender@t-online.de

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Genetic alterations in the normal tissues surrounding various
cancers have been described, but a comprehensive analysis of this carcinogenic
field effect in Barrett's-associated adenocarcinoma of the esophagus disease has 
not been reported. The aim of this study was to analyze the gene expression
profile of a panel of highly selected genes in the normal squamous esophagus
epihelium of patients with Barrett's esophagus, patients with
Barrett's-associated adenocarcinoma, and a healthy control group to define the
existence of a carcinogenic field effect, and to investigate the clinical
importance of such a field effect in the management of Barrett's disease.
METHODS: Forty-nine histologic normal squamous esophageal epithelia collected
from 19 patients with Barrett's esophagus, 20 patients with Barrett's-associated 
esophageal adenocarcinoma, and a healthy control group of 10 patients were
studied. A quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR method (TaqMan) was
used to measure the expression of a panel of genes with known associations with
gastrointestinal carcinogenesis.
RESULTS: A widespread carcinogenic field effect was detected for more than 50% of
the genes analyzed including Bax, BFT, CDX2, COX2, DAPK, DNMT1, GSTP1, RARalpha, 
RARgamma, RXRalpha, RXRbeta, SPARC, TSPAN, and VEGF. Based on the expression
signature of the normal appearing squamous esophagus, a linear discriminant
analysis was able to distinguish between the three groups of patients with an
error rate of 0%.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the first comprehensive investigation of a
carcinogenic field effect in Barrett's esophagus disease. Based on the gene
expression signature of the normal esophagus, patients could be correctly
characterized according to their pathologic classification by applying a linear
discriminant analysis. Our results provide evidence that a molecular
classification might have clinical importance for the diagnosis and treatment of 
patients with Barrett's esophagus disease.

PMID: 16172218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7953-4.

Crosstalk between the cell cycle regulator Cdk2 and the Cdx2 tumor suppressor at 
the proliferation-differentiation interface.

Gespach C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Clinical Oncology of Human solid tumors, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, 75571 Paris Cedex 12, France.
christian.gespach@st-antoine.inserm.fr

Comment on
    Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7955-63.

PMID: 16170344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;57(6):801-10. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

The effect of cytostatic drug treatment on intestine-specific transcription
factors Cdx2, GATA-4 and HNF-1alpha in mice.

de Koning BA(1), Lindenbergh-Kortleve DJ, Pieters R, Rings EH, Büller HA, Renes
IB, Einerhand AW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastro-enterology, Erasmus
MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
b.dekoning@erasmusmc.nl

Chemotherapy-induced intestinal damage is a very important dose-limiting side
effect for which there is no definitive prophylaxis or treatment. This is in part
due to the lack of understanding of its pathophysiology and impact on intestinal 
differentiation. The objective of this study was to investigate the gene
expression of the small intestinal transcription factors HNF-1alpha, Cdx2, GATA-4
in an experimental model of methotrexate (MTX)-induced intestinal damage, and to 
correlate these alterations with histological damage, epithelial proliferation
and differentiation. HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4 are critical transcription
factors in epithelial differentiation, and in combination they act as promoting
factors of the sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene, an enterocyte-specific
differentiation marker which is distinctly downregulated after MTX treatment.
Mice received two doses of MTX i.v. on two consecutive days and were sacrificed
1, 3 and 7 or 9 days after final injection. Segments of the jejunum were taken
for morphological, immunohistochemical and quantitative analyses. Intestinal
damage was most severe at day 3 and was associated with decreased expression of
the transcriptional factors HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4, which correlated well
with decreased expression of SI, and seemed inversely correlated with enhanced
proliferation of epithelial crypt cells. During severe damage, the epithelium was
preferentially concerned with proliferation rather than differentiation, most
likely in order to restore the small intestinal barrier function rather than
maintaining its absorptive function. Since HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4 are
critical for intestine-specific gene expression and therefore crucial in
epithelial differentiation, these results may explain, at least in part, why
intestinal differentiation is compromised during MTX treatment.

PMID: 16163540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;11(17):6162-70.

Expression of Cdx2 and hepatocyte antigen in gastric carcinoma: correlation with 
histologic type and implications for prognosis.

Fan Z(1), Li J, Dong B, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology and Beijing Cancer
Hospital, Beijing, PR China.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to (a) analyze the correlation between the
expression of Cdx2 and Hep and the clinicopathologic features of patients with
gastric carcinoma, and (b) determine the value of combined analysis of Cdx2 and
Hep expression in distinguishing histologic types and prognoses of gastric
carcinomas.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of Cdx2 and Hep were studied using
immunohistochemistry of paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 109 patients who
underwent D2 resection for gastric adenocarcinoma from 1995 to 1998.
RESULTS: Nuclear Cdx2 and Hep expression was detected in 36.7% (40 of 109) and
54.1% (59 of 109) of gastric carcinoma cases, respectively. Expression of Cdx2
and Hep was significantly higher in intestinal-type carcinomas than in
diffuse-type carcinomas (P = 0.027 and P = 0.037, respectively). There was a
clear negative correlation between Cdx2 expression and lymph node metastasis (P =
0.029), as well as between Hep expression and depth of wall invasion (P = 0.011).
The patients with Cdx2-positive or Hep-positive expression shows higher survival 
rate than those with Cdx2-negative or Hep-negative expression (P = 0.0008 and P =
0.003, respectively). Multivariate analysis revealed that the expression of Cdx2 
and Hep were independent prognostic indicators of gastric carcinoma. The
combination of Cdx2 and Hep expression was significantly lower in diffuse-type
carcinoma than in intestinal or mixed-type carcinoma. Multivariate analysis
revealed that Cdx2 and Hep expression was an independent prognostic indicator of 
gastric carcinoma (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that combined analysis of Cdx2 and Hep has
significant value in distinguishing histologic types and in predicting the
prognosis of gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 16144916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Pathol Int. 2005 Sep;55(9):550-7.

Establishment and characterization of a human colonic mucinous carcinoma cell
line with predominant goblet-cell differentiation from liver metastasis.

Yamachika T(1), Nakanishi H, Yasui K, Ikehara Y, Niwa T, Wanibuchi H, Tatematsu
M, Fukushima S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. tyamach@se.starcat.ne.jp

Many human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines have been developed. However,
differentiated type colorectal cancer cell lines, particularly, the goblet-cell
differentiated type, are scarce. In the present study a novel colorectal
adenocarcinoma cell line (designated as COLM-6) with predominant goblet-cell
differentiation was established from the rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma of a
Japanese woman. COLM-6 cells grow in a typical epithelial monolayer in culture.
They expressed epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and HER2 on their surface
and accordingly, their growth was significantly stimulated by EGF, transforming
growth factor (TGF)-alpha and heregulin. COLM-6 cells form tumor with typical
mucinous adenocarcinomatous appearance in nude mice. Immunohistochemical analysis
of these subcutaneous tumors demonstrated that COLM-6 cells strongly express MUC2
as a goblet-cell marker and Cdx2 in the nucleus. Some weakly express villin and
carbonic anhydrase 1 as a columnar absorptive-cell marker as well. They were also
positive for adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) cytoplasmically and expressed
beta-catenin in their cytoplasm and cell membrane without nuclear accumulation.
These results indicate that COLM-6 cell line has unique characteristics and may
provide a useful tool to study the mechanism of growth and differentiation of
colonic epithelium as well as the biological behavior of colorectal mucinous
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 16143030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2005 Aug;102(8):986-93.

[Cdx2 and gastric carcinoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Mutoh H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School.

PMID: 16124704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Sep;153(3):677-9.

Usefulness of CDX2 in the diagnosis of extramammary Paget disease associated with
malignancies of intestinal type.

De Nisi MC, D'Amuri A, Toscano M, Lalinga AV, Pirtoli L, Miracco C.

PMID: 16120171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2005 Sep;129(9):1100-5.

CDX2 is a useful marker of intestinal-type differentiation: a tissue
microarray-based study of 629 tumors from various sites.

De Lott LB(1), Morrison C, Suster S, Cohn DE, Frankel WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus,
OH, USA.

CONTEXT: CDX2, a critical nuclear transcription factor for intestinal
development, is expressed in intestinal epithelium and adenocarcinomas.
OBJECTIVES: To determine if CDX2 is a useful marker for intestinal-type
differentiation and to correlate tumor histology with CDX2 staining in colorectal
adenocarcinomas.
DESIGN: Tissue microarrays from 71 colorectal adenocarcinomas, 31 hepatocellular 
carcinomas, 47 lung adenocarcinomas, 55 squamous cell carcinomas of the lung, 69 
neuroendocrine carcinomas of the lung and 43 of the pancreas, 57 pancreatic
adenocarcinomas, and 256 endometrial adenocarcinomas were stained with antibody
against CDX2.
RESULTS: CDX2 staining was positive in 51 (71.8%) of 71 colorectal cancers,
including 38 (74.5%) of 51 well- or moderately differentiated tumors and 13
(65.0%) of 20 high-grade tumors. Of the high-grade tumors, 5 (71.4%) of 7
mucinous, 3 (100%) of 3 signet ring cell, and 5 (50.0%) of 10 poorly
differentiated tumors were positive. Other tumors showing occasional CDX2
staining included 1 of 30 well- or moderately differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinomas of the lung and 2 of 43 from the pancreas, 1 of 47 lung
adenocarcinomas, 3 of 57 pancreatic adenocarcinomas, and 15 of 256 endometrial
carcinomas. Hepatocellular, poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
lung and squamous cell carcinomas of the lung were not immunoreactive for CDX2.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 is a useful marker for intestinal-type differentiation, is
rarely seen in tumors from the other sites evaluated, and may be useful in
determining the site of origin for some metastatic tumors. However, CDX2 is not a
sensitive marker for poorly differentiated colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 16119980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Gut. 2006 Jan;55(1):16-25. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

Bile acids directly augment caudal related homeobox gene Cdx2 expression in
oesophageal keratinocytes in Barrett's epithelium.

Kazumori H(1), Ishihara S, Rumi MA, Kadowaki Y, Kinoshita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shimane University, School of
Medicine, 89-1 Enya-cho, Izumo, Shimane 693-8501, Japan.
kazumori@med.shimane-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The mechanism of transformation to intestinal metaplasia in 
Barrett's oesophagus has not been clarified. We investigated the effects of
various bile acids on expression of the caudal related homeobox gene Cdx2 in
cultured oesophageal squamous epithelial cells. In addition, morphological and
histochemical changes in squamous cells to intestinal epithelial cells were
studied in response to bile acid induced expression of Cdx2.
METHODS: A rat model of Barrett's oesophagus was created by anastomosing the
oesophagus and jejunum, and Cdx2 expression was investigated by
immunohistochemistry. Also, the response of various bile acids on Cdx2 gene
expression was studied in the human colon epithelial cell lines Caco-2 and HT-29,
as well as in cultured rat oesophageal squamous epithelial cells using a Cdx2
promoter luciferase assay. In addition, primary cultured oesophageal squamous
epithelial cells were transfected with Cdx2 expression vectors and their possible
transformation to intestinal-type epithelial cells was investigated.
RESULTS: Oesophagojejunal anastomoses formed intestinal goblet cell metaplasia in
rat oesophagus specimens and metaplastic epithelia strongly expressed Cdx2. When 
the effects of 11 types of bile acids on Cdx2 gene expression were examined, only
cholic acid (CA) and dehydrocholic acid dose dependently increased Cdx2 promoter 
activity and Cdx2 protein production in Caco-2 and HT-29 cells, and cultured rat 
oesophageal keratinocytes. Results from mutation analysis of Cdx2 promoter
suggested that two nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) binding sites were
responsible for the bile acid induced activation of the Cdx2 promoter. When bile 
acids were measured in oesophageal refluxate of rats with experimental Barrett's 
oesophagus, the concentration of CA was found to be consistent with the
experimental dose that augmented Cdx2 expression in vitro. Furthermore,
transfection of the Cdx2 expression vector in cultured rat oesophageal
keratinocytes induced production of intestinal-type mucin, MUC2, in cells that
expressed Cdx2.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that CA activates Cdx2 promoter via NFkappaB and stimulates
production of Cdx2 protein in oesophageal keratinocytes with production of
intestinal-type mucin. This may be one of the mechanisms of metaplasia in
Barrett's oesophagus.

PMCID: PMC1856383
PMID: 16118348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Hepatology. 2005 Sep;42(3):657-64.

Characterization of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma of the intraductal
growth-type and its precursor lesions.

Yeh TS(1), Tseng JH, Chen TC, Liu NJ, Chiu CT, Jan YY, Chen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University,
Taipei, Taiwan. surglab@adm.cgmh.org.tw

A cohort of patients with intraductal growth-type intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
(IG-ICC) and its precursor lesions, collectively termed intraductal papillary
neoplasm of the liver (IPNL), was characterized with respect to demographics,
clinical manifestations, perioperative management, long-term survival, and
molecular features associated with carcinogenesis. A total of 122 patients with
IPNL types 1 through 4, 108 patients with non-IG-ICC and 210 patients with
hepatolithiasis alone were studied. Expression of CDX2, TFF1, MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC,
EGFR, and p53 was determined by using immunohistochemistry. Females predominated 
in those with hepatolithiasis alone and IPNL. The mean age of patients with
hepatolithiasis alone was 6 to 8 years younger than that of those with IPNL. The 
association with hepatolithiasis in patients with IPNL types 1 and 2, IPNL types 
3 and 4, and non-IG-ICC was 100%, 79%, and 64%, respectively. Mucobilia, anemia, 
and elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels were helpful in distinguishing
IG-ICC and its precursor lesions. The mean survival of patients with IPNL type 3,
IPNL type 4, and non-IG-ICC was 55.5 months, 36.9 months, and 15.8 months,
respectively. The incidence of expression of CDX2 and TFF1 was maximal in IPNL
type 3. Expression and cellular distribution of MUC2 and CDX2 were similar.
MUC5AC was strongly expressed in all patients with IPNL; EGFR and p53 were rarely
expressed in patients with IPNL. In conclusion, hepatolithiasis appears to be a
precipitating factor in the development of IPNL. Signs of mucobilia were specific
for the diagnosis of IPNL. Expression of CDX2 and MUC2 are helpful in
differentiating IPNL and non-IG-ICC. Significant differences in survival
associated with the various lesions studied warrants a more aggressive surgical
strategy in their management.

PMID: 16116640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Histopathology. 2005 Sep;47(3):330-1.

Paneth type gastric cancer cells exhibit expression of human defensin-5.

Inada KI, Mizoshita T, Tsukamoto T, Porter EM, Tatematsu M.

PMID: 16115240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cancer Lett. 2005 Sep 28;227(2):175-84. Epub 2005 Jan 18.

Mapping of the methylation pattern of the MUC2 promoter in pancreatic cancer cell
lines, using bisulfite genomic sequencing.

Hamada T(1), Goto M, Tsutsumida H, Nomoto M, Higashi M, Sugai T, Nakamura S,
Yonezawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Field of Oncology, Kagoshima University
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima
890-8544, Japan.

Expression of the MUC2 gene is controlled by the methylation of CpG sites in the 
promoter region, but the detailed methylation status of this region has yet to be
reported. We have mapped the complete methylation status of the MUC2 promoter
from position -1989 to position +288 upstream, a region that contains 59 CpG
sites, using bisulfite genomic sequencing in two pancreatic cancer cell lines
(PANC1, BxPC3) and in isolated normal colon crypts as a control. The MUC2
promoter in PANC1, a cell line that does not express MUC2, was highly methylated 
(average 87%, complete methylation at 28 of the 59 CpG sites), while the promoter
region in the MUC2-expressing BxPC3 cell line (average 43%, complete methylation 
at 2 of 59 CpG sites) and in MUC2-expressing normal colon crypts (average 33%, no
CpG site was completely methylated) were only partially methylated (P<0.0001).
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment of PANC1 cells reduced the methylation level
(average 36%) and induced MUC2 mRNA expression. However, mRNA expression of AP2, 
SP1 and CDX2 was not affected by this treatment. Our data provide the first
detailed methylation map of the MUC2 promoter region for the first time, using
the conversion-specific bisulfite genomic sequencing. Previously unproven
methylation sites were detected, and some AP2 and SP1 binding sites showed
different methylation levels among PANC1, BxPC3 and colonic crypt cells. Our
mapping data provide an essential basis for further studies of
methylation-regulated MUC2 inactivation.

PMID: 16112420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jun;24(2):305-12.

Tumor induction by azoxymethane (AOM) and
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) in F344 rat gastric mucosa
featuring intestinal metaplasia caused by X-irradiation.

Kashiwabara S(1), Kashimoto N, Uesaka T, Wakabayashi K, Kamiya K, Watanabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Experimental Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Male F344 5-week-old rats were X-irradiated, and 16 weeks after the first dose,
azoxymethane (AOM) was injected or 2-amino-1 -methyl-6-phenylimidazo
[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) was given by intragastric intubation. Tumors in the
pylorus of the glandular stomach were observed in 4 out of the 29 animals
receiving X-rays + AOM and in 4 out of the 25 animals receiving X-rays + PhIP, 12
months after administration. No such lesions were found in the chemical or X-ray 
alone groups. Intestinal metaplasia and some induced tumors were positive for
CDX2. It was concluded that the presence of intestinal metaplasia may increase
sensitivity to the induction of gastric tumors by colon carcinogens.

PMID: 16110765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Aug;63(8):1367-71.

[Expression of transcription factor in Barrett's esophagus].

[Article in Japanese]

Mutoh H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School.

Barrett's esophagus is the result of chronic injury which is usually caused by
gastroesophageal reflux. NF-kappaB is expressed in the reflux esophagitis.
Specialized columnar epithelium (SCE) is characteristic of Barrett's esophagus
and has a malignant predisposition. SCE expresses Cdx1 and Cdx2. Adenocarcinoma
in Barrett's esophagus is believed to develop through the
metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence. P53, beta-catenin, PPARgamma, and
estrogen receptor beta are closely related to the development of esophageal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16101223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Aug;63(8):1341-9.

[Pathogenesis of Barrett's esophagus--new findings in the experimental studies of
duodenal reflux models].

[Article in Japanese]

Hattori T(1), Mukaisho K, Miwa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shiga University of Medicine Science.

Duodeno-gastro-esophageal reflux has been thought to induce Barrett's esophagus. 
Recently, we designed a new duodenal reflux model using rats, and studied
sequential morphological changes of esophageal mucosa leading to Barrett's
esophagus. A specialized columnar epithelium (SCE) developed 20 weeks after
operation. Barrett's epithelium originated from pyloric-foveolar metaplasia of
stem cells in the basal layer of the esophageal squamous epithelium. The
pyloric-foveolar metaplasia was then followed by the appearance of goblet cells, 
becoming a typical SCE. The expression of homeobox gene Cdx2 was seen in this
process, thereby suggesting a role of Cdx2 in intestinal differentiation of
Barrett's esophagus. We noticed the pyloric-foveolar metaplasia followed by the
appearance of goblet cells is common to entire gut in regenerative process, and
proposed a concept of GRCL (gut regenerative cell lineage), and an implication of
GRCL in digestive tract carcinogenesis was discussed.

PMID: 16101219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Sep;29(9):1252.

Aberrant expression of CDX2 in metaplastic and inflammatory epithelium of the
urinary bladder.

Steininger H, Mueller H, Marquardt L.

Comment on
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Sep;28(9):1253-4.
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Nov;27(11):1442-7.

PMID: 16096418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Gastric Cancer. 2005;8(3):164-72.

Microsatellite instability is linked to loss of hMLH1 expression in advanced
gastric cancers: lack of a relationship with the histological type and phenotype.

Mizoshita T(1), Tsukamoto T, Cao X, Otsuka T, Ito S, Takahashi E, Nakamura S,
Nakamura T, Yamamura Y, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the prevalence of microsatellite
instability (MSI) is high in intramucosal differentiated gastric cancers with
gastric foveolar phenotypic expression, and that these tumors are prone to lose
their glandular structures and progress to undifferentiated-type lesions. To test
this hypothesis, we examined the relationships among human MutL homologue 1
(hMLH1) expression (which is linked to MSI), the phenotype, and the histological 
type in patients with advanced and intramucosal gastric cancer.
METHODS: We analyzed hMLH1 expression by immunohistochemistry in 70 advanced and 
30 intramucosal gastric cancers with histological evaluation and assessment of
the phenotype, and Cdx2 expression determined by immunohistochemistry. The MSI
status was also examined in 20 cases.
RESULTS: Thirteen (18.6%) advanced and 5 (16.7%) intramucosal gastric cancers
were judged to be hMLH1-negative. In the advanced cases, no association was
observed between the histological type and the phenotype and loss of hMLH1. In
the intramucosal cases, MUC5AC expression was observed in all 5 hMLH1-negative
differentiated-type cancers. However, no hMLH1-negative lesions were detected in 
the intramucosal undifferentiated cancers (0/14; P < 0.05 vs differentiated
types). In the advanced cases, MSI-positivity (MSI +) and loss of hMLH1
expression did correlate (P < 0.0001), while no association was observed between 
MSI +, histological type, and phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Our data support the hypothesis that, phenotypically, some
MSI-positive differentiated gastric cancers of gastric foveolar phenotypic
expression may easily change, from gastric to intestinal phenotypic expression,
also changing, histologically, from differentiated to undifferentiated type with 
progression.

PMID: 16086119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Stem Cells. 2005 Nov-Dec;23(10):1514-25. Epub 2005 Aug 4.

Primary differentiation in the human blastocyst: comparative molecular portraits 
of inner cell mass and trophectoderm cells.

Adjaye J(1), Huntriss J, Herwig R, BenKahla A, Brink TC, Wierling C, Hultschig C,
Groth D, Yaspo ML, Picton HM, Gosden RG, Lehrach H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (Department of Vertebrate
Genomics), Ihnestrasse 73, D-14195 Berlin, Germany. adjaye@molgen.mpg.de

The primary differentiation event during mammalian development occurs at the
blastocyst stage and leads to the delineation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and
the trophectoderm (TE). We provide the first global mRNA expression data from
immunosurgically dissected ICM cells, TE cells, and intact human blastocysts.
Using a cDNA microarray composed of 15,529 cDNAs from known and novel genes, we
identify marker transcripts specific to the ICM (e.g., OCT4/POU5F1, NANOG, HMGB1,
and DPPA5) and TE (e.g., CDX2, ATP1B3, SFN, and IPL), in addition to novel ICM-
and TE-specific expressed sequence tags. The expression patterns suggest that the
emergence of pluripotent ICM and TE cell lineages from the morula is controlled
by metabolic and signaling pathways, which include inter alia, WNT,
mitogen-activated protein kinase, transforming growth factor-beta, NOTCH,
integrin-mediated cell adhesion, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and apoptosis.
These data enhance our understanding of the first step in human cellular
differentiation and, hence, the derivation of both embryonic stem cells and
trophoblastic stem cells from these lineages.

PMID: 16081659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Virchows Arch. 2005 Oct;447(4):717-22. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Clinicopathological significant and prognostic influence of cadherin-17
expression in gastric cancer.

Ito R(1), Oue N, Yoshida K, Kunimitsu K, Nakayama H, Nakachi K, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiobiology/Molecular Epidemiology, Radiation Effect Research
Foundation, 5-2 Hijiyama Park, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

Cadherin-17 (CDH17), also called liver-intestine cadherin, is a structurally
unique member of the cadherin superfamily. Our serial analysis of gene expression
demonstrated that CDH17 was one of the most up-regulated genes in advanced
gastric carcinomas. CDH17 expression is known to be regulated by Cdx2. In the
present study, we examined the expression of CDH17 in primary gastric carcinoma
tissues by immunohistochemistry, and analyzed the correlation of CDH17 expression
with clinicopathological characteristics and patients prognosis. CDH17 expression
was detected in 63/94 (67%) of gastric adenocarcinomas in addition to intestinal 
metaplasia. The expression of CDH17 tended to be associated with intestinal type 
carcinoma, and carcinomas with CDH17 expression was significantly more frequent
in advanced stage cases (80%) than in early stage (53%). The prognosis of
patients with positive CDH17 expression was significantly poorer than that of the
negative cases (P=0.0314). However, multivariate analysis revealed that CDH17 was
not an independent prognostic factor. Six of seven cases that showed positive
expression of Cdx2 simultaneously expressed CDH17 protein. These results
suggested that the expression of CDH17 was characteristic of the advanced gastric
carcinoma that is associated with poor prognosis.

PMID: 16044349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7955-63.

Phosphorylation of the homeotic tumor suppressor Cdx2 mediates its
ubiquitin-dependent proteasome degradation.

Gross I(1), Lhermitte B, Domon-Dell C, Duluc I, Martin E, Gaiddon C, Kedinger M, 
Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Physiopathology of the Intestine and Pancreas, 3, avenue
Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7953-4.

The Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factor Cdx2 plays a key role in
intestinal cell fate determination. Reduction of Cdx2 expression is a feature of 
many human colon carcinomas and inactivation of one cdx2 allele facilitates the
development of invasive adenocarcinoma in the murine colon. Here, we investigated
the post-translational regulation of Cdx2. We showed that various forms of Cdx2
coexist in the intestine and colon cancer cell lines, some of them being
phosphorylated forms. We found that cyclin-dependent kinase 2 phosphorylated Cdx2
in vitro and in vivo. Using site-specific mutagenesis, we identified serine 281
as a new key residue for Cdx2 phosphorylation. Intriguingly, serine 281 belongs
to a conserved motif of four evenly spaced serines (the 4S motif) similar to the 
one controlling beta-catenin degradation by the proteasome pathway. A
nonphosphorylated mutant Cdx2 lacking the 4S motif (4S>A) exhibited reduced
polyubiquitination upon proteasome inhibition and increased stability compared to
wild-type Cdx2. In addition, we found that this mutant was less efficient to
suppress colony formation than wild-type Cdx2. Thus, our data highlight a novel
post-translational mechanism controlling Cdx2 degradation via phosphorylation and
polyubiquitination, which may be of importance for intestinal development and
cancer.

PMID: 16027724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Clin Genet. 2005 Aug;68(2):106-12.

Genetic regulation of stem cell origins in the mouse embryo.

Ralston A(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Erratum in
    Clin Genet. 2005 Sep;68(3):286.

'Stem cell' has practically become a household term, but what is a stem cell and 
where does it come from? Insight into these questions has come from the early
mouse embryo, or blastocyst, from which three kinds of stem cells have been
derived: embryonic stem (ES) cells, trophoblast stem (TS) cells, and
extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) cells. These stem cells appear to derive from three
distinct tissue lineages within the blastocyst: the epiblast, the trophectoderm, 
and the extraembryonic endoderm. Understanding how these lineages arise during
development will illuminate efforts to understand the establishment and
maintenance of the stem cell state and the mechanisms that restrict stem cell
potency. Genetic analysis has enabled the identification of several genes
important for lineage decisions in the mouse blastocyst. Among these, Oct4,
Nanog, Cdx2, and Gata6 encode transcription factors required for the three
lineages of the blastocyst and for the maintenance their respective stem cell
types. Interestingly, genetic manipulation of several of these factors can cause 
lineage switching among these stem cells, suggesting that knowledge of key
lineage-determining genes could help control differentiation of stem cells more
generally. Pluripotent stem cells have also been isolated from the human
blastocyst, but the relationship between these cells and stem cells of the mouse 
blastocyst remains to be explored. This review describes the genetic regulation
of lineage allocation during blastocyst formation and discusses similarities and 
differences between mouse and human ES cells.

PMID: 15996204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cancer Res. 2005 Jul 1;65(13):5488-92.

CDX2 polymorphisms, RNA expression, and risk of colorectal cancer.

Rozek LS(1), Lipkin SM, Fearon ER, Hanash S, Giordano TJ, Greenson JK, Kuick R,
Misek DE, Taylor JM, Douglas JA, Rennert G, Gruber SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

In adult mammals, CDX2 acts as a transcription factor and is expressed in
intestinal epithelial cells. Down-regulation of CDX2 is frequently observed in
colorectal cancer, suggesting its loss may cause dedifferentiation of
gastrointestinal epithelial cells. However, it is not clear whether inherited
variants of CDX2 are associated with risk of colorectal cancer. Using
epidemiologic data and tumors from a population-based case-control study in
Israel, we identified novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by
resequencing 35 cases, compared genotype and haplotype frequencies in 455 matched
pairs, and characterized the tumor characteristics of all 455 cases by
microsatellite instability analysis, in addition to a partially overlapping set
of 201 frozen tumors with expression profiling data (82/201) from the same study.
Nine polymorphisms were identified in the 35 cases, and none of the SNPs or
haplotypes were associated with risk of colorectal cancer in the 455 matched
pairs. These variants were not associated with CDX2 expression in the 83 subjects
with expression data. We evaluated subject and tumor characteristics in the 201
subjects with CDX2 tumor expression data. Reduced CDX2 expression was associated 
with tumor location (right sided), poor differentiation, high microsatellite
instability status, and a positive first-degree family history. We conclude that 
it is unlikely that common CDX2 variants account for a measurable fraction of
susceptibility to colorectal cancer in this population. However, CDX2 expression 
levels were strongly associated with microsatellite instability and tumor
location in the gastrointestinal tract, consistent with a possible role in the
specification of gastrointestinal epithelial cell fate in humans.

PMID: 15994917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Stem Cells. 2005 Sep;23(8):1035-43. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Downregulation of NANOG induces differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to 
extraembryonic lineages.

Hyslop L(1), Stojkovic M, Armstrong L, Walter T, Stojkovic P, Przyborski S,
Herbert M, Murdoch A, Strachan T, Lako M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Genetics, University of
Newcastle International Centre for Life, Newcastle NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom.

The homeobox transcription factor Nanog has been proposed to play a crucial role 
in the maintenance of the undifferentiated state of murine embryonic stem cells. 
A human counterpart, NANOG, has been identified, but its function and
localization have not hitherto been described. We have used a combination of RNA 
interference and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to study NANOG 
in human embryonic stem and embryonic carcinoma cells. Transfection of
NANOG-specific small interfering RNAs reduced levels of NANOG transcript and
protein and induced activation of the extraembryonic endoderm-associated genes
GATA4, GATA6, LAMININ B1, and AFP as well as upregulation of
trophectoderm-associated genes CDX2, GATA2, hCG-alpha, and hCG-beta.
Immunostaining of preimplantation human embryos showed that NANOG was expressed
in the inner cell mass of expanded blastocysts but not in earlier-stage embryos, 
consistent with a role in the maintenance of pluripotency. Taken together, our
findings suggest that NANOG acts as a gatekeeper of pluripotency in human
embryonic stem and carcinoma cells by preventing their differentiation to
extraembryonic endoderm and trophectoderm lineages.

PMID: 15983365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005 Sep 1;207(2 Suppl):77-83.

Polymorphic variations in the expression of the chemical detoxifying UDP
glucuronosyltransferases.

Mackenzie PI(1), Gregory PA, Lewinsky RH, Yasmin SN, Height T, McKinnon RA,
Gardner-Stephen DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA 5042, Australia.
Peter.Mackenzie@flinders.edu.au

The UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are expressed predominantly in the liver
and gastrointestinal tract in humans. Their expression varies widely between
individuals, due in part to coding region polymorphisms that alter catalytic
function and in part, to differences in the regulation of UGT genes. The latter
differences are most likely the result of polymorphisms in the regulatory
elements of UGT genes and in the transcription factors that bind to these
elements. Several frequent polymorphisms in the promoters of UGT genes have been 
described; however, few of these fall within critical regulatory elements and
alter UGT expression. Some rare mutations alter UGT promoter activity in in vitro
systems but their effect in the clinic is still to be confirmed. Several
transcription factors that regulate UGT gene expression in cells of hepatic and
intestinal origin have been identified. These include positive regulators of UGT 
gene expression such as hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1 alpha), octamer
transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) and the intestine-specific transcription factor,
caudal-related homeodomain protein 2 (Cdx2). Negative regulators include the Pre 
B cell homeobox factor (Pbx2) and its dimerization partner, Pbx regulating
protein 1 (Prep1). Polymorphisms in these transcription factors may cause
differences in their interaction and binding to UGT promoters. Current work
describing the effects of these transcription factor polymorphisms on UGT
expression will be described. Knowledge of UGT promoter elements and the proteins
that bind to these elements, as well as knowledge of polymorphisms that alter
their function, may aid in the prediction of an individual's response to
chemicals and in the prediction of chemical toxicities.

PMID: 15979674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2005 Jul;129(7):920-3.

Expression of the intestinal marker Cdx2 in secondary adenocarcinomas of the
colorectum.

Groisman GM(1), Bernheim J, Halpern M, Brazowsky E, Meir A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel.
groisman@hillel-yaffe.health.gov.il

CONTEXT: Secondary adenocarcinomas of the large bowel can closely mimic primary
tumors. The differentiation of secondary from primary adenocarcinomas of the
colorectum, however, is important because their clinical management and prognosis
are different. Immunostaining with the nuclear transcription factor Cdx2,
expressed in normal intestinal epithelia and colorectal adenocarcinomas, could be
of potential diagnostic use.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the diagnostic value of Cdx2 immunoexpression in
distinguishing primary from common forms of secondary colorectal adenocarcinomas.
DESIGN: Cdx2 immunoexpression was analyzed in 20 primary colorectal
adenocarcinomas and in 34 secondary colorectal adenocarcinomas and their
corresponding primary tumors. All secondary tumors were diagnosed through
endoscopic biopsies and included 8 cases of ovarian (4 serous, 2 mucinous, and 2 
endometrioid), 6 of mammary (4 lobular and 2 ductal), 4 of gastric (2 intestinal 
and 2 diffuse), 4 of pulmonary, 4 of pancreatic (ductal), 3 of prostatic, 3 of
colorectal, and 2 of endometrial origin.
RESULTS: Cdx2 was expressed in normal colorectal epithelium, in primary
colorectal adenocarcinomas (20/20 cases), in secondary adenocarcinomas of
colorectal (3/3) and gastric (3/4) origin, and in metastatic ovarian mucinous
adenocarcinomas (2/2). In contrast, no Cdx2 immunoreactivity was observed in
secondary colorectal tumors of ovarian (serous and endometrioid), mammary,
pancreatic, pulmonary, prostatic, and endometrial origin.
CONCLUSION: Cdx2 immunostaining may be useful in discriminating primary
colorectal carcinomas from frequent types of secondary colorectal adenocarcinomas
of nongastrointestinal origin. We suggest including Cdx2 in any antibody panel
put together to distinguish between primary and secondary epithelial colorectal
malignancies.

PMID: 15974817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Jun;4(6):669-75. Epub 2005 Jun 11.

Intestinal metaplasia with a high salt diet induces epithelial proliferation and 
alters cell composition in the gastric mucosa of mice.

Xiao F(1), Crissey MA, Lynch JP, Kaestner KH, Silberg DG, Suh E.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Intestinal metaplasia of the gastric mucosa is an important component in the
pathway to adenocarcinoma. The mechanisms that induce the progression from
intestinal metaplasia to cancer have not been elucidated. High dietary salt has
been known as one of the risk factors for gastric cancer development in humans.
Therefore, we investigated the role of high salt diet on gastric epithelial cell 
proliferation and differentiation, using our mouse model that ectopically
expressed Cdx2 homeodomain transcription factor and induced an intestinal
metaplastic phenotype in the gastric epithelia. Sixty Cdx2 transgenic and sixty
age-matched wild-type littermates were studied. Fifty-percent Cdx2 transgenic and
wild type mice were administered a high-salt diet and the other fifty-percent was
fed a standard diet starting at 12 weeks after birth. At 10, 20 and 40 weeks
after initiation of the diets, histopathological changes were determined by
Hemotoxylin and Eosin, alcian blue, and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining. Cell
types and cell kinetics were assessed by immunohistochemistry. At 52 weeks,
significant alterations in pathology were observed in the Cdx2 transgenic mice
fed a high-salt diet, including elongation of gastric pits, reduction of the
glandular zone in the gastric corpus, and deepening of glands in the antrum. In
the Cdx2 transgenic mice fed a high salt diet, the parietal and chief cells were 
significantly decreased in the gastric corpus. A significant increase in cell
proliferation and apoptosis in the corpus and antrum were observed in Cdx2
transgenic mice fed a high-salt diet as compared to wild-type littermates. Taken 
together, these data implicate that intestinal metaplasia in concert with a
high-salt diet induces epithelial proliferation, apoptosis, and alters cellular
types in the gastric mucosa of mice. Alteration in the composition of the gastric
epithelium may play a role in influencing the microenvironment to engender
susceptibility to carcinogens.

PMID: 15970710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Dev Biol. 2005 Jun 15;282(2):509-23.

A consensus Oct1 binding site is required for the activity of the Xenopus Cdx4
promoter.

Reece-Hoyes JS(1), Keenan ID, Pownall ME, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Area 11, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.

Cdx homeodomain transcription factors have multiple roles in early vertebrate
development. Furthermore, mis-regulation of Cdx expression has been demonstrated 
in metaplasias and cancers of the gut epithelium. Given the importance of Cdx
genes in development and disease, the mechanisms underlying their expression are 
of considerable interest. We report an analysis of the upstream regulatory
regions from the amphibian Xenopus laevis Cdx4 gene. We show that a GFP reporter 
containing 2.8 kb upstream of the transcription start site is expressed in the
posterior of transgenic embryos. Deletion analysis of the upstream sequence
reveals that a 247-bp proximal promoter fragment will drive posterior expression 
in transgenic embryos. We show that 63 bp of upstream sequence, that includes a
consensus site for POU-domain octamer-binding proteins, retains significant
promoter activity. Co-expression of the octamer-binding protein Oct1 induces
expression from a Cdx4 reporter and mutation of the octamer site abolishes
activity of the same reporter. We show that the octamer site is highly conserved 
in the promoters of the human, mouse, chicken, and zebrafish Cdx4 genes and
within the promoters of amphibian Cdx1 and Cdx2. These data suggest a conserved
function for octamer-binding proteins in the regulation of Cdx family members.

PMID: 15950614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. FEBS J. 2005 Jun;272(11):2746-59.

PKA independent and cell type specific activation of the expression of caudal
homeobox gene Cdx-2 by cyclic AMP.

Chen L(1), Wang P, Andrade CF, Zhao IY, Dubé PE, Brubaker PL, Liu M, Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario.

Cdx-2 is a transactivator for the proglucagon gene in pancreatic and intestinal
endocrine cells. Cdx-2 is also expressed in differentiated intestinal epithelia
of nonendocrine origin. Cdx-2-/- mice are embryonic lethal, while Cdx-2+/-
mutants show multiple malfunctions including the formation of intestinal polyps. 
Within the polyps, the remaining wild type Cdx-2 allele ceases its expression,
while the expression of both Cdx-2 and proglucagon in the endocrine cells remains
unaltered, indicating that Cdx-2 could be haplo-insufficient for nonendocrine
cells, but not for proglucagon producing endocrine cells. We propose that
mechanisms underlying Cdx-2 expression and auto-regulation [Xu F, Li H & Jin T
(1999), J Biol Chem274, 34310-34316] differ in these two types of cells. We show 
here that forskolin and cAMP upregulate Cdx-2 expression in proglucagon producing
cells, but not in colon cancer cells and primary intestinal cell cultures. It is 
unlikely that the activation is mainly mediated by PKA, because the activation
was observed in a PKA deficient cell line. Co-transfecting a dominant negative
Ras expression plasmid substantially repressed the Cdx-2 promoter, in contrast to
a previous finding that Ras is a negative factor for Cdx-2 expression in colon
cancer cells. Furthermore, forskolin activated ERK1/2 phosphorylation in the
endocrine cells, and attenuation of ERK1/2 phosphorylation by its inhibitor is
associated with attenuated Cdx-2 expression. Finally, an Epac pathway specific
cAMP analogue stimulated both ERK1/2 phosphorylation and Cdx-2 expression. Taken 
together, our observations suggest that Cdx-2 expression is regulated by the
second messenger cAMP, cell-type specifically, via the Epac pathway.

PMID: 15943809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Zoolog Sci. 2005 May;22(5):501-9.

Enterotoxin/guanylin receptor type guanylyl cyclases in non-mammalian
vertebrates.

Nakauchi M(1), Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Cyclic GMP is a ubiquitous intracellular second messenger produced by guanylyl
cyclases (GCs). The enterotoxin/guanylin receptor type membrane GC (designated as
GC-C in mammals) is activated by exogenous ligands such as heat-stable
enterotoxins (STa), small peptides secreted by some pathogenic strains of
Escherichia coli which cause severe secretory diarrhea and also activated by
endogenous ligands such as guanylin and uroguanylin. The STa/guanylin receptor
type membrane GC, as well as other type membrane GCs, is composed of an
extracellular domain, a single transmembrane domain, and an intracellular region 
comprising a kinase-like domain and a catalytic domain. The STa/guanylin receptor
type membrane GC is identified in various vertebrates including fishes,
amphibians, reptiles, and birds, implying that it serves some important and
undefined physiological roles in the intestine of non-mammalian vertebrates, e.g.
the regulation of water and salt absorption. In mammals, only a single membrane
GC (GC-C) is known to be the STa/guanylin receptor. On the contrary, two membrane
GC cDNAs are cloned from the intestine of the European eel Anguilla anguilla
(GC-C1 and GC-C2) and the medaka fish Oryzias latipes (OlGC6 and OlGC9). OlGC6
and OlGC9 are structurally distinct and show different ligand responsibility.
Accumulated evidences indicate that the transcriptional regulatory mechanism of
the human GC-C gene is different from that of the corresponding medaka fish GC
gene; the human GC-C gene is regulated by Cdx2 and/or HNF-4, and the medaka fish 
OlGC6 gene is regulated by OlPC4, which is a medaka fish homologue of the
mammalian transcriptional positive co-factor 4 (PC4). Furthermore, the
transcriptional regulatory mechanism of the OlGC9 gene is different from those of
both the OlGC6 and human GC-C genes, indicating that the study on these two
medaka fish GCs will be useful for further understanding of the STa/guanylin
receptor type membrane GC in the vertebrates.

PMID: 15930822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jun 7;11(21):3182-8.

Co-expression of CDX2 and MUC2 in gastric carcinomas: correlations with
clinico-pathological parameters and prognosis.

Roessler K(1), Mönig SP, Schneider PM, Hanisch FG, Landsberg S, Thiele J,
Hölscher AH, Dienes HP, Baldus SE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9,
D-50931 Cologne, Germany.

AIM: To evaluate the role of CDX2 homeobox protein as a predictor for cancer
progression and prognosis as well as its correlation with MUC2 expression. CDX2
represents a transcription factor for various intestinal genes (including MUC2)
and thus an important regulator of intestinal differentiation, which could
previously be identified in gastric carcinomas and intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues from 190 gastric carcinoma 
patients were stained with monoclonal antibodies recognizing CDX2 and MUC2,
respectively. Immunoreactivity was evaluated semiquantitatively and statistical
analyses including chi(2) tests, uni- and multi-variate survival analyses were
performed.
RESULTS: CDX2 was mostly expressed in a nuclear or supranuclear pattern, whereas 
MUC2 showed an almost exclusive supranuclear reactivity. Both antigens were
present in >80% of areas exhibiting intestinal metaplasia. An immunoreactivity in
>5% of the tumor area was observed in 57% (CDX2) or in 21% (MUC2) of the
carcinomas. The presence of both molecules did not correlate with WHO, Lauren and
Goseki classification (with the exception of a significantly stronger MUC2
expression in mucinous tumors). CDX2 correlated with a lower pT and pN stage in
the subgroups of intestinal and stage I cancers and was associated with MUC2
positivity. A prognostic impact of CDX2 or MUC2 was not observed.
CONCLUSION: CDX2 and MUC2 play an important role in the differentiation of
normal, inflamed, and neoplastic gastric tissues. According to our results, loss 
of CDX2 may represent a marker of tumor progression in early gastric cancer and
carcinomas with an intestinal phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4316046
PMID: 15929165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2005 Jun;7(3):177-81.

Barrett's esophagus: a molecular perspective.

Spechler SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Dallas VA Medical Center, 4500 South Lancaster
Road, Dallas, TX 75216, USA. sjspechler@aol.com

Carcinogenesis in Barrett's esophagus involves the accumulation of DNA
abnormalities that enable cells to 1) provide their own growth signals; 2) ignore
growth-inhibitory signals; 3) avoid apoptosis; 4) replicate without limit; 5)
sustain angiogenesis; and 6) invade and proliferate in unnatural locations. This 
report reviews recent publications describing molecular abnormalities in
Barrett's esophagus that could lead to the acquisition of these key physiologic
hallmarks of malignancy. Some recent reports suggest that the gastroesophageal
reflux of acid and bile can activate molecular pathways that promote
proliferation and interfere with apoptosis in Barrett's metaplastic cells.
Inactivation of the p16 and p53 tumor suppressor genes through promoter
methylation, gene mutation, or loss of heterozygosity appears to be important for
carcinogenesis in Barrett's esophagus. Finally, this report discusses recent data
regarding the role of the Cdx2 gene in the development of esophageal intestinal
metaplasia.

PMID: 15913475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Histopathology. 2005 Jun;46(6):649-58.

Sox2 expression in human stomach adenocarcinomas with gastric and
gastric-and-intestinal-mixed phenotypes.

Tsukamoto T(1), Mizoshita T, Mihara M, Tanaka H, Takenaka Y, Yamamura Y, Nakamura
S, Ushijima T, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Centre Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. ttsukamt@aichi-cc.jp

AIMS: Other than ectopic expression of intestinal transcription factors, Cdx1 and
Cdx2, the molecular mechanisms underlying gastric and intestinal phenotypes of
human stomach adenocarcinomas have yet to be clarified in detail. We have
reported that Sox2, an HMG-box gastric transcription factor, is expressed in
normal gastric mucosa and down-regulated in intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analysed mRNA levels of Sox2 and other differentiation
markers in 50 surgically resected stomach adenocarcinomas, immunohistochemically 
classified into gastric (G), gastric-and-intestinal (GI)-mixed, solely intestinal
(I), and null (N) types. Sox2 was found to be transcribed in G and GI-mixed type 
adenocarcinomas in accordance with MUC5AC and MUC6 expression, while Cdx1 and
Cdx2 were up-regulated in GI-mixed and I types along with the expression of MUC2 
and villin. In the N type, both gastric and intestinal transcription factors were
suppressed. Immunohistochemistry confirmed expression of Sox2 in MUC5AC+ lesions 
and Cdx2 localization together with MUC2. A stomach adenocarcinoma cell line,
KATOIII, demonstrated both MUC5AC and Sox2, although MUC5AC mRNA was not detected
in the Sox2+ AGS cell line.
CONCLUSIONS: Sox2 may play an important role in maintaining a gastric phenotype
in stomach cancers as well as in normal tissue, in cooperation with other
cofactor(s).

PMID: 15910596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Sep;72(1):16-24.

Expression profiling of genes crucial for placental and preimplantation
development in bovine in vivo, in vitro, and nuclear transfer blastocysts.

Hall VJ(1), Ruddock NT, French AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Early Human Development, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Placental abnormalities and failed implantation are characterized phenotypes that
occur in many species as a result of somatic cell cloning. This study examines a 
number of genes, critical for early placental development and reports aberrant
expression patterns in a number of cloned bovine blastocysts, thus implicating a 
role of these genes in failed implantation. Messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of
eight genes critical for early placental and preimplantation development
including Acrogranin, Cdx2, Eomes, ErbB3, ERR2, Hand1, MRJ, and Rex1 were
analyzed in single, in vivo, in vitro, and cloned bovine blastocysts (produced by
hand-made cloning (HMC) and serial hand-made cloning (SHMC)) following
complementary DNA (cDNA) amplification with a SMART cDNA synthesis kit. Aberrant 
expression of Acrogranin, Cdx2, and ERR2 was detected in a number of blastocysts 
produced by SHMC. Other genes, Eomes and Hand1, were not detectable in, in vivo
bovine blastocysts, suggesting a differential expression pattern between bovine
and murine embryos. A number of control marker genes including Oct4, IFN-tau, and
PolyA were expressed in all single blastocysts analyzed. This is the first study 
to report that failure of implantation may be due to aberrant expression of genes
in the preimplantation cloned embryo, which are crucial for the early regulation 
and differentiation of the placenta.

PMID: 15898073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 May 15;11(10):3766-72.

Markers of adenocarcinoma characteristic of the site of origin: development of a 
diagnostic algorithm.

Dennis JL(1), Hvidsten TR, Wit EC, Komorowski J, Bell AK, Downie I, Mooney J,
Verbeke C, Bellamy C, Keith WN, Oien KA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Oncology and Applied Pharmacology, Beatson
Laboratories, University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Glasgow
G61 1BD, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown origin are a common
clinical problem. Knowledge of the primary site is important for their
management, but histologically, such tumors appear similar. Better diagnostic
markers are needed to enable the assignment of metastases to likely sites of
origin on pathologic samples.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression profiling of 27 candidate markers was done using 
tissue microarrays and immunohistochemistry. In the first (training) round, we
studied 352 primary adenocarcinomas, from seven main sites (breast, colon, lung, 
ovary, pancreas, prostate and stomach) and their differential diagnoses. Data
were analyzed in Microsoft Access and the Rosetta system, and used to develop a
classification scheme. In the second (validation) round, we studied 100 primary
adenocarcinomas and 30 paired metastases.
RESULTS: In the first round, we generated expression profiles for all 27
candidate markers in each of the seven main primary sites. Data analysis led to a
simplified diagnostic panel and decision tree containing 10 markers only: CA125, 
CDX2, cytokeratins 7 and 20, estrogen receptor, gross cystic disease fluid
protein 15, lysozyme, mesothelin, prostate-specific antigen, and thyroid
transcription factor 1. Applying the panel and tree to the original data provided
correct classification in 88%. The 10 markers and diagnostic algorithm were then 
tested in a second, independent, set of primary and metastatic tumors and again
88% were correctly classified.
CONCLUSIONS: This classification scheme should enable better prediction on biopsy
material of the primary site in patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of
unknown origin, leading to improved management and therapy.

PMID: 15897574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2005 Jun;13(2):142-6.

Expression of CDX2, cytokeratins 7 and 20 in sinonasal intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma.

Ortiz-Rey JA(1), Alvarez C, San Miguel P, Iglesias B, Antón I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centro Médico POVISA, Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain.
jaortiz@povisa.es

CDX2 is a transcription factor expressed by intestinal epithelium. It is
considered as a sensitive marker for a colorectal or-less frequently-gastric
origin of adenocarcinomas. The pattern of coordinated expression of cytokeratin
(CK) 7 and CK20 is also useful for the diagnosis of the origin of metastatic
adenocarcinomas. Expression of CDX2, CK7 and CK20 was investigated in 14 cases of
sinonasal intestinal-type adenocarcinoma (SIA), a particular tumor with an
enteric-cell-type appearance. Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissue sections
were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies using the biotin-labeled
streptavidin technique. All of the cases expressed CDX2, being stained 50 to 100%
of the tumor cells (mean: 87.2%). CK7 positivity was detected in 8 cases (57.1%),
with the staining of 10 to 100% of cells (mean: 65.6%), and CK20 was found in all
the tumors (10 to 100% of cells; mean: 78.8%). The histologic resemblance between
SIA and colorectal adenocarcinoma is reinforced by the expression of CDX2 and
CK20, which are virtually constant in both neoplasms. CDX2 seems to be a marker
for cellular phenotype better than an indicator of the origin of adenocarcinomas.
CK7 is expressed in SIA less frequently than in colonic adenocarcinoma, but with 
a rate similar to the subset of rectal tumors, making the differential diagnosis 
between the two neoplasms difficult.

PMID: 15894926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2005 Jun 15;237(1-2):59-66.

Pdx1-related homeodomain transcription factors are distinctly expressed in mouse 
adult pancreatic islets.

Rosanas-Urgell A(1), Marfany G, Garcia-Fernàndez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Av.
Diagonal, 645, E-08028, Barcelona, Spain.

Complex gene networks are responsible for the proper operation of the endocrine
pancreas. A central member of such networks, the homeodomain transcription factor
Pdx1, belongs to the ParaHox gene cluster, an array of Hox-like homeobox genes.
With a combination of mRNA in situ hybridisation and immunodetection, we have
found that the rest of ParaHox cluster genes, Cdx1, Cdx2/3, and Cdx4, and Gsh1
and Gsh2, are all expressed in specific islet cell types of the endocrine
pancreas. To our knowledge, this is the first report that locates ParaHox genes
other than Pdx1 and Cdx2/3 in a place as to be involved in the pancreatic
transcriptional regulatory networks, potentially regulating glucagon-insulin
homeostasis.

PMID: 15888377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jun 17;331(4):1039-44.

Efficient gene silencing and cell differentiation using siRNA in mouse and monkey
ES cells.

Takada T(1), Nemoto K, Yamashita A, Kato M, Kondo Y, Torii R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Ohtsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan. ttakada@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) has been widely used for suppressing gene
expression in various organisms. Here, we describe efficient methods to suppress 
target genes (EGFP or Oct4) using siRNA in mouse and monkey ES cells, and
differentiation. In mouse ES cells, FACS analysis revealed that EGFP expression
was suppressed in 97% of transfected cells at 48 h after transfection. In
addition, cells expressed Hand1 and Cdx2, which are the marker genes of
trophoblast lineage by the transient suppression of Oct4. In the case of monkey
ES cells, highly efficient suppression was achieved in 98% of cells at 96 h
post-transfection using the Sendai virus (hemagglutinating virus of Japan, HVJ)
envelope as a carrier of siRNA. These efficient transfection methods using
synthetic siRNA should contribute to evaluate specific gene function in ES cells 
and can be used to differentiate ES cells into desired cell lineages.

PMID: 15882982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Gastroenterology. 2005 Apr;128(4):946-61.

CDX2-regulated expression of iron transport protein hephaestin in intestinal and 
colonic epithelium.

Hinoi T(1), Gesina G, Akyol A, Kuick R, Hanash S, Giordano TJ, Gruber SB, Fearon 
ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2216, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The homeobox transcription factor CDX2 has a key role in
intestinal development and differentiation. Mice heterozygous for Cdx2
inactivation develop colonic polyps with epithelial cells showing gastric or
squamous differentiation. Loss of CDX2 expression is seen in some poorly
differentiated colon carcinomas in humans. Conversely, ectopic CDX2 expression in
the stomach of transgenic mice promotes intestinal metaplasia, and CDX2
expression often is seen in intestinal metaplasia in stomach and esophagus. To
enhance knowledge of CDX2 function, we sought to define CDX2-regulated genes.
METHODS: HT-29 and WiDr colorectal cancer (CRC) cells with low endogenous CDX2
expression were transduced with a CDX2 expression vector, and gene expression
changes were assessed by microarrays.
RESULTS: The gene for ceruloplasmin-related iron transport protein hephaestin
(HEPH) was induced by CDX2 in HT-29 and WiDr. In other CRC lines and human and
mice tissues, endogenous HEPH expression was linked to CDX2 expression.
Activation of CDX2 rapidly induced HEPH expression, and RNA interference-mediated
inhibition of CDX2 led to lower HEPH expression. Studies with HEPH reporter gene 
constructs and chromatin-immunoprecipitation approaches suggested that CDX2
directly regulates HEPH transcription. In CRC cells, CDX2 induction suppressed
intracellular iron levels, consistent with the view that HEPH regulates iron
export. CDX2 expression was modulated in response to changes in intracellular
iron levels, implying a regulatory pathway in which increased iron levels lead to
increased expression of CDX2 and HEPH and enhanced iron export.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 has a key role in regulating HEPH expression and iron levels in
intestinal cells.

PMID: 15825077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Gastroenterology. 2005 Apr;128(4):935-45.

Loss of Klf4 in mice causes altered proliferation and differentiation and
precancerous changes in the adult stomach.

Katz JP(1), Perreault N, Goldstein BG, Actman L, McNally SR, Silberg DG, Furth
EE, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104-6145, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The epithelial zinc-finger transcription factor Klf4 (formerly
GKLF) regulates cellular proliferation and differentiation in vitro. Klf4 null
mice die by postnatal day 1 and show changes in epithelial differentiation of
skin and colon.
METHODS: We used tissue-specific gene ablation to generate mice lacking Klf4 in
their gastric epithelia. Klf4 mutant mice and controls were killed for histology,
immunohistochemistry, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR),
and serum gastrin levels. Klf4 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were analyzed in
Foxa3-Cdx2 transgenic mice and controls. Human gastric cancers and matched normal
tissue were used for qPCR and immunohistochemistry for KLF4.
RESULTS: Klf4 mutant mice survive to adulthood and show increased proliferation
and altered differentiation of their gastric epithelia. Klf4 mutants also display
aberrant expression of acidic mucins and TFF2/SP-positive cells, findings
characteristic of premalignant conditions, but no inflammation, intestinal
metaplasia, dysplasia, or cancer up to 1 year of age. Expression of KLF4 is
nearly absent in human gastric cancer, suggesting that failure to activate KLF4
during normal cellular differentiation may be a common feature of gastric
cancers. p21 WAF1/CIP1 is an in vivo target of Klf4, but Klf4 is not a mediator
of Cdx2.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of a single genetic factor, Klf4, leads to dramatic changes in 
the gastric epithelia of mice, and Klf4 is part of a regulatory pathway involving
p21 WAF1/CIP1 but not Cdx2. Thus, Klf4 is critical for normal gastric epithelial 
homeostasis.

PMID: 15825076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Dig Dis. 2004;22(4):306-12.

Pathogenesis of pre-neoplastic lesions of the stomach: targets for prevention.

Leung WK(1), Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Gastric atrophy and intestinal metaplasia are generally considered to be
precancerous lesions of the stomach. Chronic Helicobacter pylori infection is one
the most important factors in the development of these pre-malignant gastric
lesions. In addition to bacterial factors, polymorphisms in the cytokine genes of
the host that modulate inflammatory responses are found to have a synergistic
effect in the development of gastric cancer as well as pre-neoplastic lesions.
Recently, inappropriate activation of the intestine-specific transcription factor
like the homeobox gene complex CDX1 and CDX2 are found to be an important
contributing factor in the induction of intestinal metaplasia in the stomach.
Aberrant expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and epigenetic changes are also
frequently detected in pre-neoplastic gastric lesions. One of the most important 
questions relating to these pre-neoplastic gastric lesions is that whether H.
pylori eradication could reverse these changes. However, most controlled studies 
showed no or just modest improvement in intestinal metaplasia after H. pylori
eradication. Further studies should evaluate the role of other chemopreventive
agents, particularly cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, on regression of pre-neoplastic 
lesions.

Copyright (c) 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15812152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Dig Dis Sci. 2005 Mar;50(3):425-31.

Expression of Cdx2 in early GRCL of Barrett's esophagus induced in rats by
duodenal reflux.

Tatsuta T(1), Mukaisho K, Sugihara H, Miwa K, Tani T, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Surgery, Shiga University of Medical Science,
Tsukinowa-cho, Seta, Ohtsu, Shiga, Japan.

The intestine-specific caudal-related homeobox transcription factor Cdx2 is
widely accepted to play a key role in intestinal development and differentiation 
in mammals. We studied the role of Cdx2 in the development of Barrett's esophagus
(BE). In previous studies, we have shown a sequence of morphological changes of
squamous epithelium leading to BE, found a peculiar metaplastic change common to 
other parts of gut, and proposed the concept of a "gut regenerative cell lineage"
(GRCL). The GRCL is characterized by pyloric-foveolar metaplasia with goblet cell
metaplasia, which occurs in the regenerative process in response to chronic
inflammation. BE very likely develops through the GRCL, and we studied the
expression of Cdx2 in various lesions of rat esophageal mucosa induced by
duodenal reflux, using reverse transciptase-polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry against Cdx2. We found that Cdx2 was expressed not only in
specialized columnar epithelium (SCE) of BE, but also in several pyloric gland
and foveolar metaplastic cells which developed in the basal layer of the squamous
epithelium at an earlier stage of SCE development. These findings indicate that
Cdx2 plays a crucial role in directing intestinal-type differentiation of the
GRCL.

PMID: 15810620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mod Pathol. 2005 Sep;18(9):1217-22.

Value of CDX2, villin, and alpha-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase immunostains in
the distinction between primary adenocarcinoma of the bladder and secondary
colorectal adenocarcinoma.

Suh N(1), Yang XJ, Tretiakova MS, Humphrey PA, Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Department of Pathology
and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110-1093, USA.

Primary adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder is an uncommon neoplasm that can be
indistinguishable morphologically from colorectal adenocarcinoma secondarily
involving the bladder by direct extension or metastasis. In the current study, 17
enteric-type primary adenocarcinomas of the bladder were immunohistochemically
examined for the expression of CDX2, villin and alpha-methylacyl coenzyme A
racemase (AMACR), immunomarkers preferentially expressed in colorectal
adenocarcinoma. For comparison, 17 secondary colorectal adenocarcinomas involving
the bladder, 23 primary colorectal adenocarcinomas and 14 conventional urothelial
carcinomas were similarly studied. The results show that all 40 (100%) colorectal
adenocarcinomas expressed CDX2 and 39 (98%) expressed villin. The expression of
these two immunomarkers was less frequent in primary bladder adenocarcinomas,
observed in eight (47%) and 11 (65%) cases, respectively (P<0.0001 and P=0.0019, 
respectively). The frequency of positive AMACR immunostaining was similar between
these two types of tumors, detected in 28 (70%) colorectal adenocarcinomas and 11
(65%) primary bladder adenocarcinomas (P=0.694). None of the urothelial
carcinomas exhibited CDX2 or villin immunoreactivity; and only two (14%) showed
positive staining for AMACR. These results demonstrate that CDX2 and villin are
of diagnostic value in aiding in the distinction between primary adenocarcinoma
of the bladder and secondary colorectal carcinoma. Lack of CDX2 and villin
signals points strongly to a bladder primary.

PMID: 15803184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Development. 2005 May;132(9):2093-102. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Cdx2 is required for correct cell fate specification and differentiation of
trophectoderm in the mouse blastocyst.

Strumpf D(1), Mao CA, Yamanaka Y, Ralston A, Chawengsaksophak K, Beck F, Rossant 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto M5G 1X5, Ontario, Canada.

Blastocyst formation marks the segregation of the first two cell lineages in the 
mammalian preimplantation embryo: the inner cell mass (ICM) that will form the
embryo proper and the trophectoderm (TE) that gives rise to the trophoblast
lineage. Commitment to ICM lineage is attributed to the function of the two
transcription factors, Oct4 (encoded by Pou5f1) and Nanog. However, a positive
regulator of TE cell fate has not been described. The T-box protein eomesodermin 
(Eomes) and the caudal-type homeodomain protein Cdx2 are expressed in the TE, and
both Eomes and Cdx2 homozygous mutant embryos die around the time of
implantation. A block in early TE differentiation occurs in Eomes mutant
blastocysts. However, Eomes mutant blastocysts implant, and Cdx2 and Oct4
expression are correctly restricted to the ICM TE. Blastocoel formation initiates
in Cdx2 mutants but epithelial integrity is not maintained and embryos fail to
implant. Loss of Cdx2 results in failure to downregulate Oct4 and Nanog in outer 
cells of the blastocyst and subsequent death of those cells. Thus, Cdx2 is
essential for segregation of the ICM and TE lineages at the blastocyst stage by
ensuring repression of Oct4 and Nanog in the TE.

PMID: 15788452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar 17;352(11):1153-4; author reply 1153-4.

Altered nuclear transfer.

Hurlbut WB.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Dec 30;351(27):2791-2.

PMID: 15784673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Pancreas. 2005 Apr;30(3):233-8.

Aberrant expression of cdx2 homeobox gene in intraductal papillary-mucinous
neoplasm of the pancreas but not in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Yeh TS(1), Ho YP, Chiu CT, Chen TC, Jan YY, Chen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University,
Taipei, Taiwan. surglab@adm.cgmh.org.tw

OBJECTIVES: The authors investigated differential expression of cdx2 in
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas (IPMN) and ductal
adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Patients with IPMN (n = 23) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (n =
30) were studied. Expression of cdx2 mRNA, CDX2 protein, muc2 mRNA, MUC2
apomucin, and MUC5AC apomucin were determined.
RESULTS: Of 23 IPMN, expression of cdx2 was detected in 8 of 9 adenomas, 6 of 8
borderline malignancies, and 3 of 6 malignancies, respectively. Of the 3
cdx2-expressing malignant IPMN, 2 did not display CDX2 expression. The appearance
of CDX2-positive neoplastic cells in IPMN coincided with that of MUC2-positive
neoplastic cells. All 23 IPMN displayed a positive MUC5AC expression irrespective
to the status of CDX2 expression. Of 30 ductal adenocarcinomas, none displayed
cdx2, CDX2, and MUC2 expression, while 10 cases displayed positive MUC5AC
expression.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant expression of cdx2 homeobox gene was detected in IPMN but
not in ductal adenocarcinoma, which might determine their diverse carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15782100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Aug;289(2):G285-90. Epub 2005 Mar
17.

Differential regulation of intestinal alkaline phosphatase gene expression by
Cdx1 and Cdx2.

Alkhoury F(1), Malo MS, Mozumder M, Mostafa G, Hodin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Gray 504, 55 Fruit Street,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

We have examined the role that the caudal-related homeobox transcription factors 
Cdx1 and Cdx2 play in activating the enterocyte differentiation marker gene
intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP). Human colon cancer Caco-2 cells were
transiently transfected with Cdx1 and/or Cdx2, and semiquantitative RT-PCR was
used to study the effects on IAP mRNA expression. Transfections with a variety of
IAP-luciferase reporter constructs were used to identify a Cdx response element
located within the human IAP gene promoter. Protein-DNA interactions were
examined by EMSA. Results showed that Cdx1 markedly induced IAP mRNA expression, 
whereas Cdx2 did not, and, in fact, inhibited the Cdx1 effects. Functional
analysis revealed that Cdx1 transactivates (fourfold, P < 0.05) the IAP promoter 
through a novel Cdx response element (GTTTAGA) located between -2369 and -2375
upstream of the translational start site. EMSA showed that both Cdx1 and Cdx2
could bind to the cis element, but in cotransfection experiments, Cdx2 inhibited 
the Cdx1 effects by approximately 50%. Thus we have identified a previously
unrecognized interaction between two important gut transcription factors, Cdx1
and Cdx2, in the context of IAP gene regulation. Cdx1 activates the IAP gene via 
a novel cis element, whereas Cdx2 inhibits the Cdx1 effects.

PMID: 15774940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Mar 20;23(9):1811-8.

Expression of the caudal-type homeodomain transcription factors CDX 1/2 and
outcome in carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater.

Hansel DE(1), Maitra A, Lin JW, Goggins M, Argani P, Yeo CJ, Piantadosi S, Leach 
SD, Biankin AV.

Author information: 
(1)MBBS, Department of Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
720 Rutland Ave, Ross 771, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. abianki1@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE: Adenocarcinomas of the ampulla of Vater demonstrate a characteristic
histology but vary significantly in outcome. As a consequence, prognostic factors
for these cancers are poorly defined. The caudal-type homeodomain transcription
factors 1 (CDX1) and 2 (CDX2) regulate axial development and intestinal
differentiation. We assessed the expression of these putative intestinal
epithelial-specific transcription factors and their influence on patient outcome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty-three resected carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater, 31
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, and 15 extrahepatic biliary carcinomas were
analyzed for CDX1 and CDX2 expression using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Forty percent of carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater but less than 5% of 
pancreatic and biliary adenocarcinomas expressed CDX. Expression of CDX was
associated with a better prognosis (P = .0009). Individually, both CDX1 (P = .02)
and CDX2 (P = .02) expression were associated with a survival advantage on
univariate analysis. Advanced T stage (P = .02), lymph node metastases (P =
.004), and vascular space invasion (P = .0009) were associated with a poor
prognosis. Multivariate analysis revealed vascular space invasion (P = .01) and
CDX expression (P = .01) to be independent prognostic factors.
CONCLUSION: Expression of CDX was an independent marker of outcome in patients
with resected adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater. Expression of CDX may
distinguish good prognosis intestinal-like tumors, which potentially arise within
intestinal epithelium, from poorer prognosis pancreatobiliary tumors, which arise
in adjacent pancreatic and/or biliary ductal epithelium.

PMID: 15774774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Lab Invest. 2005 May;85(5):702-15.

Interferon gamma induction of gastric mucous neck cell hypertrophy.

Kang W(1), Rathinavelu S, Samuelson LC, Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Chronic inflammation of the gastric epithelium is believed to induce mucosal
changes that can eventually develop into gastric cancer. In gastrin-deficient
(G-/-) mice exhibiting chronic inflammation in the hypochlorhydric stomach, we
documented a prominent fundic mucous cell lineage sharing morphological
similarity with preneoplastic changes reported in Helicobacter-infected mice. To 
study the identity and origin of this cell lineage, we screened for different
gastric mucosal cell markers. The clusters of large, foamy cells stained for
trefoil factor 2 (TFF2/SP), MUC6 and the lectin Griffonia Simplicifolia II
(GSII), but not for the intestine-specific transcription factor Cdx2, suggested
that they arise from gastric mucous neck cells. Ki67-labeled GSII-positive neck
cells in Helicobacter felis-infected, but not G-/- stomachs, suggested that
mucous neck cell proliferation accounted for expansion of this compartment in the
H. felis model of gastritis, but not the G-/- model. Using RNase protection
assays and quantitative PCR, we found that interferon gamma (IFNgamma) was the
most abundant proinflammatory cytokine in the G-/- stomach. We also found that
this Th1 cytokine can increase the abundance of mucous neck cells, since its
infusion into mice recapitulated the appearance of these cells as observed in
both G-/- and H. felis-infected mice. Using the human gastric cell line NCI-N87, 
we showed that IFNgamma induces the secretion of mucus and expression of MUC6,
TFF2 and pepsinogen II, but not of pepsinogen I and intrinsic factor. In
conclusion, our results demonstrate that inflammation, specifically the
proinflammatory cytokine IFNgamma, induced expansion of the fundic mucous neck
cell compartment, which likely represents both increased mucus production and
cell number.

PMID: 15765119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Int J Oncol. 2005 Apr;26(4):891-6.

Aberrant expression of the gastric mucin MUC6 in human pulmonary adenocarcinoma
xenografts.

Hamamoto A(1), Abe Y, Nishi M, Fujimori S, Ohnishi Y, Yamazaki H, Oida Y,
Miyazaki N, Inada K, Ueyama Y, Iwasaki M, Inoue H, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Bohseidai, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

Certain pulmonary adenocarcinomas show gastrointestinal differentiation with the 
expression of various mucins. The CDX homeobox gene, an intestine-specific
transcription factor, is related to gastric carcinogenesis with MUC2 and MUC6
expression. The intestinal mucin MUC2 is expressed in the normal lung, while the 
gastric mucin MUC6 is not. Previously, we have reported that the expressions of
MUC2 and MUC6 were related to a poor prognosis in small adenocarcinomas of the
lung. We estimated the expressions of the mucin (MUC2 and MUC6) and CDX (CDX1 and
CDX2) to examine how CDX relates to the gastrointestinal mucin production in the 
pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Thirty-nine human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
xenografts were examined (13 adenocarcinoma, 18 squamous cell carcinoma and 8
large cell carcinoma). Significant expression of the MUC6 gene was observed in 7 
out of 39 (17.9%) NSCLC xenografts. The expressions of the MUC6 genes were noted 
in 6 out of 13 (46.2%) adenocarcinoma xenografts, but only in 1 of 18 (0.06%)
squamous cell carcinoma xenografts. The adenocarcinoma xenografts significantly
showed higher expression of the MUC6 gene than squamous cell carcinoma xenografts
(t-test, p=0.0343). Four adenocarcinoma-xenografts co-expressed both the MUC2 and
MUC6 genes, and the residual 2 adenocarcinoma-xenografts expressed only the MUC6 
gene. One MUC6 overexpressing squamous cell carcinoma focally contained an
adenocarcinoma component. The expression patterns of the gastrointestinal mucins 
were analogous to gastric cancer. The cellular morphology of these carcinoma
xenografts was of the gastric cancer type. The proteins of the MUC2 and MUC6 were
immunohistochemically confirmed in the xenografts. The expression of the MUC6
gene was significantly correlated with the expressions of the CDX1 and CDX2 genes
in the xenografts (Fisher's test, p<0.0001 and p=0.0005, respectively), while
there was no significant association between the expression of the MUC2 and CDX
genes. These results suggest that the expression of CDX molecules in the
pulmonary carcinogenesis pathway relates to gastric cancerous features of
aberrant MUC6 expression.

PMID: 15753982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 1;65(5):1619-26.

Gene expression profiles in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia reflect the
effects of Hedgehog signaling on pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

Prasad NB(1), Biankin AV, Fukushima N, Maitra A, Dhara S, Elkahloun AG, Hruban
RH, Goggins M, Leach SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Invasive pancreatic cancer is thought to develop through a series of noninvasive 
duct lesions known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). We used cDNA 
microarrays interrogating 15,000 transcripts to identify 49 genes that were
differentially expressed in microdissected early PanIN lesions (PanIN-1B/2)
compared with microdissected normal duct epithelium. In this analysis, a cluster 
of extrapancreatic foregut markers, including pepsinogen C, MUC6, KLF4, and TFF1,
was found to be up-regulated in PanIN. Up-regulation of these genes was further
validated using combinations of real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemistry in a total of 150 early PanIN lesions
from 81 patients. Identification of these gastrointestinal transcripts in human
PanIN prompted assessment of other foregut markers by both semiquantitative and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, revealing similar up-regulation of Sox-2,
Gastrin, HoxA5, GATA4/5/6, Villin and Forkhead 6 (Foxl1). In contrast to frequent
expression of multiple gastric epithelial markers, the intestinal markers
intestinal fatty acid binding protein, CDX1 and CDX2 were rarely expressed either
in PanIN lesions or in invasive pancreatic cancer. Hedgehog pathway activation
induced by transfection of immortalized human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells 
with Gli1 resulted in up-regulation of the majority of foregut markers seen in
early PanIN lesions. These data show frequent up-regulation of foregut markers in
early PanIN lesions and suggest that PanIN development may involve
Hedgehog-mediated conversion to a gastric epithelial differentiation program.

PMID: 15753353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18095-107. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

Cdk2-dependent phosphorylation of homeobox transcription factor CDX2 regulates
its nuclear translocation and proteasome-mediated degradation in human intestinal
epithelial cells.

Boulanger J(1), Vézina A, Mongrain S, Boudreau F, Perreault N, Auclair BA, Lainé 
J, Asselin C, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group on Functional Development and
Physiopathology of the Digestive Tract, Département d'Anatomie et Biologie
Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H
5N4, Canada.

By having demonstrated previously that p27(Kip1), a potent inhibitor of G(1)
cyclin-cyclin-dependent kinases complexes, increases markedly during intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation, we examined the effect of p27(Kip1) on the
activity of the transcription factor CDX2. The present results revealed the
following. 1) p27(Kip1) interacts with the CDX2 transcription factor. 2) In
contrast to CDX2 mRNA levels, CDX2 protein expression levels significantly
increased as soon as Caco-2/15 cells reached confluence, slowed their
proliferation, and began their differentiation. The mechanism of CDX2 regulation 
is primarily related to protein stability, because inhibition of proteasome
activity increased CDX2 levels. The half-life of CDX2 protein was significantly
enhanced in differentiated versus undifferentiated proliferative intestinal
epithelial cells. 3) Cdk2 interacted with CDX2 and phosphorylated CDX2, as
determined by pull-down glutathione S-transferase and immunoprecipitation
experiments with proliferating undifferentiated Caco-2/15 cell extracts. 4)
Treatment of Caco-2/15 cells with MG132 (a proteasome inhibitor) and
(R)-roscovitine (a specific Cdk2 inhibitor) induced an increase in CDX2 protein
levels. 5) Conversely, ectopic expression of Cdk2 resulted in decreased
expression of CDX2 protein. 6) Of note, treatment of proliferative Caco-2/15
cells with (R)-roscovitine or leptomycin (an inhibitor of nuclear export through 
CRM1) led to an accumulation of CDX2 into the nucleus. These data suggest that
CDX2 undergoes CRM1-dependent nuclear export and cytoplasmic degradation in cells
in which Cdk2 is activated, such as in proliferative intestinal epithelial cells.
The targeted degradation of CDX2 following its phosphorylation by Cdk2 identifies
a new mechanism through which CDX2 activity can be regulated in coordination with
the cell cycle machinery.

PMID: 15741163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2005 Mar;129(3):338-47.

Utility of immunohistochemistry in distinguishing primary adenocarcinomas from
metastatic breast carcinomas in the gastrointestinal tract.

O'Connell FP(1), Wang HH, Odze RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Mass 02115,
USA.

CONTEXT: Breast carcinoma often metastasizes to the gastrointestinal tract,
especially the stomach, where it is frequently difficult to distinguish from a
primary gastric carcinoma.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the utility of immunohistochemical stains in
differentiating primary gastric carcinomas from metastatic breast carcinomas.
DESIGN: Mucosal biopsy specimens from 47 adenocarcinomas involving the
gastrointestinal tract (28 primary gastric carcinomas and 19 metastatic breast
carcinomas) and 16 control cases of primary breast carcinomas without metastasis 
were immunohistochemically stained for estrogen receptor protein (ER),
progesterone receptor protein (PR), gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP),
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 protein, cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, CK/7,
CK/20, a panel of mucin glycoprotein antigens (MUC2, MUC3, MUC5AC, and MUC6),
monoclonal antibody DAS-1, and caudal-type homeobox transcription factor CDX2 and
compared between primary and metastatic adenocarcinomas.
RESULTS: Highly significant proportions of metastatic breast carcinomas were
positive for ER (72%), PR (33%), GCDFP (78%), and CK5/6 (61%) compared with
primary gastric carcinomas (ER, 0%; PR, 0%; GCDFP, 0%; and CK5/6, 14%) (P < .001,
P = .002, P < .001, and P = .004, respectively). Of these immunostains, ER, PR,
and GCDFP were 100% specific. Primary breast tumors and their metastases showed a
similar phenotypic profile. In contrast, primary gastric carcinomas showed
significantly higher proportions of cases that stained with CK20 (50%), MUC2
(54%), MUC5AC (71%), MUC6 (39%), DAS-1 (43%), and CDX2 (67%) compared with
metastatic breast carcinomas (CK20, 0%; MUC2, 24%; MUC5AC, 6%; MUC6, 0%; DAS-1,
0%; and CDX2, 0%) (P = .001, P = .01, P < .001, P = .02, P = .009, and P < .001, 
respectively). No significant differences were observed with regard to any of the
other immunostains (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 protein, CK7, and
MUC3) between the patient groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen receptor protein, PR, GCDFP, CK5/6, CK20, MUC5AC, MUC6,
DAS-1, and CDX2 are helpful in distinguishing primary gastric carcinomas from
metastatic breast carcinomas. Of these, ER, PR, and GCDFP are highly specific for
metastatic breast carcinomas, whereas CK20, DAS-1, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and CDX2
are highly specific for primary gastric carcinomas.

PMID: 15737028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Pathol. 2005 Apr;205(5):615-22.

CDX2 co-localizes with liver-intestine cadherin in intestinal metaplasia and
adenocarcinoma of the stomach.

Ko S(1), Chu KM, Luk JM, Wong BW, Yuen ST, Leung SY, Wong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

CDX2 and liver-intestine (LI)-cadherin are intestine-specific markers and both
are physiologically expressed in the small intestine and colon. Recent studies
have demonstrated that CDX2 regulates LI-cadherin gene (CDH17) expression in
colorectal cancer. The present study investigated the relationship of CDX2 and
LI-cadherin expression in gastric cancer. One hundred and nine pairs of tumour
and non-cancerous gastric mucosa were collected from gastrectomy specimens.
Protein expression levels of CDX2 and LI-cadherin were determined by
immunohistochemical staining. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that the mRNAs of
both CDX2 and CDH17 were highly expressed in tumour compared with non-cancerous
mucosa. Overexpression of CDX2 was significantly associated with CDH17 in gastric
adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, the expression of CDX2 and LI-cadherin proteins was 
strongly coupled in intestinal metaplasia. In conclusion, overexpression of CDH17
is significantly associated with CDX2.

PMID: 15732140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Mar;29(3):359-67.

Immunohistochemical staining in the diagnosis of pancreatobiliary and ampulla of 
Vater adenocarcinoma: application of CDX2, CK17, MUC1, and MUC2.

Chu PG(1), Schwarz RE, Lau SK, Yen Y, Weiss LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010,
USA. pchu@coh.org

Pancreatobiliary and ampulla of Vater adenocarcinomas frequently metastasize to
regional lymph nodes, liver, or lung and are difficult to diagnose because they
lack specific immunohistochemical markers. We studied the expression of
cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin 17 (CK17), cytokeratin 20 (CK20), CDX2, mucin 1 
(MUC1), mucin 2 (MUC2), and mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) in 46 cases of pancreatic ductal
carcinoma, 18 ampulla of Vater adenocarcinomas, and 24 intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas. The expression of MUC1 and CK17 was restricted to pancreatic
ductal carcinoma (41 of 46, 89%; 38 of 46, 83%, respectively), the ampullary
carcinoma of pancreatobiliary origin (6 of 6, 100%; 5 of 6, 83%, respectively),
and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (20 of 24, 83%; 17 of 24, 71%, respectively).
More than 50% of cases of pancreatobiliary adenocarcinomas showed diffuse
cytoplasmic CK17 positivity. In contrast, less than 5% cases (8 of 184) of
extra-pancreatobiliary nonmucinous adenocarcinomas expressed CK17, and only 3 of 
them showed diffuse CK17 positivity. The expression of MUC2 and CDX2 was
restricted to the intestinal, mucinous, and signet-ring cell-type adenocarcinomas
of duodenal papillary origin (9 of 11, 82%; 11 of 11, 100%, respectively). MUC2
was rarely expressed in pancreatic ductal carcinoma (1 of 46, 2%) and was
negative in the ampullary carcinoma of pancreatobiliary origin and in
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. A heterogeneous CDX2 staining pattern was seen
in 1 of 6 cases of the ampullary carcinoma of pancreatobiliary origin (17%), 5 of
24 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (21%), and 10 of 46 (22%) pancreatic ductal
carcinomas. In contrast, all 11 cases of the intestinal, mucinous, and
signet-ring cell-type adenocarcinomas of duodenal papillary origin showed
homogeneous CDX2 nuclear positivity. We concluded that CK17 is a useful marker in
separating pancreatobiliary adenocarcinomas from extra-pancreatobiliary
nonmucinous adenocarcinomas, including adenocarcinomas from the colon, breast,
gynecologic organs, stomach, lung, prostate, thyroid, kidney, and adrenal gland, 
and malignant mesothelioma. MUC1+/CK17+ can be used as positive markers for
pancreatic ductal carcinomas, the ampullary carcinoma of pancreatobiliary origin,
and cholangiocarcinomas with positive predictive values of 76%, 83%, and 58%,
respectively. MUC2+/CDX2+ can be used as positive markers for the intestinal-type
adenocarcinoma of duodenal papillary origin with a positive predictive value of
82%.

PMID: 15725805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2005 Mar;13(1):55-60.

CDX2 immunostaining as a gastrointestinal marker: expression in lung carcinomas
is a potential pitfall.

Mazziotta RM(1), Borczuk AC, Powell CA, Mansukhani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt Clinic, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2006 Jun;14(2):249-50.

Paraffin-embedded sections of various adenocarcinomas (13 colonic, 11 mucinous
ovarian, 5 serous ovarian, 8 pancreatic, 6 ampullary, 12 gastric, 5 esophageal,
10 endometrial, 29 breast, and 55 lung) and 29 additional lung carcinomas
(nonadenocarcinomas) were immunostained with antibodies to CDX2 protein,
cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and cytokeratin 20 (CK20). The 84 lung carcinomas were also 
stained with antibody to thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). All colorectal
and most ovarian mucinous carcinomas were strongly and diffusely immunoreactive
for CDX2. Esophageal, gastric, and ampullary adenocarcinomas showed variable
immunoreactivity for CDX2. All breast, nonmucinous ovarian, and most endometrial 
and pancreatic adenocarcinomas showed no immunoreactivity for CDX2. CK7 and CK20 
expression was similar to previous reports. Ten of 84 primary lung carcinomas
(12%) were immunoreactive for CDX2 expression. Of these, 5 (4 adenocarcinomas and
1 large cell carcinoma) were reactive for TTF-1. Gene expression profiling
data--available for 32 of these 84 tumors--showed CDX2 gene expression in 7 of 8 
(88%) CDX2 immunoreactive tumors whereas only 1 of 24 (4%) tumors negative for
CDX2 immunoreactivity showed CDX2 gene expression. The authors conclude that CDX2
is a relatively specific marker for tumors with intestinal differentiation, with 
the caveat that its expression can be seen in primary large cell and
adenocarcinomas of the lung and mucinous carcinomas of the ovary.

PMID: 15722794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Mar;123(3):394-404.

Usefulness of CDX2 and TTF-1 in differentiating gastrointestinal from pulmonary
carcinoids.

Saqi A(1), Alexis D, Remotti F, Bhagat G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Carcinoids of different organs appear morphologically indistinguishable. We
studied the usefulness of differential expression of CDX2 and thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) in 78 gastrointestinal and pulmonary carcinoids
and their metastases (n = 10). CDX2 staining of gastric biopsy specimens with
neuroendocrine hyperplasia (n = 11) and various gastritides (n = 10) was also
performed. All ileal (6/6 [100%]), 6 (86%) of 7 appendiceal, 3 (75%) of 4
duodenal, 1 (50%) of 2 ampullary, 12 (33%) of 18 rectal, 6 (30%) of 20
pancreatic, and 1 (17%) of 6 gastric carcinoids expressed CDX2 with variable
intensity; none of the pulmonary carcinoids stained. Of 15 pulmonary carcinoids, 
8 (53%) stained with TTF-1, but none of the gastrointestinal carcinoids did. CDX2
and TTF-1 staining profiles of primary and metastatic carcinoids were similar.
CDX2+ gastric endocrine cells had a distribution similar to that of gastrin and
enterochromaffin cells but not enterochromaffin-like cells. Our results suggest
that CDX2 and TTF-1 have high specificity for gastrointestinal and pulmonary
carcinoids, respectively.

PMID: 15716236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2005 Mar;21(2):135-40.

Recent findings in the cell and molecular biology of the small intestine.

Walters JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
julian.walters@imperial.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recently published research exploring new aspects of the
molecular and cell biology of the small intestine is reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: The importance has become apparent of several paracrine and
autocrine signaling pathways that regulate stem cell proliferation in the crypts 
and differentiation on the villus. These growth factor systems include: the Wnt
pathway, with molecules such as Dickkopf, APC, beta-catenin and SOX9; the
Hedgehog system; and members of the TGF-beta family such as bone morphogenetic
proteins. Transcription factors activating the expression of genes in the
intestine include CDX1, CDX2 and HNF1alpha and their actions are increasingly
well characterized. Important findings are being made relating to the Toll-like
receptors, which have a major role in innate immunity and intestinal homeostasis.
SUMMARY: Many new discoveries using increasingly sophisticated techniques have
demonstrated the complexity of the cellular and molecular interactions in the
intestinal mucosa.

PMID: 15711203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Oncol Rep. 2005 Mar;13(3):547-51.

Promoter methylation downregulates CDX2 expression in colorectal carcinomas.

Kawai H(1), Tomii K, Toyooka S, Yano M, Murakami M, Tsukuda K, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Thoracic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

CDX2 (caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2) is a homeobox protein, which
is expressed in intestinal epithelium. CDX2 has been considered to play a role as
a tumor suppressor gene in colorectal cancer because its expression is lacking in
colorectal carcinomas, but preserved in adenomas. The point mutations have been
found to account for loss of CDX2 expression, but the main mechanism responsible 
for CDX2 gene inactivation is less understood. We analyzed methylation and
expression status of CDX2 in colorectal cancer cell lines and primary tumors.
There are two CpG-rich sites in promoter region of CDX2 gene, -1570 to -1200 and 
-220 to +880. By COBRA (combined bisulfite restriction analysis) assay, the upper
CpG-rich site was heavily methylated in all cell lines, but the lower CpG-rich
site was methylated in limited cell lines. Bisulfite sequencing analysis and
RT-PCR revealed that methylation of the lower CpG site was associated with
down-regulation of CDX2. In addition, gene expression was restored in COLO201, a 
methylated cell line with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, confirming that methylation
caused gene down-regulation. We also examined CDX2 promoter methylation of
primary tumors by MSP (methylated-allele specific PCR) assay and found that
nearly 40% of cases have a methylated CDX2 gene. Our results demonstrate that
CDX2 methylation is frequently present in colorectal cancers and may play a key
role in inactivating CDX2 expression.

PMID: 15706431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Exp Brain Res. 2005 May;163(1):86-99. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Noggin and basic FGF were implicated in forebrain fate and caudal fate,
respectively, of the neural tube-like structures emerging in mouse ES cell
culture.

Chiba S(1), Kurokawa MS, Yoshikawa H, Ikeda R, Takeno M, Tadokoro M, Sekino H,
Hashimoto T, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1
Sugao, 216-8511 Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Japan.

We developed neural tube-like structures accompanying neural crest-like cells by 
treating embryonic stem (ES) cells with retinoic acid. The structures contained
pseudostratified Nestin+Vimentin+ neuroepithelial cells surrounded by Masson
staining+ basement membrane. betaIIItubulin+Synaptophysin+ mature neurons and
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)+ glial cells dispersed outside of the
membrane. Addition of Noggin to the culture induced prominent proliferation of
the neuroepithelial cells, leading to epithelial hyperstratification of the
structures. mRNAs of transcription factors essential for forebrain development
such as Emx1/2 and Pax6 were specifically expressed and Islet1+Lim1/2-
motoneurons appeared by the addition of Noggin. In contrast, basic fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF) promoted enlargement of central lumen and elongation of the 
structures. mRNAs of caudal markers, Gbx2, Cdx2 and Hoxb4/9 were expressed and
Lim1/2+ spinal motoneurons appeared by the addition of bFGF. Addition of BMP-4
similarly brought about mild enlargement of central lumen of the structures.
Interestingly, the addition of BMP-4 induced Slug+ neural crest-like cells
surrounding the tube-like structures. mRNAs of Snail and dHand, other markers for
neural crest cells, were also expressed by the addition of BMP-4. These results
suggest that Noggin lead the neural-tube like structures to forebrain fate,
whereas bFGF was involved in the caudalization. BMP-4 was implicated in emergence
of the neural crest-like cells. Differentiation of ES cells by the present
methods may mimic neurulation and subsequent neural development of early embryos,
and elucidates the opposite effects of Noggin and bFGF for the neural tube
development.

PMID: 15703886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2004 Mar;20(2):70-6.

Cell and molecular biology of the small intestine: new insights into
differentiation, growth and repair.

Walters JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
julian.walters@imperial.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This paper will discuss recent research that has provided new 
insights into the molecular and cell biology of the small intestine.
RECENT FINDINGS: Differentiation of the epithelial cell lineages, including the
enterocytes, enteroendocrine, Goblet and Paneth cells, from the stem cells is
better understood. Important interactions have been demonstrated between these
cells, luminal bacteria, and underlying mesenchymal tissue. Intestine-specific
gene expression is regulated by transcription factors that are becoming well
characterized, including CDX1, CDX2 and HNF1. The actions of growth factors such 
as GLP-2 and EGF are now known to be complex, demonstrating multiple effects in
this tissue at a number of levels.
SUMMARY: Progress in the cellular and molecular biology of the small intestine is
producing many intriguing new findings.

PMID: 15703624  [PubMed]


478. Nat Med. 2005 Feb;11(2):108.

Scientists irked by ethicists' alternatives for embryo research.

Ready T.

PMID: 15692581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Jun;288(6):G1159-69. Epub 2005 Feb 
3.

Polyamines are necessary for synthesis and stability of occludin protein in
intestinal epithelial cells.

Guo X(1), Rao JN, Liu L, Zou T, Keledjian KM, Boneva D, Marasa BS, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Baltimore Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 10 North Greene
St., Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Occludin is an integral membrane protein that forms the sealing element of tight 
junctions and is critical for epithelial barrier function. Polyamines are
implicated in multiple signaling pathways driving different biological functions 
of intestinal epithelial cells (IEC). The present study determined whether
polyamines are involved in expression of occludin and play a role in intestinal
epithelial barrier function. Studies were conducted in stable Cdx2-transfected
IEC-6 cells (IEC-Cdx2L1) associated with a highly differentiated phenotype.
Polyamine depletion by alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) decreased levels of
occludin protein but failed to affect expression of its mRNA. Other tight
junction proteins, zonula occludens (ZO)-1, ZO-2, claudin-2, and claudin-3, were 
also decreased in polyamine-deficient cells. Decreased levels of tight junction
proteins in DFMO-treated cells were associated with dysfunction of the epithelial
barrier, which was overcome by exogenous polyamine spermidine. Decreased levels
of occludin in polyamine-deficient cells was not due to the reduction of
intracellular-free Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](cyt)), because either increased
or decreased [Ca(2+)](cyt) did not alter levels of occludin in the presence or
absence of polyamines. The level of newly synthesized occludin protein was
decreased by approximately 70% following polyamine depletion, whereas its protein
half-life was reduced from approximately 120 min in control cells to
approximately 75 min in polyamine-deficient cells. These findings indicate that
polyamines are necessary for the synthesis and stability of occludin protein and 
that polyamine depletion disrupts the epithelial barrier function, at least
partially, by decreasing occludin.

PMID: 15691870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2005 Feb 1;43(2):173-6.

Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage is not associated with known polymorphism in
the Vitamin D receptor gene.

Claassen M(1), Nouwen J, Fang Y, Ott A, Verbrugh H, Hofman A, van Belkum A,
Uitterlinden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus Medical
Center, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The vitamin D endocrine system has been shown to influence the immune response
and polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene have been associated with 
susceptibility to infectious diseases. We determined if the Cdx2, FokI and
BsmI-ApaI-TaqI polymorphisms in the VDR gene were associated with nasal carriage 
of Staphylococcal aureus. We defined the S. aureus nasal carriage status
(persistent, intermittent or non-carriage) for a group of more that 2000 elderly 
volunteers. The prevalence of persistent S. aureus nasal carriage was 18%, which 
was, however, not associated with any of the variant VDR genotypes. Our study
into genetic determinants of S. aureus carriage patterns is the largest in the
field, but still we found no association between VDR gene variation and S. aureus
nasal carriage.

PMID: 15681147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):13195-202. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Cdx binding determines the timing of enhancer activation in postnatal duodenum.

Maier EA(1), Dusing MR, Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental Biology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

In mammalian intestine, adenosine deaminase (ADA) is expressed at high levels
only along the villi of the duodenal epithelium. A duodenum-specific enhancer
identified in the second intron of the human ADA gene controls this pattern of
expression. This enhancer faithfully recapitulates this expression pattern in
transgenic mice, when included in CAT reporter gene constructions. Multiple
binding sites for PDX-1 and GATA factors were previously identified within the
approximately 300-bp region that encompasses the enhancer. Mutation analyses
demonstrated that binding of PDX-1 and of GATA-4 was absolutely essential for
enhancer function. In the present study, we have identified additional enhancer
binding sites for Cdx factors, for YY1, and for NFI family members. Detailed EMSA
studies were used to confirm binding at these sites. This brings the number of
confirmed binding sites within the enhancer to thirteen, with five different
factors or family of factors contributing to the putative enhanceosome complex.
Mutation analysis was utilized to examine the specific roles of the newly
identified sites. Two sites were identified that bound both Cdx1 and Cdx2.
Mutations were identified in these two sites that completely and specifically
eliminated Cdx binding. In transgenic mice, these enhancer mutations dramatically
changed the developmental timing of enhancer activation (delaying it by 2-3
weeks) without affecting other aspects of enhancer function. In the chromatin
context of certain transgenic insertion sites, mutation of the two YY1 sites to
specifically ablate binding caused a delay in enhancer activation similar to that
observed with the Cdx mutations. No overt changes were observed from mutation of 
the NFI site.

PMID: 15677472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Feb 15;303(2):252-62.

Growth of intestinal epithelium in organ culture is dependent on EGF signalling.

Abud HE(1), Watson N, Heath JK.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, PO Box 2008,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. helen.abud@ludwig.edu.au

Differentiation of endoderm into intestinal epithelium is initiated at E13.5 of
mouse development when there are significant changes in morphology resulting in
the conversion of undifferentiated stratified epithelium into a mature epithelial
monolayer. Here we demonstrate that monolayer formation is associated with the
selective apoptosis of superficial cells lining the lumen while cell
proliferation is progressively restricted to cells adjacent to the basement
membrane. We describe an innovative embryonic gut culture system that maintains
the three-dimensional architecture of gut and in which these processes are
recapitulated in vitro. Explants taken from specific regions of the gut and
placed into organ culture develop and express molecular markers (Cdx1, Cdx2 and
A33 antigen) in the same spatial and temporal pattern observed in vivo indicating
that regional specification is maintained. Inhibition of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase using the specific inhibitor AG1478
significantly reduced the proliferation and survival of cells within the
epithelial cell layer of cultured gut explants. This demonstrates an essential
role for the EGF signalling pathway during the early stages of intestinal
development.

PMID: 15652340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2005 May;131(5):271-8. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

Expression of homeodomain protein CDX2 in gallbladder carcinomas.

Wu XS(1), Akiyama Y, Igari T, Kawamura T, Hiranuma S, Shibata T, Tsuruta K, Koike
M, Arii S, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519,
Japan.

PURPOSE: Caudal-related homeobox protein CDX2 plays an important role in the
regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation of the intestinal
epithelium. CDX2 is associated with intestinal metaplasia and carcinomas of the
stomach, but the role of CDX2 in gallbladder carcinogenesis remains unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression of CDX2 and intestinal apomucin MUC2 in
gallbladder cancer cell lines at the mRNA level by the RT-PCR method. We also
investigated the expression of CDX2 and MUC2 in 68 primary gallbladder carcinomas
by the immunohistochemical staining method and compared the expression of CDX2
with the clinicopathological factors in the gallbladder carcinoma cases.
RESULTS: Expression of CDX2 and MUC2 was found in three of four gallbladder
cancer cell lines at the mRNA level. In addition, we found that CDX2 was absent
in the normal gallbladder epithelium, but the CDX2 protein was expressed in 25 of
the 68 (36.8%) gallbladder carcinomas. Interestingly, in the tubular type
gallbladder carcinomas, the frequency of CDX2 expression was much higher in the
well-differentiated type than the moderately and poorly differentiated types, the
difference being statistically significant (P<0.01). CDX2 expression showed a
relationship with expression of MUC2 (P<0.04) in the gallbladder carcinomas. CDX2
was expressed in intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia, which are hypothesized to
be premalignant conditions.
CONCLUSION: These results imply that CDX2 plays an important role in gallbladder 
carcinogenesis with intestinal differentiation.

PMID: 15645288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Endocr Pathol. 2004 Fall;15(3):247-52.

Cdx2 as a marker for neuroendocrine tumors of unknown primary sites.

Erickson LA(1), Papouchado B, Dimashkieh H, Zhang S, Nakamura N, Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The transcription factors CDX1 and CDX2 are homeobox genes that regulate
development of the epithelium of the small and large intestine. A few studies
have shown that Cdx2 protein expression is useful in the diagnosis of
adenocarcinomas as well as neuroendocrine tumors of the small and large
intestine. To examine the utility of Cdx2 in recognizing neuroendocrine tumors of
unknown primary sites, we analyzed 224 primary and metastatic neuroendocrine
tumors by immunohistochemistry. The specificity of the antibody reaction was
confirmed by Western blotting. Cdx2 antibody stained all primary and most
metastatic midgut carcinoid tumors. A few rectal and pulmonary carcinoids were
positive, while gastric carcinoids were negative for Cdx2. One of five small cell
carcinomas (20%) of the colon was positive for Cdx2, while all pulmonary small
cell carcinomas were negative. Neuroendocrine tumors of the pituitary,
parathyroid, medullary thyroid carcinomas, paragangliomas, pheochromocytomas and 
Merkel cell carcinomas were all negative for Cdx2. Western blot analysis of seven
cases showed a 40 kDa band in both primary and metastatic midgut carcinoid
tumors. These results indicate that Cdx2 can be very useful in recognizing
metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas of unknown primary sites, especially when
they are derived from the small intestine.

PMID: 15640551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. N Engl J Med. 2004 Dec 30;351(27):2791-2.

Altered nuclear transfer in stem-cell research - a flawed proposal.

Melton DA(1), Daley GQ, Jennings CG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar 17;352(11):1153-4; author reply 1153-4.

PMID: 15625329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Pol J Pathol. 2004;55(3):9-14.

CDX-2 expression is reduced in colorectal carcinomas with solid growth pattern
and proximal location, but is largely independent of MSI status.

Okon K(1), Zazula M, Rudzki Z, Papla B, Osuch C, Stachura J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathomorphology, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian University,
Grzegórzecka, Kraków.

The homeobox genes are transcription factors that control the development of
tissues and organs. In the colon one of such genes is CDX-2. In colorectal
carcinomas, the CDX-2 expression is reduced. The aim of the present study was to 
investigate the presence of CDX-2 in colorectal carcinomas and to relate it to
the histological features and microsatellite stability status. The material
consisted of 20 carcinomas without microsatellite instability, 19 cases with low 
microsatellite instability and 19 cases with high microsatellite instability.
CDX-2 expression was investigated using immunohistochemistry with CDX2-88
monoclonal antibody and assessed semiquantitatively. In 10 cases no expression of
CDX-2 was observed, while in 6 the protein was present in less than 25% of tumor 
cells. It was noted that reduced expression of CDX-2 was more frequent in
carcinomas situated proximally to the splenic flexure (p < 0.015) and in tumors
with solid growth pattern (p < 0.03). On the other hand, no significant
differences were encountered between groups differing in microsatellite
stability. The results suggest that the major factors that determine the presence
of CDX-2 in colorectal carcinomas at the protein product level may include cancer
location and the solid phenotype of the tumor.

PMID: 15619975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Gut. 2005 Jan;54(1):33-9.

Pericryptal fibroblast sheath in intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinoma.

Mutoh H(1), Sakurai S, Satoh K, Osawa H, Tomiyama T, Kita H, Yoshida T, Tamada K,
Yamamoto H, Isoda N, Ido K, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachimachi, Kawachigun, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Comment in
    Gut. 2006 Feb;55(2):295-6.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: In the progression of chronic gastritis, gastric mucosal
cells deviate from the normal pathway of gastric differentiation to an intestinal
phenotype which is closely related to gastric carcinoma. However, to date, it has
not been elucidated whether the intestinal metaplasia is merely a change in the
epithelium or whether the underlying mesenchyme also changes from gastric type to
intestinal type. We have investigated the relationship between intestinal
metaplasia and the pericryptal fibroblast sheath (PCFS) in the mesenchyme. In
addition, we also examined PCFS in gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: We determined the existence of PCFS in the intestinal metaplastic mucosa
and carcinoma of both human and Cdx2 transgenic mouse stomach. PCFS was
determined using the antibody against alpha-smooth muscle actin and electron
microscopic observations.
RESULTS: PCFS formed an almost complete layer around the small and large
intestinal crypts while it did not exist around the normal gastric glands in both
mice and humans. PCFS was seen around the glands of intestinal metaplastic mucosa
in both Cdx2 transgenic mouse and human stomachs. However, PCFS was virtually
absent in the intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma area.
CONCLUSION: We successfully demonstrated that the epithelium as well as the
mesenchyme changed from the gastric type to the intestinal type in intestinal
metaplasia and that PCFS disappeared in intestinal-type gastric carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC1774373
PMID: 15591501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Virchows Arch. 2005 Jan;446(1):1-9. Epub 2004 Dec 4.

Immunological and morphogenic basis of gastric mucosa atrophy and metaplasia.

Faller G(1), Kirchner T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Krankenhausstrasse 8-10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
Gerhard.Faller@patho.imed.uni-erlangen.de

Chronic gastritis with gastric mucosa atrophy, intestinal metaplasia and
endocrine cell hyperplasia are alterations with an increased risk for the
development of gastric neoplasias. Immunological studies in autoimmune gastritis,
in atrophic Helicobacter pylori gastritis and in studies with transgenic mice
point to a central role of the parietal cell in the development of gastric mucosa
atrophy. Destruction of gastric epithelial cells alone might not be sufficient
for the loss of complete gastric glands. Gastric atrophy, endocrine cell
hyperplasia and intestinal and pancreatic metaplasia can be regarded as the
result of altered morphogenesis within the gastric mucosa. Impaired expression of
the gastric morphogenic factor Sonic Hedgehog by parietal cells and increased
expression of the transcriptional activators of intestinal and pancreatic
differentiation, namely CDX2 and PDX1, seem to be crucial for the development of 
gastric atrophy and for intestinal, endocrine and pancreatic transdifferentiation
processes. Altered expression of these morphogenic factors is partly caused by
changes in the gastric milieu. Further studies concerning the normal and
pathological morphogenesis of the gastric mucosa and related tissues might give
new insight into the pathogenesis of gastric atrophy and metaplasia.

PMID: 15583929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):G1074-83. Epub 2004 Dec 
2.

Regulation of RELM/FIZZ isoform expression by Cdx2 in response to innate and
adaptive immune stimulation in the intestine.

Wang ML(1), Shin ME, Knight PA, Artis D, Silberg DG, Suh E, Wu GD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6144, USA.

Host immune responses to commensal flora and enteric pathogens are known to
influence gene expression in the intestinal epithelium. Although the Cdx family
of caudal-related transcription factors represents critical regulators of gene
expression in the intestinal epithelium, the effect of intestinal immune
responses on Cdx expression and function has not been determined. We have shown
that bacterial colonization and Th2 immune stimulation by intestinal nematode
infection induce expression of the intestinal goblet cell-specific gene RELM
beta. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of
resistin-like molecule/found in inflammatory zone (RELM/FIZZ, RELM beta) and its 
isoforms RELM alpha and RELM gamma to ascertain the role of Cdx in modifying
intestinal gene expression associated with innate and adaptive immune responses. 
Analysis of the RELM beta promoter showed that Cdx2 plays a critical role in
basal gene activation in vitro. This was confirmed in vivo using transgenic mice,
where ectopic gastric and hepatic expression of Cdx2 induces expression of RELM
beta, but not RELM alpha or RELM gamma, exclusively in the stomach. Although
there was no quantitative change in colonic Cdx2 mRNA expression, protein
distribution, or phosphorylation of Cdx2, bacterial colonization induced
expression of RELM beta, but not RELM alpha or RELM gamma. In contrast, parasitic
nematode infections activated colonic expression of all three RELM isoforms
without alteration in Cdx2 expression. These results demonstrated that Cdx2
participates in directing intestine-specific expression of RELM beta in the
presence of commensal bacteria and that adaptive Th2 immune responses to
intestinal nematode infections can activate intestinal goblet cell-specific gene 
expression independent of Cdx2.

PMID: 15576623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Oncol Rep. 2004 Dec;12(6):1239-43.

Cdx2 expression in pancreatic tumors: Relationship with prognosis of invasive
ductal carcinomas.

Matsumoto K(1), Mizoshita T, Tsukamoto T, Ogasawara N, Hirata A, Shimizu Y,
Haneda M, Yamao K, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya 464-8681, Japan.

We have previously reported that Caudal-related homeobox gene 2 (Cdx2) is a
useful prognostic intestinal phenotypic marker for advanced gastric cancers. In
this study, we examined Cdx2 expression and phenotype in pancreatic tumors. We
evaluated 19 mucinous cystic tumors (MCTs), 17 intraductal papillary-mucinous
tumors (IPMTs), and 41 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) with regard to their
gastrointestinal phenotype. The expression of Cdx2 was also assessed
immunohistochemically. The lesions were phenotypically divided into 39 gastric (G
type), 29 gastric and intestinal mixed (GI type), 3 intestinal (I type), and 6
null (N type) types, independent of the histopathological type. Most of the
pancreatic tumors were thus judged to be the positive for gastric phenotypic
members. Cdx2 nuclear staining demonstrated a close relation to the intestinal
phenotypic expression in all three types (MCTs, IPMTs, and IDCs; p<0.05). In
IDCs, Kaplan-Meier analysis of Cdx2 expression showed the Cdx2-positive group to 
have a significantly better outcome than their negative counterparts (p=0.015).
In conclusion, our data suggest that Cdx2 might be necessary for intestinal
phenotypic expression even in pancreatic tumor cells. In addition, Cdx2
expression in IDCs may be a novel prognostic marker for patient survival.

PMID: 15547744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7740-7.

Development of gastric carcinoma from intestinal metaplasia in Cdx2-transgenic
mice.

Mutoh H(1), Sakurai S, Satoh K, Tamada K, Kita H, Osawa H, Tomiyama T, Sato Y,
Yamamoto H, Isoda N, Yoshida T, Ido K, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.
muto@jichi.ac.jp

In the progression of chronic gastritis, gastric mucosal cells deviate from the
normal pathway of gastric differentiation to an intestinal phenotype. Many
epidemiologic studies have found an association between the formation of
intestinal metaplasia and the development of gastric carcinoma. However, there is
no direct evidence that shows intestinal metaplasia is a precursor lesion of
gastric carcinoma, to date. We periodically examined the intestinal metaplastic
mucosa of Cdx2-transgenic mice we have previously generated. Gastric polyps
developed from intestinal metaplastic mucosa in all stomachs of Cdx2-transgenic
mice examined. These gastric polyps consisted of intestinal-type adenocarcinoma
that invaded the submucosa and muscularis propria and occasionally spread into
the subserosa. p53 and APC gene mutations were recognized in the adenocarcinomas.
The participation of APC and p53 gene mutations in gastric carcinogenesis from
the intestinal metaplasia was verified by the Cdx2-transgenic mice, carrying
Apc(Min) mutation or p53 deficiency, that developed gastric polyps much earlier
than Cdx2 alone. We successfully showed that long-term intestinal metaplasia
induces invasive gastric carcinoma. These results indicate that intestinal
metaplasia itself plays a significant role in the genesis and progression of
gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 15520178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Virchows Arch. 2004 Sep;445(3):248-54. Epub 2004 Jul 29.

CDX2 as a marker of intestinal EC-cells and related well-differentiated endocrine
tumors.

La Rosa S(1), Rigoli E, Uccella S, Chiaravalli AM, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo and University of Insubria,
Varese, Italy. anapat@ospedale.varese.it

Gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) endocrine tumors (ETs) are neoplasms showing
different hormonal profiles and different clinical and prognostic features, which
depend consistently on the site of origin. Histological features and general
endocrine markers do not differentiate tumors in relation to their location,
making it difficult to establish the site of origin of a GEP ET that has
metastasized to the liver or lymph nodes. A site-specific marker would be
particularly useful in the examination of small specimens where there is not
sufficient material for an extensive study of the hormonal expression. CDX2 is a 
transcription factor that has been recently proposed as a marker of intestinal
adenocarcinomas. Our aim was to evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of
CDX2 in normal tissues and in 184 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded ETs to
verify whether it could be used to identify intestinal ETs with a high degree of 
sensitivity and specificity. Of these cases, 154 were primary tumors (99 GEP and 
55 non-GEP tumors), 101 were well-differentiated endocrine tumors, and 53 were
poorly differentiated endocrine carcinomas (PDECs). Of the cases, 30 were
metastases from differently located ETs. Nuclear CDX2 immunoreactivity was found 
in all EC-cells (serotonin-producing cells), in about 10% of G-cells
(gastrin-producing cells), in about 30% of GIP-cells (gastric inhibitory peptide 
cells) and in a few motilin-positive cells of the normal intestinal mucosa, while
other gastrointestinal endocrine cell types were CDX2 negative. All midgut
EC-cell tumors, their metastases, and two of three pancreatic EC-cell ETs were
diffusely and intensely CDX2 positive. The other GEP ETs, their metastases, as
well as the non-GEP ETs, were all CDX2 negative, with the exception of four
PDECs, five gastrinomas and one pheochromocytoma, which were only focally
positive. We conclude that CDX2 may be considered a sensitive and specific marker
of midgut EC-cells and EC-cell tumors, and its expression may be useful in the
diagnosis of metastases from occult ETs.

PMID: 15517368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Reproduction. 2004 Nov;128(5):643-54.

Serine-threonine kinases and transcription factors active in signal transduction 
are detected at high levels of phosphorylation during mitosis in preimplantation 
embryos and trophoblast stem cells.

Liu J(1), Puscheck EE, Wang F, Trostinskaia A, Barisic D, Maniere G, Wygle D,
Zhong W, Rings EH, Rappolee DA.

Collaborators: Rappolee DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)C S Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Hutzel Hospital, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201, USA.

Serine-threonine kinases and transcription factors play important roles in the
G1-S phase progression of the cell cycle. Assays that use quantitative
fluorescence by immunocytochemical means, or that measure band strength during
Western blot analysis, may have confused interpretations if the intention is to
measure G1-S phase commitment of a small subpopulation of phosphorylated
proteins, when a larger conversion of the same population of proteins can occur
during late G2 and M phases. In mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSC), a human
placental cell line (HTR), and/or mouse preimplantation embryos, 8/19
serine-threonine and tyrosine kinases, 3/8 transcription factors, and 8/14
phospho substrate and miscellaneous proteins were phosphorylated at higher levels
in M phase than in interphase. Most phosphoproteins appeared to associate with
the spindle complex during M phase, but one (p38MAPK) associated with the spindle
pole and five (Cdx2, MEK1, 2, p27, and RSK1) associated with the DNA.
Phosphorylation was detected throughout apparent metaphase, anaphase and
telophase for some proteins, or for only one of these segments for others. The
phosphorylation was from 2.1- to 6.2-fold higher during M phase compared with
interphase. These data suggest that, when planning and interpreting quantitative 
data and perturbation experiments, consideration must be given to the role of
serine-threonine kinases and transcription factors during decision making in M
phase as well as in G1-S phase.

PMID: 15509711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Carcinogenesis. 2005 Jan;26(1):193-200. Epub 2004 Oct 21.

Relationship between CDX2 gene methylation and dietary factors in gastric cancer 
patients.

Yuasa Y(1), Nagasaki H, Akiyama Y, Sakai H, Nakajima T, Ohkura Y, Takizawa T,
Koike M, Tani M, Iwai T, Sugihara K, Imai K, Nakachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 
Japan. yuasa.monc@tmd.ac.jp

Epigenetic gene silencing through DNA methylation is one of the important steps
in the mechanism underlying tumorigenesis, including in the stomach. Past
lifestyle factors of cancer patients, such as intake of vegetables, are very
important in affecting gastric carcinogenesis. However, the relationship between 
DNA methylation and past dietary habits in cancer patients remains largely
unknown. The CDX2 homeobox transcription factor plays a key role in intestinal
development, but CDX2 is also expressed in most of the intestinal metaplasia and 
part of the carcinomas of the stomach. We analyzed the methylation status of the 
CDX2 5' CpG island in gastric cancer cell lines by methylation-specific PCR
(MSP), and then CDX2 mRNA was found to be activated after 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine 
treatment of the methylation-positive cells. We further examined the methylation 
status of CDX2 in primary gastric carcinomas by MSP and compared it with the past
lifestyle of the patients, including dietary habits. Methylation of CDX2 was
found in 20 (34.5%) of the 58 male patients and one (6.7%) of the 15 female
patients. Since the methylation frequency was low in the female patients, the
analysis was performed only on the male cases. CDX2 methylation was correlated
with the decreased intake of green tea and cruciferous vegetables, and also with 
full or overeating habits. These findings are consistent with epidemiological
observations on gastric cancer. We also analyzed the methylation status of
p16/INK4a and hMLH1, but their frequencies were not associated with dietary
factors or other lifestyle factors. Thus, diet could be an important factor
determining the methylation status of genes such as CDX2 and the resultant
aberrant expression of genes involved in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15498792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 1;64(19):6973-7.

Down-regulation of the homeodomain factor Cdx2 in colorectal cancer by collagen
type I: an active role for the tumor environment in malignant tumor progression.

Brabletz T(1), Spaderna S, Kolb J, Hlubek F, Faller G, Bruns CJ, Jung A, Nentwich
J, Duluc I, Domon-Dell C, Kirchner T, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
thomas.brabletz@patho.imed.uni-erlangen.de

The homeobox transcription factor Cdx2 specifies intestinal development and
homeostasis and is considered a tumor suppressor in colorectal carcinogenesis.
However, Cdx2 mutations are rarely found. Invasion of colorectal cancer is
characterized by a transient loss of differentiation and nuclear accumulation of 
the oncoprotein beta-catenin in budding tumor cells. Strikingly, this is reversed
in growing metastases, indicating that tumor progression is a dynamic process
that is not only driven by genetic alterations but also regulated by the tumor
environment. Here we describe a transient loss of Cdx2 in budding tumor cells at 
the tumor host interface, and reexpression of Cdx2 in metastases. Cell culture
experiments show that collagen type I, through beta(1) integrin signaling,
triggers a transient transcriptional down-regulation of Cdx2 and its
intestine-specific target gene sucrase isomaltase, associated with a loss of
differentiation. These data indicate an active role for the tumor environment in 
malignant tumor progression.

PMID: 15466189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Clin Pathol. 2004 Oct;57(10):1063-8.

The homeodomain protein CDX2 is an early marker of Barrett's oesophagus.

Moons LM(1), Bax DA, Kuipers EJ, Van Dekken H, Haringsma J, Van Vliet AH,
Siersema PD, Kusters JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical
Centre Rotterdam, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: In Barrett's oesophagus (BO), squamous epithelium is replaced by
specialised intestinal epithelium (SIE). Transcription factors associated with
intestinal differentiation, such as CDX2, may be involved in BO development.
AIM: To investigate CDX2 expression in BO, squamous epithelium, and oesophageal
adenocarcinoma (ADC).
METHODS: CDX2 expression was assessed in 245 samples-167 biopsies of the columnar
lined segment and 38 squamous epithelial biopsies of 39 patients with
histologically confirmed BO (10 with ADC). Forty biopsies from 20 patients with
reflux oesophagitis (RO) without BO were also evaluated. CDX2 protein was
investigated immunohistochemically in 138 biopsies from 16 patients with BO, four
with ADC, and 20 with RO. Cdx2 and Muc2 mRNA were detected semiquantitatively
using 88 BO biopsies and squamous epithelium from 19 BO patients, and when
present from ADC.
RESULTS: SIE was present in 53/79 biopsies from the columnar lined segment; CDX2 
protein was seen in all epithelial cells, but not in biopsies containing only
gastric metaplastic epithelium (26/79), or in squamous epithelium (0/40) of
patients with RO. Cdx2 mRNA was detected in all biopsies with goblet cell
specific Muc2 transcription-indicative of SIE. Low Cdx2 mRNA expression was seen 
in 6/19 squamous epithelium samples taken 5 cm above the squamocolumnar junction 
of BO patients.
CONCLUSION: CDX2 protein/mRNA is strongly associated with oesophageal SIE. Cdx2
mRNA was present in the normal appearing squamous epithelium of one third of BO
patients, and may precede morphological changes seen in BO. Therefore, pathways
that induce Cdx2 transcription in squamous epithelial cells may be important in
BO development.

PMCID: PMC1770465
PMID: 15452161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Apr;203(1):15-26.

Differential expression of claudin-2 along the human intestine: Implication of
GATA-4 in the maintenance of claudin-2 in differentiating cells.

Escaffit F(1), Boudreau F, Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Claudins, and particularly claudin-2, are important regulatory components of
tight junction permeability. A better understanding of the involvement of
claudin-2 in intestinal barrier functions requires the characterization of its
distribution and regulation in the intestine. Interestingly, the claudin-2 gene
promoter harbors a number of similarities to that of sucrase-isomaltase, a marker
of enterocyte differentiation. We thus investigated the expression of claudin-2
in relation to the transcription factors CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 in the
human intestine. The characterization of claudin-2 and the expression of the
above transcription factors were performed by immunofluorescence, Western blot,
and RT-PCR in the developing human intestinal epithelium. The functional role of 
CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 on claudin-2 regulation was also examined by ectopic
expression studies in intestinal cell models. Claudin-2 was detected in both
crypt and villus cells of the small intestine but restricted to undifferentiated 
crypt cells in the colon. CDX2 and HNF-1alpha were expressed along the entire
intestine whereas GATA-4 was undetectable in the colon. Accordingly, in the
colonic Caco-2 cell model, claudin-2 was found to be present only in
undifferentiated cells. Like in the colonic epithelium, GATA-4 was found to be
also lacking in Caco-2 cells while CDX2 and HNF-1alpha were present at
significant levels. Cotransfection experiments showed that the claudin-2 promoter
was activated by CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 in a cooperative manner.
Furthermore, forced GATA-4 expression in Caco-2 cells enhances maintenance of
claudin-2 expression during differentiation. These observations suggest that
optimal claudin-2 expression in the gut relies on the presence of GATA-4,
suggesting a role for this factor in intestinal regionalization.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Mod Pathol. 2005 Jan;18(1):19-25.

Use of novel immunohistochemical markers expressed in colonic adenocarcinoma to
distinguish primary ovarian tumors from metastatic colorectal carcinoma.

Logani S(1), Oliva E, Arnell PM, Amin MB, Young RH.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. slogani@emory.edu

Distinguishing primary ovarian carcinoma, particularly endometrioid and mucinous 
subtypes, from metastatic colorectal carcinoma to the ovary is often difficult on
histologic examination alone. Recently, three immunohistochemical markers CDX2, a
homeobox gene encoding an intestine-specific transcription factor;
alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR/P504S), a mitochondrial and peroxisomal
enzyme with fairly restricted expression in selective tumors and beta-catenin, an
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutation product resulting in activation of the 
Wnt pathway, have been reported to have specific and sensitive expression in
colorectal carcinomas. We evaluated a panel consisting of antibodies to CDX2,
beta-catenin and P504S in 23 primary ovarian adenocarcinomas (13 mucinous and 10 
endometrioid) and compared the findings to 22 metastatic colorectal
adenocarcinomas (seven mucinous and 15 nonmucinous tumors with endometrioid-like 
morphology hereafter referred to as pseudo-endometrioid) to the ovary stained
with the same panel. Twenty (91%) metastatic tumors expressed at least two
markers and seven (32%) expressed all three. In contrast, only three (13%)
primary ovarian tumors expressed at least two markers and none expressed all
three. Strong (2+, 3+) and diffuse (>40%) expression for CDX2 was noted in 21
(95%) metastatic tumors and five (22%) primary ovarian tumors (three mucinous,
two endometrioid). P504S was similarly expressed in seven (32%) metastatic and
none of the primary ovarian carcinomas. Nuclear expression of beta-catenin was
noted in 13 (59%) metastatic tumors and in eight cases (36%), it was diffuse and 
strong. In contrast, four (19%) primary tumors showed nuclear expression of this 
protein with only one (5%) case expressing it in a diffuse pattern.
Immunohistochemical expression of gene products and enzymes of colorectal
carcinogenesis in some primary ovarian carcinomas suggest that the morphologic
similarities between colorectal and mucinous/endometrioid carcinoma of the ovary 
extends to the genetic level, although differences in the level of expression
exist between these tumors. Diffuse expression of all three markers (CDX2,
beta-catenin and P504S) in a tumor in the ovary was found to be virtually
diagnostic of metastasis from a colorectal primary in this study.

PMID: 15389251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Sep 15;199(3):354-63.

Regulation of UDP glucuronosyltransferases in the gastrointestinal tract.

Gregory PA(1), Lewinsky RH, Gardner-Stephen DA, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Flinders
University School of Medicine, Bedford Park, South Australia, 5042.

The UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract have a 
crucial role in protection against the toxic effects of lipophilic chemicals in
the environment. UGTs such as UGT1A7, UGT1A8, and UGT1A10 are exclusively
expressed in gastrointestinal tissues, each with a unique tissue distribution
pattern that is subject to interindividual variation. The factors regulating this
tissue-specific expression and that contribute to variability are beginning to be
elucidated. Studies on the UGT1A7, 1A8, 1A9, and 1A10 gene promoters in Caco-2
cells, an in vitro model of enterocytes of the gastrointestinal tract, have
identified the caudal homeodomain transcription factor, Cdx2, as an important
regulator of the UGT1A8 and 1A10 gene proximal promoters. This transcription
factor is found exclusively in the small intestine and colon: it is absent in the
gastric epithelium and the esophagus. Cdx2 regulates the UGT1A8 and 1A10
promoters in cooperation with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). It is
noteworthy that UGT1A7 is not expressed in gastrointestinal tissue distal to the 
gastric mucosa and does not contain a Cdx2 binding site in its proximal promoter.
Transcription factors, including Sp1, which differentially bind to the initiator 
regions of the UGT1A8, 1A9, and 1A10 promoters, also contribute to the
differences in expression of these UGTs in Caco-2 cells. The identification of
important regulatory regions of UGT genes expressed in the gastrointestinal
tract, and the transcription factors that bind to these regions, will aid in the 
elucidation of factors that contribute to interindividual differences in
gastrointestinal UGT expression. In turn, this will lead to further understanding
of interindividual variation in the capacity of the GI tract to metabolize
lipophilic chemicals and to act as a barrier to dietary toxins and orally
administered drugs.

PMID: 15364550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004 Sep;122(3):421-7.

Usefulness of Cdx2 in separating mucinous bronchioloalveolar adenocarcinoma of
the lung from metastatic mucinous colorectal adenocarcinoma.

Saad RS(1), Cho P, Silverman JF, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

We studied the diagnostic value of Cdx2 to distinguish mucinous
bronchioloalveolar carcinoma from mucinous colorectal adenocarcinoma metastatic
to the lung. We retrieved 92 via the hospital computer system, including 30
mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinomas, 32 nonmucinous bronchioloalveolar
carcinomas, and 30 mucinous colorectal adenocarcinomas metastatic to the lung.
All cases were confirmed by clinical history and surgical resection with
occasional immunohistochemical studies. Cases were stained with antibodies
against Cdx2, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), cytokeratin (CK) 7, and
CK20. Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, mucinous type, showed positive staining for
Cdx2, TTF-1, CK7, and CK20 in 0 (0%), 5 (17%), 30 (100%), and 18 (60%) of 30
cases, respectively; nonmucinous tumors were positive in 0 (0%), 30 (94%), 32
(100%), and 0 (0%) of 32 cases, respectively. For colorectal adenocarcinoma, the 
positive staining for Cdx-2, TTF-1, CK7, and CK20 was 29 (97%), 0 (0%), 7 (23%), 
and 29 (97%) of 30 cases, respectively. Our results demonstrated Cdx2 as a
sensitive and specific marker for differentiating metastatic colorectal
adenocarcinoma from mucinous bronchioloalveolar adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 15362373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Gut. 2004 Oct;53(10):1416-23.

Cdx1 induced intestinal metaplasia in the transgenic mouse stomach: comparative
study with Cdx2 transgenic mice.

Mutoh H(1), Sakurai S, Satoh K, Osawa H, Hakamata Y, Takeuchi T, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachi-machi, Kawachigun, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Comment on
    Gut. 2004 Oct;53(10):1394-6.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Gastric intestinal metaplasia, which is mainly induced by
Helicobacter pylori infection, is thought to be a precancerous lesion of gastric 
adenocarcinoma. Intestinal metaplastic mucosa expresses intestine specific
homeobox genes, Cdx1 and Cdx2, in the human gastric mucosa. We and others have
reported that ectopic expression of Cdx2 in the gastric epithelium generates
intestinal metaplasia in the transgenic mouse model.
METHODS: To clarify the differences in the roles of Cdx1 and Cdx2 in intestinal
metaplasia, we generated transgenic mice expressing Cdx1 in the gastric mucosa
and compared Cdx1 induced gastric mucosal morphological changes with Cdx2 induced
intestinal metaplasia.
RESULTS: The gastric mucosa in Cdx1 transgenic mice was completely replaced by
intestinal metaplastic mucosa, consisting of all four intestinal epithelial cell 
types: absorptive enterocytes, goblet, enteroendocrine, and Paneth cells. Paneth 
cells, which were not recognised in Cdx2 transgenic mice, were in the upper
portion of the intestinal metaplastic mucosa. Pseudopyloric gland metaplasia,
which was induced in Cdx2 transgenic mice, was not recognised in Cdx1 transgenic 
mice. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) positive cells were diffusely
scattered in Cdx1 induced intestinal metaplastic mucosa while PCNA positive cells
in Cdx2 induced intestinal metaplastic mucosa were in the base of the metaplastic
mucosa. Intestinal metaplastic mucosa of Cdx1 transgenic mouse stomach was
significantly thicker than that of wild-type or Cdx2 transgenic mouse stomach.
CONCLUSIONS: We have confirmed that Cdx1 induced gastric intestinal metaplasia
but that it differed from Cdx2 induced intestinal metaplasia in differentiation, 
structure, and proliferation.

PMCID: PMC1774241
PMID: 15361487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 13;321(1):58-64.

Runx3-/- gastric epithelial cells differentiate into intestinal type cells.

Fukamachi H(1), Ito K, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. h_fukama@biol.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

We have previously reported that Runx3, a runt domain transcription factor, is a 
major growth regulator of gastric epithelial cells, that a lack of RUNX3 function
is causally related to the genesis and progression of human gastric cancer, and
that expression of RUNX3 is greatly reduced in intestinal metaplasias in human
stomachs. Here we examined the differentiation of Runx3-/- mouse gastric
epithelial cells and found that some cells differentiated into intestinal type
cells, which expressed Cdx2, a transcription factor that has been shown to induce
intestinal metaplasia in transgenic mice. Differentiation of intestinal type
cells was not found in culture of Runx3+/+ gastric epithelial cells. These
results suggest that gastric epithelial cells can differentiate into intestinal
type cells, probably due to expression of Cdx2 in them when the function of Runx3
is impaired. The relationship between loss of function of Runx3, formation of
intestinal metaplasia, and gastric cancer was discussed.

PMID: 15358215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Oct 1;299(2):427-41.

IL-1beta regulates expression of Cx32, occludin, and claudin-2 of rat hepatocytes
via distinct signal transduction pathways.

Yamamoto T(1), Kojima T, Murata M, Takano K, Go M, Chiba H, Sawada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

The functions of gap and tight junctions are perturbed during the acute-phase
response to liver injury. To elucidate the mechanism of pro-inflammatory cytokine
IL-1beta responsible for regulation of hepatic gap and tight junctions, we
analyzed expression and function of gap and tight junctions using a rat liver
injury model and primary cultures of rat hepatocyte. In rat liver lobules at 24 h
after thioacetamide (TAA) treatment, where some IL-1beta-positive non-parenchymal
cells existed, disappearance of connexin32-positive spots at cell borders of the 
hepatocytes and increases of claudin-2 and occludin immunoreactivities in bile
canalicular regions were observed. In primary cultures of rat hepatocytes,
IL-1beta caused the disappearance of connexin32, which was reciprocal to the
induction and localization of claudin-2 to cell membranes. The downregulated
connexin32 expression was inhibited by treatment with a MAP-kinase inhibitor
(PD98059), whereas the upregulated claudin-2 expression was blocked by p38 MAP
and PI3-kinase inhibitors (SB203580 and LY294002). The changes of connexin32 and 
claudin-2 may be controlled at the transcriptional level via NF-kappaB,
HNF-1alpha, and CDX2. Occludin was hyperphosphorylated by IL-1beta treatment and 
was inhibited by treatment with a PI3-kinase inhibitor. These results demonstrate
that MAP-kinase, p38 MAP-kinase, and PI3-kinase are distinctly involved in the
regulation of hepatic gap and tight junctions during the acute-phase response to 
IL-1beta.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15350541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 27;573(1-3):147-54.

Cdx2 homeodomain protein regulates the expression of MOK, a member of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase superfamily, in the intestinal epithelial cells.

Uesaka T(1), Kageyama N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan. uesaka-t@cdb.riken.jp

Regulatory protein kinases are involved in various cellular processes such as
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Using cDNA differential display,
we identified MOK, a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase superfamily, 
as one of the genes induced by a caudal-related homeobox transcription factor,
Cdx2. Analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the MOK gene led to the
identification of primary Cdx2 responsive element, and an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay indicated that Cdx2 binds to that element. The interaction
of Cdx2 with the MOK promoter region was further confirmed in vivo by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. The expression of MOK mRNA and protein was limited to
the crypt epithelial cells of the mouse intestine. We also determined the MOK
activity associated with the growth arrest and induction of differentiation by
sodium butyrate or Cdx2 expression in the human colon cancer cell line HT-29.
Taken together, these data indicate that MOK is a direct target gene for Cdx2,
and that MOK may be involved in growth arrest and differentiation in the
intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 15327990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Sep;28(9):1253-4.

Aberrant expression of CDX2 in the metaplastic epithelium and inflammatory mucosa
of the gallbladder.

Osawa H, Kita H, Satoh K, Ohnishi H, Kaneko Y, Mutoh H, Tamada K, Ido K, Sugano
K.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Sep;29(9):1252.

Comment on
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Nov;27(11):1442-7.

PMID: 15316330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Sep;28(9):1233-9.

Primary mixed adenocarcinoma and small cell carcinoma of the appendix: a
clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular study of a hitherto
unreported tumor.

Rossi G(1), Bertolini F, Sartori G, Bigiani N, Cavazza A, Foroni M, Valli R,
Rindi G, De Gaetani C, Luppi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathologic Anatomy and Legal Medicine, Section of Pathology,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy. giulio@unimo.it

Appendiceal carcinoids range from well-differentiated endocrine tumor to
well-differentiated endocrine carcinoma, while poorly differentiated (small cell)
carcinoma has not been described in this site. We report herein a case of mixed
intestinal-type adenocarcinoma associated with a small cell carcinoma arisen in a
35-year-old woman and clinically presenting as an appendiceal abscess. The
resected tumor histologically appeared as a biphasic lesion composed of a
nonmucinous adenocarcinoma closely juxtaposed with a poorly differentiated (small
cell) endocrine carcinoma. The subsequent right hemicolectomy was unremarkable,
but one pericolic lymph node showed a metastatic deposit consisting of the
adenocarcinoma only. The patient thus underwent a chemotherapeutic protocol for
colorectal cancer, and she is alive and well at the 65-month follow-up.
Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinoma strongly stained for cytokeratin 20 and
carcinoembryonic antigen, while the endocrine component displayed a dot-like
positivity for pan-cytokeratins and chromogranin. Of note, both components did
not stain with CDX2 and p53. At genotypic analysis by microsatellite instability,
both components shared many microsatellite alterations as well as a normal p53
gene setup, although small cell carcinoma harbored additional alterations.
Clinical and molecular findings led us to consider this lesion as a clonal tumor 
in which the endocrine component seems to derive from a progressive
differentiation of the adenocarcinoma following a glandular-to-endocrine
sequence.

PMID: 15316325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Pathol. 2004 Aug;203(4):904-8.

Evidence for acid-induced loss of Cdx2 expression in duodenal gastric metaplasia.

Faller G(1), Dimmler A, Rau T, Spaderna S, Hlubek F, Jung A, Kirchner T, Brabletz
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Krankenhausstrasse
8-10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. gerhard.faller@patho.imed.uni-erlangen.de

Gastric metaplasia in the duodenum (GMD) is characterized by transdifferentiation
of intestinal epithelial cells into gastric foveolar cells within the duodenal
mucosa. GMD is often associated with duodenal ulceration. Higher duodenal acidity
due to increased gastric acid output into the duodenum has been implicated in the
development of GMD. Intestinal development and homeostasis are controlled by the 
homeobox transcription factor Cdx2, which is considered to be the master
regulator of intestinal differentiation. Using immunohistochemistry, the present 
study shows that GMD is associated with loss of expression of Cdx2 and its target
gene product sucrase-isomaltase. Quantitative RT-PCR experiments using the
intestinal cell line Caco2 revealed that Cdx2 and sucrase-isomaltase were
down-regulated and gastric mucins MUC5AC and MUC6 were up-regulated under acidic 
culture conditions. Thus, it is suggested that increased acid exposure leads to
GMD by impairing the transcription of Cdx2 and subsequently that of its
intestine-specific target genes.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15258992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Aug;28(8):1026-32.

Immunophenotypic differences between intestinal-type and low-grade papillary
sinonasal adenocarcinomas: an immunohistochemical study of 22 cases utilizing
CDX2 and MUC2.

Cathro HP(1), Mills SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Jefferson Park Avenue,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. hpc4f@virginia.edu

Nonsalivary sinonasal adenocarcinomas can be divided into low-grade and
high-grade tumors. The former are often papillary and the latter are usually of
intestinal type, morphologically similar to metastatic colonic carcinoma.
Antibodies to CDX2, a transcription factor gene highly specific for intestinal
adenocarcinomas, MUC2, a mucin gene expressed in adenocarcinomas from various
sites, and cytokeratins (CK) 7 and 20 were used to examine the two groups of
tumors. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from 22 sinonasal
adenocarcinomas was reclassified into 9 high-grade intestinal-type, 3 high-grade 
nonintestinal, and 10 low-grade, predominantly papillary adenocarcinomas.
Immunohistochemical staining was graded on a 0 to 4+ scale with 5% or greater
tumor cell staining considered positive. Of the high-grade intestinal group, 78% 
demonstrated 4+ CDX2 positivity, with 44% MUC2 positive. Although 89% of this
group was CK7 positive, the percent of staining was variable. A majority (67%) of
the intestinal cases was 4+ CK20 positive. Almost every nonintestinal
adenocarcinoma (90%) (low- and high-grade) was CK7 positive (7 of 9, 4+), without
expression of any of the three colonic adenocarcinoma markers. The three
high-grade nonintestinal tumors had the expression profile of the low-grade
papillary group with the exception of focal MUC2 positivity in 1 case.
Intestinal-type adenocarcinomas have an expression profile distinct from
nonintestinal sinonasal adenocarcinomas. The former are similar, but not
identical, to colonic adenocarcinomas. Immunohistochemical staining for CDX2,
MUC2, and differential cytokeratins does not differentiate metastatic colorectal 
from primary sinonasal intestinal-type adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 15252308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Arch Surg. 2004 Jul;139(7):712-6; discussion 716-7.

Increased acid exposure in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease
influences cyclooxygenase-2 gene expression in the squamous epithelium of the
lower esophagus.

Hamoui N(1), Peters JH, Schneider S, Uchida K, Yang D, Vallböhmer D, Hagen JA,
DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR, Danenberg K, Danenberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic and Foregut Surgery, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

Erratum in
    Arch Surg. 2005 Mar;140(3):249. Valböehmer, Daniel [corrected to Vallböhmer,
Daniel].

HYPOTHESIS: Although genetic changes associated with the progression to Barrett
esophagus and adenocarcinoma have been identified, changes in gene expression
associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease have not been reported. We
examined expression levels of several genes important in carcinogenesis and
compared expression levels with alterations in esophageal acid exposure.
PATIENTS, DESIGN, AND SETTING: Prospective analysis of 61 patients initially seen
with reflux symptoms at a private academic hospital.
INTERVENTIONS: Paired esophageal biopsy specimens of squamous epithelium 3 cm
above the squamocolumnar junction. All patients had 24-hour pH monitoring
performed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Cyclooxygenase (COX) 1, COX-2, thymidylate synthase, human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), Bcl-2 protein, survivin protein,
secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), tetraspan (TSPAN), and
caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) messenger RNA expression
analysis was performed on snap-frozen, microdissected tissue using a quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction method. Linear regression and the
Pearson product moment correlation were used to relate gene expression to
parameters of the 24-hour pH record.
RESULTS: Expression levels of COX-2 correlated positively with the 24-hour pH
score (r = 0.25, P =.05). There was no correlation between the expression of
other tested genes and esophageal acid exposure. There was also no significant
increase in COX-2 expression in patients with esophagitis or in those who used
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, these data provide among the first reported
correlation of genetic changes and increased esophageal acid exposure in patients
with gastroesophageal reflux symptoms. The changes in gene expression occur
before any metaplastic changes in the tissue are apparent, and may in the future 
be useful in predicting which patients will progress through a
metaplasia-dysplasia carcinoma sequence.

PMID: 15249402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Cell Biol. 2004 Jul 5;166(1):37-47.

SOX9 is an intestine crypt transcription factor, is regulated by the Wnt pathway,
and represses the CDX2 and MUC2 genes.

Blache P(1), van de Wetering M, Duluc I, Domon C, Berta P, Freund JN, Clevers H, 
Jay P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Humaine, CNRS UPR1142, 141 rue de la Cardonille, 34396
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France.

TCF and SOX proteins belong to the high mobility group box transcription factor
family. Whereas TCFs, the transcriptional effectors of the Wnt pathway, have been
widely implicated in the development, homeostasis and disease of the intestine
epithelium, little is known about the function of the SOX proteins in this
tissue. Here, we identified SOX9 in a SOX expression screening in the mouse fetal
intestine. We report that the SOX9 protein is expressed in the intestinal
epithelium in a pattern characteristic of Wnt targets. We provide in vitro and in
vivo evidence that a bipartite beta-catenin/TCF4 transcription factor, the
effector of the Wnt signaling pathway, is required for SOX9 expression in
epithelial cells. Finally, in colon epithelium-derived cells, SOX9
transcriptionally represses the CDX2 and MUC2 genes, normally expressed in the
mature villus cells of the intestinal epithelium, and may therefore contribute to
the Wnt-dependent maintenance of a progenitor cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2172132
PMID: 15240568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2004 May;89-90(1-5):317-9.

Duodenal expression of the epithelial calcium transporter gene TRPV6: is there
evidence for Vitamin D-dependence in humans?

Walters JR(1), Barley NF, Khanji M, Rhodes-Kendler O.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Campus, London W12 0NN, UK. julian.walters@imperial.ac.uk

Intestinal absorption of dietary calcium is regulated by
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) in humans and in experimental
animals but interspecies differences in responsiveness to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) are
found, possibly due to differences in the promoters of genes for intestinal
calcium transport proteins or of the Vitamin D receptor (VDR). The epithelial
calcium transporter, known as ECAC2 or CAT1, the product of the TRPV6 gene
expressed in proximal intestinal enterocytes, is the first step in calcium
absorption and studies in mice have shown that its expression is Vitamin
D-dependent. In contrast in man, we showed that duodenal TRPV6 mRNA expression
was independent of blood 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), although in Caco-2 cells,
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-dependent changes have been demonstrated. We sought to explain
these findings. A consensus Vitamin D response element in the mouse gene is
absent in the human gene. We re-analysed our duodenal expression data according
to a CDX2-site polymorphism in the VDR promoter. Mean TRPV6 expression was the
same, but there was evidence of different responsiveness to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). In
the GG genotype group, but not the AG, duodenal TRPV6 expression increased with
1,25(OH)(2)D(3). We postulate that lower levels of expression of VDR in the GG
group produce greater sensitivity to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3).

PMID: 15225792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Jul;28(7):839-48.

Pathologically and biologically distinct types of epithelium in intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasms: delineation of an "intestinal" pathway of
carcinogenesis in the pancreas.

Adsay NV(1), Merati K, Basturk O, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Levi E, Cheng JD, Sarkar
FH, Hruban RH, Klimstra DS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute and Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. adsayv@med.wayne.edu

Although general characteristics of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms
(IPMNs) and their delineation from other pancreatic tumors have been well
established, several issues regarding their biology and management remain
unresolved. It has been noted briefly by us and other authors that there are
different types of papillae in IPMNs; however, their frequency, biologic
significance, and clinical relevance are unknown. In this study, the association 
of different papillary patterns with clinical, pathologic, and biologic
parameters was studied in 74 IPMNs, and the expression profile of CDX2 (a
specific marker and one of the key determinants of intestinal "programming," and 
a tumor suppressor) was determined immunohistochemically in addition to MUC1 (a
marker of an "aggressive" phenotype in pancreatic neoplasia) and MUC2
("intestinal type mucin," a marker of the "indolent" phenotype, and a tumor
suppressor). The patterns of papillae identified and their association with these
parameters were as follows: 1) The intestinal-type (Yonezawa's dark-cell type),
similar to villous adenomas, was seen in 26 of 74 (35%) cases. The majority
harbored carcinoma in situ (85%) or borderline atypia (15%). They tended to be
large (mean, 5.5 cm). Most expressed CDX2 (95%) and MUC2 (92%) but not MUC1 (8%).
This type was more commonly associated with colloid-type invasion (14 of 16
invasive carcinomas were of colloid type). 2) The pancreatobiliary type,
characterized by arborizing papillae lined by cuboidal cells resembling papillary
neoplasms of the biliary tract, was present in 22% of the cases. These were
mostly graded as carcinoma in situ (94%); they rarely expressed CDX2 (6%) or MUC2
(19%) but often showed MUC1 labeling (44%). This pattern was more commonly
associated with the tubular type of invasive carcinoma and had a slight tendency 
for a more aggressive clinical course. 3) The null type was characterized by
abundant apical mucin and basally located nuclei, similar to the gastric foveolar
epithelium. Thirty-one percent of IPMNs had this type of papillae, but this
pattern was also present in the background of other IPMNs and in the cystic
components of most cases as well. Most pure null-type IPMNs were devoid of
complexity and consequently classified as adenoma (48%). They tended to be small 
(mean, 2.6 cm), were often negative for CDX2, MUC1, and MUC2, and were rarely
associated with invasive carcinoma. 4) Some IPMNs (12%) exhibited features that
were difficult to classify, and 2 cases had a mixture of pancreatobiliary and
intestinal types of papillae. In conclusion, IPMNs include pathologically and
biologically distinct epithelial patterns. CDX2 and MUC2 expression is relatively
specific for the intestinal type papillae, confirming that these IPMNs indeed
exhibit intestinal differentiation. Their close association with colloid
carcinoma, which also shows consistent MUC2 and CDX2 expression, supports the
existence of an intestinal pathway of carcinogenesis. This "metaplastic" pathway 
may reflect different genetic events in the development of these IPMNs, and the
presence of intestinal differentiation may potentially be used in prognostication
and stratification of patients into appropriate treatment categories.

PMID: 15223952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36865-75. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Cdx1 inhibits human colon cancer cell proliferation by reducing
beta-catenin/T-cell factor transcriptional activity.

Guo RJ(1), Huang E, Ezaki T, Patel N, Sinclair K, Wu J, Klein P, Suh ER, Lynch
JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, the Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The cessation of proliferation and the induction of differentiation are highly
coordinated processes that occur continuously in the intestinal crypts. The
homeodomain transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 regulate intestine-specific gene 
expression and enterocyte differentiation. Their roles in regulating
proliferation are recognized but remain poorly understood. Previously, we
demonstrated that Cdx1 expression diminished the proliferation of human colon
cancer cells in part by reducing cyclin D1 gene expression. In order to elucidate
further the molecular mechanisms underlying this phenomenon, we first
hypothesized that Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression reduces colon cancer cell proliferation
by inhibiting beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF) transcriptional activity. We
report that Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression does inhibit beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional
activity in colon cancer cells. This inhibitory effect is dose-dependent and is
observed in different colon cancer cell lines, and the degree of inhibition
correlates with the ability of Cdx1 to reduce cell proliferation. Cdx1 expression
does not alter beta-catenin protein levels or intracellular distribution nor does
it induce an inhibitory TCF isoform. We also find that Cdx1 expression is lost in
Min mouse polyps with increased nuclear localization of beta-catenin, suggesting 
that Cdx1 does not support beta-catenin-mediated transformation. Finally, we show
that colon cancer cells effectively reduce Cdx2-mediated inhibition of
Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity when compared with other model
systems. This suggests that colon cancer and possibly crypt epithelial cells can 
modulate the effects of Cdx2 on beta-catenin signaling and proliferation. We
conclude that Cdx1 and Cdx2 inhibit colon cancer cell proliferation by blocking
beta-catenin/TCF transcriptional activity.

PMID: 15215241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mod Pathol. 2004 Nov;17(11):1392-9.

The homeobox intestinal differentiation factor CDX2 is selectively expressed in
gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas.

Kaimaktchiev V(1), Terracciano L, Tornillo L, Spichtin H, Stoios D, Bundi M,
Korcheva V, Mirlacher M, Loda M, Sauter G, Corless CL.

Author information: 
(1)OHSU Cancer Institute and Department of Pathology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

CDX2 is a homeobox domain-containing transcription factor that is important in
the development and differentiation of the intestines. Based on recent studies,
CDX2 expression is immunohistochemically detectable in normal colonic enterocytes
and is retained in most, but not all, colorectal adenocarcinomas. CDX2 expression
has also been documented in a subset of adenocarcinomas arising in the stomach,
esophagus and ovary. In this study, we examined CDX2 expression in a series of
large tissue microarrays representing 4652 samples of normal and neoplastic
tissues. Strong nuclear staining for CDX2 was observed in 97.9% of 140 colonic
adenomas, 85.7% of 1109 colonic adenocarcinomas overall and 81.8% of 55 mucinous 
variants. There was no significant difference in the staining of
well-differentiated (96%) and moderately differentiated tumors (90.8%, P=0.18),
but poorly differentiated tumors showed reduced overall expression (56.0%,
P<0.000001). Correspondingly, there was an inverse correlation between CDX2
expression and tumor stage, with a significant decrease in staining between pT2
and pT3 tumors (95.8 vs 89.0%, P<0.012), and between pT3 and pT4 tumors (89.0 vs 
79.8%, P<0.016). Analysis of 140 locally advanced, CDX2-positive colorectal
adenocarcinomas coarrayed with their matching lymph node metastases revealed that
expression of this marker was retained in 82.1% of the metastases. Consistent
with previous reports, CDX2 staining was observed in gastric adenocarcinomas
(n=71), more commonly in the intestinal-type than the diffuse-type (28.9 vs
11.5%, P<0.05). Occasional ovarian carcinomas were positive for CDX2, including
mucinous (10.5%), endometrioid (9.3%) and serous variants (2%), but expression
was either very rare or absent in primary carcinomas of the lung, breast,
thyroid, pancreas, liver, gallbladder, kidney, endometrium and urinary bladder. A
low frequency of CDX2 expression in pancreatic and biliary carcinomas observed on
the microarrays was pursued further by comparing these tumors with ampullary
adenocarcinomas on conventional sections. Ampullary adenocarcinomas were more
commonly positive for CDX2 (19/24, 79%) than cholangiocarcinomas (1/11, 9%) and
pancreatic carcinomas (3/20, 15%). In summary, CDX2 is a sensitive and specific
marker for colorectal adenocarcinoma, although its expression is decreased among 
higher grade and stage tumors, and it is not invariably present in metastases
from positive primaries. CDX2 may also be helpful in distinguishing
adenocarcinomas of the ampulla from those arising in the pancreas and biliary
tree.

PMID: 15205684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004 Jun;121(6):884-92.

Immunohistochemical characterization of signet-ring cell carcinomas of the
stomach, breast, and colon.

Chu PG(1), Weiss LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010,
USA.

We studied the immunophenotype of signet-ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) of the
stomach (30 cases), breast (21 cases), and colon (9 cases) with the following
expression patterns: (1) breast: consistent, MUC1 (21 [100%]), cytokeratin (CK) 7
(20 [95%]), estrogen receptor (ER; 17 [81%]); infrequent, E-cadherin (6 [29%]),
MUC2, MUC5AC, CK20 (1 [5%] each); negative, CDX2 and hepatocyte paraffin 1 (Hep
Par 1; 0 [0%] each); (2) gastric: frequent, CDX2 (27 [90%]) and Hep Par 1 (25
[83%]); variable, E-cadherin and CK20 (17 [57%] each), MUC2 and MUC5AC (15 [50%] 
each), MUC1 (5 [17%]); negative, ER (0 [0%]); and (3) colon: frequent, MUC2 (9
[100%]), CDX2 and MUC5AC (8 [89%] each); infrequent or negative, MUC1 (3 [33%]), 
Hep Par 1 (2 [22%]), ER (0 [0%]). Immunohistochemical staining distinguished
breast from gastric SRCC (ER, MUC1, Hep Par 1, CDX2) and colon SRCC (ER, CDX2,
MUC2, and MUC5AC). Gastric and colon SRCCs showed a similar staining pattern for 
antibodies tested except for Hep Par 1 and CDX2 (gastric, 83% Hep Par 1
positivity and heterogeneous, weak, patchy CDX2 nuclear staining; colon, 22% Hep 
Par 1 positivity and homogeneous, strong, diffuse CDX2 nuclear staining). About
half of the cases of gastric SRCC expressed MUC2 and MUC5AC, whereas virtually
all cases of colon SRCC expressed them.

PMID: 15198362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34397-405. Epub 2004 Jun 9.

The tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli and caudal related homeodomain
protein regulate expression of retinol dehydrogenase L.

Jette C(1), Peterson PW, Sandoval IT, Manos EJ, Hadley E, Ireland CM, Jones DA.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Development of normal colon epithelial cells proceeds through a systematic
differentiation of cells that emerge from stem cells within the base of colon
crypts. Genetic mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are
thought to cause colon adenoma and carcinoma formation by enhancing colonocyte
proliferation and impairing differentiation. We currently have a limited
understanding of the cellular mechanisms that promote colonocyte differentiation.
Herein, we present evidence supporting a lack of retinoic acid biosynthesis as a 
mechanism contributing to the development of colon adenomas and carcinomas.
Microarray and reverse transcriptase-PCR analyses revealed reduced expression of 
two retinoid biosynthesis genes: retinol dehydrogenase 5 (RDH5) and retinol
dehydrogenase L (RDHL) in colon adenomas and carcinomas as compared with normal
colon. Consistent with the adenoma and carcinomas samples, seven colon carcinoma 
cell lines also lacked expression of RDH5 and RDHL. Assessment of RDH enzymatic
activity within these seven cell lines showed poor conversion of retinol into
retinoic acid when compared with normal cells such as normal human mammary
epithelial cells. Reintroduction of wild type APC into an APC-deficient colon
carcinoma cell line (HT29) resulted in increased expression of RDHL without
affecting RDH5. APC-mediated induction of RDHL was paralleled by increased
production of retinoic acid. Investigations into the mechanism responsible for
APC induction of RDHL indicated that beta-catenin fails to repress RDHL. The
colon-specific transcription factor CDX2, however, activated an RDHL promoter
construct and induced endogenous RDHL. Finally, the induction of RDHL by APC
appears dependent on the presence of CDX2. We propose a novel role for APC and
CDX2 in controlling retinoic acid biosynthesis and in promoting a
retinoid-induced program of colonocyte differentiation.

PMID: 15190067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mod Pathol. 2004 Oct;17(10):1282-8.

Expression of the intestinal marker Cdx2 in the columnar-lined esophagus with and
without intestinal (Barrett's) metaplasia.

Groisman GM(1), Amar M, Meir A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel.
groisman@hillel-yaffe.health.gov.il

Barrett's esophagus is diagnosed when goblet cells are found in the lower
esophageal mucosa. However, the distribution of these cells is patchy and they
may not represent the earliest marker of intestinal metaplasia. Cdx2 is a
transcription factor whose expression in normal tissues is restricted to
intestinal-type epithelium. Its distribution in the columnar-lined esophagus with
and without intestinal metaplasia has been seldom studied. We evaluated Cdx2
expression in lower esophageal biopsies from 90 patients with endoscopic
diagnosis of short segment Barrett's esophagus, including 45 consecutive cases
showing intestinal metaplasia (goblet cells present in hematoxylin eosin and/or
Alcian blue stains) and 45 consecutive cases without goblet cells. 25 samples of 
cardiac-type mucosa without intestinal metaplasia biopsied from the stomach
served as controls. All cases with intestinal metaplasia revealed Cdx2 reactivity
in goblet cells and adjacent nongoblet columnar cells. Dysplastic foci, seen in
five cases from this group, were Cdx2 positive. In the group without goblet
cells, Cdx2 was focally expressed by columnar cells in 17 (38%) cases. All
control cases were Cdx2 negative. Strips of Alcian blue-positive nongoblet
columnar cells ('columnar blues') were observed in 11 (24%) of the cases without 
intestinal metaplasia. All these foci were Cdx2 negative. In conclusion, Cdx2 is 
a highly sensitive marker for Barrett's esophagus. It is also expressed in a
significant minority of cases of columnar-lined esophagus without goblet cells,
suggesting that it may detect intestinal phenotypic modifications in the absence 
of goblet cells. Accordingly, Cdx2 immunostaining could help identify patients
with Barrett's metaplasia in cases where no goblet cells are visible in biopsies 
from the columnar-lined esophagus. Finally, lack of Cdx2 expression in the
'columnar blues' suggests that these cells are not diagnostic of intestinal
metaplasia.

PMID: 15167938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Jun;28(6):834-5; author reply 835.

Re: CDX2 homeotic gene expression in gastric noninvasive neoplasia.

Rugge M, Ingravallo G, Farinati F, Russo VM, Zaninotto G, Alvisi V.

Comment on
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Nov;27(11):1442-7.

PMID: 15166679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Pathol Int. 2004 Jun;54(6):392-400.

Immunohistochemically detectable Cdx2 is present in intestinal phenotypic
elements in early gastric cancers of both differentiated and undifferentiated
types, with no correlation to non-neoplastic surrounding mucosa.

Mizoshita T(1), Tsukamoto T, Inada K, Ogasawara N, Hirata A, Kato S, Joh T, Itoh 
M, Yamamura Y, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

It has previously been reported that Cdx2 is the useful prognostic and intestinal
phenotypic marker in advanced gastric cancers (GC). In this study, Cdx2
expression and phenotype in early GC and non-neoplastic surrounding mucosa were
examined. A total of 130 early GC (70 intramucosal and 60 submucosally invasive
cancers) histologically and phenotypically were evaluated. The expression of Cdx2
was assessed by immunohistochemistry. The lesions were phenotypically divided
into 44 gastric (G), 42 gastric and intestinal mixed (GI), 30 intestinal (I), and
14 null (N) types, independent of the histological classification. Most of the
early GC were Cdx2-positive, nuclear staining being strongly associated with
intestinal phenotypic expression. Early differentiated cancers tended to feature 
both Cdx2 and intestinal phenotypic expression, while their undifferentiated
counterparts were more likely to demonstrate only gastric phenotypic expression
(P < 0.05). The phenotypes of six intramucosal microcarcinomas did not correlate 
with those of adjacent normal glands. These data suggest that Cdx2 is expressed
in the very early stage of gastric carcinogenesis in association with the shift
from gastric to intestinal phenotypic expression. This appears to occur in
differentiated cancers at an earlier stage than in undifferentiated ones, and may
be linked to suppression of expansion of malignant cells.

PMID: 15144397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Pathol. 2004 Jun;203(2):645-52.

CK20 expression, CDX2 expression, K-ras mutation, and goblet cell morphology in a
subset of lung adenocarcinomas.

Yatabe Y(1), Koga T, Mitsudomi T, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. yyatabe@aichi-cc.jp

There are data in the literature that suggest a close relationship between the
expression of CK20 and CDX2, K-ras mutations, and goblet cell morphology. The
present study has examined these factors in a cohort of 264 non-small cell lung
cancers. Thirteen of 212 adenocarcinomas expressed CK20; 29 expressed CDX2; K-ras
mutation was identified in 28; and goblet cell features were present in 19. These
four factors correlated with each other in a complex way and therefore a logistic
regression model was constructed. Significant correlations were found between
CK20 and CDX2 expression, and between K-ras mutation and goblet cell morphology, 
and there was a marginal correlation between CDX2 immunoreactivity and goblet
cell morphology. These four features have also been commonly detected in
colorectal, pancreato-biliary, and ovarian mucinous carcinomas, suggesting that
these adenocarcinomas may be prototypical, independent of the organ of origin.
Furthermore, as high and uniform expression of CDX2 was characteristic of
metastatic colorectal cancer, weak and/or focal CDX2 expression should alert
surgical pathologists to the possibility of primary lung adenocarcinoma,
especially in the presence of goblet cell morphology. However, some lung
adenocarcinomas may express CDX2 strongly: in this case, CK20 also tends to be
positive.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15141379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Jul;3(7):593-601. Epub 2004 Jul 9.

The role of Cdx proteins in intestinal development and cancer.

Guo RJ(1), Suh ER, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Since their original identification in Drosophila, the caudal related homologues 
(Cdx1 and Cdx2) have been known to be evolutionarily conserved both in molecular 
structure and function. In a great variety of organisms they are recognized to
function critically during antero-posterior patterning and the development of the
intestinal epithelium. The Cdx homologues, when expressed, modulate a diverse set
of processes including proliferation, apoptosis, cell-adhesion, and columnar
morphology. They are also necessary for the expression of an increasing number of
intestine-specific genes. By targeting these processes and genes, the Cdx
homologues promote the appearance of a mature intestinal cell phenotype. In
addition to these critical roles during development, accumulating evidence
suggests that the Cdx homologues may play significant roles in oncogenesis in the
gastrointestinal tract and other tissues. In the colon, several studies suggest
the Cdx homologues may act as tumor suppressors. However, ectopic Cdx1 and Cdx2
expression is involved in the development of the precancerous intestinal
metaplasia in the stomach and esophagus, and may be a transforming event in one
form of acute myelogenous leukemia. This review will explore our current
understanding of the roles of the caudal homologues Cdx1 and Cdx2 in intestinal
development and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15136761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 May 18;101(20):7641-5. Epub 2004 May 10.

Cdx2 is essential for axial elongation in mouse development.

Chawengsaksophak K(1), de Graaff W, Rossant J, Deschamps J, Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5.

Inactivation of Cdx2 leads to preimplantation embryonic lethality. Rescue of the 
implantation defect by tetraploid fusion established that Cdx2 is necessary for
trophoblastic development, vasculogenesis in the yolk sac mesoderm, allantoic
growth, and chorioallantoic fusion. "Rescued" Cdx2 mutants die at late
gastrulation stages because of failure of placental development. Cdx2 is also
needed for the completion of the normal process of gastrulation and tail bud
elongation. Presegmental paraxial mesoderm is severely restricted in amount and
somites posterior to somite 5 are abnormal. The Cdx2 mutation, like mutations
impairing Wnt and Fgf signaling, causes posterior truncations and disturbs axial 
patterning of the embryonic structures, indicated by changes in the Hox
expression domains. The gene appears to be important in the integration of the
pathways controlling embryonic axial elongation, and anterior-posterior
patterning.

PMCID: PMC419659
PMID: 15136723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Med Sci Monit. 2004 May;10(5):BR139-43. Epub 2004 Apr 28.

Identifying colorectal metastases in liver biopsies: the novel CDX2 antibody is
less specific than the cytokeratin 20+/7- phenotype.

Tot T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Clinical Cytology, Central Hospital, Falun,
Sweden. tibor.tot@ltdalarna.se

BACKGROUND: Immunohistochemistry plays an important role in tracing the primary
site in metastatic tumors of unknown origin. Therefore, determining the
cytokeratin (CK) 20/CK7 pattern of metastases is one of the most helpful
procedures as the CK20+/CK7- pattern is typical of colorectal adenocarcinomas.
Expression of CDX2 protein is a new, highly specific and sensitive marker of the 
intestinal origin of adenocarcinomas. In the present study we compared the
sensitivity and specificity of CDX2 expression and the CK20+/CK7- phenotype in
predicting the colorectal origin of liver metastases.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The study was carried out on a consecutive series of 125
core-needle biopsies of metastatic adenocarcinomas of the liver. Most of the
patients were followed up to death, and primary tumor localization could be
established in 102 cases by a combination of clinical, radiological, histological
and, in some cases, autopsy data. All the needle biopsies were
immunohistochemically stained for CK7, CK20 and CDX2. CDX2 expression (at 10% and
50% cut-off levels) and the CK20/CK7 pattern of the metastases were correlated to
the primary site established.
RESULTS: The CK20+/CK7- pattern showed a specificity of 98.7% in predicting
colorectal primary localization, which was superior to that of CDX2 expression at
both cut-off levels (90% and 95.3% respectively). The sensitivity of CDX2
expression in these circumstances was 84% at the 10% cut-off, somewhat higher
than that of the CK20+/CK7- phenotype (79.5%), but lower at the 50% cut-off level
(72.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: The CK20+/CK7- immunophenotype is more specific in predicting the
colorectal origin of liver metastasis than CDX2 expression.

PMID: 15114262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Adv Anat Pathol. 2004 Mar;11(2):101-5.

CDX-2, a new marker for adenocarcinoma of gastrointestinal origin.

Li MK(1), Folpe AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

CDX2-88 is a recently developed monoclonal antibody to the intestinal
epithelia-specific nuclear transcription factor CDX2. CDX2 immunohistochemistry
has recently been shown to be useful in establishing gastrointestinal origin in
metastatic tumors and will likely become a useful addition to the standard panel 
of immunostains for carcinomas of unknown primary sites. This article reviews the
previous studies of this new antibody.

PMID: 15090846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Apr;28(4):442-52.

Primary mucinous (so-called colloid) carcinomas of the lung: a clinicopathologic 
and immunohistochemical study with special reference to CDX-2 homeobox gene and
MUC2 expression.

Rossi G(1), Murer B, Cavazza A, Losi L, Natali P, Marchioni A, Migaldi M,
Capitanio G, Brambilla E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathologic Anatomy and Forensic Medicine, University of Modena
and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. rossi.giulio@unimo.it

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Sep;28(9):1254-5.

Herein we describe the clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features of 13
primary mucinous (colloid) carcinomas (MCs) of the lung, an uncommon and
controversial tumor. The patients, 7 males and 6 females, ranged in age from 50
to 79 years (mean, 64.5 years). All the tumors presented as a peripheral solitary
nodule with gelatinous cut-surface and well circumscribed but lacking a complete 
fibrous wall. The size ranged from 1 to 5.5 cm. Microscopically, they consisted
of neoplastic elements floating in large mucin pools and focally lining the
alveolar spaces. Eleven cases were predominantly composed of tall, columnar
goblet cells (goblet cell-type MC), while 2 consisted of signet-ring tumor cells 
(signet-ring cell-type MC). Five tumors were incidentally discovered by chest
radiographs, while the others were symptomatic. All patients underwent complete
surgical resection (six lobectomies and seven wedge resections). Postoperative
chemotherapy was performed in 3 cases. Overall, the median follow-up was 26
months (mean 33 months; range 9-95 months). All patients with goblet cell-type MC
were alive and well, while the 2 patients with signet-ring cell-type MC died of
disease. Immunohistochemically, all the 11 goblet cell-type MCs were strongly
stained with CDX-2 and MUC2, 8 reacted with TTF-1, 6 with cytokeratin 20 (CK20), 
9 with cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and 2 with MUC-5AC. Conversely, the two signet-ring
cell-type MCs were stained with TTF-1, CK7, and MUC5AC but were negative for
CDX-2, MUC2, and CK20. Surfactant apoprotein-A (SP-A) was positive in four goblet
cell-type and one signet-ring cell-type MC. When compared with 10 mucinous
bronchioloalveolar carcinomas (m-BAC), the latter reacted with CK7, CK20, MUC5AC,
TTF-1, SP-A, CDX-2, and MUC2 in 100%, 90%, 100%, 30%, 10%, 0%, and 0% of the
cases, respectively. In summary, MC of the lung represents an entity with two
distinct clinicopathologic and immunophenotypic variants: 1) the goblet
cell-type, presenting a more indolent clinical behavior and frequently
co-expressing markers of intestinal and pulmonary differentiation; and 2) the
more aggressive signet-ring cell-type, which retains only markers of pulmonary
origin. On morphologic and immunohistochemical grounds, MCs are easily
distinguishable from m-BAC. Since goblet cell-type MC strongly stains with CDX2, 
MUC2, and CK20, differential diagnosis with metastatic colorectal carcinoma is
very challenging and requires appropriate clinical correlation.

PMID: 15087663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Actas Urol Esp. 2004 Feb;28(2):101-5.

[Expression of CDX2 in urinary bladder and urethra lesions].

[Article in Spanish]

Ortiz-Rey JA(1), Antón Badiola I, San Miguel Fraile P, Alvarez Alvarez C,
Iglesias Rodríguez B, Zungri-Telo E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Patología, Centro Médico POVISA, Vigo, Pontevedra.

BACKGROUND: CDX1 and CDX2 are transcription factors involved in the development
and maintenance of the intestinal epithelial cell. Expression of CDX2 has been
reported in normal and metaplastic intestinal epithelium, and in those
adenocarcinomas with that cellular origin. We have analyzed the expression of
this marker in reactive and tumoral lesions arising in urinary bladder, urethra
and urachus.
METHOD: CDX2 was investigated through immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded
tissue, using the labelled streptavidin-biotin method (LSAB2, Dako) with a
monoclonal antibody (CDX2-88, BioGenex).
RESULTS: Expression of CDX2 was observed in intestinal-type cistitis glandularis,
intestinal metaplasia of urinary bladder, bladder adenocarcinoma, mucinous
urothelial-type carcinoma of prostatic urethra and urachal mucinous carcinoma.
CDX2 was not detected in normal urothelium and prostatic glandular epithelium,
Von Brunn nests, typical-type cistitis glandularis, glandular adenosis and
transitional carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Lesions, both benign and malignant, with enteric-cell morphological 
features show positivity for CDX2. Expression of this marker is not
organ-specific but is just related to a cellular phenotype. Reactivity for CDX2
in an adenocarcinoma can be consistent with an origin in urinary tract or
urachus.

PMID: 15074058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Lab Invest. 2004 May;84(5):629-38.

Aberrant expression of CDX2 is closely related to the intestinal metaplasia and
MUC2 expression in intraductal papillary neoplasm of the liver in
hepatolithiasis.

Ishikawa A(1), Sasaki M, Ohira S, Ohta T, Oda K, Nimura Y, Chen MF, Jan YY, Yeh
TS, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Division of Surgical Oncology, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

Intraductal papillary neoplasia of the liver (IPNL) frequently presents
gastrointestinal metaplasia with aberrant expression of MUC2 and MUC5AC and
oversecretion of mucin into the ductal lumen. In this study, the involvement of
CDX2, a homeodomain protein involved in the regulation of intestinal development 
and differentiation, in the expression of MUC2 was examined in mucinous
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) (n=7) and IPNL with hepatolithiasis (n=19) 
with comparison to conventional ICC (n=11), and intraductal papillary mucinous
tumor and invasive ductal carcinoma of the pancreas (n=9 and 11, respectively). A
total of 33 cases of hepatolithiasis, extrahepatic biliary obstruction and normal
livers were used as the control. Immunohistochemically, both MUC2 and MUC5AC were
frequently expressed in mucinous ICC and IPNL, while expression of MUC2 was not
seen in conventional ICC. The nuclear expression of CDX2 was closely associated
with the expression of MUC2 in mucinous ICC and IPNL. This intimate association
of MUC2 and CDX2 was confirmed by double immunostaining. The cytoplasmic CDX2
expression was frequent in the mucinous and the conventional ICC and pancreatic
carcinoma, irrespective of MUC2 and MUC5AC expression. CDX2 mRNA was detected in 
neoplastic cells showing cytoplasmic as well as nuclear expression of CDX2 by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. One IPMT expressed MUC2
associated with nuclear CDX2 expression, while the other IPMT and conventional
pancreatic carcinoma expressed MUC5AC only. Aberrant expression of CDX2 is
closely related to the overexpression of MUC2 in mucinous ICC and IPNL associated
with hepatolithiasia, suggesting its role in intestinal differentiation and its
association with carcinogenesis in these tumors.

PMID: 15048136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;65(4):953-63.

Coordinate regulation of the human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A8, 1A9, and 1A10
genes by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and the caudal-related homeodomain
protein 2.

Gregory PA(1), Lewinsky RH, Gardner-Stephen DA, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia 5042, Australia.

The human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) -1A8 and -1A10 are exclusively
expressed in extrahepatic tissues and primarily in the gastrointestinal tract,
whereas UGT1A9 is expressed mainly in the liver and kidneys. We have demonstrated
previously that the UGT1A8 and UGT1A10 genes, in contrast to the UGT1A9 gene, are
regulated via an initiator-like element in their proximal promoters. To determine
the elements that contribute to the gastrointestinal expression of UGT1A8 and
-1A10, we conducted deletion analysis of the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters in
the colon-derived cell line Caco2. DNA elements contributing significantly to
UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoter activity were found to reside primarily within
140 base pairs of the transcription start site. Within this region, putative
binding sites for the intestine-specific transcription factor, caudal-related
homeodomain protein 2 (Cdx2), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) were
identified. Using gel shift and functional assays, HNF1alpha was demonstrated to 
bind to and activate the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters. In contrast, Cdx2
bound to and activated the UGT1A8 and -1A10 promoters but could not activate the 
UGT1A9 promoter. A single base pair difference between the UGT1A8 and -1A10
promoters, three base pairs downstream of the consensus Cdx2 site, contributed to
the observed difference in Cdx2 binding and Cdx2-mediated promoter activation of 
these two promoters. In addition, Cdx2 was shown to cooperate with HNF1alpha to
synergistically activate the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters. These studies
provide insight into the mechanisms controlling the extrahepatic expression of
the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 genes.

PMID: 15044625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):22228-35. Epub 2004 Mar 16.

Identification of a novel PDX-1 binding site in the human insulin gene enhancer.

Le Lay J(1), Matsuoka TA, Henderson E, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

Islet beta cell type-specific transcription of the insulin gene is regulated by a
number of cis-acting elements found within the proximal 5'-flanking region. The
control sequences conserved between mammalian insulin genes are acted upon by
transcription factors, like PDX-1 and BETA-2, that are also involved in islet
beta cell function and formation. In the current study, we investigated the
contribution to human insulin expression of the GG2 motif found between
nucleotides -145 and -140 relative to the transcription start site. Site-specific
mutants were generated within GG2 that displayed a parallel increase (i.e. -144
base pair) or decrease (i.e. -141 base pair) in insulin enhancer-driven reporter 
and gel shift binding activity in beta cells consistent with human GG2 being
under positive regulatory control. In contrast, the corresponding site in the
rodent insulin gene, which only differs from the human at nucleotides -144 and
-141, is negatively regulated by the Nkx2.2 transcription factor (Cissell, M. A.,
Zhao, L., Sussel, L., Henderson, E., and Stein, R. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278,
751-756). Human GG2 activator binding activity was present in nuclear extracts
prepared from human islets and enriched in those from rodent beta cell lines. The
human GG2 activator binding factor(s) was shown to be approximately 38-40 kDa and
distinct from other size-matched islet-enriched transcription factors, including 
Nkx2.2, Pax-4, Cdx2/3, and Isl-1. Combined DNA chromatographic purification and
mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the GG2 activator was PDX-1. These
results demonstrate that the GG2 element, despite its divergence from the core
homeodomain consensus binding motif, is a site for PDX-1 activation in the human 
insulin gene.

PMID: 15028719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Mol Biol. 2004 Mar 26;337(3):647-60.

Identifying target genes regulated downstream of Cdx2 by microarray analysis.

Uesaka T(1), Kageyama N, Watanabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-Ku, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan. tochi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

The caudal-related homeobox transcription factor (Cdx2) plays an important role
in intestinal development, differentiation, and homeostasis. However, only a
limited number of Cdx2-regulated target genes have been elucidated. To delineate 
the molecular mechanism regulated downstream of Cdx2, we aimed to define
Cdx2-regulated genes. We engineered a rat intestinal epithelial cell line, IEC-6,
with minimal endogenous Cdx2 expression to express exogenous Cdx2. The gene
expression patterns for Cdx2-inducing cells and control cells were examined using
oligonucleotide arrays. In the present study, differential expression of 23 genes
was confirmed by a semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis using gene-specific primers. Increased expression of
genes was involved in the Notch signaling pathway, xenobiotic metabolism, enzymes
associated with tumor suppression, RNA binding protein, receptors, signal
transduction, and transcription factors. The wide-ranging collection of such
inducing genes suggests to the functions of Cdx2 in cell fate decision and
maintenance of intestinal epithelia.

PMID: 15019784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Feb 27;315(1):93-9.

Homeodomain protein CDX2 regulates COX-2 expression in colorectal cancer.

Kim SP(1), Park JW, Lee SH, Lim JH, Jang BC, Lee SH, Jang IH, Freund JN, Suh SI, 
Mun KC, Song DK, Ha EM, Lee WJ, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Science, Keimyung University School of Medicine, 194
DongSan-Dong Jung-Gu, Daegu 700-712, Republic of Korea.

CDX2 is an intestine-specific tumor suppressor gene encoding
homeodomain-containing transcription factor, which is involved in a variety of
developmental, proliferating, and differentiating processes. Moreover, the
expression of CDX2 is reduced in a subset of primary colorectal cancers. In
contrast, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is often up-regulated in human colorectal
cancers. However, the molecular relationship between CDX2 down-regulation and
COX-2 up-regulation is unknown. Here we show that CDX2 down-regulates COX-2
promoter activity by interacting with NF-kappaB. The ectopic expression of CDX2
was found to suppress PMA-induced COX-2 promoter activity in a dose-dependent
manner. In addition, the treatment of colorectal cancer cells with PMA resulted
in significant reduction in the level of endogenous CDX2 and a significant
increase in the level of endogenous COX-2, in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, CDX2 was found to co-immunoprecipitate with the p65 subunit of
NF-kappaB and to inhibit p65-induced NF-kappaB minimal promoter activity in colon
cancer cells. These results suggest that reduced CDX2 expression may be involved 
in colorectal carcinogenesis by enhancing NF-kappaB-mediated inflammatory genes
such as COX-2.

PMID: 15013430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Stem Cells. 2004;22(2):225-35.

Oct-4 knockdown induces similar patterns of endoderm and trophoblast
differentiation markers in human and mouse embryonic stem cells.

Hay DC(1), Sutherland L, Clark J, Burdon T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Expression and Development, Roslin Institute, Roslin,
Midlothian, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor Oct-4 is a marker of pluripotency in mouse and human
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Previous studies using a tetracycline-regulated Oct-4 
transgene in the ZHBTc4 cell line demonstrated that downregulation of Oct-4
expression induced dedifferentiation into trophoblast, a lineage mouse ES cells
do not normally generate. We found that transfection of Oct-4-specific short
interfering RNA significantly reduced expression and functional activity of Oct-4
in mouse and human ES cells, enabling its role to be compared in both cell types.
In mouse ES cells, Oct-4 knockdown produced a pattern of morphological
differentiation and increase in expression of the trophoblast-associated
transcription factor Cdx2, similar to that triggered by suppressing the Oct-4
transgene in the ZHBTc4 cell line. In addition, downregulation of Oct-4 was
accompanied by increased expression of the endoderm-associated genes Gata6 and
alpha-fetoprotein, and a gene trap associated with primitive liver/yolk sac
differentiation. In human ES cells, Oct-4 knockdown also induced morphological
differentiation coincident with the upregulation of Gata6. The induction of Cdx2 
and other trophoblast-associated genes, however, was dependent on the culture
conditions. These results establish the general requirement for Oct-4 in
maintaining pluripotency in ES cells. Moreover, the upregulation of
endoderm-associated markers in both mouse and human ES cells points to overlap
between development of trophoblast and endoderm differentiation.

PMID: 14990861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Jul;287(1):G104-14. Epub 2004 Feb
19.

Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression activates E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and
compaction in human COLO 205 cells.

Keller MS(1), Ezaki T, Guo RJ, Lynch JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology/660 CRB, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie
Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

A mature columnar intestinal epithelium develops late in embryogenesis and is
maintained throughout the life of the organism. Although the mechanisms driving
intestine-specific gene expression have been well studied, those promoting the
acquisition of cell-cell junctions, columnar morphogenesis, and polarization have
been less studied. The Cdx homeodomain transcription factors (Cdx1 and Cdx2)
regulate intestine-specific gene expression and intestinal epithelial
differentiation. We report here that Cdx expression induces E-cadherin activity
and cell-cell adhesion in human COLO 205 cancer cells. Within days of Cdx1 or
Cdx2 expression, a new homotypic cell-cell adhesion phenotype is induced. This is
a specific response to Cdx, inasmuch as a Cdx1 mutant failed to elicit the
effect. Additionally, Cdx-expressing COLO 205 cells demonstrate a reduced
proliferative capacity and an increase in the mRNA expression of
differentiation-associated genes. Electron micrographs of these cells demonstrate
induction of tight, adherens, and desmosomal junctions, as well as a columnar
shape and apical microvilli. Investigations of the adhesion phenotype determined 
that it was Ca(2+) dependent and could be blocked by an E-cadherin-blocking
antibody. However, E-cadherin protein levels and intracellular distribution were 
unchanged. Cdx expression restored the ability of the cell membranes to adhere
and undergo compaction. We conclude that Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression is sufficient to
induce an E-cadherin-dependent adhesion of COLO 205 cells. This adhesion is
associated with polarization and cell-cell membrane compaction, as well as
induction of a differentiated gene-expression pattern. Ascertaining the mechanism
for this novel Cdx effect may yield insight into the development of mature
colonic epithelium.

PMID: 14977637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Gut. 2004 Mar;53(3):323-30.

PDX1 homeobox protein expression in pseudopyloric glands and gastric carcinomas.

Sakai H(1), Eishi Y, Li XL, Akiyama Y, Miyake S, Takizawa T, Konishi N, Tatematsu
M, Koike M, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Although it has been reported that intestinal metaplasia
implicated in gastric carcinogenesis is induced by the ParaHox gene CDX2, it is
unclear which genes are responsible for the formation of pseudopyloric glands and
whether they play a role in gastric carcinogenesis. Pancreatic-duodenal homeobox 
1 (PDX1) is also a ParaHox gene which contributes to the genesis and development 
of the pancreas, duodenum, and antrum. To clarify its significance for the
formation of pseudopyloric glands and gastric carcinogenesis, we investigated
expression of PDX1 and mucin in gastric carcinomas and surrounding mucosa.
METHODS: Gastric carcinoma tissues from 95 patients were used for
immunohistochemical analyses of PDX1, and mucins MUC6 and MUC5AC.
RESULTS: PDX1 was found to be frequently expressed in pseudopyloric glands and
intestinal metaplasia. MUC6 was more abundant than MUC5AC in pseudopyloric glands
while higher levels of MUC5AC than MUC6 were evident in intestinal metaplasia.
The frequency of PDX1 positive reactivity was higher in differentiated type
carcinomas (39/43, 90.7%) and T1 carcinomas (42/43, 97.7%) than in
undifferentiated type (33/52, 63.5%) and T2-4 (30/52, 57.7%) carcinomas. PDX1 and
MUC6 double positive expression was observed in carcinomas, respectively,
including the corpus, and also correlated with histological type and depth of
invasion. In contrast, no link was apparent between PDX1 and MUC5AC double
positive reactivity and histological type.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that PDX1 plays an important role in the
development of pseudopyloric glands, and that pseudopyloric glands may reflect a 
condition associated with gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1773956
PMID: 14960508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;32(1):9-20.

Differentially expressed Maf family transcription factors, c-Maf and MafA,
activate glucagon and insulin gene expression in pancreatic islet alpha- and
beta-cells.

Kataoka K(1), Shioda S, Ando K, Sakagami K, Handa H, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of
Biological Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5
Takayama-cho, Ikoma 630-0192, Japan. kkataoka@bs.aist-nara.ac.jp

A basic-leucine zipper transcription factor, MafA, was recently identified as one
of the most important transactivators of insulin gene expression. This protein
controls the glucose-regulated and pancreatic beta-cell-specific expression of
the insulin gene through a cis-regulatory element called RIPE3b/MARE
(Maf-recognition element). Here, we show that MafA expression is restricted to
beta-cells of pancreatic islets in vivo and in insulinoma cell lines. We also
demonstrate that c-Maf, another member of the Maf family of transcription
factors, is expressed in islet alpha-cells and in a glucagonoma cell line
(alphaTC1), but not in gamma- and delta-cells. An insulinoma cell line, betaTC6, 
also expressed c-Maf, albeit at a low level. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that Maf proteins associate with insulin and glucagon promoters in
beta- and alpha-cell lines, respectively. c-Maf protein stimulated glucagon
promoter activity in a transient luciferase assay, and activation of the glucagon
promoter by c-Maf was more efficient than by the other alpha-cell-enriched
transcription factors, Cdx2, Pax6, and Isl-1. Furthermore, inhibition of c-Maf
expression in alphaTC1 cells by specific short hairpin RNA resulted in marked
reduction of the glucagon promoter activity. Thus, c-Maf and MafA are
differentially expressed in alpha- and beta-cells where they regulate glucagon
and insulin gene expression, respectively.

PMID: 14765989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Br J Cancer. 2004 Feb 9;90(3):701-4.

Simultaneous expression of COX-2 and mPGES-1 in mouse gastrointestinal
hamartomas.

Takeda H(1), Miyoshi H, Tamai Y, Oshima M, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 is induced in various types of cancer tissues. Here, we
demonstrate stromal expression of both COX-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E(2)
synthase (mPGES)-1 in gastrointestinal hamartomas developed in Lkb1(+/-),
Smad4(+/-) and Cdx2(+/-)mice. These results suggest that PGE(2) produced by COX-2
and mPGES-1 plays an important role in hamartoma development regardless of the
mutated genes causing hamartomas.

PMCID: PMC2409590
PMID: 14760387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 20;101(3):817-22. Epub 2004 Jan 12.

Ectopic expression of the homeobox gene Cdx2 is the transforming event in a mouse
model of t(12;13)(p13;q12) acute myeloid leukemia.

Rawat VP(1), Cusan M, Deshpande A, Hiddemann W, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Humphries
RK, Bohlander SK, Feuring-Buske M, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-Clinical Cooperative Group Leukemia and Department of Medicine III,
Grosshadern, Ludwig Maximilians University, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Creation of fusion genes by balanced chromosomal translocations is one of the
hallmarks of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and is considered one of the key
leukemogenic events in this disease. In t(12;13)(p13;q12) AML, ectopic expression
of the homeobox gene CDX2 was detected in addition to expression of the ETV6-CDX2
fusion gene, generated by the chromosomal translocation. Here we show in a murine
model of t(12;13)(p13;q12) AML that myeloid leukemogenesis is induced by the
ectopic expression of CDX2 and not by the ETV6-CDX2 chimeric gene. Mice
transplanted with bone marrow cells retrovirally engineered to express Cdx2
rapidly succumbed to fatal and transplantable AML. The transforming capacity of
Cdx2 depended on an intact homeodomain and the N-terminal transactivation domain.
Transplantation of bone marrow cells expressing ETV6-CDX2 failed to induce
leukemia. Furthermore, coexpression of ETV6-CDX2 and Cdx2 in bone marrow cells
did not accelerate the course of disease in transplanted mice compared to Cdx2
alone. These data demonstrate that activation of a protooncogene by a balanced
chromosomal translocation can be the pivotal leukemogenic event in AML,
characterized by the expression of a leukemia-specific fusion gene. Furthermore, 
these findings link protooncogene activation to myeloid leukemogenesis, an
oncogenic mechanism so far associated mainly with lymphoid leukemias and
lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC321764
PMID: 14718672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2004 Jan;23(1):52-7.

The value of Cdx2 immunostaining in differentiating primary ovarian carcinomas
from colonic carcinomas metastatic to the ovaries.

Groisman GM(1), Meir A, Sabo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hillel Medical Center, Hadera, Israel.
groisman@hillel-yaffe.health.gov.il

Histologic differentiation of primary ovarian carcinoma from colonic carcinoma
metastatic to the ovary may be difficult. Cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and cytokeratin 20 
(CK20) immunostaining is usually used, but these markers lack specificity for
ovarian and intestinal epithelium, and overlapping results have been reported.
Cdx2 is a transcription factor whose expression in normal tissues is limited to
the intestinal epithelium. It is also expressed in the vast majority of colonic
carcinomas and in a sizeable proportion of cases of gastric, pancreatobiliary,
and ovarian mucinous carcinomas. We evaluated Cdx2, CK7, and CK20 expression in
50 ovarian carcinomas (15 serous, 20 mucinous, and 15 endometrioid), 15 colonic
carcinomas metastatic to the ovaries, and 20 primary colonic carcinomas. The
extent (1-25%/1+, 26-75%/2+, >75%/3+) and intensity (weak/1+, strong/2+) of
staining were recorded semiquantitatively. All primary and metastatic colonic
carcinomas had diffuse (3+) strong Cdx2 reactivity. All serous and endometrioid
tumors were Cdx2 negative, whereas mucinous carcinomas had 1+ or 2+
immunoreactivity. All ovarian carcinomas had strong diffuse CK7 staining, whereas
all colonic carcinomas were negative for CK7. CK20 stained diffusely and strongly
all primary and metastatic colonic carcinomas and was 1+ or 2+ in all mucinous
carcinomas, in 67% of serous carcinomas, and in 33% of endometrioid carcinomas.
In conclusion, 1) Cdx2 is a highly sensitive (100%) marker for colonic carcinoma 
metastatic to the ovary; 2) Cdx2 is more specific than CK20 as it is not
expressed by serous and endometrioid carcinomas; and 3) a limited panel of Cdx2
and CK7 helps in distinguishing colonic carcinomas metastatic to the ovaries
(Cdx2+/CK7-) from primary ovarian serous (Cdx2-/CK7+), endometrioid (Cdx2-/CK7+),
and mucinous (Cdx2+/CK7+) carcinomas.

PMID: 14668551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2004 Mar;130(3):135-45. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Down-regulation of a gastric transcription factor, Sox2, and ectopic expression
of intestinal homeobox genes, Cdx1 and Cdx2: inverse correlation during
progression from gastric/intestinal-mixed to complete intestinal metaplasia.

Tsukamoto T(1), Inada K, Tanaka H, Mizoshita T, Mihara M, Ushijima T, Yamamura Y,
Nakamura S, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Nagoya, Chikusa-ku, Japan. ttsukamt@aichi-cc.jp

PURPOSE: The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of intestinal
metaplasia (IM) of the human stomach have yet to be clarified in detail. Besides 
ectopic expression of intestinal transcription factors, Cdx1 and Cdx2, little
information is available regarding other regulatory factors. Hence, we here
analyzed Sox2, a human homolog of a chicken gastric transcription factor, with
reference to our new classification for gastric/intestinal (GI)-mixed type IM.
METHODS: Twenty specimens of surgically resected antral mucosa were subjected to 
a gland isolation technique. Isolated glands were classified into gastric (G),
GI-mixed, and solely intestinal (I) types according to Alcian blue and
paradoxical concanavalin A staining and were quantified for mRNA levels of
gastrointestinal markers.
RESULTS: MUC5AC and MUC6 transcripts decreased with the progression of IM, while 
MUC2 and villin-1 were inversely correlated. Sox2 showed a gradual decrease from 
G, through GI, to the I type (G vs GI and GI vs I, P<0.01 and P<0.005,
respectively). On the other hand, Cdx1 (G vs GI and GI vs I, P<0.0001 and
P=0.337, respectively) and Cdx2 (G vs GI and GI vs I, P<0.0001 and P<0.05,
respectively) appeared in IM. Immunohistochemical study confirmed decreased
expression of Sox2 and ectopic emergence of Cdx2 protein in IM glands.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of Sox2, besides ectopic expression of Cdx genes, may
be important factors for the development of IM.

PMID: 14655050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Nov 30;1630(2-3):138-43.

Human ileal bile acid-binding protein promoter and the effects of CDX2.

Barley NF(1), Taylor V, Shaw-Smith CJ, Chakravarty P, Howard A, Legon S, Walters 
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK.

The ileal bile acid-binding protein (IBABP) is important for the reabsorption of 
bile salts in the distal small intestine. Studies with the human IBABP gene
(FABP6, on chromosome 5q33.3-q34) defined the major transcription start site and 
identified conserved elements. A consensus element for the caudal-related
homeobox factor CDX2 was functional in gel-shift assays and in transfection
experiments.

PMID: 14654244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nat Genet. 2003 Dec;35(4):323-30. Epub 2003 Nov 16.

Colonic polyposis caused by mTOR-mediated chromosomal instability in
Apc+/Delta716 Cdx2+/- compound mutant mice.

Aoki K(1), Tamai Y, Horiike S, Oshima M, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Yoshida-Konoé-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

The mammalian homeobox transcription factor CDX2 has key roles in intestinal
development and differentiation. Heterozygous Cdx2 mice develop one or two benign
hamartomas in the proximal colon, whereas heterozygous Apc(Delta716) mice develop
numerous adenomatous polyps, mostly in the small intestine. Here we show that the
colonic polyp number is about six times higher in Apc+/Delta716 Cdx2+/- compound 
mutant mice. Levels of both APC and CDX2 were significantly lower in the distal
colon, which caused high anaphase bridge index (ABI) associated with a higher
frequency of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at Apc. In cultured rat intestinal
epithelial and human colon cancer cell lines, suppression of CDX2 by antisense
RNA caused marked increases in ABI and chromosomal aberrations. This was mediated
by stimulation of the mTOR pathway, causing translational deregulation and G1-S
acceleration, associated with low levels of p27 and activation of cyclin E-Cdk2. 
We obtained similar results in the colonic mucosa of Apc+/Delta716) Cdx2+/-
compound mutant mice. Forced activation of mTOR through upstream regulator Akt
also increased ABI in colon cancer cells. High ABI in all cell lines was
suppressed by mTOR inhibitors LY294002 and rapamycin. These results suggest that 
reduced expression of CDX2 is important in colon tumorigenesis through
mTOR-mediated chromosomal instability.

PMID: 14625550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2004 Jan;130(1):29-36. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

Expression of the intestine-specific transcription factors, Cdx1 and Cdx2,
correlates shift to an intestinal phenotype in gastric cancer cells.

Mizoshita T(1), Inada K, Tsukamoto T, Nozaki K, Joh T, Itoh M, Yamamura Y,
Ushijima T, Nakamura S, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, 464-8681 Nagoya, Japan.

PURPOSE: It is well known that gastric cancers (GCs) at early stages, independent
of the histological type, mainly consist of gastric phenotype malignant cells,
while those at advanced stage tend to have a more intestinal phenotype with
progression. However, the connection between this shift and expression of
homeobox genes, which are important factors to maintain tissue character, has
remained unclear. We therefore evaluated the expression of Cdx1/2 in relation to 
the phenotype of GCs.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression of Cdx1/2 mRNAs by Northern blotting and Cdx2
protein by immunohistochemistry in seventy advanced GCs, and evaluated
phenotypically using mucin- and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Seventy GCs were divided phenotypically into 16 gastric (G type), 18
gastric and intestinal mixed (GI type), 18 intestinal (I type), and 18 null (N
type) phenotypes, independent of the histological classification. Cdx1 and Cdx2
mRNAs statistically demonstrated an increase with shift from G to I ( P=0.042 and
P=0.0082, respectively). Cdx2 nuclear staining was observed immunohistochemically
in the intestinal phenotypic cancer cells, but could not be detected in those
with only the gastric phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that Cdx1 and Cdx2 might be indispensable for
intestinal phenotypic expression even in gastric cancer cells.

PMID: 14615935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Pathologica. 2003 Aug;95(4):185-91.

[Expression of the cdx2 gene in benign intestinal-type mucinous ovarian tumors].

[Article in Italian]

Gaggero G(1), Sola S, Mora M, Fulcheri E.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Anatomia Patologica dell'Università di Genova.
gabriele.gaggero@libero.it

INTRODUCTION: Cdx2 gene belongs to the homeobox caudal gene family and it is
located, in humans, on the 13q12.3 chromosome; in particular it codifies for a
specific nuclear transcription factor which induces intestinal epithelium
development, differentiation and preservation. Cdx2 expression in the human
embryo can be observed in the intestinal epithelium starting from the sixth week 
of gestation. In the foetus and in adults it is observed in the whole enteric
tube from the duodenum to the anal canal. Because of its organ specificity, cdx2 
is an important marker for metastatic neoplastic lesions. Cdx2 is expressed in
intestinal metaplasia and it is focally positive in adenocarcinomas of intestinal
type of the stomach, pancreas and gall bladder as well as in ovarian mucinous
adenocarcinomas. FINALITY OF THE STUDY: The aim of our study is to detect cdx2
positivity, with evaluation of its characteristics and expression, in ovarian
mucinous cistoadenomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined cdx2 expression in 50 ovarian mucinous
cistoadenomas (mean age between 17 and 85), 19 of which were localised in the
right ovary while 31 in the left one. Standard staining techniques (H&E),
histochemistry (AB-PAS) ed immunohistochemistry with monoclonal antibodies
against cdx2 (Biogenex/Menarini cdx2-88, batch MU3920402XS) were performed on
formalin fixed and paraffin embedded material. For each case two samples were
analysed.
RESULTS: Morphological evaluation of the 50 benign mucinous tumours distinguished
47 of endocervical type and 3 of intestinal type. These data were also confirmed 
by characterisation of mucin profile by AB-PAS staining. Using anti-cdx2
antibodies tumours of endocervical type were negative, while 3 intestinal type
tumours were positive. In particular 2 cases presented diffuse nuclear
positivity, while in one positivity was only focal.
DISCUSSION: Until today only two studies deal with cdx2 expression in mucinous
ovarian tumours: 5 and 14 cases strong respectively. In the former, cdx2
expression was positive in all cases (100% positivity--5/5), in the latter cdx2
expression was positive in 64% of cases (9/14). In order to explain the lack of
consistency in these data one must analyse ovarian mucinous tumours in detail.
These neoplasms are divided into two subtypes: endocervical type and intestinal
type. Distinction between these two types is near to impossible in malignant
tumours, difficult in borderline tumours while it becomes easy in benign ones.
Among benign tumours, endocervical type tumours are the majority, while
intestinal type are much more infrequent. Our 50 case strong casistic is
sufficiently ample to include 3 cases of intestinal type, all of which are cdx2
positive, compared to a complete negativity in the remaining 47 tumours clearly
of endocervical type. We believe that the lack of consistency between the
aforementioned studies is probably due to the fact that neither work contemplates
the subdivision in intestinal and endocervical types. It is hence possible to
hypothesise a selective and specific correlation between cdx2 positivity and the 
intestinal type epithelial component of ovarian tumours.

PMID: 14577202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Virchows Arch. 2003 Dec;443(6):782-6. Epub 2003 Oct 24.

CDX2 immunoreactivity in primary and metastatic ovarian mucinous tumours.

Fraggetta F(1), Pelosi G, Cafici A, Scollo P, Nuciforo P, Viale G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cannizzaro Hospital, Via Messina 829, 95126 Catania, 
Italy.

The caudal-related homeobox transcription factor CDX2 regulates the
differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. Recent studies have suggested
that CDX-2 immunoreactivity is strictly confined to benign and malignant
intestinal epithelium. In the present study, we evaluated the prevalence of CDX2 
immunoreactivity in a series of benign, borderline and malignant primary ovarian 
mucinous neoplasms. We tested 62 mucinous tumours of the ovary, including 28
benign cystadenomas, 18 borderline tumours, 16 adenocarcinomas, 35 serous and
endometrioid ovarian lesions and 10 ovarian metastases of colonic adenocarcinoma.
Overall, the CDX2 prevalence in primary mucinous tumours was 79%, including 20 of
28 (71.5%) cystadenomas, 14 of 18 (77.7%) borderline tumours and 15 of 16 (93.5%)
adenocarcinomas. Immunoreactivity usually correlated with intestinal
differentiation of tumour cells, although wide heterogeneity in the distribution 
of immunolabelled cells was noted. No immunoreactivity was observed in serous
lesions; whereas, 1 of 13 (7.7%) endometrioid adenocarcinomas and all of the 10
metastatic colonic adenocarcinomas were immunostained. These results indicate
that CDX2 is detectable in the majority of benign, borderline and malignant
ovarian mucinous tumours and, therefore, makes this marker unsuitable when
distinguishing primary from metastatic ovarian mucinous adenocarcinomas. However,
CDX2 immunoreactivity could be useful in the distinction between endocervical and
intestinal-type mucinous tumours of the ovary, which may have clinical relevance.

PMID: 14576939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Nov;27(11):1442-7.

Cdx2 as a marker of epithelial intestinal differentiation in the esophagus.

Phillips RW(1), Frierson HF Jr, Moskaluk CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Medical Center,
Charlottesville, VA 22908-0214, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Sep;29(9):1252.
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Jun;28(6):834-5; author reply 835.
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Sep;28(9):1253-4.

The histologic diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus requires the presence of goblet
cells, but this finding may not be the earliest indicator of intestinal
metaplasia. We used immunohistochemistry to detect Cdx2, a transcriptional
regulator important in the early differentiation and maintenance of intestinal
epithelium, in 134 esophageal biopsy or resection specimens, including 62 with
junctional-type epithelium (13 of which had equivocal histologic features of
Barrett's epithelium), 34 with Barrett's epithelium without dysplasia, and 38
with Barrett's epithelium and dysplasia or carcinoma (13 low-grade dysplasias, 19
high-grade dysplasias, and 6 adenocarcinomas). We also performed PAS-alcian blue 
staining (pH 2.5) on adjacent sections. Cdx2 was observed in all cases of
Barrett's epithelium. In some dysplasias (chiefly high-grade) and
adenocarcinomas, there was diminution or focal loss of detectable protein. Cdx2
was detected in 20 of 62 cases (30%) of junctional-type epithelium, including 10 
of 13 (77%) with equivocal histologic features of Barrett's epithelium. Acid
mucin was present in goblet cells and non-goblet columnar cells in all cases of
Barrett's esophagus and in non-goblet columnar cells in 48 of 62 cases (77%) with
junctional-type epithelium only, including 17 of 20 (85%) that were Cdx2 positive
and 31 of 42 (74%) that were Cdx2 negative. These results provide evidence that
Cdx2 protein is a sensitive marker of intestinal metaplasia in the upper
gastrointestinal tract and may be useful in detecting histologically equivocal
cases of Barrett's esophagus. Cdx2 is present in dysplasia and adenocarcinoma,
with some loss of protein primarily in high-grade dysplasia and adenocarcinoma.
Acid mucin in non-goblet columnar cells is a common feature of Barrett's and
junctional-type epithelium and may not always be indicative of intestinal
metaplasia.

PMID: 14576477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2003 Dec;129(12):727-34. Epub 2003 Oct 14.

Expression of Cdx2 and the phenotype of advanced gastric cancers: relationship
with prognosis.

Mizoshita T(1), Tsukamoto T, Nakanishi H, Inada K, Ogasawara N, Joh T, Itoh M,
Yamamura Y, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, 464-8681 Nagoya, Japan.

PURPOSE: The clinicopathologic significance of the phenotype and Cdx2 expression 
has hitherto remained unclear in gastric cancers. In the present study, we
therefore examined the correlation between prognosis, phenotype, and Cdx2
expression in advanced cases.
METHODS: We evaluated 177 advanced gastric carcinomas histologically and
phenotypically. The expression of Cdx2 was also assessed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The lesions were phenotypically divided into 32 gastric (G type), 36
gastric and intestinal mixed (GI type), 53 intestinal (I type), and 56 null (N
type) types, independent of the histological classification. Cdx2 nuclear
staining demonstrated a close relation to intestinal phenotypic expression, not
with the histological classification. Kaplan-Meier analysis of Cdx2 expression
and the phenotype showed that the Cdx2 positive groups had a significantly better
outcome than the negative ones (P=0.0013), and the patients with GI type cancers 
had significant better survival than those with N type (P=0.0052).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that Cdx2 is a useful prognostic marker. In
addition, advanced gastric cancers with both intestinal and gastric phenotypic
expression have a relatively good prognosis. Combined evaluation of gastric and
intestinal epithelial cell markers, including Cdx2, is clinically useful to
predict outcome in patients with advanced neoplasm of the stomach.

PMID: 14557879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Bioessays. 2003 Oct;25(10):971-80.

The Cdx1 homeodomain protein: an integrator of posterior signaling in the mouse.

Lohnes D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, Division of
Experimental Medicine, McGill University, and the Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal, 110 ave des Pins ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H2W 1R7.
lohnesd@ircm.qc.ca

The vertebrate Cdx genes (Cdx1 Cdx2 and Cdx4 in the mouse) encode homeodomain
transcription factors related to the Drosophila caudal gene. The vertebrate Cdx
gene products have been implicated in the development of the posterior embryo. In
particular, loss- and gain-of-function experiments suggest that Cdx members are
direct regulators of Hox genes and likely impart posterior information, in part, 
through this mechanism. Several signaling molecules, notably retinoic acid (RA*) 
and members of the Wnt (wingless) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) families,
are also implicated in patterning of the posterior vertebrate embryo.
Interestingly, recent work indicates that members of the Cdx family are targets
of Wnt, RA and FGF signaling, suggesting that Cdx factors act to convey the
activity of these signaling molecules to Hox genes. This article will briefly
review Cdx expression and function, with particular emphasis on vertebrate model 
systems.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 14505364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genetics. 2003 Sep;165(1):223-8.

DNA methylation in placentas of interspecies mouse hybrids.

Schütt S(1), Florl AR, Shi W, Hemberger M, Orth A, Otto S, Schulz WA, Fundele RH.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Interspecific hybridization in the genus Mus results in several hybrid dysgenesis
effects, such as male sterility and X-linked placental dysplasia (IHPD). The
genetic or molecular basis for the placental phenotypes is at present not clear. 
However, an extremely complex genetic system that has been hypothesized to be
caused by major epigenetic changes on the X chromosome has been shown to be
active. We have investigated DNA methylation of several single genes, Atrx, Esx1,
Mecp2, Pem, Psx1, Vbp1, Pou3f4, and Cdx2, and, in addition, of LINE-1 and IAP
repeat sequences, in placentas and tissues of fetal day 18 mouse interspecific
hybrids. Our results show some tendency toward hypomethylation in the late
gestation mouse placenta. However, no differential methylation was observed in
hyper- and hypoplastic hybrid placentas when compared with normal-sized
littermate placentas or intraspecific Mus musculus placentas of the same
developmental stage. Thus, our results strongly suggest that generalized changes 
in methylation patterns do not occur in trophoblast cells of such hybrids.

PMCID: PMC1462748
PMID: 14504229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 1;63(17):5564-72.

Tumor-specific immunological recognition of frameshift-mutated peptides in colon 
cancer with microsatellite instability.

Ishikawa T(1), Fujita T, Suzuki Y, Okabe S, Yuasa Y, Iwai T, Kawakami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Signaling, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, Keio 
University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI+ CRCs) caused by
dysfunction of DNA mismatch repair have unique clinicopathological
characteristics including good prognosis with T-cell infiltration in tumor. To
identify tumor antigens that induce immune response against MSI+ CRC, SEREX
(serological analysis of recombinant cDNA expression cloning) was applied. By
screening a lambda phage cDNA library constructed from three MSI+ CRC cell lines 
with serum from a patient with MSI+ CRC with abundant T-cell infiltrates in
tumor, 64 antigens were isolated. Immunogenicity of each antigen was evaluated by
screening sera from patients with various cancers and from healthy individuals,
and specific IgG antibodies (Abs) for 49 antigens were detected only in MSI+ CRC 
patients. A frameshift mutation in the repetitive G sequences (microsatellite) in
the coding region of CDX2, one of the identified antigens, was found in the tumor
tissue of the patient who had anti-CDX2 serum Ab. The Ab recognized both the
COOH-terminal tumor-specific peptides created by the frameshift mutation and the 
NH(2)-terminal normal peptides of CDX2 when Western blot analysis was performed
using various bacterial recombinant CDX2 proteins including the normal and
altered peptides, which indicated that immune response could be raised against
tumor-specific peptides generated through MSI. The anti-CDX2 Ab was detected only
in the patient with the CDX2 frameshift mutation in tumor and disappeared 7 years
after the curative resection, suggesting that this immune response may also be
useful as a tumor marker. No altered subcellular localization and transcription
ability was demonstrated in the mutated CDX2, although decreased expression was
suggested in immunohistochemical analysis. Therefore, tumor-specific peptides
generated by MSI may be involved in antitumor immune responses and may be useful 
for the development of diagnostic and therapeutic methods for patients with MSI+ 
CRC.

PMID: 14500396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mod Pathol. 2003 Sep;16(9):913-9.

Cdx2 protein expression in normal and malignant human tissues: an
immunohistochemical survey using tissue microarrays.

Moskaluk CA(1), Zhang H, Powell SM, Cerilli LA, Hampton GM, Frierson HF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. cam5p@virginia.edu

Cdx2 has been identified as a marker of colon cancer in RNA-profiling
experiments. We show here that the detection of Cdx2 protein by
immunohistochemistry correlates well with RNA transcript levels as detected by
oligonucleotide microarrays. Using tissue microarrays containing most normal
tissue types and an antibody to the Cdx2 protein, strong diffuse Cdx2 staining
was only seen in the nuclei of small and large intestinal epithelium and portions
of the pancreatic duct system. In tissue microarrays containing 745 cancers from 
many anatomic sites, colonic adenocarcinomas showed strong extensive staining in 
90% of cases, with adenocarcinomas of the stomach, esophagus, and ovary
(endometrioid and mucinous types) showing extensive staining in only 20-30% of
cases. Other types of carcinomas showed extensive staining in only </=1% of
cases. Of 30 neuroendocrine tumors examined, carcinoids of the midgut and hindgut
had the most cases with extensive staining (73% and 44%, respectively), thus
paralleling the distribution of Cdx2 expression in adenocarcinomas. Cdx2 shows a 
limited range of expression in the spectrum of human tissues and neoplasia and
thus may have utility in determining the site of origin of tumors in certain
clinical situations.

PMID: 13679455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 11;22(39):7942-9.

CDX2, a homeobox transcription factor, upregulates transcription of the
p21/WAF1/CIP1 gene.

Bai YQ(1), Miyake S, Iwai T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

The CDX2 homeobox transcription factor plays key roles in intestinal development 
and homeostasis. CDX2 is downregulated during colorectal carcinogenesis, whereas 
overexpression of CDX2 results in growth inhibition and differentiation of colon 
carcinoma and intestinal cells. However, the means by which CDX2 functions remain
poorly understood. p21/WAF1/CIP1 is one of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors. In addition to its role in cell cycle control, p21 plays critical
roles in differentiation and tumor suppression. The overlapping in both the
expression and function of CDX2 and p21 in the small intestine and colon strongly
suggests a link between these two genes. By means of luciferase reporter and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show here that CDX2 transactivated and 
physically interacted with the promoter of p21 in a p53-independent manner.
Moreover, overexpression of CDX2 increased the mRNA expression of p21 in HT-29
colon carcinoma cells, as demonstrated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction. These data suggest that p21 is a transcriptional target of CDX2. Our
results may thus provide a new mechanism underlying the functions of CDX2.

PMID: 12970742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Gut. 2003 Oct;52(10):1465-71.

The Cdx2 homeobox gene has a tumour suppressor function in the distal colon in
addition to a homeotic role during gut development.

Bonhomme C(1), Duluc I, Martin E, Chawengsaksophak K, Chenard MP, Kedinger M,
Beck F, Freund JN, Domon-Dell C.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unit 381, 3 Ave Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND: During development, the homeobox gene Cdx2 exerts a homeotic
function, providing the positional information necessary for correct
specification of the midgut endoderm. This is illustrated by the non-neoplastic
gastric-type heteroplasias present at birth in the pericaecal region of Cdx2(+/-)
mice. Furthermore, intestinal expression of Cdx2 continues throughout life but
diminishes in colorectal cancers compared with adjacent normal tissue, suggesting
a role in tumorigenesis.
AIM: To investigate the consequence of altered Cdx2 expression on colon tumour
initiation and/or progression.
METHODS: Heterozygous Cdx2(+/-) mice were analysed for spontaneous malignant
tumours and for tumour development after treatment with a DNA mutagen,
azoxymethane.
RESULTS: Cdx2(+/-) mice did not spontaneously develop malignant tumours. After
azoxymethane treatment, the gastric-like heteroplasias in the pericaecal region
did not evolve into cancer indicating that they are not precancerous lesions.
However, azoxymethane treated Cdx2(+/-) mice developed tumours specifically in
the distal colon 12 weeks after azoxymethane treatment whereas no tumours were
found in wild-type littermates at this stage. Histopathological and molecular
analyses indicated that these tumours were invasive adenocarcinomas that
recapitulated the malignant sequence observed in the majority of sporadic
colorectal cancers in human. In addition, we found that the colonic epithelium
was less sensitive to radiation induced apoptosis in Cdx2(+/-) than in wild-type 
mice.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the first experimental evidence that Cdx2 is a
tumour suppressor gene involved in cancer progression in the distal colon. This
action in adults is functionally and geographically distinct from its homeotic
role during gut development.

PMCID: PMC1773830
PMID: 12970140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Virchows Arch. 2003 Oct;443(4):579-82. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

Oncocytic adenocarcinoma of the rectum with diffuse intra-luminal
microcalcifications: the first reported case.

Piscitelli D(1), Ingravallo G, Resta L, Fiore MG, Maiorano E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathological Anatomy and Genetics, University of Bari, Bari,
Italy.

Several histological variants of colorectal carcinoma have been reported, some of
them bearing prognostic significance, others only incidental findings showing
unusual morphological features. The current report was aimed to describe the
histological, immunohistochemical and ultrastructural features of an oncocytic
adenocarcinoma of the rectum occurring in a 66-year-old woman. Histologically, it
was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma composed by glandular structures
lined by eosinophilic cells. The latter showed abundant granular cytoplasm and
large nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Several glandular structures contained
intraluminal, basophilic and non-birifrangent microcalcifications. The tumour
cells displayed consistent anti-mitochondrial antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, 
p53, CDX2 and cytokeratin 20 immunoreactivity. Ultrastructurally, more than 80%
of the cytoplasmic area was occupied by abnormal mitochondria, while exocrine or 
endocrine granules were undetectable. The tumour infiltrated the intestinal wall 
through the subserosal tissue, but lymph node or distant metastases were absent. 
The patient is disease free 22 months after surgery. Based on the above features,
this case could be appropriately named oncocytic adenocarcinoma with intraluminal
microcalcifications. Like gastric neoplasms showing similar morphologic features,
this tumour might have a better prognosis, and the presence of microcalcifcations
could help its proper recognition at a pre-operative stage.

PMID: 12955503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15;31(18):5238-46.

Differential regulation of the glucose-6-phosphatase TATA box by
intestine-specific homeodomain proteins CDX1 and CDX2.

Gautier-Stein A(1), Domon-Dell C, Calon A, Bady I, Freund JN, Mithieux G, Rajas
F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.449, Faculté de Médecine Laennec, Rue Guillaume Paradin, 69372 Lyon
cedex 08, France.

Glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc6Pase), the last enzyme of gluconeogenesis, is only
expressed in the liver, kidney and small intestine. The expression of the
Glc6Pase gene exhibits marked specificities in the three tissues in various
situations, but the molecular basis of the tissue specificity is not known. The
presence of a consensus binding site of CDX proteins in the minimal Glc6Pase gene
promoter has led us to consider the hypothesis that these intestine-specific CDX 
factors could be involved in the Glc6Pase-specific expression in the small
intestine. We first show that the Glc6Pase promoter is active in both hepatic
HepG2 and intestinal CaCo2 cells. Using gel shift mobility assay, mutagenesis and
competition experiments, we show that both CDX1 and CDX2 can bind the minimal
promoter, but only CDX1 can transactivate it. Consistently, intestinal IEC6 cells
stably overexpressing CDX1 exhibit induced expression of the Glc6Pase protein. We
demonstrate that a TATAAAA sequence, located in position -31/-25 relating to the 
transcription start site, exhibits separable functions in the preinitiation of
transcription and the transactivation by CDX1. Disruption of this site
dramatically suppresses both basal transcription and the CDX1 effect. The latter 
may be restored by inserting a couple of CDX- binding sites in opposite
orientation similar to that found in the sucrase-isomaltase promoter. We also
report that the specific stimulatory effect of CDX1 on the Glc6Pase TATA-box,
compared to CDX2, is related to the fact that CDX1, but not CDX2, can interact
with the TATA-binding protein. Together, these data strongly suggest that CDX
proteins could play a crucial role in the specific expression of the Glc6Pase
gene in the small intestine. They also suggest that CDX transactivation might be 
essential for intestine gene expression, irrespective of the presence of a
functional TATA box.

PMCID: PMC203330
PMID: 12954759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44608-16. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Silencing of CDX2 expression in colon cancer via a dominant repression pathway.

Hinoi T(1), Loda M, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0638, USA.

CDX2 is a caudal-related homeobox transcription factor whose expression in the
adult is normally restricted to intestinal epithelium. Mice heterozygous for germ
line Cdx2 inactivation develop intestinal polyps, and the lesions lack Cdx2
expression. Prior studies indicate some human colon carcinomas also lack CDX2
expression. To address the role of CDX2 defects in colon cancer development, we
analyzed CDX2 expression in 45 primary colorectal carcinomas. Four carcinomas
lacked CDX2 expression, and three others showed aberrant cytoplasmic localization
of CDX2, although no significant CDX2 gene defects were seen in the seven tumors.
Marked reductions in CDX2 transcript and protein levels were seen in five of 13
colorectal cell lines, and nuclear run-off data indicated reduced transcription
was a major factor in CDX2 silencing. Treatment with the DNA demethylating agent 
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and/or the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
did not restore CDX2 expression in CDX2-negative lines. However, consistent with 
a role for dominant repression mechanisms in CDX2 silencing, all somatic cell
hybrids resulting from pairwise fusions between colon cancer lines with intact
CDX2 expression and lines lacking CDX2 had reduced CDX2 transcripts and protein. 
A roughly 9.5-kb 5'-flanking region from the human CDX2 gene contained key cis
elements for regulating transcription in colon cancer cells. Restoration of CDX2 
expression suppressed proliferation and soft agar growth in the CDX2-negative
HT-29 colon cancer cell line. Our findings suggest CDX2 inactivation in colon
cancer results from defects in trans-acting pathways regulating CDX2
transcription, and CDX2 silencing contributes to the altered phenotype of some
colorectal cancers.

PMID: 12947088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Endocr J. 2003 Jun;50(3):271-9.

Morphological changes and increased sucrase and isomaltase activity in small
intestines of insulin-deficient and type 2 diabetic rats.

Adachi T(1), Mori C, Sakurai K, Shihara N, Tsuda K, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research and Development of Bioresources, Research Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology, Osaka Prefecture University, Osaka 599-8570,
Japan.

The small intestine plays an important role in the digestion and absorption of
many nutrients. To investigate the contribution of carbohydrate digestion to
diabetes mellitus, we examined the morphological changes of the small intestine, 
and the expression of sucrase-isomaltase, which is one of the intestinal
disaccharidases, in diabetic model rat, that is the streptozotocin-induced (STZ) 
diabetic rat (insulin-deficient model), and the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty
(OLETF) rats and the Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats (type 2 diabetic models). Intestinal
hyperplasia was observed in STZ, OLETF, and GK rats. Moreover, in the small
intestine of each diabetic strain, the proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA)-labeling index, which is a marker of proliferation, was higher than in the
respective control. Cdx1 and Cdx2, known to be transcriptional factors related to
intestinal proliferation and differentiation, were more highly expressed in STZ, 
OLETF and GK rats than in the respective controls. These findings indicate that
small intestinal hyperplasia, and thereby the resultant increase of total
activity of disaccharidases such as sucrase and isomaltase in the entire small
intestine, might be one of the reasons for postprandial hyperglycemia in diabetes
mellitus.

PMID: 12940455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36611-20. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Lewis type 1 antigen synthase (beta3Gal-T5) is transcriptionally regulated by
homeoproteins.

Isshiki S(1), Kudo T, Nishihara S, Ikehara Y, Togayachi A, Furuya A, Shitara K,
Kubota T, Watanabe M, Kitajima M, Narimatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Life Science, Soka University,
Tangi-cho, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-8577, Japan.

The type 1 carbohydrate chain, Galbeta1-3GlcNAc, is synthesized by
UDP-galactose:beta-N-acetylglucosamine beta1,3-galactosyltransferase
(beta3Gal-T). Among six beta3Gal-Ts cloned to date, beta3Gal-T5 is an essential
enzyme for the synthesis of type 1 chain in epithelium of digestive tracts or
pancreatic tissue. It forms the type 1 structure on glycoproteins produced from
such tissues. In the present study, we found that the transcriptional regulation 
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene is controlled by homeoproteins, i.e. members of
caudal-related homeobox protein (Cdx) and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
families. We found an important region (-151 to -121 from the transcription
initiation site), named the beta3Gal-T5 control element (GCE), for the promoter
activity. GCE contained the consensus sequences for members of the Cdx and HNF
families. Mutations introduced into this sequence abolished the transcriptional
activity. Four factors, Cdx1, Cdx2, HNF1alpha, and HNF1beta, could bind to GCE
and transcriptionally activate the beta3Gal-T5 gene. Transcriptional regulation
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene was consistent with that of members of the Cdx and HNF1
families in two in vivo systems. 1) During in vitro differentiation of Caco-2
cells, transcriptional up-regulation of beta3Gal-T5 was observed in correlation
with the increase in transcripts for Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. 2) Both transcript and
protein levels of beta3Gal-T5 were determined to be significantly reduced in
colon cancer. This down-regulation was correlated with the decrease of Cdx1 and
HNF1beta expression in cancer tissue. This is the first finding that a
glycosyltransferase gene is transcriptionally regulated under the control of
homeoproteins in a tissue-specific manner. beta3Gal-T5, controlled by the
intestinal homeoproteins, may play an important role in the specific function of 
intestinal cells by modifying the carbohydrate structure of glycoproteins.

PMID: 12855703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Br J Nutr. 2003 Jun;89(6):747-53.

Ontogeny of brush border carbohydrate digestion and uptake in the chick.

Sklan D(1), Geyra A, Tako E, Gal-Gerber O, Uni Z.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Hebrew University, PO Box 12, Rehovot, Israel.
sklan@agri.huji.ac.il

Ingestion of carbohydrates from the small intestine is the major route of energy 
supply in animals. In mammals these functions develop both pre- and postnatally
and are coordinated for the sucking period. In birds, the physiological
requirements are different and hatchlings ingest diets rich in complex
carbohydrates soon after hatching. The present study examined the ontogeny of
intestinal carbohydrate uptake in the chicken. The expression of mRNA for a brush
border enzyme, sucrase-isomaltase (SI), which is critical in disaccharide
digestion, was determined, together with that of the Na-glucose transporter
(SGLT)-1, which is the major apical glucose transporter, In addition, the
homeobox gene cdx, which is involved in inducing SI expression in mammals was
examined. It was found that the expression of cdxA mRNA and cdxA protein
increased from day 15 of incubation until hatch, after which further changes were
small. CdxA protein was shown to bind to the promoter region of SI in the chick
indicating that cdxA is similar to the mammalian cdx2. The mRNA of SI was
observed at 15 d incubation, increased from 17 d of incubation to a peak on day
19, decreased at hatch and had a further peak of expression 2 d post-hatch. In
contrast, the mRNA of SGLT-1 was not detected until 19 d of incubation when a
major peak of expression was observed followed by a decrease to low levels at
hatch and small increases post-hatch. It appears that both SI and SGLT-1 mRNA are
expressed before hatch in the chick, but the ontogeny of expression is controlled
by different mechanisms.

PMID: 12828791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dev Biol. 2003 May 1;257(1):14-29.

Vitamin A deficiency in the late gastrula stage rat embryo results in a one to
two vertebral anteriorization that extends throughout the axial skeleton.

Kaiser ME(1), Merrill RA, Stein AC, Breburda E, Clagett-Dame M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706-1544, USA.

Vitamin A and its metabolites are known to be involved in patterning the
vertebrate embryo. Study of the effect of vitamin A on axial skeletal patterning 
has been hindered by the fact that deficient embryos do not survive past
midgestation. In this study, pregnant vitamin A-deficient rats were maintained on
a purified diet containing limiting amounts of all-trans retinoic acid (12 microg
atRA/g diet) and given a daily oral bolus dose of retinol starting at embryonic
day 0.5, 8.25, 8.5, 8.75, 9.25, 9.5, 9.75, or 10.5. Embryos were recovered at
E21.5 for analysis of the skeleton and at earlier times for analysis of select
mRNAs. Normal axial skeletal development and patterning were observed in embryos 
from pregnant animals receiving retinol starting on or before E8.75. Delay of
retinol supplementation to E9.5 or later resulted in a marked increase in both
occurrence and severity of skeletal malformations, extending from the
craniocervical to sacral regions. Embryos from the groups receiving retinol
starting at E9.5 and E9.75 had one-vertebral anterior transformations of the
cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral vertebrae. Few embryos survived in the
E10.5 group, but these embryos yielded the most severe and extensive
anteriorization events. The skeletal alterations seen in vitamin A deficiency are
associated with posterior shifts in the mesodermal expression of Hoxa-4, Hoxb-3, 
Hoxd-3, Hoxd-4, and Hoxa-9 mRNAs, whereas the anterior domains of Hoxb-4 and Cdx2
expression are unaltered. This work defines a critical window of development in
the late gastrula-stage embryo when vitamin A is essential for normal axial
skeletal patterning and shows that vitamin A deficiency causes anterior homeotic 
transformations extending from the cervical to lumbosacral regions.

PMID: 12710954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):399-406.

A study of regional gut endoderm potency by analysis of Cdx2 null mutant
chimaeric mice.

Beck F(1), Chawengsaksophak K, Luckett J, Giblett S, Tucci J, Brown J, Poulsom R,
Jeffery R, Wright NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, University Road,
Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK. fb22@le.ac.uk

Inactivation of Cdx2 by homologous recombination results in the development of
forestomach epithelium at ectopic sites in pericaecal areas of the midgut of
heterozygote mice. Local factors subsequently result in the secondary induction
of tissues exhibiting an orderly sequence of tissue types between the ectopic
forestomach tissue and the surrounding colon. Clonal analysis of this secondarily
generated tissue using Y chromosome painting in chimaeric mice indicates that
once differentiated to express Cdx2, host colonic epithelium can only form small 
intestinal-type epithelium, while Cdx2 mutant cells give rise to a succession of 
gastric-type tissue but never to a small intestine morphology. Our results
indicate a difference in potency between forestomach and midgut precursor
endodermal cells.

PMID: 12648499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Cell Sci. 2003 Apr 15;116(Pt 8):1429-36.

Chronic acid exposure leads to activation of the cdx2 intestinal homeobox gene in
a long-term culture of mouse esophageal keratinocytes.

Marchetti M(1), Caliot E, Pringault E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lympho-Epithelial Interactions, Department of Cell Biology and
Infection, Pasteur Institute, 28, Rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France.

To explore mechanisms whereby Malpighian keratinocytes can transdifferentiate
into an intestinal-like epithelium, as observed in the early steps of Barrett's
esophagus (BE) development, long-standing cultures of esophageal keratinocytes
derived from normal mouse esophageal explants were developed. These cells were
able to form multilayers and to differentiate on filter support by the formation 
of differentiated layers of basal cells (cytokeratine 14 positive) on which
secondary suprabasal cell layers (cytokeratine 4 positive) spontaneously
developed. Thus, these cultured cells, referred to as P3E6, reproduced, at least 
in part, the proliferation and stratification pattern existing in the normal
esophagus. Because chronic exposure to acid pH is known to be a critical factor
for BE development, culture medium at pH 3.5 was added into the apical chamber of
cell cultures. This led to a decrease in the overall number of cells but it did
not affect cell proliferation. Furthermore, external acid environment triggered
expression of the GFP reporter gene fused downstream of the cdx2 intestinal
homeogene regulatory sequences in P3E6 transfected cells. Expression of the
endogenous CDX2 protein, detected by western blot and immunocytochemical
analysis, correlated with promoter activation. These findings demonstrate that
chronic exposure of esophageal keratinocytes to acid pH induces transcription of 
cdx2, an intestinal specific homeobox gene known to play a critical role in the
differentiation and maintenance of intestinal epithelial functions. The results
suggest that chronic acid exposure can modify the fate of P3E6 esophageal
keratinocytes towards an intestinal program. This can be a key step in the
development of intestinal metaplasia often observed in esophagus-cardia junction.

PMID: 12640028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Mar;27(3):303-10.

CDX2, a highly sensitive and specific marker of adenocarcinomas of intestinal
origin: an immunohistochemical survey of 476 primary and metastatic carcinomas.

Werling RW(1), Yaziji H, Bacchi CE, Gown AM.

Author information: 
(1)PhenoPath Laboratories and IRIS, 551 N. 34th Street, Seattle, WA 98103, USA.

CDX2 is a recently cloned homeobox gene that encodes an intestine-specific
transcription factor, expressed in the nuclei of epithelial cells throughout the 
intestine, from duodenum to rectum. While expression of CDX2 protein in primary
and metastatic colorectal carcinomas has been previously documented, neither the 
sensitivity nor the specificity of CDX2 expression, as determined by
immunohistochemistry, for colorectal adenocarcinoma has been determined. We
performed an immunohistochemical survey of 476 tumors with a monoclonal antibody,
CDX2-88, including 89 tumors from the colon and duodenum and 95 tumors from other
gastrointestinal sites, including the esophagus, stomach, pancreatobiliary
system, gastrointestinal carcinoids, and liver. CDX2 was expressed uniformly
(that is, in 76-100% of tumor cells) in all but one of the evaluated colorectal
and duodenal tumors. High-level expression of CDX2 was also found, however, in
mucinous ovarian carcinomas and adenocarcinomas primary to the urinary bladder of
which 64% and 100% were positive, respectively. Gastric, gastroesophageal, and
pancreatic adenocarcinomas and cholangiocarcinomas all showed similar,
heterogeneous patterns of CDX2 expression. Most tumors in each group showed CDX2 
expression by a minority of cells, whereas a substantial minority of cases in
each group was completely negative and a smaller minority was uniformly positive.
Gastrointestinal carcinoids gave similarly varied results, but the majority (58%)
was negative. Hepatocellular carcinomas showed no expression of CDX2. Only very
rare examples of carcinomas of the genitourinary and gynecologic tracts, breast, 
lung, and head and neck showed significant levels of CDX2 expression. In this
study of primary and metastatic epithelial tumors, uniform CDX2 expression is
demonstrated to be an exquisitely sensitive and highly, but incompletely,
specific marker of intestinal adenocarcinomas. Compared with villin, a previously
described marker of GI adenocarcinomas, CDX2 demonstrated superior sensitivity
and comparable specificity. CDX2 expression can be seen, however, in selected
non-GI adenocarcinomas such as mucinous ovarian carcinomas and adenocarcinomas of
the urinary bladder.

PMID: 12604886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Placenta. 2003 Feb-Mar;24(2-3):123-30.

Genes, development and evolution of the placenta.

Cross JC(1), Baczyk D, Dobric N, Hemberger M, Hughes M, Simmons DG, Yamamoto H,
Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
jcross@ucalgary.ca

Through studies of transgenic and mutant mice, it is possible to describe
molecular pathways that control the development of all major trophoblast cell
subtypes and structures of the placenta. For example, the proliferation of
trophoblast stem cells is dependent on FGF signalling and downstream
transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes and Err2. Several bHLH transcription factors
regulate the progression from trophoblast stem cells to spongiotrophoblast and to
trophoblast giant cells (Id1/2, Mash2, Hand1, Stra13). Intercellular actions
critical for maintaining stable precursor cell populations are dependent on the
gap junction protein Cx31 and the growth factor Nodal. Differentiation towards
syncytiotrophoblast as well as the initiation of chorioallantoic (villous)
morphogenesis is regulated by the Gcm1 transcription factor, and subsequent
labyrinth development is dependent on Wnt, HGF and FGF signalling. These insights
suggest that most of the genes that evolved to regulate placental development are
either identical to ones used in other organ systems (e.g., FGF and epithelial
branching morphogenesis), were co-opted to take on new functions (e.g.,
AP-2gamma, Dlx3, Hand1), or arose via gene duplication to take on a specialized
placental function (e.g., Gcm1, Mash2). Many of the human orthologues of these
critical genes show restricted expression patterns that are consistent with a
conserved function. Such information is aiding the comparison of the human and
mouse placenta. In addition, the prospect of a conserved function clearly
suggests potential mechanisms for explaining complications of human placental
development.

PMID: 12596737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Gastroenterol. 2003;38(1):14-22.

Aberrant expression of CDX2 in Barrett's epithelium and inflammatory esophageal
mucosa.

Eda A(1), Osawa H, Satoh K, Yanaka I, Kihira K, Ishino Y, Mutoh H, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji, Kawachi,
Tochigi 329-0438, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There have been no detailed reports directly comparing the expression
of CDX1 with that of CDX2 in the inflammatory esophageal mucosa and Barrett's
epithelium. The present study was designed to examine the expression of CDX 1/2
in inflammatory esophageal mucosa with or without Barrett's epithelium.
METHODS: The expression of CDX1/2 genes was analyzed using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 34 human esophageal biopsy
specimens, and CDX2 expression was also evaluated immunohistochemically, using
anti-human CDX2 monoclonal antibody. The biopsy specimens for RNA extraction were
taken endoscopically from esophageal mucosa with mucosal break due to
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Barrett's epithelium, and normal
epithelium. The expressions of mucin markers (MUC2) and intestine-specific genes 
(sucrase-isomal-tase, human defensin-5, alkaline phosphatase) were also
comparatively analyzed.
RESULTS: CDX1/2 expression was not found in the normal esophageal mucosa. The
prevalence of CDX1/2 mRNA expression was significantly higher in the mucosa with 
Barrett's epithelium than in the mucosa without Barrett's epithelium. It is
noteworthy, however, that the CDX2 mRNA expression was initiated at the stage of 
esophagitis, when neither CDX1 nor intestine-specific genes had emerged yet. In
contrast to CDX2, CDX1 was expressed only in Barrett's epithelium.
Immunohistochemical study demonstrated strong and extensive nuclear
immunoreactivity for CDX2 in Barrett's epithelium. Furthermore, fine granular
cytoplasmic staining was also observed in the cytoplasm in Barrett's epithelium, 
as well as in inflammatory esophageal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: We report here, for the first time, that CDX2 is expressed in
patients with Barrett's epithelium and inflammatory esophageal mucosa. These
findings imply that the expression of CDX2 may be an early event leading to the
development of Barrett's esophagus.

PMID: 12560917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 24;300(4):813-8.

Homeodomain protein CDX2 regulates goblet-specific MUC2 gene expression.

Yamamoto H(1), Bai YQ, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519,
Japan.

Intestinal mucin gene MUC2 is abundantly expressed in goblet cells. To identify
the transcriptional activator that regulates goblet-specific expression of MUC2, 
we analyzed the interaction between the MUC2 promoter and homeodomain proteins
CDX1/2, which are involved in the regulation of intestinal development and
differentiation. COS-7 cells were transiently transfected with a CDX1 or CDX2
expression construct and then used for the luciferase assay, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). The CDX2 expression construct activated the MUC2 promoter and increased
the endogenous MUC2 mRNA level, while the CDX1 one did not. EMSA revealed that
CDX2 bound to the MUC2 gene cis element, MUC2-WT. These results suggest that
CDX2, but not CDX1, interacts with the MUC2 promoter and activates MUC2
transcription, and plays an important role in the differentiation of goblet
cells.

PMID: 12559945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Pathol. 2003 Jan;199(1):36-40.

Expression of intestine-specific transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, in
intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinomas.

Almeida R(1), Silva E, Santos-Silva F, Silberg DG, Wang J, De Bolós C, David L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), 4200 Porto, Portugal. raquel.almeida@ipatimup.pt

Intestinal metaplasia (IM) is part of a stepwise sequence of alterations of the
gastric mucosa, leading ultimately to gastric cancer, and is strongly associated 
with chronic Helicobacter pylori infection. The molecular mechanisms underlying
the onset of IM remain elusive. The aim of this study was to assess the putative 
involvement of two intestine-specific transcription factors, CDX1 and CDX2, in
the pathogenesis of gastric IM and gastric carcinoma. Eighteen foci of IM and 46 
cases of gastric carcinoma were evaluated by immunohistochemistry for CDX1 and
CDX2 expression. CDX1 was expressed in all foci of IM and in 41% of gastric
carcinomas; CDX2 was expressed in 17/18 foci of IM and in 54% of gastric
carcinomas. In gastric carcinomas, a strong association was observed between the 
expression of CDX1 and CDX2, as well as between the intestinal mucin MUC2 and
CDX1 and CDX2. No association was observed between the expression of CDX1 and
CDX2 and the histological type of gastric carcinoma. In conclusion, these results
show that aberrant expression of CDX1 and CDX2 is consistently observed in IM and
in a subset of gastric carcinomas. The association of CDX1 and CDX2 with
expression of the intestinal mucin MUC2, both in IM and in gastric carcinoma,
indirectly implies that CDX1 and CDX2 may be involved in intestinal
differentiation along the gastric carcinogenesis pathway.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12474224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Dec 1;30(23):5029-35.

The caudal homeodomain protein activates Drosophila E2F gene expression.

Hwang MS(1), Kim YS, Choi NH, Park JH, Oh EJ, Kwon EJ, Yamaguchi M, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735,
Korea.

The Drosophila caudal homeobox gene is required for definition of the
anteroposterior axis and for gut development, and CDX1 and CDX2, human homologs, 
play crucial roles in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation in
the intestine. Most studies have indicated tumor suppressor functions of Cdx2,
with inhibition of proliferation, while the effects of Cdx1 are more
controversial. The influence of Drosophila Caudal on cell proliferation is
unknown. In this study, we found three potential Caudal binding sequences in the 
5'-flanking region of the Drosophila E2F (DE2F) gene and showed by transient
transfection assays that they are involved in Caudal transactivation of the dE2F 
gene promoter. Analyses with transgenic flies carrying an E2F-lacZ fusion gene,
with and without mutation in the Caudal binding site, indicated that the Caudal
binding sites are required for expression of dE2F in living flies. Caudal-induced
E2F expression was also confirmed with a GAL4-UAS system in living flies. In
addition, ectopic expression of Caudal with heat-shock promotion induced
melanotic tumors in larvae. These results suggest that Caudal is involved in
regulation of proliferation through transactivation of the E2F gene in
Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC137955
PMID: 12466526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Apr;284(4):C848-59. Epub 2002 Dec 4.

Polyamines regulate Rho-kinase and myosin phosphorylation during intestinal
epithelial restitution.

Rao JN(1), Guo X, Liu L, Zou T, Murthy KS, Yuan JX, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201, USA.

Polyamines are required for the early phase of mucosal restitution that occurs as
a consequence of epithelial cell migration. Our previous studies have shown that 
polyamines increase RhoA activity by elevating cytosolic free Ca(2+)
concentration ([Ca(2+)](cyt)) through controlling voltage-gated K(+) channel
expression and membrane potential (E(m)) during intestinal epithelial
restitution. The current study went further to determine whether increased RhoA
following elevated [Ca(2+)](cyt) activates Rho-kinase (ROK/ROCK) resulting in
myosin light chain (MLC) phosphorylation. Studies were conducted in stable
Cdx2-transfected intestinal epithelial cells (IEC-Cdx2L1), which were associated 
with a highly differentiated phenotype. Reduced [Ca(2+)](cyt), by either
polyamine depletion or exposure to the Ca(2+)-free medium, decreased RhoA protein
expression, which was paralleled by significant decreases in GTP-bound RhoA,
ROCK-1, and ROKalpha proteins, Rho-kinase activity, and MLC phosphorylation. The 
reduction of [Ca(2+)](cyt) also inhibited cell migration after wounding.
Elevation of [Ca(2+)](cyt) induced by the Ca(2+) ionophore ionomycin increased
GTP-bound RhoA, ROCK-1, and ROKalpha proteins, Rho-kinase activity, and MLC
phosphorylation. Inhibition of RhoA function by a dominant negative mutant RhoA
decreased the Rho-kinase activity and resulted in cytoskeletal reorganization.
Inhibition of ROK/ROCK activity by the specific inhibitor Y-27632 not only
decreased MLC phosphorylation but also suppressed cell migration. These results
indicate that increase in GTP-bound RhoA by polyamines via [Ca(2+)](cyt) can
interact with and activate Rho-kinase during intestinal epithelial restitution.
Activation of Rho-kinase results in increased MLC phosphorylation, leading to the
stimulation of myosin stress fiber formation and cell migration.

PMID: 12466151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Gastroenterology. 2002 Nov;123(5):1565-77.

CDX2 regulates liver intestine-cadherin expression in normal and malignant colon 
epithelium and intestinal metaplasia.

Hinoi T(1), Lucas PC, Kuick R, Hanash S, Cho KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The intestine-specific caudal-related homeobox transcription
factor CDX2 seems to play a key role in intestinal development and
differentiation. Inactivation of one Cdx2 allele predisposes mice to develop
colon polyps, and loss of CDX2 expression is a feature of some poorly
differentiated colon carcinomas in humans. Conversely, aberrant CDX2 expression
is often seen in intestinal metaplasias in the stomach and esophagus and in some 
gastric carcinomas. To better understand CDX2 function, we sought to define
CDX2-regulated genes.
METHODS: HT-29 colon cancer cells with minimal endogenous CDX2 expression were
engineered to express exogenous CDX2, and gene expression changes relative to
control cells were assessed using high-density oligonucleotide arrays.
RESULTS: The gene for liver intestine (LI)-cadherin (cadherin 17) was strongly
induced by CDX2 in HT-29. In other colorectal cancer lines, endogenous CDX2 and
LI-cadherin expression were well correlated. Activation of a ligand-regulated
form of CDX2 rapidly induced LI-cadherin gene expression, even in the presence of
protein synthesis inhibitor. Analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the
LI-cadherin gene defined 2 CDX2 responsive elements, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicate CDX2 binds to the elements. In primary
colorectal cancers and intestinal metaplasias in the stomach, CDX2 and
LI-cadherin expression were tightly correlated.
CONCLUSIONS: CDX2 regulates LI-cadherin gene expression in normal, metaplastic,
and neoplastic tissues of the gastrointestinal tract via binding to elements in
the 5'-flanking region of the gene. Given the well-established roles of cadherins
in morphogenesis and differentiation, LI-cadherin may be a key factor mediating
CDX2 function in intestinal cell fate determination.

PMID: 12404231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Gastroenterology. 2002 Oct;123(4):1395-7.

To differentiate or proliferate? The interaction between PI3K/PTEN and Cdx2.

Lynch JP, Silberg DG.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2002 Oct;123(4):1163-78.

PMID: 12360502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Oncol. 2002 Oct;21(4):769-74.

CDX2 expression in the stomach with intestinal metaplasia and intestinal-type
cancer: Prognostic implications.

Seno H(1), Oshima M, Taniguchi MA, Usami K, Ishikawa TO, Chiba T, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

CDX2, a transcriptional factor expressed in the intestine, is implicated in the
development and maintenance of the intestinal mucosa. Recent studies have
demonstrated that CDX2 is expressed in the intestinal metaplasia of the stomach
and intestinal-type gastric cancer, while it is not expressed in the normal
gastric mucosa. To investigate the role of CDX2 in gastric cancer, we determined 
CDX2 expression and cell proliferation rate in various types of gastric cancer
tissues by immunostaining. Surgically dissected gastric cancer tissues were
collected from 40 patients. Consistent with previous reports, CDX2 was expressed 
in most gastric mucosa samples with intestinal metaplasia (89%, 16/18), although 
it was not found in the adjacent normal mucosa. CDX2 expression was also detected
in 64% (18/28) of intestinal-type gastric cancer cases, whereas it was not
observed in the diffuse-type gastric cancer (0/12). Moreover, the CDX2-positive
gastric cancer samples showed significantly lower index for Ki-67 immunostaining,
indicating reduced cell proliferation rates than in the CDX2-negative samples.
Importantly, multivariate analysis for the overall survival rate revealed that
the CDX2-positive gastric cancer patients survived significantly longer than the 
CDX2-negative patients. Even among the intestinal-type gastric cancer cases, the 
CDX2-positive group showed a lower Ki-67 index and longer postoperative survival 
than the CDX2-negative group. These results collectively indicate that CDX2
expression in gastric cancer tissues can be a novel prognostic marker for patient
survival.

PMID: 12239615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2002 Oct;283(4):G840-7.

Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor gene transcription regulated by Cdx2 in
the intestinal epithelium.

Uesaka T(1), Lu H, Katoh O, Watanabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.
tochi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Development and differentiation of the intestinal epithelium appear to be
regulated by various growth factors. Using cDNA microarrays, we identified
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) as one of the genes induced by
intestinal-specific transcription factor Cdx2 in an intestinal undifferentiated
rat cell line, intestinal epithelial cell (IEC)-6. Both Cdx2 and HB-EGF
stimulated cell proliferation and migration, and their effects were inhibited
partially by an EGF receptor-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor, PD-153035.
HB-EGF may function as one of the mediators of Cdx2 and may be associated with
the proliferation and migration in the intestinal epithelium. The Cdx2 protein
can bind to the Cdx2-binding element of the HB-EGF gene. Reporter gene analyses
showed that the HB-EGF gene promoter is Cdx2 responsive and that the activity of 
the promoter in the IEC-6 cells depends on the number of consensus Cdx2-binding
site-like sequences. These data indicate that HB-EGF gene expression can be
regulated by Cdx2 and serves to mediate the control of Cdx2 of the proliferation 
and migration of IEC-6 cells.

PMID: 12223343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gut. 2002 Aug;51(2):184-90.

Expression of CDX2 in normal and neoplastic human colon tissue and during
differentiation of an in vitro model system.

Qualtrough D(1), Hinoi T, Fearon E, Paraskeva C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Colorectal Tumour Biology Research Group, Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

BACKGROUND: The Cdx genes are expressed in the colorectal epithelium and are
frequently downregulated during tumorigenesis. Overexpression of Cdx genes has
been shown previously to result in cellular differentiation.
AIM: To study expression of CDX2 in normal and neoplastic human colon using a
newly isolated monoclonal antibody. To define expression of CDX1 and CDX2 in an
in vitro model system of colorectal tumour progression and to ascertain whether
these are subject to regulation during differentiation.
METHODS: Normal and neoplastic human colon was immunostained for CDX2. CDX1 and
CDX2 expression was assayed in cell lines derived from premalignant colonic
adenomas by western blotting. Differentiation was induced by sodium butyrate
treatment or post confluent growth, and changes in CDX expression compared with
carcinoma cell lines with low levels of CDX expression.
RESULTS: CDX2 protein displayed no gradient of expression within the colonic
crypt. Cell lines derived from adenomas, with high levels of CDX1 and CDX2,
showed no regulation of these proteins when induced to differentiate by butyrate 
or confluency. CDX expression in these cell lines was independent of their APC or
Ras status. CDX1 and CDX2 were expressed at very low levels in some carcinoma
cell lines and were modestly upregulated on differentiation but were not restored
to levels seen in adenoma cells.
CONCLUSION: The lack of significant regulation on cellular differentiation and
the absence of a detectable gradient in the crypt implies that CDX2 may confer
tissue specificity but may not play the previously suggested role in crypt
patterning.

PMCID: PMC1773308
PMID: 12117877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31909-17. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha, GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain protein
Cdx2 interact functionally to modulate intestinal gene transcription. Implication
for the developmental regulation of the sucrase-isomaltase gene.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, van Wering HM, Kim RK, Swain GP, Krasinski SD, Moffett
J, Grand RJ, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), an intestine-specific gene, is induced in the
differentiated small intestinal villous epithelium during the suckling-weaning
transition in mice. We have previously identified cis-acting elements within a
short evolutionarily conserved SI promoter. However, the nature and profile of
expression of the interacting proteins have not been fully characterized during
this developmental transition. Herein, we show that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1 alpha), GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and
Cdx1 are the primary transcription factors from the adult mouse intestinal
epithelium to interact with the SIF3, GATA, and SIF1 elements of the SI promoter.
We wanted to study whether HNF-1 alpha, GATA-4, and Cdx2 can cooperate in the
regulation of SI gene expression. Immunolocalization experiments revealed that
HNF-1 alpha is detected in rare epithelial cells of suckling mice and becomes
progressively more expressed in the villous epithelial cells during the
suckling-weaning transition. GATA-4 protein is expressed exclusively in villous
differentiated epithelial cells of the proximal small intestine, decreases in
expression in the ileum, and becomes undetectable in the colon. HNF-1 alpha,
GATA-4, and Cdx2 interact in vitro and in vivo. These factors activate SI
promoter activity in cotransfection experiments where GATA-4 requires the
presence of both HNF-1 alpha and Cdx2. These findings imply a combinatory role of
HNF-1 alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 for the time- and position-dependent regulation of 
SI transcription during development.

PMID: 12060663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jun 7;294(2):470-9.

Conversion of gastric mucosa to intestinal metaplasia in Cdx2-expressing
transgenic mice.

Mutoh H(1), Hakamata Y, Sato K, Eda A, Yanaka I, Honda S, Osawa H, Kaneko Y,
Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1,
Minamikawachimachi, Kawachigun, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. muto@jichi.ac.jp

Gastric intestinal metaplasia occurs as a pathological condition in the gastric
mucosa. To clarify how an intestine-specific homeobox gene, Cdx2, affects the
morphogenesis of gastric mucosa, we generated transgenic mice expressing Cdx2 in 
parietal cells. Until Day 18 after birth, the number of parietal cells
inthegastric mucosa of transgenic mice was the same as for their normal
littermates. However, at Day 19, we detected several glands in which parietal
cells disappeared and the proliferating zone moved from the isthmus to the base
of the glands. Thereafter, parietal cells decreased gradually and disappeared at 
Day 37. All of the gastric mucosal cells, except for enterochromaffin-like (ECL) 
cells, were completely replaced by intestinal metaplasia, consisting of goblet
cells, enteroendocrine cells, and absorptive cells expressing alkaline
phosphatase. Pseudopyloric gland metaplasia was also formed. The transgenic mouse
is a very useful model for clarifying physiological differentiation of gastric
and intestinal cell lineages and analyzing the molecular events from intestinal
metaplasia to adenocarcinoma.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12051735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Helicobacter. 2002 Jun;7(3):192-8.

Aberrant expression of CDX2 in the gastric mucosa with and without intestinal
metaplasia: effect of eradication of Helicobacter pylori.

Satoh K(1), Mutoh H, Eda A, Yanaka I, Osawa H, Honda S, Kawata H, Kihira K,
Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Jichi Medical
School, Tochigi, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The intestine-specific transcription factor CDX2 plays an important
role in differentiation and maintenance of intestinal epithelial cells.
Development and progression of intestinal metaplasia (IM) in the stomach is
closely associated with Helicobacter pylori-gastritis. We investigated expression
of CDX2 protein in the gastric mucosa with and without IM before and after
eradication of H. pylori.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The subjects comprised five normal controls and 29 H.
pylori-positive patients (15 with antral IM and 14 without IM), who were followed
for 12 months after eradication of H. pylori. Biopsies were taken from the
greater curvatures of the antrum and middle body. Expression of CDX2 was
evaluated immunohistochemically using anti-CDX2 antibody.
RESULTS: CDX2 expression was not found in controls. Strong nuclear staining was
observed extensively in IM, but rarely in the gastric epithelium, except for the 
focal area in only four antral biopsies (three with and one without IM). Fine
granular cytoplasmic staining was also observed in the perinuclear regions of IM 
and the gastric epithelial cells in half of the patients. In 13 of the 15
patients with IM, IM did not regress after eradication of H. pylori, and the
extent of nuclear staining in IM did not change. The extent of cytoplasmic
staining did not change either.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that CDX2 expression in the gastric mucosa is
found in patients with chronic gastritis and is closely associated with IM. CDX2 
expression in IM or the gastric epithelial cells did not disappear after
eradication of H. pylori.

PMID: 12047325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Development. 2002 Jun;129(11):2733-47.

Transcription factor AP-2gamma is essential in the extra-embryonic lineages for
early postimplantation development.

Auman HJ(1), Nottoli T, Lakiza O, Winger Q, Donaldson S, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

Erratum in
    Development 2002 Jul;129(13):3280.

The members of the AP-2 family of transcription factors play important roles
during mammalian development and morphogenesis. AP-2gamma (Tcfap2c - Mouse Genome
Informatics) is a retinoic acid-responsive gene implicated in placental
development and the progression of human breast cancer. We show that AP-2gamma is
present in all cells of preimplantation embryos and becomes restricted to the
extra-embryonic lineages at the time of implantation. To study further the
biological function of AP-2gamma, we have generated Tcfap2c-deficient mice by
gene disruption. The majority of Tcfap2c(-/-) mice failed to survive beyond 8.5
days post coitum (d.p.c.). At 7.5 d.p.c., Tcfap2c(-/-) mutants were typically
arrested or retarded in their embryonic development in comparison to controls.
Morphological and molecular analyses of mutants revealed that gastrulation could 
be initiated and that anterior-posterior patterning of the epiblast remained
intact. However, the Tcfap2c mutants failed to establish a normal
maternal-embryonic interface, and the extra-embryonic tissues were malformed.
Moreover, the trophoblast-specific expression of eomesodermin and Cdx2, two genes
implicated in FGF-responsive trophoblast stem cell maintenance, was significantly
reduced. Chimera studies demonstrated that AP-2gamma plays no major autonomous
role in the development of the embryo proper. By contrast, the presence of
AP-2gamma in the extra-embryonic membranes is required for normal development of 
this compartment and also for survival of the mouse embryo.

PMID: 12015300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. FEBS Lett. 2002 May 8;518(1-3):83-7.

Stimulation of Cdx1 by oncogenic beta-catenin/Tcf4 in colon cancer cells;
opposite effect of the CDX2 homeoprotein.

Domon-Dell C(1), Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 3 avenue
Molière, 67200, Strasbourg, France.

The homeobox gene Cdx1 is a regulator of intestinal epithelial cell proliferation
and differentiation. Using a transfection approach, we showed here that the
oncogenic activation of the beta-catenin pathway stimulates the endogenous
expression of the Cdx1 mRNA as well as the activity of the Cdx1 promoter in
cancer cells of the human colon. Reciprocally, the paralogue homeobox gene Cdx2
exerts an inhibitory effect on the basal and on the beta-catenin-stimulated
activity of the Cdx1 promoter. The inhibitory effect of CDX2 requires the intact 
homeodomain. It is not dependent on canonical CDX binding sites in the Cdx1
promoter nor on the cis-elements specifically targeted by the beta-catenin/Tcf
complex. We conclude that the oncogenically activated beta-catenin and CDX2 have 
opposite and independent effects on the Cdx1 homeobox gene.

PMID: 11997022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2181-93.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 have overlapping functions in anteroposterior patterning and
posterior axis elongation.

van den Akker E(1), Forlani S, Chawengsaksophak K, de Graaff W, Beck F, Meyer BI,
Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mouse Cdx and Hox genes presumably evolved from genes on a common ancestor
cluster involved in anteroposterior patterning. Drosophila caudal (cad) is
involved in specifying the posterior end of the early embryo, and is essential
for patterning tissues derived from the most caudal segment, the analia. Two of
the three mouse Cdx paralogues, Cdx 1 and Cdx2, are expressed early in a Hox-like
manner in the three germ layers. In the nascent paraxial mesoderm, both genes are
expressed in cells contributing first to the most rostral, and then to
progressively more caudal parts of the vertebral column. Later, expression
regresses from the anterior sclerotomes, and is only maintained for Cdx1 in the
dorsal part of the somites, and for both genes in the tail bud. Cdx1 null mutants
show anterior homeosis of upper cervical and thoracic vertebrae. Cdx2-null
embryos die before gastrulation, and Cdx2 heterozygotes display anterior
transformations of lower cervical and thoracic vertebrae. We have analysed the
genetic interactions between Cdx1 and Cdx2 in compound mutants. Combining mutant 
alleles for both genes gives rise to anterior homeotic transformations along a
more extensive length of the vertebral column than do single mutations. The most 
severely affected Cdx1 null/Cdx2 heterozygous mice display a posterior shift of
their cranio-cervical, cervico-thoracic, thoraco-lumbar, lumbo-sacral and
sacro-caudal transitions. The effects of the mutations in Cdx1 and Cdx2 were
co-operative in severity, and a more extensive posterior shift of the expression 
of three Hox genes was observed in double mutants. The alteration in Hox
expression boundaries occurred early. We conclude that both Cdx genes cooperate
at early stages in instructing the vertebral progenitors all along the axis, at
least in part by setting the rostral expression boundaries of Hox genes. In
addition, Cdx mutants transiently exhibit alterations in the extent of Hox
expression domains in the spinal cord, reminding of the strong effects of
overexpressing Cdx genes on Hox gene expression in the neurectoderm. Phenotypical
alterations in the peripheral nervous system were observed at mid-gestation
stages. Strikingly, the altered phenotype at caudal levels included a posterior
truncation of the tail, mildly affecting Cdx2 heterozygotes, but more severely
affecting Cdx1/Cdx2 double heterozygotes and Cdx1 null/Cdx2 heterozygotes.
Mutations in Cdx1 and Cdx2 therefore also interfere with axis elongation in a
cooperative way. The function of Cdx genes in morphogenetic processes during
gastrulation and tail bud extension, and their relationship with the Hox genes
are discussed in the light of available data in Amphioxus, C. elegans, Drosophila
and mice.

PMID: 11959827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21361-70. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

Cloning of the human claudin-2 5'-flanking region revealed a TATA-less promoter
with conserved binding sites in mouse and human for caudal-related homeodomain
proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha.

Sakaguchi T(1), Gu X, Golden HM, Suh E, Rhoads DB, Reinecker HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital & Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Claudin-2 is a structural component of tight junctions in the kidneys, liver, and
intestine, but the mechanisms regulating its expression have not been defined.
The 5'-flanking region of the claudin-2 gene contains binding sites for
intestine-specific Cdx homeodomain proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1, which are conserved in human and mouse. Both Cdx1 and Cdx2 activated the
claudin-2 promoter in the human intestinal epithelial cell line Caco-2.
HNF-1alpha augmented the Cdx2-induced but not Cdx1-induced transcriptional
activation of the human claudin-2 promoter. In mice, HNF-1alpha was required for 
claudin-2 expression in the villus epithelium of the ileum and within the liver
but not in the kidneys, indicating an organ-specific function of HNF-1alpha in
the regulation of claudin-2 gene expression. Tight junction structural
components, which determine epithelial polarization and intestinal barrier
function, can be regulated by homeodomain proteins that control the
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11934881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):10576.

cAMP response element-binding protein interacts with the homeodomain protein Cdx2
and enhances transcriptional activity.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Lorentz O, Suh ER, Taylor JK, Boudreau F, Traber PG. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar
12;274(11):7196-9.

PMID: 11905463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gut. 2002 Apr;50(4):525-9.

Stimulation of the intestinal Cdx2 homeobox gene by butyrate in colon cancer
cells.

Domon-Dell C(1), Wang Q, Kim S, Kedinger M, Evers BM, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381,
Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Gut. 2002 Apr;50(4):447-8.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor encoded by the intestinal Cdx2 homeobox gene
and treatment with sodium butyrate (NaB), a byproduct of fibre fermentation by
colonic bacteria, exert similar effects on colon cancer cell lines as they both
inhibit cell growth and stimulate cell differentiation and apoptosis.
AIM: To investigate whether NaB regulates expression of the Cdx2 gene in colon
cancer cell lines.
METHODS: Human adenocarcinoma cell lines Caco2 and HT29 were grown in the
presence or absence of NaB. Cells were analysed for Cdx2 mRNA expression by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, for protein expression by
western blotting and electromobility shift assays, and for transcriptional
activity of the Cdx2 promoter by transfection with luciferase reporter plasmids.
RESULTS: In HT29 and Caco2 cells, NaB stimulated Cdx2 mRNA and protein expression
as well as transcriptional activity of the Cdx2 promoter. Stimulation of the
activity of the Cdx2 promoter by NaB was dose and time dependent. The Cdx2
promoter contains discrete regions that participate in or inversely that blunt
the stimulatory effect exerted by NaB. In addition, NaB stimulated the
transcriptional activity of the Cdx2 promoter downregulated by oncogenic ras.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first report of an intestine specific transcription
factor, Cdx2, stimulated by butyrate. Thus it provides a new mechanism whereby
butyrate controls proliferation and differentiation of colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1773166
PMID: 11889074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Apr;282(4):C885-98.

Activation of K(+) channels and increased migration of differentiated intestinal 
epithelial cells after wounding.

Rao JN(1), Platoshyn O, Li L, Guo X, Golovina VA, Yuan JX, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 10 North
Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Early mucosal restitution occurs by epithelial cell migration to reseal
superficial wounds after injury. Differentiated intestinal epithelial cells
induced by forced expression of the Cdx2 gene migrate over the wounded edge much 
faster than undifferentiated parental cells in an in vitro model. This study
determined whether these differentiated intestinal epithelial cells exhibit
increased migration by altering voltage-gated K(+) (Kv) channel expression and
cytosolic free Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](cyt)). Stable Cdx2-transfected
IEC-6 cells (IEC-Cdx2L1) with highly differentiated phenotype expressed higher
basal levels of Kv1.1 and Kv1.5 mRNAs and proteins than parental IEC-6 cells.
Neither IEC-Cdx2L1 cells nor parental IEC-6 cells expressed voltage-dependent
Ca(2+) channels. The increased expression of Kv channels in differentiated
IEC-Cdx2L1 cells was associated with an increase in whole cell K(+) currents,
membrane hyperpolarization, and a rise in [Ca(2+)](cyt). The migration rates in
differentiated IEC-Cdx2L1 cells were about four times those of parental IEC-6
cells. Inhibition of Kv channel expression by polyamine depletion decreased
[Ca(2+)](cyt), reduced myosin stress fibers, and inhibited cell migration.
Elevation of [Ca(2+)](cyt) by ionomycin promoted myosin II stress fiber formation
and increased cell migration. These results suggest that increased migration of
differentiated intestinal epithelial cells is mediated, at least partially, by
increasing Kv channel activity and Ca(2+) influx during restitution.

PMID: 11880277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Gastroenterology. 2002 Mar;122(3):689-96.

Cdx2 ectopic expression induces gastric intestinal metaplasia in transgenic mice.

Silberg DG(1), Sullivan J, Kang E, Swain GP, Moffett J, Sund NJ, Sackett SD,
Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. silberg@mail.med.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2003 Sep;125(3):996-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intestinal-type gastric cancer is often preceded by intestinal
metaplasia in humans. The genetic events responsible for the transdifferentiation
that occurs in intestinal metaplasia are not well understood. Cdx2, a
transcription factor whose expression is normally limited to the intestine, has
been detected in gastric intestinal metaplasia. Cdx2 induces differentiation of
intestinal epithelial cells in vitro; therefore, we sought to establish whether a
causal relationship exists between Cdx2 activation and intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS: Cdx2 expression was directed to the gastric mucosa in transgenic mice
using cis-regulatory elements of Foxa3 (Hnf3gamma). Transgenic mice were analyzed
for histologic and gene expression changes.
RESULTS: Histologic examination of the gastric mucosa of the Foxa3/Cdx2 mice
revealed the presence of alcian blue-positive intestinal-type goblet cells, a
hallmark of intestinal metaplasia. In addition, Cdx2 induced the expression of
intestine-specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Gastric expression of Cdx2 alone was sufficient to induce intestinal
metaplasia in mice. These mice represent a powerful tool to investigate the
molecular mechanisms that promote intestinal metaplasia. Moreover, as gastric
cancer in humans is often preceded by intestinal metaplasia, the phenotype
described here strongly suggests involvement of Cdx2 in the initiation of the
process leading to intestinal neoplasia of the gastric mucosa.

PMID: 11875002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(2):94-100.

Expression of homeobox gene CDX2 precedes that of CDX1 during the progression of 
intestinal metaplasia.

Eda A(1), Osawa H, Yanaka I, Satoh K, Mutoh H, Kihira K, Sugano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(2):147-8.

BACKGROUND: The CDX1 and CDX2 genes are intestinal transcription factors that may
be involved in the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of intestinal 
epithelial cells. There have been no detailed reports directly comparing the
expression of CDX1 with that of CDX2 in chronic gastritis and intestinal
metaplasia. Accordingly, we examined the expression of CDX1/2 and its association
with the expression of other intestinal metaplasia-associated genes during the
development of intestinal metaplasia.
METHODS: The expression of CDX1/2 genes was analyzed, using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, in 44 human gastric tissue samples
obtained endoscopically. The expressions of mucin markers (MUC2, MUC5AC),
intestine-specific genes (sucrase-isomaltase, human defensin-5, alkaline
phosphatase), a gene marker for fundic gland area (H+/K+ATPase beta subunit), and
a gene for entire gastric glands (pepsinogen C) were also comparatively analyzed.
RESULTS: There was no expression of CDX1/2 in gastric mucosa not infected by
Helicobacter pylori. The prevalence of CDX1 mRNA expression was significantly
higher in mucosa with intestinal metaplasia than in mucosa without intestinal
metaplasia. It is noteworthy that CDX2 was expressed in the antral and fundic
mucosa in the absence of the expression of CDX1 and gene markers for intestinal
metaplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of CDX2 precedes those of CDX1, sucrase-isomaltase,
other intestine-specific genes (human defensin-5, alkaline phosphatase), and MUC2
during the progression of intestinal metaplasia. These findings imply that the
expression of CDX2 may trigger the initiation and development of intestinal
metaplasia.

PMID: 11871772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Gastric Cancer. 2001;4(4):185-91.

Expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNAs and relevance of this expression to
differentiation in human gastrointestinal mucosa--with special emphasis on
participation in intestinal metaplasia of the human stomach.

Mizoshita T(1), Inada K, Tsukamoto T, Kodera Y, Yamamura Y, Hirai T, Kato T, Joh 
T, Itoh M, Tatematsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The caudal-type homeobox genes, Cdx1 and Cdx2, are candidates for
directing intestinal development, differentiation, and maintenance of the
intestinal phenotype. The aims of this study were: (1) to assess the normal
tissue expression patterns of Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the human gastrointestinal tract
and (2) to ascertain levels in intestinal metaplasia (IM) of the stomach
associated with gastritis.
METHODS: Fresh human tissues were collected by surgical resection from 39
patients after informed consent had been received. RNAs were extracted from 11
distinct sites in the gastrointestinal mucosa (gastric body, gastric antrum,
duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending
colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum), and Northern hybridization was performed for
Cdr1 and Cdx2 mRNAs. In addition, RNAs were also extracted from normal gastric
mucosa, and gastric mucosa with mild to severe IM, confirmed histopathologically.
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was then carried out for
Cdx1 and Cdx2.
RESULTS: The expression of Cdx1 mRNA increased gradually from the duodenum to the
distal colon, with no expression detected in the stomach. Compared with the
distribution of Cdx1 mRNA in the mouse gastrointestinal tract, the expression of 
Cdr1 mRNA in the human gastrointestinal tract showed greater predominance in the 
jejunum and ileum. The expression of Cdx2 mRNA increased gradually from the
duodenum to the proximal colon and decreased from the ascending colon to the
rectum. Compared with the expression pattern of Cdx2 mRNA in the mouse
gastrointestinal tract, the expression of Cdx2 mRNA in the human gastrointestinal
tract showed greater predominance in the ileum. By RT-PCR, both Cdx1 and Cdx2
mRNAs were detected in the mild and severe types of IM. However, neither of these
mRNAs was identified in normal gastric mucosa without IM.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdr1 and Cdx2 mRNAs are widely present in the human intestinal and
colonic mucosae, but not in the gastric mucosa, suggesting that their expression 
may contribute to the intestinal phenotype. The high levels of these mRNAs in IM 
mucosa associated with chronic atrophic gastritis point to an association with
this phenotypic shift in the gastric mucosa.

PMID: 11846061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Lett. 2002 Feb 8;176(1):47-55.

Ectopic expression of homeodomain protein CDX2 in intestinal metaplasia and
carcinomas of the stomach.

Bai YQ(1), Yamamoto H, Akiyama Y, Tanaka H, Takizawa T, Koike M, Kenji Yagi O,
Saitoh K, Takeshita K, Iwai T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

The roles of CDX2 and CDX1 homeobox genes during gastric carcinogenesis remain
poorly defined. We have studied the expression of CDX2/1 in gastric cancers and
intestinal metaplasia (IM) of 69 gastric carcinoma patients by
immunohistochemistry. CDX2/1 were shown to be ectopically overexpressed in IM in 
41 (85%) of 48, and 47 (90%) of 52 cases, respectively. The expression of CDX2/1 
was detected in 38 (55%) and 51 (74%) of the 69 gastric carcinomas, respectively.
The histological type of the gastric carcinomas was independently associated with
CDX2 expression, but not with that of CDX1, with higher CDX2 expression in
intestinal type (differentiated type) than in diffuse type (undifferentiated
type) gastric carcinomas. Our results thus suggest that CDX2 and CDX1 may play a 
role during IM formation and gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 11790453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 2001 Dec 1;240(1):46-60.

RARgamma and Cdx1 interactions in vertebral patterning.

Allan D(1), Houle M, Bouchard N, Meyer BI, Gruss P, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology, Institut
de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 ave des Pins, ouest, Montréal, Québec,
H2W 1R7, Canada.

Exogenous retinoic acid (RA) can evoke vertebral homeosis when administered
during late gastrulation. These vertebral transformations correlate with
alterations of the rostral limit of Hox gene expression in the prevertebrae,
suggesting that retinoid signaling regulates the combinatorial expression of Hox 
genes dictating vertebral identity. Conversely, loss of certain RA receptors
(RARs) results in anterior homeotic transformations principally affecting the
cervical region. Despite these observations, the relationship between retinoid
signaling, somitic Hox expression, and vertebral patterning is poorly understood.
The members of the murine Cdx family (Cdx1, Cdx2, and Cdx4) are the homologues of
Drosophila caudal and encode homeobox-containing transcription factors. Cdx1
homozygous null mutants exhibit anterior homeotic transformations, some of which 
are reminiscent of those in RARgamma null offspring. In Cdx1 mutants, these
transformations occur concomitant with posteriorized prevertebral expression of
certain Hox genes. Cdx1 has recently been demonstrated to be a direct RA target, 
suggesting an indirect means by which retinoid signaling may impact vertebral
patterning. To further investigate this relationship, a complete allelic series
of Cdx1-RARgamma mutants was generated and the skeletal phenotype assessed either
following normal gestation or after administration of RA. Synergistic
interactions between these null alleles were observed in compound mutants, and
the full effects of exogenous RA on vertebral morphogenesis required Cdx1. These 
findings are consistent with a role for RA upstream of Cdx1 as regards axial
patterning. However, exogenous RA attenuated several defects inherent to Cdx1
null mutants. This finding, together with the increased phenotypic severity of
RARgamma-Cdx1 double null mutants relative to single nulls, suggests that these
pathways also function in parallel, likely by converging on common targets.

(c) 2001 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11784046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):170-83.

Hepatic nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3 or Foxa2) regulates glucagon gene transcription
by binding to the G1 and G2 promoter elements.

Gauthier BR(1), Schwitzgebel VM, Zaiko M, Mamin A, Ritz-Laser B, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Diabétologie Clinique, Centre Médical Universitaire, 1211 Genève 4,
Switzerland. benoit.gauthier@medecine.unige.ch

Glucagon gene expression in the endocrine pancreas is controlled by three
islet-specific elements (G3, G2, and G4) and the alpha-cell-specific element G1. 
Two proteins interacting with G1 have previously been identified as Pax6 and
Cdx2/3. We identify here the third yet uncharacterized complex on G1 as
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3)beta, a member of the HNF-3/forkhead
transcription family, which plays an important role in the development of
endoderm-related organs. HNF-3 has been previously demonstrated to interact with 
the G2 element and to be crucial for glucagon gene expression; we thus define a
second binding site for this transcription on the glucagon gene promoter. We
demonstrate that both HNF-3alpha and -beta produced in heterologous cells can
interact with similar affinities to either the G1 or G2 element. Pax6, which
binds to an overlapping site on G1, exhibited a greater affinity as compared with
HNF-3alpha or -beta. We show that both HNF-3beta and -alpha can transactivate
glucagon gene transcription through the G2 and G1 elements. However, HNF-3 via
its transactivating domains specifically impaired Pax6-mediated transactivation
of the glucagon promoter but had no effect on transactivation by Cdx2/3. We
suggest that HNF-3 may play a dual role on glucagon gene transcription by 1)
inhibiting the transactivation potential of Pax6 on the G1 and G3 elements and 2)
direct activation through G1 and G2.

PMID: 11773447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Pathol. 2001 Dec;159(6):2239-48.

Loss of CDX2 expression and microsatellite instability are prominent features of 
large cell minimally differentiated carcinomas of the colon.

Hinoi T(1), Tani M, Lucas PC, Caca K, Dunn RL, Macri E, Loda M, Appelman HD, Cho 
KR, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA.

Most large bowel cancers are moderately to well-differentiated adenocarcinomas
comprised chiefly or entirely of glands lined by tall columnar cells. We have
identified a subset of poorly differentiated colon carcinomas with a distinctive 
histopathological appearance that we term large cell minimally differentiated
carcinomas (LCMDCs). These tumors likely include a group of poorly differentiated
carcinomas previously described by others as medullary adenocarcinomas. To better
understand the pathogenesis of these uncommon neoplasms, we compared molecular
features of 15 LCMDCs to those present in 25 differentiated adenocarcinomas
(DACs) of the colon. Tumors were examined for alterations commonly seen in
typical colorectal carcinomas, including increased p53 and beta-catenin
immunoreactivity, K-ras gene mutations, microsatellite instability, and loss of
heterozygosity of markers on chromosomes 5q, 17p, and 18q. In addition, tumors
were evaluated by immunohistochemistry for CDX2, a homeobox protein whose
expression in normal adult tissues is restricted to intestinal and colonic
epithelium. Markedly reduced or absent CDX2 expression was noted in 13 of 15
(87%) LCMDCs, whereas only 1 of the 25 (4%) DACs showed reduced CDX2 expression
(P < 0.001). Nine of 15 (60%) LCMDCs had the high-frequency microsatellite
instability phenotype, but only 2 of 25 (8%) DACs had the high-frequency
microsatellite instability phenotype (P = 0.002). Our findings provide support
for the hypothesis that the molecular pathogenesis of LCMDCs is distinct from
that of most DACs. CDX2 alterations and DNA mismatch repair defects have
particularly prominent roles in the development of LCMDCs.

PMCID: PMC1850596
PMID: 11733373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Int J Oncol. 2002 Jan;20(1):23-9.

The caudal-related homeodomain protein CDX1 activates proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen expression in hepatocellular and colorectal carcinoma cells.

Oh EJ(1), Park JH, Cho M, Lee WJ, Choi YH, Yoo MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Pusan 609-735,
Korea.

Cdx1 and Cdx2 are known as Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factors
important in the early differentiation and maintenance of intestinal epithelial
cells. Cdx1 and Cdx2 are expressed in the small intestine and colon of fetus and 
adult. Most previous studies suggested that Cdx2 inhibits proliferation. Several 
target genes of Cdx2 have been identified. However, the effect of Cdx1 on cell
proliferation is currently controversial and its target genes except for Hox-A7
remain unknown. In this study, we found several potential Caudal-related
homeodomain binding sequences in the 5'-flanking region of human PCNA gene.
Cotransfection experiments, using human PCNA reporter plasmid and CDX1 and CDX2
expression plasmids, showed that CDX1 transactivates human PCNA gene promoter
activity in hepatocellular cell line (HepG2) and colorectal carcinoma cell lines 
(Colo320HSR and HCT116), while CDX2 does not. CDX1-induced PCNA expression was
also detected in immunoblot and cytochemistry experiments. In BrdU incorporation 
experiments, CDX1 enhanced the incorporated BrdU. Taken together, our results
suggest that CDX1 have a pro-proliferative effect on proliferation through
transactivation of PCNA promoter activity.

PMID: 11743638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Gastroenterology. 2001 Dec;121(6):1437-50.

Phosphorylation of the serine 60 residue within the Cdx2 activation domain
mediates its transactivation capacity.

Rings EH(1), Boudreau F, Taylor JK, Moffett J, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cdx2 is critical in intestinal proliferation and
differentiation. Modulation of Cdx2 function in response to cellular signaling is
to be elucidated. We hypothesize that phosphorylation of the Cdx2 activation
domain can modulate its function.
METHODS: The Cdx2 activation domain was delineated in transient transfections
using different portions of Cdx2 fused to the Gal4-DNA binding domain. In vivo
phosphorylation was studied by metabolic labeling with (32)P-orthophosphate. To
study a potential phosphorylation site, polyclonal antibodies were generated: CNL
was raised against amino acids 54-66 of Cdx2 and P-Cdx2-S60 against the same
epitope in which serine 60 was phosphorylated.
RESULTS: A critical region for transactivation resides within amino acids 60-70. 
Substitution of serine 60 with alanine reduces incorporation of
(32)P-orthophosphate substantially. S60-phosphorylation decreases Cdx2
transactivation. Phosphorylation of serine 60 can be inhibited with the
mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors PD98059 or UO126. P-Cdx2-S60
recognizes phosphorylated serine 60 mainly in proliferative compartment of the
intestinal epithelial layer. In contrast, CNL recognizes Cdx2 predominantly in
the differentiated compartment.
CONCLUSIONS: The Cdx2 activation domain is phosphorylated at serine 60 via the
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. S60-phosphorylated and
S60-nonphosphorylated Cdx2 have different transcriptional activity, as well as
different spatial expression patterns in the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11729123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. FEBS Lett. 2001 Oct 26;507(2):128-32.

Nucleotide requirements for CDX2 binding to the cis promoter element mediating
intestine-specific expression of guanylyl cyclase C.

Di Guglielmo MD(1), Park J, Schulz S, Waldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Departments of Medicine, Biochemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, Thomas Jefferson University, 812 Medical Office Building,
1100 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. mdd002@jefferson.edu

Guanylyl cyclase C (GC-C), specifically expressed by intestinal epithelial cells,
is the receptor for the Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin that causes
diarrhea. Tissue-specific expression of GC-C is mediated by the intestinal
transcriptional regulator CDX2. This trans-activating protein regulates
intestine-specific expression by binding to a critical sequence in the proximal
promoter of GC-C. The precise nucleotide elements mediating CDX2 binding to
promoter elements remain undefined. Several nuclear proteins form complexes with 
a DNA probe containing the promoter element of GC-C mediating CDX2 binding. The
present study examined the nucleotide requirements in the consensus binding site 
and flanking regions in the cis element that mediates specific CDX2 binding to
the promoter of GC-C. These studies identified seven core base pairs in the
critical promoter element mediating tissue-specific expression of GC-C that are
required for CDX2 binding. In addition, base pairs flanking this core sequence
contribute to and are required for CDX2 recognition. These studies describe the
precise nucleotide sequence within the GC-C promoter that comprises the CDX2
binding site required for intestine-specific expression.

PMID: 11684084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):297-301.

Expression of homeobox-containing genes in cDNA libraries derived from cattle
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo.

Ponsuksili S(1), Wimmers K, Adjaye J, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee,
53115 Bonn, Germany. spon@itz.uni-bonn.de

The homeobox-containing gene family plays a pivotal role in regulating,
patterning, and axial morphogenesis in the developing embryo. But there is still 
very little known about the expression and function of these genes in mammalian
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos. In this study we have used degenerate 
primers corresponding to the highly conserved regions of Antennapedia class
homeodomains as a rapid and an efficient method to survey bovine cDNA libraries
derived from unfertilised oocytes, single 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and
blastocyst stage embryos for the presence of homeobox sequences. Our results
provide, for the first time, evidence for the transcription of Hoxa3 and Hoxd1 in
oocytes; Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the 2-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, Hoxd1, and Hoxd4 in the
4-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, and Hoxc9 in the 8-cell; Cdx2, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in the
morula; Cdx2, Hoxb7, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in blastocyst stage cattle embryos. These
are candidate genes for the developmental capacity of in vivo and in vitro
produced bovine embryos.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Oncogene. 2001 Aug 9;20(35):4884-90.

Expression of the gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor (Krüppel-like factor 4) gene
in the human colon cancer cell line RKO is dependent on CDX2.

Dang DT(1), Mahatan CS, Dang LH, Agboola IA, Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, MD 21205, USA.

Gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor (GKLF or KLF4) is a zinc finger-containing,
epithelial-specific transcription factor, that functions as a suppressor of cell 
proliferation. We previously showed that GKLF expression is decreased in
intestinal and colonic adenomas, respectively, from multiple intestinal neoplasia
(Min) mice and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients. This study shows
that GKLF is induced upon activation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)
gene. However, among several human colon cancer cell lines surveyed, expression
of GKLF is lowest in RKO, a line with wild-type APC and beta-catenin. RKO
contains a mutated allele that encodes the putative tumor suppressor homeodomain 
protein, CDX2. We show that wild-type CDX2 activates the GKLF promoter and that
the mutated CDX2 has a dominant negative effect on wild-type function. Our
results may help explain the exceedingly low levels of GKLF expression detected
in this cell line, which may in turn contribute to the tumor phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2268091
PMID: 11521200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(14):4761-72.

Functional interference between thyroid hormone receptor alpha (TRalpha) and
natural truncated TRDeltaalpha isoforms in the control of intestine development.

Plateroti M(1), Gauthier K, Domon-Dell C, Freund JN, Samarut J, Chassande O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de l'ENS de Lyon, UMR 5665
CNRS, LA 913 INRA, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France.

Thyroid hormone is known to participate in the control of intestine maturation at
weaning. Its action is mediated by the thyroid hormone nuclear receptors, encoded
by the TRalpha and TRbeta genes. Since previous studies have shown that TRbeta
plays a minor role in the gut, we focused here our analysis on the TRalpha gene. 
The TRalpha locus generates the TRalpha1 receptor together with the splicing
variant TRalpha2 and the truncated products TRDeltaalpha1 and TRDeltaalpha2,
which all lack an intact ligand binding domain. The TRDeltaalpha isoforms are
transcribed from an internal promoter located in intron 7, and their distribution
is restricted to a few tissues including those of the intestine. In order to
define the functions of the different isoforms encoded by the TRalpha locus in
the intestinal mucosa, we produced mice either lacking all known TRalpha products
or harboring a mutation which inactivates the intronic promoter. We performed a
detailed analysis of the intestinal phenotypes in these mice and compared it to
that of the previously described TRalpha(-/-) mice, in which TRalpha isoforms are
abolished but the TRDeltaalpha isoforms remain. This comparative analysis leads
us to the following conclusions: (i) the TRalpha1 receptor mediates the
T3-dependent functions in the intestine at weaning time and (ii) the TRDeltaalpha
products negatively control the responsiveness of the epithelial cells to T3.
Moreover, we show that TRDeltaalpha proteins can interfere with the transcription
of the intestine-specific homeobox genes cdx1 and cdx2 and that their activity is
regulated by TRalpha1. Altogether these data demonstrate that cooperation of
TRalpha and TRDeltaalpha products is essential to ensure the normal postnatal
development of the intestine and that mutations in the TRalpha locus can generate
different phenotypes caused by the disruption of the equilibrium between these
products.

PMCID: PMC87160
PMID: 11416151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Br J Cancer. 2001 May 18;84(10):1314-6.

CDX2 mutations do not account for juvenile polyposis or Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
and occur infrequently in sporadic colorectal cancers.

Woodford-Richens KL(1), Halford S, Rowan A, Bevan S, Aaltonen LA, Wasan H,
Bicknell D, Bodmer WF, Houlston RS, Tomlinson IP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund,
London, WC2A 3PX, UK.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) and juvenile polyposis (JPS) are both characterized 
by the presence of hamartomatous polyps and increased risk of malignancy in the
gastrointestinal tract. Mutations of the LKB1 and SMAD4 genes have been shown
recently to cause a number of PJS and JPS cases respectively, but there remains
considerable uncharacterized genetic heterogeneity in these syndromes,
particularly JPS. The mouse homologue of CDX2 has been shown to give rise to a
phenotype which includes hamartomatous-like polyps in the colon and is therefore 
a good candidate for JPS and PJS cases which are not accounted for by the SMAD4
and LKB1 genes. By analogy with SMAD4, CDX2 is also a candidate for somatic
mutation in sporadic colorectal cancer. We have screened 37 JPS families/cases
without known SMAD4 mutations, 10 Peutz-Jeghers cases without known LKB1
mutations and 49 sporadic colorectal cancers for mutations in CDX2. Although
polymorphic variants and rare variants of unlikely significance were detected, no
pathogenic CDX2 mutations were found in any case of JPS or PJS, or in any of the 
sporadic cancers.

Copyright 2001 Cancer Research Campaign.

PMCID: PMC2363639
PMID: 11355940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):21885-94. Epub 2001 Mar 30.

Intestinal epithelial cell differentiation involves activation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase that regulates the homeobox transcription factor
CDX2.

Houde M(1), Laprise P, Jean D, Blais M, Asselin C, Rivard N.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada.

The intracellular signaling pathways responsible for cell cycle arrest and
differentiation along the crypt-villus axis of the human small intestine remain
largely unknown. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) have recently
emerged as key modulators of various vertebrate cell differentiation processes.
In order to elucidate further the mechanism(s) responsible for the loss of
proliferative potential once committed intestinal cells begin to differentiate,
the role and regulation of p38 MAPK with regard to differentiation were analyzed 
in both intact epithelium as well as in well established intestinal cell models
recapitulating the crypt-villus axis in vitro. Results show that phosphorylated
and active forms of p38 were detected primarily in the nuclei of differentiated
villus cells. Inhibition of p38 MAPK signaling by 2-20 microm SB203580 did not
affect E2F-dependent transcriptional activity in subconfluent Caco-2/15 or HIEC
cells. p38 MAPK activity dramatically increased as soon as Caco-2/15 cells
reached confluence, whereas addition of SB203580 during differentiation of
Caco-2/15 cells strongly attenuated sucrase-isomaltase gene and protein
expression as well as protein expression of villin and alkaline phosphatase. The 
binding of CDX2 to the sucrase-isomaltase promoter and its transcriptional
activity were significantly reduced by SB203580. Pull-down glutathione
S-transferase and immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated a direct
interaction of CDX3 with p38. Finally, p38-dependent phosphorylation of CDX3 was 
observed in differentiating Caco-2/15 cells. Taken together, our results indicate
that p38 MAPK may be involved in the regulation of CDX2/3 function and intestinal
cell differentiation.

PMID: 11283019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Environ Monit. 2000 Jun;2(3):240-7.

Triethoxysilyl-substituted aminoethanethiol ligands for zinc and cadmium
complexes and aminoethanethiol-modified silica gel. Evaluation of the
corresponding supported molecular trap for metallic pollutant uptake (Cd2+, Hg2+ 
and Pb2+).

Bresson C(1), Menu MJ, Dartiguenave M, Dartiguenave Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Inorganique, Université P. Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

The reaction of 2-[3-(triethoxysilyl)propylamino]ethanethiol (LH, a) and
1-methyl-2-[3-(triethoxysilyl)propylamino]ethanethiol (LH, b) with ZnX2 and CdX2 
(X = Cl, Br, I, NO3) in tetrahydrofuran (THF) or CH2Cl2 gives several complexes
depending on the experimental conditions. Elemental analyses, IR, Raman, 13C[1H],
1H NMR and mass spectroscopies indicated the formation of mononuclear and
dinuclear complexes. In the absence of NEt3 as proton quencher, the protonated
ligands react in their zwitterionic form giving dinuclear [M(LH)X2]2 [M = Zn (1),
Cd (2); LH = a, b; X = Cl, Br, I] or mononuclear M(NO3)2(LH)2 [M = Zn (5), Cd
(6); LH = a] complexes. In both cases, coordination occurs through the S atoms,
the ligands acting as terminal and bridging species. With NEt3, the deprotonated 
ligands are chelated through their N and S atoms and bridging occurs through the 
S atoms in [MLX]2 [M = Zn (3), Cd (4); LH = a; X = Cl, Br] complexes. The LH
ligand is chemically grafted onto silica, the procedure optimized and the
resulting material characterized by 13C and 29Si cross-polarization, magic-angle 
spinning (CP-MAS) NMR and DRIFT. This material is evaluated as a supported
molecular trap for binding heavy metals (Cd2+, Hg2+, Pb2+) in aqueous solution.
In both batch and column processes, it appears that Hg2+ and Pb2+ are trapped
more than Cd2+, but in all cases values lower than those allowed were obtained.

PMID: 11256706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Br J Cancer. 2001 Jan;84(2):218-25.

The homeobox gene CDX2 in colorectal carcinoma: a genetic analysis.

Sivagnanasundaram S(1), Islam I, Talbot I, Drummond F, Walters JR, Edwards YH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Biochemical Genetics Unit, Biology Department, University College
London, Wolfson House, 4 Stephenson Way, London, NW1 2HE

Accumulation of mutations in tumour suppressor genes and oncogenes has been
proposed to underlie the initiation and progression of sporadic colorectal cancer
(CRC). Evidence is accumulating to suggest that the caudal homeobox gene CDX2 is 
implicated in the pathogenesis of CRC. The CDX2 transcription factor is expressed
in intestinal epithelium and is markedly down-regulated in colon tumours.
Furthermore, Cdx2 heterozygous null mice develop multiple intestinal tumours. In 
this present study, we have investigated CDX2 as a potential candidate gene for
sporadic CRC by a thorough search of all exons and exon/intron boundaries for DNA
polymorphisms and rare variants in a panel of CRC tumours. 6 polymorphisms were
identified and the haplotypes determined. In addition two rare variants were
found, one of which was only identified in DNA from a CRC case. Loss of
heterozygosity was observed in 3 out of 28 informative CRC cases. A possible
association between particular haplotypes and tumour progression was also
suggested by the data. In addition a preliminary analysis of the relative
expression of CDX2 alleles in tumour/normal tissue suggested some variation in
the levels, however further analysis is required before any conclusions can be
drawn. While CDX2 mutations predisposing to sporadic CRC have not been
identified, this study has established that loss of CDX2 contributes towards the 
progression of some sporadic CRC tumours.

Copyright 2001 Cancer Research Campaign.

PMCID: PMC2363702
PMID: 11161380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):G149-56.

Clusterin gene transcription is activated by caudal-related homeobox genes in
intestinal epithelium.

Suh E(1), Wang Z, Swain GP, Tenniswood M, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. suher@mail.med.upenn.edu

Caudal-related homeobox (Cdx) proteins play an important role in development and 
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium. Using cDNA differential display, we
identified clusterin as a prominently induced gene in a Cdx2-regulated cellular
model of intestinal differentiation. Transfection experiments and DNA-protein
interaction assays showed that clusterin is an immediate downstream target gene
for Cdx proteins. The distribution of clusterin protein in the intestine was
assessed during development and in the adult epithelium using
immunohistochemistry. In the adult mouse epithelium, clusterin protein was
localized in both crypt and villus compartments but not in interstitial cells of 
the intestinal mucosa. Together, these data suggest that clusterin is a direct
target gene for Cdx homeobox proteins, and the pattern of clusterin protein
expression suggests that it is associated with the differentiated state in the
intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11123208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Gastroenterology. 2000 Oct;119(4):961-71.

Cdx1 and cdx2 expression during intestinal development.

Silberg DG(1), Swain GP, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. silberg@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The intestine-specific transcription factors Cdx1 and Cdx2 are
candidate genes for directing intestinal development, differentiation, and
maintenance of the intestinal phenotype. This study focused on the complex
patterns of expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 during mouse gastrointestinal
development.
METHODS: Embryonic and postnatal mouse tissues were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry to determine protein expression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the
developing intestinal tract.
RESULTS: Cdx2 protein expression was observed at 9. 5 postcoitum (pc), whereas
weak expression of Cdx1 protein was first seen at 12.5 pc in the distal
developing intestine (hindgut). Expression of Cdx1 increased from 13.5 to 14.5 pc
during the endoderm/epithelial transition with predominately distal expression.
In contrast to Cdx1, there was intense expression of Cdx2 in all but the distal
portions of the developing intestine. Cdx2 expression remained low in the distal 
colon throughout postnatal development. A gradient of expression formed in the
crypt-villus axis, with Cdx1 primarily in the crypt and Cdx2 primarily in the
villus.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct comparison of the patterns of Cdx1 and Cdx2 protein
expression during development as performed in this study provides new insights
into their potential functional roles. The relative expression of Cdx1 to Cdx2
protein may be important in the anterior to posterior patterning of the
intestinal epithelium and in defining patterns of proliferation and
differentiation along the crypt-villus axis.

PMID: 11040183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 2000 May;3(5):271-6.

Overexpression of Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeogenes enhances expression of the HLA-I in
HT-29 cells.

Soubeyran P(1), Mallo GV, Moucadel V, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche de Physiologie et Pathologie Digestives, INSERM
U.315, 46 Boulevard de la Gaye, Marseille, 13009, France.

We have previously reported that down-regulation of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA expression
is associated with colon carcinogenesis, and that coordinated reexpression of
these genes in the HT29 colon cancer-derived cell line leads to a reduced
malignant phenotype. Here we show that restoring Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression in HT29
cells enhanced the antigen presentation system, as reflected by a strong
induction of the concentration of HLA-I molecules at the cell surface, resulting 
from increased expression of the HLA-I mRNA. Expression of the LMP2 proteasomal
protein was also strongly induced by Cdx1 and Cdx2 at the transcriptional level, 
whereas TAP1 expression which is under the control of the same bidirectional
promoter as LMP2 remained unchanged. Furthermore, expression of the adhesion
molecule ICAM-1, which works in concert with HLA-I, and of the cell death
promoter Fas was also increased upon Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression. Taken together,
these results suggest that loss of Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression during colorectal
carcinogenesis could favor the escape of tumor cells from the immune system. In
conclusion, restoration of Cdx1 and Cdx2 expression should be considered in
immunotherapeutic strategies for colorectal cancer.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10964750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Jul;28(3):184-8.

Distinct expression of CDX2 and GATA4/5, development-related genes, in human
gastric cancer cell lines.

Bai Y(1), Akiyama Y, Nagasaki H, Yagi OK, Kikuchi Y, Saito N, Takeshita K, Iwai
T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

CDX2 is a tumor-suppressor homeobox gene involved in colon carcinogenesis, but
its role in gastric cancer is unknown. Although GATA4, -5 and, -6 transcription
factors have distinct functions in the regulation of gastrointestinal epithelial 
cell differentiation, there have been no reports regarding GATA4/5/6 alterations 
in gastrointestinal carcinomas. By using a semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay, we studied the expression of gut
development-related genes CDX2/1 and GATA4/5/6 in 11 human gastric cancer cell
lines. The expression of CDX2 appeared to progressively decrease with the
transition from well differentiated to poorly differentiated cancer cell lines.
CDX1 was below detectable levels in all cell lines. The expression of GATA4 and
GATA5 was undetectable in four and six cell lines, respectively, whereas the
majority of the cell lines expressed GATA6 abundantly. These results suggest that
CDX2 and GATA4/5 may be associated with the carcinogenesis of the stomach. Mol.
Carcinog. 28:184-188, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10942535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6579-86.

Retinoic acid regulation of Cdx1: an indirect mechanism for retinoids and
vertebral specification.

Houle M(1), Prinos P, Iulianella A, Bouchard N, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada H2W 1R7.

Retinoic acid (RA) is required for diverse developmental programs, including
vertebral specification. Both RA receptor disruption and excess RA result in
homeotic transformations of the axial skeleton. These effects are believed to
occur through altered expression of Hox genes, several of which have been
demonstrated to be direct RA targets. Members of the cdx (caudal) homeobox gene
family are also implicated in regulating Hox expression. Disruption of cdx1
results in vertebral homeotic transformations and alteration of Hox expression
boundaries; similar homeosis is also observed in cdx2 heterozygotes. In Xenopus, 
gain or loss of Cdx function affects vertebral morphogenesis through a mechanism 
that also correlates with altered Hox expression. Taken together with the finding
of putative Cdx binding motifs in several Hox promoters, these data strongly
support a role for Cdx members in direct regulation of expression of at least
some Hox genes. Most retinoid-responsive Hox genes have not been demonstrated to 
be direct RA targets, suggesting that intermediaries are involved. Based on these
findings, we hypothesized that one or more cdx members may transduce the effects 
of RA on Hox transcription. Consistent with this, we present evidence that cdx1
is a direct RA target gene, suggesting an additional pathway for
retinoid-dependent vertebral specification.

PMCID: PMC86138
PMID: 10938132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gastroenterology. 2000 Jul;119(1):89-96.

Intestine-specific activity of the human guanylyl cyclase C promoter is regulated
by Cdx2.

Park J(1), Schulz S, Waldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine and Biochemistry,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The heat-stable enterotoxin receptor, guanylyl cyclase C,
exhibits an intestine-specific pattern of expression. The aim of this study was
to identify the transcriptional activator that mediates intestine-specific
expression of guanylyl cyclase C.
METHODS: Fragments of the promoter were assayed to isolate regions directing
intestine-specific gene activation. Deoxyribonuclease I footprinting was used to 
identify a site of intestine-specific protection. Electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays (EMSAs) and supershift analyses were used to characterize the protein that
bound to the protected site. The protected site was mutated to analyze its role
in promoter activity.
RESULTS: Reporter gene assays revealed that intestine-specific expression of
guanylyl cyclase C is directed by the proximal promoter. Deoxyribonuclease I
footprinting identified a specific site in the proximal promoter that exhibited
intestine-specific protection. EMSAs and supershift analyses revealed that the
transcription factor Cdx2 bound to an intestine-specific site of protection.
Mutation of the Cdx2-protected site of the promoter eliminated binding of Cdx2
and reduced reporter gene activity to the level of extraintestinal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that Cdx2 and its consensus-binding site in the
promoter are required for intestine-specific expression of the guanylyl cyclase C
gene.

PMID: 10889158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem J. 2000 Mar 1;346 Pt 2:529-35.

Interaction between the homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and HNF1alpha mediates
expression of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene.

Mitchelmore C(1), Troelsen JT, Spodsberg N, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N,
Denmark. mitch@imbg.ku.dk

Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase is a brush-border enzyme which is specifically
expressed in the small intestine where it hydrolyses lactose, the main
carbohydrate found in milk. We have previously demonstrated in transgenic mice
that the tissue-specific and developmental expression of lactase is controlled by
a 1 kb upstream region of the pig lactase gene. Two homeodomain transcription
factors, caudal-related homeodomain protein (Cdx2) and hepatic nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF1alpha), are known to bind to regulatory cis elements in the promoters
for several intestine-specific genes, including lactase, and are present in
mammalian intestinal epithelia from an early stage in development. In the present
study, we examined whether Cdx2 and HNF1alpha physically interact and
co-operatively activate transcription from the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
promoter. We show that the presence of both factors leads to a much higher level 
of transcription than the sum of the activation by either factor alone. The
N-terminal activation domain of Cdx2 is required for maximal synergy with
HNF1alpha. With the use of pull-down assays, we demonstrate a direct
protein-protein interaction between Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. The interaction domain
includes the homeodomain region of both proteins. This is the first demonstration
of a functional interaction between two transcription factors involved in the
activation of a number of intestine-specific genes. Synergistic interaction
between tissue-restricted factors is likely to be an important mechanism for
reinforcing developmental and tissue-specific gene expression within the
intestine.

PMCID: PMC1220882
PMID: 10677375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Blood. 2000 Mar 15;95(6):2126-31.

A new ETV6/TEL partner gene, ARG (ABL-related gene or ABL2), identified in an
AML-M3 cell line with a t(1;12)(q25;p13) translocation.

Iijima Y(1), Ito T, Oikawa T, Eguchi M, Eguchi-Ishimae M, Kamada N, Kishi K,
Asano S, Sakaki Y, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cytogenetics, Department of Clinical Pathology, Research
Institute, International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo, Japan.

The ETV6/TEL gene has been reported to fuse to PDGFRbetab MDS1/EVI1, BTL, ACS2,
STL, JAK2, ABL, CDX2, TRKC, AML1, and MN1. Among them, PDGFRbeta, ABL, JAK2, and 
TRKC are tyrosine kinases (TK). We identified a novel ETV6 partner gene, ARG
(ABL-related gene or ABL2), another TK gene in a cell line established from a
patient with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML-M3) with a t(15;17)(q22;q11.2) and a
t(1;12)(q25;p13), which has the remarkable feature to differentiate to mature
eosinophils in culture with all-trans retinoic acid and cytokines. The ETV6/ARG
transcripts consisted of exon 1 to 5 of ETV6 and the 3' portion of ARG starting
from exon 1B or exon 2, resulting in an open reading frame for a fusion protein
consisting of the entire PNT oligomerization domain of ETV6 and all of the
functional domains of ARG including the TK domain. This is the same protein
structure as identified in the other ETV6 TK fusion proteins. The reciprocal
ARG/ETV6 transcript was not expressed, and the normal ETV6 allele was not deleted
or rearranged. Although the ABL is known to be involved in various human
malignancies, ARG has not been involved in human malignancies despite its high
homology to ABL. Thus, this is the first report showing involvement of ARG in
human leukemia. The ETV6/ARG protein may be involved in the unique
differentiation capacity of this cell line. (Blood. 2000;95:2126-2131)

PMID: 10706884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6499-508.

A-Myb up-regulates Bcl-2 through a Cdx binding site in t(14;18) lymphoma cells.

Heckman CA(1), Mehew JW, Ying GG, Introna M, Golay J, Boxer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health
Care System and the Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

In follicular lymphoma, bcl-2 is translocated to the immunoglobulin heavy chain
locus leading to deregulation of bcl-2 expression. We examined the role of Myb
proteins in the regulation of bcl-2 expression in lymphoma cells. We showed that 
A-Myb up-regulates bcl-2 promoter activity. Northern and Western analyses
demonstrated that A-Myb was expressed in the DHL-4 t(14;18) cell line. In
t(14;18) cells and mature B cells, A-Myb up-regulated bcl-2 expression, whereas
B- and c-Myb had little effect on bcl-2 gene expression. Deletion analysis of the
bcl-2 5'-region identified a region responsive to A-Myb in t(14;18) cells. A
potential binding site for the Cdx homeodomain proteins was located in this
sequence. Analysis of the A-Myb-responsive region by UV cross-linking experiments
revealed that a 32-kDa protein formed a complex with this region, but direct
binding by Myb proteins could not be demonstrated. A-Myb could be recovered along
with Cdx2 when nuclear extracts were passed over the Cdx site. Mutagenesis of the
Cdx binding site abolished binding by the 32-kDa protein and significantly
reduced the ability of A-Myb to induce bcl-2 expression. A strong induction of
bcl-2 P2 promoter activity was observed in cotransfection studies of DHL-4 cells 
with the A-Myb and Cdx2 expression vectors, and increased endogenous Bcl-2
protein expression was observed in B cells transfected with A-Myb and/or Cdx2
expression constructs.

PMID: 10692454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Gastroenterology. 2000 Jan;118(1):115-27.

The homeodomain protein Cdx2 regulates lactase gene promoter activity during
enterocyte differentiation.

Fang R(1), Santiago NA, Olds LC, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Lactase is the intestinal disaccharidase responsible for
digestion of lactose, the predominant carbohydrate in milk. Transcription of the 
lactase gene is activated during enterocyte differentiation. We have
characterized the interaction between the lactase promoter and Cdx2, a
homeodomain protein involved in regulating intestinal development and
differentiation.
METHODS: Nuclear protein bound to the lactase gene cis element, CE-LPH1, was
analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays and supershifts with Cdx2
antibody. Lactase promoter activities were assayed in cells transfected with
luciferase reporter constructs and a Cdx2 expression construct.
RESULTS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assay with CE-LPH1 yields a specific
DNA/protein complex that requires the caudal-related protein binding site, TTTAC.
The complex is recognized by Cdx2 antibody and is more abundant in differentiated
enterocytes. A Cdx2 expression construct is able to activate transcription driven
by the wild-type, but not a mutated, promoter and results in increased endogenous
lactase messenger RNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeodomain protein Cdx2 interacts with the lactase promoter and
is capable of activating transcription of the endogenous gene. In contrast to a
previous report, Cdx2 interaction with the lactase promoter correlates with
enterocyte differentiation. These conclusions are consistent with the role of
Cdx2 in regulating intestinal cell differentiation.

PMID: 10611160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Am J Physiol. 1999 Dec;277(6 Pt 1):G1149-58.

Differentiated intestinal epithelial cells exhibit increased migration through
polyamines and myosin II.

Rao JN(1), Li J, Li L, Bass BL, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine and Baltimore
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Early mucosal restitution is a rapid process by which differentiated intestinal
epithelial cells migrate to reseal superficial wounds. However, most of the in
vitro studies for restitution employ undifferentiated intestinal crypt cells as a
model. The transcription factor, Cdx2, plays an important role in the regulation 
of intestinal epithelial differentiation. Forced expression of the Cdx2 gene in
undifferentiated intestinal crypt cells induces the development of a
differentiated phenotype. The current study was designed to determine changes in 
differentiated intestinal epithelial cell migration after wounding in the stable 
Cdx2-transfected IEC-6 cells and then to examine involvement of polyamines and
nonmuscle myosin II in the process of cell motility. Cdx2-transfected IEC-6 cells
were associated with a highly differentiated phenotype and exhibited increased
cell migration after wounding. Migration of Cdx2-transfected IEC-6 cells were
approximately four times that of nontransfected IEC-6 cells. Migration after
wounding was associated with significant increases in polyamine synthesis.
Depletion of cellular polyamines by 5 mM alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a 
specific inhibitor of polyamine biosynthesis, inhibited cell migration without
affecting the differentiated phenotype. DFMO also decreased levels of nonmuscle
myosin II mRNA and protein and resulted in reorganization of myosin II, along
with a marked reduction in stress fibers. Exogenous spermidine given together
with DFMO not only returned nonmuscle myosin II levels and cellular distribution 
toward normal but also restored cell migration to control levels. These results
indicate that 1) Cdx2-transfected IEC-6 cells exhibit increased cell migration
after wounding and 2) cellular polyamines are absolutely required for stimulation
of cell migration in association with their ability to modulate the structural
organization of nonmuscle myosin II.

PMID: 10600811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1999;86(3-4):219-22.

Cloning of the murine Mist1 gene and assignment to mouse chromosome band 5G2-5G3.

Pin CL(1), Lemercier C, Konieczny SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

Mist1 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that is highly
expressed in the adult pancreas. In this study, we isolated the mouse Mist1 gene 
and established its primary DNA sequence and complete genomic structure.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping located the Mist1 gene to the telomere
of mouse chromosome 5 at position 5G2-5G3, an area which is syntenic to human
chromosome 13q and which contains several additional pancreatic regulatory genes 
including IPF1 and CDX2.

PMID: 10575209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 2;18(35):5010-4.

CDX2 is mutated in a colorectal cancer with normal APC/beta-catenin signaling.

da Costa LT(1), He TC, Yu J, Sparks AB, Morin PJ, Polyak K, Laken S, Vogelstein
B, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, MD 21231, USA.

The majority of human colorectal cancers have elevated beta-catenin/TCF regulated
transcription due to either inactivating mutations of the APC tumor suppressor
gene or activating mutations of beta-catenin. Surprisingly, one commonly used
colorectal cancer cell line was found to have intact APC and beta-catenin and no 
demonstrable beta-catenin/TCF regulated transcription. However, this line did
possess a truncating mutation in one allele of CDX2, a gene whose inactivation
has recently been shown to cause colon tumorigenesis in mice. Expression of CDX2 
was found to be induced by restoring expression of wild type APC in a colorectal 
cancer cell line. These findings raise the intriguing possibility that CDX2
contributes to APC's tumor suppressive effects.

PMID: 10490837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Res. 1999 Jun 15;59(12):2965-70.

Colonic hamartoma development by anomalous duplication in Cdx2 knockout mice.

Tamai Y(1), Nakajima R, Ishikawa T, Takaku K, Seldin MF, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Banyu Tsukuba Research Institute (Merck), Ibaraki, Japan.

To determine the biological role of caudal-like homeobox gene CDX2, we
constructed knockout mice in which its mouse homologue Cdx2 was inactivated by
homologous recombination, placing a bacterial lacZ gene under the control of the 
Cdx2 promoter. Although the homozygous mutants died in utero around implantation,
the heterozygotes were viable and fertile and expressed lacZ in the caudal region
in early embryos and in the gut tissues in adults. The heterozygotes developed
cecal and colonic villi by anteriorization and formed hamartomatous polyps in the
proximal colon. The hamartoma started to develop at 11.5 days of gestation as an 
outpocket of the gut epithelium, which ceased to express the remaining Cdx2
allele. The outpocket then expanded as a partially duplicated gut but was
contained as a hamartoma after birth. In adult mice, these hamartomas grew very
slowly and took a benign course. None of them progressed into invasive
adenocarcinomas, even at 1.5 years of age. Whereas the cecal and colonic villi
expressed lacZ, the hamartoma epithelium did not, nor did it express Cdx2 mRNA
from the wild-type allele. However, genomic DNA analysis of the polyp epithelium 
did not show a loss of heterozygosity of the Cdx2 gene, suggesting a mechanism of
biallelic Cdx2 inactivation other than loss of heterozygosity. These results
indicate that the Cdx2 haploin-sufficiency caused cecal and colonic villi,
whereas the biallelic inactivation of Cdx2 triggered anomalous duplications of
the embryonic gut epithelium, which were contained as hamartomas after birth.

PMID: 10383162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 22;96(13):7318-23.

Reprogramming of intestinal differentiation and intercalary regeneration in Cdx2 
mutant mice.

Beck F(1), Chawengsaksophak K, Waring P, Playford RJ, Furness JB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne 3052, Australia. fb22@le.ac.uk

The homeobox gene Cdx2, a homologue of the Drosophila gene caudal, has been
implicated in the control of cell differentiation in the intestinal epithelium.
Recently, we showed that mice in which one allele of the Cdx2 gene had been
inactivated by homologous recombination developed multiple intestinal polyp-like 
lesions that did not express Cdx2 and that contained areas of squamous metaplasia
in the form of keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium, similar to that
occurring in the mouse esophagus and forestomach. We have now examined colonic
lesions from 98 Cdx2+/- mice and report that the lesions are composed of
heterotopic stomach and small intestinal mucosa. We conclude that Cdx2 directs
endodermal differentiation toward a caudal phenotype and that haploinsufficient
levels of expression in the developing distal intestine lead to homeotic
transformation to a more rostral endodermal phenotype, such as forestomach
epithelium that does not express Cdx2 during normal development. Intercalary
growth (epimorphic regeneration), which previously has never been described in
mammals, then occurs, resulting in the ordered "filling in" of tissue types at
the discontinuity between the gastric and colonic epithelia. This intercalary
growth in a restricted space results in the formation of the polypoid lesions
observed.

PMCID: PMC22083
PMID: 10377412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. FEBS Lett. 1999 Feb 26;445(2-3):306-10.

Pax6 and Cdx2/3 form a functional complex on the rat glucagon gene promoter
G1-element.

Andersen FG(1), Heller RS, Petersen HV, Jensen J, Madsen OD, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark.

Alpha-cell specific transcription of the glucagon gene is mainly conferred by the
glucagon promoter G1-element, while additional elements G2, G3, and G4 have broad
islet cell specificity. Transcription of the glucagon gene has been shown to be
stimulated by Pax6 through binding to the glucagon gene promoter G3-element. In
this report, we show that Pax6 additionally binds the glucagon gene promoter
G1-element and forms a transcriptionally active complex with another homeodomain 
protein, Cdx2/3. Two distinct mutations in the G1-element, that both reduce
promoter activity by 85-90%, is shown to eliminate binding of either Pax6 or
Cdx2/3. Additionally, Pax6 enhanced Cdx2/3 mediated activation of a glucagon
reporter in heterologous cells. We discuss how Pax6 may contribute to cell-type
specific transcription in the pancreatic islets by complex formation with
different transcription factors.

PMID: 10094478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 12;274(11):7196-9.

CREB-binding [corrected] protein interacts with the homeodomain protein Cdx2 and 
enhances transcriptional activity.

Lorentz O(1), Suh ER, Taylor JK, Boudreau F, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1999 May 7;274(19):13728.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):10576.

Cdx2 encodes for a homeodomain protein that is expressed in intestinal epithelial
cells. The Cdx2 protein triggers intestinal differentiation in cell lines and is 
necessary for maintenance of the intestinal phenotype in mice. CBP (cAMP response
element-binding protein) is a transcriptional co-activator that interacts with
many transcription factors and components of the basal transcriptional machinery.
In this study, we demonstrate that CBP is markedly induced upon differentiation
of the Caco-2 intestinal cell line and augments Cdx2-dependent transcriptional
activity. Cdx2 interacts with the amino-terminal domain of CBP, and the two
proteins coexist in vivo within the same nuclear protein complex. Moreover,
expression of the CBP domain that interacts with Cdx2 acts as a dominant-negative
inhibitor of transcriptional activation by Cdx2. These findings demonstrate a
direct interaction between an intestinal homeodomain protein and CBP and suggest 
that CBP participates in the network of transcriptional proteins that direct
intestinal differentiation.

PMID: 10066780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Br J Cancer. 1999 Feb;79(3-4):440-4.

Genomic structure and alterations of homeobox gene CDX2 in colorectal carcinomas.

Yagi OK(1), Akiyama Y, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of
Medicine, Japan.

Expression of CDX2, a caudal-related homeobox gene, was found to be decreased in 
colorectal carcinomas. Heterozygous null mutant mice as to Cdx2 develop multiple 
intestinal adenomatous polyps. To clarify the role of CDX2 in colorectal
carcinogenesis, we determined its genomic structure, and searched for mutations
of CDX2 in 49 sporadic colorectal carcinomas and ten hereditary non-polyposis
colorectal cancers (HNPCC) without microsatellite instability. None of them
exhibited a mutation. We further examined 19 HNPCC carcinomas with microsatellite
instability for mutations in a (G)7 repeat site within CDX2. One of them (5.3%)
exhibited one G insertion. Loss of heterozygosity was observed in 2 of the 20
(10%) informative sporadic carcinomas, and in one of the three (33.3%)
informative HNPCC cancers. These data indicate that CDX2 may play only a minor
role in colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2362430
PMID: 10027310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Blood. 1999 Feb 1;93(3):1025-31.

Fusion of ETV6 to the caudal-related homeobox gene CDX2 in acute myeloid leukemia
with the t(12;13)(p13;q12).

Chase A(1), Reiter A, Burci L, Cazzaniga G, Biondi A, Pickard J, Roberts IA,
Goldman JM, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College School of Medicine, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, UK.

The t(12;13)(p13;q12) is a rare, recurrent translocation reported in a range of
hematological malignancies. We have analyzed the molecular basis of this lesion
in three patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), two of whom were known to
have chromosome 12 breakpoints within the ETV6 gene. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) with ETV6 cosmids indicated that this gene was also
disrupted in the third patient, while the normal ETV6 allele was retained. 3'
rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from bone
marrow mRNA of this individual identified a novel sequence fused to ETV6 that was
homologous to a region just upstream of the mouse CDX2 homeobox gene, the human
homologue of which has previously been mapped to chromosome 13q12. PCR primers
designed to amplify an ETV6-CDX2 fusion identified two major transcripts from
this patient. First, a direct in-frame fusion between exon 2 of ETV6 and exon 2
of CDX2, and second, a transcript that had an additional sequence of unknown
origin spliced between these same exons. Surprisingly, apparently normal CDX2
transcripts, usually expressed only in intestinal epithelium, were also
detectable in cDNA from this patient. Neither normal nor fusion CDX2 mRNA was
detectable in the two other patients with a t(12;13), indicating that this
translocation is heterogeneous at the molecular level. Reverse transcription-PCR 
analysis showed that CDX2 mRNA, but not ETV6-CDX2 mRNA, was strongly expressed in
1 of 10 patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in transformation, suggesting that
deregulation of this gene may be more widespread in leukemia. CDX2 is known to
regulate class I homeobox genes and its expression in hematopoietic cells may
critically alter the balance between differentiation and proliferation.

PMID: 9920852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 27;273(48):31939-46.

Intestinal expression of the calbindin-D9K gene in transgenic mice. Requirement
for a Cdx2-binding site in a distal activator region.

Colnot S(1), Romagnolo B, Lambert M, Cluzeaud F, Porteu A, Vandewalle A,
Thomasset M, Kahn A, Perret C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U458, Hôpital Robert Debré, 48 boulevard Sérurier, 75019 Paris, France.

The calbindin-D9K gene encodes a vitamin D-induced calcium-binding protein that
is expressed as a marker of small intestine differentiation. We have shown that
4580 base pairs of its 5' DNA regulatory region can target reporter transgene
expression in the intestine and cause this transgene to respond like the
endogenous gene to vitamin D active metabolite and that the homeoprotein Cdx2 is 
bound to the TATA box in the intestine. We now show that the 4580 base pairs
construct confers a differentiated pattern of reporter transgene expression in
the intestine and that cooperation between the proximal promoter and a distal
element located in an opened chromatin structure is responsible for the
intestinal expression and vitamin D responsiveness of the transgene. Gel shift
and footprinting assays using duodenal nuclear extracts indicate that this distal
element contains a Cdx2-binding site. Finally, a mutation in this distal
Cdx2-binding site dramatically decreases intestinal expression in transgenic
mice. This report, using an in vivo approach, demonstrates the crucial role of
Cdx2 for the transcription of an intestinal gene.

PMID: 9822664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol Suppl. 1998 Nov;25:S12-5.

Developmental biology at the Howard Florey Institute.

Beck F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. f.beck@howard_florey.unimelb.edu.au

1. A brief account of the history of developmental biology at the Howard Florey
Institute, as well as in a wider general context, is presented and some of the
results of developmental studies performed at the Institute over the past 7 years
are discussed. 2. In the foetal rat, parathyroid hormone rather than parathyroid 
hormone-related protein is produced by the parathyroid anlage. This contrasts
with results reported by others for the sheep. 3. The control of imprinting of
H19 and insulin-like growth factor-II has been studied in the mouse using gene
knockout of the coding region of the H19 gene. Bi-allelic expression of H19 in
some liver and gut cells was observed. 4. Gene knockout of the homeobox gene Cdx2
produced dramatic effects. Homozygous embryos did not implant in the uterus.
Heterozygotes exhibited homeosis involving the gut and skeleton. Animals
developed intestinal tumours within a few weeks of birth.

PMID: 9809186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):657-9.

CDX2, a human homologue of Drosophila caudal, is mutated in both alleles in a
replication error positive colorectal cancer.

Wicking C(1), Simms LA, Evans T, Walsh M, Chawengsaksophak K, Beck F,
Chenevix-Trench G, Young J, Jass J, Leggett B, Wainwright B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Queensland, St Lucia,
Australia.

The Cdx2 gene is one of three murine homologues of the Drosophila homeobox gene
caudal. Mice heterozygous for a null mutation in Cdx2 exhibit a variable
phenotype including tail abnormalities, stunted growth and a homeotic shift of
vertebrae. Most strikingly, however, 90% of heterozygous mice were reported to
develop multiple intestinal adenomatous polyps, most notably in the proximal
colon (Chawengsaksophak et al., 1997). These observations led us to propose that 
mutation of CDX2 may be involved in the genesis of some human colorectal tumours.
A survey of DNA from 85 colorectal tumours revealed that one with extensive
microsatellite instability (RER+ phenotype) has mutations in both alleles of
CDX2. Both mutations occur in coding regions which contain repetitive elements
and are consistent with those found in RER + tumours.

PMID: 9704932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):14030-6.

Expression of the Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeotic genes leads to reduced malignancy in
colon cancer-derived cells.

Mallo GV(1), Soubeyran P, Lissitzky JC, André F, Farnarier C, Marvaldi J, Dagorn 
JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)U.315 INSERM, F 13009 Marseille, France.

We have previously described an inverse relationship between Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA
levels and the extent of dysplasia and severity of clinical outcome in colorectal
carcinoma, suggesting that altered expression of these genes was associated with 
colorectal carcinogenesis or tumor progression. To investigate further their
involvement in the physiopathology of colorectal cancer, HT29 colon carcinoma
cells that show very low Cdx expression were transfected with Cdx1 and/or Cdx2
cDNA to elicit their overexpression. Growth rate, tumorigenicity, resistance to
apoptosis, and migration potential of the corresponding cells were analyzed.
Growth rate of cells overexpressing Cdx2 decreased by half, whereas
overexpression of Cdx1 had no effect. However, cells overexpressing both Cdxs had
a growth rate reduced to 20% of control. In cells overexpressing Cdx1 or Cdx2,
tumorigenicity and resistance to apoptosis induced by serum starvation, ceramide,
or staurosporine were not changed compared with control cells; yet phorbol
ester-stimulated cell migration was decreased by 50%. In cells overexpressing
both Cdx1 and Cdx2, tumorigenicity was decreased by 50%, resistance to apoptosis 
was significantly lowered, and stimulated cell migration was further decreased to
15% of control compared with cells expressing Cdx1 or Cdx2. Finally, cells
overexpressing both Cdxs showed strongly decreased Bcl-2 expression, which could 
account for their increased sensitivity to apoptosis. These findings show that,
in HT29 cells, both Cdx1 and Cdx2 genes must be expressed to reduce tumorigenic
potential, to increase sensitivity to apoptosis, and to reduce cell migration,
suggesting that the two genes control the normal phenotype by independent
pathways. This may explain why loss of Cdx1 or Cdx2 expression is associated with
tumor development and invasiveness in colorectal tumors.

PMID: 9593754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. FEBS Lett. 1998 Feb 20;423(2):218-22.

Colon carbonic anhydrase 1: transactivation of gene expression by the homeodomain
protein Cdx2.

Drummond FJ(1), Sowden J, Morrison K, Edwards YH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Biochemical Genetics Unit, University College London, UK.

The homeodomain protein, Cdx2, has been implicated in the transcriptional
regulation of genes expressed in the small intestine. In vitro studies of the
carbonic anhydrase 1 (CA1) colon promoter implied that Cdx2 may also play a role 
in the regulation of colon-specific gene expression. The current work follows up 
this proposal by examining the ability of Cdx2 to transactivate gene expression
in cultured cells mediated by CA1 promoter sequences. The results show that Cdx2 
exerts a positive regulatory effect by binding to a motif 87 bp upstream of the
CA1 TATA box; this motif appears to act as an enhancer since gene activation is
independent of its orientation.

PMID: 9512360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Ann Hum Genet. 1997 Sep;61(Pt 5):393-400.

Cloning and chromosome assignment of the human CDX2 gene.

Drummond F(1), Putt W, Fox M, Edwards YH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Biochemical Genetics Unit, University College London.

The caudal-type homeobox gene Cdx2 encodes a transcription factor which is
expressed in the intestine and is thought to play an important role in the
proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. Mice
heterozygous for null mutations in the caudal-type homeobox gene Cdx2 show
multiple adenomatous polyps in the proximal colon in addition to skeletal
problems associated with abnormal segmentation. In human colorectal cancer the
expression of both CDX2 and carbonic anhydrase 1, a gene regulated by CDX2, is
reduced or absent. It is possible that mutation of CDX2 is a primary event in the
origin of some colorectal cancers. We have cloned human CDX2 cDNA and report here
the nucleotide and protein sequences and assignment of the human gene to
chromosome 13q12-13.

PMID: 9459001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Cell Biol. 1997 Dec 15;139(6):1553-65.

Key role of the Cdx2 homeobox gene in extracellular matrix-mediated intestinal
cell differentiation.

Lorentz O(1), Duluc I, Arcangelis AD, Simon-Assmann P, Kedinger M, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381, 67200
Strasbourg, France.

To explore the role of homeobox genes in the intestine, the human colon
adenocarcinoma cell line Caco2-TC7 has been stably transfected with plasmids
synthesizing Cdx1 and Cdx2 sense and antisense RNAs. Cdx1 overexpression or
inhibition by antisense RNA does not markedly modify the cell differentiation
markers analyzed in this study. In contrast, Cdx2 overexpression stimulates two
typical markers of enterocytic differentiation: sucrase-isomaltase and lactase.
Cells in which the endogenous expression of Cdx2 is reduced by antisense RNA
attach poorly to the substratum. Conversely, Cdx2 overexpression modifies the
expression of molecules involved in cell-cell and cell-substratum interactions
and in transduction process: indeed, E-cadherin, integrin-beta4 subunit,
laminin-gamma2 chain, hemidesmosomal protein, APC, and alpha-actinin are
upregulated. Interestingly, most of these molecules are preferentially expressed 
in vivo in the differentiated villi enterocytes rather than in crypt cells. Cdx2 
overexpression also results in the stimulation of HoxA-9 mRNA expression, an
homeobox gene selectively expressed in the colon. In contrast,
Cdx2-overexpressing cells display a decline of Cdx1 mRNA, which is mostly found
in vivo in crypt cells. When implanted in nude mice, Cdx2-overexpressing cells
produce larger tumors than control cells, and form glandular and villus-like
structures. Laminin-1 is known to stimulate intestinal cell differentiation in
vitro. In the present study, we demonstrate that the differentiating effect of
laminin-1 coatings on Caco2-TC7 cells is accompanied by an upregulation of Cdx2. 
To further document this observation, we analyzed a series of Caco2 clones in
which the production of laminin-alpha1 chain is differentially inhibited by
antisense RNA. We found a positive correlation between the level of Cdx2
expression, that of endogenous laminin-alpha1 chain mRNA and that of
sucrase-isomaltase expression in these cell lines. Taken together, these results 
suggest (a) that Cdx1 and Cdx2 homeobox genes play distinct roles in the
intestinal epithelium, (b) that Cdx2 provokes pleiotropic effects triggering
cells towards the phenotype of differentiated villus enterocytes, and (c) that
Cdx2 expression is modulated by basement membrane components. Hence, we conclude 
that Cdx2 plays a key role in the extracellular matrix-mediated intestinal cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2132620
PMID: 9396760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1419-28.

Comparison of intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes suggest a common structure for enterocyte-specific promoters.

Taylor JK(1), Boll W, Levy T, Suh E, Siang S, Mantei N, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase (IPAL) is an intestine-specific
brush-border enzyme expressed during development and along the intestinal
crypt-villus axis in a pattern similar to another well characterized brush-border
enzyme, sucrase-isomaltase (SI). A tissue-specific DNase I hypersensitive site
was identified in chromatin from intestinal nuclei immediately upstream from the 
transcriptional start site of the IPAL gene. Footprinting analysis showed that
two DNA elements within the IPAL promoter were protected by intestinal nuclear
proteins. The IPAL-FP1 element was shown to be a monomer binding site for Cdx1
and Cdx2, intestine-specific homeobox proteins. Moreover, this site was important
for transcriptional activation of the promoter in intestinal cell lines via
interaction with Cdx proteins. Nuclear proteins from both liver and intestine
interacted with the IPAL-FP2 element, forming a complex consistent with binding
to HNF1. Cdx and HNF1 binding sites have also been shown to be the two major
regulatory elements responsible for transcriptional activation of the SI gene
promoter, which directs intestine-specific transcription in transgenic mice.
These findings suggest that enterocyte genes that are expressed in similar
developmental patterns may be regulated by the interaction of common DNA elements
and their associated transcription factors.

PMID: 9428790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Bioessays. 1997 Jul;19(7):551-5.

Homeosis and polyposis: a tale from the mouse.

He TC(1), da Costa LT, Thiagalingam S.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Homeobox genes play essential roles in specifying the fates of different cell
types during embryogenesis. In Drosophila, the homeotic gene caudal is important 
for the generation of posterior structures. In the mouse, the caudal homologue
Cdx2 has been implicated in directing early processes in intestinal morphogenesis
and in the maintenance of the differentiated phenotype. A recent study showed
that Cdx2 null mutation was embryonically lethal, whereas Cdx2+/- mice developed 
multiple intestinal polyps in the proximal colon in addition to developmental
defects. There are striking phenotypic similarities and differences between
Cdx2+/- and other mice predisposed to intestinal neoplasia. The possible role of 
Cdx2 in human colorectal tumorigenesis is discussed.

PMID: 9230687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jun 15;25(12):2293-300.

Activation of enhancer elements by the homeobox gene Cdx2 is cell line specific.

Taylor JK(1), Levy T, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cdx2 is a caudal-related homeodomain transcription factor that is expressed in
complex patterns during mouse development and at high levels in the intestinal
epithelium of adult mice. Cdx2 activates transcription of intestinal gene
promoters containing specific binding sites. Moreover, Cdx2 has been shown to
induce intestinal differentiation in cell lines. In this study, we show that Cdx2
is able to bind to two well defined enhancer elements in the HoxC8 gene. We then 
demonstrate that Cdx2 is able to activate transcription of heterologous promoters
when its DNA binding element is placed in an enhancer context. Furthermore, the
ability to activate enhancer elements is cell-line dependent. When the Cdx2
activation domain was linked to the Gal4 DNA binding domain, the chimeric protein
was able to activate Gal4 enhancer constructs in an intestinal cell line, but was
unable to activate transcription in NIH3T3 cells. These data suggest that there
are cell-specific factors that allow the Cdx2 activation domain to function in
the activation of enhancer elements. We hypothesize that either a co-activator
protein or differential phosphorylation of the activation domain may be the
mechanism for intestinal cell line-specific function of Cdx2 and possibly in
other tissues in early development.

PMCID: PMC146749
PMID: 9171078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Apr;41(2):375-8.

The effect of antisense oligonucleotides to Cdx2 on the development of mouse
embryos in vitro.

Valcanis H(1), Kachab E, Haralambidis J, Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

The Drosophila homeobox gene caudal is thought to play a role in segmentation and
the formation of posterior structures in the fly. One of the mouse homologs,
Cdx2, is first expressed in embryonic tissue at 8.5 days, being detected in the
tail bud, neural tube and hindgut. To gain insight into the role of Cdx2 in mouse
development, we have applied antisense technology to the mouse embryo culture
system. Two antisense and two mismatch (control) oligonucleotides were injected
into the amniotic cavity of 5-7 somite embryos, thus coming into direct contact
with the dorsal surface of the embryo. The results showed that all constructs
were biologically active, the nature of the abnormalities produced probably
reflecting the developmental stage at which the embryo was exposed. However, the 
antisense constructs were clearly more potent than their mismatch controls and we
conclude that some specificity of action is responsible for this effect. In our
view, this does not necessarily imply that Cdx2 has a direct role in brain
morphogenesis.

PMID: 9184347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Nature. 1997 Mar 6;386(6620):84-7.

Homeosis and intestinal tumours in Cdx2 mutant mice.

Chawengsaksophak K(1), James R, Hammond VE, Köntgen F, Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

In Drosophila, disturbing the expression of the homeobox gene caudal causes a
severe disruption in body segmentation and global body patterning. There are
three mouse homologues of Drosophila caudal: Cdx1 (ref. 2), Cdx2 (ref. 3) and
Cdx4 (ref. 4). We have generated a null mutation of murine Cdx2 by homologous
recombination. Cdx2 homozygote null mutants die between 3.5 and 5.5 days post
coitum (d.p.c.). Cdx2 heterozygote mutants exhibit a variable phenotype, with
many showing tail abnormalities or stunted growth. Skeletal analysis demonstrates
a homeotic shift of vertebrae and compatible malformations of the ribs. Within
the first three months of life, 90% of Cdx2 heterozygotes develop multiple
intestinal adenomatous polyps, particularly in the proximal colon. These polyps
occasionally contain areas of true metaplasia. In contrast to the surrounding
intestinal epithelium, the neoplastic cells do not express Cdx2 from the
remaining allele. These results suggest that Cdx2 mutation is the primary event
in the genesis of some intestinal tumours.

PMID: 9052785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Int J Cancer. 1997 Feb 20;74(1):35-44.

Molecular cloning, sequencing and expression of the mRNA encoding human Cdx1 and 
Cdx2 homeobox. Down-regulation of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA expression during colorectal
carcinogenesis.

Mallo GV(1), Rechreche H, Frigerio JM, Rocha D, Zweibaum A, Lacasa M, Jordan BR, 
Dusetti NJ, Dagorn JC, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)U.315 INSERM, Marseille, France.

Defining the molecular mechanisms involved in cancer formation and progression is
still a major challenge in colorectal-cancer research. Our strategy was to
characterize genes whose expression is altered during colorectal carcinogenesis. 
To this end, the phenotype of a colorectal tumour was previously established by
partial sequencing of a large number of its transcripts and the genes of interest
were selected by differential screening on high-density filters with mRNA of
colorectal cancer and normal adjacent mucosa. Fifty-one clones were found
over-expressed and 23 were underexpressed in the colorectal-cancer tissues of the
5 analyzed patients. Among the latter, clones 6G2 and 32D6 were found of
particular interest, since they had significant homology with several
homeodomain-containing genes. The highest degree of similarity was with the
murine Cdx1 for 6G2, and with the murine Cdx2 and hamster Cdx3 for 32D6. Using a 
RT-PCR approach, complete sequence of both types of homeobox-containing cDNA was 
obtained. The amino-acid sequence of the human Cdx1 is 85% identical to the mouse
protein, and human Cdx2 has 94% identity with the mouse Cdx2 and hamster Cdx3.
Tissue-distribution analysis of Cdx1 and Cdx2 mRNA showed that both transcripts
were specifically expressed in small intestine, in colon and rectum. Twelve
tissue samples from colorectal adenocarcinomas and the corresponding normal
mucosa were analyzed by Northern blot. Expression of the 2 types of mRNA was
either reduced or absent in 10 of them. Several colon-cancer cell lines were also
analyzed. Cdx2 mRNA was absent from LS174T cells and Cdx1 mRNA was absent in
PF11, TC7 and SW480 cells; none was detected in HT29 cells. It was concluded that
decrease in human Cdx1 and/or Cdx2 expression is associated with colorectal
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9036867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genomics. 1996 Jun 1;34(2):270-1.

Chromosomal localization of cdx2, a murine homologue of the Drosophila gene
caudal, to mouse chromosome 5.

Chawengsaksophak K(1), Beck F.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia.

PMID: 8661069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):619-25.

An intestine-specific homeobox gene regulates proliferation and differentiation.

Suh E(1), Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6144,
USA.

Precise regulation of cellular proliferation, differentiation, and senescence
results in the continuous renewal of the intestinal epithelium with maintenance
of a highly ordered tissue architecture. Here we show that an intestine-specific 
homeobox gene, Cdx2, is a transcription factor that regulates both proliferation 
and differentiation in intestinal epithelial cells. Conditional expression of
Cdx2 in IEC-6 cells, an undifferentiated intestinal cell line, led to arrest of
proliferation for several days followed by a period of growth resulting in
multicellular structures containing a well-formed columnar layer of cells. The
columnar cells had multiple morphological characteristics of intestinal
epithelial cells. Enterocyte-like cells were polarized with tight junctions,
lateral membrane interdigitations, and well-organized microvilli with associated 
glycocalyx located at the apical pole. Remarkably, there were also cells with a
goblet cell-like ultrastructure, suggesting that two of the four intestinal
epithelial cell lineages may arise from IEC-6 cells. Molecular evidence for
differentiation was shown by demonstrating that cells expressing high levels of
Cdx2 expressed sucrase-isomaltase, an enterocyte-specific gene which is a
well-defined target for the Cdx2 protein. Taken together, our data suggest that
Cdx2 may play a role in directing early processes in intestinal cell
morphogenesis and in the maintenance of the differentiated phenotype by
supporting transcription of differentiated gene products. We propose that Cdx2 is
part of a regulatory network that orchestrates a developmental program of
proliferation, morphogenesis, and gene expression in the intestinal epithelium.

PMCID: PMC231041
PMID: 8552090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Annu Rev Physiol. 1996;58:275-97.

Intestine-specific gene transcription.

Traber PG(1), Silberg DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6144,
USA.

The diverse cellular lineages that populate the intestinal epithelium are derived
from committed stem cells located in intestinal crypts. The complex architecture 
of the intestinal epithelium results from well-orchestrated processes of
cell-line-age allocation, proliferation of immature cells in the crypt
compartment, differentiation of various cell lineages, migration of cells in
defined patterns, and cell-specific programmed senescence. The patterns of
intestinal gene transcription in the context of this complex architecture are
regulated by the combinatorial effect of multiple positive and negative
regulatory elements. Although the DNA regulatory elements required to
recapitulate the pattern of endogenous gene expression appear to be spread over
relatively large genomic distances, short promoters of several intestinal genes
are sufficient to direct intestine-specific transcription. The sucrase-isomaltase
gene promoter has multiple regulatory elements that bind tissue-restricted
transcription factors. A critical factor in regulating the sucrase-isomaltase
promoter is Cdx2, an intestine-specific homeobox gene related to caudal, that may
also have a broader role in intestinal development and morphogenesis. As
additional regulatory elements and their cognate DNA-binding proteins are
identified, the challenge will be to define their integrated role in the
regulation of intestine-specific genes and in the development and maintenance of 
the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 8815796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Br J Ind Med. 1985 Sep;42(9):617-26.

Protective effect of selenium on lung cancer in smelter workers.

Gerhardsson L, Brune D, Nordberg IG, Wester PO.

A possible protective effect of selenium against lung cancer has been indicated
in recent studies. Workers in copper smelters are exposed to a combination of
airborne selenium and carcinogens. In this study lung tissue concentrations of
selenium, antimony, arsenic, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, lanthanum, and lead from 
76 dead copper smelter workers were compared with those of 15 controls from a
rural area and 10 controls from an urban area. The mean exposure time for the
dead workers was 31.2 years, and the mean retirement time after the end of
exposure 7.2 years. Lung cancer appeared in the workers with the lowest selenium 
lung tissue levels (selenium median value 71 micrograms/kg wet weight), as
compared with both the controls (rural group, median value 110; urban group,
median value 136) and other causes of death among the workers (median value 158).
The quotient between the metals and selenium was used for comparison: a high
quotient indicating a low protective effect of selenium and vice versa. The
median values of the quotients between antimony, arsenic, cadmium, lanthanum,
lead, chromium, and cobalt versus selenium were all numerically higher among the 
cases of lung cancer, the first five significantly higher (p less than 0.05) in
28 of the 35 comparisons between the lung cancer group and all other groups of
smelter workers and controls. The different lung metal concentrations for each
person were weighted according to their carcinogenic potency (Crx4 + Asx3 + Cdx2 
+ Sbx1 + Cox1 + Lax1 + Pbx1) against their corresponding selenium concentrations.
From these calculations the protective effect of selenium was even more
pronounced.

PMCID: PMC1007544
PMID: 4041390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


