
1. Genet Mol Biol. 2016 Mar;39(1):7-13. doi: 10.1590/S1415-475738420140368.

The complex translocation (9;14;14) involving IGH and CEBPE genes suggests a new 
subgroup in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Zerrouki R(1), Benhassine T(1), Bensaada M(2), Lauzon P(3), Trabzi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Faculté des Sciences
Biologiques, Université des Sciences et Technologies Houari Boumediene, Alger,
Algeria. (2)Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Clinique de Chirurgie et des Sciences
de la Reproduction, Constantine, Algeria. (3)Animal Health Unit, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (4)Hôpital Mustapha Bacha, Service
d'Onco-Hématologie, Centre Pierre et Marie-Curie, Alger, Algeria.

Many subtypes of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are associated with specific 
chromosomal rearrangements. The complex translocation t(9;14;14), a variant of
the translocation (14;14)(q11;q32), is a rare but recurrent chromosomal
abnormality involving the immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IGH) and CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein (CEBPE) genes in B-lineage ALL (B-ALL) and may represent
a new B-ALL subgroup. We report here the case of a 5-year-old girl with B-ALL,
positive for CD19, CD38 and HLA-DR. A direct technique and G-banding were used
for chromosomal analysis and fluorescentin situ hybridization (FISH) with BAC
probes was used to investigate a possible rearrangement of the IGH andCEBPE
genes. The karyotype exhibit the chromosomal aberration
46,XX,del(9)(p21),t(14;14)(q11;q32). FISH with dual-color break-apartIGH-specific
and CEPBE-specific bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) probes showed a complex 
t(9;14;14) associated with a deletion of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A
(CDKN2A) and paired box gene 5 (PAX5) at 9p21-13 and duplication of the fusion
gene IGH-CEBPE.

PMID: 27007892  [PubMed]


2. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016 Mar 3. pii: cebp.0528.2015. [Epub ahead of
print]

Pathway analysis of genome-wide association study in childhood leukemia among
Hispanics.

Hsu LI(1), Briggs F(2), Shao X(3), Metayer C(3), Wiemels JL(4), Chokkalingam
AP(3), Barcellos LF(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley
lingi122@gmail.com. (2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of
Medicine, Case Western Reserve University. (3)School of Public Health, University
of California, Berkeley. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is nearly 20%
higher among Hispanics than non-Hispanic Whites. Previous studies have shown
evidence for association between risk of ALL and variation within IKZF1, ARID5B, 
CEBPE, CDKN2A, GATA3, and BM1-PIP4K2A genes. However, variants identified only
account for <10% of the genetic risk of ALL.
METHODS: We applied pathway-based analyses to GWAS data from the California
Childhood Leukemia Study to determine whether different biological pathways were 
overrepresented in childhood ALL and major ALL subtypes. Furthermore, we applied 
causal inference and data reduction methods to prioritize candidate genes within 
each identified overrepresented pathway, while accounting for correlation among
SNPs.
RESULTS: Pathway analysis results indicate that different ALL subtypes may
involve distinct biological mechanisms. Focal adhesion is a shared mechanism
across the different disease subtypes. For ALL, the top five overrepresented
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways include axon guidance, protein
digestion and absorption, melanogenesis, leukocyte transendothelial migration,
and focal adhesion (PFDR < 0.05). Notably, these pathways are connected to
downstream MAPK or Wnt signaling pathways which have been linked to B-cell
malignancies. Several candidate genes for ALL, such as COL6A6 and COL5A1 were
identified through targeted maximum likelihood estimation.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to show distinct biological pathways are
overrepresented in different ALL subtypes using pathway-based approaches, and
identified potential gene candidates using causal inference methods.
IMPACT: The findings demonstrate that newly developed bioinformatics tools and
causal inference methods can provide insights to furthering our understanding of 
the pathogenesis of leukemia.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26941364  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 17;10(11):e0143343. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143343.
eCollection 2015.

Somatic Mutation Allelic Ratio Test Using ddPCR (SMART-ddPCR): An Accurate Method
for Assessment of Preferential Allelic Imbalance in Tumor DNA.

de Smith AJ(1), Walsh KM(2), Hansen HM(2), Endicott AA(1), Wiencke JK(2), Metayer
C(3), Wiemels JL(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America. (2)Division of
Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America. (3)School of 
Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of
America.

The extent to which heritable genetic variants can affect tumor development has
yet to be fully elucidated. Tumor selection of single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) risk alleles, a phenomenon called preferential allelic imbalance (PAI), has
been demonstrated in some cancer types. We developed a novel application of
digital PCR termed Somatic Mutation Allelic Ratio Test using Droplet Digital PCR 
(SMART-ddPCR) for accurate assessment of tumor PAI, and have applied this method 
to test the hypothesis that heritable SNPs associated with childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) may demonstrate tumor PAI. These SNPs are located at
CDKN2A (rs3731217) and IKZF1 (rs4132601), genes frequently lost in ALL, and at
CEBPE (rs2239633), ARID5B (rs7089424), PIP4K2A (rs10764338), and GATA3
(rs3824662), genes located on chromosomes gained in high-hyperdiploid ALL. We
established thresholds of AI using constitutional DNA from SNP heterozygotes, and
subsequently measured allelic copy number in tumor DNA from 19-142 heterozygote
samples per SNP locus. We did not find significant tumor PAI at these loci,
though CDKN2A and IKZF1 SNPs showed a trend towards preferential selection of the
risk allele (p = 0.17 and p = 0.23, respectively). Using a genomic copy number
control ddPCR assay, we investigated somatic copy number alterations (SCNA)
underlying AI at CDKN2A and IKZF1, revealing a complex range of alterations
including homozygous and hemizygous deletions and copy-neutral loss of
heterozygosity, with varying degrees of clonality. Copy number estimates from
ddPCR showed high agreement with those from multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) assays. We demonstrate that SMART-ddPCR is a highly accurate
method for investigation of tumor PAI and for assessment of the somatic
alterations underlying AI. Furthermore, analysis of publicly available data from 
The Cancer Genome Atlas identified 16 recurrent SCNA loci that contain heritable 
cancer risk SNPs associated with a matching tumor type, and which represent
candidate PAI regions warranting further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4648491
PMID: 26575185  [PubMed - in process]


4. Leukemia. 2015 Sep 16. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.251. [Epub ahead of print]

A functional polymorphism in the CEBPE gene promoter influences acute
lymphoblastic leukemia risk through interaction with the hematopoietic
transcription factor Ikaros.

Wiemels JL(1,)(2), de Smith AJ(1), Xiao J(1), Lee ST(3), Muench MO(3), Fomin
ME(4), Zhou M(1), Hansen HM(2), Termuhlen A(5), Metayer C(6), Walsh KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department
of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA, USA. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Blood Systems Research Institute and
Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (5)Jonathan Jaques Children's Cancer Center, Department of
Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of South California, Long Beach, 
CA, USA. (6)School of Public Health, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley,
CA, USA.

PMCID: PMC4794412 [Available on 2017-03-16]
PMID: 26437776  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Sep 7;8:2443-51. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S89661. eCollection
2015.

A common genetic variation in CEBPE and acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a
meta-analysis of the available evidence.

Zhang XX(1), Du YF(2), Zhai YJ(1), Gao F(3), Yang YJ(4), Ma XC(3), Lu J(3), Zheng
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Urology,
The First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
People's Republic of China. (3)Clinical Research Center, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. 
(4)The Third Department of Cardiology, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital,
Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has been studied intensively for decades, but 
the details of its etiology and underlying mechanisms have yet to be fully
elucidated. It is now generally acknowledged that genetic factors contribute
greatly to the development of this disease. The gene encoding
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein e (CEBPE) is involved in the development of
leukemia, and in particular the rs2239633 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of
CEBPE. The association between rs2239633 and risk of ALL has been well studied,
but remains unclear. Therefore, a meta-analysis was performed in this study to
establish a more precise estimation of that relationship. A comprehensive
literature search of the PubMed electronic database was conducted, and relevant
studies published up to February 20, 2015 were selected for analysis. The
references of the retrieved articles were also screened. The extracted data were 
analyzed statistically, and pooled odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals were
calculated using Review Manager (version 5.2) to estimate the association
strength. Finally, eleven studies were included in the meta-analysis. The pooled 
analyses revealed that rs2239633 was associated with an increased risk of
childhood ALL in Caucasians under any contrast models (P<0.01). However, this SNP
did not affect the risk of ALL in adulthood among Caucasians, or in childhood
among East Asians. In conclusion, these findings confirm that the CEBPE rs2239633
SNP could be considered a good marker of pediatric ALL risk in Caucasians, but
not in East Asians; it is not a good marker of adult ALL risk in Caucasians.

PMCID: PMC4571986
PMID: 26388693  [PubMed]


6. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Oct 12:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification and functional analysis of acute myeloid leukemia susceptibility
associated single nucleotide polymorphisms at non-protein coding regions of
RUNX1.

Xu X(1), Ren X(2), Wang H(3), Zhao Y(1), Yi Z(4), Wang K(5), Zhang S(6), Wang
L(7), Samuelson DJ(8), Hu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratory for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine . (2)b Department of
Obstetrics . (3)c Department of Hematology , and. (4)d Department of Laboratory
Medicine , The Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University , Weifang ,
Shandong Province , PR China . (5)e The People's Hospital of Zhangqiu , Jinan ,
Shandong Province , PR China . (6)f Department of Medical Imaging , The
Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University , Weifang , Shandong Province ,
PR China . (7)g Weifang University , Weifang , Shandong Province , PR China ,
and. (8)h Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology , University of
Louisville School of Medicine , Louisville , KY , USA.

Little is known about the susceptibility to acute myeloid leukemia. We aim to
search non-protein coding regions of key hematopoiesis transcription factors for 
genetic variations associated with acute myeloid leukemia susceptibility. We
genotyped SNPs of RUNX1 P1 promoter, P2 promoter,<U+2009>+23 enhancer, intron 5.2
enhancer, PU.1 promoter, CEBPA promoter, and CEBPE promoter from acute myeloid
leukemia patients and healthy controls. Rs2249650 and rs2268276 at RUNX1 intron
5.2 enhancer were found to be associated with acute myeloid leukemia
susceptibility. Artificial reporters containing different rs2249650 and rs2268276
alleles showed differential activities in the K562 cell line, a human
immortalized myeloid leukemia line. Rs2249650 contributes to reporter activities 
more than rs2268276. Gel shift assay is consistent with the luciferase assay.
Supershift assay indicated that one potential binding protein was PU.1. To sum
up, rs2268276 and especially rs2249650 may be qualified as new acute myeloid
leukemia susceptibility-associated SNPs.

PMID: 26374622  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):80-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402222. Epub 2015 May
27.

A Novel In-Frame Deletion in the Leucine Zipper Domain of C/EBPe Leads to
Neutrophil-Specific Granule Deficiency.

Wada T(1), Akagi T(2), Muraoka M(3), Toma T(3), Kaji K(4), Agematsu K(5),
Koeffler HP(6), Yokota T(2), Yachie A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-8641, Japan;
taizo@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of
Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, School of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan; (3)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of
Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health Sciences, School of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa 920-8641, Japan; (4)Department of Dermatology, Komatsu
Municipal Hospital, Komatsu 923-0961, Japan; (5)Department of Infection and Host 
Defense, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto 390-8621,
Japan; (6)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
University of California Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048;
and Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 117599, Singapore.

Neutrophil-specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare autosomal recessive
primary immunodeficiency characterized by neutrophil dysfunction, bilobed
neutrophil nuclei and lack of neutrophil-specific granules. Defects in a
myeloid-specific transcription factor, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-e (C/EBPe),
have been identified in two cases in which homozygous frameshift mutations led to
loss of the leucine zipper domain. In this study, we report a 55-y-old woman
affected with SGD caused by a novel homozygous 2-aa deletion (<U+0394>RS) in the leucine
zipper domain of the C/EBPe gene. The patient showed characteristic neutrophil
abnormalities and recurrent skin infections; however, there was no history of
deep organ infections. Biochemical analysis revealed that, in contrast to the two
frameshift mutations, the <U+0394>RS mutant maintained normal cellular localization,
DNA-binding activity, and dimerization, and all three mutants exhibited marked
reduction in transcriptional activity. The <U+0394>RS mutant was defective in its
association with Gata1 and PU.1, as well as aberrant cooperative transcriptional 
activation of eosinophil major basic protein. Thus, the <U+0394>RS likely impairs
protein-protein interaction with other transcription factors, resulting in a loss
of transcriptional activation. These results further support the importance of
the leucine zipper domain of C/EBPe for its essential function, and indicate that
multiple molecular mechanisms lead to SGD.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26019275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2015 May 4;10(5):e0125657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125657.
eCollection 2015.

Association between CEBPE Variant and Childhood Acute Leukemia Risk: Evidence
from a Meta-Analysis of 22 Studies.

Sun J(1), Zheng J(2), Tang L(3), Healy J(4), Sinnett D(5), Dai YE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Huai'an Matenal and Child Health Hospital,
Huai'an, Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Affiliated Huai'an
Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Huai'an, China. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, Tongling People's Hospital, Tongling, An'hui, People's Republic of 
China. (4)Sainte-Justine University Hospital Research Center, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. (5)Sainte-Justine University Hospital Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada; Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (6)Nanjing Children's Hospital, Affiliated with Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (CEBPs) have been involved in the etiology of
acute leukemia (AL) and investigated in numerous genetic association studies,
however, the results were inconclusive. The current meta-analysis was conducted
to clarify the effect of CEBPE rs2239633 variant on childhood AL risk. Electronic
literature search was performed on August 15, 2014, from databases of Medline,
PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science. A total of 22 case-control studies were
eligible for the pooled analysis. The results demonstrated that rs2239633 A
allele was significantly associated with a decreased risk of childhood AL (A vs
G: OR=0.87, 95%CI = 0.80, 0.94, p<0.001), especially in B-cell ALL subgroup (A vs
G: OR = 0.79, 95%CI = 0.74, 0.83, p<0.001), but not among T-cell ALL or AML
subgroups. In the stratified analysis by ethnicity, the association was observed 
in Europeans (A vs G: OR = 0.80, 95%CI = 0.76, 0.84, p<0.001) but not in Asian
and mixed populations. Moreover, the results of sensitivity and cumulative
meta-analysis indicated the robustness of our results. Also, Begg's and Egger's
tests did not indicate any evidence of obvious asymmetry. In summary, our study
provided evidence that CEBPE rs2239633 variant is associated with decreased risk 
of childhood B-cell ALL in Europeans.

PMCID: PMC4418706
PMID: 25938438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0123460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123460.
eCollection 2015.

Nicotinamide exacerbates hypoxemia in ventilator-induced lung injury independent 
of neutrophil infiltration.

Jones HD(1), Yoo J(2), Crother TR(3), Kyme P(3), Ben-Shlomo A(4), Khalafi R(4),
Tseng CW(3), Parks WC(2), Arditi M(3), Liu GY(3), Shimada K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA, United States of America; Infectious and Immunologic Diseases
Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America. (3)Division of
Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, United States of America; Infectious and Immunologic Diseases
Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America. (4)Pituitary Center, Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(5):e0128735.

BACKGROUND: Ventilator-induced lung injury is a form of acute lung injury that
develops in critically ill patients on mechanical ventilation and has a high
degree of mortality. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase is an enzyme that is 
highly upregulated in ventilator-induced lung injury and exacerbates the injury
when given exogenously. Nicotinamide (vitamin B3) directly inhibits downstream
pathways activated by Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase and is protective in
other models of acute lung injury.
METHODS: We administered nicotinamide i.p. to mice undergoing mechanical
ventilation with high tidal volumes to study the effects of nicotinamide on
ventilator-induced lung injury. Measures of injury included oxygen saturations
and bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophil counts, protein, and cytokine levels. We
also measured expression of nicotinamide phosophoribosyltransferase, and its
downstream effectors Sirt1 and Cebpa, Cebpb, Cebpe. We assessed the effect of
nicotinamide on the production of nitric oxide during ventilator-induced lung
injury. We also studied the effects of ventilator-induced lung injury in mice
deficient in C/EBPe.
RESULTS: Nicotinamide treatment significantly inhibited neutrophil infiltration
into the lungs during ventilator-induced lung injury, but did not affect protein 
leakage or cytokine production. Surprisingly, mice treated with nicotinamide
developed significantly worse hypoxemia during mechanical ventilation. This
effect was not linked to increases in nitric oxide production or alterations in
expression of Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase, Sirt1, or Cebpa and Cebpb.
Cebpe mRNA levels were decreased with either nicotinamide treatment or mechanical
ventilation, but mice lacking C/EBPe developed the same degree of hypoxemia and
ventilator-induced lung injury as wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Nicotinamide treatment during VILI inhibits neutrophil infiltration 
of the lungs consistent with a strong anti-inflammatory effect, but paradoxically
also leads to the development of significant hypoxemia. These findings suggest
that pulmonary neutrophilia is not linked to hypoxemia in ventilator-induced lung
injury, and that nicotinamide exacerbates hypoxemia during VILI.

PMCID: PMC4395431
PMID: 25875775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1688-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-01-622209.

The end of the line for neutrophils.

Gombart AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)OREGON STATE UNIVERSITY.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1782-92.

PMID: 25766564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cancer Causes Control. 2015 Apr;26(4):609-19. doi: 10.1007/s10552-015-0550-3.
Epub 2015 Mar 12.

Association of genetic variation in IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE and surrogates for
early-life infections with the risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Hispanic
children.

Hsu LI(1), Chokkalingam AP, Briggs FB, Walsh K, Crouse V, Fu C, Metayer C,
Wiemels JL, Barcellos LF, Buffler PA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
94720, USA, lingi.hsu732@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies focusing on European-ancestry
populations have identified ALL risk loci on IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE. To capture
the impacts of these genes on ALL risk in the California Hispanic population, we 
comprehensively assessed the variation within the genes and further assessed the 
joint effects between the genetic variation and surrogates for early-life
infections (the presence of older siblings, daycare attendance, and ear
infections).
METHODS: Genotypic data for 323 Hispanic ALL cases and 454 controls from the
California Childhood Leukemia Study were generated using Illumina OmniExpress v1 
platform. Logistic regression assuming a log-additive model estimated odds ratios
(OR) associated with each SNP, adjusted for age, sex, and the first five
principal components. In addition, we examined potential interactions between six
ALL risk alleles and surrogates for early-life infections using logistic
regression models that included an interaction term.
RESULTS: Significant associations between genotypes at IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE
and ALL risk were identified: rs7780012, OR 0.50, 95% confidence interval (CI)
0.35-0.71 (p = 0.004); rs7089424, OR 2.12, 95% CI 1.70-2.65 (p = 1.16 × 10(-9)); 
rs4982731, OR 1.69, 95% CI 1.37-2.08 (p = 2.35 × 10(-6)), respectively. Evidence 
for multiplicative interactions between genetic variants and surrogates for
early-life infections with ALL risk was not observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with findings in non-Hispanic White population, our study
showed that variants within IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE were associated with
increased ALL risk, and the effects for ARID5B and CEBPE were most prominent in
the high-hyperdiploid ALL subtype in the California Hispanic population. Results 
implicate the ARID5B, CEBPE, and IKZF1 genes in the pathogenesis of childhood
ALL.

PMCID: PMC4504234
PMID: 25761407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biomed Res. 2015;36(1):21-9. doi: 10.2220/biomedres.36.21.

Regulation of mouse chondrocyte differentiation by CCAAT/enhancer-binding
proteins.

Okuma T(1), Hirata M, Yano F, Mori D, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI, Tanaka S, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß regulates chondrocyte differentiaion and
proliferation during endochondral ossification. However, expression and function 
of other C/EBP family members in chondrocytes have not been fully understood. To 
understand the comprehensive regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by C/EBPs,
we initially examined their expression levels. Among four members (C/EBPa,
C/EBPß, C/EBPd and C/EBPe) with transactivation domain, expression of Cebpb and
Cebpd was abundant compared to Cebpa, while Cebpe was hardly expressed in mouse
isolated chondrocytes. Doxycycline (DOX)-inducible overexpression of each of the 
three C/EBPs (C/EBPa, C/EBPß and C/EBPd) in ATDC5 cells suppressed expressions of
early differentiation markers including Col2a1, aggrecan and Sox9, enhanced those
of late differentiation markers including Mmp13, Vegfa and Col10a1, and
decelerated cell proliferation, indicating their overlapped functions in
chondrocytes. In contrast, DOX-inducible overexpression of A-CEBP, which exerts a
dominant-negative effect against all C/EBPs, increased expressions of early
differentiation markers and decreased those of late differentiation markers.
Finally, microarray and gene ontology analyses showed that A-CEBP altered many
genes related with various events or tissues such as skeletal development,
cartilage, cell cycle, inflammation and apoptosis. In conclusion, C/EBPa, C/EBPß 
and C/EBPd regulate proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and
possibly is involved with apoptosis and inflammation. C/EBPs may play a variety
of roles in the homeostasis of joint cartilage under physiological and
pathological conditions.

PMID: 25749148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):5553-7. eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis of the association between CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-e
polymorphism and the risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Pan Y(1), Chen H(2), Liang H(1), Wang X(1), Wang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Children's Hospital of Zhengzhou Zhengzhou 450052,
Henan, China. (2)Department of pediatrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450052, Henan, China.

CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism has been implicated in susceptibility to childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) risk. Several studies investigated the
association of this polymorphism with ALL in different populations. However, the 
results were contradictory. A meta-analysis was conducted to assess the
association between CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism and ALL susceptibility.
Databases including Pubmed, EMBASE, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure
(CNKI) and Wangfang were searched to find relevant studies. Odds ratios (ORs)
with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of
associations. A random-effects model was used. A significant association was
found between CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism and childhood ALL (OR = 1.19, 95% CI, 
1.11-1.28). In the subgroup analyses by ethnicity, the significant association
was found among Caucasians (OR = 1.19, 95% CI, 1.09-1.30) and Hispanics (OR =
1.39, 95% CI, 1.18-1.63), but not in Asians (OR = 1.05, 95% CI, 0.90-1.22). In
the subgroup analysis by histology, B-cell ALL risk (OR = 1.29, 95% CI,
1.15-1.44) and B hyperdiploid ALL risk (OR = 1.84, 95% CI, 1.40-2.43) were
increased. Our results suggested that CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism conferred a
risk factor of childhood ALL.

PMCID: PMC4307517
PMID: 25664070  [PubMed]


14. Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1782-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-543850. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Acetylation of C/EBPe is a prerequisite for terminal neutrophil differentiation.

Bartels M(1), Govers AM(1), Fleskens V(2), Lourenço AR(2), Pals CE(2), Vervoort
SJ(2), van Gent R(3), Brenkman AB(4), Bierings MB(5), Ackerman SJ(6), van
Loosdregt J(1), Coffer PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, and Division of
Pediatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, and. (3)Department 
of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; (4)Department of Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; and. (5)Division of Pediatrics, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; (6)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1688-90.

C/EBPe, a member of the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family of
transcription factors, is exclusively expressed in myeloid cells and regulates
transition from the promyelocytic stage to the myelocytic stage of neutrophil
development, being indispensable for secondary and tertiary granule formation.
Knowledge concerning the functional role of C/EBPe posttranslational
modifications is limited to studies concerning phosphorylation and sumoylation.
In the current study, using ectopic expression and ex vivo differentiation of
CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells, we demonstrate that C/EBPe is acetylated,
which was confirmed by mass spectrometry analysis, identifying 4 acetylated
lysines in 3 distinct functional domains. Regulation of C/EBPe acetylation levels
by the p300 acetyltransferase and the sirtuin 1 deacetylase controls
transcriptional activity, which can at least in part be explained by modulation
of DNA binding. During neutrophil development, acetylation of lysines 121 and 198
were found to be crucial for terminal neutrophil differentiation and the
expression of neutrophil-specific granule proteins, including lactoferrin and
collagenase. Taken together, our data illustrate a critical role for acetylation 
in the functional regulation of C/EBPe activity during terminal neutrophil
development.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25568349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jan 20;112(2):329-37. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.589. Epub 2014 Dec 
16.

Antagonism between granulocytic maturation and deacetylase inhibitor-induced
apoptosis in acute promyelocytic leukaemia cells.

Hennig D(1), Müller S(2), Wichmann C(3), Drube S(2), Pietschmann K(1), Pelzl
L(4), Grez M(5), Bug G(6), Heinzel T(1), Krämer OH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biomedicine (CMB), Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Hans-Knöll-Strasse 2, 07745 Jena,
Germany. (2)University Hospital Jena, Institute for Immunology,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Leutragraben 3, 07743 Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Transfusion Medicine, Cell Therapy and Haemostasis,
Ludwig-Maximilian University Hospital, Max-Lebsche Platz 32, 81377 Munich,
Germany. (4)Institute of Physiology I, Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen,
Gmelinstrasse 5, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. (5)Institute for Biomedical Research,
Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(6)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University
Frankfurt/Main, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany. (7)Department
of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67, 55131
Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional repression is a key mechanism driving
leukaemogenesis. In acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), the fusion protein
promyelocytic leukaemia-retinoic acid receptor-a fusion (PML-RARa) recruits
transcriptional repressors to myeloid differentiation genes. All-trans-retinoic
acid (ATRA) induces the proteasomal degradation of PML-RARa and granulocytic
differentiation. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) fall into four classes (I-IV) and
contribute to the transcription block caused by PML-RARa.
METHODS: Immunoblot, flow cytometry, and May-Grünwald-Giemsa staining were used
to analyze differentiation and induction of apoptosis.
RESULTS: A PML-RARa- and ATRA-dependent differentiation programme induces
granulocytic maturation associated with an accumulation of the myeloid
transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)<U+025B> and of the surface
protein CD11b. While this process protects APL cells from inhibitors of class I
HDAC activity, inhibition of all Zinc-dependent HDACs (classes I, II, and IV)
with the pan-HDACi (histone deacetylase inhibitor(s)) LBH589 induces apoptosis of
immature and differentiated APL cells. LBH589 can eliminate C/EBP<U+025B> and the
mitochondrial apoptosis regulator B-cell lymphoma (BCL)-xL in immature and
differentiated NB4 cells. Thus, BCL-xL and C/EBP<U+025B> are newly identified molecular 
markers for the efficacy of HDACi against APL cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results could explain the therapeutic limitations occurring with
ATRA and class I HDACi combinations. Pro-apoptotic effects caused by pan-HDAC
inhibition are not blunted by ATRA-induced differentiation and may provide a
clinically interesting alternative.

PMCID: PMC4453449
PMID: 25514379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;87(2):162-73. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.094672. Epub 2014 Nov 
14.

The inverse agonist DG172 triggers a PPARß/d-independent myeloid lineage shift
and promotes GM-CSF/IL-4-induced dendritic cell differentiation.

Lieber S(1), Scheer F(1), Finkernagel F(1), Meissner W(1), Giehl G(1), Brendel
C(1), Diederich WE(1), Müller-Brüsselbach S(1), Müller R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (S.L., F.F., 
W.M., S.M.-B., R.M.); Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (F.S.,
W.E.D.); and Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology (G.G., C.B.); Center 
for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (S.L., F.F., 
W.M., S.M.-B., R.M.); Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (F.S.,
W.E.D.); and Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology (G.G., C.B.); Center 
for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany
rmueller@imt.uni-marburg.de.

The stilbene derivative
(Z)-2-(2-bromophenyl)-3-{[4-(1-methylpiperazine)amino]phenyl}acrylonitrile
(DG172) was developed as a highly selective inhibitory peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)ß/d ligand. Here, we describe a novel
PPARß/d-independent, yet highly specific, effect of DG172 on the differentiation 
of bone marrow cells (BMCs). DG172 strongly augmented
granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced differentiation
of primary BMCs from Ppard null mice into two specific populations, characterized
as mature (CD11c(hi)MHCII(hi)) and immature (CD11c(hi)MHCII(lo)) dendritic cells 
(DCs). IL-4 synergized with DG172 to shift the differentiation from MHCII(lo)
cells to mature DCs in vitro. The promotion of DC differentiation occurred at the
expense of differentiation to granulocytic Gr1(+)Ly6B(+) cells. In agreement with
these findings, transcriptome analyses showed a strong DG172-mediated repression 
of genes encoding neutrophilic markers in both differentiating wild-type and
Ppard null cells, while macrophage/DC marker genes were up-regulated. DG172 also 
inhibited the expression of transcription factors driving granulocytic
differentiation (Cebpe, Gfi1, and Klf5), and increased the levels of
transcription factors promoting macrophage/DC differentiation (Irf4, Irf8, Spib, 
and Spic). DG172 exerted these effects only at an early stage of BMC
differentiation induced by GM-CSF, did not affect macrophage-colony-stimulating
factor-triggered differentiation to macrophages and had no detectable
PPARß/d-independent effect on other cell types tested. Structure-function
analyses demonstrated that the 4-methylpiperazine moiety in DG172 is required for
its effect on DC differentiation, but is dispensable for PPARß/d binding. Based
on these data we developed a new compound,
(Z)-2-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-[4-(4-methylpiperazine-1-yl)phenyl]acrylonitrile
(DG228), which enhances DC differentiation in the absence of significant PPARß/d 
binding.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25398837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Oct;55(10):2242-8.

Genomic evaluations of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia susceptibility
across race/ethnicities.

Urayama KY(1), Manabe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Disease Diversity, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University.

PMID: 25297793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Ann Hematol. 2015 Feb;94(2):181-5. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2186-x. Epub 2014 Sep 
7.

CEBPE polymorphism confers an increased risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia: a meta-analysis of 11 case-control studies with 5,639 cases and 10,036 
controls.

Wang C(1), Chen J, Sun H, Sun L, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, China.

The association between CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-e (CEBPE) rs2239633
polymorphism and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) risk has been reported, but
results of previous studies remain controversial and ambiguous. To assess the
association between CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism and childhood ALL risk, a
meta-analysis was performed. Based on comprehensive searches of the PubMed,
Embase, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and Chinese Biomedical 
Literature Database (CBM), we identified outcome data from all articles
estimating the association between CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism and childhood ALL
risk. The pooled odds ratio (OR) with 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) were
calculated. A significant association between CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism with
childhood ALL was found (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.19, 95 % CI 1.11-1.28, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Subgroup
analysis stratified by ethnicity also suggested a significant association between
this polymorphism and childhood ALL in the Caucasian subgroup (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.19, 95 % CI
1.09-1.30, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and Hispanic subgroup (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.39, 95 % CI 1.18-1.63,
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). No significant association was observed in the Asian subgroup
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.05, 95 % CI 0.90-1.22, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.53). The CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism
increased B cell ALL risk (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.29, 95 % CI 1.15-1.44, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and B
hyperdiploid ALL risk (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.84, 95 % CI 1.40-2.43, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). This
meta-analysis demonstrated that the CEBPE rs2239633 polymorphism was
significantly associated with childhood ALL risk.

PMID: 25195121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Jan;54(1):110-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.07.011. Epub 
2014 Aug 20.

Concordant B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in non-twinned siblings.

Pombo-de-Oliveira MS(1), Emerenciano M(2), Winn AP(3), Costa I(3), Mansur MB(4), 
Ford AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de 
Cancer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: mpombo@inca.gov.br.
(2)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de 
Cancer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (3)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Service,
Hospital Joana de Gusmão, Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil. (4)Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de Cancer, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil; Centre for Evolution and Cancer, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, United Kingdom. (5)Centre for Evolution and Cancer, The
Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.

Associating the risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with genetic
predisposition is still a challenge. Here, we discuss two non-twinned sibs (girl 
and boy) diagnosed with B-cell precursor (BCP-ALL) and ETV6-RUNX1. BCP-ALL
clinical onset occurred 10months apart from each diagnosis. One child is alive in
complete continuous remission, whereas, the other relapsed and evolved to death
with resistance to ALL treatment. Despite the fact that BCP-ALL with ETV6-RUNX1
usually results in a very good prognosis, the sibs experienced divergent
outcomes; a remarkable difference in one child that presented a more aggressive
disease was higher leukocytosis associated with IKZF1 deletion. The familial
history of cancer and genetic susceptibility was explored. The sibs were
absolutely identical in all 17 loci of genes tested; GSTM1, GSTT1, NQO1, TP53,
and TP63 were wild-type, whereas at least one copy of the variant allele for
IKZF1, ARID5B, PTPRJ and CEBPE was present. The familial pattern of ETV6 was
tested by the 12p microsatellite analysis and demonstrated that deletions
occurred in one child but not the other, while heterozygous patterns were found
in the parents. Altogether, our data suggest that genetic predisposition aligned 
with chance haa an additive effect in BCP-ALL outcome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Clin Immunol. 2014 Oct;34(7):780-3. doi: 10.1007/s10875-014-0082-8. Epub 2014
Aug 1.

Clinical course in a patient with neutrophil-specific granule deficiency and
rapid detection of neutrophil granules as a screening test.

Shigemura T(1), Yamazaki T, Shiohara M, Kobayashi N, Naganuma K, Koike K,
Agematsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
390-8621, Japan.

PURPOSE: Neutrophil-specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare, congenital
disorder characterized by atypical neutrophil structure and function that results
in frequent and severe bacterial infections. However, the clinical course of
patients with SGD have not been described in detail because of the scarcity of
the disease. We present the clinical course of an adult patient with SGD and
propose a method for making an early diagnosis of SGD.
PATIENT AND METHODS: A32-year-old Japanese woman with SGD had a small impetigo
lesion on her face and experienced the rapid spread of a facial abscess to a
pulmonary abscess via the blood stream. We also analyzed the expression of
neutrophil granule proteins in our patient compared with a healthy control by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: We confirmed defects of several neutrophil granule proteins in our
patient by flow cytometry.
CONCLUSION: Severe bacterial infections sometimes occur and spread rapidly in
SGD. Detection of neutrophil granules by flow cytometry is useful for a rapid
diagnosis and a screening of SGD.

PMID: 25081842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Mar;56(3):814-6. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.933479. Epub 2014
Aug 13.

Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia-associated risk-loci IKZF1, ARID5B and
CEBPE and risk of pediatric non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a report from the
Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster Study Group.

Bartram T(1), Burkhardt B, Wössmann W, Seidemann K, Zimmermann M, Cario G,
Lisfeld J, Ellinghaus E, Franke A, Houlston RS, Schrappe M, Reiter A, Stanulla M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein , Kiel ,
Germany.

PMID: 25005032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Leuk Res. 2014 Jul;38(7):850-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.04.013. Epub 2014 May
9.

Comparison of promoter DNA methylation and expression levels of genes encoding
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins in AML patients.

Musialik E(1), Bujko M(2), Kober P(3), Grygorowicz MA(4), Libura M(5),
Przestrzelska M(6), Juszczynski P(7), Borg K(8), Florek I(9), Jakóbczyk M(10),
Baranowska A(11), Siedlecki JA(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic
address: musialik.ewa@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular and Translational
Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of
Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: mbujko@coi.waw.pl. (3)Department of
Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer
Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
pkober@coi.waw.pl. (4)Department of Immunology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial
Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
m.a.grygorowicz@gmail.com. (5)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Internal
Diseases, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
marta.libura@gmail.com. (6)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Internal
Diseases, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
m.przest@autograf.pl. (7)Department of Diagnostic Hematology, Institute of
Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
pjuszczynski@ihit.waw.pl. (8)Department of Diagnostic Hematology, Institute of
Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
kborg@ihit.waw.pl. (9)Department of Hematology, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, 
Poland. Electronic address: iflorek@gmail.com. (10)Department of Hematology,
Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland. Electronic address: jakobcz@tlen.pl.
(11)Neuroortopedic Department, Marian Weiss Memorial Mazowia Rehabilitation
Center, Konstancin-Jeziorna, Poland. Electronic address:
alicja.baranowska@onet.eu. (12)Department of Molecular and Translational
Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of
Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: jas@coi.waw.pl.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (CEBPs) are transcription factors regulating
myeloid differentiation. Disturbances of their expression may contribute to
leukemogenesis. In this study we compared promoter methylation and expression
levels of selected CEBP genes in a group of 78 AML patients, normal bone marrow
and hematopoietic precursor cells. CEBPA, CEBPD and CEBPE promoter methylation
levels were elevated in 37%, 35.5% and 56.7% of patients. No CEBPZ(DDIT3)
methylation was observed. An inverse relationship between CEBPA and CEBPD DNA
methylation and expression levels was observed. AML cytogenetic risk groups and
patients with particular translocation are characterized by distinct
methylation/expression profile of CEBPs encoding genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24878001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2014 Jul;58(7):1474-90. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201300818. Epub 2014
Apr 25.

Nicotinamide treatment ameliorates the course of experimental colitis mediated by
enhanced neutrophil-specific antibacterial clearance.

Bettenworth D(1), Nowacki TM, Ross M, Kyme P, Schwammbach D, Kerstiens L,
Thoennissen GB, Bokemeyer C, Hengst K, Berdel WE, Heidemann J, Thoennissen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine B, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.

SCOPE: In previous studies, we could show that the B vitamin nicotinamide (NAM)
enhanced antimicrobial activity of neutrophils. Here, we assessed the effects of 
NAM in two models of experimental colitis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Colitis was induced in C57BL/6 mice either by oral infection
with Citrobacter rodentium or by DSS (dextran sodium sulphate) administration,
and animals were systemically treated with NAM. Ex vivo bacterial clearance was
assessed in murine and human whole blood, as well as isolated human neutrophils. 
In C. rodentium-induced colitis, NAM treatment resulted in markedly decreased
systemic bacterial invasion, histological damage and increased fecal clearance of
C. rodentium by up to 600-fold. In contrast, NAM had no effect when administered 
to neutrophil-depleted mice. Ex vivo stimulation of isolated human neutrophils,
as well as murine and human whole blood with NAM led to increased clearance of C.
rodentium and enhanced expression of antimicrobial peptides in neutrophils.
Moreover, NAM treatment significantly ameliorated the course of DSS colitis, as
assessed by body weight, histological damage and myeloperoxidase activity.
CONCLUSION: Pharmacological application of NAM mediates beneficial effects in
bacterial and chemically induced colitis. Future studies are needed to explore
the clinical potential of NAM in the context of intestinal bacterial infections
and human inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24764203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Hematol. 2014 Jul;89(7):721-5. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23727. Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Genomic ancestry and somatic alterations correlate with age at diagnosis in
Hispanic children with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Walsh KM(1), de Smith AJ, Welch TC, Smirnov I, Cunningham MJ, Ma X, Chokkalingam 
AP, Dahl GV, Roberts W, Barcellos LF, Buffler PA, Metayer C, Wiemels JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 94143; Program in Cancer
Genetics, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 94143.

Hispanic children have a higher incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
than non-Hispanic whites but tend to be diagnosed at older ages. In genome-wide
association studies, Native American ancestry and polymorphisms in six genes have
been associated with ALL risk. In multivariable regression models, we
investigated whether genomic ancestry, inherited risk SNPs, or acquired somatic
alterations were associated with differences in age at diagnosis in Hispanic
children with B-cell ALL. Genome-wide array data were used to estimate each
participant's percent membership in the three Hispanic ancestral populations:
Native American, African, and European. Each 20% increase in European ancestry
was associated with a six month younger age at diagnosis (95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.36-11.6
months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.037). Correspondingly, each 20% increase in Native American
ancestry was associated with a six-month older age at diagnosis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.037). Both
the TEL-AML1 translocation and high-hyperdiploidy were associated with younger
age at diagnosis (24.4 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.0 x 10(-4) and 12.4 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011,
respectively), while CDKN2A and IKZF1 deletions were associated with older age at
diagnosis (19.7 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.0 x 10(-4) and 18.1 months, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012,
respectively). No associations with age at diagnosis were observed for RAS
mutation, PAX5 deletion or for known heritable risk alleles in IKZF1, CDKN2A,
PIP4K2A, GATA3, ARID5B, or CEBPE. Because younger age at diagnosis is associated 
with improved treatment outcomes for children with ALL, the effect of European
ancestry on ALL survival may be mediated by its effect on age at diagnosis, or by
proxy, its association with more treatable molecular subtypes of ALL.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4069235
PMID: 24753091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 21;9(4):e95784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095784. eCollection
2014.

Granulopoiesis requires increased C/EBPa compared to monopoiesis, correlated with
elevated Cebpa in immature G-CSF receptor versus M-CSF receptor expressing cells.

Ma O(1), Hong S(1), Guo H(1), Ghiaur G(2), Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America. (2)Division of Hematologic Malignancies, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

C/EBPa is required for the formation of granulocyte-monocyte progenitors;
however, its role in subsequent myeloid lineage specification remains uncertain. 
Transduction of murine marrow with either of two Cebpa shRNAs markedly increases 
monocyte and reduces granulocyte colonies in methylcellulose or the monocyte to
neutrophil ratio in liquid culture. Similar findings were found after marrow
shRNA transduction and transplantation and with CEBPA knockdown in human marrow
CD34+ cells. These results apparently reflect altered myeloid lineage
specification, as similar knockdown allowed nearly complete 32Dcl3 granulocytic
maturation. Cebpa knockdown also generated lineage-negative blasts with increased
colony replating capacity but unchanged cell cycle parameters, likely reflecting 
complete differentiation block. The shRNA having the greatest effect on lineage
skewing reduced Cebpa 3-fold in differentiating cells but 6-fold in accumulating 
blasts. Indicating that Cebpa is the relevant shRNA target, shRNA-resistant
C/EBPa-ER rescued marrow myelopoiesis. Cebpa knockdown in murine marrow cells
also increased in vitro erythropoiesis, perhaps reflecting 1.6-fold reduction in 
PU.1 leading to GATA-1 derepression. Global gene expression analysis of
lineage-negative blasts that accumulate after Cebpa knockdown demonstrated
reduction in Cebpe and Gfi1, known transcriptional regulators of granulopoiesis, 
and also reduced Ets1 and Klf5. Populations enriched for immature granulocyte or 
monocyte progenitor/precursors were isolated by sorting Lin-Sca-1-c-Kit+ cells
into GCSFR+MCSFR- or GCSFR-MCSFR+ subsets. Cebpa, Cebpe, Gfi1, Ets1, and Klf5
RNAs were increased in the c-Kit+GCSFR+ and Klf4 and Irf8 in the c-Kit+MCSFR+
populations, with PU.1 levels similar in both. In summary, higher levels of
C/EBPa are required for granulocyte and lower levels for monocyte lineage
specification, and this myeloid bifurcation may be facilitated by increased Cebpa
gene expression in granulocyte compared with monocyte progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3994156
PMID: 24752325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 21;9(3):e92471. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092471. eCollection
2014.

Human a-defensin expression is not dependent on CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-e 
in a murine model.

Glenthøj A(1), Dahl S(1), Larsen MT(1), Cowland JB(1), Borregaard N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Granulocyte Research Laboratory, Department of Hematology, National
University Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by 
recurrent infections. The disease is caused by inactivating mutations of the
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-e (C/EBP-e) gene. As a consequence, specific and
gelatinase granules lack most matrix proteins. Furthermore, azurophil granules
contain diminished amounts of their most abundant proteins, a-defensins, also
known as human neutrophil peptides (HNPs). In accordance with this, in vitro
models have demonstrated induction of HNPs by C/EBP-e. Since mice do not express 
myeloid defensins, they cannot per se be used to characterize the role of C/EBP-e
in controlling HNP expression in vivo. We therefore crossed a transgenic
HNP-1-expressing mouse with the Cebpe-/- mouse to study the in vivo significance 
of C/EBP-e for HNP-1 transcription and expression. Surprisingly, neither
expression nor processing of HNP-1 was affected by lack of C/EBP-e in these mice.
Transduction of C/EBP-e into primary bone marrow cells from HNP-1 mice induced
some HNP-1 expression, but not to levels comparable to expression human cells.
Taken together, our data infer that the HNP-1 of the transgenic mouse does not
show an expression pattern equivalent to endogenous secondary granule proteins.
This limits the use of these transgenic mice as a model for human conditions.

PMCID: PMC3962403
PMID: 24658030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2015 Feb;19(1):99-106. doi: 10.1007/s10157-014-0952-7. Epub
2014 Mar 6.

An AKI biomarker lipocalin 2 in the blood derives from the kidney in renal injury
but from neutrophils in normal and infected conditions.

Kanda J(1), Mori K, Kawabata H, Kuwabara T, Mori KP, Imamaki H, Kasahara M, Yokoi
H, Mizumoto C, Thoennissen NH, Koeffler HP, Barasch J, Takaori-Kondo A, Mukoyama 
M, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lipocalin 2 (LCN2 or neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin) is a
secretory protein discovered from neutrophils, which accumulates in the blood and
urine during acute kidney injury (AKI) and in the blood by bacterial infection.
Little is known about the tissue source and molecular forms of this protein under
normal and pathophysiologic conditions.
METHODS: By sandwich ELISA, serum and urinary LCN2 levels were measured in 36
patients with hematologic malignancies who transiently became neutropenic by stem
cell transplantation (SCT). To evaluate contribution of neutrophil-derived LCN2
in the physiologic blood LCN2 concentrations, we examined CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein e (C/EBPe) knockout mice, which lack mature neutrophils.
RESULTS: In patients without AKI and bacterial infection, at 1 week after SCT,
the median blood neutrophil counts became zero and serum LCN2 levels were
decreased by 76 ± 6 % (p < 0.01), but urinary LCN2 levels were not altered.
During neutropenic conditions, bacterial infection caused only a modest rise of
serum LCN2 but AKI produced a marked rise of serum and urinary LCN2 levels. Serum
LCN2 concentrations in C/EBPe knockout mice were reduced by 66 ± 11 % compared to
wild-type mice (p < 0.05). Blood LCN2 existed predominantly in high molecular
weight forms (>100 kDa), while urinary LCN2 was mainly in low molecular weight
forms.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that neutrophils are the major source of
circulating LCN2 in normal and infected conditions, whereas blood and urinary
LCN2 mainly derive from the kidney during AKI, and that the molecular forms and
regulation of blood and urinary LCN2 are clearly distinct.

PMID: 24599361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 25;14:127. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-127.

ARID5B polymorphism confers an increased risk to acquire specific MLL
rearrangements in early childhood leukemia.

Emerenciano M, Barbosa TC, Lopes BA, Blunck CB, Faro A, Andrade C, Meyer C,
Marschalek R, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS(1); Brazilian Collaborative Study Group of
Infant Acute Leukemia.

Collaborators: Magalhães IQ, Cordoba JC, Lafayette TC, Cóser VM, Dorea MD, Araujo
FN, Burlachini LM, Nobrega AG, Fialho EC, Pimenta FC, Mamede GT, Salles Tde J,
Dobbin J, Apa A, Brandalise S, Pinheiro VR, de Souza AM, Rouxinol S, Carvalho EG,
Silva AM, de Andrade Agareno JM, Pianovski MA, Tormen TH, de Brito PC, Oliveira
LS, Costa I, Bousfield D, de Almeida Wernerck F, Cardoso TC, de Souza MS,
Baseggio R, Melaragno R, Neves G, Arancibia AM, Cristofani LM, Mendes W, Costa
CM, Ramos G, Neto JC, Lee ML, de Brito NP, Gurgel RS.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de 
Câncer, Rua André Cavalcanti 37, Rio de Janeiro/RJ 20231-050, Brasil.
mpombo@inca.gov.br.

BACKGROUND: Acute leukemia in early age (EAL) is characterized by acquired
genetic alterations such as MLL rearrangements (MLL-r). The aim of this
case-controlled study was to investigate whether single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE could be related to the onset of EAL cases
(<24 months-old at diagnosis).
METHODS: The SNPs (IKZF1 rs11978267, ARID5B rs10821936 and rs10994982, CEBPE
rs2239633) were genotyped in 265 cases [169 acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
and 96 acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)] and 505 controls by Taqman allelic
discrimination assay. Logistic regression was used to evaluate the association
between SNPs of cases and controls, adjusted on skin color and/or age. The risk
was determined by calculating odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence interval
(CI).
RESULTS: Children with the IKZF1 SNP had an increased risk of developing
MLL-germline ALL in white children. The heterozygous/mutant genotype in ARID5B
rs10994982 significantly increased the risk for MLL-germline leukemia in white
and non-white children (OR 2.60, 95% CI: 1.09-6.18 and OR 3.55, 95% CI:
1.57-8.68, respectively). The heterozygous genotype in ARID5B rs10821936
increased the risk for MLL-r leukemia in both white and non-white (OR 2.06, 95%
CI: 1.12-3.79 and OR 2.36, 95% CI: 1.09-5.10, respectively). Furthermore, ARID5B 
rs10821936 conferred increased risk for MLL-MLLT3 positive cases (OR 7.10, 95%
CI:1.54-32.68). Our data do not show evidence that CEBPE rs2239633 confers
increased genetic susceptibility to EAL.
CONCLUSIONS: IKZF1 and CEBPE variants seem to play a minor role in genetic
susceptibility to EAL, while ARID5B rs10821936 increased the risk of MLL-MLLT3.
This result shows that genetic susceptibility could be associated with the
differences regarding MLL breakpoints and partner genes.

PMCID: PMC3948138
PMID: 24564228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):e23-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.090720.

Germline variants in IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE as risk factors for adult-onset
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: an analysis from the GMALL study group.

Burmeister T(1), Bartels G, Gröger D, Trautmann H, Schwartz S, Lenz K,
Tietze-Bürger C, Viardot A, Wäsch R, Horst HA, Reinhardt R, Gökbuget N, Hoelzer
D, Kneba M, Brüggemann M.

Author information: 
(1)thomas.burmeister@charite.de.

PMCID: PMC3912981
PMID: 24497567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 28;9(1):e85341. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085341. eCollection
2014.

Deficiency of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-epsilon reduces atherosclerotic
lesions in LDLR-/- mice.

Okamoto R(1), Gery S(1), Gombart AF(2), Wang X(3), Castellani LW(4), Akagi T(1), 
Chen S(5), Arditi M(5), Ho Q(1), Lusis AJ(3), Li Q(6), Koeffler HP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University
of California Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America. (2)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America ; Department of Biochemisty and
Biophysics, Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, 
United States of America. (3)Department of Human Genetics, Department of
Medicine, and Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology,
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles (UCLA),
Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (4)Department of
Medicine/Division of Cardiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(5)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (6)Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics Research Center, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(7)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University
of California Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America ; Cancer Science Institute of Singapore and National
Cancer Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are transcription factors involved
in hematopoietic cell development and induction of several inflammatory
mediators. C/EBPe is expressed only in myeloid cells including
monocytes/macrophages. Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disorder of the
vascular wall and circulating immune cells such as monocytes/macrophages. Mice
deficient in the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor (Ldlr-/-) fed on a high
cholesterol diet (HCD) show elevated blood cholesterol levels and are widely used
as models to study human atherosclerosis. In this study, we generated Ldlr and
Cebpe double-knockout (llee) mice and compared their atherogenic phenotypes to
Ldlr single deficient (llEE) mice after HCD. Macrophages from llee mice have
reduced lipid uptake by foam cells and impaired phagokinetic motility in vitro
compared to macrophages from llEE mice. Also, compared to llEE mice, llee mice
have alterations of lipid metabolism, and reduced atheroma and obesity,
particularly the males. Peritoneal macrophages of llee male mice have reduced
mRNA expression of FABP4, a fatty acid binding protein implicated in
atherosclerosis. Overall, our study suggests that the myeloid specific factor
C/EBPe is involved in systemic lipid metabolism and that silencing of C/EBPe
could decrease the development of atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3904867
PMID: 24489659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1079-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-523233. Epub 2014
Jan 7.

miRNA-130a regulates C/EBP-e expression during granulopoiesis.

Larsen MT(1), Häger M, Glenthøj A, Asmar F, Clemmensen SN, Mora-Jensen H,
Borregaard N, Cowland JB.

Author information: 
(1)The Granulocyte Research Laboratory and.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-e (C/EBP-e) is considered a master transcription
factor regulating terminal neutrophil maturation. It is essential for expression 
of secondary granule proteins, but it also regulates proliferation, cell cycle,
and maturation during granulopoiesis. Cebpe(-/-) mice have incomplete
granulocytic differentiation and increased sensitivity toward bacterial
infections. The amount of C/EBP-e messenger RNA (mRNA) increases with maturation 
from myeloblasts with peak level in myelocytes (MC)/metamyelocytes (MM), when the
cells stop proliferating followed by a decline in more mature cells. In contrast,
C/EBP-e protein is virtually detectable only in the MC/MM population, indicating 
that expression in more immature cells could be inhibited by microRNAs (miRNAs). 
We found that miRNA-130a (miR-130a) regulates C/EBP-e protein expression in both 
murine and human granulocytic precursors. Overexpression of miR-130a in a murine 
cell line downregulated C/EBP-e protein and lactoferrin (Ltf), cathelicidin
antimicrobial protein (Camp), and lipocalin-2 (Lcn2) mRNA expression giving rise 
to cells with a more immature phenotype, as seen in the Cebpe(-/-) mouse.
Introduction of a C/EBP-e mRNA without target site for miR-130a restored both
C/EBP-e production, expression of Camp and Lcn2, and resulted in the cells having
a more mature phenotype. We conclude that miR-130a is important for the
regulation of the timed expression of C/EBP-e during granulopoiesis.

PMID: 24398327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):865-73. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2236. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Enhancement of differentiation induction and upregulation of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins and PU.1 in NB4 cells treated with combination of
ATRA and valproic acid.

Iriyama N(1), Yuan B(2), Yoshino Y(2), Hatta Y(1), Horikoshi A(1), Aizawa S(3),
Takei M(1), Takeuchi J(1), Takagi N(4), Toyoda H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Nihon University School of
Medicine, Itabashi Hospital, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan. (2)Department of
Clinical Molecular Genetics, School of Pharmacy, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and
Life Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan. (3)Department of Functional
Morphology, Nihon University School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610,
Japan. (4)Department of Applied Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Tokyo
University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

The effects of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and valproic acid (VPA), alone and 
in combination, on the human acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cell line NB4
were investigated in view of differentiation induction and growth inhibition.
After 48 h of treatment, not only ATRA but also VPA induced differentiation in
NB4 cells, and their combination further augmented the differentiation activity. 
Furthermore, the upregulation of transcription factors including
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPa, ß, e) and PU.1, which are known to be
critical factors for normal myelopoiesis, granulocytic maturation and being
repressed in APL, concurred with the differentiation induction. A significant
cell growth inhibition was observed after the treatment with VPA, which was
further strengthened by the addition of ATRA. Given the importance of C/EBPs and 
PU.1 in myeloid development, these results, thus, suggest that restoration of the
normal function of the myeloid cell transcriptional machinery is a major
molecular mechanism underlying the differentiation induction in NB4. Therefore,
these results may provide novel insights into a possible combinational
therapeutic approach for APL patients.

PMID: 24379003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncogenesis. 2013 Nov 4;2:e78. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.41.

Runx1 deficiency permits granulocyte lineage commitment but impairs subsequent
maturation.

Ng KP(1), Hu Z, Ebrahem Q, Negrotto S, Lausen J, Saunthararajah Y.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, USA.

First-hits in the multi-hit process of leukemogenesis originate in germline or
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), yet leukemia-initiating cells (LICs) usually
have a lineage-committed phenotype. The molecular mechanisms underlying this
compartment shift during leukemia evolution have not been a major focus of
investigation and remain poorly understood. Here a mechanism underlying this
shift was examined in the context of Runx1 deficiency, a frequent
leukemia-initiating event. Lineage-negative cells isolated from the bone marrow
of Runx1-haploinsufficient and wild-type control mice were cultured in
granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor to force lineage commitment.
Runx1-haploinsufficient cells demonstrated significantly greater and persistent
exponential cell growth than wild-type controls. Not surprisingly, the
Runx1-haploinsufficient cells were differentiation-impaired, by morphology and by
flow-cytometric evaluation for granulocyte differentiation markers.
Interestingly, however, this impaired differentiation was not because of
decreased granulocyte lineage commitment, as RNA and protein upregulation of the 
master granulocyte lineage-commitment transcription factor Cebpa, and Hoxb4
repression, was similar in wild-type and Runx1-haploinsufficient cells. Instead, 
RNA and protein expression of Cebpe, a key driver of progressive maturation after
lineage commitment, were significantly decreased in Runx1-haploinsufficient
cells. Primary acute myeloid leukemia cells with normal cytogenetics and RUNX1
mutation also demonstrated this phenotype of very high CEBPA mRNA expression but 
paradoxically low expression of CEBPE, a CEBPA target gene.
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses suggested a molecular mechanism for this
phenotype: in wild-type cells, Runx1 binding was substantially greater at the
Cebpe than at the Cebpa enhancer. Furthermore, Runx1 deficiency substantially
diminished high-level Runx1 binding at the Cebpe enhancer, but lower-level
binding at the Cebpa enhancer was relatively preserved. Thus, Runx1-deficiency
permits Cebpa upregulation and the exponential cell growth that accompanies
lineage commitment, but by impairing activation of Cebpe, a key
proliferation-terminating maturation gene, extends this exponential growth. These
mechanisms facilitate germline cell or HSC of origin, yet evolution into LIC with
lineage-committed phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3849692
PMID: 24189977  [PubMed]


34. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075815. eCollection
2013.

MicroRNA-150 expression induces myeloid differentiation of human acute leukemia
cells and normal hematopoietic progenitors.

Morris VA(1), Zhang A, Yang T, Stirewalt DL, Ramamurthy R, Meshinchi S, Oehler
VG.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America ; Division of Hematology, Department of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and blast crisis (BC) chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) normal differentiation is impaired. Differentiation of immature
stem/progenitor cells is critical for normal blood cell function. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs or miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that interfere with gene expression by
degrading messenger RNAs (mRNAs) or blocking protein translation. Aberrant miRNA 
expression is a feature of leukemia and miRNAs also play a significant role in
normal hematopoiesis and differentiation. We have identified miRNAs
differentially expressed in AML and BC CML and identified a new role for miR-150 
in myeloid differentiation. Expression of miR-150 is low or absent in BC CML and 
AML patient samples and cell lines. We have found that expression of miR-150 in
AML cell lines, CD34+ progenitor cells from healthy individuals, and primary BC
CML and AML patient samples at levels similar to miR-150 expression in normal
bone marrow promotes myeloid differentiation of these cells. MYB is a direct
target of miR-150, and we have identified that the observed phenotype is
partially mediated by MYB. In AML cell lines, differentiation of miR-150
expressing cells occurs independently of retinoic acid receptor a (RARA)
signaling. High-throughput gene expression profiling (GEP) studies of the AML
cell lines HL60, PL21, and THP-1 suggest that activation of CEPBA, CEBPE, and
cytokines associated with myeloid differentiation in miR-150 expressing cells as 
compared to control cells contributes to myeloid differentiation. These data
suggest that miR-150 promotes myeloid differentiation, a previously
uncharacterized role for this miRNA, and that absent or low miR-150 expression
contributes to blocked myeloid differentiation in acute leukemia cells.

PMCID: PMC3782459
PMID: 24086639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;58(9):571-2. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2013.81. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

CEBPE promoter SNPs, caught red handed? A commentary on identification of
functional nucleotide and haplotype variants in the promoter of the CEBPE gene.

Xu H(1), Yang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Comment on
    J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;58(9):600-3.

PMID: 23903072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Causes Control. 2013 Oct;24(10):1789-95. doi: 10.1007/s10552-013-0256-3.
Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Genetic variants in ARID5B and CEBPE are childhood ALL susceptibility loci in
Hispanics.

Chokkalingam AP(1), Hsu LI, Metayer C, Hansen HM, Month SR, Barcellos LF, Wiemels
JL, Buffler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of California,
1995 University Ave, Ste 460, Berkeley, CA, 94704, USA, anandc@berkeley.edu.

Recent genome-wide studies conducted in European Whites have identified novel
susceptibility genes for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We sought 
to examine whether these loci are susceptibility genes among Hispanics, whose
reported incidence of childhood ALL is the highest of all ethnic groups in
California, and whether their effects differ between Hispanics and non-Hispanic
Whites (NHWs). We genotyped 13 variants in these genes among 706 Hispanic (300
cases, 406 controls) and 594 NHW (225 cases, 369 controls) participants in a
matched population-based case-control study in California. We found significant
associations for the five studied ARID5B variants in both Hispanics (p values of 
1.0 × 10(-9) to 0.004) and NHWs (p values of 2.2 × 10(-6) to 0.018). Risk
estimates were in the same direction in both groups (ORs of 1.53-1.99 and
1.37-1.84, respectively) and strengthened when restricted to B-cell precursor
high-hyperdiploid ALL (>50 chromosomes; ORs of 2.21-3.22 and 1.67-2.71,
respectively). Similar results were observed for the single CEBPE variant.
Hispanics and NHWs exhibited different susceptibility loci at CDKN2A. Although
IKZF1 loci showed significant susceptibility effects among NHWs (p < 1 × 10(-5)),
their effects among Hispanics were in the same direction but nonsignificant,
despite similar minor allele frequencies. Future studies should examine whether
the observed effects vary by environmental, immunological, or lifestyle factors.

PMCID: PMC3771434
PMID: 23836053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e67134. Print 2013.

Global Identification of EVI1 Target Genes in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Glass C(1), Wuertzer C, Cui X, Bi Y, Davuluri R, Xiao YY, Wilson M, Owens K,
Zhang Y, Perkins A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.

The ecotropic virus integration site 1 (EVI1) transcription factor is associated 
with human myeloid malignancy of poor prognosis and is overexpressed in 8-10% of 
adult AML and strikingly up to 27% of pediatric MLL-rearranged leukemias. For the
first time, we report comprehensive genomewide EVI1 binding and whole
transcriptome gene deregulation in leukemic cells using a combination of ChIP-Seq
and RNA-Seq expression profiling. We found disruption of terminal myeloid
differentiation and cell cycle regulation to be prominent in EVI-induced
leukemogenesis. Specifically, we identified EVI1 directly binds to and
downregulates the master myeloid differentiation gene Cebpe and several of its
downstream gene targets critical for terminal myeloid differentiation. We also
found EVI1 binds to and downregulates Serpinb2 as well as numerous genes involved
in the Jak-Stat signaling pathway. Finally, we identified decreased expression of
several ATP-dependent P2X purinoreceptors genes involved in apoptosis mechanisms.
These findings provide a foundation for future study of potential therapeutic
gene targets for EVI1-induced leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3694976
PMID: 23826213  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):749-60. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.202. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Induced differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia cells by activation of retinoid
X and liver X receptors.

Sanchez PV(1), Glantz ST(1), Scotland S(1), Kasner MT(2), Carroll M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, USA. (2)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Use of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) as a differentiation agent has been limited
to acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) as non-APL leukemias are insensitive to
ATRA. We recently demonstrated that the rexinoid, bexarotene, induces
differentiation and therapeutic responses in patients with refractory AML.
Rexinoids bind and activate retinoid X receptors (RXRs); however, rexinoids alone
are incapable of activating retinoic acid receptor (RAR)/RXR complexes,
suggesting that myeloid differentiation can occur independent of RAR. In this
study, we demonstrate that rexinoid differentiation of AML cells is RAR
independent and requires the expression of PU.1. Because of the promiscuousness
of RXR with other nuclear receptors, myeloid differentiation by bexarotene with
other nuclear receptor ligands was explored. Bexarotene cooperated with ATRA to
enhance differentiation in some AML cell lines; however, the combination of
bexarotene with the PPAR<U+03B3> agonist rosiglitazone did not. In contrast, bexarotene 
combined with liver X receptor (LXR) agonists, T0901317 or GW3965, induced potent
differentiation and cytotoxicity in AML cell lines and primary human AML cells,
but not in normal progenitor cells. These results suggest that RXR/LXR-regulated 
gene expression in normal cells is deregulated in AML cells and identifies a
potential role for these agonists in differentiation therapy of non-APLs.

PMID: 23823656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;58(9):600-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2013.62. Epub 2013 May 30.

Identification of functional nucleotide and haplotype variants in the promoter of
the CEBPE gene.

Ryoo H(1), Kong M, Kim Y, Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Systems Biomedical Science, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;58(9):571-2.

The current study examined the promoter activity of an association signal in a
5'-upstream region of the gene encoding CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon
(CEBPE) identified from a recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) for complex
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). This follow-up study first compared the
activity of reporter constructs with three haplotypes estimated with the
rs2239633 and its proximity nucleotide variants in strong linkage. The most
frequent haplotype was CTTTTGT (H1), and the second most frequent haplotype
consisted of entirely opposite alleles to H1 (TCGCACC, H2). Their luciferase
activity revealed the strongest expression with H2 and the weakest with H1.
Subsequent analysis revealed that different luciferase activity was found by the 
single-nucleotide substitution at rs2239632 and rs2239633 (P<0.05). Especially,
the difference in luciferase activity between two alleles of rs2239632
corresponded to the difference between H1 and H2. We concluded that rs2239632
could regulate the expression of the CEBPE gene. We suggest a hypothesis that its
risk allele (G) might increase the gene product and lead to leukemogenesis. As a 
result, a person with the allele or the corresponding haplotype might have
increased susceptibility to ALL. Further research is warranted to investigate
this hypothesis and the underlying mechanisms.

PMID: 23719191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Gene. 2013 Jul 25;524(2):203-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.028. Epub 2013 Apr
20.

Association of three polymorphisms in ARID5B, IKZF1 and CEBPE with the risk of
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a Chinese population.

Wang Y(1), Chen J, Li J, Deng J, Rui Y, Lu Q, Wang M, Tong N, Zhang Z, Fang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nanjing Children's Hospital Affiliated 
to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210008, China.

Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that focus on childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the most common malignancy in children younger than
15 years old, have found evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
IKZF1 (7p12.2), ARID5B (10q21.2) and CEBPE (14q11.2) are strongly related to the 
risk of childhood ALL. These polymorphisms may lead to abnormal expression and
dysfunction of the corresponding transcription factors and are likely to increase
the risk of ALL. To validate the relationship between these SNPs and the risk of 
childhood ALL in Chinese population, we conducted a case-control study of 570 ALL
cases and 673 controls. We determined that the SNP rs10821936 in ARID5B was
statistically significantly associated with the risk of childhood ALL (P<0.0001).
The results were also significant for the subgroup analysis of high-risk,
medium-risk and low-risk ALL as well as B-lineage ALL. Statistically significant 
differences were not found in the SNPs for IKZF1 and CEBPE. In conclusion, ARID5B
rs10821936 could serve as a potential biomarker for assessing the risk of
childhood ALL in Chinese children.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23608171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 May 15;105(10):733-42. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt042. Epub
2013 Mar 19.

Novel susceptibility variants at 10p12.31-12.2 for childhood acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia in ethnically diverse populations.

Xu H(1), Yang W, Perez-Andreu V, Devidas M, Fan Y, Cheng C, Pei D, Scheet P,
Burchard EG, Eng C, Huntsman S, Torgerson DG, Dean M, Winick NJ, Martin PL,
Camitta BM, Bowman WP, Willman CL, Carroll WL, Mullighan CG, Bhojwani D, Hunger
SP, Pui CH, Evans WE, Relling MV, Loh ML, Yang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105-3678, USA.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1512-3.

BACKGROUND: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer in
children and the incidence of ALL varies by ethnicity. Although accumulating
evidence indicates inherited predisposition to ALL, the genetic basis of ALL
susceptibility in diverse ancestry has not been comprehensively examined.
METHODS: We performed a multiethnic genome-wide association study in 1605
children with ALL and 6661 control subjects after adjusting for population
structure, with validation in three replication series of 845 case subjects and
4316 control subjects. Association was tested by two-sided logistic regression.
RESULTS: A novel ALL susceptibility locus at 10p12.31-12.2 (BMI1-PIP4K2A,
rs7088318, P = 1.1 × 10(-11)) was identified in the genome-wide association
study, with independent replication in European Americans, African Americans, and
Hispanic Americans (P = .001, .009, and .04, respectively). Association was also 
validated at four known ALL susceptibility loci: ARID5B, IKZF1, CEBPE, and
CDKN2A/2B. Associations at ARID5B, IKZF1, and BMI1-PIP4K2A variants were
consistent across ethnicity, with multiple independent signals at IKZF1 and
BMI1-PIP4K2A loci. The frequency of ARID5B and BMI1-PIP4K2A variants differed by 
ethnicity, in parallel with ethnic differences in ALL incidence. Suggestive
evidence for modifying effects of age on genetic predisposition to ALL was also
observed. ARID5B, IKZF1, CEBPE, and BMI1-PIP4K2A variants cumulatively conferred 
strong predisposition to ALL, with children carrying six to eight copies of risk 
alleles at a ninefold (95% confidence interval = 6.9 to 11.8) higher ALL risk
relative to those carrying zero to one risk allele at these four single
nucleotide polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate strong associations between inherited
genetic variation and ALL susceptibility in children and shed new light on ALL
molecular etiology in diverse ancestry.

PMCID: PMC3691938
PMID: 23512250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Br J Haematol. 2012 Dec;159(5):599-602. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12063. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Genetic polymorphisms in ARID5B, CEBPE, IKZF1 and CDKN2A in relation with risk of
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in adults: a Group for Research on Adult Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (GRAALL) study.

Peyrouze P, Guihard S, Grardel N, Berthon C, Pottier N, Pigneux A, Cahn JY, Béné 
MC, Lhéritier V, Delabesse E, Macintyre E, Thomas X, Dombret H, Ifrah N, Cheok M.

PMID: 23016962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Clin Invest. 2012 Sep;122(9):3316-29. doi: 10.1172/JCI62070. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

C/EBPe mediates nicotinamide-enhanced clearance of Staphylococcus aureus in mice.

Kyme P(1), Thoennissen NH, Tseng CW, Thoennissen GB, Wolf AJ, Shimada K, Krug UO,
Lee K, Müller-Tidow C, Berdel WE, Hardy WD, Gombart AF, Koeffler HP, Liu GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA 90048, USA. pierre.kyme@gmail.com

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Nov;122(11):4301.

The myeloid-specific transcription factor, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein e
(C/EBPe) is a critical mediator of myelopoiesis. Mutation of this gene is
responsible for neutrophil-specific granule deficiency in humans, a condition
that confers susceptibility to Staphylococcus aureus infection. We found that
C/EBPe-deficient mice are severely affected by infection with S. aureus, and
C/EBPe deficiency in neutrophils contributes to the infectious phenotype.
Conversely, exposure to the epigenetic modulator nicotinamide (vitamin B3)
increased expression of C/EBPe in WT myeloid cells. Further, nicotinamide
increased the activity of C/EBPe and select downstream antimicrobial targets,
particularly in neutrophils. In a systemic murine infection model as well as in
murine and human peripheral blood, nicotinamide enhanced killing of S. aureus by 
up to 1,000 fold but had no effect when administered to either C/EBPe-deficient
mice or mice depleted of neutrophils. Nicotinamide was efficacious in both
prophylactic and therapeutic settings. Our findings suggest that C/EBPe is an
important target to boost killing of bacteria by the innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC3428083
PMID: 22922257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;29(2):137-40. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.02.004.

[Clinical and molecular cytogenetic studies of a case of B-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with t(14;14)(q11;q32)].

[Article in Chinese]

Han YS(1), Xue YQ, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, People's
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To report on a rare case of B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(B-ALL) with t(14;14) (q11;q32) and clarify its clinical and molecular
cytogenetic features.
METHODS: Clinical data of a B-ALL patient with t(14;14) (q11;q32) were analyzed. 
After 24 hour of unstimulated culturing, chromosome specimens of bone marrow
cells were prepared with regular method, and R-banding was used for karyotype
analysis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed on
fixed bone marrow cells using IGH dual-color break-apart probe, CEBPE dual-color 
break-apart probe, whole chromosome paint (WCP) probe for chromosome 4, and
Chromoprobe Multiprobe-ALL System probe.
RESULTS: The 39-year-old female was diagnosed with B-ALL based on morphologic and
immunophenotypic analyses. Conventional cytogenetic analysis showed a karyotype
of 47, XX, +4, t(14;14) (q11;q32) [20], which was confirmed by FISH analysis.
FISH using IGH-dual-color break-apart probe confirmed involvement of IGH gene in 
t(14;14) (q11;q32), and FISH using CEBPE dual-color break-apart probe indicated
that CEBPE is the partner gene involved in t(14;14) (q11; q32). The patient
achieved complete remission (CR) after a round of combined chemotherapy. At the
time of follow-up, she had remained CR for more than 6 months.
CONCLUSION: t(14;14) (q11;q32) simultaneously involving IGH and CEBPE genes in
B-ALL is a rare but recurrent genetic abnormality that may identify a new
subgroup of B-ALL. In B-ALL patients, t(14; 14) (q11; q32) involving IGH/CEBPE
translocation may indicate a better prognosis.

PMID: 22487819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Exp Hematol. 2012 Aug;40(8):675-81. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.03.003. Epub 2012 
Apr 5.

Maturity-dependent fractionation of neutrophil progenitors: a new method to
examine in vivo expression profiles of differentiation-regulating genes.

Hu H(1), Shikama Y, Shichishima T, Ikeda K, Akutsu K, Ono T, Kimura H, Ogawa K,
Noji H, Takeishi Y, Kimura J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
Fukushima, Japan.

To investigate differentiation-dependent gene expression during granulopoiesis,
we established a new method to isolate six sequential differentiation stages of
neutrophil progenitors from bone marrow. Neutrophil progenitors were divided into
three populations by density centrifugation, followed by depletion of other
lineages, and further separated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting based on
the expressions of CD34, CD11b, and CD16: CD34(+) fraction from a low-density
population (F1), CD11b(-)/CD16(-) (F2), CD11b(+)/CD16(-) (F3), and
CD11b(+)/CD16(low) (F4) fractions with intermediate density, and
CD11b(+)/CD16(int) (F5) and CD11b(+)/CD16(high) (F6) fractions from a
high-density population. To examine whether this fractionation was applicable to 
the study of in vivo gene expression profiles during granulopoiesis, we analyzed 
messenger RNA levels of AML-1 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (EBP)-e and two 
target genes of C/EBP-e, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
receptor common ß subunit and lactoferrin, in the six fractions and peripheral
blood-derived neutrophils (F7). Expression of AML-1 and C/EBP-e peaked at F1 and 
F4, respectively, followed by a gradual decrease. Although granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor receptor common ß subunit messenger RNA levels remained
low from F1 through F6 and elevated at F7, lactoferrin messenger RNA showed a
drastic increase at F3 and dropped at F5. The difference in the expression
profiles of the two C/EBP-e target genes suggests the involvement of regulators
other than C/EBP-e in the induction of the two genes. The new fractionation
method is able to provide new information on maturation-dependent gene expression
during granulopoiesis.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22484554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013 Jan;60(1):31-4. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24131. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Genetic variants modify susceptibility to leukemia in infants: a Children's
Oncology Group report.

Ross JA(1), Linabery AM, Blommer CN, Langer EK, Spector LG, Hilden JM, Heerema
NA, Radloff GA, Tower RL, Davies SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
rossx014@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: The mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene is commonly rearranged in
infant leukemia (IL). Genetic determinants of susceptibility to IL are unknown.
Recent genome-wide association studies for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) have identified susceptibility loci at IKZF1, ARID5B, and CEBPE.
PROCEDURE: We genotyped these loci in 171 infants with leukemia and 384 controls 
and evaluated associations overall, by subtype [ALL, acute myeloid leukemia
(AML)], and by presence (+) or absence (-) of MLL rearrangements.
RESULTS: Homozygosity for a variant IKZF1 allele (rs11978267) increased risk of
infant AML [Odds ratio (OR)<U+2009>= 3.9, 95% confidence interval (CI)<U+2009>= 1.8-8.4]; the
increased risk was similar for AML/MLL+ and MLL- cases. In contrast, risk of
ALL/MLL- was increased in infants homozygous for the IKZF1 variant (OR = 5.1, 95%
CI = 1.8-14.5) but the variant did not modify risk of ALL/MLL+. For ARID5B
(rs10821936), homozygosity for the variant allele increased risk for the ALL/MLL-
subgroup only (OR = 7.2, 95% CI = 2.5-20.6). There was little evidence of an
association with the CEBP variant (rs2239633).
CONCLUSION: IKZF1 is expressed in early hematopoiesis, including precursor
myeloid cells. Our data provide the first evidence that IKZF1 modifies
susceptibility to infant AML, irrespective of MLL rearrangements, and could
provide important new etiologic insights into this rare and heterogeneous
hematopoietic malignancy.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3381932
PMID: 22422485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Blood. 2012 Mar 1;119(9):2177-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-395350.

CEBPE activation in PML-RARA cells by arsenic.

Hu Z, Saunthararajah Y.

Comment on
    Blood. 2011 Jun 2;117(22):5795-802.

PMID: 22383794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Genet. 2011 Oct;204(10):563-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.10.005.

Double CEBPE-IGH rearrangement due to chromosome duplication and cryptic
insertion in an adult with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Pierini V(1), Nofrini V, La Starza R, Barba G, Vitale A, Di Raimondo F, Matteucci
C, Crescenzi B, Elia L, Gorello P, Storlazzi CT, Mecucci C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy.

In an adult case of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) with a complex
karyotype, both chromosomes 14 were involved in unbalanced rearrangements,
specifically, der(14)t(13;14)(q21;q21) and dup(14)(q11q32). Fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) detected two CEBPE-IGH rearrangements at the dup(14). One
was found at the duplication breakpoint and the other derived from insertion of
CEBPE into an apparently normal IGH locus. Hypotheses to account for these
unusual chromosomal rearrangements are discussed. This case provides the first
evidence that chromosome duplication and cryptic insertion produce the CEBPE-IGH 
fusion and that more than one CEBPE-IGH recombination can occur in a leukemic
cell. Our findings confirm that deregulated CEBPE plays a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of CEBPE-IGH positive B-ALL.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22137487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Leuk Res. 2011 Nov;35(11):1534-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.07.034. Epub 2011
Sep 1.

Role of 657del5 NBN mutation and 7p12.2 (IKZF1), 9p21 (CDKN2A), 10q21.2 (ARID5B) 
and 14q11.2 (CEBPE) variation and risk of childhood ALL in the Polish population.

Pastorczak A(1), Górniak P, Sherborne A, Hosking F, Trelinska J, Lejman M,
Szczepanski T, Borowiec M, Fendler W, Kowalczyk J, Houlston RS, Mlynarski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology, Oncology and Diabetology, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. ciel@tlen.pl

Recent studies have shown that SNPs mapping to 7p12.2 (IKZF1), 9p21 (CDKN2A),
10q21.2 (ARID5B), and 14q11.2 (CEBPE) and carrier status for recessively
inherited Nijmegen Breakage syndrome (NBS) influence childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) risk. To examine these relationship, we analysed 398
ALL cases and 731 controls from Poland. Statistically significant association
between genotype at 7p12.2 (IKZF1), 10q21.2 (ARID5B) and the NBS associated
locus, 8q21.3 (NBN) and ALL risk was found; odds ratios (ORs), 1.34 (P=0.002),
1.33 (P=0.003), and 1325.21 (P=0.0028), respectively. These data provide further 
insights into the biological basis of ALL highlighting the existence of both
common and rare disease susceptibility variants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21889209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Leukemia. 2012 Feb;26(2):244-54. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.207. Epub 2011 Aug 12.

CpG methylation patterns and decitabine treatment response in acute myeloid
leukemia cells and normal hematopoietic precursors.

Negrotto S(1), Ng KP, Jankowska AM, Bodo J, Gopalan B, Guinta K, Mulloy JC, Hsi
E, Maciejewski J, Saunthararajah Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. saunthy@ccf.org

The DNA hypomethylating drug decitabine maintains normal hematopoietic stem cell 
(HSC) self-renewal but induces terminal differentiation in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cells. The basis for these contrasting cell fates, and for selective CpG
hypomethylation by decitabine, is poorly understood. Promoter CpGs, with
methylation measured by microarray, were classified by the direction of
methylation change with normal myeloid maturation. In AML cells, the methylation 
pattern at maturation-responsive CpGs suggested at least partial maturation.
Consistent with partial maturation, in gene expression analyses, AML cells
expressed high levels of the key lineage-specifying factor CEBPA, but relatively 
low levels of the key late-differentiation driver CEBPE. In methylation analysis 
by mass spectrometry, CEBPE promoter CpGs that are usually hypomethylated during 
granulocyte maturation were significantly hypermethylated in AML cells.
Decitabine-induced hypomethylation was greatest at these and other promoter CpGs 
that are usually hypomethylated with myeloid maturation, accompanied by cellular 
differentiation of AML cells. In contrast, decitabine-treated normal HSCs
retained immature morphology, and methylation significantly decreased at CpGs
that are less methylated in immature cells. High expression of lineage-specifying
factor and aberrant epigenetic repression of some key late-differentiation driver
genes distinguishes AML cells from normal HSCs, and could explain the contrasting
differentiation and methylation responses to decitabine.

PMCID: PMC3217177
PMID: 21836612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 3;5(11):e15419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015419.

In vivo deficiency of both C/EBPß and C/EBPe results in highly defective myeloid 
differentiation and lack of cytokine response.

Akagi T(1), Thoennissen NH, George A, Crooks G, Song JH, Okamoto R, Nowak D,
Gombart AF, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University
of California Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America. tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are transcription factors involved
in hematopoietic cell development and induction of several inflammatory
mediators. Here, we generated C/EBPß and C/EBPe double-knockout (bbee) mice and
compared their phenotypes to those of single deficient (bbEE and BBee) and
wild-type (BBEE) mice. The bbee mice were highly susceptible to fatal infections 
and died within 2-3 months. Morphologically, their neutrophils were blocked at
the myelocytes/metamyelocytes stage, and clonogenic assays of bone marrow cells
indicated a significant decrease in the number of myeloid colonies of the bbee
mice. In addition, the proportion of hematopoietic progenitor cells
[Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-Kit(+)] in the bone marrow of the bbee mice was significantly
increased, reflecting the defective differentiation of the myeloid compartment.
Furthermore, microarray expression analysis of LPS- and IFN<U+03B3>-activated bone
marrow-derived macrophages from bbee compared to single knockout mice revealed
decreased expression of essential immune response-related genes and networks,
including some direct C/EBP-targets such as Marco and Clec4e. Overall, the
phenotype of the bbee mice is distinct from either the bbEE or BBee mice,
demonstrating that both transcription factors are crucial for the maturation of
neutrophils and macrophages, as well as the innate immune system, and can at
least in part compensate for each other in the single knockout mice.

PMCID: PMC2972224
PMID: 21072215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 May;20(5):769-84. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0333. Epub 2010 Nov 
9.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-null allele mice have hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells with abnormal characteristics and functions.

Singh KP(1), Garrett RW, Casado FL, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix family 
of DNA-binding proteins that play a role in the toxicity and carcinogenicity of
certain chemicals. The most potent ligand of the AhR known is
2,3,7,8-tetracholorodibenzo-p-dioxin. We previously reported
tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced alterations in numbers and function of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). To better understand a possible role of the AhR 
in hematopoiesis, studies were undertaken in young adult AhR null-allele (KO)
mice. These mice have enlarged spleens with increased number of cells from
different lineages. Altered expression of several chemokine, cytokine, and their 
receptor genes were observed in spleen. The KO mice have altered numbers of
circulating red and white blood cells, as well as a circadian rhythm-associated
2-fold increase in the number of HSC-enriched Lin(-)Sca-1(+)c-Kit(+) (LSK) cells 
in bone marrow. Primary cultures of KO HSCs and in vivo bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation studies demonstrated an approximate 2-fold increased proliferative 
ability of these cells. More LSK cells from KO mice were in G(1) and S phases of 
cell cycle. Competitive repopulation studies also indicated significant
functional changes in KO HSCs. LSK cells showed increased expression of Cebpe and
decreased expression of several hematopoiesis-associated genes. These data
indicate that AhR has a physiological and functional role in hematopoiesis. The
AhR appears to play a role in maintaining the normal quiescence of HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3128774
PMID: 20874460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Dec;37(8):3795-800. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0034-1. Epub 2010 
Jul 27.

C/EBPe participates in all-trans retinoic acid induction of PI3K<U+03B3> in U937 cells
via an intronic matrix attachment region sequence.

Cai R(1), Cai X, Chen B, Xu W, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute of Medical Sciences,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 280# Chongqing Road(S),
Shanghai, 200025, People's Republic of China.

ATRA (all-trans retinoic acid) regulates gene expression by binding as a ligand
to its specific receptors like C/EBPe which is directly induced. In the U937 cell
line, PI3K<U+03B3> is selectively induced over other PI3Ks by ATRA, although the
mechanism is still unclear. Here, we show that C/EBPe and PI3K<U+03B3> are induced in
U937 cells by ATRA both in levels of mRNA and protein. Reporter gene assay
revealed that C/EBPe is able to interact with a previously identified 2 kb MAR
(matrix attachment region) sequence in the last intron of PI3K<U+03B3> gene, and
increases its linked heterogeneous reporter gene expression. ChIP assay showed
that induction of endogenous PI3K<U+03B3> is at least partially caused by enhanced,
direct C/EBPe binding to a 15 bp sequence at nucleotides 1428-1442 within this
MAR sequence, and EMSA analysis confirmed this binding in vitro. The results
above collectively show that C/EBPe participates in ATRA induction of PI3K<U+03B3>.

PMID: 20661648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Leuk Res. 2010 Oct;34(10):1269-70. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.05.013. Epub 2010 
Jun 9.

Genetic variation and the risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Mullighan CG.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2010 Oct;34(10):1271-4.

PMID: 20538337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Leukemia. 2010 Apr;24(4):729-39. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.27. Epub 2010 Mar 4.

Targeting PKC delta-mediated topoisomerase II beta overexpression subverts the
differentiation block in a retinoic acid-resistant APL cell line.

McNamara S(1), Nichol JN, Wang H, Miller WH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Oncology, Segal Cancer
Comprehensive Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B
Davis Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Retinoic acid (RA) relieves the maturation block in t(15:17) acute promyelocytic 
leukemia (APL), leading to granulocytic differentiation. However, RA treatment
alone invariably results in RA resistance, both in vivo and in vitro.
RA-resistant cell lines have been shown to serve as useful models for elucidation
of mechanisms of resistance. Previously, we identified topoisomerase II beta
(TOP2B) as a novel mediator of RA-resistance in APL cell lines. In this study, we
show that both TOP2B protein stability and activity are regulated by a member of 
the protein kinase C (PRKC) family, PRKC delta (PRKCD). Co-treatment with a
pharmacologic inhibitor of PRKCD and RA resulted in the induction of an RA
responsive reporter construct, as well as the endogenous RA target genes, CEBPE, 
CYP26A1 and RIG-I. Furthermore, the co-treatment overcame the differentiation
block in RA-resistant cells, as assessed by morphological analysis, restoration
of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies, induction of CD11c cell surface
expression and an increase in nitro-blue-tetrazolium reduction. Cumulatively, our
data suggest a model whereby inhibition of PRKCD decreases TOP2B protein levels, 
leading to a loss of TOP2B-mediated repressive effects on RA-induced
transcription and granulocytic differentiation.

PMID: 20200558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Leuk Res. 2010 Oct;34(10):1271-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.02.001. Epub 2010
Feb 26.

Genome-wide association study of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Korea.

Han S(1), Lee KM, Park SK, Lee JE, Ahn HS, Shin HY, Kang HJ, Koo HH, Seo JJ, Choi
JE, Ahn YO, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2010 Oct;34(10):1269-70.

We conducted a genome-wide association study of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) in a case-control study conducted in Korea. Incident childhood ALL
cases (n=50) and non-cancer controls (n=50) frequency-matched to cases by age and
sex, recruited from three teaching hospitals in Seoul between 2003 and 2008, were
genotyped using Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 platform. ALL risks were estimated as
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) adjusted for age and birth
weight. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used for adjusting multiple tests. Of 
these 1 million SNPs, six SNPs in 4 genes (HAO1 rs6140264, EPB41L2 rs9388856,
rs9388857, rs1360756, C2orf3 12105972, MAN2A1 rs3776932) were strongly associated
with childhood ALL risk (P(dominant)<or=0.0001 and P(trend)<0.006). These SNPs
remained significant after FDR adjustment (FDR value <0.2). Our genome-wide
association study in Korea children identified a few genetic variations as
potential susceptibility markers for ALL, warranting further replication studies 
among various ethnic groups.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20189245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Feb;220(2):127-38.

Fractionation of mature eosinophils in GATA-reporter transgenic mice.

Kim K(1), Suzuki N, Ohneda K, Minegishi N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Eosinophils contribute to the pathophysiology of allergic and infectious
diseases, albeit their molecular functions remain unknown. Mature eosinophils are
identified by their unique morphology and staining characteristics. However, it
is difficult to fractionate living eosinophils by flow cytometry because these
granulocytes express multiple cell surface markers that are shared by other cells
of hematopoietic or non-hematopoietic origin. In this study, we describe a flow
cytometry-based method to enumerate and fractionate eosinophils by developmental 
stages. To fractionate these cell types, we used transgenic mouse lines that
express fluorescent proteins under control of the Gata1 gene hematopoietic
regulatory region (Gata1-HRD), which is exclusively active in Gata1-expressing
hematopoietic cells, including eosinophils. As expected, mature eosinophils were 
highly enriched in the fluorescent reporter-expressing subfraction of bone marrow
myeloid cells that were negatively selected by using multiple antibodies against 
B220, CD4, CD8, Ter119, c-Kit and CD71. Cytochemical analyses of flow-sorted
cells identified the cells in this fraction as eosinophils harboring eosinophilic
granules. Additionally, expression of eosinophil-specific genes, for instance
eosinophil enzymes and the IL-5 receptor alpha gene, were specifically detected
in this fraction. The expression of these eosinophil-specific genes increased as 
the cells differentiated. This method for enrichment of bone marrow eosinophils
is applicable to fractionation of eosinophils and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
from transgenic mice with atopic asthma. Thus, both pathological and
developmental stages of eosinophils are efficiently fractionated by this flow
cytometry-based method using Gata1-HRD transgenic reporter mice. This study,
therefore, proposes a useful means to study the experimental allergic and
inflammatory systems.

PMID: 20139664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Blood. 2010 Mar 4;115(9):1765-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-241513. Epub 2009 Dec
30.

Verification of the susceptibility loci on 7p12.2, 10q21.2, and 14q11.2 in
precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood.

Prasad RB(1), Hosking FJ, Vijayakrishnan J, Papaemmanuil E, Koehler R, Greaves M,
Sheridan E, Gast A, Kinsey SE, Lightfoot T, Roman E, Taylor M, Pritchard-Jones K,
Stanulla M, Schrappe M, Bartram CR, Houlston RS, Kumar R, Hemminki K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Recent genome-wide association data have implicated genetic variation at 7p12.2
(IKZF1), 10q21.2 (ARIDB5), and 14q11.2 (CEBPE) in the etiology of B-cell
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To verify and further examine the
relationship between these variants and ALL risk, we genotyped 1384 cases of
precursor B-cell childhood ALL and 1877 controls from Germany and the United
Kingdom. The combined data provided statistically significant support for an
association between genotype at each of these loci and ALL risk; odds ratios
(OR), 1.69 (P = 7.51 x10(-22)), 1.80 (P = 5.90 x 10(-28)), and 1.27 (P = 4.90 x
10(-6)), respectively. Furthermore, the risk of ALL increases with an increasing 
numbers of variant alleles for the 3 loci (OR(per-allele) = 1.53, 95% confidence 
interval, 1.44-1.62; P(trend) = 3.49 x 10(-42)), consistent with a polygenic
model of disease susceptibility. These data provide unambiguous evidence for the 
role of these variants in defining ALL risk underscoring approximately 64% of
cases.

PMID: 20042726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Exp Hematol. 2010 Feb;38(2):90-103. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.11.004. Epub 2009 
Dec 5.

C/EBPepsilon directs granulocytic-vs-monocytic lineage determination and confers 
chemotactic function via Hlx.

Halene S(1), Gaines P, Sun H, Zibello T, Lin S, Khanna-Gupta A, Williams SC,
Perkins A, Krause D, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine and Yale Cancer Center,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8073, USA.
Stephanie.halene@yale.edu

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the CCAAT enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon)
gene have been identified in the cells of patients with neutrophil specific
granule deficiency, a rare congenital disorder marked by recurrent bacterial
infections. Their neutrophils, in addition to lacking specific granules required 
for normal respiratory burst activity, also lack normal phagocytosis and
chemotaxis. Although the specific granule deficiency phenotype has been
replicated in C/EBPepsilon(-/-) (knockout [KO]) mice, the mechanisms by which
C/EBPepsilon mutations act to decrease neutrophil function are not entirely
clear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to determine the role of C/EBPepsilon in
neutrophil differentiation and migration, we generated immortalized progenitor
cell lines from C/EBPepsilon KO and wild-type mice and performed expression and
flow cytometric analysis and functional studies.
RESULTS: Expression of lineage-specific cell surface antigens on our in vitro
differentiated cell lines revealed persistent expression of monocytic markers on 
KO granulocytes. We verified this in primary murine peripheral blood and bone
marrow cells. In addition, KO bone marrow had an increase in immature myeloid
precursors at the common myeloid progenitor and granulocyte/monocyte progenitor
levels, suggesting a critical role for C/EBPepsilon not only in granulocyte
maturation beyond the promyelocyte stage, but also in the monocyte/granulocyte
lineage decision. We found that restoration of Hlx (H2.0-like homeo box 1)
expression, which was decreased in C/EBPepsilon KO cells, rescued chemotaxis, but
not the other defects of C/EBPepsilon KO neutrophils.
CONCLUSIONS: We show two new regulatory functions of C/EBPepsilon in
myelopoiesis: in the absence of C/EBPepsilon, there is not only incomplete
differentiation of granulocytes, but myelopoiesis is disrupted with the
appearance of an intermediate cell type with monocyte and granulocyte features,
and the neutrophils have abnormal chemotaxis. Restoration of expression of Hlx
provides partial recovery of function; it has no effect on neutrophil maturation,
but can completely ameliorate the chemotaxis defect in C/EBPepsilon KO cells.

Copyright 2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2827304
PMID: 19925846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Biol Int. 2009 Dec;33(12):1253-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2009.08.009. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

Gene networks involved in apoptosis induced by hyperthermia in human lymphoma
U937 cells.

Furusawa Y(1), Tabuchi Y, Takasaki I, Wada S, Ohtsuka K, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

To define the molecular mechanisms that mediate hyperthermia-induced apoptosis,
we performed microarray and computational gene expression analyses. U937 cells, a
human myelomonocytic lymphoma cell line, were treated with hyperthermia at 42
degrees C for 90 min and cultured at 37 degrees C. Apoptotic cells (
approximately 15%) were seen 6 h after hyperthermic treatment, and elevated
expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) including Hsp27, Hsp40, and Hsp70 was
detected, following the activation of heat shock factor-1. Of the 54,675 probe
sets analyzed, 1334 were upregulated and 4214 were downregulated by >2.0-fold in 
the cells treated with hyperthermia. A non-hierarchical gene clustering
algorithm, K-means clustering, demonstrated 10 gene clusters. The gene network U1
or U2 that was obtained from up-regulated genes in cluster I or IX contained
HSPA1B, DNAJB1, HSPH1, and TXN or PML, LYN, and DUSP1, and were mainly associated
with cellular compromise, and cellular function and maintenance or death, and
cancer, respectively. In the decreased gene cluster II, the gene network D1
including CCNE1 and CEBPE was associated with the cell cycle and cellular growth 
and proliferation. These findings will provide a basis for understanding the
detailed molecular mechanisms of apoptosis induced by hyperthermia at 42 degrees 
C in cells.

PMID: 19732844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nat Genet. 2009 Sep;41(9):957-8. doi: 10.1038/ng0909-957.

Inherited susceptibility to pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Levine RL.

Although genome-wide analyses have identified somatic alterations contributing to
the pathogenesis of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), few studies
have identified germline variants conferring risk of this disease. Two reports
now provide the first genome-wide glimpse into the role of inherited alleles in
ALL pathogenesis.

PMID: 19710713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nat Genet. 2009 Sep;41(9):1006-10. doi: 10.1038/ng.430. Epub 2009 Aug 16.

Loci on 7p12.2, 10q21.2 and 14q11.2 are associated with risk of childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Papaemmanuil E(1), Hosking FJ, Vijayakrishnan J, Price A, Olver B, Sheridan E,
Kinsey SE, Lightfoot T, Roman E, Irving JA, Allan JM, Tomlinson IP, Taylor M,
Greaves M, Houlston RS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

To identify risk variants for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), we
conducted a genome-wide association study of two case-control series, analyzing
the genotypes with respect to 291,423 tagging SNPs in a total of 907 ALL cases
and 2,398 controls. We identified risk loci for ALL at 7p12.2 (IKZF1, rs4132601, 
odds ratio (OR) = 1.69, P = 1.20 x 10(-19)), 10q21.2 (ARID5B, rs7089424, OR =
1.65, P = 6.69 x 10(-19)) and 14q11.2 (CEBPE, rs2239633, OR = 1.34, P = 2.88 x
10(-7)). The 10q21.2 (ARID5B) risk association appears to be selective for the
subset of B-cell precursor ALL with hyperdiploidy. These data show that common
low-penetrance susceptibility alleles contribute to the risk of developing
childhood ALL and provide new insight into disease causation of this specific
hematological cancer. Notably, all three risk variants map to genes involved in
transcriptional regulation and differentiation of B-cell progenitors.

PMID: 19684604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;125(7):1710-20. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24472.

Inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin signaling potentiates the effects of 
all-trans retinoic acid to induce growth arrest and differentiation of human
acute myelogenous leukemia cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T, Yang J, Gery S, Koeffler HP, Yokoyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.

Our study explored the drug interaction of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and
RAD001 (everolimus), the inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1), in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) NB4 and HL60 cells. RAD001 (10 nM) 
significantly enhanced the ATRA-induced growth arrest and differentiation of
these cells, as measured by colony-forming assay and cell cycle analysis, and
expression of CD11b cell surface antigen and nitroblue tetrazolium reduction,
respectively. ATRA (0.1-1 microM) upregulated levels of RTP801, a negative
regulator of mTORC1, and inhibited mTORC1 signaling as assessed by measurement of
the levels of p-p70S6K and p-4E-BP1 in HL60 and NB4 cells. ATRA (0.1-1 microM) in
combination with RAD001 (10 nM) strikingly downregulated the levels of p-70S6K
and p-4E-BP1 without affecting the total amount of these proteins. Notably,
RAD001 (10 nM) significantly augmented ATRA-induced expression of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) and p27(kip1) and
downregulated levels of c-Myc in these cells. Furthermore, RAD001 (5 mg/kg)
enhanced the ability of ATRA (10 mg/kg) to inhibit the proliferation of HL60
cells growing as tumor xenografts in immune-deficient nude mice. Taken together, 
concomitant blockade of the RA and mTORC1 signaling may be a promising treatment 
strategy for individuals with AML.

PMID: 19507250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5456-65. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-01-200048. Epub 2009 
Apr 3.

The transcriptional program controlled by the stem cell leukemia gene Scl/Tal1
during early embryonic hematopoietic development.

Wilson NK(1), Miranda-Saavedra D, Kinston S, Bonadies N, Foster SD, Calero-Nieto 
F, Dawson MA, Donaldson IJ, Dumon S, Frampton J, Janky R, Sun XH, Teichmann SA,
Bannister AJ, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Scl/Tal1 controls the development
and subsequent differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). However,
because few Scl target genes have been validated to date, the underlying
mechanisms have remained largely unknown. In this study, we have used ChIP-Seq
technology (coupling chromatin immunoprecipitation with deep sequencing) to
generate a genome-wide catalog of Scl-binding events in a stem/progenitor cell
line, followed by validation using primary fetal liver cells and comprehensive
transgenic mouse assays. Transgenic analysis provided in vivo validation of
multiple new direct Scl target genes and allowed us to reconstruct an in vivo
validated network consisting of 17 factors and their respective regulatory
elements. By coupling ChIP-Seq in model cell lines with in vivo transgenic
validation and sophisticated bioinformatic analysis, we have identified a widely 
applicable strategy for the reconstruction of stem cell regulatory networks in
which biologic material is otherwise limiting. Moreover, in addition to revealing
multiple previously unrecognized links to known HSC regulators, as well as novel 
links to genes not previously implicated in HSC function, comprehensive
transgenic analysis of regulatory elements provided substantial new insights into
the transcriptional control of several important hematopoietic regulators,
including Cbfa2t3h/Eto2, Cebpe, Nfe2, Zfpm1/Fog1, Erg, Mafk, Gfi1b, and Myb.

PMID: 19346495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):563-71.

Inflammatory cytokine production by human neutrophils involves C/EBP
transcription factors.

Cloutier A(1), Guindi C, Larivée P, Dubois CM, Amrani A, McDonald PP.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, and Centre 
de recherche du CHUS, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

A growing number of neutrophil-derived cytokines have proven to be crucial to
various inflammatory and immune processes in vivo. Whereas C/EBP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) transcription factors are important for
neutrophil differentiation from myeloid precursors, we report herein that they
also regulate cytokine production in mature neutrophils. All known C/EBP proteins
but C/EBPgamma are expressed in neutrophils; most isoforms localize to the
nucleus, except for C/EBPalpha, which is cytoplasmic. Neutrophil stimulation does
not alter the overall levels, cellular distribution, or turnover of C/EBP
proteins; it also does not further induce the constitutive DNA-binding activity
detected in nuclear extracts, consisting of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPepsilon. However, 
nuclear C/EBPbeta is rapidly phosphorylated upon cell stimulation, suggesting
that it can activate cytokine promoters. Indeed, the transactivation of an IL-8
promoter-luciferase construct in a human neutrophil-like cell line was impaired
when its C/EBP or NF-kappaB sites were mutated. Overexpression of a C/EBP
repressor also impeded IL-8 promoter transactivation, as well as the generation
of IL-8, Mip-1alpha, and Mip-1beta in this cellular model, whereas TNF-alpha
generation was mostly unaffected. Finally, overexpression of a C/EBPbeta mutant
(T235A) as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation assays unveiled an important
role for this residue in cytokine induction. This is the first demonstration that
C/EBP factors are important regulators of cytokine expression in human
neutrophils.

PMID: 19109189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Dec;187(2):125-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.08.008.

Translocation (14;14)(q11;q32) with simultaneous involvement of the IGH and CEBPE
genes in B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Han Y(1), Xue Y, Zhang J, Wu Y, Pan J, Wang Y, Shen J, Dai H, Bai S.

Author information: 
(1)First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Jiangsu institute of
Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, 188 Shizi Street,
Suzhou, 215006, PR China.

Translocation (14;14)(q11;q32) is one of the recurrent chromosome aberrations in 
ataxia-teleangiectasia (AT) and T-cell malignancies. In patients with the
t(14;14), the TCL1 and TCRalpha/delta genes were found to be involved at the
molecular level. However, t(14;14)(q11;q32) is an exceedingly rare phenomenon in 
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). To date, it has been reported in 
only 5 B-ALL cases. Here, we report another B-ALL case with t(14;14)(q11;q32) in 
a 39-year-old female. The immunophenotype of the blasts showed positivity for
CD79a, CD10, CD19, and HLA-DR. Chromosome analysis of the bone marrow (BM) cells 
at presentation showed the karyotype 47,XX,+4,t(14;14)(q11;q32). Fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated trisomy 4 and the simultaneous involvement
of the IGH gene at 14q32 and the CEBPE gene at 14q11, which differs from the
genes involved in T-cell leukemias. After chemotherapy, the patient achieved
complete remission (CR). Later, she received allogeneic peripheral blood stem
cell transplantation. After CR, the karyotype of the BM cells was normal. She was
disease-free at a 6-month follow-up. We suggest that t(14;14)(q11;q32) involving 
the IGH and CEBPE genes in B-ALL is rare, but it is a recurrent abnormality that 
could identify a new subgroup of B-ALL.

PMID: 19027493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 2009 Jan 8;113(2):317-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-02-139741. Epub 2008 Oct
2.

Human C/EBP-epsilon activator and repressor isoforms differentially reprogram
myeloid lineage commitment and differentiation.

Bedi R(1), Du J, Sharma AK, Gomes I, Ackerman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Section of
Hematology-Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-epsilon (C/EBP-epsilon) is required for the
terminal differentiation of neutrophils and eosinophils. Human C/EBP-epsilon is
expressed as 4 isoforms (32, 30, 27, and 14 kDa) through differential RNA
splicing, and alternative promoters and translational start sites. The
C/EBP-epsilon(32/30) isoforms are transcriptional activators, whereas
C/EBP-epsilon(27) interacts with and represses GATA-1 transactivation of
eosinophil promoters. C/EBP-epsilon(14) contains only DNA-binding and
-dimerization domains and may function as a dominant-negative regulator. To
define functional activities for these C/EBP-epsilon isoforms in myelopoiesis,
human CD34(+) progenitors were transduced with internal ribosomal entry
site-enhanced green fluorescent protein retroviral vectors encoding the 32/30,
27, and 14-kDa isoforms, purified by fluorescence-activated cell sorter, and
analyzed in colony-forming assays and suspension cultures. Progenitors transduced
with C/EBP-epsilon(32/30) default exclusively to eosinophil differentiation and
gene expression, independent of interleukin-5, and regardless of inclusion of
cytokines to induce other lineages. In contrast, the putative repressor
C/EBP-epsilon(27) isoform strongly inhibits eosinophil differentiation and gene
expression, including GATA-1, promoting granulocyte (neutrophil)-macrophage
differen-tiation. The C/EBP-epsilon(14) repressor isoform strongly inhibits
eosinophil development and gene expression, promoting erythroid differentiation, 
an effect enhanced by erythropoietin. Thus, C/EBP-epsilon isoforms can reprogram 
myeloid lineage commitment and differentiation consistent with their predicted
activities based on activator and repressor domains and in vitro functional
activities.

PMCID: PMC2615649
PMID: 18832658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Leukemia. 2008 Dec;22(12):2159-68. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.243. Epub 2008 Sep 11.

Blockade of mTOR signaling potentiates the ability of histone deacetylase
inhibitor to induce growth arrest and differentiation of acute myelogenous
leukemia cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T, Yang J, Koeffler HP, Yokoyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.

This study found that MS-275, a novel synthetic benzamide histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACI), blocked Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling in 
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) HL60 and acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) NB4 
cells, as assessed by decreased levels of the phosphorylated (p)-Akt, p-p70
ribosomal S6 kinase (p70S6K) and p-S6K by western blot analysis. Interestingly,
further inactivation of mTOR by rapamycin analog RAD001 (everolimus)
significantly enhanced MS-275-mediated growth inhibition and apoptosis of these
cells in parallel with enhanced upregulation of p27(kip1) and downregulation of
c-Myc. In addition, RAD001 potentiated the ability of MS-275 to induce
differentiation of HL60 and NB4 cells, as measured by the expression of CD11b
cell surface antigens, as well as reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium.
Importantly, RAD001 potentiated the ability of MS-275 to induce the expression of
the myeloid differentiation-related transcription factor, CCAAT enhancer-binding 
protein-epsilon, in these cells in association with enhanced acetylation of
histone H3 on its promoter. Furthermore, RAD001 (5 mg/kg) significantly enhanced 
the effects of MS-275 (10 mg/kg) to inhibit proliferation of HL60 tumor
xenografts in nude mice without adverse effects. Taken together, concomitant
administration of an HDACI and an mTOR inhibitor may be a promising treatment
strategy for the individuals with a subset of human leukemia.

PMID: 18784743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 2008 Dec 4;27(53):6749-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.285. Epub 2008 Sep 8.

C/EBPalpha and C/EBPvarepsilon induce the monocytic differentiation of
myelomonocytic cells with the MLL-chimeric fusion gene.

Matsushita H(1), Nakajima H, Nakamura Y, Tsukamoto H, Tanaka Y, Jin G, Yabe M,
Asai S, Ono R, Nosaka T, Sugita K, Morimoto A, Hayashi Y, Hotta T, Ando K,
Miyachi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Kanagawa, Japan. hmatsu@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) have an important function in
granulocytic differentiation, and are also involved in the leukemogenesis of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Their involvement in myelomonocytic leukemia,
however, is still unclear. Therefore, the expression and function of C/EBPs in
myelomonocytic cells with MLL-fusion genes were investigated. Retinoic acid (RA) 
induced monocytic differentiation in the myelomonocytic cell lines with
MLL-fusion genes, THP-1, MOLM-14 and HF-6 cells, accompanied by monocytic
differentiation with the upregulation of C/EBPalpha and C/EBPepsilon. Monocytic
differentiation by RA treatment was confirmed in primary AML cells using a
clonogenic assay. When the activity of C/EBPalpha or C/EBPepsilon was introduced 
into HF-6 cells, their cellular growth was arrested through differentiation into 
monocytes with the concomitant marked downregulation of Myc. Cebpe mRNA was
upregulated by the induction of C/EBPalpha-ER, but not vice versa, thus
suggesting that C/EBPepsilon may have an important function in the
differentiation process. Introduction of Myc isoforms into HF-6 cells partially
antagonized the C/EBPs effects. These findings suggest that the ectopic
expression of C/EBPepsilon, as well as C/EBPalpha, can induce the monocytic
differentiation of myelomonocytic leukemic cells with MLL-fusion gene through the
downregulation of Myc, thus providing insight into the development of novel
therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 18776924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Oct 1;17(19):2921-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn191. Epub 2008 Jul 
11.

The lamin B receptor under transcriptional control of C/EBPepsilon is required
for morphological but not functional maturation of neutrophils.

Cohen TV(1), Klarmann KD, Sakchaisri K, Cooper JP, Kuhns D, Anver M, Johnson PF, 
Williams SC, Keller JR, Stewart CL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, CCR, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The lamin B receptor (LBR) is an integral nuclear envelope protein that interacts
with chromatin and has homology to sterol reductases. Mutations in LBR result in 
Pelger-Huët anomaly and HEM-Greenberg skeletal dysplasia, whereas in mice Lbr
mutations result in ichthyosis. To further understand the function of the LBR and
its role in disease, we derived a novel mouse model with a gene-trap insertion
into the Lbr locus (Lbr(GT/GT)). Phenotypically, the Lbr(GT/GT) mice are similar 
to ichthyosis mice. The Lbr(GT/GT) granulocytes lack a mature segmented nucleus
and have a block in late maturation. Despite these changes in nuclear morphology,
the innate granulocyte immune function in the killing of Staphylococcus aureus
bacteria appears to be intact. Granulocyte differentiation requires the
transcription factor C/EBPepsilon. We identified C/EBPepsilon binding sites
within the Lbr promoter and used EMSAs and luciferase assays to show that Lbr is 
transcriptionally regulated by C/EBPepsilon. Our findings indicate that the
Lbr(GT/GT) mice are a model for Pelger-Huët anomaly and that Lbr, under
transcriptional regulation of C/EBPepsilon, is necessary for morphological but
not necessarily functional granulocyte maturation.

PMCID: PMC2536505
PMID: 18621876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Leukemia. 2008 Feb;22(2):273-80. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Phosphorylation of PML is essential for activation of C/EBP epsilon and PU.1 to
accelerate granulocytic differentiation.

Tagata Y(1), Yoshida H, Nguyen LA, Kato H, Ichikawa H, Tashiro F, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) is a nuclear protein that functions as a regulator
of transcription, cell proliferation, apoptosis and myeloid cell differentiation.
PML is subjected to post-translational modifications such as sumoylation and
phosphorylation. However, the physiological significance of these modifications, 
especially for myeloid cell differentiation, remains unclear. In this report, we 
found that four serine residues in the PML C-terminal region are highly
phosphorylated in a myeloid cell line. Wild-type PML accelerated G-CSF-induced
granulocytic differentiation, but a phosphorylation-deficient PML mutant failed. 
PML interacted with C/EBP epsilon, a transcription factor essential for
granulopoiesis, activated C/EBP epsilon-mediated transcription in concert with
p300 and accelerated C/EBP epsilon-induced granulocytic differentiation.
Phosphorylation of PML was required for stimulating C/EBP epsilon-dependent
transcription and accelerating C/EBP epsilon-induced granulocytic
differentiation. We also found that PML phosphorylation was required for
stimulation of PU.1-dependent transcription and acceleration of PU.1-induced
granulocytic differentiation. These results suggest that phosphorylation plays
essential roles in the regulation of PML to accelerate granulocytic
differentiation through multiple pathways.

PMID: 17989716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 15;176(6):528-30.

Expression profiling and disseminated intravascular coagulation: finding genes
gone wild.

Idell S.

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 15;176(6):602-9.

PMID: 17915353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem J. 2007 Dec 1;408(2):277-86.

Identification of a responsible promoter region and a key transcription factor,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon, for up-regulation of PHGPx in HL60 cells 
stimulated with TNF alpha.

Hattori H(1), Imai H, Kirai N, Furuhama K, Sato O, Konishi K, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8641, Japan.

In the present study we investigated promoter regions of the PHGPx [phospholipid 
hydroperoxide GPx (glutathione peroxidase)] gene and transcription factors
involved in TNFalpha (tumour necrosis factor alpha)-induced up-regulation of
PHGPx in non-differentiated HL60 cells. Non-differentiated HL60 cells displayed
up-regulation of non-mitochondrial and mitochondrial PHGPx mRNA in response to
TNFalpha stimulation. The promoter activity was up-regulated by TNFalpha
stimulation in cells transfected with a luciferase reporter vector encoding the
region from -282 to -123 of the human PHGPx gene compared with the non-stimulated
control. The up-regulated promoter activity was effectively abrogated by a
mutation in the C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein)-binding sequence in this
region. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) assays demonstrated that
C/EBPepsilon bound to the -247 to -34 region in HL60 cells, but C/EBPalpha, beta,
gamma and delta did not. The binding of C/EBPepsilon to the promoter region was
increased in HL60 cells stimulated with TNFalpha compared with that of the
non-stimulated control. An increased binding of nuclear protein to the
C/EBP-binding sequence was observed by EMSA (electrophoretic mobility-shift
assay) in cells stimulated with TNFalpha, and it was inhibited by pre-treatment
with an anti-C/EBPepsilon antibody, but not with other antibodies. The
C/EBPepsilon mRNA was expressed in PMNs (polymorphonuclear cells),
non-differentiated HL60 cells and neutrophil-like differentiated HL60 cells
displaying TNFalpha-induced up-regulation of PHGPx mRNA, but not in
macrophage-like differentiated HL60 cells, HEK-293 cells (human embryonic
kidney-293 cells) and other cell lines exhibiting no up-regulation. The
up-regulation of PHGPx mRNA, however, was detected in HEK-293 cells
overexpressing C/EBPepsilon as a result of TNFalpha stimulation. These results
indicate that C/EBPepsilon is a critical transcription factor in TNFalpha-induced
up-regulation of PHGPx expression.

PMCID: PMC2267347
PMID: 17688422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;27(16):5819-34. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha inhibits PML IV enhancement of PU.1-induced
C/EBPepsilon expression in myeloid differentiation.

Yoshida H(1), Ichikawa H, Tagata Y, Katsumoto T, Ohnishi K, Akao Y, Naoe T,
Pandolfi PP, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-Chome, Chuo-Ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. hityoshi@gan2.res.ncc.go.jp

PML and PU.1 play important roles in myeloid differentiation. PML-deficient mice 
have an impaired capacity for terminal maturation of their myeloid precursor
cells. This finding has been explained, at least in part, by the lack of PML
action to modulate retinoic acid-differentiating activities. In this study, we
found that C/EBPepsilon expression is reduced in PML-deficient mice. We showed
that PU.1 directly activates the transcription of the C/EBPepsilon gene that is
essential for granulocytic differentiation. The type IV isoform of PML interacted
with PU.1, promoted its association with p300, and then enhanced PU.1-induced
transcription and granulocytic differentiation. In contrast to PML IV, the
leukemia-associated PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha fusion protein dissociated
the PU.1/PML IV/p300 complex and inhibited PU.1-induced transcription. These
results suggest a novel pathogenic mechanism of the PML-retinoic acid receptor
alpha fusion protein in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMCID: PMC1952121
PMID: 17562868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Hematol. 2007 May;85(4):304-11.

Expression of bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein requires C/EBP
epsilon.

Tanaka M(1), Gombart AF, Koeffler HP, Shiohara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) is a 55-kd cationic protein
found mainly in neutrophil primary granules. BPI shows cytotoxicity against
Gram-negative bacteria. In this study, we studied the role of a myeloid-specific 
transcription factor, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBP epsilon), in 
the regulation of BPI gene expression. A patient with neutrophil-specific granule
deficiency with a homozygous inactivating mutation in the CEBP epsilon gene
showed severely impaired expression of both BPI messenger RNA (mRNA) and BPI
protein. Both U937 and NB4 cells treated with 10-7 M all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) for 6 days displayed increased levels of BPI protein and accompanying
up-regulated C/EBP epsilon expression. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed binding of the C/EBP epsilon
protein to the C/EBP-binding site in the BPI gene promoter. U937 cells stably
transfected with a zinc-inducible C/EBP epsilon expression vector showed a
30-fold increase in BPI mRNA levels compared with cells transfected with control 
empty vector after culturing for 48 hours with 100 microM ZnSO4. BPI mRNA
expression was severely reduced in the bone marrow of C/EBP epsilon-deficient
mice compared with wild-type mice. Expression of BPI in human cord blood cells
was increased by incubation with 10-7 MATRA for 48 hours. These results
demonstrate the requirement for C/EBP epsilon in mediating BPI gene expression in
myeloid cells in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 17483073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jun;81(6):1535-47. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

ATF4 differentially regulates transcriptional activation of myeloid-specific
genes by C/EBPepsilon and C/EBPalpha.

Gombart AF(1), Grewal J, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Davis Bldg.
5019, 8700 Beverly Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. gombarta@csmc.edu

Dimerization between different basic region leucine zipper (ZIP) transcription
factors is regarded as an important mechanism for integrating various
extracellular signals to control specific patterns of gene expression in cells.
The activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein was identified as a
principal partner for the myeloid-specific transcriptional factor C/EBPepsilon.
Dimerization required the ZIP motif of each protein and redirected DNA binding of
C/EBPepsilon and ATF4 from their respective symmetric consensus sites to
asymmetric C/EBP and cAMP response element sites. The C/EBPepsilon:ATF4
heterodimer bound to the C/EBP sites in the promoters of the myeloid-specific
genes encoding neutrophil elastase (NE) and the G-CSF receptor (G-CSFR). Also,
the heterodimer bound a previously uncharacterized site in the promoter of the
mim-1 gene at nucleotide -174. Coexpression of ATF4 and C/EBPepsilon in the
presence of c-Myb synergistically activated the mim-1 and NE promoters compared
with C/EBPepsilon plus c-Myb alone. Synergistic activation was not observed for
the G-CSFR promoter and only occurred in the presence of c-myb with the NE or
mim-1 promoters. In contrast, ATF4:C/EBPalpha dimers bound to the C/EBP sites in 
the G-CSFR and NE promoters, but transcriptional activation was inhibited by
30-80% in the presence or absence of c-Myb. We propose that ATF4 may regulate
myeloid gene expression differentially by potentiating C/EBPepsilon but
inhibiting C/EBPalpha-mediated transcriptional activation.

PMID: 17347301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4209-19. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Modulation of DNA binding properties of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon by
heterodimer formation and interactions with NFkappaB pathway.

Chumakov AM(1), Silla A, Williamson EA, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of California 
at Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. chumakov@gmail.com

C/EBP epsilon is a transcription factor involved in myeloid cell differentiation.
Along with C/EBP-alpha, -beta, -gamma, -delta, and -zeta, C/EBP-epsilon belongs
to the family of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins that are implicated in control
of growth and differentiation of several cell lineages in inflammation and stress
response. We have previously shown that C/EBP-epsilon preferentially binds DNA as
a heterodimer with other C/EBP family members such as C/EBP-delta, CHOP
(C/EBP-zeta), and the b-zip family protein ATF4. In this study, we define the
consensus binding sites for C/EBP-epsilon dimers and C/EBP-epsilon-ATF4
heterodimers. We show that the activated NFkappaB pathway promotes interaction of
the C/EBP-epsilon subunit with its cognate DNA binding site via interaction with 
RelA. RelA-C/EBP interaction is enhanced by phosphorylation of threonine at amino
acid 75 and results in increased DNA binding compared with the wild-type
nonphosphorylated C/EBP both in vitro and in vivo. We suggest that interaction of
the activated NFkappaB pathway and C/EBP-epsilon may be important in selective
activation of a subset of C/EBP-epsilon-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC1885488
PMID: 17255362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4181-90. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Growth factor independence-1 (Gfi-1) plays a role in mediating specific granule
deficiency (SGD) in a patient lacking a gene-inactivating mutation in the
C/EBPepsilon gene.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Sun H, Zibello T, Lee HM, Dahl R, Boxer LA, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.

Neutrophil-specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare congenital disorder marked
by recurrent bacterial infections. Neutrophils from SGD patients lack secondary
and tertiary granules and their content proteins and lack normal neutrophil
functions. Gene-inactivating mutations in the C/EBPepsilon gene have been
identified in 2 SGD patients. Our studies on a third SGD patient revealed a
heterozygous mutation in the C/EBPepsilon gene. However, we demonstrate elevated 
levels of C/EBPepsilon and PU.1 proteins in the patient's peripheral blood
neutrophils. The expression of the transcription factor growth factor
independence-1 (Gfi-1), however, was found to be markedly reduced in our SGD
patient despite the absence of an obvious mutation in this gene. This may explain
the elevated levels of both C/EBPepsilon and PU.1, which are targets of Gfi-1
transcriptional repression. We have generated a growth factor-dependent EML cell 
line from the bone marrow of Gfi-1(+/-) and Gfi-1(+/+) mice as a model for
Gfi-1-deficient SGD, and demonstrate that lower levels of Gfi-1 expression in the
Gfi-1(+/-) EML cells is associated with reduced levels of secondary granule
protein (SGP) gene expression. Furthermore, we demonstrate a positive role for
Gfi-1 in SGP expression, in that Gfi-1 binds to and up-regulates the promoter of 
neutrophil collagenase (an SGP gene), in cooperation with wild-type but not with 
mutant C/EBPepsilon. We hypothesize that decreased Gfi-1 levels in our SGD
patient, together with the mutant C/EBPepsilon, block SGP expression, thereby
contributing to the underlying etiology of the disease in our patient.

PMCID: PMC1885490
PMID: 17244686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2006 Dec 20;1:e31.

Human resistin is a systemic immune-derived proinflammatory cytokine targeting
both leukocytes and adipocytes.

Nagaev I(1), Bokarewa M, Tarkowski A, Smith U.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Department of Internal Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden. ivan.nagaev@.gu.se

The characteristics of human resistin (RETN) are unclear and controversial
despite intensive adipose-focused research. Its transcriptional and functional
similarity with the murine myeloid-specific and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
epsilon (Cebpe)-dependent gene, resistin-like gamma (Retnlg), is unexplored. We
examined the human CEBPE-regulatory pathway by unbiased reference and custom gene
expression assays. Real-time RT-PCR analysis demonstrated lack of both the
transcriptional factor CEBPE and RETN expression in adipose and muscle cells. In 
contrast, primary myelocytic samples revealed a concerted CEBPE-RETN
transcription that was significantly elevated in inflammatory synoviocytes
relative to intact peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Mouse Cebpe and
Retnlg were predictably expressed in macrophages, whereas Retn was abundant in
adipocytes. Quite the opposite, a low and inconsistent RETN transcription was
seen in some human white adipose tissue (WAT) biopsies without any relationship
to body mass index, insulin sensitivity, or fat depot. However, in these cases,
RETN was co-detected with CEBPE and the leukocyte-specific marker, EMR1,
indicating the presence of inflammatory cells and their possible
resistin-mediated effect on adipocytes. Indeed, addition of human resistin to WAT
in culture induced, like in PBMC, the inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL8 and TNF.
Importantly, the expression of the adipose-specific markers CEBPA, FABP4 and
SLC2A4 was unchanged, while the expected inhibitory effect was seen with TNF.
Both cytokines increased the mRNA level of CCL2 and MMP3, which may further
promote inflammation in WAT. Thus, the myeloid-restricted nature of CEBPE
precludes the expression of RETN in human adipocytes which, however, are targeted
by this innate immune-derived proinflammatory cytokine.

PMCID: PMC1762367
PMID: 17183659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Blood. 2007 Apr 15;109(8):3451-61. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Five members of the CEBP transcription factor family are targeted by recurrent
IGH translocations in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL).

Akasaka T(1), Balasas T, Russell LJ, Sugimoto KJ, Majid A, Walewska R, Karran EL,
Brown DG, Cain K, Harder L, Gesk S, Martin-Subero JI, Atherton MG, Brüggemann M, 
Calasanz MJ, Davies T, Haas OA, Hagemeijer A, Kempski H, Lessard M, Lillington
DM, Moore S, Nguyen-Khac F, Radford-Weiss I, Schoch C, Struski S, Talley P,
Welham MJ, Worley H, Strefford JC, Harrison CJ, Siebert R, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology Unit, Medical Research Council, University of Leicester, Lancaster 
Road, Leicester, UK.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) transcription factors play pivotal roles in
proliferation and differentiation, including suppression of myeloid
leukemogenesis. Mutations of CEBPA are found in a subset of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and in some cases of familial AML. Here, using cytogenetics,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and molecular cloning, we show that 5 
CEBP gene family members are targeted by recurrent IGH chromosomal translocations
in BCP-ALL. Ten patients with t(8;14)(q11;q32) involved CEBPD on chromosome 8,
and 9 patients with t(14;19)(q32;q13) involved CEBPA, while a further patient
involved CEBPG, located 71 kb telomeric of CEBPA in chromosome band 19q13; 4
patients with inv(14)(q11q32)/t(14;14)(q11;q32) involved CEBPE and 3 patients
with t(14;20)(q32;q13) involved CEBPB. In 16 patients the translocation
breakpoints were cloned using long-distance inverse-polymerase chain reaction
(LDI-PCR). With the exception of CEBPD breakpoints, which were scattered within a
43-kb region centromeric of CEBPD, translocation breakpoints were clustered
immediately 5' or 3' of the involved CEBP gene. Except in 1 patient with
t(14;14)(q11;q32), the involved CEBP genes retained germ-line sequences.
Quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR showed overexpression of the
translocated CEBP gene. Our findings implicate the CEBP gene family as novel
oncogenes in BCP-ALL, and suggest opposing functions of CEBP dysregulation in
myeloid and lymphoid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17170124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Ai Zheng. 2006 Nov;25(11):1368-73.

Promotive effect of C/EBPepsilon overexpression on differentiation of human
myelomonocytic leukemia cell line U-937.

Cai R(1), Dai BB, Li K, Wang HJ, Xu WR, Wang JM, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200025, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: CCAAT-enhancer binding protein omega (C/EBPepsilon) is a 
kind of nuclear transcriptional factor expressed predominantly in myeloid cells, 
and may be a critical regulator of myeloid differentiation, which can activate
the transcription of a subset of myeloid-specific genes. This study was to detect
the cell-specific expression of C/EBPepsilon, and to investigate the effect of
C/EBPepsilon overexpression on c-Myc expression, cell cycle distribution, and
cell differentiation of human myelomonocytic leukemia cell line U-937.
METHODS: The expression of C/EBPepsilon in 5 hematopoietic cell lines (U-937,
NB4, HL-60, K-562 and Jurkat T cell lines) was tested by semi-quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). According to the RT-PCR
results, human myelomonocytic leukemia cell line U-937 was selected and
transfected with pcDNA3.1-C/EBPepsilon32 expression vector by electroperforation,
and screened by G418 to yield positive clones which were termed
U-937-C/EBPepsilon32. The expression of C/EBPepsilon and c-Myc in
U937-C/EBPepsilon32 cells was detected by RT-PCR and Western blot; cell cycle and
differentiation of U937-C/EBPepsilon32 cells was analyzed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: C/EBPepsilon overexpression obviously increased the expression of CD11b 
(a cell surface marker of granulocyte maturity). The positive rate of CD11b was
significantly higher in U-937-C/EBPepsilon32 cells than in U-937 and
U-937-pcDNA3.1 cells(92.56% vs. 77.46% and 74.81%), while c-Myc expression and
cell cycle had no changes.
CONCLUSION: C/EBPepsilon might be an essential transcriptional regulator for
U-937 cells differentiating into granulocytes.

PMID: 17094903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Scand J Immunol. 2006 Sep;64(3):271-9.

Inhibition of monocytic differentiation by phosphorylation-deficient Stat1 is
associated with impaired expression of Stat2, ICSBP/IRF8 and C/EBPepsilon.

Dimberg A(1), Kårehed K, Nilsson K, Oberg F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
S-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Monocytic differentiation is coordinated through the ordered activation of
multiple signalling pathways, controlling transcription of specific subsets of
genes that regulate the development of the mature phenotype. To identify key
transcription factors involved in this process, we used the human monoblastic
U-937 cell line as a model of monocytic differentiation. U-937 cells can be
differentiated by treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and
1,25alpha-dihydroxycholecalciferol (VitD3), resulting in G(0)/G(1)-arrested cells
expressing monocytic surface markers. We have previously shown that ATRA-induced 
differentiation and cell cycle arrest specifically requires Stat1 activation,
through phosphorylation of tyrosine 701 and serine 727. In this report, we used
U-937 cells expressing phosphorylation-deficient mutants of Stat1 (Stat1Y701F and
Stat1S727A) to determine myeloid-specific transcription factors that are
activated downstream of Stat1 during induced monocytic differentiation. We
demonstrate that ATRA-induced upregulation of Stat2, ICSBP/IRF8 and C/EBPepsilon,
key transcription factors linked to myelomonocytic differentiation, is
selectively impaired in cells expressing mutant Stat1. In contrast, ATRA-induced 
expression of PU.1, C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta and IRF-1 was unaffected. Taken
together, our data suggest that ATRA-induced regulation of Stat2, ICSBP and
C/EBPepsilon is dependent on active Stat1, and that a failure to correctly
regulate these transcription factors is associated with the inhibition of
monocytic differentiation.

PMID: 16918696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Blood. 2006 Oct 1;108(7):2416-9. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins alpha and epsilon cooperate with all-trans
retinoic acid in therapy but differ in their antileukemic activities.

Lee YJ(1), Jones LC, Timchenko NA, Perrotti D, Tenen DG, Kogan SC.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Laboratory Medicine, Box 0134, 513 Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) play critical roles in myelopoiesis.
Dysregulation of these proteins likely contributes to the pathogenesis of myeloid
disorders characterized by a block in granulopoiesis. In one such disease, acute 
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor
alpha (PML-RARalpha) fusion protein is expressed as a result of a t(15;17)
chromosomal translocation. Treatment of PML-RARalpha leukemic cells with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) causes them to differentiate into mature
neutrophils, an effect thought to be mediated by C/EBPs. In this study, we assess
the potential for cooperativity between increased C/EBP activity and ATRA
therapy. We demonstrate that although both C/EBPalpha and C/EBPepsilon can
significantly prolong survival in a mouse model of APL, they are not functionally
equivalent in this capacity. We also show that forced expression of C/EBPalpha or
C/EBPepsilon in combination with ATRA treatment has a synergistic effect on
survival of leukemic mice compared with either therapy alone.

PMCID: PMC1895555
PMID: 16788101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006 Oct 1;216(1):80-8.

Enhancement of caffeic acid phenethyl ester on all-trans retinoic acid-induced
differentiation in human leukemia HL-60 cells.

Kuo HC(1), Kuo WH, Lee YJ, Wang CJ, Tseng TH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University,
No. 110, Section 1, Chien-Kuo N. Road, Taichung, Taiwan.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces complete remission in a high proportion of
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL); however, the response is
sometimes very slow. Furthermore, relapse and resistance to treatment often occur
despite continued treatment with ATRA. Thereafter, combination treatment
strategies have been suggested to circumvent these problems. The present study
demonstrates that caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE), a major component of
honeybee propolis, enhanced ATRA-induced granulocytic differentiation in HL-60, a
human promyelocytic cell line. The differentiation was assessed by Wright-Giemsa 
stain, nitroblue tetrazolium reduction, and membrane differentiation marker
CD11b. In addition, CAPE enhanced ATRA-induced cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase 
by decreasing the association of cdk2-cyclin E complex. Finally, it was
demonstrated that CAPE promoted the ATRA-mediated nuclear transcription
activation of RARalpha assessed by EMSA assay and enhanced the expression of
target genes including RARalpha, C/EBPepsilon, and p21 protein resulting in the
differentiation development of leukemia. It is suggested that CAPE possesses the 
potential to enhance the efficiency of ATRA in the differentiation therapy of
APL.

PMID: 16766008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Immunol. 2006 Jul;7(7):732-9. Epub 2006 Jun 4.

C/EBPbeta is required for 'emergency' granulopoiesis.

Hirai H(1), Zhang P, Dayaram T, Hetherington CJ, Mizuno S, Imanishi J, Akashi K, 
Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Institutes of Medicine and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jul;7(7):701-2.

During 'emergency' situations such as infections, host defense requires rapid
mobilization of bone marrow granulocyte progenitors. 'Steady-state'
granulopoiesis is absolutely dependent on the C/EBPalpha transcription factor,
but the transcriptional mechanisms underlying emergency granulopoiesis remain
unclear. Here we show that large numbers of granulocytes were generated from
C/EBPalpha-deficient progenitors after cytokine stimulation in vivo. Cytokine
treatment or fungal infection induced upregulation of C/EBPbeta but not
C/EBPalpha or C/EBPepsilon transcripts in granulocyte progenitors, and
C/EBPbeta-deficient progenitors showed decreased emergency-induced granulopoiesis
in vitro and in vivo. C/EBPbeta inhibited proliferation less severely than did
C/EBPalpha. These data suggest a critical function for C/EBPbeta in emergency
granulopoiesis, which demands both differentiation and proliferation of
granulocyte precursors.

PMID: 16751774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Leukoc Biol. 2006 Jul;80(1):196-203. Epub 2006 May 9.

All-trans retinoic acid-induced expression of
bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) in human myeloid cells
correlates to binding of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPepsilon to the BPI promoter.

Lennartsson A(1), Vidovic K, Pass MB, Cowland JB, Gullberg U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Lund University, Sweden.

Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) neutralizes the
proinflammatory effects of lipopolysaccharide and is of potential clinical use in
the treatment of fulminant Gram-negative infections. BPI is a cationic protein
with antibacterial activity stored in azurophil (primary) granules of neutrophil 
granulocytes. However, the absence of BPI in patients with specific granule
deficiency indicates a transcriptional control of BPI, which is distinct from
that of other azurophil granule proteins. Accordingly, we demonstrate in vivo
that the BPI mRNA level peaks, together with mRNA for specific granule proteins, 
during the myelocytic and metamyelocytic stage of granulocytic maturation. The
human promyelocytic cell line NB4 expresses several azurophil granule proteins,
but expression of BPI is undetectable. We show that treatment of NB4 cells with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces BPI expression at mRNA and at protein
level. The induction is dependent on de novo protein synthesis, as judged by
sensitivity to cycloheximide. Previous investigations have indicated a potential 
role of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) transcription factors in the
regulation of BPI expression. Here, we show that induction of NB4 cells with ATRA
correlates to direct binding of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPepsilon to the proximal BPI
promoter, as determined by electrophoretic mobility shift analysis and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation. The dependency on C/EBPbeta and C/EBPepsilon provides an
explanation for delayed BPI mRNA expression, as compared with mRNA of other
azurophil granule proteins.

PMID: 16684888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 19;281(20):14494-502. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

N-terminal region of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon is critical for cell 
cycle arrest, apoptosis, and functional maturation during myeloid
differentiation.

Nakajima H(1), Watanabe N, Shibata F, Kitamura T, Ikeda Y, Handa M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. hnakajim@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) plays a critical role in
terminal myeloid differentiation. Differentiation is an integrated process of
cell cycle arrest, morphological change, functional maturation, and apoptosis.
However, the molecular networks underlying these events in C/EBPepsilon-induced
differentiation remain poorly understood. To reveal these mechanisms, we
performed a detailed molecular analysis of C/EBPepsilon-induced differentiation
using an inducible form of C/EBPepsilon. The activation of C/EBPepsilon induced
growth arrest, morphological differentiation, the expression of CD11b and
secondary granule proteins, and apoptosis in myeloid cell lines. Unlike
C/EBPalpha, C/EBPepsilon dramatically up-regulated p27 with a concomitant
down-regulation of cdk4/6 and cyclin D2/A/E. Moreover, the anti-apoptotic
proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-x were down-regulated, whereas pro-apoptotic protein Bax
remained unchanged. Using a variety of mutants, we revealed that these events
were all regulated by the N-terminal activation domain of C/EBPepsilon.
Interestingly, some of the differentiation processes such as the induction of
secondary granule protein genes were clearly inhibited by c-Myc; however,
inhibition of apoptosis by Bcl-x did not affect the entire differentiation
processes. These data indicate the N terminus of C/EBPepsilon to be solely
responsible for most aspects of myeloid differentiation, and these events were
differentially affected by c-Myc.

PMID: 16531405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):10745-51. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Increased CCAAT enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) expression and
premature apoptosis in myeloid cells expressing Gfi-1 N382S mutant associated
with severe congenital neutropenia.

Zhuang D(1), Qiu Y, Kogan SC, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43606,
USA.

Granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) stimulates the activation of
multiple signaling pathways, leading to alterations in the activities of
transcription factors. Gfi-1 is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor that is
required for granulopoiesis. How Gfi-1 acts in myeloid cells is poorly
understood. We show here that the expression of Gfi-1 was up-regulated during
G-CSF-induced granulocytic differentiation in myeloid 32D cells. Truncation of
the carboxyl terminus of the G-CSF receptor, as seen in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia evolving from severe congenital neutropenia, disrupted Gfi-1
up-regulation by G-CSF. Ectopic expression of a dominant negative Gfi-1 mutant,
N382S, which was associated with severe congenital neutropenia, resulted in
premature apoptosis and reduced proliferation of cells induced to differentiate
with G-CSF. The expression of neutrophil elastase (NE) and CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) was significantly increased in 32D cells
expressing N382S. In contrast, overexpression of wild type Gfi-1 abolished
G-CSF-induced up-regulation of C/EBPepsilon but had no apparent effect on NE
up-regulation by G-CSF. Notably, G-CSF-dependent proliferation and survival were 
inhibited upon overexpression of C/EBPepsilon but not NE. These data indicate
that Gfi-1 down-regulates C/EBPepsilon expression and suggest that increased
expression of C/EBPepsilon as a consequence of loss of Gfi-1 function may be
deleterious to the proliferation and survival of early myeloid cells.

PMID: 16500901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12246-54. Epub 2005 Jan 20.

Repression and coactivation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon by
sumoylation and protein inhibitor of activated STATx proteins.

Kim J(1), Sharma S, Li Y, Cobos E, Palvimo JJ, Williams SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is a neutrophil-specific
transcription factor whose activity is controlled by juxtaposed activating and
regulatory domains. We previously determined that the function of the major
regulatory domain (RD1) in C/EBPepsilon was dependent on the integrity of a
five-amino acid motif that was identical to the recognition site for members of
the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) family of ubiquitin-related proteins. We
show here that the SUMO attachment site (the regulatory domain motif) is
necessary and sufficient both for the intrinsic inhibitory function of RD1 and
for coactivation by PIASxalpha and PIASxbeta, two members of the protein
inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) family of SUMO E3 ligases. PIASxbeta was a
more potent coactivator than PIASxalpha of both full-length C/EBPepsilon and
fusion proteins containing the N-terminal portion of C/EBPepsilon, whereas
PIASxalpha was more active on fusion proteins containing a heterologous
activation domain. Two modes of coactivation were observed, one that was
dependent on the integrity of the RING finger (RF) domain and was shared by both 
PIASxalpha and PIASxbeta and a second mode that was independent of the RF and was
only observed with PIASxbeta. Sumoylation of C/EBPepsilon was enhanced by
coexpression of PIASxalpha, suggesting that this modification is associated with 
the enhanced activity of the target protein. These results suggest that a complex
interplay of accessory factors, including SUMO and PIAS proteins, modulates the
activity of C/EBPepsilon.

PMID: 15661739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Exp Hematol. 2005 Jan;33(1):42-52.

Human neutrophil collagenase expression is C/EBP-dependent during myeloid
development.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Zibello T, Idone V, Sun H, Lekstrom-Himes J, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Human neutrophil collagenase (HNC) is one of several secondary granule
proteins (SGP) expressed late in the myeloid maturation pathway. SGPs are encoded
by unlinked and functionally diverse genes that are hypothesized to be
coordinately regulated at the transcriptional level and demonstrate uniform
dysregulation in leukemic cells. In support of the hypothesis that tissue and
stage-specific expression of SGP genes is regulated by shared factor(s), we
sought to identify factors responsible for positive regulation of the SGP genes.
METHODS: Using 5' deletion analysis, we identified a minimal HNC promoter located
within the first 193 bp upstream of the transcription start site. Three CCAAT
enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) sites were identified within this region and
their functional importance was confirmed by mutational analysis, gel
retardation, and oligonucleotide pulldown assays. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we demonstrated that C/EBPalpha binds to the SGP gene
promoters lactoferrin and HNC in nonexpressing cells. Upon induction of
maturation, C/EBPalpha binds to these promoters and this binding correlates with 
the expression of both SGP genes.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that in the later stages of myeloid development, SGP
genes are coordinately upregulated, and that members of the C/EBP family of
transcription factors, in particular C/EBPalpha and C/EBPepsilon, play specific
and unique roles in upregulating their expression.

PMID: 15661397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Leukemia. 2004 Nov;18(11):1864-71.

Impaired myelopoiesis in mice devoid of interferon regulatory factor 1.

Testa U(1), Stellacci E, Pelosi E, Sestili P, Venditti M, Orsatti R, Fragale A,
Petrucci E, Pasquini L, Belardelli F, Gabriele L, Battistini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 is a transcription factor controlling the
expression of several genes, which are differentially induced depending on the
cell type and signal. IRF-1 modulates multiple functions, including regulation of
immune responses and host defence, cell growth, cytokine signalling and
hematopoietic development. Here, we investigated the role of IRF-1 in
granulocytic differentiation in mice with a null mutation in the IRF-1 gene. We
show that IRF-1(-/-) bone marrow cells exhibit an increased number of immature
granulocytic precursors, associated with a decreased number of mature
granulocytic elements as compared to normal mice, suggestive of a defective
maturation process. Clonogenetic analyses revealed a reduced number of CFU-G,
CFU-M and CFU-GM colonies in IRF-1(-/-) mice, while the number of BFU-E/CFU-E
colonies was unchanged. At the molecular level, the expression of
CAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-epsilon, -alpha and PU.1 was substantially 
lower in the CD11b(+) cells from the bone marrow of IRF-1(-/-) mice as compared
to cells from wild-type mice. These results, together with the fact that IRF-1 is
markedly induced early during granulo-monocytic differentiation of CD34+ cells,
highlight the pivotal role of IRF-1 in the early phases of myelopoiesis.

PMID: 15385939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Blood. 2004 Dec 15;104(13):3911-7. Epub 2004 Aug 12.

Retinoic acid regulates C/EBP homologous protein expression (CHOP), which
negatively regulates myeloid target genes.

Gery S(1), Park DJ, Vuong PT, Chih DY, Lemp N, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of
California at Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. gerys@cshs.org

Retinoic acid (RA) promotes granulocytic differentiation of normal hematopoietic 
cells and acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) blasts by transcriptional modulation
of myeloid regulatory genes. In this study, we have identified the C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP) as a novel retinoid-responsive gene using a polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR)-based cDNA subtraction method. All-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) induced a biphasic expression of CHOP mRNA in the NB4 and HL60 AML cell
lines. Levels of CHOP expression increased within 1 hour of exposure to ATRA.
ATRA expression became nearly absent between 6 and 24 hours, and a second phase
of induction occurred after 48 hours. Retinoid-dependent regulation of CHOP
expression was also observed in normal human neutrophils but not in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. In addition, retinoid-dependent regulation of CHOP
expression was not observed in retinoid-nonresponsive cell lines HL60R and
NB4-R2. CHOP expression was regulated at the transcriptional level and was
independent of new protein synthesis. CHOP heterodimerized with C/EBPepsilon and 
negatively regulated the myeloid-specific gene lactoferrin. Furthermore, CHOP
transcriptionally inhibited C/EBPalpha- and C/EBPepsilon-dependent induction of
secondary granule gene expression. RA signaling in granulocytic differentiation
involves regulated expression of CHOP and C/EBPepsilon in a coordinated fashion.

PMID: 15308577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Leuk Res. 2004 May;28(5):525-32.

Induction of differentiation of retinoic acid-resistant acute promyelocytic
leukemia cells by the combination of all-trans retinoic acid and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor.

Higuchi T(1), Kizaki M, Omine M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Internal Medicine, Showa University Fujigaoka
Hospital, 1-30 Fujigaoka, Aoba-ku, Yokohama 227-8501, Japan.
thiguchi@med.showa-u.ac.jp

An acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cell line with natural resistance to
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), UF-1, was induced to differentiate into mature
granulocyte when treated with the combination of ATRA and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), while neither of them alone was capable of
inducing the differentiation effectively. Continuous presence of both agents was 
required for the maximal differentiation-inductive effect. Neither proliferation 
arrest nor induction of apoptosis preceded the differentiation. Differentiated
phenotype was accompanied by growth arrest, however, not by increased apoptosis. 
It was assumed that cellular events at the downstream of the signaling pathways
of ATRA and G-CSF cooperatively played pivotal roles in the
differentiation-induction.

PMID: 15068906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 22;23(19):3414-25.

Identification of murine and human XCP1 genes as C/EBP-epsilon-dependent members 
of FIZZ/Resistin gene family.

Chumakov AM(1), Kubota T, Walter S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Burns & Allen Research Institute, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
achumakov@hotmail.com

The CCAAT enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBP-epsilon) transcription factor
is expressed predominantly in granulocytes. Mice with a disruption of the
C/EBP-epsilon gene fail to produce mature granulocytes and eosinophils. Cells
derived from the peritoneal exudates of C/EBP-epsilon -/- mice lack the
expression of a number of chemokines and chemokine receptor genes. We have found 
a novel C/EBP-epsilon-dependent promyelocyte-specific gene, mXCP1. mXCP1 belongs 
to a family of XCP/FIZZ/Resistin genes, which includes four murine genes and two 
human genes, hXCP1 and hXCP2. These genes have four exons and encode short
secreted proteins sharing a ten-cysteine motif. Murine mXCP1, mXCP2 and mXCP3
genes map to murine chromosome 16 and mXCP4 is positioned on chromosome 8; the
hXCP1 and hXCP2 genes are located at homologous regions of chromosomes 3 and 19. 
Introduction of an inducible C/EBP-epsilon gene into the NIH3T3 and myeloid cells
from C/EBP-epsilon-null mice line revealed that the conditional expression of
C/EBP-epsilon induced mXCP1. The HXCP1 gene was identified as a
C/EBP-epsilon-dependent regulatory homologue of mXCP1. The expression data for
other members of XCP/FIZZ gene family are presented. Further studies indicate
that XCP1 is a secreted protein that is chemotactic to myeloid cells from
C/EBP-epsilon-null mice and is able to interact directly with alpha-defensin.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15064728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2004 Jul 1;104(1):89-91. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

Deletion of the major GATA1 enhancer HS 1 does not affect eosinophil GATA1
expression and eosinophil differentiation.

Guyot B(1), Valverde-Garduno V, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford 
Radcliffe Hospital, United Kingdom.

Expression of the myeloid transcription factor GATA1 is required for early stages
of eosinophil differentiation. Defining mechanisms regulating eosinophil GATA1
expression will be important to understand development of this lineage. However, 
the cis-elements required for eosinophil GATA1 expression are not fully
characterized. Previous work identified HS 1 as a major GATA1 enhancer, but its
role in eosinophil GATA1 expression is unclear. Here, we show that mouse HS 1
deletion leaves eosinophil GATA1 mRNA expression and eosinophil differentiation
unaffected. Chromatin isolated from eosinophils and encompassing HS 1 is weakly
enriched for acetylated histones H3/H4. HS 1 deletion does not alter eosinophil
GATA1 locus histone acetylation. In eosinophils, GATA1 and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein epsilon (C/EBP epsilon) do not bind HS 1 but bind selectively a
cis-element in the first GATA1 intron. Thus, HS 1 is not required for eosinophil 
GATA1 expression. Instead, this study suggests a previously unsuspected role for 
the GATA1 intron element for this function.

PMID: 15016648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2004 Feb 15;103(4):1286-95. Epub 2003 Oct 23.

Identification of the molecular requirements for an RAR alpha-mediated cell cycle
arrest during granulocytic differentiation.

Walkley CR(1), Purton LE, Snelling HJ, Yuan YD, Nakajima H, Chambon P,
Chandraratna RA, McArthur GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrew's Place, East 
Melbourne, Victoria, 3002, Australia.

Retinoids are potent inducers of cell cycle arrest and differentiation of
numerous cell types, notably granulocytes. However the mechanisms by which
retinoids mediate cell cycle arrest during differentiation remain unclear. We
have used myeloid differentiation to characterize the molecular pathways that
couple cell cycle withdrawal to terminal differentiation. Using primary cells
from mice deficient for either the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKi)
p27(Kip1), the Myc antagonist Mad1, or both Mad1 and p27(Kip1), we observed that 
signals mediated through retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha), but not RAR
beta or gamma, required both Mad1 and p27(Kip1) to induce cell cycle arrest and
to accelerate terminal differentiation of granulocytes. Although RAR alpha did
not directly regulate Mad1 or p27(Kip1), the RAR alpha target gene C/EBP epsilon 
directly regulated transcription of Mad1. Induction of C/EBP epsilon activity in 
granulocytic cells led to rapid induction of Mad1 protein and transcript, with
direct binding of C/EBP epsilon to the Mad1 promoter demonstrated through
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. These data demonstrate that cell cycle
arrest in response to RAR alpha specifically requires Mad1 and p27(Kip1) and that
Mad1 is transcriptionally activated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon
(C/EBP epsilon). Moreover, these data demonstrate selectivity among the RARs for 
cell cycle arrest pathways and provide a direct mechanism to link differentiation
induction and regulation of the Myc antagonist Mad1.

PMID: 14576045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Blood. 2004 Feb 1;103(3):828-35. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

C/EBPepsilon interacts with retinoblastoma and E2F1 during granulopoiesis.

Gery S(1), Gombart AF, Fung YK, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Davis Bldg 5066, 8700 Beverly Blvd, Los Angeles, 
CA 90048, USA. gerys@cshs.org

CCAAT enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is a myeloid specific
transcription factor that is essential for terminal granulocytic differentiation.
Retinoblastoma (Rb) and E2F1 are critical cell cycle regulators that also have
been implicated in several differentiation systems. Here, we demonstrate that
C/EBPepsilon interacts with Rb and E2F1 during granulocytic differentiation in
NB4 and U937 human myeloid cells and in 32Dcl3 murine myeloid precursor cells.
The interaction between C/EBPepsilon and Rb enhances C/EBPepsilon-mediated
transcription of myeloid specific genes both in reporter assays and endogenously.
The C/EBPepsilon-E2F1 interaction results in repression of E2F1-mediated
transcriptional activity. Finally, overexpression of C/EBPepsilon in human
myeloid cells leads to down-regulation of c-Myc. We propose that the interactions
between C/EBPepsilon, a tissue-specific transcription factor, and the
broad-spectrum proteins, Rb and E2F1, are important in C/EBPepsilon-induced
terminal granulocytic differentiation.

PMID: 12947005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Blood. 2003 May 1;101(9):3460-8. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies indicate a role for CCAAT enhancer
binding proteins alpha and epsilon (C/EBP alpha and C/EBP epsilon ) and CDP/cut
in myeloid maturation-induced lactoferrin gene expression.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Zibello T, Sun H, Gaines P, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

In vitro models of granulopoiesis involving the inducible expression of either
CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha) or C/EBP epsilon in myeloid
cells have been shown to lead to the induction of a granulocytic maturation
program accompanied by the expression of myeloid-specific genes. Since members of
the C/EBP family of transcription factors recognize and bind to similar
DNA-binding motifs, it has been difficult to elucidate the specific role of each 
of the C/EBP family members in eliciting myeloid gene expression. In order to
address this issue, we focused on the expression of the lactoferrin (LF) gene. LF
expression is transcriptionally regulated in a C/EBP-dependent manner in myeloid 
cells. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis we demonstrate that
C/EBP alpha binds to the LF promoter in nonexpressing cells. Upon induction of
maturation, C/EBP epsilon binds to the LF promoter, which correlates with LF
expression. Lack of LF expression in the acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line
NB4, which harbors the t(15;17) translocation, cannot be correlated with aberrant
binding at the C/EBP site in the LF promoter. It is, however, associated with the
persistent binding of the silencer CCAAT displacement protein (CDP/cut) to the LF
promoter in these cells. We conclude that C/EBP alpha, C/EBP epsilon, and CDP/cut
all play definitive roles in regulating late gene expression during normal
myeloid development.

PMID: 12522000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3265-73. Epub 2002 Dec 19.

Regulation of neutrophil and eosinophil secondary granule gene expression by
transcription factors C/EBP epsilon and PU.1.

Gombart AF(1), Kwok SH, Anderson KL, Yamaguchi Y, Torbett BE, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
90048, USA. gombarta@csmc.edu

In the bone marrow of C/EBP epsilon(-/-) mice, expression of neutrophil secondary
and tertiary granule mRNAs is absent for lactoferrin (LF), neutrophil gelatinase 
(NG), murine cathelin-like protein (MCLP), and the cathelin B9; it is severely
reduced for neutrophil collagenase (NC) and neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin (NGAL). In addition, the expression of eosinophil granule genes, major 
basic protein (MBP), and eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) is absent. These mice
express C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, and C/EBP delta in the bone marrow at levels
similar to those of their wild-type counterparts, suggesting a lack of functional
redundancy among the family in vivo. Stable inducible expression of C/EBP epsilon
and C/EBP alpha in the murine fibroblast cell line NIH 3T3 activated expression
of mRNAs for B9, MCLP, NC, and NGAL but not for LF. In transient transfections of
C/EBP epsilon and C/EBP alpha, B9 was strongly induced with weaker induction of
the other genes. C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta proteins weakly induced B9
expression, but C/EBP delta induced NC expression more efficiently than the other
C/EBPs. The expression of MBP was inefficiently induced by C/EBP epsilon alone
and weakly induced with C/EBP epsilon and GATA-1, but the addition of PU.1
resulted in a striking cooperative induction of MBP in NIH 3T3 cells. Mutation of
a predicted PU.1 site in the human MBP promoter-luciferase reporter construct
abrogated the response to PU.1. Gel-shift analysis demonstrated binding of PU.1
to this site. MBP and EPX mRNAs were absent in a PU.1-null myeloid cell line
established from the embryonic liver of PU.1(-/-) mice. Restitution of PU.1
protein expression restored MBP and EPX protein expression. This study
demonstrates that C/EBP epsilon is essential and sufficient for the expression of
a particular subset of neutrophil secondary granule genes. Furthermore, it
indicates the importance of PU.1 in the cooperative activation of eosinophil
granule genes.

PMID: 12515729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Blood. 2003 Feb 1;101(3):1141-8. Epub 2002 Oct 3.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding proteins repress the leukemic phenotype of acute myeloid
leukemia.

Truong BT(1), Lee YJ, Lodie TA, Park DJ, Perrotti D, Watanabe N, Koeffler HP,
Nakajima H, Tenen DG, Kogan SC.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Laboratory Medicine, University 
of California, San Francisco 94143-0128, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are a family of factors that regulate
cell growth and differentiation. These factors, particularly C/EBPalpha and
C/EBPepsilon, have important roles in normal myelopoiesis. In addition, loss of
C/EBP activity appears to have a role in the pathogenesis of myeloid disorders
including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a
subtype of AML in which a role for C/EBPs has been postulated. In almost all
cases of APL, a promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha
(PML-RARalpha) fusion protein is expressed as a result of a t(15;17)(q22;q12)
chromosomal translocation. PML-RARalpha inhibits expression of C/EBPepsilon,
whereas all-trans retinoic acid (tRA), a differentiating agent to which APL is
particularly susceptible, induces C/EBPepsilon expression. PML-RARalpha may also 
inhibit C/EBPalpha activity. Thus, the effects of PML-RARalpha on C/EBPs may
contribute to both the development of leukemia and the unique sensitivity of APL 
to tRA. We tested the hypothesis that increasing the activity of C/EBPs would
revert the leukemic phenotype. C/EBPalpha and C/EBPepsilon were introduced into
the FDC-P1 myeloid cell line and into leukemic cells from PML-RARA transgenic
mice. C/EBP factors suppressed growth and induced partial differentiation in
vitro. In vivo, enhanced expression of C/EBPs prolonged survival. By using a
tamoxifen-responsive version of C/EBPepsilon, we observed that C/EBPepsilon could
mimic the effect of tRA, driving neutrophilic differentiation in leukemic
animals. Our results support the hypothesis that induction of C/EBP activity is a
critical effect of tRA in APL. Furthermore, our findings suggest that targeted
modulation of C/EBP activities could provide a new approach to therapy of AML.

PMID: 12393450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):43481-94. Epub 2002 Aug 28.

Novel combinatorial interactions of GATA-1, PU.1, and C/EBPepsilon isoforms
regulate transcription of the gene encoding eosinophil granule major basic
protein.

Du J(1), Stankiewicz MJ, Liu Y, Xi Q, Schmitz JE, Lekstrom-Himes JA, Ackerman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

GATA-1 and the ets factor PU.1 have been reported to functionally antagonize one 
another in the regulation of erythroid versus myeloid gene transcription and
development. The CCAAT enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is
expressed as multiple isoforms and has been shown to be essential to myeloid
(granulocyte) terminal differentiation. We have defined a novel synergistic, as
opposed to antagonistic, combinatorial interaction between GATA-1 and PU.1, and a
unique repressor role for certain C/EBPepsilon isoforms in the transcriptional
regulation of a model eosinophil granulocyte gene, the major basic protein (MBP).
The eosinophil-specific P2 promoter of the MBP gene contains GATA-1, C/EBP, and
PU.1 consensus sites that bind these factors in nuclear extracts of the
eosinophil myelocyte cell line, AML14.3D10. The promoter is transactivated by
GATA-1 alone but is synergistically transactivated by low levels of PU.1 in the
context of optimal levels of GATA-1. The C/EBPepsilon(27) isoform strongly
represses GATA-1 activity and completely blocks GATA-1/PU.1 synergy. In vitro
mutational analyses of the MBP-P2 promoter showed that both the GATA-1/PU.1
synergy, and repressor activity of C/EBPepsilon(27) are mediated via
protein-protein interactions through the C/EBP and/or GATA-binding sites but not 
the PU.1 sites. Co-immunoprecipitations using lysates of AML14.3D10 eosinophils
show that both C/EBPepsilon(32/30) and epsilon(27) physically interact in vivo
with PU.1 and GATA-1, demonstrating functional interactions among these factors
in eosinophil progenitors. Our findings identify novel combinatorial
protein-protein interactions for GATA-1, PU.1, and C/EBPepsilon isoforms in
eosinophil gene transcription that include GATA-1/PU.1 synergy and repressor
activity for C/EBPepsilon(27).

PMID: 12202480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 2002 Jun 15;99(12):4406-12.

Induction of granulocytic differentiation by 2 pathways.

Zhang P(1), Nelson E, Radomska HS, Iwasaki-Arai J, Akashi K, Friedman AD, Tenen
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha) transcription factor plays
a critical role in granulocytopoiesis. Mice with a disruption of the C/EBP alpha 
gene demonstrate an early block in granulocytic differentiation, and disruption
of C/EBP alpha function is a common theme in many types of human acute
myelogenous leukemia, which is characterized by a block in myeloid development.
To characterize further the nature of this block, we derived cell lines from the 
fetal liver of C/EBP alpha-deficient animals. These lines resembled
morphologically the immature myeloid blasts observed in C/EBP alpha(-/-) fetal
livers and did not express messenger RNA encoding early myeloid genes such as
myeloperoxidase. Similarly, granulocytic markers such as Mac-1 and Gr-1 were not 
expressed; nor were erythroid and lymphoid surface antigens. Introduction of an
inducible C/EBP alpha gene into the line revealed that conditional expression of 
C/EBP alpha induced the C/EBP family members C/EBP beta and C/EBP epsilon and
subsequent granulocyte differentiation. Similar results were obtained when C/EBP 
alpha(-/-) cells were stimulated with the cytokines interleukin-3 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, but not with all-trans retinoic
acid, supporting a model of at least 2 pathways leading to the differentiation of
myeloid progenitors to granulocytes and implicating induction of other C/EBP
family members in granulopoiesis.

PMID: 12036869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Blood. 2002 Mar 1;99(5):1794-801.

Macrophage functional maturation and cytokine production are impaired in C/EBP
epsilon-deficient mice.

Tavor S(1), Vuong PT, Park DJ, Gombart AF, Cohen AH, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. koeffler@cshs.org

Members of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family are involved in the 
regulation of cellular differentiation and function of many tissues. Unlike the
other members of the family, C/EBP epsilon expression is restricted to
granulocytes, macrophages, and lymphocytes. C/EBP epsilon is highly conserved
between human and rodents and is essential for terminal granulopoiesis in both
species. To study the role that C/EBP epsilon plays in macrophages, wild-type and
C/EBP epsilon-deficient (-/-) murine macrophages obtained from
thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal lavages and differentiated bone marrow cells
were compared. Although macrophage development occurred in both types of mice,
the C/EBP epsilon -/- cells had a lower expression of macrophage markers and a
morphologic and ultrastructural appearance of immaturity. Phagocytic function,
measured by calculating the percentage of internalized opsonized fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled yeast, was significantly impaired in the C/EBP
epsilon -/- macrophages compared with their wild-type counterparts. Furthermore, 
the differential expression of 26 macrophage-specific genes between wild-type and
C/EBP-/- mice was analyzed. A subset of genes involved in differentiation,
immune, and inflammatory responses was found down-regulated in the C/EBP-/-
macrophages. Taken together, this study implicates the C/EBP epsilon gene as an
important transcription factor required for normal function and development of
macrophages.

PMID: 11861297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Curr Opin Hematol. 2002 Jan;9(1):36-42.

Neutrophil specific granule deficiency and mutations in the gene encoding
transcription factor C/EBP(epsilon).

Gombart AF(1), Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Burns & Allen
Research Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. 
gombarta@csmc.edu

Neutrophil specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare congenital disorder. The
neutrophils of these patients display atypical bilobed nuclei; lack expression of
at least one primary and all secondary and tertiary granule proteins; and possess
defects in chemotaxis, disaggregation, receptor upregulation, and bactericidal
activity. SGD patients suffer frequent and severe bacterial infections. Although 
the first of five patients worldwide was reported in the early 1970s, the
molecular basis for the defect was discovered only recently. This review presents
data implicating the functional loss of the myeloid transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP(epsilon)) as a causative agent in the
development of SGD. The murine model for SGD provides evidence for defects in
eosinophil granule gene expression and indicates abnormalities in macrophage
maturation and function. Deficiencies in multiple myeloid lineages, in addition
to neutrophils, indicate the importance of C/EBP(epsilon) in regulating important
innate immune and inflammatory responses critical for host defense.

PMID: 11753076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Blood. 2001 Aug 15;98(4):897-905.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor regulates myeloid differentiation through
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon.

Nakajima H(1), Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. hnakajim@med.keio.ac.jp

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a major cytokine that regulates 
proliferation and differentiation of myeloid cells, although the underlying
mechanisms by which G-CSF controls myeloid differentiation are largely unknown.
Differentiation of hematopoietic cells is regulated by lineage-specific
transcription factors, and gene-targeting studies previously revealed the
critical roles of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha and C/EBP epsilon,
respectively, in the early and mid-late stages of granulocyte differentiation.
The expression of C/EBP epsilon in 32Dcl3 cells and FDCP1 cells expressing mutant
G-CSF receptors was examined and it was found that G-CSF up-regulates C/EBP
epsilon. The signal for this expression required the region containing the first 
tyrosine residue of G-CSF receptor. Dominant-negative signal transducers and
activators of transcription 3 blocked G-CSF--induced granulocytic differentiation
in 32D cells but did not block induction of C/EBP epsilon, indicating that these 
proteins work in different pathways. It was also found that overexpression of
C/EBP epsilon greatly facilitated granulocytic differentiation by G-CSF and,
surprisingly, that expression of C/EBP epsilon alone was sufficient to make cells
differentiate into morphologically and functionally mature granulocytes.
Overexpression of c-myc inhibits differentiation of hematopoietic cells, but the 
molecular mechanisms of this inhibition are not fully understood. In 32Dcl3 cells
overexpressing c-myc that do not differentiate by means of G-CSF, induction of
C/EBP epsilon is completely abrogated. Ectopic expression of C/EBP epsilon in
these cells induced features of differentiation, including changes in nuclear
morphologic characteristics and the appearance of granules. These data show that 
C/EBP epsilon constitutes a rate-limiting step in G-CSF-regulated granulocyte
differentiation and that c-myc antagonizes G-CSF-induced myeloid differentiation,
at least partly by suppressing induction of C/EBP epsilon. (Blood.
2001;98:897-905)

PMID: 11493431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Leukemia. 2001 Jan;15(1):103-11.

C/EBPepsilon -/- mice: increased rate of myeloid proliferation and apoptosis.

Verbeek W(1), Wächter M, Lekstrom-Himes J, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is essential for terminal
granulocytic differentiation. Its expression begins at the transition between the
proliferative and non-proliferative compartments of myelopoiesis. We studied the 
effect of targeted disruption of the C/EBPepsilon gene on murine myeloid
proliferation and apoptosis. Bone marrow cellularity of C/EBPepsilon -/- and
wild-type mice was 95% and 65%, respectively. The C/EBPepsilon -/- mice had an
expansion in the number of their CFU-GM/femur. The number of myeloid committed
progenitor cells in the peripheral blood and the spleen of these mice was also
increased. Bromodeoxyuridine (BrDU) pulse labeling studies demonstrated that the 
fraction of actively proliferating cells was two-fold higher in the bone marrow
of C/EBPepsilon -/- mice. However, the number of myeloid colonies arising from
purified Sca-1+/lin- early hematopoietic progenitor cells and from bone marrow
mononuclear cells grown in different cytokine combinations was not significantly 
different between wild-type and knock-out mice. Also, long-term marrow growth,
and CFU were not different between the wild-type and C/EBPepsilon -/- mice. The
sensitivity to induction of apoptosis in the committed progenitor cell
compartment after either withdrawal of growth factor or brief exposure to
etoposide was normal. However, Gr-1 antigen-positive C/EBPepsilon -/-
granulocytic cells showed an increased rate of apoptosis in comparison to their
wild-type counterparts. In summary, the myeloid compartment appears to be
expanded in mice lacking C/EBPepsilon. However, this is not the consequence of an
intrinsic myeloproliferation but due to an indirect, possibly cytokine-mediated
stimulation of myelopoiesis in vivo. C/EBPepsilon may have a role in the
inhibition of apoptosis in maturing granulocytic cells.

PMID: 11243377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Stem Cells. 2001;19(2):125-33.

The role of C/EBP(epsilon) in the terminal stages of granulocyte differentiation.

Lekstrom-Himes JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
jlekstrom@atlas.niaid.nih.gov

As a consequence of its characterization using both in vitro and knockout mouse
models, the myeloid-specific transcription factor, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP)epsilon, has been identified as a critical regulator of terminal
granulopoiesis and one of the causative mutations in the human disease,
neutrophil-specific granule deficiency. C/EBPs are a family of transcription
factors sharing numerous structural and functional features and to date include
C/EBPalpha, -beta, -gamma, -delta, -epsilon, and -zeta. C/EBPalpha was the first 
family member isolated and characterized, its essential role in hepatocyte and
adipocyte differentiation demonstrated in knockout mouse models. Subsequent
analysis of the hematopoietic elements in fetal mouse liver revealed its critical
role in myelopoiesis. Understanding the role of C/EBPepsilon in terminal
granulopoiesis in the context of other known transcription factors is ongoing
with analysis of deficient and conditionally expressing cell lines and knockout
models. Mouse models with targeted gene disruptions have contributed greatly to
our understanding of the transcriptional regulation of granulopoiesis. Further
manipulation of these models and other conditional expression systems have
bypassed some of the limitations of knockout models and helped delineate the
interactions of different transcription factors in affecting granulocyte
development. Phenotypic expression of the loss of C/EBPepsilon in mice is
extreme, resembling absolute neutropenia with systemic infection with P.
aeruginosa. Future work will need to explore the regulation of C/EBPepsilon
expression, its functional interactions with other transcriptional regulators
such as PU.1, and its role in monocyte differentiation and function in the mouse.

PMID: 11239167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 2000;(32):167-9.

[Neutrophil secondary granule deficiency].

[Article in Japanese]

Shiohara M(1), Komiyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine.

PMID: 11212678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Cell Biochem. 2001;80(4):606-16.

Molecular analysis of the mouse S100A9 gene and evidence that the myeloid
specific transcription factor C/EBPepsilon is not required for the regulation of 
the S100A9/A8 gene expression in neutrophils.

Nacken W(1), Lekstrom-Himes JA, Sorg C, Manitz MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Dermatology, University of Münster, Von-Esmarch-Str.
56, D-48149 Münster, Germany. nacken@uni-muenster.de

The genomic locus of the mouse S100A9 (MRP14) gene, a myeloid expressed gene
belonging to the S100 family, is split in three exons and two introns. Insertions
of B1 like and LINE elements as well as several sequence repeat structures are
scattered over the gene suggesting that this region of the S100 gene cluster has 
been the subject of a high mutational activity in mouse evolution. The insertions
may represent molecular footprints of a recently postulated inversion event,
which resulted in a rearrangement of the S100 gene cluster in mouse compared to
man. Deletion analysis of the promoter reveals, that a 1200 bp fragment is able
to direct a cell type-specific expression of a reporter gene in granulocytic 32D 
cells. Unexpectedly, the myeloid-specific transcription factor C/EBPepsilon is
not needed for the transcriptional upregulation of the S100A9 and S100A8 genes in
neutrophils. The data described here provide further insights into the evolution 
of the S100 gene cluster and into the myeloid-specific regulation of the murine
S100A9 gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11169745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Trends Biochem Sci. 2000 Feb;25(2):46-7.

The PPR motif - a TPR-related motif prevalent in plant organellar proteins.

Small ID(1), Peeters N.

Author information: 
(1)Station de Génétique, INRA, Route de St-Cyr, 78026 Versailles Cedex, France.

PMID: 10664580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3327-37.

C/EBPepsilon directly interacts with the DNA binding domain of c-myb and
cooperatively activates transcription of myeloid promoters.

Verbeek W(1), Gombart AF, Chumakov AM, Müller C, Friedman AD, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles CA, USA.

C/EBPepsilon is essential for granulocytic differentiation. We investigated the
role of C/EBPepsilon in the transcriptional activation of various
myeloid-specific genes. We found that two C/EBPepsilon isoforms, p32 and p30,
possessing transcriptional activation domains were coexpressed in myeloid cells. 
Interestingly, isoform C/EBPepsilon p30 but not p32 was differentially
upregulated in NB-4 promyelocytic leukemia cells treated with retinoids. Both
isoforms bound specifically to C/EBP sites in myeloid promoters. The kd for
C/EBPepsilon binding to the C/EBP site of the neutrophil elastase promoter was
4.2 nmol/L. In transfection assays using the nonhematopoietic cell line, CV-1,
the p32 isoform activated promoters from the myeloid-specific mim-1, neutrophil
elastase, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) receptor genes by
2.5-, 1.8-, and 1.6-fold, respectively. The p30 isoform lacked significant
transcriptional activity, suggesting that other hematopoietic-specific factors
were required for its function. Consistent with this prediction, transfections
into the hematopoietic cell line Jurkat showed a 9.0- and 2.5-fold activation of 
the mim-1 promoter by the p32 and p30 isoforms, respectively. The additional 32
NH2-terminal residues made p32 a significantly more potent transcriptional
activator than p30. T lymphoblasts (Jurkat cells) and immature myeloid cells (eg,
Kcl22 cells) expressed high levels of the c-myb hematopoietic transcription
factor. Cotransfection of c-myb with either the p32 or p30 isoform of
C/EBPepsilon in CV-1 cells cooperatively transactivated the mim-1 promoter by 20-
and 16-fold, respectively, and the neutrophil elastase promoter by 10-and 7-fold,
respectively. Pulldown assays showed that each C/EBPepsilon isoform interacted
directly with the DNA binding domain of the c-myb protein. Further studies showed
that Kcl22 myeloid cells only contained active C/EBPepsilon, but not C/EBPalpha, 
C/EBPbeta, or C/EBPdelta. A mutation of the C/EBP site in the neutrophil elastase
promoter markedly decreased the transactivation of the promoter in Kcl22
myeloblasts. These results demonstrate a role for C/EBPepsilon in regulating
myeloid promoters, such as neutrophil elastase, probably through a direct
interaction with c-myb.

PMID: 10233885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 12;274(7):4147-54.

A short conserved motif is required for repressor domain function in the
myeloid-specific transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon.

Angerer ND(1), Du Y, Nalbant D, Williams SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Texas 79430, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is expressed almost
exclusively in the myeloid lineage of the hematopoietic system and functions
during terminal differentiation of neutrophils and macrophages, and in the
regulation of cytokine gene expression in macrophages and T cells. We have
undertaken a series of structure/function studies on the murine C/EBPepsilon
polypeptide to investigate the mechanism by which C/EBPepsilon activates
transcription. Studies with deletion mutants and fusion proteins consisting of
C/EBPepsilon sequences joined to the Gal4 DNA-binding protein identified two
transcriptional activation domains in C/EBPepsilon. Removal of sequences between 
the two activation domains or sequences between the second activation domain and 
the C-terminal DNA binding domain significantly increased the activity of
C/EBPepsilon, suggesting the presence of two separate regulatory domains
(designated RD-1epsilon and RD-2epsilon). RD-1epsilon behaved as a classic active
repressor domain being capable of inhibiting adjacent activation domains
irrespective of their origin and when linked to a heterologous DNA binding
domain. Mutagenesis studies revealed a short motif in RD-1epsilon that appears to
be a target site for protein-protein interactions and is conserved in repressor
domains from C/EBPbeta, Sp3, c-Fos, and FosB. The juxtaposition of activation and
repressor domains may permit C/EBPepsilon to function as a transcriptional
activator or repressor at different stages of myeloid differentiation or as an
inducible transcriptional activator of cytokine genes.

PMID: 9933609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;83(1-2):10-1.

Assignment1 of CSRP1 encoding the LIM domain protein CRP1, to human chromosome
1q32 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Erdel M(1), Weiskirchen R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck (Austria).

PMID: 9925910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Circ Res. 1998 Nov 16;83(10):980-5.

Embryonic expression suggests an important role for CRP2/SmLIM in the developing 
cardiovascular system.

Jain MK(1), Kashiki S, Hsieh CM, Layne MD, Yet SF, Sibinga NE, Chin MT, Feinberg 
MW, Woo I, Maas RL, Haber E, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, the
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Proteins of the LIM family are critical regulators of development and
differentiation in various cell types. We have described the cloning of
cysteine-rich protein 2/smooth muscle LIM protein (CRP2/SmLIM), a LIM-only
protein expressed in differentiated vascular smooth muscle cells. As a first step
toward understanding the potential functions of CRP2/SmLIM, we analyzed its
expression after gastrulation in developing mice and compared the expression of
CRP2/SmLIM with that of the other 2 members of the CRP subclass, CRP1 and
CRP3/MLP. In situ hybridization in whole-mount and sectioned embryos showed that 
CRP2/SmLIM was expressed in the sinus venosus and the 2 cardiac chambers at
embryonic day 9. Vascular expression of CRP2/SmLIM was first seen at embryonic
day 10. At subsequent time points, CRP2/SmLIM expression decreased in the heart
but remained high in the vasculature. CRP1 was expressed both in vascular and
nonvascular tissues containing smooth muscle cells, whereas CRP3/MLP was
expressed only in tissues containing striated muscle. These patterns of
expression were maintained in the adult animal and suggest an important role for 
this gene family in the development of smooth and striated muscle.

PMID: 9815145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 10;94(12):6462-7.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon is preferentially up-regulated during
granulocytic differentiation and its functional versatility is determined by
alternative use of promoters and differential splicing.

Yamanaka R(1), Kim GD, Radomska HS, Lekstrom-Himes J, Smith LT, Antonson P, Tenen
DG, Xanthopoulos KG.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Gene Therapy Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
Building 10, Room 10C103, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1851,
USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) epsilon is a recently cloned member of the
C/EBP family of transcription factors and is expressed exclusively in cells of
hematopoietic origin. The human C/EBPepsilon gene is transcribed by two
alternative promoters, Palpha and Pbeta. A combination of differential splicing
and alternative use of promoters generates four mRNA isoforms, of 2.6 kb and
1.3-1.5 kb in size. These transcripts can encode three proteins of calculated
molecular mass 32.2 kDa, 27.8 kDa, and 14.3 kDa. Accordingly, Western blots with 
antibodies specific for the DNA-binding domain, that is common to all forms,
identify multiple proteins. C/EBPepsilon mRNA was greatly induced during in vitro
granulocytic differentiation of human primary CD34(+) cells. Retinoic acid
treatment of HL60 promyelocytic leukemia cells for 24 hr induced C/EBPepsilon
mRNA levels by 4-fold, while prolonged treatment gradually reduced mRNA
expression to pretreatment levels. Transient transfection experiments with
expression vectors for two of the isoforms demonstrated that the 32.2-kDa protein
is an activator of transcription of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
receptor promoter, while the 14.3-kDa protein is not. Thus, C/EBPepsilon is
regulated in a complex fashion and may play a role in the regulation of genes
involved in myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC21072
PMID: 9177240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1375-86.

Cloning of the novel human myeloid-cell-specific C/EBP-epsilon transcription
factor.

Chumakov AM(1), Grillier I, Chumakova E, Chih D, Slater J, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Chicken NF-M transcription factor, in cooperation with either c-Myb or v-Myb, is 
active in the combinatorial activation of myeloid-cell-specific genes in
heterologous cell types, such as embryonic fibroblasts. In humans, similar
effects were observed with homologous members of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) family of transcriptional regulators, especially the human
homolog of chicken NF-M, C/EBP-beta (NF-IL6). However, the NF-IL6 gene is
expressed in a variety of nonmyeloid cell types and is strongly inducible in
response to inflammatory stimuli, making it an unlikely candidate to have an
exclusive role as a combinatorial differentiation switch during myelopoiesis in
human cells. By using a reverse transcription-PCR-based approach and a set of
primers specific for the DNA-binding domains of highly homologous members of the 
C/EBP family of transcriptional regulators, we have cloned a novel human gene
encoding a member of the C/EBP gene family, identified as the human homolog of
CRP1, C/EBP-epsilon. A 1.2-kb cDNA encoding full-length human C/EBP-epsilon was
cloned from a promyelocyte-late myeloblast-derived lambda gt11 library. Molecular
analysis of the cDNA and genomic clones indicated the presence of two exons
encoding a protein with an apparent molecular mass of 32 kDa and a pI of 9.5.
Primer extension analysis of C/EBP-epsilon mRNA detected a single major
transcription start site approximately 200 bp upstream of the start codon. The
putative promoter area is similar to those of several other myeloid-cell-specific
genes in that it contains no TATAAA box but has a number of purine-rich stretches
with multiple sites for the factors of the Ets family of transcriptional
regulators. Northern blot analyses indicated a highly restricted mRNA expression 
pattern, with the strongest expression occurring in promyelocyte and
late-myeloblast-like cell lines. Western blot and immunoprecipitation studies
using rabbit anti-C/EBP-epsilon antibodies raised against the N-terminal portion 
of C/EBP-epsilon (amino acids 1 to 115) showed that C/EBP-epsilon is a 32-kDa
nuclear phosphoprotein. The human C/EBP-epsilon protein exhibited strong and
specific binding to double-stranded DNA containing consensus C/EBP sites.
Cotransfection of the C/EBP-epsilon sense and antisense expression constructs
together with chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter vectors containing
myeloid-cell-specific c-mim and human myeloperoxidase promoters suggested a role 
for C/EBP-epsilon transcription factor in the regulation of a subset of
myeloid-cell-specific genes. Transient tranfection of a promyelocyte cell line
(NB4) with a C/EBP-epsilon expression plasmid increased cell growth by sevenfold,
while antisense C/EBP-epsilon caused a fivefold decrease in clonal growth of
these cells.

PMCID: PMC231862
PMID: 9032264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Gene Expr. 1997;6(6):371-85.

C/EBP proteins contain nuclear localization signals imbedded in their basic
regions.

Williams SC(1), Angerer ND, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA.

The C/EBP-related proteins (C/EBPalpha, CRP1, C/EBPbeta, and C/EBPdelta) form a
subfamily of bZIP (basic region/leucine zipper) transcription factors that
display sequence homology within the bZIP domain. The conserved basic region
contains two motifs that exhibit significant homology to the bipartite nuclear
localization signal (NLS) first described in nucleoplasmin. CRP1 and C/EBPbeta
proteins bearing deletions of the basic region accumulate in the cytoplasm, in
contrast to their normal nuclear location. Analysis of chimeric proteins
consisting of CRP1 basic region sequences fused to beta-galactosidase revealed
that the CRP1 basic region contains a single NLS that differs from conventional
bipartite signals in two ways. First, mutation of a pair of arginine residues at 
the N-terminus of the proposed NLS does not disrupt its function. Second, the
CRP1 NLS requires additional nonbasic residues at its C-terminus. A basic residue
within the CRP1 NLS that is not conserved within the C/EBP family is occupied
instead by an uncharged residue in C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta. When this
nonconserved arginine residue was changed to alanine the CRP1 NLS behaved as a
classical bipartite signal, suggesting that bipartite NLSs are present in all
family members but that NLSs of the individual members differ slightly.
Additionally, mutation of critical NLS residues in the intact CRP1 and C/EBPbeta 
proteins showed that these elements exhibit more bipartite-like characteristics
when present in their normal sequence context. Finally, we observed that a
C/EBPbeta protein lacking its NLS can be localized to the nucleus when
coexpressed with C/EBPalpha, indicating that a single NLS is sufficient to
promote nuclear transport of a bZIP dimer.

PMID: 9495318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genomics. 1996 Jul 1;35(1):30-8.

A novel human CCAAT/enhancer binding protein gene, C/EBPepsilon, is expressed in 
cells of lymphoid and myeloid lineages and is localized on chromosome 14q11.2
close to the T-cell receptor alpha/delta locus.

Antonson P(1), Stellan B, Yamanaka R, Xanthopoulos KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, S-141 57, Sweden.

Members of the CsolidusEBP family of transcriptional factors have been implicated
in the regulation of genes in a variety of tissues. We report here the isolation 
and characterization of the human C/EBPepsilon gene (CEBPE). By using
low-stringency hybridization conditions and probes derived from the C/EBPalpha
and C/EBPdelta genes, we have isolated overlapping genomic clones that cover
almost 25 kb of the C/EBPepsilon gene locus and corresponding cDNA clones. DNA
sequence analysis reveals that the gene encodes a protein highly homologous to
rat CRP1. The gene was assigned to chromosome 14q11.2 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization and was physically linked to the genetic marker D14S990. Based on
linkage data derived from this marker, we positioned the CEBPE gene between the
T-cell receptor alpha/delta locus and a cluster of four serine proteases
expressed exclusively in hematopoietic cells. Expression of C/EBPepsilon was
detected in Jurkat T-cell and in HL 60 promyelocytic cell lines. From a variety
of normal human tissues studied, expression of mRNA was monitored only in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells, tissues involved in the immune system, and
ovaries. These data demonstrate that the C/EBPepsilon gene shows a restricted
pattern of expression, has an intriguing chromosomal location, and suggest a
possible role for the regulation of certain genes in cells of myeloid and
lymphoid lineages.

PMID: 8661101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):333-6.

Mouse chromosomal location of the CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins C/EBP beta
(Cebpb), C/EBP delta (Cebpd), and CRP1 (Cebpe).

Jenkins NA(1), Gilbert DJ, Cho BC, Strobel MC, Williams SC, Copeland NG, Johnson 
PF.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

There are four known members of the C/EBP family of basic region-leucine zipper
transcription factors: Cebpa, Cebpb, Cebpd, and Cebpe. Cebpa has previously been 
mapped to mouse chromosome 7. Here, we show that Cebpb maps to mouse chromosome
2, Cebpd to chromosome 16, and Cebpe to chromosome 14. The assignment of Cebpd to
chromosome 16 identifies a new region of homology between mouse chromosome 16 and
human chromosome 8.

PMID: 8530045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genes Dev. 1991 Sep;5(9):1553-67.

A family of C/EBP-related proteins capable of forming covalently linked leucine
zipper dimers in vitro.

Williams SC(1), Cantwell CA, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201.

Mouse and rat genomic DNA libraries were screened by reduced stringency
hybridization with the DNA-binding domain of the c/ebp gene as a probe. Three
genes were isolated that encode bZIP DNA-binding proteins (designated CRP1, CRP2,
and CRP3) with strong amino acid sequence similarities to the C/EBP-binding
domain. CRP2 is identical to the protein described recently by other groups as
NF-IL6, LAP, IL-6DBP, and AGP/EBP, whereas CRP1 and CRP3 represent novel
proteins. Several lines of evidence indicate that these three proteins, along
with C/EBP, comprise a functional family. Each bacterially expressed polypeptide 
binds to DNA as a dimer with recognition properties that are virtually identical 
to those of C/EBP. Every member also bears a conserved cysteine residue at or
near the carboxyl terminus, immediately following the leucine zipper, that at
least in vitro allows efficient disulfide cross-linking between paired zipper
helices. We developed a gel assay for covalent dimers to assess leucine zipper
specificities among the family members. The results demonstrate that all pairwise
combinations of dimer interactions are possible. To the extent that we have
examined them, the same heterodimeric complexes can be detected intracellularly
following cotransfection of the appropriate pair of genes into recipient cells.
All members are also capable of activating in vivo transcription from promoters
that contain a C/EBP-binding site. Our findings indicate that a set of
potentially interacting C/EBP-like proteins exists, whose complexity is
comparable to that of other bZIP protein subfamilies such as Jun, Fos, and
ATF/CREB.

PMID: 1884998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


