
1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2015 Nov 30. pii: S0939-4753(15)00236-7. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2015.11.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-acting insulin analog detemir displays reduced effects on adipocyte
differentiation of human subcutaneous and visceral adipose stem cells.

Cignarelli A(1), Perrini S(1), Nigro P(1), Ficarella R(1), Barbaro M(1),
Peschechera A(1), Porro S(1), Natalicchio A(1), Laviola L(1), Puglisi F(2),
Giorgino F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, Section of Internal
Medicine, Endocrinology, Andrology and Metabolic Diseases, University of Bari
Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy. (2)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation,
Section of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology, Andrology and Metabolic Diseases,
University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy; Azienda Sanitaria Locale Bari -
Ospedale "Sarcone", Terlizzi, Italy. (3)Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation, Section of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology, Andrology and
Metabolic Diseases, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy. Electronic
address: francesco.giorgino@uniba.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Since treatment with insulin detemir results in a lower
weight gain compared to human insulin, we investigated whether detemir is
associated with lower ability to promote adipogenesis and/or lipogenesis in human
adipose stem cells (ASC).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human ASC isolated from both the subcutaneous and visceral
adipose tissues were differentiated for 30 days in the presence of human insulin 
or insulin detemir. Nile Red and Oil-Red-O staining were used to quantify the
rate of ASC conversion to adipocytes and lipid accumulation, respectively. mRNA
expression levels of early genes, including Fos and Cebpb, as well as of
lipogenic and adipogenic genes, were measured at various phases of
differentiation by qRT-PCR. Activation of insulin signaling was assessed by
immunoblotting. ASC isolated from subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue were
less differentiated when exposed to insulin detemir compared to human insulin,
showing lower rates of adipocyte conversion, reduced triglyceride accumulation,
and impaired expression of late-phase adipocyte marker genes, such as Pparg2,
Slc2a4, Adipoq, and Cidec. However, no differences in activation of insulin
receptor, Akt and Erk and induction of the early genes Fos and Cebpb were
observed between insulin detemir and human insulin.
CONCLUSION: Insulin detemir displays reduced induction of the Pparg2 adipocyte
master gene and diminished effects on adipocyte differentiation and lipogenesis
in human subcutaneous and visceral ASC, in spite of normal activation of proximal
insulin signaling reactions. These characteristics of insulin detemir may be of
potential relevance to its weight-sparing effects observed in the clinical
setting.

Copyright © 2015 The Italian Society of Diabetology, the Italian Society for the 
Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition, and the
Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26947594  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 12;7:10635. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10635.

A variant at 9p21.3 functionally implicates CDKN2B in paediatric B-cell precursor
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia aetiology.

Hungate EA(1), Vora SR(2), Gamazon ER(3,)(4), Moriyama T(5), Best T(2), Hulur
I(6), Lee Y(3), Evans TJ(7), Ellinghaus E(8), Stanulla M(9), Rudant J(10,)(11),
Orsi L(10,)(11), Clavel J(10,)(11,)(12), Milne E(13), Scott RJ(7,)(14), Pui
CH(15), Cox NJ(3), Loh ML(16), Yang JJ(5), Skol AD(1), Onel K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, 900 East 57th Street, Room
5140, MC 4060, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. (2)Committee on Cancer Biology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. (3)Department of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. (4)The
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The
Netherlands. (5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (6)Committee on Genetics,
Genomics and Systems Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA. (7)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Information Based Medicine, Hunter
Medical Research Institute, School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy,
University of Newcastle, New Lambton, New South Wales 2305, Australia.
(8)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel 
24118, Germany. (9)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel 24105, Germany. (10)INSERM U1153 Epidemiology and
Biostatistics Sorbonne Paris Cité Center (CRESS), Epidemiology of Childhood and
Adolescent Cancers Team (EPICEA), Villejuif 94807, France. (11)UMRS-1153,
Epidemiology and Biostatistics Sorbonne Paris Cité Center (CRESS),
Paris-Descartes University, Paris 75270, France. (12)French National Registry of 
Childhood Hematopoietic Malignancies (RNHE), Villejuif 94807, France.
(13)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western
Australia 6872, Australia. (14)Division of Molecular Medicine, Pathology North,
John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305, Australia. (15)Department 
of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of California-San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Paediatric B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (BCP-ALL) is the most
common cancer of childhood, yet little is known about BCP-ALL predisposition. In 
this study, in 2,187 cases of European ancestry and 5,543 controls, we discover
and replicate a locus indexed by rs77728904 at 9p21.3 associated with BCP-ALL
susceptibility (Pcombined=3.32 × 10(-15), OR=1.72) and independent from
rs3731217, the previously reported ALL-associated variant in this region. Of
correlated SNPs tagged by this locus, only rs662463 is significant in African
Americans, suggesting it is a plausible causative variant. Functional analysis
shows that rs662463 is a cis-eQTL for CDKN2B, with the risk allele associated
with lower expression, and suggests that rs662463 influences BCP-ALL risk by
regulating CDKN2B expression through CEBPB signalling. Functional analysis of
rs3731217 suggests it is associated with BCP-ALL by acting within a splicing
regulatory element determining CDKN2A exon 3 usage (P=0.01). These findings
provide new insights into the critical role of the CDKN2 locus in BCP-ALL
aetiology.

PMCID: PMC4754340
PMID: 26868379  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Nutr. 2016 Mar;146(3):603-11. doi: 10.3945/jn.115.219675. Epub 2016 Feb 10.

Intake of Total and Subgroups of Fat Minimally Affect the Associations between
Selected Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in the PPAR<U+03B3> Pathway and Changes in
Anthropometry among European Adults from Cohorts of the DiOGenes Study.

Larsen SC(1), Ängquist L(2), Østergaard JN(3), Ahluwalia TS(4), Vimaleswaran
KS(5), Roswall N(6), Mortensen LM(7), Nielsen BM(8), Tjønneland A(6), Wareham
NJ(9), Palli D(10), Masala G(10), Saris WH(11), van der A DL(12), Boer JM(12),
Feskens EJ(13), Boeing H(14), Jakobsen MU(15), Loos RJ(16), Sørensen TIa(17),
Overvad K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Dietary Studies at the Parker Institute, Institute of
Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospitals, The Capital Region, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Center,
Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; sofus.christian.larsen@regionh.dk.
(2)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospitals, The 
Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark; (3)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department for
Health and Care, Aarhus Municipality, Aarhus, Denmark; Department of Public
Health, Section for Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark; (4)Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, and Department of Public 
Health, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Copenhagen Prospective Studies on
Asthma in Childhood (COPSAC), Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark;
(5)Hugh Sinclair Unit of Human Nutrition, Department of Food and Nutritional
Sciences, Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research (ICMR), University 
of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom; Medical Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology 
Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom; (6)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Danish
Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark; (7)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular 
Research Center, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of
Public Health, Section for Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark;
(8)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospitals, The 
Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark; Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in 
Childhood (COPSAC), Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark; (9)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science,
Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom; (10)Molecular and Nutritional
Epidemiology Unit, Cancer Research and Prevention Institute (ISPO), Florence,
Italy; (11)Department of Human Biology, NUTRIM School of Nutrition and
Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, Netherlands; (12)National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, Netherlands; (13)Division of Human Nutrition,
Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands; (14)Department of Epidemiology,
German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Nuthetal, Germany;
(15)Department of Public Health, Section for Epidemiology, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark; (16)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Charles Bronfman Institute
for Personalized Medicine, Department of Preventive Medicine, and the Mindich
Child Health and Development Institute, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY; and. (17)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and
Frederiksberg Hospitals, The Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark; Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, and Department of Public Health, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Although the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>)
pathway is central in adipogenesis, it remains unknown whether it influences
change in body weight (BW) and whether dietary fat has a modifying effect on the 
association.
OBJECTIVES: We examined whether 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 
4 genes in the PPAR<U+03B3> pathway are associated with the OR of being a BW gainer or
with annual changes in anthropometry and whether intake of total fat,
monounsaturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, or saturated fat has a modifying effect
on these associations.
METHODS: A case-noncase study included 11,048 men and women from cohorts in the
European Diet, Obesity and Genes study; 5552 were cases, defined as individuals
with the greatest BW gain during follow-up, and 6548 were randomly selected,
including 5496 noncases. We selected 4 genes [CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß
(CEBPB), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2, PPAR<U+03B3> gene (PPARG), and sterol
regulatory element binding transcription factor 1] according to evidence about
biologic plausibility for interactions with dietary fat in weight regulation.
Diet was assessed at baseline, and anthropometry was followed for 7 y.
RESULTS: The ORs for being a BW gainer for the 27 genetic variants ranged from
0.87 (95% CI: 0.79, 1.03) to 1.12 (95% CI: 0.96, 1.22) per additional minor
allele. Uncorrected, CEBPB rs4253449 had a significant interaction with the
intake of total fat and subgroups of fat. The OR for being a BW gainer for each
additional rs4253449 minor allele per 100 kcal higher total fat intake was 1.07
(95% CI: 1.02, 1.12; P = 0.008), and similar associations were found for
subgroups of fat.
CONCLUSIONS: Among European men and women, the influence of dietary fat on
associations between SNPs in the PPAR<U+03B3> pathway and anthropometry is likely to be 
absent or marginal. The observed interaction between rs4253449 and dietary fat
needs confirmation.

© 2016 American Society for Nutrition.

PMID: 26865646  [PubMed - in process]


4. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 11;6:21502. doi: 10.1038/srep21502.

Temporal retinal transcriptome and systems biology analysis identifies key
pathways and hub genes in Staphylococcus aureus endophthalmitis.

Rajamani D(1), Singh PK(2,)(3), Rottmann BG(3), Singh N(1), Bhasin MK(1,)(4),
Kumar A(2,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)BIDMC Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Center, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. (2)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI. (3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Interdisciplinary
Medicine and Biotechnology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.

Bacterial endophthalmitis remains a devastating inflammatory condition associated
with permanent vision loss. Hence, assessing the host response in this disease
may provide new targets for intervention. Using a mouse model of Staphylococcus
aureus (SA) endophthalmitis and performing retinal transcriptome analysis, we
discovered progressive changes in the expression of 1,234 genes. Gene ontology
(GO) and pathway analyses revealed the major pathways impacted in endophthalmitis
includes: metabolism, inflammatory/immune, antimicrobial, cell trafficking, and
lipid biosynthesis. Among the immune/inflammation pathways, JAK/Stat and IL-17A
signaling were the most significantly affected. Interactive network-based
analyses identified 13 focus hub genes (IL-6, IL-1ß, CXCL2, STAT3, NUPR1, Jun,
CSF1, CYR61, CEBPB, IGF-1, EGFR1, SPP1, and TGM2) within these important
pathways. The expression of hub genes confirmed by qRT-PCR, ELISA (IL-6, IL-1ß,
and CXCL2), and Western blot or immunostaining (CEBP, STAT3, NUPR1, and IGF1)
showed strong correlation with transcriptome data. Since TLR2 plays an important 
role in SA endophthalmitis, counter regulation analysis of TLR2 ligand pretreated
retina or the use of retinas from TLR2 knockout mice showed the down-regulation
of inflammatory regulatory genes. Collectively, our study provides, for the first
time, a comprehensive analysis of the transcriptomic response and identifies key 
pathways regulating retinal innate responses in staphylococcal endophthalmitis.

PMCID: PMC4749995
PMID: 26865111  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan 15. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25494. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcription Factors and Medium Suitable for Initiating the Differentiation of
Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells to the Hepatocyte Lineage.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, 934-5 Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan.
(2)Department of Radiology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 
934-5 Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (3)Department of
Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of
Rheumatology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan.

Transcription factors and culture media were investigated to determine the
condition to initiate the differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells most efficiently. The expression of genes in human adult liver was compared
with that in 201B7 cells (iPS cells) using cDNA microarray analysis. Episomal
plasmids expressing transcription factors were constructed. 201B7 cells were
transfected with the episomal plasmids and cultured in ReproFF (feeder-free media
maintaining pluripotency), Leibovitz-15 (L15), William's E (WE), or Dulbecco's
Modified Eagle Medium/Nutrient F-12 Ham (DF12) for seven days. RNA was isolated
and subjected to real-time quantitative PCR to analyze the expression of
alpha-feto protein (AFP) and albumin. cDNA microarray analysis revealed 16
transcription factors that were upregulated in human adult liver relative to that
in 201B7 cells. Episomal plasmids expressing these 16 genes were transfected into
201B7 cells. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA), CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta (CEBPB), forkhead box A1 (FOXA1), and forkhead box A3 (FOXA3)
up-regulated AFP and down-regulated Nanog. These four genes were further
analyzed. The expression of AFP and albumin was the highest in 201B7 cells
transfected with the combination of CEBPA, CEBPB, FOXA1, and FOXA3 and cultured
in WE. The combination of CEBPA, CEBPB, FOXA1, and FOXA3 was suitable for 201B7
cells to initiate differentiation to the hepatocyte lineage and WE was the most
suitable medium for culture after transfection. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773721  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 23;17(1). pii: E11. doi: 10.3390/ijms17010011.

Fibroblast Growth Factor 21 Suppresses Adipogenesis in Pig Intramuscular Fat
Cells.

Wang Y(1), Liu X(2), Hou L(3), Wu W(4), Zhao S(5), Xiong Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
College of Animal Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
ylwang@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (2)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Animal Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal Science, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. XinyiLiu9@gmail.com. (3)Key Laboratory of
Agriculture Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
mnhouliming@gmail.com. (4)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China. wuwangjun2012@njau.edu.cn. (5)Key Laboratory
of Agriculture Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
shzhao@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (6)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Animal Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal Science, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. yzxionghzau@gmail.com.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) plays an important role in the treatment of
disease associated with muscle insulin resistance which is characterized by
various factors, such as intramuscular triglyceride (IMT) content. Studies have
also shown that FGF21 inhibits triglyceride synthesis in vivo. However, the
precise mechanism whereby FGF21 regulates triglyceride metabolism in
intramuscular fat (IMF), which may influence the muscle insulin sensitivity, is
not clearly understood. In order to understand the role of FGF21 in IMF
deposition, we performed FGF21 overexpression in IMF cells by stable
transfection. Our results showed that FGF21 inhibited the key adipogenesis gene
mRNA expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) family by reducing lysine-specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1) expression which led to significant decline in lipid
accumulation, and the result was confirmed by Western blot. Moreover, triggered
by FGF21, parts of the adipokines-fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4), glucose
transporter 4 (GLUT4), adiponectin (ADIPOQ), and perilipin (PLIN1)-were also
down-regulated. Furthermore, FGF21 gene expression was suppressed by
transcription factor CEBP beta (CEBPB) which contributed strongly to triglyceride
synthesis. Taken together, our study is the first to experimentally demonstrate
FGF21 emerging as an efficient blockade of adipogenesis in IMF, thus also
providing a new understanding of the mechanism whereby FGF21 improves insulin
sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC4730258
PMID: 26703591  [PubMed - in process]


7. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2015 Dec 18;3(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s40478-015-0266-3.

Molecular analysis of pediatric brain tumors identifies microRNAs in pilocytic
astrocytomas that target the MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways.

Jones TA(1), Jeyapalan JN(1), Forshew T(1,)(2), Tatevossian RG(1,)(3), Lawson
AR(1,)(4), Patel SN(1), Doctor GT(1), Mumin MA(1), Picker SR(5,)(6), Phipps
KP(7), Michalski A(8), Jacques TS(9,)(10), Sheer D(11).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark
Street, London, E1 2AT, UK. (2)Present address: Research Department of Pathology,
Cancer Institute, University College London, 72 Huntley St, Camden Town, London, 
WC1E 6DD, UK. (3)Present address: Department of Neuropathology, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 38105, USA. (4)Present address:
Inivata Limited, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK. (5)Department of
Histopathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, WC1N
3JH, UK. (6)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, UCL-Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK. (7)Department of
Neurosurgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, WC1N
3JH, UK. (8)Department of Oncology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Trust, London, WC1N 3JH, UK. (9)Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, WC1N 3JH, UK. t.jacques@ich.ucl.ac.uk.
(10)Developmental Biology and Cancer Programme, UCL-Institute of Child Health,
University College London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK. t.jacques@ich.ucl.ac.uk.
(11)Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark
Street, London, E1 2AT, UK. d.sheer@qmul.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: Pilocytic astrocytomas are slow-growing tumors that usually occur
in the cerebellum or in the midline along the hypothalamic/optic pathways. The
most common genetic alterations in pilocytic astrocytomas activate the ERK/MAPK
signal transduction pathway, which is a major driver of proliferation but is also
believed to induce senescence in these tumors. Here, we have conducted a detailed
investigation of microRNA and gene expression, together with pathway analysis, to
improve our understanding of the regulatory mechanisms in pilocytic astrocytomas.
RESULTS: Pilocytic astrocytomas were found to have distinctive microRNA and gene 
expression profiles compared to normal brain tissue and a selection of other
pediatric brain tumors. Several microRNAs found to be up-regulated in pilocytic
astrocytomas are predicted to target the ERK/MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathways as
well as genes involved in senescence-associated inflammation and cell cycle
control. Furthermore, IGFBP7 and CEBPB, which are transcriptional inducers of the
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), were also up-regulated together
with the markers of senescence and inflammation, CDKN1A (p21), CDKN2A (p16) and
IL1B.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide further evidence of a senescent phenotype in
pilocytic astrocytomas. In addition, they suggest that the ERK/MAPK pathway,
which is considered the major driver of these tumors, is regulated not only by
genetic aberrations but also by microRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4683939
PMID: 26682910  [PubMed - in process]


8. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Dec 3;97(6):801-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.10.016.

Multiple Hepatic Regulatory Variants at the GALNT2 GWAS Locus Associated with
High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol.

Roman TS(1), Marvelle AF(2), Fogarty MP(2), Vadlamudi S(2), Gonzalez AJ(2),
Buchkovich ML(2), Huyghe JR(3), Fuchsberger C(3), Jackson AU(3), Wu Y(2), Civelek
M(4), Lusis AJ(5), Gaulton KJ(6), Sethupathy P(2), Kangas AJ(7), Soininen P(8),
Ala-Korpela M(9), Kuusisto J(10), Collins FS(11), Laakso M(10), Boehnke M(3),
Mohlke KL(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA; Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (2)Department of
Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, School
of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (4)Department
of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center
for Public Health Genomics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. (5)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Deparment of Microbiology,
Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Human
Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (6)Department of Genetics, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (7)Computational
Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu, 90014 Oulu, Finland. 
(8)Computational Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu,
90014 Oulu, Finland; Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Metabolomics Laboratory, School
of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, 70211 Kuopio, Finland.
(9)Computational Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu,
90014 Oulu, Finland; Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Metabolomics Laboratory, School
of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, 70211 Kuopio, Finland; Oulu
University Hospital, 90220 Oulu, Finland; Computational Medicine, School of
Social and Community Medicine and Medical Research Council Integrative
Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2BN, UK. (10)Department of 
Medicine, University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, 70210
Kuopio, Finland. (11)National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (12)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address: mohlke@med.unc.edu.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified more than 150 loci
associated with blood lipid and cholesterol levels; however, the functional and
molecular mechanisms for many associations are unknown. We examined the
functional regulatory effects of candidate variants at the GALNT2 locus
associated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C). Fine-mapping and
conditional analyses in the METSIM study identified a single locus harboring 25
noncoding variants (r(2) > 0.7 with the lead GWAS variants) strongly associated
with total cholesterol in medium-sized HDL (e.g., rs17315646, p = 3.5 × 10(-12)).
We used luciferase reporter assays in HepG2 cells to test all 25 variants for
allelic differences in regulatory enhancer activity. rs2281721 showed allelic
differences in transcriptional activity (75-fold [T] versus 27-fold [C] more than
the empty-vector control), as did a separate 780-bp segment containing rs4846913,
rs2144300, and rs6143660 (49-fold [AT(-) haplotype] versus 16-fold [CC(+)
haplotype] more). Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we observed
differential CEBPB binding to rs4846913, and we confirmed this binding in a
native chromatin context by performing chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays in HepG2 and Huh-7 cell lines of differing genotypes. Additionally,
sequence reads in HepG2 DNase-I-hypersensitivity and CEBPB ChIP-seq signals
spanning rs4846913 showed significant allelic imbalance.
Allelic-expression-imbalance assays performed with RNA from primary human
hepatocyte samples and expression-quantitative-trait-locus (eQTL) data in human
subcutaneous adipose tissue samples confirmed that alleles associated with
increased HDL-C are associated with a modest increase in GALNT2 expression.
Together, these data suggest that at least rs4846913 and rs2281721 play key roles
in influencing GALNT2 expression at this HDL-C locus.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4678431 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 26637976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:958231. doi: 10.1155/2015/958231. Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell Gene Expression Remains Broadly Altered Years
after Successful Interferon-Based Hepatitis C Virus Treatment.

Waldron PR(1), Holodniy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA ; Division of
Infectious Diseases & Geographic Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305-5107, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) is altered in chronic Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) infection. Duration of
changes after pegylated interferon- (peg-IFN-) based HCV treatment is unclear.
METHODS: PBMC mRNA expression of 184 inflammatory response genes was analyzed
(nCounter GX Human Inflammation Kit, Nanostring) from peg-IFN treatment
nonresponders (NR, n = 18), sustained virologic responders (SVR, n = 22), and
spontaneous clearers (SC, n = 15). Logistic regression was used for comparison.
RESULTS: Median time from last treatment was 2 and 2.7 years in SVR and NR,
respectively (p = NS). Mean mRNA counts were significantly different for 42 and
29 genes comparing SVR to SC patients and NR to SC, respectively, and no genes
comparing SVR to NR. Differential expression of 24 genes was significantly
different in both SVR and NR groups compared to SC. Among these 24 acute and
chronic inflammatory cascade genes, significant upregulation was noted for
proinflammatory transcription regulators Fos, CEBPB, and MyD88 in SVR and NR
compared to SC. HDAC4 was significantly downregulated in SVR and NR compared to
the SC group.
CONCLUSIONS: PBMC inflammatory gene expression patterns in SVR resemble NR more
than SC patients. A generalized inflammatory response persists in PBMCs long
after successful peg-IFN treatment for HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC4629046
PMID: 26568966  [PubMed - in process]


10. Genome Res. 2015 Dec;25(12):1791-800. doi: 10.1101/gr.191593.115. Epub 2015 Oct
20.

Promoter-distal RNA polymerase II binding discriminates active from inactive
CCAAT/ enhancer-binding protein beta binding sites.

Savic D(1), Roberts BS(1), Carleton JB(2), Partridge EC(1), White MA(3), Cohen
BA(3), Cooper GM(1), Gertz J(2), Myers RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, Alabama 35806, USA;
(2)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA; (3)Washington University at St. Louis,
Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Department of Genetics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.

Transcription factors (TFs) bind to thousands of DNA sequences in mammalian
genomes, but most of these binding events appear to have no direct effect on gene
expression. It is unclear why only a subset of TF bound sites are actively
involved in transcriptional regulation. Moreover, the key genomic features that
accurately discriminate between active and inactive TF binding events remain
ambiguous. Recent studies have identified promoter-distal RNA polymerase II
(RNAP2) binding at enhancer elements, suggesting that these interactions may
serve as a marker for active regulatory sequences. Despite these correlative
analyses, a thorough functional validation of these genomic co-occupancies is
still lacking. To characterize the gene regulatory activity of DNA sequences
underlying promoter-distal TF binding events that co-occur with RNAP2 and TF
sites devoid of RNAP2 occupancy using a functional reporter assay, we performed
cis-regulatory element sequencing (CRE-seq). We tested more than 1000
promoter-distal CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (CEBPB)-bound sites in HepG2 
and K562 cells, and found that CEBPB-bound sites co-occurring with RNAP2 were
more likely to exhibit enhancer activity. CEBPB-bound sites further maintained
substantial cell-type specificity, indicating that local DNA sequence can
accurately convey cell-type-specific regulatory information. By comparing our
CRE-seq results to a comprehensive set of genome annotations, we identified a
variety of genomic features that are strong predictors of regulatory element
activity and cell-type-specific activity. Collectively, our functional assay
results indicate that RNAP2 occupancy can be used as a key genomic marker that
can distinguish active from inactive TF bound sites.

© 2015 Savic et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4665001 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26486725  [PubMed - in process]


11. Adipocyte. 2015 Jan 20;4(4):248-55. doi: 10.1080/21623945.2015.1007823.

The transient expression of Klf4 and Klf5 during adipogenesis depends on GSK3ß
activity.

Cervantes-Camacho C(1), Beltrán-Langarica A(1), Ochoa-Uribe AK(1), Marsch-Moreno 
M(1), Ayala-Sumuano JT(2), Velez-delValle C(1), Kuri-Harcuch W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology; Centro de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados del
Instituto Politécnico Nacional ; México City, Mexico. (2)Instituto de
Neurobiología; Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México ; Querétaro, México.

Adipogenesis is regulated by a complex cascade of transcriptional factors, among 
them KLF4. This factor was previously shown to be necessary for adipose
differentiation. We found that GSK3ß activity was required for Klf4 and Klf5
expression during adipogenesis. In addition, retinoic acid inhibited Klf4 and
Klf5 expression but not that of Cebpb. Protein synthesis inhibition showed that
the transient expression of Klf4, Cebpb and Klf5 during early adipogenesis seemed
to require a yet unknown protein for their repression. We also found that Klf4
forced expression in 3T3-F442A cells cultured under non-adipogenic conditions did
not induce adipogenesis, nor the expression of Cebpb or Klf5, a Cebpb target
gene, showing that KLF4 was not sufficient for adipose differentiation to take
place. This would suggest that a more complex combination of molecular pathways
not yet understood, is involved during early adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4573185
PMID: 26451280  [PubMed]


12. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Dec;59 Pt A:117-25. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Predicting functional regulatory SNPs in the human antimicrobial peptide genes
DEFB1 and CAMP in tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.

Flores Saiffe Farías A(1), Jaime Herrera López E(2), Moreno Vázquez CJ(3), Li
W(4), Prado Montes de Oca E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Personalized Medicine Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, Research Center of Technology and Design
Assistance of Jalisco State, National Council of Science and Technology (CIATEJ
AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, CP 44270
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address: adolfo.flores.saiffe@gmail.com.
(2)Industrial Biotechnology, CIATEJ AC, Zapopan Unit, CONACYT, Camino Arenero
1227, Col. El Bajío del Arenal, CP 45019 Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic
address: eherrera@ciatej.mx. (3)Personalized Medicine Laboratory (LAMPER),
Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, Research Center of
Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State, National Council of Science
and Technology (CIATEJ AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la
Normal, CP 44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address:
ing_cjmv@hotmail.com. (4)The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human
Genetics, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, 350 Community Dr. Manhasset, 
NY 11030, USA. Electronic address: wtli2012@gmail.com. (5)Personalized Medicine
Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, 
Research Center of Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State, National
Council of Science and Technology (CIATEJ AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col.
Colinas de la Normal, CP 44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico; Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Biosafety Area, Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara
Unit, CIATEJ AC, CONACYT, Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, CP
44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address: eprado@ciatej.mx.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs) within gene promoter region or enhancers can modify the transcription
rate of genes related to complex diseases. These SNPs can be called regulatory
SNPs (rSNPs). Data compiled from recent projects, such as the 1000 Genomes
Project and ENCODE, has revealed essential information used to perform in silico 
prediction of the molecular and biological repercussions of SNPs within TFBS.
However, most of these studies are very limited, as they only analyze SNPs in
coding regions or when applied to promoters, and do not integrate essential
biological data like TFBSs, expression profiles, pathway analysis, homotypic
redundancy (number of TFBSs for the same TF in a region), chromatin accessibility
and others, which could lead to a more accurate prediction. Our aim was to
integrate different data in a biologically coherent method to analyze the
proximal promoter regions of two antimicrobial peptide genes, DEFB1 and CAMP,
that are associated with tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/AIDS. We predicted SNPs within
the promoter regions that are more likely to interact with transcription factors 
(TFs). We also assessed the impact of homotypic redundancy using a novel approach
called the homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF). Our results identified 10
SNPs, which putatively modify the binding affinity of 24 TFs previously
identified as related to TB and HIV/AIDS expression profiles (e.g. KLF5, CEBPA
and NFKB1 for TB; FOXP2, BRCA1, CEBPB, CREB1, EBF1 and ZNF354C for HIV/AIDS; and 
RUNX2, HIF1A, JUN/AP-1, NR4A2, EGR1 for both diseases). Validating with the
OregAnno database and cell-specific functional/non functional SNPs from
additional 13 genes, our algorithm performed 53% sensitivity and 84.6%
specificity to detect functional rSNPs using the DNAseI-HUP database. We are
proposing our algorithm as a novel in silico method to detect true functional
rSNPs in antimicrobial peptide genes. With further improvement, this novel method
could be applied to other promoters in order to design probes and to discover new
drug targets for complex diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26447748  [PubMed - in process]


13. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2015 Oct 6;13:113. doi: 10.1186/s12958-015-0112-2.

Gene expression analysis of pig cumulus-oocyte complexes stimulated in vitro with
follicle stimulating hormone or epidermal growth factor-like peptides.

Blaha M(1), Nemcova L(1), Kepkova KV(1), Vodicka P(2), Prochazka R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Institute of Animal Physiology and
Genetics, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Rumburska 89, 277 21, Libechov, Czech
Republic. (2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA. (3)Laboratory of Developmental Biology,
Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics, The Czech Academy of Sciences,
Rumburska 89, 277 21, Libechov, Czech Republic. prochazka@iapg.cas.cz.

BACKGROUND: The gonadotropin-induced resumption of oocyte meiosis in preovulatory
follicles is preceded by expression of epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like
peptides, amphiregulin (AREG) and epiregulin (EREG), in mural granulosa and
cumulus cells. Both the gonadotropins and the EGF-like peptides possess the
capacity to stimulate resumption of oocyte meiosis in vitro via activation of a
broad signaling network in cumulus cells. To better understand the rapid genomic 
actions of gonadotropins (FSH) and EGF-like peptides, we analyzed transcriptomes 
of cumulus cells at 3 h after their stimulation.
METHODS: We hybridized aRNA from cumulus cells to a pig oligonucleotide
microarray and compared the transcriptomes of FSH- and AREG/EREG-stimulated
cumulus cells with untreated control cells and vice versa. The identified over-
and underexpressed genes were subjected to functional genomic analysis according 
to their molecular and cellular functions. The expression pattern of 50 selected 
genes with a known or potential function in ovarian development was verified by
real-time qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: Both FSH and AREG/EREG increased the expression of genes associated with
regulation of cell proliferation, cell migration, blood coagulation and
extracellular matrix remodeling. FSH alone induced the expression of genes
involved in inflammatory response and in the response to reactive oxygen species.
Moreover, FSH stimulated the expression of genes closely related to some
ovulatory events either exclusively or significantly more than AREG/EREG (AREG,
ADAMTS1, HAS2, TNFAIP6, PLAUR, PLAT, and HSD17B7). In contrast to AREG/EREG, FSH 
also increased the expression of genes coding for key transcription factors
(CEBPB, FOS, ID1/3, and NR5A2), which may contribute to the differing expression 
profiles of FSH- and AREG/EREG-treated cumulus cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The impact of FSH on cumulus cell gene transcription was higher than
the impact of EGF-like factors in terms of the number of cell functions affected 
as well as the number of over- and underexpressed genes. Both FSH and EGF-like
factors overexpressed genes involved in the post-ovulatory switch in
steroidogenesis and tissue remodelling. However, FSH was remarkably more
efficient in the up-regulation of several specific genes essential for ovulation 
of matured oocytes and also genes that been reported to play an important role in
maturation of cumulus-enclosed oocytes in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4596359
PMID: 26445099  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 15;6:199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00199. eCollection
2015.

Systems pharmacology of adiposity reveals inhibition of EP300 as a common
therapeutic mechanism of caloric restriction and resveratrol for obesity.

Nishimura Y(1), Sasagawa S(2), Ariyoshi M(2), Ichikawa S(2), Shimada Y(2),
Kawaguchi K(2), Kawase R(2), Yamamoto R(3), Uehara T(3), Yanai T(3), Takata R(3),
Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Mie 
University Medical Zebrafish Research Center Tsu, Japan ; Department of Systems
Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Department 
of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology Innovation Institute Tsu,
Japan ; Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center
Tsu, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine Tsu, Japan. (3)Product Development Research Institute, Mercian
Corporation Fujisawa, Japan.

Both caloric restriction (CR) and resveratrol (RSV) have beneficial effects on
obesity. However, the biochemical pathways that mediate these beneficial effects 
might be complex and interconnected and have not been fully elucidated. To reveal
the common therapeutic mechanism of CR and RSV, we performed a comparative
transcriptome analysis of adipose tissues from diet-induced obese (DIO) zebrafish
and obese humans. We identified nine genes in DIO zebrafish and seven genes in
obese humans whose expressions were regulated by CR and RSV. Although the gene
lists did not overlap except for one gene, the gene ontologies enriched in the
gene lists were highly overlapped, and included genes involved in adipocyte
differentiation, lipid storage and lipid metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis of
cis-regulatory sequences of these genes revealed that their transcriptional
regulators also overlapped, including EP300, HDAC2, CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and
FOXA2. We also identified 15 and 46 genes that were dysregulated in the adipose
tissue of DIO zebrafish and obese humans, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis
identified EP300, HDAC2, and CEBPB as common transcriptional regulators for these
genes. EP300 is a histone and lysyl acetyltransferase that modulates the function
of histone and various proteins including CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and FOXA2. We
demonstrated that adiposity in larval zebrafish was significantly reduced by
C646, an inhibitor of EP300 that antagonizes acetyl-CoA. The reduction of
adiposity by C646 was not significantly different from that induced by RSV or
co-treatment of C646 and RSV. These results indicate that the inhibition of EP300
might be a common therapeutic mechanism between CR and RSV in adipose tissues of 
obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC4569862
PMID: 26441656  [PubMed]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 14;10(9):e0137087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137087.
eCollection 2015.

A Genome-Wide mRNA Screen and Functional Analysis Reveal FOXO3 as a Candidate
Gene for Chicken Growth.

Chen B(1), Xu J(1), He X(1), Xu H(1), Li G(1), Du H(2), Nie Q(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, Guangdong,
China; Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular
Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Guangzhou, 510642, Guangdong, China. (2)School of Bioscience and
Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.

Chicken growth performance provides direct economic benefits to the poultry
industry. However, the underlying genetic mechanisms are unclear. The objective
of this study was to identify candidate genes associated with chicken growth and 
investigate their potential mechanisms. We used RNA-Seq to study the breast
muscle transcriptome in high and low tails of Recessive White Rock (WRRh, WRRl)
and Xinghua chickens (XHh, XHl). A total of 60, 23, 153 and 359 differentially
expressed genes were detected in WRRh vs. WRRl, XHh vs. XHl, WRRh vs. XHh and
WRRl vs. XHl, respectively. GO, KEGG pathway and gene network analyses showed
that CEBPB, FBXO32, FOXO3 and MYOD1 played key roles in growth. The functions of 
FBXO32 and FOXO3 were validated. FBXO32 was predominantly expressed in leg
muscle, heart and breast muscle. After decreased FBXO32 expression,
growth-related genes such as PDK4, IGF2R and IGF2BP3 were significantly
down-regulated (P < 0.05). FBXO32 was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with
carcass and meat quality traits, but not growth traits. FOXO3 was predominantly
expressed in breast and leg muscle. In both of these tissues, the FOXO3 mRNA
level in XH was significantly higher than that in WRR chickens with normal body
weight (P < 0.05). In DF-1 cells, siRNA knockdown of FOXO3 significantly (P <
0.01) inhibited the MYOD expression and significantly up-regulated (P < 0.01 or P
< 0.05) the expression of growth-related genes including CEBPB, FBXO32, GH, GHR, 
IGF1R, IGF2R, IGF2BP1, IGF2BP3, INSR, PDK1 and PDK4. Moreover, 18 SNPs were
identified in FOXO3. G66716193A was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with
growth traits. The sites C66716002T, C66716195T and A66716179G were significantly
(P < 0.05) associated with growth or carcass traits. These results demonstrated
that FOXO3 is a candidate gene influencing chicken growth. Our observations
provide new clues to understand the molecular basis of chicken growth.

PMCID: PMC4569328
PMID: 26366565  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Transl Med. 2015 Aug 19;13:270. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0603-0.

Identification of apoptosis-related microRNAs and their target genes in
myocardial infarction post-transplantation with skeletal myoblasts.

Liu Q(1,)(2), Du GQ(3,)(4), Zhu ZT(5,)(6), Zhang C(7,)(8), Sun XW(9,)(10), Liu
JJ(11,)(12), Li X(13,)(14), Wang YS(15,)(16), Du WJ(17,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia, Chinese Ministry of Education,
Harbin, China. doctorliu9128@126.com. (2)Department of Cardiology, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150086, China.
doctorliu9128@126.com. (3)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia, Chinese
Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. duguoqing9@163.com. (4)Department of
Ultrasound, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 
China. duguoqing9@163.com. (5)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia, Chinese 
Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. zzt405zzt405@163.com. (6)Department of
Cardiac Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China. zzt405zzt405@163.com. (7)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial
Ischemia, Chinese Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. 289986993@qq.com.
(8)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150086, China. 289986993@qq.com. (9)The Key Laboratory of
Myocardial Ischemia, Chinese Ministry of Education, Harbin, China.
sunxiaowei198902@163.com. (10)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150086, China.
sunxiaowei198902@163.com. (11)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia, Chinese 
Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. 190821918@qq.com. (12)Department of
Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 
150086, China. 190821918@qq.com. (13)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia,
Chinese Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. xialiyinmingzhu@126.com.
(14)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150086, China. xialiyinmingzhu@126.com. (15)The Key
Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia, Chinese Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. 
wys19874642163@yahoo.com.cn. (16)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150086, China.
wys19874642163@yahoo.com.cn. (17)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia,
Chinese Ministry of Education, Harbin, China. duwenjuan8009@126.com.
(18)Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150086, China. duwenjuan8009@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Skeletal myoblasts (SkMs) has provided a promising treatment for
myocardial infarction (MI). Functioning as posttranscriptional regulators,
microRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in cardiac repairment and stem cell
regulation. However, the correlation between miRNAs and their targeted genes in
SkM cell therapy for MI was not fully understood.
METHODS: We explored the cardioprotection by SkMs in infracted rats and
determined cardiac functions at 4 weeks. In addition, we compared the expression 
profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs in post-MI rats with or without SkM cell therapy
using microarray. The concordance between miRNA expression and mRNA levels of
potential target genes was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Quantitative echocardiography and histology showed improved cardiac
function, attenuated heart infarcted area and inhibited cardiomyocyte apoptosis
in the SkM group, compared with MI group. We identified that 160 miRNAs were
differentially expressed in MI group as compared to the control group and 78
miRNAs were differentially expressed in the SkM treated group as compared to the 
untreated post-MI. We focused on a novel set of apoptosis-associated miRNAs and
their target genes, among which 4 miRNAs (miR-30a-5p, miR-30c-5p, miR-145-5p,
miR-140-3p), except one (miR-143-3p), were downregulated in the SkM treated group
as compared to the untreated group. Furthermore, we found seven genes including
Angptl4, Dpep1, Egr1, Eif5a, Tsc22d3, Irs2 and Cebpb that showed a linear
correlation with which miRNAs.
CONCLUSIONS: The downregulation of apoptosis-regulatory miRNAs and in turn
upregulation of target genes may partially account for rescue effect of SKM
therapy for MI.

PMCID: PMC4539916
PMID: 26286600  [PubMed - in process]


17. Cancer Lett. 2015 Nov 1;368(1):115-25. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.07.036. Epub
2015 Aug 10.

Tumor cell-secreted angiogenin induces angiogenic activity of endothelial cells
by suppressing miR-542-3p.

He T(1), Qi F(1), Jia L(1), Wang S(1), Wang C(1), Song N(1), Fu Y(1), Li L(1),
Luo Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)The National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Protein Therapeutics,
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; Beijing Key 
Laboratory for Protein Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China; Cancer Biology Laboratory, School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (2)The National Engineering
Laboratory for Anti-tumor Protein Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China; Beijing Key Laboratory for Protein
Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China; Cancer Biology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: yluo@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Therapeutic strategies for targeting angiogenesis have been proven as successful 
treatments for divergent cancers. We previously discovered an anti-angiogenic
miR-542-3p, which directly targeted the key angiogenesis-promoting protein
Angiopoietin-2 to inhibit tumor angiogenesis in breast cancer models. In this
study, to further investigate the mechanism of miR-542-3p induced angiogenic
inhibition, we screened for tumor cell derived factors which were responsible for
miR-542-3p alteration in endothelial cells. We found that tumor cell-derived
angiogenin downregulated miR-542-3p in endothelial cells. Overexpression of
angiogenin in tumor cells facilitated angiogenic activation in both in vitro and 
in vivo models via inhibition of miR-542-3p. Furthermore, our results showed that
angiogenin could suppress CEBPB and POU2F1, which were transcription factors for 
miR-542-3p, suggesting a novel tumor cell-endothelial cell signal pathway. In
addition, the level of angiogenin in primary breast carcinomas correlated with
clinical progression. Serum levels of angiogenin were associated with metastatic 
development of breast cancer patients. Together, these findings reveal a novel
regulatory pathway whereby tumor-derived angiogenin directly activates
angiogenesis through inhibition of miR-542-3p, suggesting that angiogenin may
represent a promising target for anti-angiogenic therapy and a potential marker
for monitoring disease progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26272182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Mar;117(3):629-37. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25311. Epub 2015 Sep 29.

Retinoic Acid Inhibits Adipogenesis Modulating C/EBPß Phosphorylation and Down
Regulating Srebf1a Expression.

Ayala-Sumuano JT(1), Vélez-DelValle C(2), Marsch-Moreno M(2), Beltrán-Langarica
A(2), Hernández-Mosqueira C(2), Kuri-Harcuch W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Blvd,
Juriquilla 3001, Juriquilla, Querétaro, Mexico. (2)Department of Cell Biology,
Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Avenida Instituto
Politécnico Nacional 2508, San Pedro Zacatenco, Mexico City, Mexico.

Adipogenesis comprises a complex network of signaling pathways and
transcriptional cascades; the GSK3ß-C/EBPß-srebf1a axis is a critical signaling
pathway at early stages leading to the expression of PPAR<U+03B3>2, the master regulator
of adipose differentiation. Previous work has demonstrated that retinoic acid
inhibits adipogenesis affecting different signaling pathways. Here, we evaluated 
the anti-adipogenic effect of retinoic acid on the adipogenic transcriptional
cascade, and the expression of adipogenic genes cebpb, srebf1a, srebf1c, pparg2, 
and cebpa. Our results demonstrate that retinoic acid blocks adipose
differentiation during commitment, returning cells to an apparent non-committed
state, since they have to be newly induced to adipose conversion after the
retinoid is removed from the culture medium. Retinoic acid down regulates the
expression of the adipogenic genes, srebf1a, srebf1c, pparg2, and cebpa; however,
it did not down regulate the expression of cebpb, but it inhibited C/EBPß
phosphorylation at Thr188, a critical step for the progression of the adipogenic 
program. We also found that RA inhibition of adipogenesis did not increase the
expression of dlk1, the gene encoding for Pref1, a well-known anti-adipogenic
factor. J. Cell. Biochem. 117: 629-637, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26271478  [PubMed - in process]


19. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 6;6:7808. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8808.

Region-specific variation in the properties of skeletal adipocytes reveals
regulated and constitutive marrow adipose tissues.

Scheller EL(1), Doucette CR(2), Learman BS(1), Cawthorn WP(1), Khandaker S(1),
Schell B(1), Wu B(1), Ding SY(3), Bredella MA(4), Fazeli PK(5), Khoury B(6),
Jepsen KJ(6), Pilch PF(3), Klibanski A(5), Rosen CJ(2), MacDougald OA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Integrative Physiology and Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA. (2)Center for Clinical
and Translational Research, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Scarborough,
Maine 04074, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. (4)Department of Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02114, USA. (5)Neuroendocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (6)Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Marrow adipose tissue (MAT) accumulates in diverse clinical conditions but
remains poorly understood. Here we show region-specific variation in MAT
adipocyte development, regulation, size, lipid composition, gene expression and
genetic determinants. Early MAT formation in mice is conserved, whereas later
development is strain dependent. Proximal, but not distal tibial, MAT is lost
with 21-day cold exposure. Rat MAT adipocytes from distal sites have an increased
proportion of monounsaturated fatty acids and expression of Scd1/Scd2, Cebpa and 
Cebpb. Humans also have increased distal marrow fat unsaturation. We define
proximal 'regulated' MAT (rMAT) as single adipocytes interspersed with active
haematopoiesis, whereas distal 'constitutive' MAT (cMAT) has low haematopoiesis, 
contains larger adipocytes, develops earlier and remains preserved upon systemic 
challenges. Loss of rMAT occurs in mice with congenital generalized lipodystrophy
type 4, whereas both rMAT and cMAT are preserved in mice with congenital
generalized lipodystrophy type 3. Consideration of these MAT subpopulations may
be important for future studies linking MAT to bone biology, haematopoiesis and
whole-body metabolism.

PMCID: PMC4530473
PMID: 26245716  [PubMed - in process]


20. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;35(19):3409-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00494-15. Epub 2015 Jul 
27.

C/EBPß and Nuclear Factor of Activated T Cells Differentially Regulate Adamts-1
Induction by Stimuli Associated with Vascular Remodeling.

Oller J(1), Alfranca A(2), Méndez-Barbero N(1), Villahoz S(1), Lozano-Vidal N(1),
Martín-Alonso M(1), Arroyo AG(1), Escolano A(1), Armesilla AL(3), Campanero
MR(4), Redondo JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Inflammation, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of
Vascular Biology and Inflammation, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain Unidad de Biotecnología Celular,
Instituto de Investigación en Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain. (3)Research Institute in Healthcare Science, School of Pharmacy,
Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton,
United Kingdom. (4)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain mcampanero@iib.uam.es
jmredondo@cnic.es. (5)Department of Vascular Biology and Inflammation, Centro
Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
mcampanero@iib.uam.es jmredondo@cnic.es.

Emerging evidence indicates that the metalloproteinase Adamts-1 plays a
significant role in the pathophysiology of vessel remodeling, but little is known
about the signaling pathways that control Adamts-1 expression. We show that
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiotensin-II, interleukin-1ß, and
tumor necrosis factor a, stimuli implicated in pathological vascular remodeling, 
increase Adamts-1 expression in endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells.
Analysis of the intracellular signaling pathways implicated in this process
revealed that VEGF and angiotensin-II upregulate Adamts-1 expression via
activation of differential signaling pathways that ultimately promote functional 
binding of the NFAT or C/EBPß transcription factors, respectively, to the
Adamts-1 promoter. Infusion of mice with angiotensin-II triggered phosphorylation
and nuclear translocation of C/EBPß proteins in aortic cells concomitantly with
an increase in the expression of Adamts-1, further underscoring the importance of
C/EBPß signaling in angiotensin-II-induced upregulation of Adamts-1. Similarly,
VEGF promoted NFAT activation and subsequent Adamts-1 induction in aortic wall in
a calcineurin-dependent manner. Our results demonstrate that Adamts-1
upregulation by inducers of pathological vascular remodeling is mediated by
specific signal transduction pathways involving NFAT or C/EBPß transcription
factors. Targeting of these pathways may prove useful in the treatment of
vascular disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4561726
PMID: 26217013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 25;16:547. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1740-9.

Common and specific downstream signaling targets controlled by Tlr2 and Tlr5
innate immune signaling in zebrafish.

Yang S(1), Marín-Juez R(2,)(3), Meijer AH(1), Spaink HP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)ZF-screens BV, J. H. Oortweg 19, 2333 CH, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (3)Present address: Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck
Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Ludwigstrasse 43, 61231, Bad Nauheim,
Germany. (4)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA,
Leiden, The Netherlands. h.p.spaink@biology.leidenuniv.nl.

BACKGROUND: Although the responses to many pathogen associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) in cell cultures and extracted organs are well characterized, there is
little known of transcriptome responses to PAMPs in whole organisms. To
characterize this in detail, we have performed RNAseq analysis of responses of
zebrafish embryos to injection of PAMPs in the caudal vein at one hour after
exposure. We have compared two ligands that in mammals have been shown to
specifically activate the TLR2 and TLR5 receptors: Pam3CSK4 and flagellin,
respectively.
RESULTS: We identified a group of 80 common genes that respond with high
stringency selection to stimulations with both PAMPs, which included several
well-known immune marker genes such as il1b and tnfa. Surprisingly, we also
identified sets of 48 and 42 genes that specifically respond to either Pam3CSK4
or flagellin, respectively, after a comparative filtering approach. Remarkably,
in the Pam3CSK4 specific set, there was a set of transcription factors with more 
than 2 fold-change, as confirmed by qPCR analyses, including cebpb, fosb, nr4a1
and egr3. We also showed that the regulation of the Pam3CSK4 and flagellin
specifically responding sets is inhibited by knockdown of tlr2 or tlr5,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies show that Pam3CSK4 and flagellin can stimulate the Tlr2 
and Tlr5 signaling pathways leading to common and specific responses in the
zebrafish embryo system.

PMCID: PMC4514945
PMID: 26208853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):3103-16. doi: 10.1172/JCI80924. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Pathogenesis of ELANE-mutant severe neutropenia revealed by induced pluripotent
stem cells.

Nayak RC, Trump LR, Aronow BJ, Myers K, Mehta P, Kalfa T, Wellendorf AM, Valencia
CA, Paddison PJ, Horwitz MS, Grimes HL, Lutzko C, Cancelas JA.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is often associated with inherited
heterozygous point mutations in ELANE, which encodes neutrophil elastase (NE).
However, a lack of appropriate models to recapitulate SCN has substantially
hampered the understanding of the genetic etiology and pathobiology of this
disease. To this end, we generated both normal and SCN patient-derived induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and performed genome editing and differentiation 
protocols that recapitulate the major features of granulopoiesis. Pathogenesis of
ELANE point mutations was the result of promyelocyte death and differentiation
arrest, and was associated with NE mislocalization and activation of the unfolded
protein response/ER stress (UPR/ER stress). Similarly, high-dose G-CSF (or
downstream signaling through AKT/BCL2) rescues the dysgranulopoietic defect in
SCN patient-derived iPSCs through C/EBPß-dependent emergency granulopoiesis. In
contrast, sivelestat, an NE-specific small-molecule inhibitor, corrected
dysgranulopoiesis by restoring normal intracellular NE localization in primary
granules; ameliorating UPR/ER stress; increasing expression of CEBPA, but not
CEBPB; and promoting promyelocyte survival and differentiation. Together, these
data suggest that SCN disease pathogenesis includes NE mislocalization, which in 
turn triggers dysfunctional survival signaling and UPR/ER stress. This paradigm
has the potential to be clinically exploited to achieve therapeutic responses
using lower doses of G-CSF combined with targeting to correct NE mislocalization.

PMCID: PMC4563755
PMID: 26193632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 21;464(2):654-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.045. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

Accelerated apoptosis of peripheral blood monocytes in Cebpb-deficient mice.

Tamura A(1), Hirai H(2), Yokota A(1), Sato A(1), Shoji T(1), Kashiwagi T(1),
Iwasa M(3), Fujishiro A(3), Miura Y(1), Maekawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Cell Therapy, Kyoto University
Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Cell Therapy,
Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address:
hhirai@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Cell
Therapy, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan; Division of Gastroenterology
and Hematology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.

The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) transcription factor is required
for granulopoiesis under stress conditions. However, little is known about its
roles in steady state hematopoiesis. Here, we analyzed the peripheral blood and
bone marrow of Cebpb(-/-) mice at steady state by flow cytometry and unexpectedly
found that the number of peripheral blood monocytes was severely reduced, while
the number of bone marrow monocytes was maintained. The ability of Cebpb(-/-)
bone marrow cells to give rise to macrophages/monocytes in vitro was comparable
to that of wild-type bone marrow cells. Apoptosis of monocytes was enhanced in
the peripheral blood, but not in the bone marrow of Cebpb(-/-) mice. These
results indicate that C/EBPß is required for the survival of monocytes in
peripheral blood.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26168729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Sep;45(9):2661-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545471. Epub 2015 Jul 
20.

Endogenous prostaglandin E2 potentiates anti-inflammatory phenotype of macrophage
through the CREB-C/EBP-ß cascade.

Na YR(1), Jung D(1), Yoon BR(2), Lee WW(2,)(3), Seok SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Macrophage Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and
Institute of Endemic Disease, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (3)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Macrophages have important functions in tissue homeostasis, but the exact
mechanisms regarding wide spectrum of macrophage phenotype remain unresolved. In 
this study, we report that mouse bone marrow derived naïve macrophages produce
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2 ) endogenously, resulting in anti-inflammatory gene
expression upon differentiation induced by macrophage colony stimulating factor
(M-CSF). Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibition by indomethacin reduced endogenous PGE2 
production of macrophages and subsequently reduced arg1, IL10 and Mrc1, YmI and
FizzI gene expressions. Of note, PGE2 phosphorylates CREB via EP2 and EP4
receptor ligation, thereby transcriptionally increasing C/EBP-ß expression in
BALB/c bone marrow derived macrophages. Activated CREB directly binds to the
CREB-responsive element of the C/EBP-ß promoter, such that PGE2 ultimately
reinforces arg1, IL10 and Mrc1 gene expression. Cyclic AMP activator forskolin
also phosphorylated CREB and induced the C/EBP-ß cascade, but this was completely
blocked by the PKA inhibitor, H89. Consequently, M-CSF grown macrophages
inhibited T-cell proliferation but the inhibition ability was reduced when the
COX is inhibited by indomethacin or macrophage C/EBP-ß expression was decreased
by siRNA transduction. Our results collectively describe the molecular basis for 
homeostatic macrophage differentiation by endogenous PGE2 .

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26118414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Anim Sci. 2015 Jun;93(6):2730-44. doi: 10.2527/jas.2014-8573.

Long term vitamin A restriction improves meat quality parameters and modifies
gene expression in Iberian pigs.

Ayuso M, Fernández A, Isabel B, Rey A, Benítez R, Daza A, López-Bote CJ, Óvilo C.

Vitamin A is a key regulator of gene expression, influencing adipogenesis and
lipid metabolism in animal tissues. This experiment was conducted to assess the
effect of dietary vitamin A level and administration time on productive traits,
intramuscular fat (IMF) content in ham muscles, tissue fatty acid composition,
and expression of a panel of adipogenic and lipogenic candidate genes in Iberian 
pigs. Sixty piglets of 16.3 kg (SD = 2.5 kg) live weight (LW) were either fed a
vitamin A-enriched diet (10,000 IU vitamin A/kg; CONTROL, n = 20) or a diet
without supplemented vitamin A, applied from 16.3 kg (SD = 2.5 kg; early
restriction group, ER, n = 20) or from an average weight of 35.8 kg (SD = 3.1 kg;
late restriction group, LR, n = 20). Two slaughters were performed when pigs
reached the averaged weights of 101.4 (SD = 4.1 kg) and 157.9 kg LW (SD = 7 kg)
and samples from liver, heart, and backfat were obtained in both sacrifice times.
In addition, ham subcutaneous fat and Semimembranosus (SM) and Biceps Femoris
(BF) muscles were sampled at the last sacrifice. Dietary vitamin A level produced
no effect on carcass traits in any of the harvests, while a small effect was
observed on fatty acid composition in backfat at 101.4 kg LW. However, at 157.9
kg LW, the ER and LR groups showed higher MUFA content and lower SFA content in
backfat, ham fat, and IMF (P < 0.01). In IMF, a decrease in n-6/n-3 PUFA ratio
was observed in the restricted groups (P < 0.005). Intramuscular fat content in
SM muscle was greater (P < 0.05) in the ER group than in the CONTROL and LR
groups, while no difference was detected in BF muscle. Little effect of dietary
vitamin A was observed in liver. Regarding changes in gene expression, ACSL4,
CEBPB, and IGF1 genes were upregulated (P < 0.0001, P < 0.0001, and P < 0.05,
respectively) in the ER group in hepatic tissue, whereas CRABPII and SCD genes
were upregulated (P < 0.05) in the same group in adipose tissue. On the other
hand, was downregulated ( < 0.05) in the ER group in adipose tissue. Results
found in this experiment show that long-term restriction of dietary vitamin A has
a positive effect on nutritional and sensorial parameters of ham meat. Moreover, 
gene expression results were consistent with the vitamin A transcriptional
regulation of adipogenesis and lipogenesis and with the changes observed in meat 
and fat composition.

PMID: 26115261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Leuk Res. 2015 Aug;39(8):883-96. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.04.017. Epub 2015
May 28.

miR-155 regulative network in FLT3 mutated acute myeloid leukemia.

Salemi D(1), Cammarata G(2), Agueli C(1), Augugliaro L(3), Corrado C(4), Bica
MG(1), Raimondo S(4), Marfia A(1), Randazzo V(1), Dragotto P(1), Di Raimondo
F(5), Alessandro R(4), Fabbiano F(1), Santoro A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Ematologia con UTMO, A.O. Ospedali Riuniti Villa Sofia-Cervello, 
Palermo, Italy. (2)IBIM CNR, Palermo, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze
Statistiche e Matematiche "Silvio Vianelli," Università di Palermo, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Biotecnologie Mediche e Forensi, Sezione di
Biologia e Genetica, Palermo, Italy. (5)Divisione di Ematologia, P.O. Ferrarotto 
Catania, Italy. (6)Divisione di Ematologia con UTMO, A.O. Ospedali Riuniti Villa 
Sofia-Cervello, Palermo, Italy. Electronic address: a.santoro@villasofia.it.

BACKGROUND: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) represents a heterogeneous disorder with
recurrent chromosomal alterations and molecular abnormalities. Among AML with
normal karyotype (NK-AML) FLT3 activating mutation, internal tandem duplication
(FLT3-ITD), is present in about 30% of patients, conferring unfavorable outcome. 
Our previous data demonstrated specific up-regulation of miR-155 in FLT3-ITD+
AML. miR-155 is known to be directly implicated in normal hematopoiesis and in
some pathologies such as myeloid hyperplasia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To investigate about the potential influence of miR-155
de-regulation in FLT3-mutated AML we generated a transcription factors regulatory
network and combined this with data from multiple sources that predict miR-155
interactions. From these analyses, we derived a sub-network, called "miR-155
module" that describes functional relationship among miR-155 and transcription
factors in FLT3-mutated AML. We found that "miR-155 module" is characterized by
the presence of six transcription factors as central hubs: four miR-155
regulators (JUN, RUNX1, FOSb, JUNB) and two targets of miR-155 (SPI1, CEBPB) all 
known to be "master" genes of myelopoiesis. We found, in FLT3-mutated AML, a
significant down-regulation of miR-155 target genes CEBPB and SPI1 and
up-regulation of miR-155 regulator genes JUN and RUNX1. We also showed that
PKC412-related FLT3 inhibition, in MV4-11 cell line, causes down-regulation of
miR-155 and increased level of mRNA and protein of miR-155 target SPI1. We showed
in experiments of miR-155 mimic in K562 cell line, a high increase of miR-155 and
an inverse correlation with the mRNA levels of its targets SPI1 and CEBPB.
Moreover silencing of miR-155 in primary AMLs causes mRNA up-regulation of its
target SPI1 and CEBPB.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that activating mutation of FLT3 in AML can lead,
through the induction of JUN, to an increased expression of miR-155, which then
causes down-regulation of SPI1 and CEBPB and consequently may causes block of
myeloid differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26055960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Lett. 2015 Sep 1;365(2):201-10. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.05.027. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

IDH1, a CHOP and C/EBPß-responsive gene under ER stress, sensitizes human
melanoma cells to hypoxia-induced apoptosis.

Yang X(1), Du T(1), Wang X(1), Zhang Y(1), Hu W(2), Du X(1), Miao L(3), Han C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Second Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116044, China. (2)Department of Immunology, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230601, China. (3)Oncology Department, The Second
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230601, China. Electronic
address: bluelin523@163.com. (4)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, China. Electronic address:
hanchuanchun@163.com.

Isocitrate dehydrogenase1 (IDH1) is of great importance in cell metabolism and
energy conversion. However, alterations in IDH1 in response to stress and
excise-regulated mechanisms are not well described. Here we investigated gene
expression profiles under ER stress in melanoma cells and found that IDH1 was
dramatically increased with ER stress induced by tunicamycin. Elevated IDH1
subsequently sensitized human melanoma cells to hypoxia-induced apoptosis and
promoted HIF-1a degradation. In addition, we revealed that CHOP and C/EBPß were
involved in hypoxia-induced apoptosis via transcriptional regulation of IDH1
expression. Our data indicate that IDH1, regulated by CHOP and C/EBPß in response
to ER stress treatment, inhibits survival of melanoma cells under hypoxia and
promotes HIF-1a degradation. Therefore, we propose that IDH1 may serve as a
valuable target for melanoma therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26049021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Sep 15;291:130-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.05.029. Epub 2015
May 27.

The contribution of hypothalamic neuroendocrine, neuroplastic and
neuroinflammatory processes to lipopolysaccharide-induced depressive-like
behaviour in female and male rats: Involvement of glucocorticoid receptor and
C/EBP-ß.

Adzic M(1), Djordjevic J(2), Mitic M(2), Brkic Z(2), Lukic I(2), Radojcic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, VINCA Institute of Nuclear 
Sciences, University of Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: miraz@vinca.rs.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, VINCA Institute of Nuclear 
Sciences, University of Belgrade, Serbia.

Peripheral inflammation induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) causes behavioural
changes indicative for depression. The possible mechanisms involve the
interference with neuroinflammatory, neuroendocrine, and neurotrophic processes. 
Apart from heterogeneity in the molecular background, sexual context may be
another factor relevant to the manifestation of mood disturbances upon an immune 
challenge. We investigated sex-dependent effects of a 7-day LPS treatment of
adult Wistar rats on depressive-like behaviour and their relation with
hypothalamic neuroendocrine factor, corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH),
proplastic brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF), pro-inflammatory
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and nuclear factor kappa beta (NFkB). Also, their
regulators, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP) ß were followed. LPS induced depressive-like behaviour in females was
associated with the increased hypothalamic CRH and decreased BDNF, but not with
COX-2. These changes were paralleled by an increase in nuclear GR, NFkB and 20
kDa C/EBPß. LPS also altered behaviour in males and increased CRH expression, but
in contrast to females, this was accompanied with the elevated COX-2,
accumulation of cytosolic GR and elevated nuclear 38 kDa C/EBPß and NFkB. In
conclusion, depressive-like phenotype induced by LPS in both sexes emerges from
similar HPA axis activation and sex-specific alterations of hypothalamic
molecular signalling: in males it is related to compromised control of
neuroinflamation connected with cytoplasmic GR retention, while in females it is 
related to diminished proplastic capacity of BDNF. Sex-dependent mechanisms by
which inflammation alters hypothalamic processes and cause pathological behaviour
in animals, could be operative in the treatment of depression-related brain
inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26024764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Meta Gene. 2015 May 15;4:129-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2015.04.002. eCollection
2015.

Enriched transcription factor signatures in triple negative breast cancer
indicates possible targeted therapies with existing drugs.

Willis S(1), De P(1), Dey N(1), Long B(2), Young B(1), Sparano JA(3), Wang V(4), 
Davidson NE(5), Leyland-Jones BR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Avera Cancer Institute, Sioux Falls, SD, United States. (2)The Scripps
Research Institute, Jupiter, FL, United States. (3)Montefiore Medical Center,
Bronx, NY, United States. (4)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United
States. (5)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and UPMC Cancer Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

PURPOSE: Triple negative (TN) breast cancers which lack expression of the
estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)
receptors convey a poor prognosis due in part to a lack of targeted therapies.
METHODS: To identify viable targets for the treatment of TN disease, we have
conducted a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on seven different breast cancer 
whole genome gene expression cohorts comparing TN vs. ER + HER2 - to identify
consistently enriched genes that share a common promoter motif. The seven cohorts
were profiled on three different genome expression platforms (Affymetrix,
Illumina and RNAseq) consisting in total of 2088 samples with IHC metadata.
RESULTS: GSEA identified enriched gene expression patterns in TN samples that
share common promoter motifs associated with SOX9, E2F1, HIF1A, HMGA1, MYC BACH2,
CEBPB, and GCNF/NR6A1. Unexpectedly, NR6A1 an orphan nuclear receptor normally
expressed in germ cells of gonads is highly expressed in TN and ER + HER2 -
samples making it an ideal drug target.
CONCLUSION: With the increasing number of large sample size breast cancer
cohorts, an exploratory analysis of genes that are consistently enriched in TN
sharing common promoter motifs allows for the identification of possible
therapeutic targets with extensive validation in patient derived data sets.

PMID: 26005638  [PubMed]


30. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Jul 10;599:140-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.029. Epub
2015 May 19.

Transcriptional regulation of the a-synuclein gene in human brain tissue.

Brenner S(1), Wersinger C(2), Gasser T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department of Neurodegenerative 
diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
brenner.steffen@googlemail.com. (2)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany.

The transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding a-synuclein (SNCA) is thought
to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD), as
common genetic variability in this gene is associated with an elevated risk of
developing PD. However, the relevant mechanisms are still poorly understood. So
far, only few proteins have been identified as transcription factors (TFs) of
SNCA in cellular models. Here we show that two of these TFs bind to the DNA in
human brain tissue: the zinc finger protein ZSCAN21 occupies a region within SNCA
intron 1, as described before, while GATA2 occupies a specific region within
intron 2, where we have identified a new binding site within the complex
structure of the 5'-promoter region of SNCA. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays confirmed these binding sites. Genetic investigations revealed no
polymorphisms or mutations within these sites. A better understanding of TF-DNA
interactions within SNCA may allow to develop novel therapies designed to reduce 
a-synuclein levels.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26002080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0123460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123460.
eCollection 2015.

Nicotinamide exacerbates hypoxemia in ventilator-induced lung injury independent 
of neutrophil infiltration.

Jones HD(1), Yoo J(2), Crother TR(3), Kyme P(3), Ben-Shlomo A(4), Khalafi R(4),
Tseng CW(3), Parks WC(2), Arditi M(3), Liu GY(3), Shimada K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA, United States of America; Infectious and Immunologic Diseases
Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America. (3)Division of
Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, United States of America; Infectious and Immunologic Diseases
Research Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America. (4)Pituitary Center, Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(5):e0128735.

BACKGROUND: Ventilator-induced lung injury is a form of acute lung injury that
develops in critically ill patients on mechanical ventilation and has a high
degree of mortality. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase is an enzyme that is 
highly upregulated in ventilator-induced lung injury and exacerbates the injury
when given exogenously. Nicotinamide (vitamin B3) directly inhibits downstream
pathways activated by Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase and is protective in
other models of acute lung injury.
METHODS: We administered nicotinamide i.p. to mice undergoing mechanical
ventilation with high tidal volumes to study the effects of nicotinamide on
ventilator-induced lung injury. Measures of injury included oxygen saturations
and bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophil counts, protein, and cytokine levels. We
also measured expression of nicotinamide phosophoribosyltransferase, and its
downstream effectors Sirt1 and Cebpa, Cebpb, Cebpe. We assessed the effect of
nicotinamide on the production of nitric oxide during ventilator-induced lung
injury. We also studied the effects of ventilator-induced lung injury in mice
deficient in C/EBPe.
RESULTS: Nicotinamide treatment significantly inhibited neutrophil infiltration
into the lungs during ventilator-induced lung injury, but did not affect protein 
leakage or cytokine production. Surprisingly, mice treated with nicotinamide
developed significantly worse hypoxemia during mechanical ventilation. This
effect was not linked to increases in nitric oxide production or alterations in
expression of Nicotinamide phosphoribosyl transferase, Sirt1, or Cebpa and Cebpb.
Cebpe mRNA levels were decreased with either nicotinamide treatment or mechanical
ventilation, but mice lacking C/EBPe developed the same degree of hypoxemia and
ventilator-induced lung injury as wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Nicotinamide treatment during VILI inhibits neutrophil infiltration 
of the lungs consistent with a strong anti-inflammatory effect, but paradoxically
also leads to the development of significant hypoxemia. These findings suggest
that pulmonary neutrophilia is not linked to hypoxemia in ventilator-induced lung
injury, and that nicotinamide exacerbates hypoxemia during VILI.

PMCID: PMC4395431
PMID: 25875775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncotarget. 2015 May 20;6(14):12637-53.

A STAT3-NFkB/DDIT3/CEBPß axis modulates ALDH1A3 expression in chemoresistant cell
subpopulations.

Canino C(1), Luo Y(2), Marcato P(3), Blandino G(4,)(5), Pass HI(1), Cioce M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Langone
Medical Center, New York University, New York, USA. (2)New York University School
of Medicine, New York, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Department of
Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Translational Oncogenomics Unit, Italian National Cancer Institute 'Regina
Elena', Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Oncology, Juravinski Cancer Center-McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Here we studied the relevance and modulation of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
expression in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) chemoresistant cell
subpopulations (ALDH(bright) cells), which survive pemetrexed + cisplatin
treatment in vitro and in vivo. Expression of the ALDH1A3 isoform was invariably 
enriched in purified ALDH(bright) cells from multiple MPM cell lines and
accounted for the enzymatic activity of those cells. RNAi mediated downregulation
of ALDH1A3 reduced the survival of the ALDH(bright) cells at steady state and,
much more, after pemetrexed + cisplatin treatment. We demonstrated, for the first
time, that a pSTAT3(tyr705)-NFkB(p65) complex is required for the repression of
DDIT3 mRNA and this ensures high levels of CEBPß-dependent ALDH1A3 promoter
activity. Inhibition of STAT3-NFkB activity allowed high levels of DDIT3
expression with increased formation of a DDIT3-CEBPß complex. This reduced the
occupancy of the ALDH1A3 promoter by CEBPß, thus largely reducing the ALDH1A3
expression. Consequently, survival of ALDH(bright) cells in pemetrexed +
cisplatin-treated cultures was impaired, following increased apoptosis. We show
that such a mechanism is relevant in vivo and underlies the action of butein, a
dual STAT3-NFkB inhibitor capable of abating the chemoresistance of mesothelioma 
cells in vivo. The possible broad translational relevance of the described
mechanism is discussed.

PMCID: PMC4494963
PMID: 25868979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 2;11(4):e1005061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005061.
eCollection 2015.

Lipid-induced epigenomic changes in human macrophages identify a coronary artery 
disease-associated variant that regulates PPAP2B Expression through Altered
C/EBP-beta binding.

Reschen ME(1), Gaulton KJ(1), Lin D(1), Soilleux EJ(2), Morris AJ(3), Smyth
SS(3), O'Callaghan CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (2)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of
Oxford and Department of Cellular Pathology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom. (3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Gill Heart Institute,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, United States of America; Department
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Lexington, Kentucky, United States of
America.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified over 40 loci that affect
risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) and the causal mechanisms at the majority
of loci are unknown. Recent studies have suggested that many causal GWAS variants
influence disease through altered transcriptional regulation in disease-relevant 
cell types. We explored changes in transcriptional regulation during a key
pathophysiological event in CAD, the environmental lipid-induced transformation
of macrophages to lipid-laden foam cells. We used a combination of open chromatin
mapping with formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE-seq)
and enhancer and transcription factor mapping using chromatin
immuno-precipitation (ChIP-seq) in primary human macrophages before and after
exposure to atherogenic oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL), with resultant 
foam cell formation. OxLDL-induced foam cell formation was associated with
changes in a subset of open chromatin and active enhancer sites that strongly
correlated with expression changes of nearby genes. OxLDL-regulated enhancers
were enriched for several transcription factors including C/EBP-beta, which has
no previously documented role in foam cell formation. OxLDL exposure up-regulated
C/EBP-beta expression and increased genomic binding events, most prominently
around genes involved in inflammatory response pathways. Variants at
CAD-associated loci were significantly and specifically enriched in the subset of
chromatin sites altered by oxLDL exposure, including rs72664324 in an
oxLDL-induced enhancer at the PPAP2B locus. OxLDL increased C/EBP beta binding to
this site and C/EBP beta binding and enhancer activity were stronger with the
protective A allele of rs72664324. In addition, expression of the PPAP2B protein 
product LPP3 was present in foam cells in human atherosclerotic plaques and oxLDL
exposure up-regulated LPP3 in macrophages resulting in increased degradation of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Our results demonstrate a genetic mechanism
contributing to CAD risk at the PPAP2B locus and highlight the value of studying 
epigenetic changes in disease processes involving pathogenic environmental
stimuli.

PMCID: PMC4383549
PMID: 25835000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. RNA Biol. 2015;12(2):208-20. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017213.

RBM4-MEF2C network constitutes a feed-forward circuit that facilitates the
differentiation of brown adipocytes.

Lin JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology ; College of Medical 
Science and Technology; Taipei Medical University ; Taipei , Taiwan.

Myocyte enhancer factor 2c (MEF2C) is the MADS-box type transcription factor
involved in the differentiation of cardiac and skeletal muscle and synaptic
formation. Alternatively spliced transcripts of the MEF2C gene were proven to
encode isoforms which exert distinct functions in transcriptional regulation.
During the differentiation of brown adipocytes, upregulated RBM4 enhanced
skipping of the MEF2C<U+03B3> region which functions as a transcriptional repressor. The
presence of an overexpressed MEF2C<U+03B3>- isoform in turn induced transcriptional
activity of the RBM4 promoter, constituting a positive feedback circuit in
differentiating brown adipocytes. The RBM4-MEF2C<U+03B3>- network induced the expression
of "myogenic" miR-1 to a greater extent than did PRDM17, BMP7 C/EBPß, or UCP1
transcripts in C3H10T1/2 cells. Overexpression of miR-1 independently exerted the
same activity as RBM4 and the MEF2C<U+03B3>- isoform of upregulating brown
adipocyte-specific factors in C3H10T1/2 cells, which suggests a potential effect 
of miR-1 on brown adipocytes. These results indicated that the RBM4-MEF2C-miR-1
network constitutes a novel mechanism which programs the gene expression profile 
toward the development of brown adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC4615228
PMID: 25826570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Pathol. 2015 Aug;236(4):445-56. doi: 10.1002/path.4539. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Oncogenic role of miR-155 in anaplastic large cell lymphoma lacking the t(2;5)
translocation.

Merkel O(1,)(2,)(3), Hamacher F(4), Griessl R(4), Grabner L(2), Schiefer AI(2),
Prutsch N(2), Baer C(5), Egger G(2,)(3), Schlederer M(2,)(6), Krenn PW(4),
Hartmann TN(4), Simonitsch-Klupp I(2), Plass C(5), Staber PB(7), Moriggl
R(6,)(8), Turner SD(9,)(3), Greil R(4), Kenner L(2,)(6,)(10,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Oncology, National Centre for Tumour Diseases
(NCT), German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department
of Clinical Pathology, Medical University Vienna, Austria. (3)European Research
Initiative on ALK Related Malignancies (www.erialcl.net). (4)Laboratory for
Immunological and Molecular Cancer Research, Third Medical Department, Oncologic 
Centre, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria. (5)Department of
Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna,
Austria. (7)Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, Comprehensive Cancer
Centre Vienna, Medical University of Vienna, 1090, Vienna, Austria. (8)Institute 
of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna and
Medical University of Vienna, Austria. (9)Division of Molecular Histopathology,
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK. (10)Unit of Pathology of
Laboratory Animals, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a rare, aggressive, non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma that is characterized by CD30 expression and disease onset in young
patients. About half of ALCL patients bear the t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation,
which results in the formation of the nucleophosmin-anaplastic lymphoma tyrosine 
kinase (NPM-ALK) fusion protein (ALCL ALK(+)). However, little is known about the
molecular features and tumour drivers in ALK-negative ALCL (ALCL ALK(-)), which
is characterized by a worse prognosis. We found that ALCL ALK(-), in contrast to 
ALCL ALK(+), lymphomas display high miR-155 expression. Consistent with this, we 
observed an inverse correlation between miR-155 promoter methylation and miR-155 
expression in ALCL. However, no direct effect of the ALK kinase on miR-155 levels
was observed. Ago2 immunoprecipitation revealed miR-155 as the most abundant
miRNA, and enrichment of target mRNAs C/EBPß and SOCS1. To investigate its
function, we over-expressed miR-155 in ALCL ALK(+) cell lines and demonstrated
reduced levels of C/EBPß and SOCS1. In murine engraftment models of ALCL ALK(-), 
we showed that anti-miR-155 mimics are able to reduce tumour growth. This goes
hand-in-hand with increased levels of cleaved caspase-3 and high SOCS1 in these
tumours, which leads to suppression of STAT3 signalling. Moreover, miR-155
induces IL-22 expression and suppresses the C/EBPß target IL-8. These data
suggest that miR-155 can act as a tumour driver in ALCL ALK(-) and blocking
miR-155 could be therapeutically relevant. Original miRNA array data are to be
found in the supplementary material (Table S1).

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4557053
PMID: 25820993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):4144-58.

miR-191 promotes tumorigenesis of human colorectal cancer through targeting
C/EBPß.

Zhang XF(1), Li KK(1), Gao L(2), Li SZ(1), Chen K(3), Zhang JB(4), Wang D(5), Tu 
RF(1), Zhang JX(6), Tao KX(6), Wang G(6), Zhang XD(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430000, PR China.
(3)Institute of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430000, PR China. (4)Department of
Emergency, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430000, PR China. (5)Department of Gastrointestinal
Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430000, PR China. (6)Department of General Surgery, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan 430000, PR China.

MicroRNA-191 (miR-191), a small non-coding RNA, is involved in disease
development and cancer diagnosis and prognosis. However, how miR-191 functions in
colorectal cancer remains largely unclear. In this study, we show that miR-191 is
highly expressed in colon tumor tissues, and that inhibition of miR-191 leads to 
decreased cell growth, proliferation and tumorigenicity in a xenograft model.
Overexpression of miR-191 in colorectal cancer cell lines alters cell cycle
progression and cell resistance to 5-Fu induced cell apoptosis. Mechanistic
studies demonstrated that miR-191 directly binds to the 3'UTR of the C/EBPß mRNA 
and mediates a decrease in the mRNA and protein expression of C/EBPß. We further 
showed that C/EBPß induces growth arrest in a colorectal cancer cell line and
that its expression is negatively correlated with the miR-191 level in patient
samples. Our findings suggest that miR-191 may be a potential gene therapy target
for the treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4414178
PMID: 25784653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jun;1849(6):583-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.03.002. 
Epub 2015 Mar 13.

C/EBPß (CEBPB) protein binding to the C/EBP|CRE DNA 8-mer TTGC|GTCA is inhibited 
by 5hmC and enhanced by 5mC, 5fC, and 5caC in the CG dinucleotide.

Sayeed SK(1), Zhao J(1), Sathyanarayana BK(2), Golla JP(1), Vinson C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Room 3128, Building 37, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. (2)Laboratory 
of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Room 5120, Building 37, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. (3)Laboratory of
Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Room 3128, 
Building 37, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Electronic address:
vinsonc@mail.nih.gov.

During mammalian development, some methylated cytosines (5mC) in CG dinucleotides
are iteratively oxidized by TET dioxygenases to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC),
5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC). The effect of these
cytosine oxidative products on the sequence-specific DNA binding of transcription
factors is being actively investigated. Here, we used the electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) to examine C/EBPa and C/EBPß homodimers binding to
all 25 chemical forms of a CG dinucleotide for two DNA sequences: the canonical
C/EBP 8-mer TTGC|GCAA and the chimeric C/EBP|CRE 8-mer TTGC|GTCA. 5hmC in the CG 
dinucleotide in the C/EBP|CRE motif 8-mer TGAC|GCAA inhibits binding of C/EBPß
but not C/EBPa. Binding was increased by 5mC, 5fC and 5caC. Circular dichroism
monitored thermal denaturations for C/EBPß bound to the C/EBP|CRE motif confirmed
the EMSA. The structural differences between C/EBPa and C/EBPß that may account
for the difference in binding 5hmC in the 8-mer TGAC|GCAA are explored.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25779641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 26;34(48):5912-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.41. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding protein ß controls androgen-deprivation-induced senescence
in prostate cancer cells.

Barakat DJ(1), Zhang J(1), Barberi T(1), Denmeade SR(2), Friedman AD(1),
Paz-Priel I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Division of Medical Oncology,
The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

The processes associated with transition to castration-resistant prostate cancer 
(PC) growth are not well understood. Cellular senescence is a stable cell cycle
arrest that occurs in response to sublethal stress. It is often overcome in
malignant transformation to confer a survival advantage. CCAAT/Enhancer Binding
Protein (C/EBP) ß function is frequently deregulated in human malignancies and
interestingly, androgen-sensitive PC cells express primarily the liver-enriched
inhibitory protein isoform. We found that C/EBPß expression is negatively
regulated by androgen receptor (AR) activity and that treatment of
androgen-sensitive cell lines with anti-androgens increases C/EBPß mRNA and
protein levels. Accordingly, we also find that C/EBPß levels are significantly
elevated in primary PC samples from castration-resistant compared with
therapy-naive patients. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated enhanced
binding of the AR to the proximal promoter of the CEBPB gene in the presence of
dihydroxytestosterone. Upon androgen deprivation, induction of C/EBPß is
facilitated by active transcription as evident by increased histone 3 acetylation
at the C/EBPß promoter. Also, the androgen agonist R1881 suppresses the activity 
of a CEBPB promoter reporter. Loss of C/EBPß expression prevents growth arrest
following androgen deprivation or anti-androgen challenge. Accordingly,
suppression of C/EBPß under low androgen conditions results in reduced expression
of senescence-associated secretory genes, significantly decreased number of cells
displaying heterochromatin foci and increased numbers of Ki67-positive cells.
Ectopic expression of C/EBPß caused pronounced morphological changes, reduced PC 
cell growth and increased the number of senescent LNCaP cells. Lastly, we found
that senescence contributes to PC cell survival under androgen deprivation, and
C/EBPß-deficient cells were significantly more susceptible to killing by
cytotoxic chemotherapy following androgen deprivation. Our data demonstrate that 
upregulation of C/EBPß is critical for complete maintenance of androgen
deprivation-induced senescence and that targeting C/EBPß expression may synergize
with anti-androgen or chemotherapy in eradicating PC.

PMCID: PMC4573387 [Available on 2016-05-26]
PMID: 25772238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0120647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120647.
eCollection 2015.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß is dispensable for development of lung
adenocarcinoma.

Cai Y(1), Hirata A(2), Nakayama S(1), VanderLaan PA(3), Levantini E(4), Yamamoto 
M(1), Hirai H(5), Wong KK(6), Costa DB(1), Watanabe H(7), Kobayashi SS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Transfusion Medicine &
Cell Therapy, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Department of
Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research
Council (CNR), Pisa, Italy. (5)Department of Transfusion Medicine & Cell Therapy,
Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. (6)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America. (8)Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Although disruption
of normal proliferation and differentiation is a vital component of
tumorigenesis, the mechanisms of this process in lung cancer are still unclear. A
transcription factor, C/EBPß is a critical regulator of proliferation and/or
differentiation in multiple tissues. In lung, C/EBPß is expressed in alveolar
pneumocytes and bronchial epithelial cells; however, its roles on normal lung
homeostasis and lung cancer development have not been well described. Here we
investigated whether C/EBPß is required for normal lung development and whether
its aberrant expression and/or activity contribute to lung tumorigenesis. We
showed that C/EBPß was expressed in both human normal pneumocytes and lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines. We found that overall lung architecture was maintained
in Cebpb knockout mice. Neither overexpression of nuclear C/EBPß nor suppression 
of CEBPB expression had significant effects on cell proliferation. C/EBPß
expression and activity remained unchanged upon EGF stimulation. Furthermore,
deletion of Cebpb had no impact on lung tumor burden in a lung specific,
conditional mutant EGFR lung cancer mouse model. Analyses of data from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) revealed that expression, promoter methylation, or copy
number of CEBPB was not significantly altered in human lung adenocarcinoma. Taken
together, our data suggest that C/EBPß is dispensable for development of lung
adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4358974
PMID: 25767874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1314-20. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3463. Epub 2015 Mar
10.

Zanthoxylum schinifolium leaf ethanol extract inhibits adipocyte differentiation 
through inactivation of the extracellular signal regulated kinase and
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathways in 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes.

Choi EO(1), Park C(2), Shin SS(3), Cho EJ(1), Kim BW(4), Hwang JA(5), Hwang
HJ(6), Choi YH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Busan National University, Busan 609-735,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, Dongeui University, Busan 
614-714, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Formula Sciences, Dongeui University
College of Korean Medicine, Busan 614-052, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Life Science and Biotechnology, Dongeui University, Busan 614-714, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Food and Nutrition, Myongji University, Yongin 449-728,
Republic of Korea. (6)Anti-Aging Research Center, Dongeui University, Busan
614-714, Republic of Korea.

Zanthoxylum schinifolium is widely used as a food flavoring in east Asia.
Although this plant has also been used in traditional oriental medicine for the
treatment of the common cold, toothache, stomach ache, diarrhea and jaundice, its
anti-obesity activity remains to be elucidated. The present study investigated
the effects of ethanol extract from the leaves of Z. schinifolium (EEZS) on
adipocyte differentiation, and its underlying mechanism, in 3T3-L1
pre-adipocytes. The results demonstrated that EEZS effectively suppressed
intracellular lipid accumulation at non-toxic concentrations, and was associated 
with the downregulation of several adipocyte-specific transcription factors,
including peroxisome proliferation-activity receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP)a and C/EBPß, in a concentration-dependent manner.
Furthermore, it was observed that EEZS markedly inactivated the extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) and phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/Akt pathways, which act upstream of PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPs in adipogenesis.
These results suggested that EEZS inhibited lipid accumulation by downregulating 
the major transcription factors involved in the pathway of adipogenesis,
including PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa and C/EBPß, via regulation of the ERK and PI3K/Akt
signaling pathways in 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation. This indicated the
potential use of EEZS as an anti-obesity agent.

PMID: 25760758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biomed Res. 2015;36(1):21-9. doi: 10.2220/biomedres.36.21.

Regulation of mouse chondrocyte differentiation by CCAAT/enhancer-binding
proteins.

Okuma T(1), Hirata M, Yano F, Mori D, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI, Tanaka S, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß regulates chondrocyte differentiaion and
proliferation during endochondral ossification. However, expression and function 
of other C/EBP family members in chondrocytes have not been fully understood. To 
understand the comprehensive regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by C/EBPs,
we initially examined their expression levels. Among four members (C/EBPa,
C/EBPß, C/EBPd and C/EBPe) with transactivation domain, expression of Cebpb and
Cebpd was abundant compared to Cebpa, while Cebpe was hardly expressed in mouse
isolated chondrocytes. Doxycycline (DOX)-inducible overexpression of each of the 
three C/EBPs (C/EBPa, C/EBPß and C/EBPd) in ATDC5 cells suppressed expressions of
early differentiation markers including Col2a1, aggrecan and Sox9, enhanced those
of late differentiation markers including Mmp13, Vegfa and Col10a1, and
decelerated cell proliferation, indicating their overlapped functions in
chondrocytes. In contrast, DOX-inducible overexpression of A-CEBP, which exerts a
dominant-negative effect against all C/EBPs, increased expressions of early
differentiation markers and decreased those of late differentiation markers.
Finally, microarray and gene ontology analyses showed that A-CEBP altered many
genes related with various events or tissues such as skeletal development,
cartilage, cell cycle, inflammation and apoptosis. In conclusion, C/EBPa, C/EBPß 
and C/EBPd regulate proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and
possibly is involved with apoptosis and inflammation. C/EBPs may play a variety
of roles in the homeostasis of joint cartilage under physiological and
pathological conditions.

PMID: 25749148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Gastric Cancer. 2016 Jan;19(1):74-84. doi: 10.1007/s10120-014-0448-x. Epub 2015
Mar 5.

Interleukin-1B signalling leads to increased survival of gastric carcinoma cells 
through a CREB-C/EBPß-associated mechanism.

Resende C(1,)(2,)(3), Regalo G(2), Durães C(1,)(2), Pinto MT(1,)(2), Wen X(4),
Figueiredo C(1,)(2,)(5), Carneiro F(1,)(2,)(5), Machado JC(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (2)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology (Ipatimup),
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel
Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal. (4)Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Centro
Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Gaia, Portugal. (5)Faculty of Medicine,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (6)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em 
Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. josem@ipatimup.pt. (7)Institute of
Molecular Pathology and Immunology (Ipatimup), University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal. josem@ipatimup.pt. (8)Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, 
Portugal. josem@ipatimup.pt.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in inflammation-related genes have been associated with
a risk of gastric carcinoma (GC). However, the biological mechanisms underlying
these associations are still elusive. Our objective was to determine whether
chronic inflammation-associated IL1<U+0392> signalling, as seen in the context of
Helicobacter pylori infection, could be linked to gastric carcinogenesis by
modulating the behaviour of gastric epithelial cells.
METHODS: The effect of IL1B was assessed by studying the expression and
activation status of the IL1<U+0392>-activated transcription factors C/EBPß and CREB in 
GC cell lines. Interaction between CREB and C/EBPß was explored through
interference RNA, chromatin immunoprecipitation and chemical inhibition. CREB and
C/EBPß expression was analysed in 66 samples of primary GC and in normal gastric 
mucosa. GC cell growth was analysed in vitro by BrdU incorporation and in vivo
employing a chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane model.
RESULTS: We found that IL1B regulates the expression/activation status of both
C/EBPß and CREB in GC cells through an ERK1/2-dependent mechanism. Our results
show that CREB is a direct transactivator of CEBPB, acting as an upstream
effector in this regulatory mechanism. Furthermore, we found CREB to be
overexpressed in 94 % of GC samples and significantly associated with C/EBPß
expression (P < 0.05). Finally, we demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo that
CREB can mediate IL1B-induced GC cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis that the effect of chronic
inflammation on gastric carcinogenesis, as seen in the context of genetically
susceptible individuals infected with Helicobacter pylori, includes the
modulation of signalling pathways that regulate survival mechanisms in epithelial
cells. IL1B is able to increase the expression/activation status of CREB and its 
target gene C/EBPß, which are mandatory for GC cell survival. Our results may
help inform new strategies for the prevention and treatment of GC, including the 
control of chronic inflammation.

PMID: 25740226  [PubMed - in process]


43. Nutr Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):317-27. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2014.12.009. Epub 2015 Jan
8.

Myricetin suppresses differentiation of 3 T3-L1 preadipocytes and enhances
lipolysis in adipocytes.

Wang Q(1), Wang ST(1), Yang X(1), You PP(1), Zhang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University. (2)School of Life
Sciences, East China Normal University. Electronic address:
wzhang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

Myricetin (MyR), a naturally occurring flavonol widely distributed in fruits,
vegetables, and medicinal plants, has anticancer, anti-inflammatory,
antihyperlipidaemic, and antiobesity activities. In the present study, we
hypothesized that the antiobesity property of MyR is mediated via suppression of 
differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes and promotion of lipolysis of
mature adipocytes, which effectively decrease the intracellular triglyceride
concentration of adipocytes. Accordingly, the aim of this work was to investigate
the effects of MyR on adipocyte differentiation and lipolysis in differentiated 3
T3-L1 adipocytes. Our results showed that MyR inhibited differentiation of 3
T3-L1 preadipocytes in a concentration-dependent manner. Myricetin downregulated 
the mRNA and protein levels of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>, both of which are major adipogenic
transcription factors. Furthermore, the mRNA levels of other adipogenesis-related
transcription factors, namely, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß, sterin
regulatory element binding protein 1-c, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1, adipocyte protein 2, lipoprotein lipase and glucose
transporter 4, were also reduced by MyR treatment. Moreover, MyR significantly
inhibited the phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, Jun
N-terminal kinase, and p38 during the differentiation process. On the other hand,
MyR induced a dose-dependent increase in glycerol release in fully differentiated
adipocytes, indicating its stimulatory effect on adipocyte lipolysis.
Furthermore, MyR downregulated mRNA level of perilipin A and enhanced the
phosphorylation level of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, Jun N-terminal
kinase, and p38 during lipolysis. Taken together, these findings indicate that
MyR exerts antiobesity activity in adipocytes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25724338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):10200-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.638577. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Mdm2 promotes myogenesis through the ubiquitination and degradation of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß.

Fu D(1), Lala-Tabbert N(2), Lee H(2), Wiper-Bergeron N(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and. (2)Graduate
Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada. (3)From the Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine and Nadine.WiperBergeron@uottawa.ca.

Myogenesis is a tightly regulated differentiation process during which precursor 
cells express in a coordinated fashion the myogenic regulatory factors, while
down-regulating the satellite cell marker Pax7. CCAAT/Enhancer-binding protein ß 
(C/EBPß) is also expressed in satellite cells and acts to maintain the
undifferentiated state by stimulating Pax7 expression and by triggering a
decrease in MyoD protein expression. Herein, we show that C/EBPß protein is
rapidly down-regulated upon induction of myogenesis and this is not due to
changes in Cebpb mRNA expression. Rather, loss of C/EBPß protein is accompanied
by an increase in Mdm2 expression, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. We demonstrate that
Mdm2 interacts with, ubiquitinates and targets C/EBPß for degradation by the 26 S
proteasome, leading to increased MyoD expression. Knockdown of Mdm2 expression in
myoblasts using a shRNA resulted in high C/EBPß levels and a blockade of
myogenesis, indicating that Mdm2 is necessary for myogenic differentiation.
Primary myoblasts expressing the shMdm2 construct were unable to contribute to
muscle regeneration when grafted into cardiotoxin-injured muscle. The
differentiation defect imposed by loss of Mdm2 could be partially rescued by loss
of C/EBPß, suggesting that the regulation of C/EBPß turnover is a major role for 
Mdm2 in myoblasts. Taken together, we provide evidence that Mdm2 regulates entry 
into myogenesis by targeting C/EBPß for degradation by the 26 S proteasome.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4400335 [Available on 2016-04-17]
PMID: 25720496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mutagenesis. 2015 May;30(3):431-9. doi: 10.1093/mutage/gev001. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Adaptation of HepG2 cells to silver nanoparticles-induced stress is based on the 
pro-proliferative and anti-apoptotic changes in gene expression.

Brzóska K(1), Meczynska-Wielgosz S(2), Stepkowski TM(2), Kruszewski M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology, Centre for Radiobiology and
Biological Dosimetry, Dorodna 16, 03-195 Warsaw, Poland, k.brzoska@ichtj.waw.pl. 
(2)Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology, Centre for Radiobiology and
Biological Dosimetry, Dorodna 16, 03-195 Warsaw, Poland.

Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are one of the most widely used nanomaterials due to
their antibacterial properties. Owing to the recent boost in the usage of
AgNPs-containing products, human exposure to AgNPs is increasing, highlighting
the need for careful evaluation of AgNPs toxicity in humans. We used two cellular
models, hepatic HepG2 and epithelial A549 cell lines, to study the mechanism of
AgNPs-induced toxicity at the cellular level. These two cell lines differ
significantly in their response to AgNPs treatment. In the case of A549 cells, a 
minor decrease in viability and increase in the extent of DNA breakage were
observed. A markedly different response to AgNPs was observed in HepG2 cells. In 
short term, a massive induction of DNA breakage was observed, suggesting that the
basal activity of antioxidant defence in these cells was not sufficient to
effectively protect them from the nanoparticle-induced oxidative stress. After
prolonged exposure, the extent of DNA breakage decreased to the level observed in
the control cells proving that a successful adaptation to the new conditions had 
taken place. The cells that were unable to adapt must have died, as revealed by
the Neutral Red assay that indicated less than half viable cells after 24-h
treatment with 100 µg/ml of 20nm AgNPs. The gene expression analysis revealed
that the observed adaptation was underlain by a pro-proliferative, anti-apoptotic
signal leading to up-regulation of the genes promoting proliferation and
inflammatory response (EGR1, FOS, JUN, HK2, IL4, MMP10, VEGFA, WISP1, CEBPB, IL8,
SELPLG), genes coding the anti-apoptotic proteins (BCL2A1, CCL2) and factors
involved in the response to stress (HSPB1, GADD45A). Such a selection of highly
resistant population of cells should be taken into account in the case of medical
applications of nanoparticles since the sustained proliferative signalling and
resistance to cell death are hallmarks of cancer, acquired by the cells in the
process of carcinogenesis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the UK
Environmental Mutagen Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25681789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):5170-80. eCollection 2014.

Biological mechanism analysis of acute renal allograft rejection: integrated of
mRNA and microRNA expression profiles.

Huang SM(1), Zhao X(2), Zhao XM(3), Wang XY(4), Li SS(5), Zhu YH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Qianfoshan Hospital Affiliated to Shandong Univercity
Jinan 250014, China. (2)Department of Nephrology, Qianfoshan Hospital Affiliated 
to Shandong Univercity Jinan 250014, China. (3)Department of Anorecta, Qianfoshan
Hospital Affiliated to Shandong Univercity Jinan 250014, China. (4)Chemical
Defense Clusters Medical Teams of 74122 PLA Troops Jinan 250031, China.
(5)Department of Nephrology, The 456th Hospital of Jinan Military Region Jinan
250031, China.

OBJECTIVES: Renal transplantation is the preferred method for most patients with 
end-stage renal disease, however, acute renal allograft rejection is still a
major risk factor for recipients leading to renal injury. To improve the early
diagnosis and treatment of acute rejection, study on the molecular mechanism of
it is urgent.
METHODS: MicroRNA (miRNA) expression profile and mRNA expression profile of acute
renal allograft rejection and well-functioning allograft downloaded from
ArrayExpress database were applied to identify differentially expressed (DE)
miRNAs and DE mRNAs. DE miRNAs targets were predicted by combining five
algorithm. By overlapping the DE mRNAs and DE miRNAs targets, common genes were
obtained. Differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) were identified by
differential co-expression profile (DCp) and differential co-expression
enrichment (DCe) methods in Differentially Co-expressed Genes and Links (DCGL)
package. Then, co-expression network of DCGs and the cluster analysis were
performed. Functional enrichment analysis for DCGs was undergone.
RESULTS: A total of 1270 miRNA targets were predicted and 698 DE mRNAs were
obtained. While overlapping miRNA targets and DE mRNAs, 59 common genes were
gained. We obtained 103 DCGs and 5 transcription factors (TFs) based on
regulatory impact factors (RIF), then built the regulation network of miRNA
targets and DE mRNAs. By clustering the co-expression network, 5 modules were
obtained. Thereinto, module 1 had the highest degree and module 2 showed the most
number of DCGs and common genes. TF CEBPB and several common genes, such as RXRA,
BASP1 and AKAP10, were mapped on the co-expression network. C1R showed the
highest degree in the network. These genes might be associated with human acute
renal allograft rejection.
CONCLUSIONS: We conducted biological analysis on integration of DE mRNA and DE
miRNA in acute renal allograft rejection, displayed gene expression patterns and 
screened out genes and TFs that may be related to acute renal allograft
rejection.

PMCID: PMC4307466
PMID: 25664019  [PubMed]


47. Aging Cell. 2015 Apr;14(2):274-83. doi: 10.1111/acel.12316. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

The cerebral cavernous malformation 3 gene is necessary for senescence induction.

Guerrero A(1), Iglesias C, Raguz S, Floridia E, Gil J, Pombo CM, Zalvide J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, CIMUS, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IDIS,
University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, A Coruña, 15703,
Spain; Cell Proliferation Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London, W12 0NN, UK.

Mutations in cerebral cavernous malformation 3 gene are known to result in
development of vascular malformations and have recently been proposed to also
give rise to meningiomas. We report in this study that lack of CCM3 unexpectedly 
impairs the senescence response of cells, and this is related to the inability of
CCM3-deficient cells to induce the C/EBPß transcription factor and implement the 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype. Induction of C/EBPß and cytokines is
also impaired in the absence of CCM3 in response to cytokines in nonsenescent
cells, pointing to it being a primary defect and not secondary to impaired
senescence. CCM3-deficient cells also have a defect in autophagy at late passages
of culture, and this defect is also not dependent on impaired senescence, as it
is evident in immortal cells after nutrient starvation. Further, these two
defects may be related, as enforcing autophagy in CCM3-deficient late passage
cells increases C/EBPß cytokine expression. These results broaden our knowledge
on the mechanisms by which CCM3 deficiency results in disease and open new
avenues of research into both CCM3 and senescence biology.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4364839
PMID: 25655101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Apr;14(4):877-88. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-1093-T.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

ATF4 Gene Network Mediates Cellular Response to the Anticancer PAD Inhibitor
YW3-56 in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cells.

Wang S(1), Chen XA(1), Hu J(1), Jiang JK(2), Li Y(1), Chan-Salis KY(1), Gu Y(1), 
Chen G(3), Thomas C(2), Pugh BF(1), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State
University, State College, Pennsylvania. (4)Center for Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State 
University, State College, Pennsylvania. yuw12@psu.edu.

We previously reported that a pan-PAD inhibitor, YW3-56, activates p53 target
genes to inhibit cancer growth. However, the p53-independent anticancer activity 
and molecular mechanisms of YW3-56 remain largely elusive. Here, gene expression 
analyses found that ATF4 target genes involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress response were activated by YW3-56. Depletion of ATF4 greatly attenuated
YW3-56-mediated activation of the mTORC1 regulatory genes SESN2 and DDIT4. Using 
the ChIP-exo method, high-resolution genomic binding sites of ATF4 and CEBPB
responsive to YW3-56 treatment were generated. In human breast cancer cells,
YW3-56-mediated cell death features mitochondria depletion and autophagy
perturbation. Moreover, YW3-56 treatment effectively inhibits the growth of
triple-negative breast cancer xenograft tumors in nude mice. Taken together, we
unveiled the anticancer mechanisms and therapeutic potentials of the pan-PAD
inhibitor YW3-56.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4394025
PMID: 25612620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Nov;240(11):1520-7. doi: 10.1177/1535370214565081.
Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Vaspin promotes 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation.

Liu P(1), Li G(2), Wu J(3), Zhou X(3), Wang L(4), Han W(3), Lv Y(3), Sun C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University College of Medicine, Shaanxi 710061, PR China Department of
Endocrinology, The Affiliated Xi'an Central Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University
College of Medicine, Shaanxi 710003, PR China. (2)Department of Cardiology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University College of Medicine,
Shaanxi 710061, PR China guailiang@stu.xjtu.edu cfsun1@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University College of Medicine, Shaanxi 710061, PR China. (4)Department of
Endocrinology, The Affiliated Xi'an Central Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University
College of Medicine, Shaanxi 710003, PR China.

Vaspin, a novel adipocyte factor secreted from visceral adipose tissues, is
associated with obesity and insulin resistance and can regulate glucose and lipid
metabolism, increase insulin sensitivity, and suppress inflammation; however, the
underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Proliferation and maladaptive
differentiation are important pathological mechanisms underlying obesity. This
study aimed to evaluate the effects of vaspin on the proliferation and
differentiation of preadipocyte 3T3-L1 cells and to explore the likely mechanisms
responsible for 3T3-L1 differentiation. Vaspin was added to cultured 3T3-L1
cells, and the differentiation of adipocytes was evaluated using Oil Red O
staining. The AKT signaling pathway and specific differentiation factors related 
to the differentiation of preadipocyte 3T3-L1 cells, peroxisome
proliferator-activated <U+03B3> and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family,
were evaluated using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
western blot analyses during the early phase of differentiation. Additionally,
adiponectin mRNA, interleukin-6 mRNA (IL-6 mRNA), and glucose transporter-4
(GLUT4) protein levels were measured in the differentiated adipocytes. The
results indicated that vaspin promotes the intracellular accumulation of lipids
and increases differentiation-related factors, including peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>, C/EBPa, and free fatty acid-binding protein 4 
(FABP4), in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, vaspin (200<U+2009>ng/mL) increased
the mRNA and protein levels of C/EBPß, peroxisome proliferator-activated <U+03B3>,
C/EBPa, and FABP4. Moreover, compared with the control, significantly smaller
eight-day differentiated adipocytes were observed, and these cells exhibited
decreased IL-6 mRNA and increased GLUT4 mRNA levels; these results also indicated
the potential of vaspin to promote the insulin-mediated AKT signaling pathway
during the early phase of differentiation. In conclusion, vaspin is able to
promote the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and may increase their
sensitivity to insulin and suppress obesity.

© 2015 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 25585626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Appl Toxicol. 2015 Jan;35(1):90-103.

Molecular biomarkers of phospholipidosis in rat blood and heart after amiodarone 
treatment.

Bocchini N, Giantin M, Crivellente F, Ferraresso S, Faustinelli I, Dacasto M,
Cristofori P.

Phospholipidosis (PLD) is characterized by an intracellular accumulation of
phospholipids in lysosomes and concurrent development of concentric lamellar
bodies. It is induced in humans and in animals by drugs with a cationic
amphiphilic structure. The purpose of the present study was to identify a set of 
molecular biomarkers of PLD in rat blood and heart, hypotheticallya pplicable in 
preclinical screens within the drug development process. A toxicological study
was set up in rats orally treated up to 11 days with 300 mg kg(1) per day(1)
amiodarone (AMD). Light and transmission electron microscopy investigations were 
performed to confirm the presence of lamellar bodies indicative of phospholipid
accumulation. The effects of AMD upon the transcriptome of these tissues were
estimated using DNA microarray technology. Microarray data analysis showed that a
total of 545 and 8218 genes were modulated by AMD treatment in heart and blood,
respectively. Some genes implicated in the phospholipid accumulation in cells,
such as phospholipase A2, showed similar alterations of gene expression. After
transcriptome criteria of analysis and target selection, including also the
involvement in the onset of PLD, 7 genes (Pla2g2a, Pla2g7, Gal, Il1b, Cebpb,
Fcgr2b, Acer 2) were selected as candidate biomarkers of PLD in heart and blood
tissues, and their potential usefulness as a sensitive screening test was
screened and confirmed by quantitative Real-Time PCR analysis. Collectively,
these data underscore the importance of transcriptional profiling in drug
discovery and development, and suggest blood as a surrogate tissue for possible
phospholipid accumulation in cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 25580480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Apr;98(2):246-53. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.01.004. Epub
2015 Jan 7.

Dissecting the mechanism of colorectal tumorigenesis based on RNA-sequencing
data.

Liu F(1), Ji F(2), Ji Y(3), Jiang Y(4), Sun X(5), Lu Y(6), Zhang L(7), Han Y(8), 
Liu X(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address:
lfuguo@yeah.net. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China.
Electronic address: jfengz@163.com. (3)Statistics Division, The Affiliated
Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003, Shandong
Province, China. Electronic address: xinjianghjj@163.com. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University,
Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: jjyping@126.com.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address:
xguosu@163.com. (6)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China.
Electronic address: yylulan@163.com. (7)Department of Gastroenterology, The
Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003,
Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: zhlingyu@yeah.net. (8)Department of
Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University,
Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address: hyyueh@163.com.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Qingdao University, Qingdao 266003, Shandong Province, China. Electronic address:
shuangxll@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to identify the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs), mutated genes and fusion genes in colorectal cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RNA-sequencing data (ID: SRP009386) from cancerous,
paracancerous non-tumor and distant normal tissue from one Chinese patient with
stage III colorectal cancer were downloaded from Sequence Read Archive. Quality
control was checked using FastQC, followed by sequence alignment against the hg19
reference genome using TopHat v1.3.3. The expression levels were quantified using
Cufflinks, followed by DEGs screening using NOISeq. Enrichment analysis was
performed using DAVID. Transcription factors were screened using TRANSFA. Mutated
loci were identified using SAMTools and VCFTools. Gene fusion events were
detected by TopHat-fusion.
RESULTS: In total 2440, 1887 and 834 DEGs were respectively detected in cancerous
vs. normal tissue, cancerous vs. paracancerous tissue and paracancerous vs.
normal tissue. The up-regulated genes from cancerous and paracancerous tissue
compared with normal tissue were enriched in "extracellular matrix receptor
interaction" and "focal adhesion pathway" as well as some biological processes
except for "negative regulation of programmed cell death" uniquely presenting in 
cancer. Dysregulated transcription factors including SOX4, BCL6, CEBPB and MSX2
were enriched in the unique biological process. Trp53 was identified with one
mutated locus 7577142 (C <U+2192> T) on chromosome 17. BCL6 also experienced missense
mutation. Additionally, COL1A1-PPP2R2C and EXPH5-COL1A2 were observed fusion
genes in cancer tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: The unique biological process in cancer tissue may be the cause for 
colorectal carcinogenesis. The screened transcription factors, mutated genes and 
fusion genes may contribute to the progression of colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):862-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1396. Epub 2015 Jan
7.

A composite enhancer regulates p63 gene expression in epidermal morphogenesis and
in keratinocyte differentiation by multiple mechanisms.

Antonini D(1), Sirico A(2), Aberdam E(3), Ambrosio R(1), Campanile C(2), Fagoonee
S(4), Altruda F(5), Aberdam D(3), Brissette JL(6), Missero C(7).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS SDN, Napoli, Italy. (2)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy.
(3)INSERM UMR-S 976, Paris, France Université Paris-Diderot, Hopital St-Louis,
Paris, France. (4)Institute for Biostructures and Bioimages (CNR), c/o Molecular 
Biotechnology Center, University of Turin, Torino, Italy. (5)Molecular
Biotechnology Center, Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, 
University of Turin, Torino, Italy. (6)Department of Cell Biology, State
University of New York Downstate Medical Center, NY, USA. (7)CEINGE Biotecnologie
Avanzate, Napoli, Italy Department of Biology, University of Naples Federico II, 
Napoli, Italy caterina.missero@unina.it.

p63 is a crucial regulator of epidermal development, but its transcriptional
control has remained elusive. Here, we report the identification of a long-range 
enhancer (p63LRE) that is composed of two evolutionary conserved modules (C38 and
C40), acting in concert to control tissue- and layer-specific expression of the
p63 gene. Both modules are in an open and active chromatin state in human and
mouse keratinocytes and in embryonic epidermis, and are strongly bound by p63.
p63LRE activity is dependent on p63 expression in embryonic skin, and also in the
commitment of human induced pluripotent stem cells toward an epithelial cell
fate. A search for other transcription factors involved in p63LRE regulation
revealed that the CAAT enhancer binding proteins Cebpa and Cebpb and the POU
domain-containing protein Pou3f1 repress p63 expression during keratinocyte
differentiation by binding the p63LRE enhancer. Collectively, our data indicate
that p63LRE is composed of additive and partly redundant enhancer modules that
act to direct robust p63 expression selectively in the basal layer of the
epidermis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333422
PMID: 25567987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jul;116(7):1232-40. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25076.

Dynamic Mitochondrial Localisation of STAT3 in the Cellular Adipogenesis Model
3T3-L1.

Kramer AH(1), Edkins AL(2), Hoppe HC(3), Prinsloo E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Biotechnology Research Unit, Biotechnology Innovation Centre,
Rhodes University, PO Box 94, Grahamstown, 6140, South Africa. (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Biomedical Biotechnology Research Unit, Rhodes
University, PO Box 94, Grahamstown, 6140, South Africa. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rhodes University, PO Box 94, Grahamstown, 6140,
South Africa.

A mechanistic relationship exists between protein localisation, activity and
cellular differentiation. Understanding the contribution of these molecular
mechanisms is required for elucidation of conditions that drive development.
Literature suggests non-canonical translocation of the Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) to the mitochondria contributes to the
regulation of the electron transport chain, cellular respiration and reactive
oxygen species production. Based on this we investigated the role of
mitochondrial STAT3, specifically the serine 727 phosphorylated form, in cellular
differentiation using the well-defined mouse adipogenic model 3T3-L1. Relative
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the levels and dynamic localization
of pSTAT3S727 were investigated during the initiation of adipogenesis. As a
signalling entity, ROS is known to regulate the activation of C/EBPß to stimulate
a critical cascade of events prior to differentiation of 3T3-L1. Results indicate
that upon induction of the differentiation programme, relative levels of
mitochondrial pSTAT3S727 dramatically decrease in the mitochondria; in contrast
the total cellular pSTAT3S727 levels increase. A positive correlation between
increasing levels of ROS and dynamic changes in C/EBPß indicate that
mitochondrial STAT3 plays a potential critical role as an initiator of the
process. Based on these findings we propose a model for mitochondrial STAT3 as a 
regulator of ROS in adipogenesis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25565605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. BMC Cancer. 2014 Dec 24;14:997. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-997.

Genome-wide identification of FoxO-dependent gene networks in skeletal muscle
during C26 cancer cachexia.

Judge SM(1), Wu CL(2), Beharry AW(3), Roberts BM(4), Ferreira LF(5), Kandarian
SC(6), Judge AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, 1225 Center Drive, HPNP
Building 1142, Gainesville, Florida, USA. smsenf@ufl.edu. (2)Department of Health
Sciences, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. clwu@bu.edu.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, 1225 Center Drive, HPNP
Building 1142, Gainesville, Florida, USA. beharrya1@phhp.ufl.edu. (4)Department
of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, 1225 Center Drive, HPNP Building
1142, Gainesville, Florida, USA. brob21@ufl.edu. (5)Department of Applied
Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
ferreira@hhp.ufl.edu. (6)Department of Health Sciences, Boston University,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. skandar@bu.edu. (7)Department of Physical Therapy,
University of Florida, 1225 Center Drive, HPNP Building 1142, Gainesville,
Florida, USA. arjudge@phhp.ufl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Evidence from cachectic cancer patients and animal models of cancer
cachexia supports the involvement of Forkhead box O (FoxO) transcription factors 
in driving cancer-induced skeletal muscle wasting. However, the genome-wide gene 
networks and associated biological processes regulated by FoxO during cancer
cachexia are unknown. We hypothesize that FoxO is a central upstream regulator of
diverse gene networks in skeletal muscle during cancer that may act coordinately 
to promote the wasting phenotype.
METHODS: To inhibit endogenous FoxO DNA-binding, we transduced limb and diaphragm
muscles of mice with AAV9 containing the cDNA for a dominant negative (d.n.) FoxO
protein (or GFP control). The d.n.FoxO construct consists of only the FoxO3a
DNA-binding domain that is highly homologous to that of FoxO1 and FoxO4, and
which outcompetes and blocks endogenous FoxO DNA binding. Mice were subsequently 
inoculated with Colon-26 (C26) cells and muscles harvested 26 days later.
RESULTS: Blocking FoxO prevented C26-induced muscle fiber atrophy of both
locomotor muscles and the diaphragm and significantly spared force deficits. This
sparing of muscle size and function was associated with the differential
regulation of 543 transcripts (out of 2,093) which changed in response to C26.
Bioinformatics analysis of upregulated gene transcripts that required FoxO
revealed enrichment of the proteasome, AP-1 and IL-6 pathways, and included
several atrophy-related transcription factors, including Stat3, Fos, and Cebpb.
FoxO was also necessary for the cancer-induced downregulation of several gene
transcripts that were enriched for extracellular matrix and sarcomere
protein-encoding genes. We validated these findings in limb muscles and the
diaphragm through qRT-PCR, and further demonstrate that FoxO1 and/or FoxO3a are
sufficient to increase Stat3, Fos, Cebpb, and the C/EBPß target gene, Ubr2.
Analysis of the Cebpb proximal promoter revealed two bona fide FoxO binding
elements, which we further establish are necessary for Cebpb promoter activation 
in response to IL-6, a predominant cytokine in the C26 cancer model.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide new evidence that FoxO-dependent
transcription is a central node controlling diverse gene networks in skeletal
muscle during cancer cachexia, and identifies novel candidate genes and networks 
for further investigation as causative factors in cancer-induced wasting.

PMCID: PMC4391468
PMID: 25539728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(5):866-83. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01489-14. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

An Arf-Egr-C/EBPß pathway linked to ras-induced senescence and cancer.

Salotti J(1), Sakchaisri K(1), Tourtellotte WG(2), Johnson PF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (3)Mouse Cancer
Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, Maryland, USA johnsope@mail.nih.gov.

Oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) protects normal cells from transformation by
Ras, whereas cells lacking p14/p19(Arf) or other tumor suppressors can be
transformed. The transcription factor C/EBPß is required for OIS in primary
fibroblasts but is downregulated by H-Ras(V12) in immortalized NIH 3T3 cells
through a mechanism involving p19(Arf) loss. Here, we report that members of the 
serum-induced early growth response (Egr) protein family are also downregulated
in 3T3(Ras) cells and directly and redundantly control Cebpb gene transcription. 
Egr1, Egr2, and Egr3 recognize three sites in the Cebpb promoter and associate
transiently with this region after serum stimulation, coincident with Cebpb
induction. Codepletion of all three Egrs prevented Cebpb expression, and serum
induction of Egrs was significantly blunted in 3T3(Ras) cells. Egr2 and Egr3
levels were also reduced in Ras(V12)-expressing p19(Arf) null mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs), and overall Egr DNA-binding activity was suppressed in
Arf-deficient but not wild-type (WT) MEFs, leading to Cebpb downregulation.
Analysis of human cancers revealed a strong correlation between EGR levels and
CEBPB expression, regardless of whether CEBPB was increased or decreased in
tumors. Moreover, overexpression of Egrs in tumor cell lines induced CEBPB and
inhibited proliferation. Thus, our findings identify the Arf-Egr-C/EBPß axis as
an important determinant of cellular responses (senescence or transformation) to 
oncogenic Ras signaling.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323493
PMID: 25535333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Genomics. 2014 Dec 18;15:1134. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1134.

Discovery of osmotic sensitive transcription factors in fish intestine via a
transcriptomic approach.

Wong MK(1), Ozaki H, Suzuki Y, Iwasaki W, Takei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. martywong@aori.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Teleost intestine is crucial for seawater acclimation by sensing
osmolality of imbibed seawater and regulating drinking and water/ion absorption. 
Regulatory genes for transforming intestinal function have not been identified. A
transcriptomic approach was used to search for such genes in the intestine of
euryhaline medaka.
RESULTS: Quantitative RNA-seq by Illumina Hi-Seq Sequencing method was performed 
to analyze intestinal gene expression 0 h, 1 h, 3 h, 1 d, and 7 d after seawater 
transfer. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment results showed that cell adhesion, signal
transduction, and protein phosphorylation gene categories were augmented soon
after transfer, indicating a rapid reorganization of cellular components and
functions. Among >50 transiently up-regulated transcription factors selected via 
co-expression correlation and GO selection, five transcription factors, including
CEBPB and CEBPD, were confirmed by quantitative PCR to be specific to
hyperosmotic stress, while others were also up-regulated after freshwater control
transfer, including some well-known osmotic-stress transcription factors such as 
SGK1 and TSC22D3/Ostf1. Protein interaction networks suggest a high degree of
overlapping among the signaling of transcription factors that respond to osmotic 
and general stresses, which sheds light on the interpretation of their roles
during hyperosmotic stress and emergency.
CONCLUSIONS: Since cortisol is an important hormone for seawater acclimation as
well as for general stress in teleosts, emergency and osmotic challenges could
have been evolved in parallel and resulted in the overlapped signaling networks. 
Our results revealed important interactions among transcription factors and offer
a multifactorial perspective of genes involved in seawater acclimation.

PMCID: PMC4377849
PMID: 25520040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Cell Sci. 2015 Jan 15;128(2):293-304. doi: 10.1242/jcs.158360. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

The microRNA miR-17-3p inhibits mouse cardiac fibroblast senescence by targeting 
Par4.

Du WW(1), Li X(2), Li T(1), Li H(1), Khorshidi A(1), Liu F(1), Yang BB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto ON
M4N 3M5, Canada Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada. (2)Sunnybrook Research Institute,
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto ON M4N 3M5, Canada Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5,
Canada Guangdong Institute of Microbiology, Guangzhou 510070, China.
(3)Sunnybrook Research Institute, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto ON
M4N 3M5, Canada Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada byang@sri.utoronto.ca.

The microRNA miR-17-92 cluster plays a fundamental role in heart development. The
aim of this study was to investigate the effect of a member of this cluster,
miR-17, on cardiac senescence. We examined the roles of miR-17 in senescence and 
demonstrated that miR-17-3p attenuates cardiac aging in the myocardium by
targeting Par4 (also known as PAWR). This upregulates the downstream proteins
CEBPB, FAK, N-cadherin, vimentin, Oct4 and Sca-1 (also known as stem cell
antigen-1), and downregulates E-cadherin. Par4 has been reported as a tumor
suppressor gene that induces apoptosis in cancer cells, but not in normal cells. 
Repression of Par4 by miR-17-3p enhances the transcription of CEBPB and FAK,
which promotes mouse cardiac fibroblast (MCF) epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and self-renewal, resulting in cellular senescence and apoptosis
resistance. We conclude that Par4 can bind to the CEBPB promoter and inhibit its 
transcription. Decreased Par4 expression increases the amount of CEBPB, which
binds to the FAK promoter and enhances FAK transcription. Par4, CEBPB and FAK
form a senescence signaling pathway, playing roles in modulating cell survival,
growth, apoptosis, EMT and self-renewal. Through this novel senescence signaling 
axis, miR-17-3p represses Par4 expression, acting pleiotropically as a negative
modulator of cardiac aging and cardiac fibroblast cellular senescence.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25472717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Meat Sci. 2015 Feb;100:237-45.

Localization and abundance of early markers of fat cell differentiation in the
skeletal muscle of cattle during growth--are DLK1-positive cells the origin of
marbling flecks?

Albrecht E, Kuzinski J, Komolka K, Gotoh T, Maak S.

Localization and abundance of early markers of adipogenic differentiation were
investigated in bovine muscle tissue to verify their association with marbling
development. Bovine skeletal muscle samples were used for immunohistochemical
localization and measurement of mRNA and protein abundance of delta-like homolog 
1 (DLK1) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (CEBPB). The localization of
DLK1-positive cells confirmed the position of small clusters of adipocytes which 
can be considered as the origin of marbling flecks. The results indicated higher 
DLK1 expression in the less marbled muscle of Holstein (HS) steers (P < 0.05) and
a trend to higher CEBPB expression in Japanese Black (JB) steers (P < 0.1) at
slaughter. The number of DLK1-positive cells and fat content were negatively
correlated. The lower expression of DLK1 together with higher CEBPB abundance
during fattening in JB may have contributed to the development of more adipocytes
in the skeletal muscle of JB.

PMID: 25460132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;93(1):54-62. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0104. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

Identification of transcription factors involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the CXCL12 gene in rat pancreatic insulinoma Rin-5F cell line.

Markovic J(1), Uskokovic A, Grdovic N, Dinic S, Mihailovic M, Jovanovic JA,
Poznanovic G, Vidakovic M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Biology, Institute for Biological Research,
University of Belgrade, Bulevar despota Stefana 142, 10060 Belgrade, Serbia.

Diabetes is characterized by a deficit in the number of functional pancreatic
ß-cells. Understanding the mechanisms that stimulate neogenesis of ß-cells should
contribute to improved maintenance of ß-cell mass. Chemokine CXCL12 has recently 
become established as a novel ß-cell growth factor, however the mechanisms
controlling its expression require clarification. We investigated the proteins
involved in the transcriptional regulation of the rat ß-cell CXCL12 gene
(Cxcl12). Using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we established the in vitro and in vivo binding of C/EBPß,
C/EBPa, STAT3, p53, FOXO3a, and HMG I/Y to the Cxcl12 promoter.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed protein-protein interactions between 
YY1 and PARP-1, FOXO3a and PARP-1, Sp1 and PARP-1, p53 and PARP-1, C/EBPß and
PARP-1, YY1 and p53, YY1 and FOXO3a, p53 and FOXO3a, Sp1 and FOXO3a, C/EBPß and
FOXO3a, C/EBPa and FOXO3a, Sp1 and STAT3. Our data lay the foundation for
research into the interplay of signaling pathways that determine the ß-cell
Cxcl12 expression profile.

PMID: 25453873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell. 2014 Dec 18;56(6):749-62. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.10.014. Epub 2014 
Nov 20.

A negative feedback loop of transcription factors specifies alternative dendritic
cell chromatin States.

Bornstein C(1), Winter D(1), Barnett-Itzhaki Z(1), David E(1), Kadri S(2), Garber
M(3), Amit I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel. (2)Broad 
Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)Program in
Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology and Program in Molecular Biology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
Electronic address: ido.amit@weizmann.ac.il.

During hematopoiesis, cells originating from the same stem cell reservoir
differentiate into distinct cell types. The mechanisms enabling common
progenitors to differentiate into alternative cell fates are not fully
understood. Here, we identify cell-fate-determining transcription factors (TFs)
governing dendritic cell (DC) development by annotating the enhancer landscapes
of the DC lineage. Combining these analyses with detailed overexpression,
knockdown, and ChIP-Seq studies, we show that Irf8 functions as a plasmacytoid DC
epigenetic and fate-determining TF, regulating massive, cell-specific chromatin
changes in thousands of pDC enhancers. Importantly, Irf8 forms a negative
feedback loop with Cebpb, a monocyte-derived DC epigenetic fate-determining TF.
We show that using this circuit logic, a pulse of TF expression can stably define
epigenetic and transcriptional states, regardless of the microenvironment. More
broadly, our study proposes a general paradigm that allows closely related cells 
with a similar set of signal-dependent factors to generate differential and
persistent enhancer landscapes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4412443
PMID: 25453760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 5;399:321-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.10.003. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Alpha-lipoic acid attenuates cardiac hypertrophy via inhibition of C/EBPß
activation.

Zou J(1), Gan X(1), Zhou H(1), Chen X(1), Guo Y(1), Chen J(1), Yang X(2), Lei
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Chengdu Fifth People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan
611130, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Gansu Provincial People's Hospital,
Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China. Electronic address: yxl1668@vip.163.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Chengdu Fifth People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan
611130, China. Electronic address: 2569987264@qq.com.

Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), a naturally occurring compound, exerts powerful
protective effects in numerous cardiovascular disease models. However, the
pharmacological property of ALA on cardiac hypertrophy has not been well
investigated. The present study was carried out to determine whether ALA exerts a
direct anti-hypertrophic effect in cultured cardiomyocytes and whether it
modifies the hypertrophic process in vivo. Furthermore, we determined the
potential underlying mechanisms for these actions. Treatment of cardiomyocytes
with phenylephrine (PE) for 24<U+2009>h produced a marked hypertrophic effect as
evidenced by significantly increased in ANF and BNP mRNA levels, as well as cell 
surface area. These effects were attenuated by ALA in a concentration-dependent
manner with a complete inhibition of hypertrophy at a concentration of 100<U+2009>µg/mL.
PE-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was associated with increased mRNA and
protein levels of C/EBPß, which were inhibited by pretreatment with ALA. However,
when cardiomyocytes were co-transfected with C/EBPß, ALA failed to inhibit
hypertrophic responses. Upregulation of C/EBPß expression was also evident in
rats subjected to 4 weeks of coronary artery ligation (CAL). However, rats
treated with ALA demonstrated markedly reduced hemodynamic and hypertrophic
responses, which were accompanied by attenuation of upregulation of C/EBPß. Taken
together, our results revealed a robust anti-hypertrophic and anti-remodeling
effect of ALA, which is mediated by inhibition of C/EBPß activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Mar;401(1-2):39-47. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2290-1. Epub
2014 Dec 2.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate inhibits differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells into
adipocyte.

Hashimoto Y(1), Matsuzaki E, Higashi K, Takahashi-Yanaga F, Takano A, Hirata M,
Nishimura F.

Author information: 
(1)Periodontal Section, Division of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dental
Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can differentiate into a number of cell types,
including adipocytes and osteoblasts. MSC differentiation into adipocytes
inhibits osteogenic differentiation and vice versa. Therefore, understanding the 
mechanisms of MSC differentiation at the signaling level can lead to the
development of novel therapeutic strategies toward tissue regeneration.
Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a signaling molecule that regulates many
cellular responses, including cellular differentiation. However, the effects of
S1P on MSC differentiation are largely unknown. The purpose of study was to
investigate whether S1P drives MSCs toward either adipogenic or osteogenic
differentiation, and if so, to clarify the underlying signaling mechanisms for
such differentiation. We found that S1P inhibited adipogenic differentiation of
C3H10T1/2 multipotent stem cells, while promoting their osteogenic
differentiation. During adipogenic differentiation, S1P suppressed the cAMP
accumulation in a Gi-protein-dependent manner. The Gi-dependent S1P signaling
suppressed C/EBPß expression, which is essential for adipogenic differentiation. 
Furthermore, S1P did not affect cAMP-independent adipogenic differentiation.
These findings suggest that S1P suppresses cAMP accumulation, leading to
inhibition of C/EBPß expression, thereby resulting in decreased adipogenic
differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells. Thus, our findings provide novel molecular
mechanisms as regards how S1P inhibits adipogenic differentiation of C3H10T1/2
cells, indicating a potential beneficial role for regeneration and repair of
tissues.

PMID: 25445169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem J. 2015 Feb 15;466(1):163-76. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140428.

Decreased adipogenesis and adipose tissue in mice with inactivated protein
phosphatase 5.

Jacob W(1), Rosenzweig D(1), Vázquez-Martin C(1), Duce SL(2), Cohen PT(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit,
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K.
(2)Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K.

Glucocorticoids play an important role in the treatment of inflammation and
immune disorders, despite side effects, which include metabolic derangements such
as central adiposity. These studies examine the role of protein phosphatase 5
(Ppp5) in glucocorticoid receptor (GR) complexes which mediate response to
glucocorticoids. Mice homozygous for inactivated Ppp5 (Ppp5D274A/D274A) exhibit
decreased adipose tissue surrounding the gonads and kidneys compared with
wild-type mice. Adipocyte size is smaller, more preadipocytes/stromal cell are
present in their gonadal fat tissue and differentiation of preadipocytes to
adipocytes is retarded. Glucocorticoid levels are raised and the GR is
hyperphosphorylated in adipose tissue of Ppp5D274A/D274A mice at Ser212 and
Ser220 (orthologous to human Ser203 and Ser211) in the absence of
glucocorticoids. Preadipocyte cultures from Ppp5D274A/D274A mice show decreased
down regulation of Delta-like protein-1/preadipocyte factor-1,
hyperphosphorylation of extra-cellular signal regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) and
increased concentration of (sex determining region Y)-box 9 (SOX9), changes in a 
pathway essential for preadipocyte differentiation, which leads to decreased
concentrations of the transcription factors CEBPß and CEBPa necessary for the
later stages of adipogenesis. The data indicate that Ppp5 plays a crucial role in
modifying GR-mediated initiation of adipose tissue differentiation, suggesting
that inhibition of Ppp5 may potentially be beneficial to prevent obesity during
glucocorticoid treatment.

PMID: 25437352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Integr Med. 2014 Nov;12(6):476-82. doi: 10.1016/S2095-4964(14)60058-3.

Constructing protein-protein interaction network of hypertension with blood
stasis syndrome via digital gene expression sequencing and database mining.

Lian YH(1), Fang MX(1), Chen LG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Medical School of Ji'nan
University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong Province, China. (2)Institute of
Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Medical School of Ji'nan University,
Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong Province, China; E-mail: tchenly@jnu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network in
hypertension patients with blood-stasis syndrome (BSS) by using digital gene
expression (DGE) sequencing and database mining techniques.
METHODS: DGE analysis based on the Solexa Genome Analyzer platform was performed 
on vascular endothelial cells incubated with serum of hypertension patients with 
BSS. The differentially expressed genes were filtered by comparing the expression
levels between the different experimental groups. Then functional categories and 
enriched pathways of the unique genes for BSS were analyzed using Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) to select those in the
enrichment pathways. Interologous Interaction Database (I2D) was used to
construct PPI networks with the selected genes for hypertension patients with
BSS. The potential candidate genes related to BSS were identified by comparing
the number of relationships among genes. Confirmed by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), gene ontology (GO) analysis
was used to infer the functional annotations of the potential candidate genes for
BSS.
RESULTS: With gene enrichment analysis using DAVID, a list of 58 genes was chosen
from the unique genes. The selected 58 genes were analyzed using I2D, and a PPI
network was constructed. Based on the network analysis results, candidate genes
for BSS were identified: DDIT3, JUN, HSPA8, NFIL3, HSPA5, HIST2H2BE, H3F3B,
CEBPB, SAT1 and GADD45A. Verified through qRT-PCR and analyzed by GO, the
functional annotations of the potential candidate genes were explored.
CONCLUSION: Compared with previous methodologies reported in the literature, the 
present DGE analysis and data mining method have shown a great improvement in
analyzing BSS.

PMID: 25412665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;93(1):38-46. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0098. Epub 2014
Sep 17.

C/EBPß regulates P2X7 receptor expression in response to glucose challenge in
intestinal epithelial cells.

Bilodeau MS(1), Arguin G, Gendron FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de
la Santé, Pavillon de Recherche Appliquée sur le Cancer, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 3201 Jean-Mignault, QC J1E 4K8, Canada.

Activation of the ATP-dependent P2X7 receptor modulates glucose transport in
intestinal epithelial cells through the downregulation of glucose transporter
GLUT2. In the present study, we show that an increase in glucose concentration
stimulates P2X7 receptor transcription via modulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding
proteins (C/EBPs) a and ß expression. The described human P2X7 receptor promoter 
region (GenBank Y12851) was cloned upstream of a luciferase reporter gene in
pGL4.10 plasmid and used to determine whether C/EBPs, namely C/EBPa and C/EBPß,
are able to stimulate the transcription of P2X7 receptor. Results show that
C/EBPß was the main regulator of P2X7 receptor expression in response to a
glucose challenge. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays further revealed
that C/EBPß occupied the -213 to +6 nt P2X7 promoter region. Surprisingly, C/EBPa
was also able to bind this region as revealed by ChIP assays, but without
inducing receptor transcription. In fact, C/EBPa and the C/EBPß-LIP isoform
blocked the C/EBPß-dependent regulation of P2X7 receptor transcription. These
findings suggest that glucose is not only the major source of energy for cell
function but may also act as a signaling molecule to stimulate the expression of 
regulatory proteins.

PMID: 25403356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Mol Med (Berl). 2015 Jan;93(1):39-49. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1215-5. Epub 2014
Nov 18.

Deregulation of the endogenous C/EBPß LIP isoform predisposes to tumorigenesis.

Bégay V(1), Smink JJ, Loddenkemper C, Zimmermann K, Rudolph C, Scheller M,
Steinemann D, Leser U, Schlegelberger B, Stein H, Leutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumorigenesis and Cell Differentiation, Max Delbrueck Center for
Molecular Medicine, Robert-Roessle-Str.10, 13125, Berlin, Germany.

Two long and one truncated isoforms (termed LAP*, LAP, and LIP, respectively) of 
the transcription factor CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPß) are
expressed from a single intronless Cebpb gene by alternative translation
initiation. Isoform expression is sensitive to mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR)-mediated activation of the translation initiation machinery and relayed
through an upstream open reading frame (uORF) on the C/EBPß mRNA. The truncated
C/EBPß LIP, initiated by high mTOR activity, has been implied in neoplasia, but
it was never shown whether endogenous C/EBPß LIP may function as an oncogene. In 
this study, we examined spontaneous tumor formation in C/EBPß knockin mice that
constitutively express only the C/EBPß LIP isoform from its own locus. Our data
show that deregulated C/EBPß LIP predisposes to oncogenesis in many tissues. Gene
expression profiling suggests that C/EBPß LIP supports a pro-tumorigenic
microenvironment, resistance to apoptosis, and alteration of cytokine/chemokine
expression. The results imply that enhanced translation reinitiation of C/EBPß
LIP promotes tumorigenesis. Accordingly, pharmacological restriction of mTOR
function might be a therapeutic option in tumorigenesis that involves enhanced
expression of the truncated C/EBPß LIP isoform.KEY MESSAGE: Elevated C/EBPß LIP
promotes cancer in mice. C/EBPß LIP is upregulated in B-NHL. Deregulated C/EBPß
LIP alters apoptosis and cytokine/chemokine networks. Deregulated C/EBPß LIP may 
support a pro-tumorigenic microenvironment.

PMID: 25401168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Physiol Sci. 2015 Jan;65(1):145-50. doi: 10.1007/s12576-014-0350-7. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

Changes in CEBPB expression in circulating leukocytes following eccentric
elbow-flexion exercise.

Blackwell J(1), Harries LW, Pilling LC, Ferrucci L, Jones A, Melzer D.

Author information: 
(1)Sport and Health Sciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, St. Luke's Campus, Exeter, UK.

In mouse models, CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta (CEBPB) is necessary for M2 
macrophage-mediated regeneration after muscle injury. In humans, CEBPB expression
in blood was strongly associated with muscle strength. In this study we aimed to 
test whether CEBPB expression in blood in people is increased 2 days after
exercise designed to induce muscle damage and subsequent repair. Sixteen healthy 
male volunteers undertook elbow flexor exercises designed to induce acute muscle 
micro-damage. Peripheral blood samples were collected at baseline and days 1, 2, 
4 and 7 following exercise. Expression of CEBPB and related genes were analysed
by qRT-PCR. Extent of muscle damage was determined by decline in maximal
voluntary isometric torque and by plasma creatine kinase activity. Nine subjects 
had peak (day 4) creatine kinase activity exceeding 10,000 U/l. In this subgroup,
CEBPB expression was elevated from baseline to 2 days post exercise
(paired-samples t (1,8) = 3.72, p = 0.006). Related expression and selected
cytokine changes after exercise did not reach significance. Muscle-damaging
exercise in humans can be followed by induction of CEBPB transcript expression in
peripheral blood. Associations between CEBPB expression in blood and muscle
strength may be consistent with the CEBPB-dependent muscle repair process.

PMCID: PMC4276809
PMID: 25391587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Clin Invest. 2014 Dec;124(12):5424-36. doi: 10.1172/JCI76289. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

TGR5 reduces macrophage migration through mTOR-induced C/EBPß differential
translation.

Perino A, Pols TW, Nomura M, Stein S, Pellicciari R, Schoonjans K.

The bile acid-responsive G protein-coupled receptor TGR5 is involved in several
metabolic processes, and recent studies suggest that TGR5 activation may promote 
pathways that are protective against diet-induced diabetes. Here, we investigated
the role of macrophage-specific TGR5 signaling in protecting adipose tissue from 
inflammation and associated insulin resistance. Examination of adipose tissue
from obese mice lacking macrophage Tgr5 revealed enhanced inflammation, increased
chemokine expression, and higher macrophage numbers compared with control obese
animals. Moreover, macrophage-specific deletion of Tgr5 exacerbated insulin
resistance in obese animals. Conversely, pharmacological activation of TGR5
markedly decreased LPS-induced chemokine expression in primary macrophages. This 
reduction was mediated by AKT-dependent activation of mTOR complex 1, which in
turn induced the differential translation of the dominant-negative C/EBPß
isoform, liver inhibitory protein (LIP). Overall, these studies reveal a
signaling pathway downstream of TGR5 that modulates chemokine expression in
response to high-fat diet and suggest that targeting this pathway has the
potential to be therapeutically exploited for prevention of chronic inflammatory 
diseases and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC4348975
PMID: 25365223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2014;14(8):685-99.

Nontoxic-dose of deguelin induce NPMc+ AML cell differentiation by selectively
targeting Mt NPM1/SIRT1 instead of HDAC1/3.

Wang YP, Yi S, Wen L, Zhang BP, Zhao Z, Hu JY, Zhao F, He J, Fang J, Zhang C, Cui
G, Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, P.R. China.
yanchen981@163.com.

AML with Mt NPM1 has relatively good responses to induction therapy. However, a
proportion of NPMc+ AML cells cannot be cleared by conventional treatments.
Therefore, we determined the therapeutic efficacy of deguelin that has
demonstrated extensive biological activity with low toxicity. We previously
reported that deguelin selectively reduces Mt NPM1, as well as induces
differentiation and potentiates apoptosis in NPMc+ AML cells. Nevertheless,
little information is available regarding the mechanism of deguelin-induced
differentiation. Here, we investigated the role of deguelin in the induction of
NPMc+ AML cell differentiation. Deguelin at the nontoxic concentration of 2 µM
strongly inhibited cell growth but reduced apoptosis in OCI-AML3 cells carrying
Mt NPM1, whereas the antiproliferative effect was minimal in OCIM2 cells
harboring Wt NPM1. Compared with OCIM2 cells that showed no response,
deguelin-treated OCI-AML3 cells exhibited the morphological features of
granulocytic/monocytic differentiation, increased expression of differentiation
antigens, and a nitroblue tetrazolium reduction activity. Induction of
differentiation was associated with downregulation of Mt NPM1 and SIRT1, but not 
Wt NPM1, which was accompanied by an increase in CEBPß and G-CSFR expression, and
further confirmed by sh-Mt NPM1 and sh-SIRT1. sh-Mt NPM1 treatment reduced SIRT1 
expression, but did not change HDAC1/3 levels, suggesting that the decline of
SIRT1 was partially accountable for the deguelin-induced, Mt-NPM1-related
differentiation. Moreover, Mt NPM1 overexpression blocked deguelin-induced cell
differentiation. Lastly, we showed that deguelin reduced the expression of Mt
NPM1 via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Taken together, our results suggest
that deguelin may be a therapeutic candidate for NPMc+ AML.

PMID: 25348016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Molecules. 2014 Oct 21;19(10):16909-24. doi: 10.3390/molecules191016909.

Effects of yerba maté, a plant extract formulation ("YGD") and resveratrol in
3T3-L1 adipogenesis.

Santos JC(1), Gotardo EM(2), Brianti MT(3), Piraee M(4), Gambero A(5), Ribeiro
ML(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Clinical Pharmacology and
Gastroenterology Unit, Sao Francisco University Medical School, Bragança
Paulista-SP 12916-900, Brazil. ju_carvalho_s@hotmail.com. (2)Laboratory of
Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Clinical Pharmacology and Gastroenterology
Unit, Sao Francisco University Medical School, Bragança Paulista-SP 12916-900,
Brazil. erikinha_gotardo@yahoo.com.br. (3)Laboratory of Microbiology and
Molecular Biology, Clinical Pharmacology and Gastroenterology Unit, Sao Francisco
University Medical School, Bragança Paulista-SP 12916-900, Brazil.
mitsue.brianti@gmail.com. (4)Groupe Persavita Inc., CP 49586 DU-MUSEE, Montreal, 
QC H3T 2A5, Canada. mpiraee@persavita.com. (5)Laboratory of Microbiology and
Molecular Biology, Clinical Pharmacology and Gastroenterology Unit, Sao Francisco
University Medical School, Bragança Paulista-SP 12916-900, Brazil.
alessandra.gambero@usf.edu.br. (6)Laboratory of Microbiology and Molecular
Biology, Clinical Pharmacology and Gastroenterology Unit, Sao Francisco
University Medical School, Bragança Paulista-SP 12916-900, Brazil.
marcelo.ribeiro@usf.edu.br.

We aimed to evaluate the in vitro effects of yerba maté, YGD (a herbal
preparation containing yerba maté, guarana and damiana), and resveratrol on
adipogenesis. The anti-adipogenic effects of yerba mate, YGD, resveratrol and YGD
+ resveratrol and yerba mate + resveratrol combinations were evaluated in 3T3-L1 
cells by Oil Red staining, cellular triglyceride content, and PCR quantitative
array. The results demonstrated that all of the tested compounds inhibited
adipogenesis. Yerba maté extract significantly down-regulated the expression of
genes that play an important role in regulating adipogenesis, such as Adig, Axin,
Cebpa, Fgf10, Lep, Lpl, and Ppar<U+03B3>2. In addition, these genes, YGD also repressed 
Bmp2, Ccnd1, Fasn, and Srebf1. Resveratrol also modulated the expression of Adig,
Bmp2, Ccnd1, C/EBPa, Fasn, Fgf10, Lep, Lpl, and Ppar<U+03B3>2. Moreover, resveratrol
repressed Cebpb, Cdk4, Fgf2, and Klf15. The yerba maté extract and YGD
up-regulated the expression of genes involved in inhibiting adipogenesis, such as
Dlk-1, Klf2, and Ucp1. Resveratrol also induced the expression of Klf2 and Ucp1. 
In addition resveratrol modulated the Ddit3, Foxo1, Sirt1, and Sirt2. The
combined effects of these compounds on gene expression showed similar results
observed from individual treatments. Our data indicates that the synergy between 
the compounds favors the inhibition of adipogenesis.

PMID: 25338179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(18):7547-52.

Evolution of the mir-155 family and possible targets in cancers and the immune
system.

Xie GB(1), Liu WJ, Pan ZJ, Cheng TY, Luo C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Orient Science and Technology, Hunan Agriculture University,
Changsha, China E-mail : superlluo@163.com.

The mir-155 family is not only involved in a diversity of cancers, but also as a 
regulator of the immune system. However, the evolutionary history of this family 
is still unclear. The present study indicates that mir-155 evolved independently 
with lineage-specific gain of miRNAs. In addition, arm switching has occurred in 
the mir-155 family, and alternative splicing could produce two different lengths 
of ancestral sequences, implying the alternative splicing can also drive
evolution for intragenic miRNAs. Here we screened validated target genes and
immunity- related proteins, followed by analyzation of the mir-155 family
function by high-throughput methods like the gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto
Eneyclopedin of Genes and Genemes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis. The
high-throughput analysis showed that the CCND1 and EGFR genes were outstanding in
being significantly enriched, and the target genes cebpb and VCAM1 and the
protein SMAD2 were also vital in mir-155-related immune reponse activities.
Therefore, we conclude that the mir-155 family is highly conserved in evolution, 
and CCND1 and EGFR genes might be potential targets of mir-155 with regard to
progress of cancers, while the cebpb and VCAM1 genes and the protein SMAD2 might 
be key factors in the mir-155 regulated immune activities.

PMID: 25292026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cells. 2014 Oct 31;37(10):734-41. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2014.0180. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

The histone demethylase PHF2 promotes fat cell differentiation as an epigenetic
activator of both C/EBPa and C/EBPd.

Lee KH(1), Ju UI(2), Song JY(2), Chun YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea. (2)Departments of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea.
(3)Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea ; Departments of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea ; Departments of
Physiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Histone modifications on major transcription factor target genes are one of the
major regulatory mechanisms controlling adipogenesis. Plant homeodomain finger 2 
(PHF2) is a Jumonji domain-containing protein and is known to demethylate the
histone H3K9, a repressive gene marker. To better understand the function of PHF2
in adipocyte differentiation, we constructed stable PHF2 knock-down cells by
using the mouse pre-adipocyte cell line 3T3-L1. When induced with adipogenic
media, PHF2 knock-down cells showed reduced lipid accumulation compared to
control cells. Differential expression using a cDNA microarray revealed
significant reduction of metabolic pathway genes in the PHF2 knock-down cell line
after differentiation. The reduced expression of major transcription factors and 
adipokines was confirmed with reverse transcription- quantitative polymerase
chain reaction and Western blotting. We further performed co-immunoprecipitation 
analysis of PHF2 with four major adipogenic transcription factors, and we found
that CCATT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)a and C/EBPd physically interact with 
PHF2. In addition, PHF2 binding to target gene promoters was confirmed with a
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiment. Finally, histone H3K9 methylation
markers on the PHF2-binding sequences were increased in PHF2 knock-down cells
after differentiation. Together, these results demonstrate that PHF2 histone
demethylase controls adipogenic gene expression during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4213764
PMID: 25266703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):124. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.122606. Epub 2014
Sep 24.

Atrazine enhances progesterone production through activation of multiple
signaling pathways in FSH-stimulated rat granulosa cells: evidence for premature 
luteinization.

Pogrmic-Majkic K(1), Samardzija D(1), Fa S(1), Hrubik J(1), Glisic B(1),
Kaisarevic S(1), Andric N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Reproductive Toxicology Unit, Laboratory for Ecotoxicology,
Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi Sad,
Novi Sad, Serbia. (2)Molecular and Reproductive Toxicology Unit, Laboratory for
Ecotoxicology, Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Sciences, University
of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia nebojsa.andric@dbe.uns.ac.rs.

Premature luteinization is a possible cause of infertility in women. It is
currently unknown whether environmental chemicals can induce changes associated
with premature luteinization. Using rat granulosa cells (GC) in vitro, we
demonstrated that exposure to atrazine (ATR), a widely used herbicide, causes GC 
phenotype that resembles that of human premature luteinization. At the end of the
48-h stimulation with FSH, ATR-exposed GC showed (1) higher levels of
progesterone, (2) overexpression of luteal markers (Star and Cyp11a1), and (3) an
increase in progesterone:estradiol ratio above 1. Mechanistic experiments were
conducted to understand the signaling events engaged by ATR that lead to this
phenotype. Western blot analysis revealed prolonged phosphorylation of protein
kinase B (AKT) and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) in ATR- and
FSH-exposed GC. An increased level of ERK1/2-dependent transcriptional factor
CCATT/enhancer-binding protein beta (CEBPB) was observed after 4 h of ATR
exposure. Inhibitors of PI3K (wortmannin) and MEK (U0126) prevented ATR-induced
rise in progesterone level and expression of luteal markers in FSH-stimulated GC.
Atrazine intensified AKT and CEBPB signaling and caused Star overexpression in
forskolin-stimulated GC but not in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-stimulated GC.
In the presence of rolipram, a specific inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4), 
ATR was not able to further elevate AKT phosphorylation, CEBPB protein level, and
Star mRNA in FSH-stimulated GC, suggesting that ATR inhibits PDE4. Overall, this 
study showed that ATR acts as a FSH sensitizer leading to enhanced cAMP, AKT, and
CEBPB signaling and progesterone biosynthesis, which promotes premature
luteinization phenotype in GC.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25253736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Sep 22;6(10):2634-46. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu210.

Transcription factors bind negatively selected sites within human mtDNA genes.

Blumberg A(1), Sri Sailaja B(2), Kundaje A(3), Levin L(1), Dadon S(1), Shmorak
S(4), Shaulian E(4), Meshorer E(2), Mishmar D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel. (2)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life Sciences, and The Edmond
Lily Center for Brain Sciences (ELSC), The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmond
J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, Israel. (3)Department of Genetics, Stanford
University Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. (4)Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, IMRIC, The Hebrew University Medical School, 
Ein Karem, Jerusalem, Israel. (5)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel dmishmar@bgu.ac.il.

Transcription of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded genes is thought to be
regulated by a handful of dedicated transcription factors (TFs), suggesting that 
mtDNA genes are separately regulated from the nucleus. However, several TFs, with
known nuclear activities, were found to bind mtDNA and regulate mitochondrial
transcription. Additionally, mtDNA transcriptional regulatory elements, which
were proved important in vitro, were harbored by a deletion that normally
segregated among healthy individuals. Hence, mtDNA transcriptional regulation is 
more complex than once thought. Here, by analyzing ENCODE chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) data, we identified strong binding
sites of three bona fide nuclear TFs (c-Jun, Jun-D, and CEBPb) within human mtDNA
protein-coding genes. We validated the binding of two TFs by ChIP-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (c-Jun and Jun-D) and showed their mitochondrial
localization by electron microscopy and subcellular fractionation. As a step
toward investigating the functionality of these TF-binding sites (TFBS), we
assessed signatures of selection. By analyzing 9,868 human mtDNA sequences
encompassing all major global populations, we recorded genetic variants in tips
and nodes of mtDNA phylogeny within the TFBS. We next calculated the effects of
variants on binding motif prediction scores. Finally, the mtDNA variation pattern
in predicted TFBS, occurring within ChIP-seq negative-binding sites, was compared
with ChIP-seq positive-TFBS (CPR). Motifs within CPRs of c-Jun, Jun-D, and CEBPb 
harbored either only tip variants or their nodal variants retained high motif
prediction scores. This reflects negative selection within mtDNA CPRs, thus
supporting their functionality. Hence, human mtDNA-coding sequences may have dual
roles, namely coding for genes yet possibly also possessing regulatory potential.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMCID: PMC4224337
PMID: 25245407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 10;34(37):12547-59. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0324-14.2014.

A positive autoregulatory BDNF feedback loop via C/EBPß mediates hippocampal
memory consolidation.

Bambah-Mukku D(1), Travaglia A(2), Chen DY(3), Pollonini G(2), Alberini CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York 10003 and
Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029. (2)Center for Neural Science, New York 
University, New York, New York 10003 and. (3)Department of Neuroscience and
Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York 10029. (4)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York
10003 and ca60@nyu.edu.

Little is known about the temporal progression and regulation of the mechanisms
underlying memory consolidation. Brain-derived-neurotrophic-factor (BDNF) has
been shown to mediate the maintenance of memory consolidation, but the mechanisms
of this regulation remain unclear. Using inhibitory avoidance (IA) in rats, here 
we show that a hippocampal BDNF-positive autoregulatory feedback loop via
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is necessary to mediate memory
consolidation. At training, a very rapid, learning-induced requirement of BDNF
accompanied by rapid de novo translation controls the induction of a persistent
activation of cAMP-response element binding-protein (CREB) and C/EBPß expression.
The latter, in turn, controls an increase in expression of bdnf exon IV
transcripts and BDNF protein, both of which are necessary and, together with the 
initial BDNF requirement, mediate memory consolidation. The autoregulatory loop
terminates by 48 h after training with decreased C/EBPß and pCREB and increased
methyl-CpG binding protein-2, histone-deacetylase-2, and switch-independent-3a
binding at the bdnf exon IV promoter.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3412547-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4160783
PMID: 25209292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31136-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.587311. Epub 2014
Sep 8.

Medroxyprogesterone acetate differentially regulates interleukin (IL)-12 and
IL-10 in a human ectocervical epithelial cell line in a glucocorticoid receptor
(GR)-dependent manner.

Louw-du Toit R(1), Hapgood JP(2), Africander D(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Stellenbosch, Private Bag
X1, Matieland 7602 and. (2)the Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, South Africa. (3)From the Department of
Biochemistry, University of Stellenbosch, Private Bag X1, Matieland 7602 and
drho@sun.ac.za.

Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), designed to mimic the actions of the
endogenous hormone progesterone (P4), is extensively used by women as a
contraceptive and in hormone replacement therapy. However, little is known about 
the steroid receptor-mediated molecular mechanisms of action of MPA in the female
genital tract. In this study, we investigated the regulation of the
pro-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin (IL)-12, and the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10, by MPA versus P4, in an in vitro cell culture model of the female
ectocervical environment. This study shows that P4 and MPA significantly increase
the expression of the IL-12p40 and IL-12p35 genes, whereas IL-10 gene expression 
is suppressed in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, these effects were abrogated 
when reducing the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) levels with siRNA. Using a
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), siRNA, and re-ChIP assays,
we show that recruitment of the P4- and MPA-bound GR to the IL-12p40 promoter
requires CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-ß and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B),
although recruitment to the IL-10 promoter requires signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)-3. These results suggest that both P4 and MPA
may modulate inflammation in the ectocervix via this genomic mechanism.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4223317
PMID: 25202013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):9079-91.

Prolactin induces up-regulation of its cognate receptor in breast cancer cells
via transcriptional activation of its generic promoter by cross-talk between ERa 
and STAT5.

Kavarthapu R(1), Tsai Morris CH(1), Dufau ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Prolactin (PRL) serves a critical role in breast cancer progression via
activation of its cognate receptor. These studies reveal up-regulation of PRLR
gene expression by PRL in absence of estradiol in MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer
cells. PRL/PRLR via activation of STAT5 that binds a GAS-element in the PRLR gene
and the participation of ERa stimulates PRLR transcription/expression. PRL/PRLR
induces phosphorylation of ERa through the JAK2/PI3K/MAPK/ERK and JAK2/HER2
activated pathways. The increased recruitment of phospho-ERa, induced by PRL to
Sp1 and C/EBPß at PRLR promoter sites is essential for PRL-induced PRLR
transcription. This recruitment is prevented by blockade of PRL expression using 
RNA interference or ERa phosphorylation using specific inhibitors of PI3K and
ERK. Direct evidence is provided for local actions of PRL, independent of
estradiol, in the up-regulation of PRLR transcription/expression by an
activation-loop between STAT5 and the phospho-ERa/Sp1/C/EBPß complex with
requisite participation of signaling mechanisms. PRL's central role in the
up-regulation of PRLR maximizes the action of the endogenous hormone. This study 
offers mechanistically rational basis for invasiveness fueled by prolactin in
refractory states to adjuvant therapies in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4253420
PMID: 25193864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 1;5:4696. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5696.

TSC1 controls macrophage polarization to prevent inflammatory disease.

Zhu L(1), Yang T(1), Li L(2), Sun L(2), Hou Y(2), Hu X(2), Zhang L(2), Tian H(3),
Zhao Q(2), Peng J(2), Zhang H(4), Wang R(3), Yang Z(5), Zhang L(6), Zhao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute
of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China [2]. (2)State Key 
Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (3)Department of Oncology,
The Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University, Dalian 116001, China.
(4)1] National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Physiology 
and Pathophysiology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic
Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, China [2] Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116085, China. (5)MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for
Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, 
China. (6)Key Laboratory of Human Diseases Comparative Medicine, Ministry of
Health, Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, CAMS &PUMC, Beijing 100021,
China.

Macrophages acquire distinct phenotypes during tissue stress and inflammatory
responses, but the mechanisms that regulate the macrophage polarization are
poorly defined. Here we show that tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1) is a
critical regulator of M1 and M2 phenotypes of macrophages. Mice with
myeloid-specific deletion of TSC1 exhibit enhanced M1 response and spontaneously 
develop M1-related inflammatory disorders. However, TSC1-deficient mice are
highly resistant to M2-polarized allergic asthma. Inhibition of the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) fails to reverse the hypersensitive M1 response of
TSC1-deficient macrophages, but efficiently rescues the defective M2
polarization. Deletion of mTOR also fails to reverse the enhanced inflammatory
response of TSC1-deficient macrophages. Molecular studies indicate that TSC1
inhibits M1 polarization by suppressing the Ras GTPase-Raf1-MEK-ERK pathway in
mTOR-independent manner, whereas TSC1 promotes M2 properties by mTOR-dependent
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-ß pathways. Overall, these findings define a key
role for TSC1 in orchestrating macrophage polarization via mTOR-dependent and
independent pathways.

PMID: 25175012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Neuroscience. 2014 Oct 24;279:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.08.032. Epub 
2014 Aug 27.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces expression of C/EBP-beta in primary afferent 
neurons following nerve injury.

Sasaki M(1), Hashimoto S(1), Sawa T(1), Amaya F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: ama@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBP-beta) is a transcription factor that
belongs to the C/EBP family. To understand the role of C/EBP-beta in the
peripheral nervous system, we investigated the expression of C/EBP-beta in the
dorsal root ganglion. C/EBP-beta was weakly detected in nuclei of naive dorsal
root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Spinal nerve ligation increased the expression of
C/EBP-beta in L4 and L5 DRG neurons. Treatment with anti-TNF-alpha prevented
SNL-induced pain hypersensitivity and C/EBP-beta expression in the DRG. Injection
of TNF-alpha into the sciatic nerve produced transient pain hypersensitivity and 
induction of C/EBP-beta expression in the DRG. These results demonstrate that
C/EBP-beta is activated in the DRG neurons by a TNF-alpha-dependent manner and
might be involved in the activation of primary afferent neurons after nerve
injury.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Arch Pharm Res. 2015;38(5):865-75. doi: 10.1007/s12272-014-0470-x. Epub 2014 Aug 
28.

Gene expression profiling in the striatum of amphetamine-treated spontaneously
hypertensive rats which showed amphetamine conditioned place preference and
self-administration.

dela Peña I(1), de la Peña JB, Kim BN, Han DH, Noh M, Cheong JH.

Author information: 
(1)Uimyung Research Institute for Neuroscience, Sahmyook University, 26-21
Kongreung-2-dong, Hwarangro-815, Nowon-gu, Seoul, 139-742, Korea.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), the most commonly diagnosed
neurobehavioral disorder of childhood, is usually treated with psychostimulants
(e.g., amphetamine). Little is known about the neuronal and behavioral
consequences of chronic amphetamine use or abuse in individuals with ADHD. Of all
ADHD animal models, the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) is the most
validated and widely used. Here, we analyzed striatal transcriptomes in
amphetamine-pretreated SHRs (5 mg/kg, i.p. for 7 days [twice daily]), which
showed a conditioned place preference to and self-administration of amphetamine. 
Microarray analyses revealed increased mRNA expression of 55 genes (>1.65-fold
increase), while 17 genes were downregulated (<0.6-fold) in the striatum of SHRs.
The main functional categories overrepresented among the differentially expressed
genes in the striatum include those involved in transcription (e.g., Cebpb,
Per2), genes associated with angiogenesis (e.g., Kdr, Klf5), cell adhesion (e.g.,
Col11a1, Ctgf), apoptosis (e.g., Nfkbia, Perp) and neuronal development (e.g.,
Egr2, Nr4a3). In conclusion, we dissected the striatal transcriptional responses 
to the reinforcing effects of repeated amphetamine treatment in the SHR model of 
ADHD. Future studies should determine the influence of these altered transcripts 
on amphetamine reinforcement in amphetamine-treated SHRs, and the clinical
relevance of the present findings with regard to amphetamine use/abuse in ADHD
individuals.

PMID: 25163681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 1;193(7):3664-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301593. Epub 2014
Aug 25.

Differential control of Mincle-dependent cord factor recognition and macrophage
responses by the transcription factors C/EBPß and HIF1a.

Schoenen H(1), Huber A(1), Sonda N(2), Zimmermann S(3), Jantsch J(4), Lepenies
B(3), Bronte V(5), Lang R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University
Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054
Erlangen, Germany; (2)Oncology and Immunology Section, Department of Surgery,
Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padua, 35128, Padua, Italy;
(3)Department of Biomolecular Systems, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and
Interfaces, 14476 Potsdam, Germany; Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, 14195 Berlin, Germany; (4)Institute of Clinical
Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich
Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany; Institut für
Klinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universitätsklinikum Regensburg, 93053
Regensburg, Germany; and. (5)Immunology Section, Department of Pathology, Verona 
University Hospital, University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy. (6)Institute of
Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany;
roland.lang@uk-erlangen.de.

Trehalose-6,6-dimycolate (TDM), the mycobacterial cord factor, and its synthetic 
analog Trehalose-6,6-dibehenate (TDB) bind to the C-type lectin receptors
macrophage-inducible C-type lectin (Mincle) and Mcl to activate macrophages.
Genetically, the transcriptional response to TDB/TDM has been defined to require 
FcR<U+03B3>-Syk-Card9 signaling. However, TDB/TDM-triggered kinase activation has not
been studied well, and it is largely unknown which transcriptional regulators
bring about inflammatory gene expression. In this article, we report that TDB/TDM
caused only weak Syk-phosphorylation in resting macrophages, consistent with low 
basal Mincle expression. However, LPS-priming caused MYD88-dependent upregulation
of Mincle, resulting in enhanced TDB/TDM-induced kinase activation and more rapid
inflammatory gene expression. TLR-induced Mincle expression partially
circumvented the requirement for Mcl in the response to TDB/TDM. To dissect
transcriptional responses to TDB/TDM, we mined microarray data and identified
early growth response (Egr) family transcription factors as direct Mincle target 
genes, whereas upregulation of Cebpb and Hif1a required new protein synthesis.
Macrophages and dendritic cells lacking C/EBPß showed nearly complete abrogation 
of TDB/TDM responsiveness, but also failed to upregulate Mincle. Retroviral
rescue of Mincle expression in Cebpb-deficient cells restored induction of Egr1, 
but not of G-CSF. This pattern of C/EBPß dependence was also observed after
stimulation with the Dectin-1 ligand Curdlan. Inducible expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a) also required C/EBPß. In turn, HIF1a was not 
required for Mincle expression, kinase activation, and Egr1 or Csf3 expression,
but critically contributed to NO production. Taken together, we identify C/EBPß
as central hub in Mincle expression and inflammatory gene induction, whereas
HIF1a controls Nos2 expression. C/EBPß also connects TLR signals to cord factor
responsiveness through MYD88-dependent upregulation of Mincle.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25156364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e105381. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105381.
eCollection 2014.

Inhibition of c-Myc overcomes cytotoxic drug resistance in acute myeloid leukemia
cells by promoting differentiation.

Pan XN(1), Chen JJ(1), Wang LX(1), Xiao RZ(1), Liu LL(1), Fang ZG(1), Liu Q(1),
Long ZJ(1), Lin DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China; Sun Yat-sen Institute of Hematology, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.

Nowadays, drug resistance still represents a major obstacle to successful acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) treatment and the underlying mechanism is not fully
elucidated. Here, we found that high expression of c-Myc was one of the
cytogenetic characteristics in the drug-resistant leukemic cells. c-Myc
over-expression in leukemic cells induced resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs,
enhanced colony formation capacity and inhibited cell differentiation induced by 
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Meanwhile, inhibition of c-Myc by shRNA or
specific c-Myc inhibitor 10058-F4 rescued the sensitivity to cytotoxic drugs,
restrained the colony formation ability and promoted differentiation. RT-PCR and 
western blotting analysis showed that down-regulation of C/EBPß contributed to
the poor differentiation state of leukemic cells induced by c-Myc
over-expression. Importantly, over-expression of C/EBPß could reverse c-Myc
induced drug resistance. In primary AML cells, the c-Myc expression was
negatively correlated with C/EBPß. 10058-F4, displayed anti-proliferative
activity and increased cellular differentiation with up-regulation of C/EBPß in
primary AML cells. Thus, our study indicated that c-Myc could be a novel target
to overcome drug resistance, providing a new approach in AML therapy.

PMCID: PMC4134294
PMID: 25127121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2014;77(19):1125-40. doi:
10.1080/15287394.2013.874246.

Regulation of IL-8 promoter activity by verrucarin A in human monocytic THP-1
cells.

Liu J(1), Simmons SO, Pei R.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering , University of Texas at
San Antonio , San Antonio , Texas , USA.

Macrocyclic trichothecenes have been frequently detected in fungi in
water-damaged buildings and exhibited higher toxicity than the well-studied
trichothecenes; however, the mechanism underlying their toxicity has been poorly 
understood. In this study, transcriptional regulation of the cytokine interleukin
(IL)-8 by a macrocyclic trichothecene, verrucarin A (VA), in human monocytic
THP-1 cells is reported. Consistent with previous findings, VA was 100-fold more 
cytotoxic than deoxynivalenol (DON), while ochratoxin A (OA) was not cytotoxic.
In cells transduced with the wild-type IL-8 promoter luciferase construct, VA
induced a biphasic dose response composed of an upregulation of luciferase
expression at low concentrations of 0.01-1 ng/ml and a downregulation at high
levels of 10 ng/ml and higher. In contrast, DON induced a sigmoid-shaped dose
response with the EC50 of 11.6 ng/ml, while OA did not markedly affect the IL-8
expression. When cells were transduced with IL-8 promoter with a mutation of
transcription factor nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-binding site, VA (1 ng/ml), DON
(1000 ng/ml), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) a (20 ng/ml)-induced luciferase
expression were impaired. In addition, the NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor caffeic acid phenethyl
ester inhibited VA-, DON-, and TNFa-induced luciferase expression. Mutation of
the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) ß binding site of the IL-8 promoter
affected only DON-, but not VA- and TNFa-induced luciferase expression. Taken
together, these results suggested that VA activated IL-8 promoter via an
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent, but not CEBPß-dependent, pathway in human monocytes.

PMID: 25119735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Aug 22;451(2):329-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.130. Epub 2014 Aug 2.

PU.1 promotes miR-191 to inhibit adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.

Ji S(1), Li W(2), Bao L(1), Han P(1), Yang W(1), Ma L(1), Meng F(1), Cao B(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong 
Road, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, PR China. (2)Beijing Shuita Aged-vinegar Research
Institute for Biosciences, Beijing 102200, PR China. (3)College of Animal Science
and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling 712100,
Shaanxi, PR China. Electronic address: jiziqing2010@163.com.

PU.1, an Ets family transcription factor, was previously demonstrated expressed
in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and had an negative effect on adiopogenesis. However, the
underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, miR-191 was identified as an
inhibitor of adipocyte differentiation through targeting the 3' untranslated
regions of C/EBPß, the initial factor in the C/EBPa/ß-PPAR<U+03B3> terminal pathway of
adipogenic differentiation. MiR-191 suppressed the lipid accumulation by Oil Red 
O staining and downregulated the levels of adipogenic marker genes PPAR<U+03B3>
(P<0.01), aP2 (P<0.01) and FAS (P<0.05). Then, we found that PU.1 overexpression 
resulted in upregulation of miR-191 and adipogenic inhibition. Likewise, PU.1
overexpression rescued the miR-191 decrease and resisted the adipogenic promotion
caused by miR-191 oligonucleotide inhibitor. Collectively, these results revealed
that PU.1 promoted miR-191 to suppress adipogenesis 3T3-L1 preadipocyte and
indicated a new mechanism of PU.1 inhibiting adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25094047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Apoptosis. 2014 Sep;19(9):1399-410. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-1013-0.

Apelin is transcriptionally regulated by ER stress-induced ATF4 expression via a 
p38 MAPK-dependent pathway.

Jeong K(1), Oh Y, Kim SJ, Kim H, Park KC, Kim SS, Ha J, Kang I, Choe W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BK21 project), Medical
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and Biomedical Science
Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, #1, Hoegi-dong,
Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul, 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Apelin, which is an endogenous ligand for the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor
APJ, was reported to be up-regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1-a (HIF1-a) in 
hypoxia- and insulin-treated cell systems. However, a negative transcriptional
regulator of apelin has not yet been identified. In this study, we showed that
apelin is down-regulated by ATF4 via the pro-apoptotic p38 MAPK pathway under
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. First, we analyzed the human apelin promoter
to characterize the effects of ER stress on apelin expression in hepatocytes.
Treatment with thapsigargin, an inducer of ER stress, and over-expression of ATF4
decreased apelin expression in hepatocytes. This work identified an
ATF4-responsive region within the apelin promoter. Interestingly, ATF4-mediated
repression of apelin was dependent upon the N-terminal domain of ATF4. C/EBP-ß
knockdown experiments suggest that C/EBP-ß, which acts as an ATF4 binding
partner, is critical for the ER stress-induced down-regulation of apelin. We also
demonstrated that ATF4 regulates apelin gene expression via p38 pathways. Ectopic
expression of constitutively active MKK6, an upstream kinase of p38, suggested
that activation of the p38 pathway is sufficient to induce ATF4-mediated
repression of apelin. Moreover, apelin enhanced cell migration in a wound healing
assay in a p38 MAPK-dependent manner. Furthermore, analysis of caspase-3
activation indicated that ATF4 knockdown up-regulated apelin expression, leading 
to the inability of MKK6 (CA) to exert pro-apoptotic effects. Taken together, our
results suggest that ATF4-mediated repression of apelin contributes substantially
to the pro-apoptotic effects of p38.

PMID: 25052841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Dev Biol. 2014;58(2-4):117-26. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.130335gw.

Evolution of mammalian pregnancy and the origin of the decidual stromal cell.

Wagner GP(1), Kin K, Muglia L, Pavlicev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and Systems Biology Institute, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. gunter.wagner@yale.edu.

Reproduction in eutherian mammals is characterized by extended intrauterine
retention of the fetus after implantation. We summarize evolutionary innovations 
that enable this form of vivipary, including early maternal recognition of
pregnancy, invasive placentation, and emergence of the decidual cell type. We
first review the structure of the marsupial endometrium and its relationship to
that of eutherian mammals. While the tissue components of endometrium are the
same in marsupials and eutherians, an important difference is the amount of
stromal cells, which are much more abundant in eutherians. Moreover, the nature
of the invasive placentation differs in marsupials and eutherians. In the
opossum, it consists of cytoplasmatic extensions of trophoblast cells that
penetrate between the luminal epithelial cells to contact maternal capillaries.
In bandicoots, the trophoblast and luminal epithelial cells fuse, and the
maternal epithelium is replaced by a layer of multinucleated cells. In no case
has there been evidence of a direct interaction between trophoblast and stromal
cells. The direct interface between the trophoblast and maternal stroma is a
derived feature of eutherian mammals, coincidental with the origin of decidual
cells. Gene expression studies are suggestive of "categorical reprograming" of
endometrial fibroblasts during decidualization. This reprogramming suggests that 
the decidual cell is a distinct cell type rather than a modulation of endometrial
fibroblasts. Further support for this hypothesis is the origin of derived
transcription factor interactions that are necessary for the regulation of
decidual gene expression, in particular the interactions between HOXA11 and CEBPB
with FOXO1A.

PMID: 25023677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Immunol. 2014 Aug 15;193(4):1717-27. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302167. Epub 2014
Jul 11.

Macrophage PTEN regulates expression and secretion of arginase I modulating
innate and adaptive immune responses.

Sahin E(1), Haubenwallner S(1), Kuttke M(1), Kollmann I(1), Halfmann A(2), Dohnal
AM(2), Chen L(3), Cheng P(3), Hoesel B(4), Einwallner E(5), Brunner J(1), Kral
JB(1), Schrottmaier WC(1), Thell K(1), Saferding V(6), Blüml S(6), Schabbauer
G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Physiology, Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; (2)St. Anna Children's Cancer
Research Institute, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; (3)Bio Cancer Treatment International
Ltd., Hong Kong, China; (4)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis
Research, Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria; (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University 
of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; and. (6)Department of Rheumatology, Internal
Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. (7)Institute 
for Physiology, Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of
Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; gernot.schabbauer@meduniwien.ac.at.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2014 Nov 15;193(10):5350. Dohnal, Alexander B [Corrected to Dohnal,
Alexander M].

The activation of innate immune cells triggers numerous intracellular signaling
pathways, which require tight control to mount an adequate immune response. The
PI3K signaling pathway is intricately involved in innate immunity, and its
activation dampens the expression and release of proinflammatory cytokines in
myeloid cells. These signaling processes are strictly regulated by the PI3K
antagonist, the lipid phosphatase, PTEN, a known tumor suppressor. Importantly,
PTEN is responsible for the elevated production of cytokines such as IL-6 in
response to TLR agonists, and deletion of PTEN results in diminished inflammatory
responses. However, the mechanisms by which PI3K negatively regulates TLR
signaling are only partially resolved. We observed that Arginase I expression and
secretion were markedly induced by PTEN deletion, suggesting PTEN(-/-)
macrophages were alternatively activated. This was mediated by increased
expression and activation of the transcription factors C/EBPß and STAT3. Genetic 
and pharmacologic experimental approaches in vitro, as well as in vivo
autoimmunity models, provide convincing evidence that PI3K/PTEN-regulated
extracellular Arginase I acts as a paracrine regulator of inflammation and
immunity.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4120896
PMID: 25015834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 8;289(32):22128-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.551242. Epub 2014
Jun 25.

CD1d-mediated presentation of endogenous lipid antigens by adipocytes requires
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein.

Rakhshandehroo M(1), Gijzel SM(1), Siersbæk R(2), Broekema MF(1), de Haar C(3),
Schipper HS(4), Boes M(3), Mandrup S(2), Kalkhoven E(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine and. (2)the 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark,
DK-5230 Odense, Denmark. (3)the Department of Pediatric Immunology, University
Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CG Utrecht, the Netherlands and. (4)From the
Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine and the Department of
Pediatric Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CG Utrecht, the
Netherlands and. (5)From the Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular
Medicine and e.kalkhoven@umcutrecht.nl.

Obesity-induced adipose tissue (AT) dysfunction results in a chronic low-grade
inflammation that predisposes to the development of insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes. During the development of obesity, the AT-resident immune cell profile 
alters to create a pro-inflammatory state. Very recently, CD1d-restricted
invariant (i) natural killer T (NKT) cells, a unique subset of lymphocytes that
are reactive to so called lipid antigens, were implicated in AT homeostasis.
Interestingly, recent data also suggest that human and mouse adipocytes can
present such lipid antigens to iNKT cells in a CD1d-dependent fashion, but little
is known about the lipid antigen presentation machinery in adipocytes. Here we
show that CD1d, as well as the lipid antigen loading machinery genes pro-saposin 
(Psap), Niemann Pick type C2 (Npc2), a-galactosidase (Gla), are up-regulated in
early adipogenesis, and are transcriptionally controlled by
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-ß and -d. Moreover, adipocyte-induced Th1 
and Th2 cytokine release by iNKT cells also occurred in the absence of exogenous 
ligands, suggesting the display of endogenous lipid antigen-D1d complexes by
3T3-L1 adipocytes. Furthermore, we identified microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein, which we show is also under the transcriptional regulation of C/EBPß and
-d, as a novel player in the presentation of endogenous lipid antigens by
adipocytes. Overall, our findings indicate that adipocytes can function as
non-professional lipid antigen presenting cells, which may present an important
aspect of adipocyte-immune cell communication in the regulation of whole body
energy metabolism and immune homeostasis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4139226
PMID: 24966328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;34(16):3168-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00039-14. Epub 2014 Jun 
9.

Cyclin D1 and C/EBPß LAP1 operate in a common pathway to promote mammary
epithelial cell differentiation.

Liu Q(1), Boudot A(2), Ni J(3), Hennessey T(2), Beauparlant SL(2), Rajabi HN(3), 
Zahnow C(4), Ewen ME(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
(4)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (5)Molecular Oncology Research Institute,
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA mewen@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

Both cyclin D1 and the transcription factor C/EBPß are required for mammary
epithelial cell differentiation; however, the pathway in which they operate is
uncertain. Previous analyses of the patterns of gene expression in human tumors
suggested a connection between cyclin D1 overexpression and C/EBPß, but whether
this represents a cancer-specific gain of function for cyclin D1 is unknown.
C/EBPß is an intronless gene encoding three protein isoforms--LAP1, LAP2, and
LIP. Here, we provide evidence that cyclin D1 engages C/EBPß in an
isoform-specific manner. Cyclin D1 binds to LAP1, an event that activates the
transcriptional function of LAP1 by relieving its autoinhibited state effected by
intramolecular interactions. Reexpression of LAP1 but not LAP2 or LIP restores
the ability of C/EBPß-deficient mammary epithelial cells to differentiate and
does so in a manner dependent on cyclin D1. And cyclin D1-mediated activation of 
LAP1 participates in mammary epithelial cell differentiation. Our findings
indicate that cyclin D1 and C/EBPß LAP1 operate in a common pathway to promote
mammary epithelial cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135606
PMID: 24912680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 11;289(28):19539-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.578104. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Genomic determinants of gene regulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 during
osteoblast-lineage cell differentiation.

Meyer MB(1), Benkusky NA(1), Lee CH(1), Pike JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706. (2)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 pike@biochem.wisc.edu.

The biological effects of 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25 (OH)2D3) on osteoblast 
differentiation and function differ significantly depending upon the cellular
state of maturation. To explore this phenomenon mechanistically, we examined the 
impact of 1,25(OH)2D3 on the transcriptomes of both pre-osteoblastic (POBs) and
differentiated osteoblastic (OBs) MC3T3-E1 cells, and assessed localization of
the vitamin D receptor (VDR) at sites of action on a genome-scale using ChIP
sequence analysis. We observed that the 1,25(OH)2D3-induced transcriptomes of
POBs and OBs were quantitatively and qualitatively different, supporting not only
the altered biology observed but the potential for a change in VDR interaction at
the genome as well. This idea was confirmed through discovery that VDR cistromes 
in POBs and OBs were also strikingly different. Depletion of VDR-binding sites in
OBs, due in part to reduced VDR expression, was the likely cause of the loss of
VDR-target gene interaction. Continued novel regulation by 1,25(OH)2D3, however, 
suggested that factors in addition to the VDR might also be involved.
Accordingly, we show that transcriptomic modifications are also accompanied by
changes in genome binding of the master osteoblast regulator RUNX2 and the
chromatin remodeler CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß. Importantly, genome
occupancy was also highlighted by the presence of epigenetic enhancer signatures 
that were selectively changed in response to both differentiation and
1,25(OH)2D3. The impact of VDR, RUNX2, and C/EBPß on osteoblast differentiation
is exemplified by their actions at the Runx2 and Sp7 gene loci. We conclude that 
each of these mechanisms may contribute to the diverse actions of 1,25(OH)2D3 on 
differentiating osteoblasts.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094065
PMID: 24891508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biomed Sci. 2014 May 13;21:44. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-21-44.

Prospective signs of cleidocranial dysplasia in Cebpb deficiency.

Huang B, Takahashi K(1), Jennings EA, Pumtang-On P, Kiso H, Togo Y, Saito K,
Sugai M, Akira S, Shimizu A, Bessho K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara-cho 54, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
takahask@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Although runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) has been
considered a determinant of cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), some CCD patients were
free of RUNX2 mutations. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (Cebpb) is a key
factor of Runx2 expression and our previous study has reported two CCD signs
including hyperdontia and elongated coronoid process of the mandible in Cebpb
deficient mice. Following that, this work aimed to conduct a case-control study
of thoracic, zygomatic and masticatory muscular morphology to propose an
association between musculoskeletal phenotypes and deficiency of Cebpb, using a
sample of Cebpb-/-, Cebpb+/- and Cebpb+/+ adult mice. Somatic skeletons and
skulls of mice were inspected with soft x-rays and micro-computed tomography
(µCT), respectively. Zygomatic inclination was assessed using methods of
coordinate geometry and trigonometric function on anatomic landmarks identified
with µCT. Masseter and temporal muscles were collected and weighed. Expression of
Cebpb was examined with a reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) technique.
RESULTS: Cebpb-/- mice displayed hypoplastic clavicles, a narrow thoracic cage,
and a downward tilted zygomatic arch (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Although Cebpb+/- mice did not 
show the phenotypes above (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.357), a larger mass percentage of temporal
muscles over masseter muscles was seen in Cebpb+/- littermates (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012). The
mRNA expression of Cebpb was detected in the clavicle, the zygoma, the temporal
muscle and the masseter muscle, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Prospective signs of CCD were identified in mice with Cebpb
deficiency. These could provide an additional aetiological factor of CCD.
Succeeding investigation into interactions among Cebpb, Runx2 and musculoskeletal
development is indicated.

PMCID: PMC4039338
PMID: 24885110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Behav Brain Funct. 2014 May 6;10:17. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-10-17.

Prefrontal cortical and striatal transcriptional responses to the reinforcing
effect of repeated methylphenidate treatment in the spontaneously hypertensive
rat, animal model of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

dela Peña I, Kim HJ, Sohn A, Kim BN, Han DH, Ryu JH, Shin CY, Noh M(1), Cheong
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Uimyung Research Institute for Neuroscience, Sahmyook University, 26-21
Kongreung-2-dong, Hwarangro- 815 Nowon-gu, Seoul 139-742, Korea.
minsoonoh@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Methylphenidate is the most commonly used stimulant drug for the
treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Research has found 
that methylphenidate is a "reinforcer" and that individuals with ADHD also abuse 
this medication. Nevertheless, the molecular consequences of long-term
recreational methylphenidate use or abuse in individuals with ADHD are not yet
fully known.
METHODS: Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR), the most validated and widely
used ADHD animal model, were pretreated with methylphenidate (5 mg/kg, i.p.)
during their adolescence (post-natal day [PND] 42-48) and tested for subsequent
methylphenidate-induced conditioned place preference (CPP) and
self-administration. Thereafter, the differentially expressed genes in the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and striatum of representative methylphenidate-treated
SHRs, which showed CPP to and self-administration of methylphenidate, were
analyzed.
RESULTS: Genome-wide transcriptome profiling analyses revealed 30 differentially 
expressed genes in the PFC, which include transcripts involved in apoptosis (e.g.
S100a9, Angptl4, Nfkbia), transcription (Cebpb, Per3), and neuronal plasticity
(Homer1, Jam2, Asap1). In contrast, 306 genes were differentially expressed in
the striatum and among them, 252 were downregulated. The main functional
categories overrepresented among the downregulated genes include those involved
in cell adhesion (e.g. Pcdh10, Ctbbd1, Itgb6), positive regulation of apoptosis
(Perp, Taf1, Api5), (Notch3, Nsbp1, Sik1), mitochondrion organization (Prps18c,
Letm1, Uqcrc2), and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (Nedd4, Usp27x, Ube2d2).
CONCLUSION: Together, these changes indicate methylphenidate-induced
neurotoxicity, altered synaptic and neuronal plasticity, energy metabolism and
ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation in the brains of methylphenidate-treated 
SHRs, which showed methylphenidate CPP and self-administration. In addition,
these findings may also reflect cognitive impairment associated with chronic
methylphenidate use as demonstrated in preclinical studies. Future studies are
warranted to determine the clinical significance of the present findings with
regard to long-term recreational methylphenidate use or abuse in individuals with
ADHD.

PMCID: PMC4077266
PMID: 24884696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Jul 15;554:44-54. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.05.008. Epub
2014 May 17.

The chalcones cardamonin and flavokawain B inhibit the differentiation of
preadipocytes to adipocytes by activating ERK.

Zhang T(1), Yamamoto N(2), Yamashita Y(1), Ashida H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agrobioscience, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe
University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan. (2)Food Science Research Center, House Wellness
Foods Corporation, Imoji 3-20, Itami, Hyogo 664-0011, Japan. (3)Department of
Agrobioscience, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Kobe
657-8501, Japan. Electronic address: ashida@kobe-u.ac.jp.

AIM: We searched for polyphenols capable of inhibiting the lipid accumulation in 
3T3-L1 cells, and investigated the mechanisms of two effective chalcones
cardamonin and flavokawain B on differentiation of preadipocytes.
METHOD AND RESULTS: We treated 3T3-L1 cells with a panel of 46 polyphenols and
measured intracellular lipid accumulation by Sudan II staining. Four of them,
including cardamonin and flavokawain B, inhibited lipid accumulation. In the
further study, cardamonin and flavokawain B inhibited lipid accumulation by
downregulating the expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-ß,
C/EBPa, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) at both mRNA and
protein levels. Cardamonin and flavokawain B also increased phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in the early phase of adipocyte
differentiation. PD98059, an ERK inhibitor, restored C/EBPß, PPAR<U+03B3> expression and
intracellular lipid accumulation in adipocytes. Moreover, cardamonin and
flavokawain B also modulated the secretion of C-reactive protein, dipeptidyl
peptidase IV, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-a and fibroblast growth
factor-21 in mature adipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that ERK activation and consequent
downregulation of adipocyte-specific transcription factors are involved in the
inhibitory effects of the chalcones cardamonin and flavokawain B on adipocyte
differentiation. Moreover, cardamonin and flavokawain B are able to modulate
secretion of adipokines in mature adipocytes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24845100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Haematologica. 2014 Aug;99(8):1334-42. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.103820. Epub
2014 May 9.

IGH@ translocations co-exist with other primary rearrangements in B-cell
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Jeffries SJ(1), Jones L(2), Harrison CJ(2), Russell LJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK. (2)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group,
Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK. (3)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Northern
Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
lisa.russell@newcastle.ac.uk.

Primary established genetic abnormalities in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic
leukemia include high hyperdiploidy (51-65 chromosomes), the translocations
t(12;21)(p13;q22)/ETV6-RUNX1 fusion and t(9;22)(q34;q11)/BCR-ABL1 fusion, MLL
rearrangements and intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome 21. These
rearrangements are of prognostic and therapeutic relevance and are usually
mutually exclusive. We identified 28 patients at diagnosis with both a primary
genetic rearrangement and an immunoglobulin heavy chain locus translocation using
chromosomal analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Among these
patients, the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus translocation partner gene was
identified in six (CRLF2, CEBPA, CEBPB, TRA/D@, IGF2BP1 and IGK@). Clonal
architecture was investigated in 17 patients using multiple color interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, which showed that the translocation 
was acquired as a secondary abnormality in ten patients, in four patients the
etiology was undetermined and in three patients it was observed in a separate
clone from the primary chromosomal rearrangement. These findings demonstrate the 
co-existence of immunoglobulin heavy chain locus translocations with other
primary chromosomal rearrangements either in the same or separate clones, which
may have prognostic significance in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Clinical trials: UKALLXII: Study ID n. ISRCTN77346223 and ALL2003:
Study ID n. ISRCTN07355119.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4116832
PMID: 24816234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Reprod Toxicol. 2014 Aug;47:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2014.04.010. Epub 2014 
May 9.

The unique characteristics of the placental transcriptome and the hormonal
metabolism enzymes in placenta.

Storvik M(1), Huuskonen P(2), Pehkonen P(3), Pasanen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211
Kuopio, Finland. Electronic address: markus.storvik@uef.fi. (2)School of
Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.
(3)Department of Biosciences, University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627,
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

The placenta regulates the passage of both endogenous and xenobiotic compounds to
the fetus during pregnancy. A small number of xenobiotic metabolizing CYP enzymes
are constantly expressed in placenta, those include CYP19A1 which mainly converts
androgens to estrogens, and CYP1A1 whose substrates include steroid hormones and 
xenobiotics. We performed an analysis of co-expression of xenobiotic metabolizing
enzyme-coding genes and transcription factors in placenta and in 86 other tissues
to discern the unique characteristics of the placental transcriptome.
Transcription factors (TFs) driving the expression of proteins involved in phase 
I and II xenobiotic metabolism in the liver were not expressed in the placenta,
nor were the bulk of xenobiotic metabolizing hepatic CYP enzymes. In contrast,
TFs whose co-expression correlated with CYP1A1, i.e. AHR, PPARG, and CEBPB were
highly expressed in placenta. The placenta is a hormonal tissue, and one needs to
maintain the tissue-specific focus by removing the hepatic spectacles.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24814680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Tissue Eng Part A. 2014 Oct;20(19-20):2680-91. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2013.0656.
Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Effects of CD14 macrophages and proinflammatory cytokines on chondrogenesis in
osteoarthritic synovium-derived stem cells.

Han SA(1), Lee S, Seong SC, Lee MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seoul National University College of
Medicine , Seoul, South Korea .

We investigated the effects of CD14 macrophages and proinflammatory cytokines on 
chondrogenic differentiation of osteoarthritic synovium-derived stem cells
(SDSCs). Osteoarthritic synovial fluid was analyzed for interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß),
tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), and IL-6. Levels of stem cell surface markers in
osteoarthritic SDSCs were evaluated using flow cytometry. CD14-negative cells
were obtained using magnetically activated cell sorting. We compared chondrogenic
potentials between whole cells and CD14-negative cells in CD14(low) cells and
CD14(high) cells, respectively. To assess whether nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) modulate IL-1ß-induced alterations in
chondrogenic potential, we performed small interfering RNA transfection. We
observed a significant correlation between the CD14 ratio in osteoarthritic SDSCs
and IL-1ß and TNF-a in osteoarthritic synovial fluid. Phenotypic characterization
of whole cells and CD14-negative cells showed no significant differences in
levels of stem cell markers. mRNA expression of type II collagen was higher in
CD14-negative cell pellets than in whole cell pellets. Immunohistochemical
staining indicated higher levels of type II collagen in the CD14-negative cell
pellets of CD14(high) cells than in whole cell pellets of CD14(high) cells. As
expected, IL-1ß and TNF-a significantly inhibited the expression of
chondrogenic-related genes in SDSCs, an effect which was antagonized by knockdown
of NF-<U+03BA>B and C/EBPß. Our results suggest that depletion of CD14(+) synovial
macrophages leads to improved chondrogenic potential in CD14(high) cell
populations in osteoarthritic SDSCs, and that NF-<U+03BA>B (RelA) and C/EBPß are
critical factors mediating IL-1ß-induced suppression of the chondrogenic
potential of human SDSCs.

PMCID: PMC4195476
PMID: 24806317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biol Reprod. 2014 May;90(5):111. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.115139. Epub 2014
Apr 16.

Immunohistological study of the endometrial stromal fibroblasts in the opossum,
Monodelphis domestica: evidence for homology with eutherian stromal fibroblasts.

Kin K(1), Maziarz J(1), Wagner GP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale Systems Biology
Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. (2)Department of Ecology and 
Evolutionary Biology, Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut gunter.wagner@yale.edu.

Molecular phylogenetic studies suggest that the hemochorial placentation and
decidualization are ancestral traits of eutherian mammals. While the origin of
the placental tissue is well understood, the origin of the decidual cells is
unclear. Here we address the origin of decidual cells by examining the expression
patterns of six transcription factors (TFs) as well as four structural proteins
in the endometrium of a marsupial, Monodelphis domestica, and compared them with 
the patterns known from eutherian species. We found a mesenchymal cell population
in the subepithelial compartment of the opossum endometrium. These cells express 
a set of TFs, such as homeobox A11 (HOXA11), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta 
(CEBPB), and progesterone receptor (PGR), that are important for eutherian
endometrial stromal cells. On the other hand, we did not find the expression of a
decidual cell marker desmin (DES) or of TFs that are important for decidual cell 
differentiation, such as forkhead box O1 (FOXO1), in those cells. Based on these 
results, we propose that opossum has cells homologous to eutherian endometrial
fibroblasts but no decidual cells. In addition, we describe cellular changes
associated with the progression of pregnancy: nuclear localization of CEBPB in
luminal epithelial cells as early as 8 days postcoitum, expansion of endometrial 
glands, nuclear localization of FOXO1 in glandular epithelial cells, and
expression of smooth muscle actin in luminal epithelial cells. These data show
that the luminal and glandular epithelium react to the presence of the
preplacentation conceptus and suggest a limited form of pregnancy recognition.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 24740599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 8;111(14):5248-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321014111. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

In vivo radiation response of proneural glioma characterized by protective p53
transcriptional program and proneural-mesenchymal shift.

Halliday J(1), Helmy K, Pattwell SS, Pitter KL, LaPlant Q, Ozawa T, Holland EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065.

Glioblastoma is the most common adult primary brain tumor and has a dismal median
survival. Radiation is a mainstay of treatment and significantly improves
survival, yet recurrence is nearly inevitable. Better understanding the radiation
response of glioblastoma will help improve strategies to treat this devastating
disease. Here, we present a comprehensive study of the in vivo radiation response
of glioma cells in a mouse model of proneural glioblastoma. These tumors are a
heterogeneous mix of cell types with differing radiation sensitivities. To
explicitly study the gene expression changes comprising the radiation response of
the Olig2(+) tumor bulk cells, we used translating ribosome affinity purification
(TRAP) from Olig2-TRAP transgenic mice. Comparing both ribosome-associated and
total pools of mRNA isolated from Olig2(+) cells indicated that the in vivo gene 
expression response to radiation occurs primarily at the total transcript level. 
Genes related to apoptosis and cell growth were significantly altered. p53 and
E2F were implicated as major regulators of the radiation response, with p53
activity needed for the largest gene expression changes after radiation.
Additionally, radiation induced a marked shift away from a proneural expression
pattern toward a mesenchymal one. This shift occurs in Olig2(+) cells within
hours and in multiple genetic backgrounds. Targets for Stat3 and CEBPB, which
have been suggested to be master regulators of a mesenchymal shift, were also
up-regulated by radiation. These data provide a systematic description of the
events following radiation and may be of use in identifying biological processes 
that promote glioma radioresistance.

PMCID: PMC3986190
PMID: 24706837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jun 5;390(1-2):18-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.03.007.
Epub 2014 Apr 2.

C/EBPß knockdown protects cardiomyocytes from hypertrophy via inhibition of
p65-NF<U+03BA>B.

Zou J(1), Li H(2), Chen X(3), Zeng S(4), Ye J(2), Zhou C(2), Liu M(2), Zhang
L(2), Yu N(2), Gan X(5), Zhou H(5), Xian Z(5), Chen S(6), Liu P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China; Department of Pharmacy, Chengdu 
Fifth People's Hospital, Chengdu 611130, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 
510006, China. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Changsha Central Hospital, Changsha
410004, China. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Guangdong No.2 Provincial People's
Hospital, Guangzhou 524000, China. (5)Department of Pharmacy, Chengdu Fifth
People's Hospital, Chengdu 611130, China. (6)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 
510006, China. Electronic address: chshaor@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (7)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address: liupq@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

C/EBPß, a member of the bHLH gene family of DNA-binding transcription factors,
has been indicated as a central signal in physiologic hypertrophy. However, the
role of C/EBPß in pathological cardiac hypertrophy remains to be elucidated. In
this study, we revealed that C/EBPß is involved in cardiac hypertrophy, the
expression of C/EBPß were significantly increased in response to hypertrophic
stimulation in vitro and in vivo. C/EBPß knockdown inhibited PE-induced cardiac
hypertrophy, and diminished the nuclear translocation and DNA binding activity of
p65-NF<U+03BA>B. These results suggested that C/EBPß knockdown protected cardiomyocytes 
from hypertrophy, which may be attributed to inhibition of NF<U+03BA>B-dependent
transcriptional activity. These findings shed new light on the understanding of
C/EBPß-related cardiomyopathy, and suggest the potential application of C/EBPß
inhibitors in cardiac hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jul;72:74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.02.013. Epub
2014 Mar 5.

Phenotypic screen quantifying differential regulation of cardiac myocyte
hypertrophy identifies CITED4 regulation of myocyte elongation.

Ryall KA(1), Bezzerides VJ(2), Rosenzweig A(3), Saucerman JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. (3)Cardiovascular Division of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Virginia, VA, USA. Electronic address:
jsaucerman@virginia.edu.

Cardiac hypertrophy is controlled by a highly connected signaling network with
many effectors of cardiac myocyte size. Quantification of the contribution of
individual pathways to specific changes in shape and transcript abundance is
needed to better understand hypertrophy signaling and to improve heart failure
therapies. We stimulated cardiac myocytes with 15 hypertrophic agonists and
quantitatively characterized differential regulation of 5 shape features using
high-throughput microscopy and transcript levels of 12 genes using qPCR.
Transcripts measured were associated with phenotypes including fibrosis, cell
death, contractility, proliferation, angiogenesis, inflammation, and the fetal
cardiac gene program. While hypertrophy pathways are highly connected, the
agonist screen revealed distinct hypertrophy phenotypic signatures for the 15
receptor agonists. We then used k-means clustering of inputs and outputs to
identify a network map linking input modules to output modules. Five modules were
identified within inputs and outputs with many maladaptive outputs grouping
together in one module: Bax, C/EBPß, Serca2a, TNFa, and CTGF. Subsequently, we
identified mechanisms underlying two correlations revealed in the agonist screen:
correlation between regulators of fibrosis and cell death signaling (CTGF and Bax
mRNA) caused by AngII; and myocyte proliferation (CITED4 mRNA) and elongation
caused by Nrg1. Follow-up experiments revealed positive regulation of Bax mRNA
level by CTGF and an incoherent feedforward loop linking Nrg1, CITED4 and
elongation. With this agonist screen, we identified the most influential inputs
in the cardiac hypertrophy signaling network for a variety of features related to
pathological and protective hypertrophy signaling and shared regulation among
cardiac myocyte phenotypes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4078663
PMID: 24613264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Autophagy. 2014 May;10(5):785-802. doi: 10.4161/auto.28072. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

The AMPK-PPARGC1A pathway is required for antimicrobial host defense through
activation of autophagy.

Yang CS(1), Kim JJ(1), Lee HM(1), Jin HS(1), Lee SH(2), Park JH(3), Kim SJ(4),
Kim JM(5), Han YM(6), Lee MS(7), Kweon GR(3), Shong M(4), Jo EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology; Chungnam National University School of Medicine;
Daejeon, Korea; Infection Signaling Network Research Center; Chungnam National
University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea. (2)BioMedical Research Center;
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology; Daejeon, Korea. (3)Infection 
Signaling Network Research Center; Chungnam National University School of
Medicine; Daejeon, Korea; Department of Biochemistry; Chungnam National
University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea. (4)Department of Internal Medicine
and Research Center for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases; Chungnam National
University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea. (5)Infection Signaling Network
Research Center; Chungnam National University School of Medicine; Daejeon, Korea;
Department of Pathology; Chungnam National University School of Medicine;
Daejeon, Korea. (6)Department of Biological Sciences and Center for Stem Cell
Differentiation; Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology; Daejeon,
Korea. (7)Department of Medicine; Samsung Medical Center; Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine; Seoul, Korea.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a crucial energy sensor and plays a key
role in integration of cellular functions to maintain homeostasis. Despite this, 
it is largely unknown whether targeting the AMPK pathway can be used as a
therapeutic strategy for infectious diseases. Herein, we show that AMPK
activation robustly induces antibacterial autophagy, which contributes to
antimicrobial defense against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). AMPK activation
led to inhibition of Mtb-induced phosphorylation of the mechanistic target of
rapamycin (MTOR) in macrophages. In addition, AMPK activation increased the genes
involved in oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial ATP production, and
biogenesis in Mtb-infected macrophages. Notably, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, coactivator 1a (PPARGC1A) was required for
AMPK-mediated antimicrobial activity, as well as enhancement of mitochondrial
function and biogenesis, in macrophages. Further, the AMPK-PPARGC1A pathway was
involved in the upregulation of multiple autophagy-related genes via
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), ß (CEBPB). PPARGC1A knockdown inhibited
the AMPK-mediated induction of autophagy and impaired the fusion of phagosomes
with MAP1LC3B (LC3B) autophagosomes in Mtb-infected macrophages. The link between
autophagy, mitochondrial function, and antimicrobial activity was further
demonstrated by studying LysMCre-mediated knockout of atg7, demonstrating
mitochondrial ultrastructural defects and dysfunction, as well as blockade of
antimicrobial activity against mycobacteria. Collectively, our results identify
the AMPK-PPARGC1A axis as contributing to autophagy activation leading to an
antimicrobial response, as a novel host defense mechanism.

PMID: 24598403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e90284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090284. eCollection
2014.

IL-17 induces an expanded range of downstream genes in reconstituted human
epidermis model.

Chiricozzi A(1), Nograles KE(2), Johnson-Huang LM(3), Fuentes-Duculan J(3),
Cardinale I(3), Bonifacio KM(3), Gulati N(3), Mitsui H(3), Guttman-Yassky E(4),
Suárez-Fariñas M(2), Krueger JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New York
City, New York, United States of America ; Center for Clinical and Translational 
Science, The Rockefeller University, New York City, New York, United States of
America ; Department of Dermatology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome,
Italy. (2)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University,
New York City, New York, United States of America ; Center for Clinical and
Translational Science, The Rockefeller University, New York City, New York,
United States of America. (3)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The
Rockefeller University, New York City, New York, United States of America.
(4)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New York
City, New York, United States of America ; Center for Clinical and Translational 
Science, The Rockefeller University, New York City, New York, United States of
America ; Department of Dermatology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York
City, New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: IL-17 is the defining cytokine of the Th17, Tc17, and <U+03B3>d T cell
populations that plays a critical role in mediating inflammation and
autoimmunity. Psoriasis vulgaris is an inflammatory skin disease mediated by Th1 
and Th17 cytokines with relevant contributions of IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF-a, and IL-17.
Despite the pivotal role IL-17 plays in psoriasis, and in contrast to the other
key mediators involved in the psoriasis cytokine cascade that are capable of
inducing broad effects on keratinocytes, IL-17 was demonstrated to regulate the
expression of a limited number of genes in monolayer keratinocytes cultured in
vitro.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Given the clinical efficacy of anti-IL-17 agents 
is associated with an impressive reduction in a large set of inflammatory genes, 
we sought a full-thickness skin model that more closely resemble in vivo
epidermal architecture. Using a reconstructed human epidermis (RHE), IL-17 was
able to upregulate 419 gene probes and downregulate 216 gene probes. As possible 
explanation for the increased gene induction in the RHE model is that
C/CAAT-enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) -ß, the transcription factor regulating 
IL-17-responsive genes, is expressed preferentially in differentiated
keratinocytes.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The genes identified in IL-17-treated RHE are likely
relevant to the IL-17 effects in psoriasis, since ixekizumab (anti-IL-17A agent) 
strongly suppressed the "RHE" genes in psoriasis patients treated in vivo with
this IL-17 antagonist.

PMCID: PMC3938679
PMID: 24587313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2014 Apr;30(2):79-88. doi: 10.1007/s10565-014-9270-9. Epub
2014 Feb 20.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation and endocytosis were involved 
in zinc oxide nanoparticle-induced interleukin-8 overexpression in human
bronchial epithelial cells.

Yan Z(1), Xu L, Han J, Wu YJ, Wang W, Yao W, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

Inhaled zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) can induce lung inflammation through
released inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin 8 (IL-8), from airways.
However, the mechanisms underlying ZnO-NP-induced IL-8 gene expression have not
been fully characterized. The transcription inhibitor actinomycin D (Act D) and
the BEAS-2B cells stably overexpressing wild-type or mutated IL-8 promoter at the
NF<U+03BA>B or C/EBPß binding site were used to determine the involvement of
transcriptional mechanisms. The effect of ZnO-NPs on IL-8 mRNA stability was
examined using mRNA decay assay. The phagocytosis inhibitor cytochalasin B (CB)
was utilized to define the role of endocytosis in ZnO-NP-induced IL-8 expression.
In addition, the solubility of ZnO-NPs in culture medium was assessed using
atomic absorption spectroscopy. Exposure to ZnO-NPs significantly increased the
expression of IL-8 mRNA and protein in a dose-dependent manner. Pretreatment with
Act D blocked ZnO-NP-induced IL-8 expression. Both NF<U+03BA>B and C/EBPß transcription 
factors were required for ZnO-NP-induced IL-8 transcription. mRNA decay assay
showed that ZnO-NP stimulation delayed IL-8 mRNA degradation in BEAS-2B cells.
Pretreatment of BEAS-2B cells with CB blocked ZnO-NP-induced IL-8 expression by
30 %. Exposure to ZnO-NPs induced IL-8 gene expression through transcriptional
activation and mRNA stabilization. Internalization of nanoparticles was partially
involved in ZnO-NP-induced IL-8 expression.

PMID: 24554449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(2):217-28.

Gene expression analysis of lung cancer.

Shi WY(1), Liu KD, Xu SG, Zhang JT, Yu LL, Xu KQ, Zhang TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, Dachang Hospital, Baoshan District,
Shanghai, China. zhangtief@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: We aim to explore the expression difference between lung cancer cells 
and normal lung cells, and to investigate the mechanism of lung cancer
development. Besides, we predicted the potential target site of transcriptional
factors and microRNAs for differentially expressed genes (DEGs), which may help
to regulate expression of DEGs. Small molecules were also identified to cure lung
cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiles we used were downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) using accession number of GSE2378. Firstly, we
identified differential genes between lung cancer cells and normal lung cells by 
using R package limma. Then, we detected the processes and pathways that changed 
in lung cancer cells by Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. 
Potential target sites of transcriptional factors and microRNAs were also
detected based on gene annotation data in MSigDB. Finally, small molecule drugs
were screened via querying Connectivity Map database.
RESULTS: We obtained 2961 differentially expressed genes between lung cancer
cells and normal lung cells. Besides changes in cell cycle, metabolic processes
and proteasome were also dramatically disordered. Some DEGs shared target sites
of the transcription factor such as E2F, ETS and CEBPB. Target sites of
hsa-miR-196a and hsa-miR-200c were also significantly enriched by DEGs. Iloprost 
simulated the state of normal cells, while MS-275 might be potential pathogenic
substances.
CONCLUSIONS: We investigate the lung cancer from Gene Ontology, pathway,
transcription factors and microRNAs based on gene expression profiles. All these 
results may facilitate lung cancer treatment with a new breakthrough.

PMID: 24488911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. FASEB J. 2014 May;28(5):2088-97. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-238402. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Global and gene-specific DNA methylation across multiple tissues in early
infancy: implications for children's health research.

Armstrong DA(1), Lesseur C, Conradt E, Lester BM, Marsit CJ.

Author information: 
(1)2Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, 7650 Remsen, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. carmen.j.marsit@dartmouth.edu.

An increasing number of population studies are assessing epigenetic variation in 
relation to early-life outcomes in tissues accessible to epidemiologic
researchers. Epigenetic mechanisms are highly tissue specific, however, and it is
unclear whether the variation observed in one of the tissue types is
representative of other sources or whether the variation in DNA methylation is
distinct, reflecting potential functional differences across tissues. To assess
relations between DNA methylation in various samples from newborns and children
in early infancy, we measured promoter or gene-body DNA methylation in matched
term placenta, cord blood, and 3-6 mo saliva samples from 27 unrelated infants
enrolled in the Rhode Island Child Health Study. We investigated 7 gene loci
(KLF15, NR3C1, LEP, DEPTOR, DDIT4, HSD11B2, and CEBPB) and global methylation,
using repetitive region LINE-1 and ALUYb8 sequences. We observed a great degree
of interlocus, intertissue, and interindividual epigenetic variation in most of
the analyzed loci. In correlation analyses, only cord blood NR3C1 promoter
methylation correlated negatively with methylation in saliva. We conclude that
placenta, cord blood, and saliva cannot be used as a substitute for one another
to evaluate DNA methylation at these loci during infancy. Each tissue has a
unique epigenetic signature that likely reflects their differential functions.
Future studies should consider the uniqueness of these features, to improve
epigenetic biomarker discovery and translation.

PMCID: PMC3986842
PMID: 24478308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Proteome Res. 2014 Mar 7;13(3):1307-14. doi: 10.1021/pr401292p. Epub 2014 Feb
5.

Proteome profiling of mitotic clonal expansion during 3T3-L1 adipocyte
differentiation using iTRAQ-2DLC-MS/MS.

Jiang Y(1), Guo L, Xie LQ, Zhang YY, Liu XH, Zhang Y, Zhu H, Yang PY, Lu HJ, Tang
QQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, the Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College ,
Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

Mitotic clonal expansion (MCE) is one of the important events taking place at the
early stage during 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation. To investigate the mechanism
underlying this process, we carried out a temporal proteomic analysis to profile 
the dynamic changes in MCE. Using 8-plex-iTRAQ-2DLC-MS/MS analysis, 3152 proteins
were quantified during the initial 28 h of 3T3-L1 adipogenesis. Functional
analysis was performed on 595 proteins with maximum or minimum quantities at 20 h
of adipogenic induction that were potentially involved in MCE, which identified
PI3K/AKT/mTOR as the most relevant pathway. Among the 595 proteins, PKM2
(Pyruvate kinase M2), a patterned protein identified as a potential target gene
of C/EBPß in our previous work, was selected for further investigation. Network
analysis suggested positive correlations among C/EBPß, PIN1, and PKM2, which may 
be related with the PI3K-AKT pathway. Knockdown of PKM2 with siRNA inhibited both
MCE and adipocyte differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells. Moreover, PKM2 was
down-regulated at both the mRNA level and the protein level upon the knockdown of
C/EBPß. And overexpressed PKM2 can partially restore MCE, although it did not
restore terminal adipocyte differentiation, which was inhibited by siC/EBPß.
Thus, PKM2, potentially regulated by C/EBPß, is involved in MCE during adipocyte 
differentiation. The dynamic proteome changes quantified here provide a promising
basis for revealing molecular mechanism regulating adipogenesis.

PMID: 24450392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jan;39(2):176-85. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12407. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

The transcription factor CCAAT enhancer-binding protein ß protects rat cerebellar
granule neurons from apoptosis through its transcription-activating isoforms.

Peña-Altamira E(1), Polazzi E, Moretto E, Lauriola M, Monti B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and BioTechnology, University of Bologna, Ex-BES
Building, Via Selmi 3, Bologna, 40126, Italy.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein ß is a transcription factor that is involved in
many brain processes, although its role in neuronal survival/death remains
unclear. By using primary cultures of rat cerebellar granule neurons, we have
shown here that CCAAT enhancer-binding protein ß is present as all of its
isoforms: the transcriptional activators liver activator proteins 1 and 2, and
the transcriptional inhibitor liver inhibitory protein. We have also shown that
liver activator protein 1 undergoes post-translational modifications, such as
phosphorylation and sumoylation. These isoforms have different subcellular
localizations, liver activator protein 2 being found in the cytosolic fraction
only, liver inhibitory protein in the nucleus only, and liver activator protein 1
in both fractions. Through neuronal apoptosis induction by shifting mature
cerebellar granule neurons to low-potassium medium, we have demonstrated that
nuclear liver activator protein 1 expression decreases and its phosphorylation
disappears, whereas liver inhibitory protein levels increase in the nuclear
fraction, suggesting a pro-survival role for liver activator protein
transcriptional activation and a pro-apoptotic role for liver inhibitory protein 
transcriptional inhibition. To confirm this, we transfected cerebellar granule
neurons with plasmids expressing liver activator protein 1, liver activator
protein 2, or liver inhibitory protein respectively, and observed that both liver
activator proteins, which increase CCAAT-dependent transcription, but not liver
inhibitory protein, counteracted apoptosis, thus demonstrating the pro-survival
role of liver activator proteins. These data significantly improve our current
understanding of the role of CCAAT enhancer-binding protein ß in neuronal
survival/apoptosis.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24438488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Pharmacol Rep. 2013;65(5):1322-35.

Glucocorticoid receptor regulates organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, SLC22A1)
expression via HNF4a upregulation in primary human hepatocytes.

Rulcova A(1), Krausova L, Smutny T, Vrzal R, Dvorak Z, Jover R, Pavek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec
Kralove, Charles University in Prague, Heyrovskeho 1203, Hradec Kralove, CZ-500
05, Czech Republic. petr.pavek@faf.cuni.cz.

BACKGROUND: Organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, SLC22A1) is a membrane
transporter that is important for therapeutic effect of the antidiabetic drug
metformin. Its liver-specific expression in hepatocytes is strongly controlled by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF4a). HNF4a expression and transcriptional
activity have been demonstrated to be augmented by glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
in human hepatocytes and rodent livers.
METHODS: It was examined whether GR activation indirectly induces OCT1 gene
expression via HNF4a up-regulation in primary human hepatocytes. We also examined
which other transcription factors are involved in OCT1 gene expression and
whether they are regulated by dexamethasone using qRT-PCR and gene reporter
assays.
RESULTS: We found that dexamethasone significantly up-regulates OCT1 mRNA and
protein in normal primary human hepatocytes, but not in hepatocyte-derived tumor 
cell lines HepG2 and MZ-Hep1. Consistently, we observed that HNF4a is induced by 
dexamethasone in primary human hepatocytes, but not in hepatocyte tumor-derived
cell lines. Viral transduction of MZ-Hep1 cells with the expression constructs
for HNF4a, CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins ß (C/EBPß) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC1a) demonstrated significant
roles of the transcription factors in OCT1 gene regulation. We found that
expression of OCT1 mRNA in human livers significantly correlates with C/EBPß and 
HNF4a mRNAs expression and that C/EBPß co-transfection stimulates OCT1 gene
reporter construct in HepG2 cells. Nevertheless, neither C/EBPß nor PGC1a were
upregulated in human hepatocytes by dexamethasone.
CONCLUSION: We can conclude that GR-induced expression of HNF4a may contribute to
indirect OCT1 gene up-regulation by dexamethasone in primary human hepatocytes,
but not in hepatocyte-derived tumor cell lines.

PMID: 24399729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 24;52(2):145-58. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0243. Print 2014 
Apr.

TRIB1 downregulates hepatic lipogenesis and glycogenesis via multiple molecular
interactions.

Ishizuka Y(1), Nakayama K, Ogawa A, Makishima S, Boonvisut S, Hirao A, Iwasaki Y,
Yada T, Yanagisawa Y, Miyashita H, Takahashi M, Iwamoto S; Jichi Medical
University Promotion Team of Large-Scale Human Genome Bank for All over Japan.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Department of
Anatomy Division of Integrative Physiology, Department of Physiology, Jichi
Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Health Care Food Research, Human
Health Care Research, Research and Development, Kao Corporation, Sumida-ku, Tokyo
131-8501, Japan Jichi Medical University Health Care Center, Shimotsuke-shi,
Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Division of Inflammation Research, Center for Molecular
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Division of Community
and Family Medicine, Center for Community Medicine, Jichi Medical University,
3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Mammalian tribbles homolog 1 (TRIB1) regulates hepatic lipogenesis and is
genetically associated with plasma triglyceride (TG) levels and cholesterol, but 
the molecular mechanisms remain obscure. We explored these mechanisms in mouse
livers transfected with a TRIB1 overexpression, a shRNA template or a control
(LacZ) adenovirus vector. The overexpression of TRIB1 reduced, whereas induction 
of the shRNA template increased, plasma glucose, TG, and cholesterol and
simultaneously hepatic TG and glycogen levels. The involvement of TRIB1 in
hepatic lipid accumulation was supported by the findings of a human SNP
association study. A TRIB1 SNP, rs6982502, was identified in an enhancer
sequence, modulated enhancer activity in reporter gene assays, and was
significantly (P=9.39 × 10(-7)) associated with ultrasonographically diagnosed
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in a population of 5570 individuals.
Transcriptome analyses of mouse livers revealed significant modulation of the
gene sets involved in glycogenolysis and lipogenesis. Enforced TRIB1 expression
abolished CCAAT/enhancer binding protein A (CEBPA), CEBPB, and MLXIPL proteins,
whereas knockdown increased the protein level. Levels of TRIB1 expression
simultaneously affected MKK4 (MAP2K4), MEK1 (MAP2K1), and ERK1/2 (MAPK1/3)
protein levels and the phosphorylation of JNK, but not of ERK1/2. Pull-down and
mammalian two-hybrid analyses revealed novel molecular interaction between TRIB1 
and a hepatic lipogenic master regulator, MLXIPL. Co-expression of TRIB1 and
CEBPA or MLXIPL reduced their protein levels and proteasome inhibitors attenuated
the reduction. These data suggested that the modulation of TRIB1 expression
affects hepatic lipogenesis and glycogenesis through multiple molecular
interactions.

PMID: 24389359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Bone Res. 2014 Oct 28;2:14034. doi: 10.1038/boneres.2014.34. eCollection 2014.

High-throughput screening of mouse gene knockouts identifies established and
novel skeletal phenotypes.

Brommage R(1), Liu J(1), Hansen GM(1), Kirkpatrick LL(1), Potter DG(1), Sands
AT(1), Zambrowicz B(1), Powell DR(1), Vogel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lexicon Pharmaceuticals , The Woodlands, TX, USA.

Screening gene function in vivo is a powerful approach to discover novel drug
targets. We present high-throughput screening (HTS) data for 3<U+2009>762 distinct
global gene knockout (KO) mouse lines with viable adult homozygous mice generated
using either gene-trap or homologous recombination technologies. Bone mass was
determined from DEXA scans of male and female mice at 14 weeks of age and by
microCT analyses of bones from male mice at 16 weeks of age. Wild-type (WT)
cagemates/littermates were examined for each gene KO. Lethality was observed in
an additional 850 KO lines. Since primary HTS are susceptible to false positive
findings, additional cohorts of mice from KO lines with intriguing HTS bone data 
were examined. Aging, ovariectomy, histomorphometry and bone strength studies
were performed and possible non-skeletal phenotypes were explored. Together,
these screens identified multiple genes affecting bone mass: 23 previously
reported genes (Calcr, Cebpb, Crtap, Dcstamp, Dkk1, Duoxa2, Enpp1, Fgf23,
Kiss1/Kiss1r, Kl (Klotho), Lrp5, Mstn, Neo1, Npr2, Ostm1, Postn, Sfrp4, Slc30a5, 
Slc39a13, Sost, Sumf1, Src, Wnt10b), five novel genes extensively characterized
(Cldn18, Fam20c, Lrrk1, Sgpl1, Wnt16), five novel genes with preliminary
characterization (Agpat2, Rassf5, Slc10a7, Slc26a7, Slc30a10) and three novel
undisclosed genes coding for potential osteoporosis drug targets.

PMCID: PMC4472125
PMID: 26273529  [PubMed]


111. Metabolism. 2014 Mar;63(3):372-81. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 
Nov 21.

Abdominal subcutaneous and omental adipocyte morphology and its relation to gene 
expression, lipolysis and adipocytokine levels in women.

Michaud A(1), Boulet MM(1), Veilleux A(2), Noël S(3), Paris G(3), Tchernof A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Nephrology, Laval University Medical Center; Department of
Nutrition, Laval University. (2)Department of Nutrition, University of Montreal, 
Research Center, CHU Sainte-Justine. (3)Gynecology Unit, Laval University Medical
Center Quebec City. (4)Endocrinology and Nephrology, Laval University Medical
Center; Department of Nutrition, Laval University. Electronic address:
andre.tchernof@crchul.ulaval.ca.

OBJECTIVE: We tested the hypothesis that women with adipocyte hypertrophy in
either omental (OM) or subcutaneous (SC) adipose tissue are characterized by
alterations in adipocyte lipolysis and adipose tissue expression of genes coding 
for proteins involved in adipocyte metabolism or inflammation, independent of
overall adiposity and fat distribution.
METHODS: OM and SC fat samples were obtained surgically in 44 women (age:
47.1±5.0years, BMI: 27.7±5.3kg/m(2)). In a given depot, women with larger
adipocytes than predicted by the regression of adipocyte size vs. total and
regional adiposity measurements were considered as having adipocyte hypertrophy, 
whereas women with smaller adipocytes than predicted were considered as having
adipocyte hyperplasia.
RESULTS: Women with OM adipocyte hypertrophy had significantly lower SC GLUT4
mRNA abundance (p=0.05), higher SC CEBPB mRNA expression (p=0.05) as well as
higher mRNA expression of OM PLIN (p=0.05), CD68 (p=0.10), CD14 (p=0.10), CD31
(p=0.05) and vWF (p=0.05) compared to women with OM adipocyte hyperplasia. OM
adipocyte isoproterenol- (10(-10) to 10(-5)mol/L), forskolin- (10(-5)mol/L) and
dibutyryl cAMP- (10(-3)mol/L) stimulated lipolysis was higher in women with
hypertrophic OM adipocytes (p=0.05, for all). Women with SC adipocyte hypertrophy
had lower SC mRNA expression of GLUT4 (p=0.10), higher SC mRNA expression of
CEBPB (p=0.05), lower plasma adiponectin concentrations (p=0.05) and higher SC
adipocyte isoproterenol- (10(-9) to 10(-5)mol/L) stimulated lipolysis (p=0.05)
compared to women with SC adipocyte hyperplasia.
CONCLUSION: Hypertrophic adipocytes in both fat compartments are characterized by
alterations in adipocyte lipolysis and adipose tissue expression of genes coding 
for proteins involved in adipocyte metabolism or inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24369916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Mar;138(1):161-74. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft331. Epub 2013 Dec
21.

Genistein exposure during the early postnatal period favors the development of
obesity in female, but not male rats.

Strakovsky RS(1), Lezmi S, Flaws JA, Schantz SL, Pan YX, Helferich WG.

Author information: 
(1)* Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition;

Genistein (Gen), the primary isoflavone in soy, has been shown to adversely
affect various endocrine-mediated endpoints in rodents and humans. Soy formula
intake by human infants has been associated with early age at menarche and
decreased female-typical behavior in girls. Adipose deposition and expansion are 
also hormonally regulated and Gen has been shown to alter these processes.
However, little is known about the impact of early-life soy intake on metabolic
homeostasis in adulthood. The current study examined the impact of early-life Gen
exposure on adulthood body composition (by magnetic resonance imaging) and the
molecular signals mediating adipose expansion. From postnatal day (PND) 1 to 22, 
rat pups were daily orally dosed with 50mg/kg Gen to mimic blood Gen levels in
human infants fed soy formula. Female but not male Gen-exposed rats had increased
fat/lean mass ratio, fat mass, adipocyte size and number, and decreased muscle
fiber perimeter. PND22 Gen-exposed females, but not males, had increased
expression of adipogenic factors, including CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha 
(Cebpa), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (Cebpß), and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Ppar<U+03B3>). Furthermore, Wingless-related MMTV
integration site 10b (Wnt10b), a critical regulator of adipogenic cell fate
determination, was hypermethylated and had decreased expression in adipose of
PND22 Gen-exposed females. These data suggest that developmental Gen exposure in 
rats has gender-specific effects on adiposity that closely parallel the effects
of a postweaning high-fat diet and underscore the importance of considering
timing of exposure and gender when establishing safety recommendations for
early-life dietary Gen intake.

PMCID: PMC3930366
PMID: 24361872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):2852-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.492843. Epub 2013 
Dec 16.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß regulates the repression of type II collagen
expression during the differentiation from proliferative to hypertrophic
chondrocytes.

Ushijima T(1), Okazaki K, Tsushima H, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka City, 812-8582, Japan.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is a transcription factor that promotes
hypertrophic differentiation by stimulating type X collagen and matrix
metalloproteinase 13 during chondrocyte differentiation. However, the effect of
C/EBPß on proliferative chondrocytes is unclear. Here, we investigated whether
C/EBPß represses type II collagen (COL2A1) expression and is involved in the
regulation of sex-determining region Y-type high mobility group box 9 (SOX9), a
crucial factor for transactivation of Col2a1. Endogenous expression of C/EBPß in 
the embryonic growth plate and differentiated ATDC5 cells were opposite to those 
of COL2A1 and SOX9. Overexpression of C/EBPß by adenovirus vector in ATDC5 cells 
caused marked repression of Col2a1. The expression of Sox9 mRNA and nuclear
protein was also repressed, resulting in decreased binding of SOX9 to the Col2a1 
enhancer as shown by a ChIP assay. Knockdown of C/EBPß by lentivirus expressing
shRNA caused significant stimulation of these genes in ATDC5 cells. Reporter
assays demonstrated that C/EBPß repressed transcriptional activity of Col2a1.
Deletion and mutation analysis showed that the C/EBPß core responsive element was
located between +2144 and +2152 bp within the Col2a1 enhancer. EMSA and ChIP
assays also revealed that C/EBPß directly bound to this region. Ex vivo organ
cultures of mouse limbs transfected with C/EBPß showed that the expression of
COL2A1 and SOX9 was reduced upon ectopic C/EBPß expression. Together, these
results indicated that C/EBPß represses the transcriptional activity of Col2a1
both directly and indirectly through modulation of Sox9 expression. This
consequently promotes the phenotypic conversion from proliferative to
hypertrophic chondrocytes during chondrocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3908417
PMID: 24344131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jun 15;134(12):2808-19. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28638. Epub 2013 Dec 
7.

A mechanistic study on the metastasis inducing function of FUS-CHOP fusion
protein in liposarcoma.

Patil N(1), Ahmed Kabeer Rasheed S, Abba M, Hendrik Leupold J, Schwarzbach M,
Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg and German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

The FUS-CHOP fusion protein has been found to be instrumental for specific
oncogenic processes in liposarcoma, but its ability to induce metastasis and the 
underlying mechanisms by which this can be achieved remain unknown. To dissect
its functional role in this context, we stably overexpressed this protein in
SW872 liposarcoma and HT1080 fibrosarcoma cell lines, and were able to
demonstrate that forced expression of FUS-CHOP significantly increases migration 
and invasion, as well as enhances lung and liver metastasis in the in vivo
chicken chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model, that is proliferation independent. 
Additionally, FUS-CHOP enhances the expression of matrix-metalloproteinases -2
and -9, and transactivates their promoters in vitro. Mutational analysis showed
that C/EBP-ß- (-769/-755), NF-<U+03BA>B (-525/-516) and CREB/AP-1 (-218/-207) sites were
important for MMP-2 and NF-<U+03BA>B (-604/-598), AP-1 (-539/-532) and AP-1 (-81/-72)
for MMP-9 transactivation. Moreover, a direct in vivo interaction of FUS-CHOP was
observed in case of the MMP-2 promoter within region (-769/-207). siRNA data
revealed that MMP-2 expression is essential in the FUS-CHOP induced metastatic
phenotype. MMP-2-mRNA and protein expression correlated significantly with
FUS-CHOP positivity in 46 resected patient liposarcoma tissues. We have for the
first time provided substantial evidence for the FUS-CHOP oncoprotein as an
inducer of metastasis that is due to the transcriptional induction of specific
tumor-associated proteases. Insights gained from this study not only support a
deeper understanding of the mechanistic properties of FUS-CHOP, but also open up 
new avenues for targeted therapy.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24285420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jul;229(7):856-67. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24513.

ERK5 pathway regulates transcription factors important for monocytic
differentiation of human myeloid leukemia cells.

Wang X(1), Pesakhov S, Harrison JS, Danilenko M, Studzinski GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rutgers Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Newark, New Jersey.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are important transducers of external
signals for cell growth, survival, and other cellular responses including cell
differentiation. Several MAPK cascades are known with the MEK1/2-ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38MAPKs receiving most attention, but the role of MEK5-ERK5 in intracellular
signaling deserves more scrutiny, as this pathway transmits signals that can
complement ERK/2 signaling. We hypothesized that the ERK5 pathway plays a role in
the control of monocytic differentiation, which is disturbed in myeloid leukemia.
We therefore examined the cellular phenotype and key molecular events which occur
when human myeloid leukemia cells, acute (AML) or chronic (CML), are forced to
differentiate by vitamin D derivatives (VDDs). This study was performed using
established cell lines HL60 and U937, and primary cultures of blasts from 10
patients with ML. We found that ERK5 and its direct downstream target
transcription factor MEF2C are upregulated by 1,25D in parallel with monocytic
differentiation. Further, inhibition of ERK5 activity by specific pharmacological
agents BIX02189 and XMD8-92 alters the phenotype of these cells by reducing the
abundance of the VDD-induced surface monocytic marker CD14, and concomitantly
increasing surface expression of the general myeloid marker CD11b. Similar
results were obtained when the expression of ERK5 was reduced by siRNA or short
hairpin (sh) RNA. ERK5 inhibition resulted in an expected decrease in MEF2C
activation. We also found that in AML cells the transcription factor C/EBPß is
positively regulated, while C/EBPa is negatively regulated by ERK5. These
findings provide new understanding of dysregulated differentiation in human
myeloid leukemia.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4363988
PMID: 24264602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Reproduction. 2013 Dec 19;147(2):221-9. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0356. Print 2014 Feb.

Role of leptin receptors in granulosa cells during ovulation.

Dupuis L(1), Schuermann Y, Cohen T, Siddappa D, Kalaiselvanraja A, Pansera M,
Bordignon V, Duggavathi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, McGill University, Sainte Anne de Bellevue,
Quebec, Canada H9X 3V9.

Leptin is an important hormone influencing reproductive function. However, the
mechanisms underpinning the role of leptin in the regulation of reproduction
remain to be completely deciphered. In this study, our objective is to understand
the mechanisms regulating the expression of leptin receptor (Lepr) and its role
in ovarian granulosa cells during ovulation. First, granulosa cells were
collected from superovulated mice to profile mRNA expression of Lepr isoforms
(LeprA and LeprB) throughout follicular development. Expression of LeprA and
LeprB was dramatically induced in the granulosa cells of ovulating follicles at
4<U+200A>h after human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) treatment. Relative abundance of
both mRNA and protein of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (Cebpß) increased in
granulosa cells from 1 to 7<U+200A>h post-hCG. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the recruitment of Cebpß to Lepr promoter.
Thus, hCG-induced transcription of Lepr appears to be regulated by Cebpß, which
led us to hypothesise that Lepr may play a role during ovulation. To test this
hypothesis, we used a recently developed pegylated superactive mouse leptin
antagonist (PEG-SMLA) to inhibit Lepr signalling during ovulation. I.p.
administration of PEG-SMLA (10<U+200A>µg/g) to superovulated mice reduced ovulation rate
by 65% compared with control treatment. Although the maturation stage of the
ovulated oocytes remained unaltered, ovulation genes Ptgs2 and Has2 were
downregulated in PEG-SMLA-treated mice compared with control mice. These results 
demonstrate that Lepr is dramatically induced in the granulosa cells of ovulating
follicles and this induction of Lepr expression requires the transcription factor
Cebpß. Lepr plays a critical role in the process of ovulation by regulating, at
least in part, the expression of the important genes involved in the preovulatory
maturation of follicles.

PMID: 24256641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 15;382(2):814-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.11.006.
Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Role of interferon-inducible protein 202 (p202) in the regulation of adipogenesis
in mouse adipose-derived stem cells.

Li H(1), Liu F(2), Guo H(2), Zhu Z(2), Jiao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018,
China. Electronic address: hfli1228@163.com. (2)College of Life Sciences,
Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018, China.

The interferon-inducible protein 202 (p202) has emerged as a key regulator of
cell proliferation and differentiation. To explore the role of p202 in adipocyte 
differentiation, p202 mRNA and protein levels in differentiating mouse
adipose-derived stem cells (mASCs) were examined, and were found to continuously 
increase during mASC adipogenesis. The nuclear and cytoplasmic distribution of
p202 in the differentiation process was also determined. In addition, suppression
and overexpression of p202 impaired and enhanced the differentiation process,
respectively. Further, results of co-immunoprecipitation and
co-immunofluorescence showed the interaction and intracellular co-localization of
p202 with C/EBPß, C/EBPa, and PPAR<U+03B3> at intermediate and/or late differentiation
stages. Knockdown of p202 interfered with the elevated expression of C/EBPß,
C/EBPa, and PPAR<U+03B3>. In conclusion, the temporal and spatial profiles of p202 and
the observed manner in which p202 affected the expression of these transcription 
factors provided evidence that p202 plays a role during mASC adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24246779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 7;8(11):e78179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078179. eCollection
2013.

Combinatorial recruitment of CREB, C/EBPß and c-Jun determines activation of
promoters upon keratinocyte differentiation.

Rozenberg JM(1), Bhattacharya P, Chatterjee R, Glass K, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/0cd737c6-949b-48f9-8bc8-ab36376c03e3.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors CREB, C/EBPß and Jun regulate genes involved in
keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation. We questioned if specific
combinations of CREB, C/EBPß and c-Jun bound to promoters correlate with RNA
polymerase II binding, mRNA transcript levels and methylation of promoters in
proliferating and differentiating keratinocytes.
RESULTS: Induction of mRNA and RNA polymerase II by differentiation is highest
when promoters are bound by C/EBP ß alone, C/EBPß together with c-Jun, or by
CREB, C/EBPß and c-Jun, although in this case CREB binds with low affinity. In
contrast, RNA polymerase II binding and mRNA levels change the least upon
differentiation when promoters are bound by CREB either alone or in combination
with C/EBPß or c-Jun. Notably, promoters bound by CREB have relatively high
levels of RNA polymerase II binding irrespective of differentiation. Inhibition
of C/EBPß or c-Jun preferentially represses mRNA when gene promoters are bound by
corresponding transcription factors and not CREB. Methylated promoters have
relatively low CREB binding and, accordingly, those which are bound by C/EBPß are
induced by differentiation irrespective of CREB. Composite "Half and Half"
consensus motifs and co localizing consensus DNA binding motifs are
overrepresented in promoters bound by the combination of corresponding
transcription factors.
CONCLUSION: Correlational and functional data describes combinatorial mechanisms 
regulating the activation of promoters. Colocalization of C/EBPß and c-Jun on
promoters without strong CREB binding determines high probability of activation
upon keratinocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3820678
PMID: 24244291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. PLoS Genet. 2013 Nov;9(11):e1003863. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003863. Epub 2013
Nov 14.

Activin-like kinase 2 functions in peri-implantation uterine signaling in mice
and humans.

Clementi C(1), Tripurani SK, Large MJ, Edson MA, Creighton CJ, Hawkins SM,
Kovanci E, Kaartinen V, Lydon JP, Pangas SA, DeMayo FJ, Matzuk MM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
United States of America ; Departments of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Center for Reproductive
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Implantation of a blastocyst in the uterus is a multistep process tightly
controlled by an intricate regulatory network of interconnected ovarian, uterine,
and embryonic factors. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) ligands and receptors are
expressed in the uterus of pregnant mice, and BMP2 has been shown to be a key
regulator of implantation. In this study, we investigated the roles of the BMP
type 1 receptor, activin-like kinase 2 (ALK2), during mouse pregnancy by
producing mice carrying a conditional ablation of Alk2 in the uterus (Alk2 cKO
mice). In the absence of ALK2, embryos demonstrate delayed invasion into the
uterine epithelium and stroma, and upon implantation, stromal cells fail to
undergo uterine decidualization, resulting in sterility. Mechanistically,
microarray analysis revealed that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (Cebpb)
expression is suppressed during decidualization in Alk2 cKO females. These
findings and the similar phenotypes of Cebpb cKO and Alk2 cKO mice lead to the
hypothesis that BMPs act upstream of CEBPB in the stroma to regulate
decidualization. To test this hypothesis, we knocked down ALK2 in human uterine
stromal cells (hESC) and discovered that ablation of ALK2 alters hESC
decidualization and suppresses CEBPB mRNA and protein levels. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of decidualizing hESC confirmed that BMP
signaling proteins, SMAD1/5, directly regulate expression of CEBPB by binding a
distinct regulatory sequence in the 3' UTR of this gene; CEBPB, in turn,
regulates the expression of progesterone receptor (PGR). Our work clarifies the
conserved mechanisms through which BMPs regulate peri-implantation in rodents and
primates and, for the first time, uncovers a linear pathway of BMP signaling
through ALK2 to regulate CEBPB and, subsequently, PGR during decidualization.

PMCID: PMC3828128
PMID: 24244176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Jan;46(1):76-7. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt120. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Existence of independent C/EBPß 3'-UTR RNA in human tissues.

Liu D(1), Xue P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

PMID: 24222641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e76451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076451.
eCollection 2013.

Type V collagen induced tolerance suppresses collagen deposition, TGF-ß and
associated transcripts in pulmonary fibrosis.

Vittal R(1), Mickler EA, Fisher AJ, Zhang C, Rothhaar K, Gu H, Brown KM,
Emtiazdjoo A, Lott JM, Frye SB, Smith GN, Sandusky GE, Cummings OW, Wilkes DS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunobiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana, United States of America.

RATIONALE: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a fatal interstitial lung
disease characterized by progressive scarring and matrix deposition. Recent
reports highlight an autoimmune component in IPF pathogenesis. We have reported
anti-col(V) immunity in IPF patients. The objective of our study was to determine
the specificity of col(V) expression profile and anti-col(V) immunity relative to
col(I) in clinical IPF and the efficacy of nebulized col(V) in pre-clinical IPF
models.
METHODS: Col(V) and col(I) expression profile was analyzed in normal human and
IPF tissues. C57-BL6 mice were intratracheally instilled with bleomycin (0.025 U)
followed by col(V) nebulization at pre-/post-fibrotic stage and analyzed for
systemic and local responses.
RESULTS: Compared to normal lungs, IPF lungs had higher protein and transcript
expression of the alpha 1 chain of col(V) and col(I). Systemic anti-col(V)
antibody concentrations, but not of anti-col(I), were higher in IPF patients.
Nebulized col(V), but not col(I), prevented bleomycin-induced fibrosis, collagen 
deposition, and myofibroblast differentiation. Col(V) treatment suppressed
systemic levels of anti-col(V) antibodies, IL-6 and TNF-a; and local Il-17a
transcripts. Compared to controls, nebulized col(V)-induced tolerance abrogated
antigen-specific proliferation in mediastinal lymphocytes and production of
IL-17A, IL-6, TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>. In a clinically relevant established fibrosis
model, nebulized col(V) decreased collagen deposition. mRNA array revealed
downregulation of genes specific to fibrosis (Tgf-ß, Il-1ß, Pdgfb), matrix
(Acta2, Col1a2, Col3a1, Lox, Itgb1/6, Itga2/3) and members of the TGF-ß
superfamily (Tgfbr1/2, Smad2/3, Ltbp1, Serpine1, Nfkb/Sp1/Cebpb).
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-col(V) immunity is pathogenic in IPF, and col(V)-induced
tolerance abrogates bleomycin-induced fibrogenesis and down regulates TGF-
ß-related signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3804565
PMID: 24204629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Hypertension. 2014 Feb;63(2):281-8. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.02303. Epub 
2013 Nov 4.

Dynamic CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-associated changes of DNA methylation in
the angiotensinogen gene.

Wang F(1), Demura M, Cheng Y, Zhu A, Karashima S, Yoneda T, Demura Y, Maeda Y,
Namiki M, Ono K, Nakamura Y, Sasano H, Akagi T, Yamagishi M, Saijoh K, Takeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan. m-demura@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

DNA methylation patterns are maintained in adult somatic cells. Recent findings, 
however, suggest that all methylation patterns are not preserved. We demonstrate 
that stimulatory signals can change the DNA methylation status at a
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (CEBP) binding site and a transcription start site
and activate expression of the angiotensinogen gene (AGT). A CEBP binding site in
the human AGT promoter was hypomethylated in tissues with high expression of AGT,
but not in those with low expression. The transcriptional activity of AGT
promoter sequences cloned into a reporter plasmid depended on DNA methylation. In
cultured human cells, interleukin 6 stimulation caused DNA demethylation around a
CEBP binding site and a transcription start site; demethylation was accompanied
by increased CEBP-ß recruitment and chromatin accessibility of the AGT promoter. 
DNA methylation activity decreased in the nucleus. Excess circulating aldosterone
upregulated AGT expression and was accompanied by DNA hypomethylation around a
CEBP binding site and a transcription start site in human visceral adipose
tissue. High salt intake led to upregulation of Agt expression, DNA
hypomethylation around 2 CEBP binding sites and a transcription start site, and
decreased DNA methylation activity in rat visceral adipose tissue. Taken
together, CEBP binding initiates chromatin relaxation and transcription, which
are followed by DNA demethylation around a CEBP binding site and a transcription 
start site in the AGT promoter. Decreased DNA methylation activity in the nucleus
may play a role in DNA demethylation. DNA demethylation switches the phenotype of
AGT expression from an inactive to an active state.

PMID: 24191285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Formos Med Assoc. 2013 Nov;112(11):713-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2012.08.006.
Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Microarray analysis of gene expression of bone marrow stem cells cocultured with 
salivary acinar cells.

Lin CY(1), Yang JR, Teng SL, Tsai S, Chen MH.

Author information: 
(1)Dentistry Department, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsinchu Branch,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate Institute of Clinical Dentistry, School of
Dentistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Our previous work has demonstrated that rat bone marrow stem 
cells (BMSCs) can transdifferentiate into a-amylase-producing cells after
coculture with rat submandibular gland acinar cells. These transdifferentiated
cells may be used for regeneration of damaged salivary gland. The purpose of this
study was to investigate the global gene expression of rat BMSCs cocultured with 
rat submandibular gland acinar cells and the factors inducing this
transdifferentiation.
METHODS: Rat BMSCs were indirectly cocultured with rat submandibular gland acinar
cells by using the double chamber system for 5 and 10 days. The global gene
expression of BMSCs during transdifferentiation into acinar cells was
investigated by microarray analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 45,018 probes were used and 41,012 genes were detected. After
coculture for 5 days, 1409 genes were upregulated more than twofold and 1417
genes were downregulated more than twofold (p<0.005). Moreover, after coculture
for 10 days, 1356 genes were upregulated more than twofold and 1231 genes were
downregulated more than twofold (p<0.005). Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-6 was
one of the top-ranked upregulated genes. The hub genes were interleukin-6 and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (CEBPB) in the early and late response gene
groups, respectively.
CONCLUSION: This is believed to be the first study on the global gene expression 
of rat BMSCs cocultured with rat acinar cells. Many genes related to the function
of salivary acinar cells such as those responsible for the production of
a-amylase protein were upregulated and many genes related to the differentiation 
of BMSCs into adipocytes and osteoblasts were downregulated. In addition, BMP-6
gene was found to be highly upregulated. We proposed that three target genes,
BMP-6, interleukin-6 and CEBPB, play important roles in the transdifferentiation 
of BMSCs into acinar cells, and are worthy of further investigation.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24183201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jan;34(1):44-51. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302214. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Mice heterozygous for the xanthine oxidoreductase gene facilitate lipid
accumulation in adipocytes.

Murakami N(1), Ohtsubo T, Kansui Y, Goto K, Noguchi H, Haga Y, Nakabeppu Y,
Matsumura K, Kitazono T.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences (N.M., T.O., Y.K., K.G., H.N., Y.H., K.M., T.K.), Division of
Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of Immunobiology and Neuroscience, Medical
Institute of Bioregulation (Y.N.), and Research Center for Nucleotide Pool
(Y.N.), Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Xanthine oxidoreductase (XOR) catalyzes the production of uric acid
with concomitant generation of reactive oxygen species. XOR has been shown to
regulate adipogenesis through the control of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3>, but its role in adipose tissue remains unclear. The aim of this study
was to examine the role of XOR in adipose tissue using XOR genetically modified
mice.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Experiments were performed using 2-, 4-, and 18-month-old
XOR heterozygous mice (XOR(+/-)) and their wild-type littermates to evaluate the 
physiological role of XOR as the mice aged. Stromal vascular fraction cells were 
prepared from epididymal white adipose tissue in 2-month-old XOR mice to assess
adipogenesis. At 18 months, XOR(+/)- mice had significantly higher body weight,
higher systolic blood pressure, and higher incidence of insulin resistance
compared with wild-type mice. At 4 months, blood glucose and the expressions of
CCAAT enhancer-binding protein ß, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>,
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and tumor necrosis factor a mRNA in
epididymal white adipose tissue were significantly higher in XOR(+/-) than in
wild-type mice. Furthermore, histological analysis of epididymal white adipose
tissue in XOR(+/-) mice revealed that adipocyte size and the F4/80-positive
macrophage count were increased. Experiments with a high-fat diet exhibited that 
body weight gain was also significantly higher in XOR(+/-) than in wild-type
mice. In stromal vascular fraction cells derived from XOR(+/-) mice, the levels
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>, fatty acid-binding protein 4,
and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein a mRNA were upregulated, and oxidative stress 
levels were elevated during differentiation into adipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the reduction in XOR gene expression in
mice augments lipid accumulation in adipocytes, accompanied by an increase in
oxidative stress, and induces obesity with insulin resistance in older age.

PMID: 24158515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Life Sci. 2013 Nov 19;93(22):805-13. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.011. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a/4a and forkhead box A2 regulate the solute carrier 
2A2 (Slc2a2) gene expression in the liver and kidney of diabetic rats.

David-Silva A(1), Freitas HS, Okamoto MM, Sabino-Silva R, Schaan BD, Machado UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.

AIMS: Solute carrier 2a2 (Slc2a2) gene codifies the glucose transporter GLUT2, a 
key protein for glucose flux in hepatocytes and renal epithelial cells of
proximal tubule. In diabetes mellitus, hepatic and tubular glucose output has
been related to Slc2a2/GLUT2 overexpression; and controlling the expression of
this gene may be an important adjuvant way to improve glycemic homeostasis. Thus,
the present study investigated transcriptional mechanisms involved in the
diabetes-induced overexpression of the Slc2a2 gene.
MAIN METHODS: Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a and 4a (HNF-1a and HNF-4a), forkhead 
box A2 (FOXA2), sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) and the
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß) mRNA expression (RT-PCR) and binding
activity into the Slc2a2 promoter (electrophoretic mobility assay) were analyzed 
in the liver and kidney of diabetic and 6-day insulin-treated diabetic rats.
KEY FINDINGS: Slc2a2/GLUT2 expression increased by more than 50% (P<0.001) in the
liver and kidney of diabetic rats, and 6-day insulin treatment restores these
values to those observed in non-diabetic animals. Similarly, the mRNA expression 
and the binding activity of HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 increased by 50 to 100%
(P<0.05 to P<0.001), also returning to values of non-diabetic rats after insulin 
treatment. Neither the Srebf1 and Cebpb mRNA expression, nor the SREBP-1c and
C/EBP-ß binding activity was altered in diabetic rats.
SIGNIFICANCE: HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 transcriptional factors are involved in
diabetes-induced overexpression of Slc2a2 gene in the liver and kidney. These
data point out that these transcriptional factors are important targets to
control GLUT2 expression in these tissues, which can contribute to glycemic
homeostasis in diabetes.

© 2013.

PMID: 24157454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3386-95. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.10.011. Epub 2013 Oct 19.

Lipocalin-2 elicited by advanced glycation end-products promotes the migration of
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Chung TW(1), Choi HJ, Kim CH, Jeong HS, Ha KT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Medicine, School of Korean Medicine, Pusan National
University, Yangsan, Gyeongsangnam-do 626-870, Republic of Korea; Department of
Molecular and Cellular Glycobiology, College of Natural Science, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, Kyungki-do 440-746, Republic of Korea.

Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) play key roles in the development of
diabetic vascular complications by activating the proliferation and migration of 
vascular smooth muscle cells. Here, we identified an increase of the migratory
properties of human aortic smooth muscle cells (HASMC) through AGE-induced
expression of lipocalin-2 (LCN2). Because the AGE-elicited expression of LCN2 was
diminished by an antibody against the AGE receptor (RAGE), diphenylene iodonium
(DPI), N-acetyl cysteine, LY294002, and SP600125, we suggest that AGEs enhance
the expression of LCN2 via a RAGE-NADPH oxidase-reactive oxygen species pathway, 
leading to the phosphorylation of PI3K-Akt and JNK in HASMCs. In addition, a
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and promoter assay revealed that
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß is crucial for AGE-induced expression of LCN2.
However, any other AGE-related signaling pathway, including ERK1/2, p38, NF-<U+03BA>B,
and AP-1, did not affect the AGE- induced expression of LCN2. Knockdown of LCN2
expression by shRNA showed that AGE-elicited LCN2 expression enhanced the
invasive and migratory properties of HASMCs, but showed no effect on cell
proliferation. Considering the importance of HASMC migration in the development
of atherosclerosis, our study provides a novel insight into diabetic vascular
complications.

© 2013.

PMID: 24149112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 15;273(3):435-41. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.10.005. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Isoniazid suppresses antioxidant response element activities and impairs
adipogenesis in mouse and human preadipocytes.

Chen Y(1), Xue P, Hou Y, Zhang H, Zheng H, Zhou T, Qu W, Teng W, Zhang Q,
Andersen ME, Pi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Safety Sciences, The Hamner Institutes for Health
Sciences, 6 Davis Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA; The First
Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

Transcriptional signaling through the antioxidant response element (ARE),
orchestrated by the Nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), is a major
cellular defense mechanism against oxidative or electrophilic stress. Here, we
reported that isoniazid (INH), a widely used antitubercular drug, displays a
substantial inhibitory property against ARE activities in diverse mouse and human
cells. In 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, INH concentration-dependently suppressed the
ARE-luciferase reporter activity and mRNA expression of various ARE-dependent
antioxidant genes under basal and oxidative stressed conditions. In keeping with 
our previous findings that Nrf2-ARE plays a critical role in adipogenesis by
regulating expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), suppression of ARE signaling by INH
hampered adipogenic differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells and human adipose-derived
stem cells (ADSCs). Following adipogenesis induced by hormonal cocktails,
INH-treated 3T3-L1 cells and ADSCs displayed significantly reduced levels of
lipid accumulation and attenuated expression of C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3>. Time-course
studies in 3T3-L1 cells revealed that inhibition of adipogenesis by INH occurred 
in the early stage of terminal adipogenic differentiation, where reduced
expression of C/EBPß and C/EBPd was observed. To our knowledge, the present study
is the first to demonstrate that INH suppresses ARE signaling and interrupts with
the transcriptional network of adipogenesis, leading to impaired adipogenic
differentiation. The inhibition of ARE signaling may be a potential underlying
mechanism by which INH attenuates cellular antioxidant response contributing to
various complications.

© 2013.

PMID: 24128855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 26;8(9):e75874. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075874. eCollection
2013.

Pro-inflammatory cytokine induction of 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 in
A549 cells requires phosphorylation of C/EBPß at Thr235.

Esteves CL(1), Verma M, Róg-Zielinska E, Kelly V, Sai S, Breton A, Donadeu FX,
Seckl JR, Chapman KE.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Unit, University/BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's 
Medical Research Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11ß-HSD1) converts inert glucocorticoids
into active forms, thereby increasing intracellular glucocorticoid levels,
important to restrain acute inflammation. 11ß-HSD1 is induced by pro-inflammatory
cytokines in a variety of cells. Here, we show 11ß-HSD1 expression in human A549 
epithelial cells is increased by pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1a/TNFa) via the 
P2 promoter of the HSD11B1 gene. Inhibition of p38 MAPK attenuated the
pro-inflammatory cytokine induction of mRNA encoding 11ß-HSD1 as well as that
encoding C/EBPß. IL-1a/TNFa-induced phosphorylation of C/EBPß at Thr235 was also 
attenuated by p38 MAPK inhibition suggesting involvement of a p38 MAPK-C/EBPß
pathway. siRNA-mediated knock-down of C/EBPß and NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA implicated both
transcription factors in the IL-1a/TNFa induction of HSD11B1 mRNA. Transient
transfections of HSD11B1 promoter-reporter constructs identified the proximal
region of the P2 promoter of HSD11B1 as essential for this induction. IL-1a
increased binding of C/EBPß to the HSD11B1 P2 promoter, but this was not observed
for NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA, suggesting indirect regulation by NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA. Ectopic expression 
of mutant chicken C/EBPß constructs unable to undergo phosphorylation at the
threonine equivalent to Thr235 attenuated the IL-1a-induction of HSD11B1, whereas
mimicking constitutive phosphorylation of Thr235 (by mutation to aspartate)
increased basal expression of HSD11B1 mRNA without affecting IL-1a-induced
levels. These data clearly demonstrate a role for both C/EBPß and NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA in
the pro-inflammatory cytokine induction of HSD11B1 in human epithelial cells and 
show that p38 MAPK-induced phosphorylation of C/EBPß at Thr235 is critical in
this.

PMCID: PMC3784397
PMID: 24086653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e75568. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075568. eCollection
2013.

A low-molecular-weight compound K7174 represses hepcidin: possible therapeutic
strategy against anemia of chronic disease.

Fujiwara T(1), Ikeda T, Nagasaka Y, Okitsu Y, Katsuoka Y, Fukuhara N, Onishi Y,
Ishizawa K, Ichinohasama R, Tomosugi N, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School, 
Sendai, Japan ; Molecular Hematology/Oncology, Tohoku University Graduate School,
Sendai, Japan.

Hepcidin is the principal iron regulatory hormone, controlling the systemic
absorption and remobilization of iron from intracellular stores. The expression
of the hepcidin gene, HAMP, is increased in patients with anemia of chronic
disease. Previously, the synthetic compound K7174 was identified through chemical
screening as a novel inhibitor of the adhesion of monocytes to
cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells. K7174 also ameliorated anemia induced by
inflammatory cytokines in mice, which suggests a possible involvement of hepcidin
regulation. The present study was performed to assess the impact of K7174 on
hepcidin expression in a human hematoma cell line and in mice in vivo. We first
demonstrated that K7174 treatment in HepG2 cells significantly decreased HAMP
expression. Then, we conducted microarray analysis to determine the molecular
mechanism by which K7174 inhibits HAMP expression. Transcriptional profiling
confirmed the downregulation of HAMP. Surprisingly, we found that K7174 strongly 
induced GDF15, known as a negative regulator of HAMP expression. Western blotting
analysis as well as ELISA confirmed the induction of GDF15 by K7174 treatment.
Furthermore, K7174-mediated HAMP suppression was rescued by the silencing of
GDF15 expression. Interestingly, we found that K7174 also upregulates CEBPB.
Promoter analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that CEBPB 
could contribute to K7174-mediated transcriptional activation of GDF15.
Subsequently, we also examined whether K7174 inhibits hepcidin expression in
mice. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis with liver samples from K7174-treated mice
demonstrated significant upregulation of Gdf15 and downregulation of Hamp
expression, as compared to control mice. Furthermore, serum hepcidin
concentration was also significantly decreased in K7174-treated mice. In
conclusion, K7174 inhibits hepcidin expression partly by inducing GDF15. K-7174
may be a potential therapeutic option to treat anemia of chronic disease.

PMCID: PMC3785497
PMID: 24086573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75282. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075282. eCollection
2013.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 signaling pathway is required for
endometrial decidualization in mice and human.

Lee CH(1), Kim TH, Lee JH, Oh SJ, Yoo JY, Kwon HS, Kim YI, Ferguson SD, Ahn JY,
Ku BJ, Fazleabas AT, Lim JM, Jeong JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Biology, Michigan State
University College of Human Medicine, Grand Rapids, Michigan, United States of
America ; Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University,
Seoul, South Korea.

Decidualization is a crucial change required for successful embryo implantation
and the maintenance of pregnancy. During this process, endometrial stromal cells 
differentiate into decidual cells in response to the ovarian steroid hormones of 
early pregnancy. Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) 
are known to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis in multiple cell types,
including uterine endometrial cells. Aberrant activation of ERK1/2 has recently
been implicated in the pathological processes of endometriosis and endometrial
cancer. However, the function of ERK1/2 signaling during implantation and
decidualization is still unknown. To determine the role and regulation of ERK1/2 
signaling during implantation and decidualization, we examine ERK1/2 signaling in
the mouse uterus during early pregnancy using immunostaining and qPCR.
Interestingly, levels of phospho-ERK1/2 were highest within decidual cells
located at the implantation sites. Expression levels of ERK1/2 target genes were 
also significantly higher at implantation sites, when compared to either
inter-implantation sites. To determine if ERK1/2 signaling is also important
during human endometrial decidualization, we examined levels of phospho-ERK1/2 in
cultured human endometrial stromal cells during in vitro decidualization.
Following treatment with a well-established decidualization-inducing
steroidogenic cocktail, levels of phospho-ERK1/2 were markedly increased.
Treatment with the ERK1/2 inhibitor, U0126, significantly decreased the
expression of the known decidualization marker genes, IGFBP1 and PRL as well as
inhibited the induction of known ERK1/2 target genes; FOS, MSK1, STAT1, and
STAT3. Interestingly, the phosphorylation level of CCAAT/ enhancer binding
protein ß (C/EBPß), a protein previously shown to be critical for
decidualization, was significantly reduced in this model. These results suggest
that ERK1/2 signaling is required for successful decidualization in mice as well 
as human endometrial stromal cells and implicates C/EBPß as a downstream target
of ERK1/2.

PMCID: PMC3782496
PMID: 24086495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 1;191(9):4665-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300581. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

Identification of a tissue-specific, C/EBPß-dependent pathway of differentiation 
for murine peritoneal macrophages.

Cain DW(1), O'Koren EG, Kan MJ, Womble M, Sempowski GD, Hopper K, Gunn MD, Kelsoe
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710;

Macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) are distributed throughout the body and play
important roles in pathogen detection and tissue homeostasis. In tissues,
resident macrophages exhibit distinct phenotypes and activities, yet the
transcriptional pathways that specify tissue-specific macrophages are largely
unknown. We investigated the functions and origins of two peritoneal macrophage
populations in mice: small and large peritoneal macrophages (SPM and LPM,
respectively). SPM and LPM differ in their ability to phagocytose apoptotic
cells, as well as in the production of cytokines in response to LPS. In
steady-state conditions, SPM are sustained by circulating precursors, whereas LPM
are maintained independently of hematopoiesis; however, both populations are
replenished by bone marrow precursors following radiation injury. Transcription
factor analysis revealed that SPM and LPM express abundant CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP)-ß. Cebpb(-/-) mice exhibit elevated numbers of SPM-like cells but
lack functional LPM. Alveolar macrophages are also missing in Cebpb(-/-) mice,
although macrophage populations in the spleen, kidney, skin, mesenteric lymph
nodes, and liver are normal. Adoptive transfer of SPM into Cebpb(-/-) mice
results in SPM differentiation into LPM, yet donor SPM do not generate LPM after 
transfer into C/EBPß-sufficient mice, suggesting that endogenous LPM inhibit
differentiation by SPM. We conclude that C/EBPß plays an intrinsic,
tissue-restricted role in the generation of resident macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3808250
PMID: 24078688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 19;8(9):e73656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073656. eCollection
2013.

Unraveling regulatory programs for NF-kappaB, p53 and microRNAs in head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma.

Yan B(1), Li H, Yang X, Shao J, Jang M, Guan D, Zou S, Van Waes C, Chen Z, Zhan
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

In head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), mutations of p53 usually
coexist with aberrant activation of NF-kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B), other transcription
factors and microRNAs, which promote tumor pathogenesis. However, how these
factors and microRNAs interact to globally modulate gene expression and mediate
oncogenesis is not fully understood. We devised a novel bioinformatics method to 
uncover interactive relationships between transcription factors or microRNAs and 
genes. This approach is based on matrix decomposition modeling under the joint
constraints of sparseness and regulator-target connectivity, and able to
integrate gene expression profiling and binding data of regulators. We employed
this method to infer the gene regulatory networks in HNSCC. We found that the
majority of the predicted p53 targets overlapped with those for NF-<U+03BA>B, suggesting
that the two transcription factors exert a concerted modulation on regulatory
programs in tumor cells. We further investigated the interrelationships of p53
and NF-<U+03BA>B with five additional transcription factors, AP1, CEBPB, EGR1, SP1 and
STAT3, and microRNAs mir21 and mir34ac. The resulting gene networks indicate that
interactions among NF-<U+03BA>B, p53, and the two miRNAs likely regulate progression of 
HNSCC. We experimentally validated our findings by determining expression of the 
predicted NF-<U+03BA>B and p53 target genes by siRNA knock down, and by examining p53
binding activity on promoters of predicted target genes in the tumor cell lines. 
Our results elucidating the cross-regulations among NF-<U+03BA>B, p53, and microRNAs
provide insights into the complex regulatory mechanisms underlying HNSCC, and
shows an efficient approach to inferring gene regulatory programs in biological
complex systems.

PMCID: PMC3777940
PMID: 24069219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. BMC Immunol. 2013 Sep 24;14:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-44.

CAWS administration increases the expression of interferon <U+03B3> and complement
factors that lead to severe vasculitis in DBA/2 mice.

Nagi-Miura N(1), Okuzaki D, Torigata K, Sakurai MA, Ito A, Ohno N, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunopharmacology of Microbial Products, School of Pharmacy,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo 192-0329, Japan. ohnonao@toyaku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Candida albicans water-soluble fraction (CAWS), a
mannoprotein-ß-glucan complex obtained from the culture supernatant of C.
albicans NBRC1385, causes CAWS-mediated vasculitis (CAWS-vasculitis) in B6 and
DBA/2 mice with mild and lethal symptoms, respectively. Why CAWS is lethal only
in DBA/2 mice remains unknown.
RESULTS: We performed DNA microarray analyses using mRNA obtained from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of B6 and DBA/2 mice and compared their
respective transcriptomes. We found that the mRNA levels of interferon-<U+03B3> (Ifng)
and several genes that regulate the complement system, such as C3, C4, Cfb, Cfh, 
and Fcna, were increased dramatically only in DBA/2 mice at 4 and 8 weeks after
CAWS administration. The dramatic increase was confirmed by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reactions (qRT-PCR). Moreover, mRNA levels of
immune-related genes, such as Irf1, Irf7, Irf9, Cebpb, Ccl4, Itgam, Icam1, and
IL-12rb1, whose expression levels are known to be increased by Ifng, were also
increased, but only in DBA/2 mice. By contrast, the mRNA level of Dectin-2, the
critical receptor for the a-mannans of CAWS, was increased slightly and similarly
in both B6 and DBA/2 mice after CAWS administration.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results suggest that CAWS administration induces
Dectin-2 mediated CAWS-vasculitis in both B6 and DBA/2 mice and the expression of
Ifng, but only in DBA/2 mice, which led to increased expression of C3, C4, Cfb,
Cfh, and Fcna and an associated increase in lethality in these mice. This model
may contribute to our understanding of the pathogenesis of severe human
vasculitis.

PMCID: PMC3876726
PMID: 24063402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):30892-903. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.477158. Epub
2013 Sep 16.

MUC1-C oncoprotein activates ERK<U+2192>C/EBPß signaling and induction of aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1A1 in breast cancer cells.

Alam M(1), Ahmad R, Rajabi H, Kharbanda A, Kufe D.

Author information: 
(1)From the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (ALDH1A1) activity is used as a marker of breast
cancer stem cells; however, little is known about the regulation of ALDH1A1
expression. Mucin 1 (MUC1) is a heterodimeric protein that is aberrantly
overexpressed in most human breast cancers. In studies of breast cancer cells
stably silenced for MUC1 or overexpressing the oncogenic MUC1-C subunit, we
demonstrate that MUC1-C is sufficient for induction of MEK <U+2192> ERK signaling and
that treatment with a MUC1-C inhibitor suppresses ERK activation. In turn, MUC1-C
induces ERK-mediated phosphorylation and activation of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein ß (C/EBPß) transcription factor. The results further show that MUC1-C and
C/EBPß form a complex on the ALDH1A1 gene promoter and activate ALDH1A1 gene
transcription. MUC1-C-induced up-regulation of ALDH1A1 expression is associated
with increases in ALDH activity and is detectable in stem-like cells when
expanded as mammospheres. These findings demonstrate that MUC1-C (i) activates a 
previously unrecognized ERK<U+2192>C/EBPß<U+2192>ALDH1A1 pathway, and (ii) promotes the
induction of ALDH activity in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3829404
PMID: 24043631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e72607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072607. eCollection 
2013.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide (PACAP) participates in
adipogenesis by activating ERK signaling pathway.

Arsenijevic T(1), Gregoire F, Chiadak J, Courtequisse E, Bolaky N, Perret J,
Delporte C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathophysiological and Nutritional Biochemistry, Université
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide (PACAP) belongs to the
secretin/glucagon/vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) family. Its action can be
mediated by three different receptor subtypes: PAC1, which has exclusive affinity
for PACAP, and VPAC1 and VPAC2 which have equal affinity for PACAP and VIP. We
showed that all three receptors are expressed in 3T3-L1 cells throughout their
differentiation into adipocytes. We established the activity of these receptors
by cAMP accumulation upon induction by PACAP. Together with insulin and
dexamethasone, PACAP induced adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cell line. PACAP increased
cAMP production within 15 min upon stimulation and targeted the expression and
phosphorylation of MAPK (ERK1/2), strengthened by the ERK1/2 phosphorylation
being partially or completely abolished by different combinations of PACAP
receptors antagonists. We therefore speculate that ERK1/2 activation is crucial
for the activation of CCAAT/enhancer- binding protein ß (C/EBPß).

PMCID: PMC3767812
PMID: 24039785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4299-307. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301117. Epub 2013 
Sep 13.

The p38-MSK1 signaling cascade influences cytokine production through CREB and
C/EBP factors in human neutrophils.

Mayer TZ(1), Simard FA, Cloutier A, Vardhan H, Dubois CM, McDonald PP.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada;

Neutrophils influence innate and adaptative immunity by generating numerous
cytokines and chemokines whose regulation largely depends on transcriptional
activators such as NF-<U+03BA>B and C/EBP factors. In this study, we describe the
critical involvement of CREB transcription factors (CREB1 and activating
transcription factor-1) in this functional response as well as relevant upstream 
signaling components. Neutrophil stimulation with LPS or TNF led to the
phosphorylation, DNA binding activity, and chemokine promoter association of
CREB1 and activating transcription factor-1. These responses occurred downstream 
of the p38-MSK1 signaling axis, as did the phosphorylation and promoter
association of another bZIP factor, C/EBPß. Conversely, inhibition of RSK1 failed
to alter the phosphorylation of either CREB1 or C/EBPß in neutrophils. From a
more functional standpoint, the inhibition of p38 MAPK or MSK1 interfered with
cytokine generation in neutrophils. Likewise, overexpression of a
dominant-negative CREB1 mutant (K-CREB) or of a point mutant (S133A) resulted in 
a decreased ability of human neutrophil-like PLB-985 cells to generate
inflammatory cytokines (CXCL8, CCL3, CCL4, and TNF-a). Collectively, our data
show the involvement of CREB1 in neutrophil cytokine production, the key role of 
its S133 residue, important upstream signaling events, and the parallel
activation of another bZIP factor. These are all potential molecular targets that
could be exploited in the context of several chronic inflammatory diseases that
prominently feature neutrophils and their products.

PMID: 24038085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2013 Aug;54(8):749-58.

[The shortest isoform of C/EBPß, Liver inhibitory protein (LIP), collaborates
with Evi1 to induce AML in a mouse BMT model].

[Article in Japanese]

Watanabe-Okochi N, Yoshimi A, Sato T, Ikeda T, Kumano K, Taoka K, Satoh Y,
Shinohara A, Tsuruta T, Masuda A, Yokota H, Yatomi Y, Takahashi K, Kitaura J,
Kitamura T, Kurokawa M.

PMID: 24005435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Metab Brain Dis. 2013 Dec;28(4):667-76. doi: 10.1007/s11011-013-9430-2. Epub 2013
Aug 27.

Expression of autophagy and UPR genes in the developing brain during
ethanol-sensitive and resistant periods.

Alimov A(1), Wang H, Liu M, Frank JA, Xu M, Ou X, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biochemical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, 132 Health Sciences Research Building, 1095 Veterans Drive, 
Lexington, KY, 40536, USA.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) results from ethanol exposure to the
developing fetus and is the leading cause of mental retardation. FASD is
associated with a broad range of neurobehavioral deficits which may be mediated
by ethanol-induced neurodegeneration in the developing brain. An immature brain
is more susceptible to ethanol neurotoxicity. We hypothesize that the enhanced
sensitivity of the immature brain to ethanol is due to a limited capacity to
alleviate cellular stress. Using a third trimester equivalent mouse model of
ethanol exposure, we demonstrated that subcutaneous injection of ethanol induced 
a wide-spread neuroapoptosis in postnatal day 4 (PD4) C57BL/6 mice, but had
little effect on the brain of PD12 mice. We analyzed the expression profile of
genes regulating apoptosis, and the pathways of ER stress response (also known as
unfolded protein response, UPR) and autophagy during these ethanol-sensitive and 
resistant periods (PD4 versus PD12) using PCR microarray. The expression of
pro-apoptotic genes, such as caspase-3, was much higher on PD4 than PD12; in
contrast, the expression of genes that regulate UPR and autophagy, such as atf6, 
atg4, atg9, atg10, beclin1, bnip3, cebpb, ctsb, ctsd, ctss, grp78, ire1a, lamp,
lc3 perk, pik3c3, and sqstm1 was significantly higher on PD12 than PD4. These
results suggest that the vulnerability of the immature brain to ethanol could
result from high expression of pro-apoptotic proteins and a deficiency in the
stress responsive system, such as UPR and autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3809151
PMID: 23979425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Aug 13;14(8):16672-84. doi: 10.3390/ijms140816672.

Molecular and functional analyses of the fast skeletal myosin light chain2 gene
of the Korean oily bitterling, Acheilognathus koreensis.

Kong HJ(1), Lee YJ, Kim WJ, Kim HS, Kim BS, An CM, Yeo SY, Cho HK.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Division, National Fisheries Research and Development
Institute, Busan 619-705, Korea. heejkong@hotmail.com

We identified and characterized the primary structure of the Korean oily
bitterling Acheilognathus koreensis fast skeletal myosin light chain 2 (Akmlc2f),
gene. Encoded by seven exons spanning 3955 bp, the deduced 168-amino acid AkMLC2f
polypeptide contained an EF-hand calcium-binding motif and showed strong homology
(80%-98%) with the MLC2 proteins of Ictalurus punctatus and other species,
including mammals. Akmlc2f mRNA was highly enriched in skeletal muscles, and was 
detectable in other tissues. The upstream regions of Akmlc2f included a TATA box,
one copy of a putative MEF-2 binding site and several putative C/EBPß binding
sites. The functional activity of the promoter region of Akmlc2f was examined
using luciferase and red fluorescent protein reporters. The Akmlc2f
promoter-driven reporter expressions were detected and increased by the C/EBPß
transcription factor in HEK293T cells. The activity of the promoter of Akmlc2f
was also confirmed in the developing zebrafish embryo. Although the detailed
mechanism underlying the expression of Akmlc2f remains unknown, these results
suggest the muscle-specific expression of Akmlc2f transcript and the functional
activation of Akmlc2f promoter by C/EBPß.

PMCID: PMC3759931
PMID: 23945561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Hum Mutat. 2013 Nov;34(11):1467-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.22395. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Novel FOXF1 deep intronic deletion causes lethal lung developmental disorder,
alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins.

Szafranski P(1), Yang Y, Nelson MU, Bizzarro MJ, Morotti RA, Langston C,
Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, 77030.

Haploinsufficiency of FOXF1 causes an autosomal dominant neonatally lethal lung
disorder, alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins
(ACDMPV). We identified novel 0.8-kb deletion within the 1.4-kb intron of FOXF1
in a deceased newborn diagnosed with ACDMPV. The deletion arose de novo on the
maternal copy of the chromosome 16, and did not affect FOXF1 minigene splicing
tested in lung fibroblasts. However, FOXF1 transcript level in the ACDMPV
peripheral lung tissue was reduced by almost 40%. We found that, in an in vitro
reporter assay, the FOXF1 intron exhibited moderate transcriptional enhancer
activity, correlating with the presence of binding sites for expression
regulators CTCF and CEBPB, whereas its truncated copy, which lost major CTCF and 
CEBPB-binding sites, inhibited the FOXF1 promoter. Our data further emphasize the
importance of testing the non-protein coding regions of the genome currently not 
covered by diagnostic chromosomal microarray analyses or whole-exome sequencing.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4123314
PMID: 23943206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 25;8(7):e69925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069925. Print 2013.

Blueberry peel extracts inhibit adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells and reduce high-fat 
diet-induced obesity.

Song Y(1), Park HJ, Kang SN, Jang SH, Lee SJ, Ko YG, Kim GS, Cho JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Science, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang National
University, Jinju, Korea.

This study examined the anti-obesity effect and mechanism of action of blueberry 
peel extracts (BPE) in 3T3-L1 cells and high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obese rats.
The levels of lipid accumulation were measured, along with the changes in the
expression of genes and proteins associated with adipocyte differentiation in
3T3-L1 cells. Evidenced by Oil-red O staining and triglyceride assay, BPE
dose-dependently inhibited lipid accumulation at concentrations of 0, 50, and 200
µg/ml. BPE decreased the expression of the key adipocyte differentiation
regulator C/EBPß, as well as the C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> genes, during the
differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes. Moreover, BPE down-regulated
adipocyte-specific genes such as aP2 and FAS compared with control adipocytes.
The specific mechanism mediating the effects of BP revealed that
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt was strongly decreased, and its
downstream substrate, phospho-GSK3ß, was downregulated by BPE treatment in 3T3-L1
cells. Together, these data indicated that BP exerted anti-adipogenic activity by
inhibiting the expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPß and the Akt signaling pathway in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. Next, we investigated whether BP extracts attenuated
HFD-induced obesity in rats. Oral administration of BPE reduced HFD-induced body 
weight gain significantly without affecting food intake. The epididymal or
perirenal adipose tissue weights were lower in rats on an HFD plus BPE compared
with the tissue weights of HFD-induced obese rats. Total cholesterol and
triglyceride levels in the rats fed BPE were modestly reduced, and the
HDL-cholesterol level was significantly increased in HFD plus BP-fed rats
compared with those of HFD-fed rats. Taken together, these results demonstrated
an inhibitory effect of BP on adipogenesis through the down-regulation of C/EBPß,
C/EBPa, and PPAR<U+03B3> and the reduction of the phospho-Akt adipogenic factor in
3T3-L1 cells. Moreover, BPE reduced body weight gain and inhibited fat
accumulation in an HFD-induced animal model of obesity.

PMCID: PMC3723699
PMID: 23936120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Mar;68(2):437-42. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9725-2.

Asiatic acid inhibits adipogenic differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells.

Li ZW(1), Piao CD, Sun HH, Ren XS, Bai YS.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Clinical Hospital of JiLin University, Changchun, 130041, People's 
Republic of China.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) are the common precursors for both 
osteoblasts and adipocytes. With aging, BMSC osteoblast differentiation decreases
whereas BMSC differentiation into adipocytes increases, resulting in increased
adipogenesis and bone loss. In the present study, we investigated the effect of
asiatic acid (AA) on adipocytic differentiation of BMSCs. AA inhibited the
adipogenic induction of lipid accumulation, activity of glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, and expression of marker genes in adipogenesis: peroxisome
proliferation-activated receptor (PPAR)<U+03B3>, adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein
(ap) 2, and adipsin. Further, we found that AA did not alter clonal expansion
rate and expression of C/EBPß, upstream key regulator of PPAR<U+03B3>, and binding
activity of C/EBPß to PPAR<U+03B3> promoter was not affected by AA as well. These
findings suggest that AA may modulate differentiation of BMSCs to cause a lineage
shift away from the adipocytes, and inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3> by AA is through
C/EBPß-independent mechanisms. Thus, AA could be a potential candidate for a
novel drug against osteoporosis.

PMID: 23934183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cell Metab. 2013 Aug 6;18(2):265-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.06.018.

Immunoresponsive gene 1 augments bactericidal activity of macrophage-lineage
cells by regulating ß-oxidation-dependent mitochondrial ROS production.

Hall CJ(1), Boyle RH, Astin JW, Flores MV, Oehlers SH, Sanderson LE, Ellett F,
Lieschke GJ, Crosier KE, Crosier PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences,
The University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Evidence suggests the bactericidal activity of mitochondria-derived reactive
oxygen species (mROS) directly contributes to killing phagocytozed bacteria.
Infection-responsive components that regulate this process remain incompletely
understood. We describe a role for the mitochondria-localizing enzyme encoded by 
Immunoresponsive gene 1 (IRG1) during the utilization of fatty acids as a fuel
for oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and associated mROS production. In a
zebrafish infection model, infection-responsive expression of zebrafish irg1 is
specific to macrophage-lineage cells and is regulated cooperatively by
glucocorticoid and JAK/STAT signaling pathways. Irg1-depleted macrophage-lineage 
cells are impaired in their ability to utilize fatty acids as an energy substrate
for OXPHOS-derived mROS production resulting in defective bactericidal activity. 
Additionally, the requirement for fatty acid ß-oxidation during
infection-responsive mROS production and bactericidal activity toward
intracellular bacteria is conserved in murine macrophages. These results reveal
IRG1 as a key component of the immunometabolism axis, connecting infection,
cellular metabolism, and macrophage effector function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23931757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Oct 15;305(8):E1007-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00063.2013. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

GCN2 regulates the CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta and hepatic
gluconeogenesis.

Xu X(1), Hu J, McGrath BC, Cavener DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Cellular Dynamics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania.

Mice deficient for general control nondepressible-2 (Gcn2) either globally or
specifically in the liver display reduced capacity to maintain glucose
homeostasis during fasting, suggesting the hypothesis that GCN2 may regulate
gluconeogenesis (GNG), which normally plays a key role maintaining peripheral
glucose homeostasis. Gcn2-deficient mice exhibit normal insulin sensitivity and
plasma insulin but show reduced GNG when administered pyruvate, a gluconeogenic
substrate. The basal expression of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, a
rate-limiting enzyme in GNG, is abnormally elevated in Gcn2 knockout (KO) mice in
the fed state but fails to be further induced during fasting. The level of
tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates, including malate and oxaloacetate, and
the NADH-to-NAD(+) ratio are perturbed in the liver of Gcn2 KO mice either in the
fed or fasted state, which may directly impinge upon GNG. Additionally, the
expression of the CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-ß (C/EBPß) in the liver fails to
be induced in Gcn2 KO mice after 24 h fasting, and the liver-specific Cebpß KO
mice show reduced fasting GNG similar to that seen in Gcn2-deficient mice. Our
study demonstrates that GCN2 is important in maintaining GNG in the liver, which 
is likely to be mediated through regulation of C/EBPß.

PMCID: PMC3798698
PMID: 23900421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):2854-65. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343301. Epub 2013 Aug
27.

Reciprocal modulation of C/EBP-a and C/EBP-ß by IL-13 in activated microglia
prevents neuronal death.

Pan HC(1), Yang CN, Hung YW, Lee WJ, Tien HR, Shen CC, Sheehan J, Chou CT, Sheu
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Neurosurgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan.

In response to aggravation by activated microglia, IL-13 can significantly
enhance ER stress induction, apoptosis, and death via reciprocal signaling
through CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBP-a) and C/EBP-beta (C/EBP-ß). 
This reciprocal signaling promotes neuronal survival. Since the induction of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma/heme oxygenase 1 (PPAR-<U+03B3>/HO-1) by IL-13 plays a crucial role in the
promotion of and protection from activated microglia, respectively; here, we
investigated the role of IL-13 in regulating C/EBPs in activated microglia and
determined its correlation with neuronal function. The results revealed that
IL-13 significantly enhanced C/EBP-a/COX-2 expression and PGE2 production in
LPS-treated microglial cells. Paradoxically, IL-13 abolished C/EBP-ß/PPAR-<U+03B3>/HO-1 
expression. IL-13 also enhanced ER stress-evoked calpain activation by promoting 
the association of C/EBP-ß and PPAR-<U+03B3>. SiRNA-C/EBP-a effectively reversed the
combined LPS-activated caspase-12 activation and IL-13-induced apoptosis. In
contrast, siRNA-C/EBP-ß partially increased microglial cell apoptosis. By NeuN
immunochemistry and CD11b staining, there was improvement in the loss of CA3
neuronal cells after intrahippocampal injection of IL-13. This suggests that
IL-13-enhanced PLA2 activity regulates COX-2/PGE2 expression through C/EBP-a
activation. In parallel, ER stress-related calpain downregulates the PPAR-<U+03B3>/HO-1 
pathway via C/EBP-ß and leads to aggravated death of activated microglia via
IL-13, thereby preventing cerebral inflammation and neuronal injury.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23881867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Arch Med Sci. 2013 Jun 20;9(3):569-75. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2012.30956. Epub 2012
Oct 8.

Pivotal regulatory network and genes in osteosarcoma.

Luo Y(1), Deng Z, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central-South University,
Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding the transcriptional regulatory networks that map out 
the coordinated responses of transcription factors and target genes would
represent a significant advance in the analysis of osteosarcoma, a common primary
bone malignancy. The objective of our study was to interpret the mechanisms of
osteosarcoma through the regulation network construction.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using GSE14359 datasets downloaded from Gene Expression
Omnibus data, we first screened the differentially expressed genes in
osteosarcoma. We explored the regulation relationship between transcription
factors and target genes using Cytoscape. The underlying molecular mechanisms of 
these crucial target genes were investigated by Gene Ontology function and Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 1836 differentially expressed were identified and 98
regulatory relationships were constructed between 32 transcription factors and
their 60 differentially expressed target genes. Furthermore, BCL2-like 1
(BCL2L1), tumor protein p53 (TP53), v-rel reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene
homolog A (avian) (RELA), interleukin 6 (IL6), retinoic acid receptor, alpha
(RARA), nuclear factor I/C (CCAAT-binding transcription factor) (NFIC), and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein, beta (CEBPB) formed a small pivotal network, in
which IL-6 could be regulated by TP53, NFIC, RARA, and CEBPB, but BCL2L1 may be
only regulated by TP53 and RELA. These genes had been demonstrated to be involved
in osteosarcoma progression via various biological processes and pathways,
including regulation of cell apoptosis, proliferation, antigen processing and
presentation pathway, and phosphatidylinositol signaling system.
CONCLUSIONS: In general, we have obtained a regulatory network and several
pathways that may play important roles in osteosarcoma, identified several
pivotal genes in osteosarcoma, and predicted several potential key genes for
osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3701964
PMID: 23847684  [PubMed]


147. J Cell Sci. 2013 Sep 1;126(Pt 17):4026-36. doi: 10.1242/jcs.130757. Epub 2013 Jun
26.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress impairs IL-4/IL-13 signaling through C/EBPß-mediated
transcriptional suppression.

Arensdorf AM(1), Rutkowski DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) by endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress culminates in extensive gene regulation, with transcriptional upregulation
of genes that improve the protein folding capacity of the organelle. However, a
substantial number of genes are downregulated by ER stress, and the mechanisms
that lead to this downregulation and its consequences on cellular function are
poorly understood. We found that ER stress led to coordinated transcriptional
suppression of diverse cellular processes, including those involved in cytokine
signaling. Using expression of the IL-4/IL-13 receptor subunit Il4ra as a
sentinel, we sought to understand the mechanism behind this suppression and its
impact on inflammatory signaling. We found that reinitiation of global protein
synthesis by GADD34-mediated dephosphorylation of eIF2a resulted in preferential 
expression of the inhibitory LIP isoform of the transcription factor C/EBPß. This
regulation was in turn required for the suppression of Il4ra and related
inflammatory genes. Suppression of Il4ra was lost in Cebpb(-/-) cells but could
be induced by LIP overexpression. As a consequence of Il4ra suppression, ER
stress impaired IL-4/IL-13 signaling. Strikingly, Cebpb(-/-) cells lacking Il4ra 
downregulation were protected from this signaling impairment. This work
identifies a novel role for C/EBPß in regulating transcriptional suppression and 
inflammatory signaling during ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3757336
PMID: 23813955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Hyperthermia. 2013 Aug;29(5):455-63. doi: 10.3109/02656736.2013.798037.
Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Extracellular Hsp70 inhibits pro-inflammatory cytokine production by IL-10 driven
down-regulation of C/EBPß and C/EBPd.

Borges TJ(1), Lopes RL, Pinho NG, Machado FD, Souza AP, Bonorino C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Biomedical Research Institute, Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul , Av. Ipiranga, 6690, Porto Alegre,
Rio Grande do Sul , Brazil.

PURPOSE: Extracellular Hsp70 has anti-inflammatory potential, demonstrated in
different models of inflammatory diseases. We investigated probable mechanisms
used by Hsp70 to down-regulate pro-inflammatory cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analysed cytokine mRNA levels in bone marrow-derived
murine dendritic cells treated with Hsp70, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
peptidoglycan (PGN) or OVA (an irrelevant protein control), hypothesising that
this was mediated by C/EBPß and C/EBPd transcription factors. We also tested the 
involvement of TLR2, IL-10, ERK and STAT3, using genetically deficient mice and
pharmacological inhibitors.
RESULTS: C/EBPß and C/EBPd levels were inhibited in bone marrow derived dendritic
cells (BMDCs) treated with Hsp70, and that correlated with inhibition of TNF-a,
IFN-<U+03B3> and MCP-1. Such inhibition was not observed in TLR2 or IL-10 knockout mice,
and was also abrogated upon pretreatment of cells with ERK and JAK2/STAT3
inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: C/EBPß and C/EBPd transcription factors are inhibited by Hsp70
treatment, and their inhibition occurs via the TLR2-ERK-STAT3-IL-10 pathway in
BMDCs, mediating the anti-inflammatory effects of Hsp70.

PMID: 23808579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 5;8(6):e65169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065169. Print 2013.

Lymphoid to myeloid cell trans-differentiation is determined by C/EBPß structure 
and post-translational modifications.

Stoilova B(1), Kowenz-Leutz E, Scheller M, Leutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

The transcription factor C/EBPß controls differentiation, proliferation, and
functionality of many cell types, including innate immune cells. A detailed
molecular understanding of how C/EBPß directs alternative cell fates remains
largely elusive. A multitude of signal-dependent post-translational modifications
(PTMs) differentially affect the protean C/EBPß functions. In this study we apply
an assay that converts primary mouse B lymphoid progenitors into myeloid cells in
order to answer the question how C/EBPß regulates (trans-) differentiation and
determines myeloid cell fate. We found that structural alterations and various
C/EBPß PTMs determine the outcome of trans-differentiation of lymphoid into
myeloid cells, including different types of monocytes/macrophages, dendritic
cells, and granulocytes. The ability of C/EBPß to recruit chromatin remodeling
complexes is required for the granulocytic trans-differentiation outcome. These
novel findings reveal that PTMs and structural plasticity of C/EBPß are adaptable
modular properties that integrate and rewire epigenetic functions to direct
differentiation to diverse innate immune system cells, which are crucial for the 
organism survival.

PMCID: PMC3674013
PMID: 23755188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 19;288(29):20955-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486746. Epub
2013 Jun 9.

Mediator complex recruits epigenetic regulators via its two cyclin-dependent
kinase subunits to repress transcription of immune response genes.

Tsutsui T(1), Fukasawa R, Shinmyouzu K, Nakagawa R, Tobe K, Tanaka A, Ohkuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

The Mediator complex (Mediator) plays pivotal roles in activating transcription
by RNA polymerase II, but relatively little is known about its roles in
repression. Here, we identified the histone arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 and 
WD repeat protein 77/methylosome protein 50 (WDR77/MEP50) as Mediator
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-interacting proteins and studied the roles of PRMT5
in the transcriptional regulation of CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß
target genes. First, we purified CDK8- and CDK19-containing complexes from HeLa
nuclear extracts and subjected these purified complexes to mass spectrometric
analyses. These experiments revealed that two Mediator CDKs, CDK8 and CDK19,
individually interact with PRMT5 and WDR77, and their interactions with PRMT5
cause transcriptional repression of C/EBPß target genes by regulating symmetric
dimethylation of histone H4 arginine 3 (H4R3me2s) in the promoter regions of
those genes. Furthermore, the recruitment of the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3A
correlated with H4R3 dimethylation potentially leading to DNA methylation at the 
promoter proximal region and tight inhibition of preinitiation complex formation.
In vertebrates, C/EBPß regulates many genes involved in immune responses and cell
differentiation. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms of the
repressive roles of Mediator CDKs in transcription of C/EBPß target genes and
might provide clues that enable future studies of the functional associations
between Mediators and epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3774365
PMID: 23749998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e64544. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064544. Print 2013.

Identification of C/EBPß target genes in ALK+ anaplastic large cell lymphoma
(ALCL) by gene expression profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation.

Bonzheim I(1), Irmler M, Klier-Richter M, Steinhilber J, Anastasov N, Schäfer S, 
Adam P, Beckers J, Raffeld M, Fend F, Quintanilla-Martinez L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, University Hospital Tübingen and
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Eberhard-Karls-University, Tübingen, Germany.

C/EBPß (CCAAT enhancer binding protein) is a transcription factor that plays a
crucial role in survival and transformation of ALK+ anaplastic large cell
lymphoma (ALCL). The aim of this study was to identify the downstream targets of 
C/EBPß responsible for ALK-mediated oncogenesis. C/EBPß was knocked down in ALK+ 
ALCL cell lines with a C/EBPß-shRNA, followed by gene expression profiling (GEP).
GEP analysis revealed a reproducible signature of genes that were significantly
regulated by C/EBPß. Classification into biological categories revealed
overrepresentation of genes involved in the immune response, apoptosis and cell
proliferation. Transcriptional regulation by C/EBPß was found in 6 of 11 (BCL2A1,
G0S2, TRIB1, S100A9, DDX21 and DDIT4) genes investigated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. We demonstrated that BCL2A1, G0S2 and DDX21 play a crucial
role in survival and proliferation of ALK+ ALCL cells. DDX21, a gene involved in 
rRNA biogenesis, was found differentially overexpressed in primary ALK+ ALCL
cases. All three candidate genes were validated in primary ALCL cases by either
immunohistochemistry or RT-qPCR. In conclusion, we identified and validated
several key C/EBPß-regulated genes with major impact on survival and cell growth 
in ALK+ ALCL, supporting the central role of C/EBPß in ALK-mediated oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3669320
PMID: 23741337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2013 Jun;6(6):473-80. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(13)60077-2.

Identification of target genes of transcription factor CEBPB in acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells induced by all-trans retinoic acid.

Yu L(1), Zhang YD, Zhou J, Yao DM, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatic Surgery, National Hepatobiliary and Enteric Surgery
Research Center, Ministry of Health, Central South University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify target genes of transcription factor CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein ß (CEBPB) in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells induced 
by all-trans retinoic acid.
METHODS: A new strategy for high-throughput identification of direct target genes
was established by combining chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with in vitro
selection. Then, 106 potential CEBPB binding fragments from the genome of the
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)-treated NB4 cells were identified.
RESULTS: Of them, 82 were mapped in proximity to known or previously predicted
genes; 7 were randomly picked up for further confirmation by ChIP-PCR and 3 genes
(GALM, ITPR2 and ORM2) were found to be specifically up-regulated in the
ATRA-treated NB4 cells, indicating that they might be the down-stream target
genes of ATRA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided new insight into the mechanisms of ATRA-induced
granulocytic differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Hainan Medical College. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23711709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Steroids. 2013 Sep;78(9):920-6. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2013.05.001. Epub 2013
May 23.

Androgens inhibit adipogenesis during human adipose stem cell commitment to
preadipocyte formation.

Chazenbalk G(1), Singh P, Irge D, Shah A, Abbott DH, Dumesic DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States. gchazenbalk@mednet.ucla.edu

Androgens play a pivotal role in the regulation of body fat distribution.
Adipogenesis is a process whereby multipotent adipose stem cells (ASCs) initially
become preadipocytes (ASC commitment to preadipocytes) before differentiating
into adipocytes. Androgens inhibit human (h) subcutaneous (SC) abdominal
preadipocyte differentiation in both sexes, but their effects on hASC commitment 
to preadipocyte formation is unknown. We therefore examined whether androgen
exposure to human (h) ASCs, isolated from SC abdominal adipose of nonobese women,
impairs their commitment to preadipocyte formation and/or subsequent
differentiation into adipocytes. For this, isolated hASCs from SC abdominal
lipoaspirate were cultured in adipogenesis-inducing medium for 0.5-14days in the 
presence of testosterone (T, 0-100nM) or dihydrotestosterone (DHT, 0-50nM).
Adipogenesis was determined by immunofluorescence microscopy and by
quantification of adipogenically relevant transcriptional factors, PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa 
and C/EBPß. We found that a 3-day exposure of hASCs to T (50nM) or DHT (5nM) in
adipogenesis-inducing medium impaired lipid acquisition and decreased PPAR<U+03B3>,
C/EBPa and C/EBPß gene expression. The inhibitory effects of T and DHT at this
early-stage of adipocyte differentiation, were partially and completely reversed 
by flutamide (F, 100nM), respectively. The effect of androgens on hASC commitment
to a preadipocyte phenotype was examined via activation of Bone Morphogenic
Protein 4 (BMP4) signaling. T (50nM) and DHT (5nM) significantly inhibited the
stimulatory effect of BMP4-induced ASC commitment to the preadipocyte phenotype, 
as regards PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa gene expression. Our findings indicate that
androgens, in part through androgen receptor action, impair BMP4-induced
commitment of SC hASCs to preadipocytes and also reduce early-stage adipocyte
differentiation, perhaps limiting adipocyte numbers and fat storage in SC
abdominal adipose.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951890
PMID: 23707571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 Oct;57(10):1729-40. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201300020. Epub
2013 May 16.

4-Hydroxyderricin and xanthoangelol from Ashitaba (Angelica keiskei) suppress
differentiation of preadiopocytes to adipocytes via AMPK and MAPK pathways.

Zhang T(1), Sawada K, Yamamoto N, Ashida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agrobioscience, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe
University, Kobe, Japan.

SCOPE: Adipocytes differentiation is deeply involved in the onset of obesity.
4-Hydroxyderricin (4HD) and xanthoangelol (XAG) are the chalcones that are
derived from Ashitaba (Angelica keiskei). In this study, we demonstrated the
inhibitory effects of these chalcones on adipocytes differentiation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 4HD and XAG suppressed intracellular lipid accumulation by
Oil red O staining at 5 µM without cytotoxicity. They inhibited adipocytes
differentiation accompanied by down-expression of adipocyte-specific
transcription factors, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-ß (C/EBP-ß), C/EBP-a, and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-<U+03B3>) using RT-PCR and
Western blotting analysis. To obtain insights into the underlying mechanism, the 
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways was investigated. These two chalcones promoted phosphorylation of
AMPK and acetyl CoA carboxylase during differentiation of 3T3-L1 adipocytes
accompanied by a decrease in glycerol-3-phosphate acyl transferase-1 and an
increase in carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 mRNA expression. These chalcones
also promoted phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases and Jun
aminoterminal kinases, but not p38. Moreover, the inhibitors for AMPK and
extracellular signal-regulated kinases abolished the chalcones-caused
down-expression of C/EBP-ß, C/EBP-a, and PPAR-<U+03B3>. Treatment with Jun aminoterminal
kinases inhibitor abolished the down-expression of C/EBP-a and PPAR-<U+03B3>, but not
C/EBP-ß.
CONCLUSION: 4HD and XAG inhibit adipocytes differentiation through AMPK and
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, resulting in the down-expression of
adipocyte-specific transcription factors.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23681764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Proteome Res. 2013 Jun 7;12(6):2732-41. doi: 10.1021/pr400085n. Epub 2013 May
15.

A combination of transcriptomics and metabolomics uncovers enhanced bile acid
biosynthesis in HepG2 cells expressing CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß),
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR).

Blazquez M(1), Carretero A, Ellis JK, Athersuch TJ, Cavill R, Ebbels TM, Keun HC,
Castell JV, Lahoz A, Bort R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, CIBERehd, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia 46009, Spain.

The development of hepatoma-based in vitro models to study hepatocyte physiology 
is an invaluable tool for both industry and academia. Here, we develop an in
vitro model based on the HepG2 cell line that produces chenodeoxycholic acid, the
main bile acid in humans, in amounts comparable to human hepatocytes. A
combination of adenoviral transfections for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
(C/EBPß), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), and constitutive androstane
receptor (CAR) decreased intracellular glutamate, succinate, leucine, and valine 
levels in HepG2 cells, suggestive of a switch to catabolism to increase lipogenic
acetyl CoA and increased anaplerosis to replenish the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Transcripts of key genes involved in bile acid synthesis were significantly
induced by approximately 160-fold. Consistently, chenodeoxycholic acid production
rate was increased by more than 20-fold. Comparison between mRNA and bile acid
levels suggest that 12-alpha hydroxylation of 7-alpha-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one
is the limiting step in cholic acid synthesis in HepG2 cells. These data reveal
that introduction of three hepatocyte-related transcription factors enhance
anabolic reactions in HepG2 cells and provide a suitable model to study bile acid
biosynthesis under pathophysiological conditions.

PMID: 23641669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061706. Print 2013.

Mapping of MN1 sequences necessary for myeloid transformation.

Kandilci A(1), Surtel J, Janke L, Neale G, Terranova S, Grosveld GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States of America.

The MN1 oncogene is deregulated in human acute myeloid leukemia and its
overexpression induces proliferation and represses myeloid differentiation of
primitive human and mouse hematopoietic cells, leading to myeloid leukemia in
mouse models. To delineate the sequences within MN1 necessary for MN1-induced
leukemia, we tested the transforming capacity of in-frame deletion mutants, using
retroviral transduction of mouse bone marrow. We found that integrity of the
regions between amino acids 12 to 458 and 1119 to 1273 are required for MN1's in 
vivo transforming activity, generating myeloid leukemia with some mutants also
producing T-cell lympho-leukemia and megakaryocytic leukemia. Although both full 
length MN1 and a mutant that lacks the residues between 12-228 (<U+0394>12-228 mutant)
repressed myeloid differentiation and increased myeloproliferative activity in
vitro, the mutant lost its transforming activity in vivo. Both MN1 and <U+0394>12-228
increased the frequency of common myeloid progentiors (CMP) in vitro and
microarray comparisons of purified MN1-CMP and <U+0394>12-228-CMP cells showed many
differentially expressed genes including Hoxa9, Meis1, Myb, Runx2, Cebpa, Cebpb
and Cebpd. This collection of immediate MN1-responsive candidate genes
distinguishes the leukemic activity from the in vitro myeloproliferative capacity
of this oncoprotein.

PMCID: PMC3634013
PMID: 23626719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 1;190(11):5649-58. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203094. Epub 2013
Apr 26.

Mammalian target of rapamycin regulates IL-10 and resistance to Pseudomonas
aeruginosa corneal infection.

Foldenauer ME(1), McClellan SA, Berger EA, Hazlett LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

IL-10 is important in the resistance response of BALB/c mice to experimental
Pseudomonas aeruginosa corneal infection. However, the cellular mechanisms by
which this anti-inflammatory cytokine is regulated remain unknown. Because the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) regulates IL-10 in other disease models, the
present study tested its role in bacterial keratitis. After infection, corneas of
rapamycin versus control-treated BALB/c mice showed worsened disease, and
real-time RT-PCR confirmed that mTOR mRNA levels were significantly decreased.
Rapamycin treatment also increased clinical score, polymorphonuclear neutrophil
(PMN) infiltration (determined by myeloperoxidase assay), and bacterial load, but
it diminished PMN bactericidal activity. Inhibition of mTOR also led to elevated 
mRNA and protein levels of IL-12p40, matrix metalloproteinase 9, and inducible NO
synthase, whereas mRNA and protein levels of IL-10, its regulator/effector
STAT-3, and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (a proinflammatory cytokine
regulator) were decreased. Furthermore, mTOR inhibition reduced levels of
proapoptotic caspase-3 and increased levels of B cell lymphoma-2 (antiapoptotic),
indicative of delayed apoptosis. mTOR inhibition also altered genes related to
TLR signaling, including elevation of TLR4, TLR5, and IL-1R1, with decreases in
IL-1R-associated kinase 1 and an inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B, NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor-like 1.
Rapamycin treatment also increased levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein, ß, a gene that regulates expression of preprotachykinin-A (the precursor
of substance P). Collectively, these data, as well as a rescue experiment using
rIL-10 together with rapamycin, which decreased PMN in cornea, provide concrete
evidence that mTOR regulates IL-10 in P. aeruginosa-induced bacterial keratitis
and is critical to balancing pro- and anti-inflammatory events, resulting in
better disease outcome.

PMCID: PMC3660542
PMID: 23626014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 4;51(1):91-8. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0029. Print 2013.

Stable conditional expression and effect of C/ebpß-LIP in adipocytes using the
pSLIK system.

Esteves CL(1), Kelly V, Bégay V, Lillico SG, Leutz A, Seckl JR, Chapman KE.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Queen's Medical Research Institute, University/BHF Centre 
for Cardiovascular Science, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
cristina.esteves@ed.ac.uk

Murine 3T3-L1 adipocytes are widely used as a cellular model of obesity. However,
whereas transfection of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes is straightforward, ectopic gene
expression in mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes has proved challenging. Here, we used the 
pSLIK vector system to generate stable doxycycline-inducible expression of the
liver-enriched inhibitor protein isoform of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß
(C/ebpß (Cebpb)) (C/EBPß-LIP) in fully differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Because 
overexpression of C/ebpß-LIP impairs adipocyte differentiation, the C/ebpß-LIP
construct was first integrated in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes but expression was induced
only when adipocytes were fully differentiated. Increased C/EBPß-LIP in mature
adipocytes down-regulated C/ebpß target genes including 11ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and fatty acid binding
protein 4 but had no effect on asparagine synthetase, demonstrating that
transcriptional down-regulation by C/ebpß-LIP in 3T3-L1 adipocytes is not a
general effect. Importantly, these genes were modulated in a similar manner in
adipose tissue of mice with genetically increased C/ebpß-LIP levels. The use of
the pSLIK system to conditionally express transgenes in 3T3-L1 cells could be a
valuable tool to dissect adipocyte physiology.

PMCID: PMC3672996
PMID: 23620165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jul 1;126(Pt 13):2890-902. doi: 10.1242/jcs.124305. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

Sox9 modulates cell survival and adipogenic differentiation of multipotent adult 
rat mesenchymal stem cells.

Stöckl S(1), Bauer RJ, Bosserhoff AK, Göttl C, Grifka J, Grässel S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Biotechnology, BioPark I, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

Sox9 is a key transcription factor in early chondrogenesis with distinct roles in
differentiation processes and during embryonic development. Here, we report that 
Sox9 modulates cell survival and contributes to the commitment of mesenchymal
stem cells (MSC) to adipogenic or osteogenic differentiation lineages. We found
that the Sox9 activity level affects the expression of the key transcription
factor in adipogenic differentiation, C/EBPß, and that cyclin D1 mediates the
expression of the osteogenic marker osteocalcin in undifferentiated adult
bone-marrow-derived rat MSC. Introducing a stable Sox9 knockdown into
undifferentiated rat MSC resulted in a marked decrease in proliferation rate and 
an increase in apoptotic activity. This was linked to a profound upregulation of 
p21 and cyclin D1 gene and protein expression accompanied by an induction of
caspase 3/7 activity and an inhibition of Bcl-2. We observed that Sox9 silencing 
provoked a delayed S-phase progression and an increased nuclear localization of
p21. The protein stability of cyclin D1 was induced in the absence of Sox9
presumably as a function of altered p38 signalling. In addition, the major
transcription factor for adipogenic differentiation, C/EBPß, was repressed after 
silencing Sox9. The nearly complete absence of C/EBPß protein as a result of
increased destabilization of the C/EBPß mRNA and the impact on osteocalcin gene
expression and protein synthesis, suggests that a delicate balance of Sox9 level 
is not only imperative for proper chondrogenic differentiation of progenitor
cells, but also affects the adipogenic and probably osteogenic differentiation
pathways of MSC. Our results identified Sox9 as an important link between
differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis in undifferentiated adult rat
mesenchymal stem cells, emphasizing the importance of the delicate balance of a
precisely regulated Sox9 activity in MSC not only for proper skeletal development
during embryogenesis but probably also for successful repair and regeneration of 
tissues and organs in adults.

PMID: 23606745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Dec;21(12):E616-25. doi: 10.1002/oby.20479. Epub
2013 Jul 5.

Histone demethylase KDM1A represses inflammatory gene expression in
preadipocytes.

Hanzu FA(1), Musri MM, Sánchez-Herrero A, Claret M, Esteban Y, Kaliman P, Gomis
R, Párrizas M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory, IDIBAPS, CIBERDEM, Barcelona, Spain;
Endocrinology and Nutrition Unit, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Persistent inflammation and impaired adipogenesis are frequent
features of obesity and underlie the development of its complications. However,
the factors behind adipose tissue dysfunction are not completely understood.
Previously it was shown that histone demethylase KDM1A is required for
adipogenesis.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Kdm1a expression was knocked down in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes by 
siRNA transfection and whole-genome expression profiling was performed by
microarray hybridization. The role of NF-<U+03BA>ß and C/EBPß was analyzed by incubation
with the inhibitor parthenolide and by cebpb knockdown, respectively.
RESULTS: Knockdown of kdm1a or rcor2 in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes results in impaired 
differentiation and induction of inflammatory gene expression. Enhanced
expression of il6 in kdm1a knocked down preadipocytes is associated with
increased recruitment of C/EBPß and the NF-<U+03BA>ß subunit RelA to the il6 promoter.
Cebpb knockdown attenuates the induction of il6 expression in kdm1a knocked down 
cells, whereas simultaneous cebpb knockdown and NF-<U+03BA>ß inhibition abrogates it.
Dietary-induced and genetic mouse models of obesity display decreased KDM1A in
adipose tissue, and this correlates with increased expression of proinflammatory 
genes and C/EBPß.
CONCLUSION: KDM1A represses the expression of inflammatory genes in
preadipocytes. Dysregulated kdm1a expression in preadipocytes may thus
participate in the development of obesity-associated inflammation.

Copyright © 2013 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 23595969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Br J Haematol. 2013 Jun;161(6):821-31. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12333. Epub 2013 Apr 18.

Immature dendritic cells in multiple myeloma are prone to osteoclast-like
differentiation through interleukin-17A stimulation.

Tucci M(1), Stucci S, Savonarola A, Ciavarella S, Cafforio P, Dammacco F,
Silvestris F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Clinical Oncology, University of Bari
Aldo Moro, Piazza Giulio Cesare, Bari, Italy. marco.tucci@uniba.it

Interleukin 17A (IL17A), a cytokine involved in allergy, inflammation and
osteoclastogenesis, was investigated in multiple myeloma (MM) to assess its role 
in the osteoclast (OC)-like activity of marrow immature dendritic cells (iDCs).
Comparing nine MM patients with control subjects affected by monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance, we found high IL17A expression in the
marrow plasma of MM patients in parallel with its deposits within the stromal
matrix. Increased expression of the IL17A receptor (IL17RA) was also found in
primary myeloma iDCs, which underwent OC-like transdifferentiation after IL17A
stimulation. To assess the role of IL17A, we measured the activity of the
IL17/IL17RA pathway in IL17A-transdifferentiated iDCs and the expression of
functional OC genes by Western blotting and real-time polymerase chain reaction. 
These cells showed increased RNA transcription of genes enrolled in the
maturation of OCs, while NFATC1 and FOS were induced by IL17A, independently of
NFKB1 phosphorylation. Moreover, the concurrent phosphorylation of the Lip
isoform of CEBPB and the down-regulation of MAFB supported the activation of
IL17RA pathway in OC-like transdifferentiated iDCs that was apparently unrelated 
to TNFRSF11A signalling. These data emphasize the involvement of iDCs in MM
hyperactive osteoclastogenesis and suggest that their bone resorption activity is
also regulated, at least in vitro, by IL17RA.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23594390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genome Res. 2013 Jun;23(6):988-97. doi: 10.1101/gr.146654.112. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

CG methylated microarrays identify a novel methylated sequence bound by the
CEBPB|ATF4 heterodimer that is active in vivo.

Mann IK(1), Chatterjee R, Zhao J, He X, Weirauch MT, Hughes TR, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

To evaluate the effect of CG methylation on DNA binding of sequence-specific
B-ZIP transcription factors (TFs) in a high-throughput manner, we enzymatically
methylated the cytosine in the CG dinucleotide on protein binding microarrays.
Two Agilent DNA array designs were used. One contained 40,000 features using de
Bruijn sequences where each 8-mer occurs 32 times in various positions in the DNA
sequence. The second contained 180,000 features with each CG containing 8-mer
occurring three times. The first design was better for identification of binding 
motifs, while the second was better for quantification. Using this novel
technology, we show that CG methylation enhanced binding for CEBPA and CEBPB and 
inhibited binding for CREB, ATF4, JUN, JUND, CEBPD, and CEBPG. The CEBPB|ATF4
heterodimer bound a novel motif CGAT|GCAA 10-fold better when methylated. The
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) confirmed these results. CEBPB
ChIP-seq data using primary female mouse dermal fibroblasts with 50× methylome
coverage for each strand indicate that the methylated sequences well-bound on the
arrays are also bound in vivo. CEBPB bound 39% of the methylated canonical
10-mers ATTGC|GCAAT in the mouse genome. After ATF4 protein induction by
thapsigargin which results in ER stress, CEBPB binds methylated CGAT|GCAA in
vivo, recapitulating what was observed on the arrays. This methodology can be
used to identify new methylated DNA sequences preferentially bound by TFs, which 
may be functional in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3668366
PMID: 23590861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Aug;49(2):306-15. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0283OC.

LPS-treated macrophage cytokines repress surfactant protein-B in lung epithelial 
cells.

Bein K(1), Di Giuseppe M, Mischler SE, Ortiz LA, Leikauf GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130, USA. kbein@pitt.edu

In the mouse lung, Escherichia coli LPS can decrease surfactant protein-B (SFTPB)
mRNA and protein concentrations. LPS also regulates the expression, synthesis,
and concentrations of a variety of gene and metabolic products that inhibit SFTPB
gene expression. The purpose of the present study was to determine whether LPS
acts directly or indirectly on pulmonary epithelial cells to trigger signaling
pathways that inhibit SFTPB expression, and whether the transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-ß (CEBPB) is a downstream inhibitory
effector. To investigate the mechanism of SFTPB repression, the human pulmonary
epithelial cell lines NCI-H441 (H441) and NCI-H820 (H820) and the mouse
macrophage-like cell line RAW264.7 were treated with LPS. Whereas LPS did not
decrease SFTPB transcripts in H441 or H820 cells, the conditioned medium of
LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells decreased SFTPB transcripts in H441 and H820 cells,
and inhibited SFTPB promoter activity in H441 cells. In the presence of
neutralizing anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antibodies, the conditioned medium 
of LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells did not inhibit SFTPB promoter activity. In H441
cells treated with recombinant TNF protein, SFTPB transcripts decreased, whereas 
CEBPB transcripts increased and the transient coexpression of CEBPB decreased
SFTPB promoter activity. Further, CEBPB short, interfering RNA increased basal
SFTPB transcripts and countered the decrease of SFTPB transcripts by TNF.
Together, these findings suggest that macrophages participate in the repression
of SFTPB expression by LPS, and that macrophage-released cytokines (including
TNF) regulate the transcription factor CEBPB, which can function as a downstream 
transcriptional repressor of SFTPB gene expression in pulmonary epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3824031
PMID: 23590297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060211. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Phosphorylated C/EBPß influences a complex network involving YY1 and USF2 in lung
epithelial cells.

Viart V(1), Varilh J, Lopez E, René C, Claustres M, Taulan-Cadars M.

Author information: 
(1)UFR de Médecine, Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France ; INSERM U827,
Laboratoire de Génétique de Maladies Rares, Montpellier, France.

The promoter of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene CFTR
is tightly controlled by regulators including CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins
(C/EBPs). We previously reported that the transcription factors YY1 and USF2
affect CFTR expression. We can now demonstrate that C/EBPß, a member of the CCAAT
family, binds to the CFTR promoter and contributes to its transcriptional
activity. Our data reveal that C/EBPß cooperates with USF2 and acts
antagonistically to YY1 in the control of CFTR expression. Interestingly, YY1, a 
strong repressor, fails to repress the CFTR activation induced by USF2 through
DNA binding competition. Collectively, the data strongly suggest a model by which
USF2 functionally interacts with YY1 blocking its inhibitory activity, in favour 
of C/EBPß transactivation. Further investigation into the interactions between
these three proteins revealed that phosphorylation of C/EBPß influences the DNA
occupancy of YY1 and favours the interaction between USF2 and YY1. This
phosphorylation process has several implications in the CFTR transcriptional
process, thus evoking an additional layer of complexity to the mechanisms
influencing CFTR gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3613372
PMID: 23560079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;45(7):1281-92. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.03.014. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

ß-Arrestin signal complex plays a critical role in adipose differentiation.

Santos-Zas I(1), Lodeiro M, Gurriarán-Rodríguez U, Bouzo-Lorenzo M, Mosteiro CS, 
Casanueva FF, Casabiell X, Pazos Y, Camiña JP.

Author information: 
(1)Área de Endocrinología Molecular y Celular, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria de Santiago, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Servicio 
Gallego de Salud, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

ß-Arrestins were identified as scaffold-proteins that have the capacity to
desensitize G protein-coupled receptors. However, it has been found that
ß-arrestins activate signaling pathways independent of G protein activation. The 
diversity of these signaling pathways has also been recognized for receptor
tyrosine kinase. The aim of the present study was to validate the
ß-arrestin-dependent signaling mechanism(s) responsible for regulation of
adipogenesis. Two signal models were selected, ghrelin and insulin, based on its 
ß-arrestin-associated Akt activity. Herein, we found that ß-arrestin 1 and 2 were
essential molecules for adipocyte differentiation. More specifically, the role of
these scaffolding proteins was demonstrated by depletion of ß-arrestin 1 and 2
during ghrelin-induced adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells, which decreased the
adipocyte differentiation and the expression levels of master regulators of
early, the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) and the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d (C/EBPd), and terminal, the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR<U+03B3>) and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a 
(C/EBPa), adipogenesis. Accordingly ghrelin-induced Akt activity and its
downstream targets, the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and the 
ribosomal protein S6 kinase beta-1 (S6K1), were inhibited by ß-arrestin 1 and 2
siRNAs. By contrast, assays performed during insulin-activated adipogenesis
showed an intensifying effect on the adipocyte differentiation as well as on the 
expression of C/EBPß, C/EBPd, PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa. The increase in insulin-induced
adipogenesis by ß-arrestin knock-down was concomitant to a decrease in the
insulin receptor susbtrate-1 (IRS-1) serine phosphorylation, proving the loss of 
the negative feedback loop on IRS-1/phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt.
Therefore, ß-arrestins control the extent and intensity of the lipogenic and
adipogenic factors associated to Akt signaling, although the mechanistic and
functional principles that underlie the connection between signaling and
ß-arrestins are specifically associated to each receptor type.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23557604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Blood. 2013 May 16;121(20):4142-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-368654. Epub 2013 
Apr 1.

The shortest isoform of C/EBPß, liver inhibitory protein (LIP), collaborates with
Evi1 to induce AML in a mouse BMT model.

Watanabe-Okochi N(1), Yoshimi A, Sato T, Ikeda T, Kumano K, Taoka K, Satoh Y,
Shinohara A, Tsuruta T, Masuda A, Yokota H, Yatomi Y, Takahashi K, Kitaura J,
Kitamura T, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Universityof
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) is one of the master regulators in the 
development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome. High
expression of Evi1 is found in 10% of patients with AML and indicates a poor
outcome. Several recent studies have indicated that Evi1 requires collaborative
factors to induce AML. Therefore, the search for candidate factors that
collaborate with Evi1 in leukemogenesis is one of the key issues in uncovering
the mechanism of Evi1-related leukemia. Previously, we succeeded in making a
mouse model of Evi1-related leukemia using a bone marrow transplantation (BMT)
system. In the Evi1-induced leukemic cells, we identified frequent retroviral
integrations near the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) gene and
overexpression of its protein. These findings imply that C/EBPß is a candidate
gene that collaborates with Evi1 in leukemogenesis. Cotransduction of Evi1 and
the shortest isoform of C/EBPß, liver inhibitory protein (LIP), induced AML with 
short latencies in a mouse BMT model. Overexpression of LIP alone also induced
AML with longer latencies. However, excision of all 3 isoforms of C/EBPß
(LAP*/LAP/LIP) did not inhibit the development of Evi1-induced leukemia.
Therefore, isoform-specific intervention that targets LIP is required when we
consider C/EBPß as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 23547050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Theriogenology. 2013 May;79(8):1196-203. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.02.018. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Progesterone regulation of Na/K-ATPase ß1 subunit expression in the mouse uterus 
during the peri-implantation period.

Deng WB(1), Tian Z, Liang XH, Wang BC, Yang F, Yang ZM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Department of
Biology, Shantou University, Shantou, China.

Luminal closure and embryo apposition are essential for blastocyst attachment
during early pregnancy. In our preliminary microarray results (unpublished data),
sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase (Na/K-ATPase) ß1 (Atp1b1) was highly
expressed in mouse uterus on Days 3 and 4 of pregnancy. However, expression and
regulation of Atp1b1 in the mammalian uterus during early pregnancy are unknown. 
Using in situ hybridization, a strong level of Atp1b1 mRNA was detected in
luminal epithelial cells on Days 3 and 4 of pregnancy (Day 1 = day of vaginal
plug). The expression pattern of FXYD domain-containing ion transport regulator 4
(Fxyd4) was similar to that of Atp1b1. Real-time reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction confirmed the high expression level of Atp1b1 mRNA. Compared with 
Day 1, the mRNA level of Atp1b1 on Days 3 and 4 increased by 3.5 ± 0.5 and 4.5 ± 
0.5 fold, respectively. When the embryo invaded through epithelial cells into the
maternal stromal compartment on day 5, Atp1b1 expression decreased to a basal
level. Progesterone stimulated Atp1b1 expression by 2.8 ± 1 fold compared with
oil in ovariectomized mice at 24 hours after treatment. Expression of Atp1b1 was 
further upregulated to 4 ± 0.4 fold by estrogen and progesterone. Based on
time-course study, progesterone rapidly induced Atp1b1 expression at 6 and 12
hours (13.7 ± 0.5 and 16.6 ± 1.4, respectively); furthermore, this upregulation
was blocked by RU486 (progesterone receptor antagonist). Transcription activity
of the Atp1b1 promoter was (Day 1 = day of vaginal plug) stimulated by
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (Cebpb). In conclusion, Atp1b1 was
highly expressed in luminal epithelium during peri-implantation and upregulated
by progesterone.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23534996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 May;27(5):769-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1332. Epub 2013 Mar
22.

THRAP3 interacts with HELZ2 and plays a novel role in adipocyte differentiation.

Katano-Toki A(1), Satoh T, Tomaru T, Yoshino S, Ishizuka T, Ishii S, Ozawa A,
Shibusawa N, Tsuchiya T, Saito T, Shimizu H, Hashimoto K, Okada S, Yamada M, Mori
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan.

Using yeast two-hybrid screen, we previously isolated HELZ2 (helicase with zinc
finger 2, transcriptional coactivator) that functions as a coregulator of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). To further delineate its
molecular function, we here identified thyroid hormone receptor-associated
protein3 (THRAP3), a putative component of the Mediator complex, as a protein
stably associating with HELZ2 using immunoprecipitation coupled with mass
spectrometry analyses. In immunoprecipitation assays, Thrap3 could associate with
endogenous Helz2 as well as Pparg in differentiated 3T3-L1 cells. HELZ2 interacts
with the serine/arginine-rich domain and Bcl2 associated transcription
factor1-homologous region in THRAP3, whereas THRAP3 directly binds 2 helicase
motifs in HELZ2. HELZ2 and THRAP3 synergistically augment transcriptional
activation mediated by PPAR<U+03B3>, whereas knockdown of endogenous THRAP3 abolished
the enhancement by HELZ2 in reporter assays. Thrap3, similar to Helz2, is evenly 
expressed in the process of adipogenic differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Knockdown
of Thrap3 in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes using short-interfering RNA did not influence
the expression of Krox20, Klf5, Cebpb, or Cebpd during early stages of adipocyte 
differentiation, but significantly attenuated the expression of Pparg, Cebpa, and
Fabp4/aP2 and accumulation of lipid droplets. Pharmacologic activation of Pparg
by troglitazone could not fully restore the differentiation of Thrap3-knockdown
adipocytes. In chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, endogenous Helz2 and Thrap3 
could be co-recruited, in a ligand-dependent manner, to the PPAR<U+03B3>-response
elements in Fabp4/aP2 and Adipoq gene enhancers in differentiated 3T3-L1 cells.
These findings collectively suggest that Thrap3 could play indispensable roles in
terminal differentiation of adipocytes by enhancing PPAR<U+03B3>-mediated gene
activation cooperatively with Helz2.

PMID: 23525231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Med. 2013 Apr;19(4):473-80. doi: 10.1038/nm.3117. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

Loss of sorting nexin 27 contributes to excitatory synaptic dysfunction by
modulating glutamate receptor recycling in Down's syndrome.

Wang X(1), Zhao Y, Zhang X, Badie H, Zhou Y, Mu Y, Loo LS, Cai L, Thompson RC,
Yang B, Chen Y, Johnson PF, Wu C, Bu G, Mobley WC, Zhang D, Gage FH, Ranscht B,
Zhang YW, Lipton SA, Hong W, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell Research, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2013 Apr;19(4):404-6.

Sorting nexin 27 (SNX27), a brain-enriched PDZ domain protein, regulates
endocytic sorting and trafficking. Here we show that Snx27(-/-) mice have severe 
neuronal deficits in the hippocampus and cortex. Although Snx27(+/-) mice have
grossly normal neuroanatomy, we found defects in synaptic function, learning and 
memory and a reduction in the amounts of ionotropic glutamate receptors (NMDA and
AMPA receptors) in these mice. SNX27 interacts with these receptors through its
PDZ domain, regulating their recycling to the plasma membrane. We demonstrate a
concomitant reduced expression of SNX27 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß
(C/EBPß) in Down's syndrome brains and identify C/EBPß as a transcription factor 
for SNX27. Down's syndrome causes overexpression of miR-155, a chromosome
21-encoded microRNA that negatively regulates C/EBPß, thereby reducing SNX27
expression and resulting in synaptic dysfunction. Upregulating SNX27 in the
hippocampus of Down's syndrome mice rescues synaptic and cognitive deficits. Our 
identification of the role of SNX27 in synaptic function establishes a new
molecular mechanism of Down's syndrome pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3911880
PMID: 23524343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 May;40(5):3731-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2449-3. Epub 2013
Mar 1.

Microarray gene expression profiling analysis combined with bioinformatics in
multiple sclerosis.

Liu M(1), Hou X, Zhang P, Hao Y, Yang Y, Wu X, Zhu D, Guan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Changhai Hospital, 168 Changhai Road, Shanghai
200433, China.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most prevalent demyelinating disease and the
principal cause of neurological disability in young adults. Recent microarray
gene expression profiling studies have identified several genetic variants
contributing to the complex pathogenesis of MS, however, expressional and
functional studies are still required to further understand its molecular
mechanism. The present study aimed to analyze the molecular mechanism of MS using
microarray analysis combined with bioinformatics techniques. We downloaded the
gene expression profile of MS from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and analysed the
microarray data using the differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and links
package in R and Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery.
The regulatory impact factor (RIF) algorithm was used to measure the impact
factor of transcription factor. A total of 1,297 DCGs between MS patients and
healthy controls were identified. Functional annotation indicated that these DCGs
were associated with immune and neurological functions. Furthermore, the RIF
result suggested that IKZF1, BACH1, CEBPB, EGR1, FOS may play central regulatory 
roles in controlling gene expression in the pathogenesis of MS. Our findings
confirm the presence of multiple molecular alterations in MS and indicate the
possibility for identifying prognostic factors associated with MS pathogenesis.

PMID: 23456643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;16(2):179-82.

[Expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta in human gastric carcinoma and
its clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Du YX(1), Zhang LH, Wang XH, Xing XF, Cheng XJ, Du H, Hu Y, Li YA, Zhu YB, Jia
YN, Lin Y, Ji JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Cancer Surgery, Peking Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Peking University Cancer Hospital, Beijing 100142, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta
(CEBPB) in gastric carcinoma tissues and its association with clinicopathological
features and prognosis.
METHODS: CEBPB protein expression level was detected by immunohistochemistry
method in resected gastric carcinomas and adjacent gastric mucosa tissues (n=81),
and its association with clinicopathological features and prognosis was analyzed.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemical staining of CEBPB was predominantly in the
nucleus with some cytoplasmic staining. As a result, 16% (13/81) of the gastric
carcinomas were stained positively, whereas there was hardly positive expression 
in adjacent gastric mucosa tissues. There was a significant association between
the expression of CEBPB and distant metastasis on univariate analysis (P<0.05).
The median survival time in patients with positive CEBPB expression was
significantly lower than those with negative CEBPB expression (19.4 months vs.
45.2 months, P=0.024). Multivariable analysis showed that CEBPB was independently
associated with prognosis (HR=2.544, 95%CI:1.154-5.610, P=0.021).
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of CEBPB suggests poor prognosis in patients with
gastric cancer.

PMID: 23446483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;977:159-67. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-284-1_12.

Electrophoretic mobility-shift and super-shift assays for studies and
characterization of protein-DNA complexes.

Parés-Matos EI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez, Mayagüez, PR, 
USA.

Gene expression is in part regulated by transcription factors that bind specific 
sequence motifs in genomic DNA. Transcription factors cooperate with the basal
machinery to upregulate or downregulate transcription. Experimental data have
revealed the importance of interactions among members of distinct families of
transcription factors to form complexes that regulate gene expression. Thus, a
full characterization of protein-DNA complexes is essential to understanding of
gene regulation in a more complex cellular environment. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay (EMSA) is a powerful technique to resolve nucleic acid-protein
complexes formed with transcription factors in nuclear extracts. Herein is
described how EMSA and super-shift assays were used to characterize several
complexes produced from binding of transcription factors to a regulatory DNA
sequence upstream from the promoter region of the human NF-IL6 gene.

PMID: 23436360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Genome Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):592-603. doi: 10.1101/gr.146399.112. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Temporal mapping of CEBPA and CEBPB binding during liver regeneration reveals
dynamic occupancy and specific regulatory codes for homeostatic and cell cycle
gene batteries.

Jakobsen JS(1), Waage J, Rapin N, Bisgaard HC, Larsen FS, Porse BT.

Author information: 
(1)The Finsen Laboratory, Faculty of Health Sciences, Rigshospitalet, DK-2100
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Dynamic shifts in transcription factor binding are central to the regulation of
biological processes by allowing rapid changes in gene transcription. However,
very few genome-wide studies have examined how transcription factor occupancy is 
coordinated temporally in vivo in higher animals. Here, we quantified the
genome-wide binding patterns of two key hepatocyte transcription factors, CEBPA
and CEBPB (also known as C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta), at multiple time points
during the highly dynamic process of liver regeneration elicited by partial
hepatectomy in mouse. Combining these profiles with RNA polymerase II binding
data, we find three temporal classes of transcription factor binding to be
associated with distinct sets of regulated genes involved in the acute phase
response, metabolic/homeostatic functions, or cell cycle progression. Moreover,
we demonstrate a previously unrecognized early phase of homeostatic gene
expression prior to S-phase entry. By analyzing the three classes of CEBP bound
regions, we uncovered mutually exclusive sets of sequence motifs, suggesting
temporal codes of CEBP recruitment by differential cobinding with other factors. 
These findings were validated by sequential ChIP experiments involving a panel of
central transcription factors and/or by comparison to external ChIP-seq data. Our
quantitative investigation not only provides in vivo evidence for the involvement
of many new factors in liver regeneration but also points to similarities in the 
circuitries regulating self-renewal of differentiated cells. Taken together, our 
work emphasizes the power of global temporal analyses of transcription factor
occupancy to elucidate mechanisms regulating dynamic biological processes in
complex higher organisms.

PMCID: PMC3613577
PMID: 23403033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 May;377(1-2):97-106. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1574-1. Epub 
2013 Jan 30.

Docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid reduce C-reactive protein
expression and STAT3 activation in IL-6-treated HepG2 cells.

Wang TM(1), Hsieh SC, Chen JW, Chiang AN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

C-reactive protein (CRP), an acute phase protein in humans, is predominantly
produced by hepatocytes in response to interleukin-6 (IL-6). Several
epidemiological studies have reported that dietary intake of n-3 polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (n-3 PUFAs) is inversely associated with serum CRP concentration.
However, the molecular mechanism by which n-3 PUFAs reduce the serum CRP level in
HepG2 cells remains unclear. The aims of this study were to examine the effect of
the n-3 PUFAs, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), on
the modulation of IL-6-induced CRP expression and to explore its possible
mechanisms. We demonstrated that DHA and EPA inhibited IL-6-induced CRP protein
and mRNA expression, as well as reduced CRP promoter activity in HepG2 cells.
Knockdown of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) and CCAAT
box/Enhancer-Binding Protein ß (C/EBPß) by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
significantly decreased IL-6-induced CRP promoter activity. Gel electrophoresis
mobility shift assays (EMSA) showed that pretreatment with DHA and EPA decreased 
IL-6-induced STAT3 DNA binding activity but not C/EBPß. By western blot analysis,
DHA and EPA inhibited IL-6-induced STAT3 phosphorylation but not ERK1/2 or
C/EBPß. The suppression of the phosphorylation of STAT3 by DHA and EPA was
further verified by immunofluorescence staining. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that DHA and EPA are able to reduce IL-6-induced CRP expression in
HepG2 cells via an inhibition of STAT3 activation. This mechanism, which explains
the inhibitory effect of n-3 PUFAs on the CRP expression, provides new insights
into the beneficial anti-inflammatory effect of n-3 PUFAs.

PMID: 23361365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Feb 20;61(7):1493-500. doi: 10.1021/jf304015z. Epub 2013 
Feb 8.

Monascus-fermented yellow pigments monascin and ankaflavin showed antiobesity
effect via the suppression of differentiation and lipogenesis in obese rats fed a
high-fat diet.

Lee CL(1), Wen JY, Hsu YW, Pan TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taitung University, Taitung, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

Monascus-fermented monascin and ankaflavin are found to strongly inhibit
differentiation and lipogenesis and stimulate lipolysis effects in a 3T3-L1
preadipocyte model, but the in vivo regulation mechanism is unclear. This study
uses obese rats caused by a high-fat diet to examine the effects of daily
monascin and ankaflavin feeding (8 weeks) on antiobesity effects and modulation
of differentiation, lipogenesis, and lipid absorption. The results show that
monascin and ankaflavin had a significant antiobesity effect, which should result
from the modulation of monascin and ankaflavin on the inhibition of
differentiation by inhibiting CCAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) expression
(36.4% and 48.3%) and its downstream peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
(PPAR<U+03B3>) (55.6% and 64.5%) and CCAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa)
expressions (25.2% and 33.2%) and the inhibition of lipogenesis by increasing
lipase activity (14.0% and 10.7%) and decreasing heparin releasable lipoprotein
lipase (HR-LPL) activity (34.8% and 30.5%). Furthermore, monascin and ankaflavin 
are the first agents found to suppress Niemann-Pick C1 Like 1 (NPC1L1) protein
expression (73.6% and 26.1%) associated with small intestine tissue lipid
absorption. Importantly, monascin and ankaflavin are not like monacolin K, which 
increases creatine phosphokinase (CPK) activity, known as a rhabdomyolysis
indicator.

PMID: 23360447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Feb 27;12(1):494-505. doi: 10.4238/2013.January.4.21.

Adenovirus-mediated interference of FABP4 regulates mRNA expression of ADIPOQ,
LEP and LEPR in bovine adipocytes.

Wei S(1), Zan LS, Wang HB, Cheng G, Du M, Jiang Z, Hausman GJ, McFarland DC,
Dodson MV.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, P.R. China.

Fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) is an important adipocyte gene, with roles
in fatty acid transport and fat deposition in animals as well as human metabolic 
syndrome. However, little is known about the functional regulation of FABP4 at
the cellular level in bovine. We designed and selected an effective shRNA (small 
hairpin RNA) against bovine FABP4, constructed a corresponding adenovirus
(AD-FABP4), and then detected its influence on mRNA expression of four
differentiation-related genes (PPAR(y), CEBPA, CEBPB, and SREBF1) and three lipid
metabolism-related genes (ADIPOQ, LEP and LEPR) of adipocytes. The FABP4 mRNA
content, derived from bovine adipocytes, decreased by 41% (P < 0.01) after 24 h
and 66% (P < 0.01) after 72 h of AD-FABP4 infection. However, lower mRNA content 
of FABP4 did not significantly alter levels of differentiation-related gene
expression at 24 h following AD-FABP4 treatment of bovine-derived preadipocytes
(P = 0.54, 0.78, 0.89, and 0.94, respectively). Meanwhile, knocking down
(partially silencing) FABP4 significantly decreased ADIPOQ (P < 0.05) and LEP (P 
< 0.01) gene expression after 24 h of AD-FABP4 treatment, decreased ADIPOQ (P <
0.01) and LEP (P < 0.01) gene expression, but increased LEPR mRNA expression (P <
0.01) after a 72-h treatment of bovine preadipocytes. We conclude that FABP4
plays a role in fat deposition and metabolic syndrome by regulating lipid
metabolism-related genes (such as ADIPOQ, LEP and LEPR), without affecting the
ability of preadipocytes to differentiate into adipocytes.

PMID: 23315880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Differentiation. 2013 Jan;85(1-2):20-31. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2012.11.001. Epub
2013 Jan 11.

Role of C/EBPß-LAP and C/EBPß-LIP in early adipogenic differentiation of human
white adipose-derived progenitors and at later stages in immature adipocytes.

Lechner S(1), Mitterberger MC, Mattesich M, Zwerschke W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Metabolism and Differentiation Research, Institute for
Biomedical Aging Research of the University of Innsbruck, Rennweg 10, Innsbruck, 
Austria. stefanlechner1@gmx.at

We investigated the role of the major isoforms of CCAAT enhancer binding protein 
ß (C/EBPß), C/EBPß-LAP and C/EBPß-LIP, in adipogenesis of human white
adipose-derived stromal/progenitor cells (ASC). C/EBPß gene expression was
transiently induced early in adipogenesis. At later stages, in immature
adipocytes, the C/EBPß mRNA and protein levels declined. The C/EBPß-LIP protein
steady-state level decreased considerably stronger than the C/EBPß-LAP level and 
the C/EBPß-LIP half-life was significantly shorter than the C/EBPß-LAP half-life.
The turn-over of both C/EBPß-isoforms was regulated by
ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent degradation. These data suggest that the protein
stability of the C/EBPß-isoforms is differentially regulated in the course of
adipogenesis and in immature adipocytes. Constitutive overexpression of
C/EBPß-LIP had antiadipogenic activity in human ASC. C/EBPß-LAP, which promotes
adipogenesis in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes by directly activating expression of
the adipogenic keyregulator PPAR<U+03B3>2, induced the expression of PPAR<U+03B3>2 and of the
adipocyte differentiation gene product FABP4 in confluent ASC in the absence of
adipogenic hormones. At later stages after hormone cocktail-induced adipogenesis,
in immature adipocytes, constitutive overexpression of C/EBPß-LAP led to reduced 
expression of PPAR<U+03B3>2 and FABP4, C/EBPa expression was downregulated and the
expression of the adipocyte differentiation gene products adiponectin and leptin 
was impaired. These findings suggest that constitutive overexpression of
C/EBPß-LAP induces adipogenesis in human ASC and negatively regulates the
expression of adipogenic regulators and certain adipocyte differentiation gene
products in immature adipocytes. We conclude the regulation of both C/EBPß gene
expression and C/EBPß-LIP and C/EBPß-LAP protein turn-over plays an important
role for the expression of adipogenic regulators and/or adipocyte differentiation
genes in early adipogenic differentiation of human ASC and at later stages in
human immature adipocytes.

Copyright © 2012 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23314288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):192-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.136. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Acetyl-keto-ß-boswellic acid induces lipolysis in mature adipocytes.

Liu JJ(1), Toy WC, Liu S, Cheng A, Lim BK, Subramaniam T, Sum CF, Lim SC.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Unit, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, Singapore 768828, Republic of
Singapore. liu.jianjun@alexandrahealth.com.sg

Recently, it was reported that naturally occurring pentacyclic triterpenoids such
as ursolic acid have anti-adiposity property. We studied if
acetyl-keto-ß-boswellic acid (AKBA), an established anti-inflammation and
anti-cancer pentacyclic triterpenoid which has similar chemical structure to
ursolic acid, may modulate adipocyte phenotype. 3T3-L1 murine adipocytes and
human subcutaneous adipocytes were treated with AKBA in different concentrations 
in vitro. AKBA triggered significant lipolysis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes as shown by
reduced neutral lipids in cytosol and increased free fatty acids in culture
medium. Increased lipolysis by AKBA was accompanied by up-regulation of lipolytic
enzymes, adipocyte triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and hormone sensitive lipase (HSL),
and a decreased expression of lipid droplet stability regulator perilipin. In
addition, AKBA treatment reduced phenotypic markers of mature adipocyte aP2,
adiponectin and glut-4 in mature adipocytes. Further studies revealed that AKBA
down-regulated PPAR-<U+03B3> and C/EBP-a expression in a dose and temporal dependent
manner in mature adipocytes. In human adipocytes, AKBA likewise mobilized
lipolysis accompanied by down-regulation of PPAR-<U+03B3>2 expression and loss of
phenotypic markers of mature adipocytes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23313487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2012 Dec;34(6):563-6. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.06.005.

[Regulatory effects of cyclosporin A and tacrolimus on the immunological gene
expressions in renal transplant recipients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen J(1), Ji ZG, Niu JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, PUMC Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the change of Th immunological gene in renal transplant
recipients after the treatment of cyclosporine (CsA) and tacrolimus (FK506).
METHODS: The peripheral blood lymphacytes just before and 24 hours after CsA and 
FK506 treatment were isolated. The total RNA of them were reverse-transcripted
and examined by real-time quantity PCR array. The results were analyzed by
bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: The TLR4, CEBPB, IL4R, IL1R1,IL18R1,and IL1R2 genes were remarkably
upregulated, whereas IL-2, CCL5, CD27, CCR5, CCR4, CD4, RPL13A, TGFB3, CD86,
CCR3, STAT1, NFATC2IP, IL23A, IL15, IRF4, and TFCP2 were downregulated 24 hours
after CsA treatment. The IL18, IL7, PTPRC, TNFSF4, SPP1, GFI1, TLR4, IL13RA1,
TNF, INHBA, LAG3, IL13, IL1R1, SOCS5, IL10, YY1, TBX21, FASLG, IL18R1, and IL1R2 
genes were remarkably upregulated, whereas IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-6,CCR5, CD4,
CD27, CD40LG, IL15, CCR3, CD86, CCR4, and IRF4 were obviously downregulated 24
hours after FK506 treatment.
CONCLUSION: CsA and FK506 exert their therapeutic effectiveness by regulating the
expressions of a series of target genes.

PMID: 23286399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):4405-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.432344. Epub 2012
Dec 31.

C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) contributes to suppression of metabolic genes
during endoplasmic reticulum stress in the liver.

Chikka MR(1), McCabe DD, Tyra HM, Rutkowski DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine,Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) senses stress in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and initiates signal transduction cascades that culminate in changes to gene
regulation. Long recognized as a means for improving ER protein folding through
up-regulation of ER chaperones, the UPR is increasingly recognized to play a role
in the regulation of metabolic pathways. ER stress is clearly connected to
altered metabolism in tissues such as the liver, but the mechanisms underlying
this connection are only beginning to be elucidated. Here, working exclusively in
vivo, we tested the hypothesis that the UPR-regulated CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP) participates in the transcriptional
regulation of metabolism during hepatic ER stress. We found that metabolic
dysregulation was associated with induction of eIF2a signaling and CHOP
up-regulation during challenge with tunicamycin or Velcade. CHOP was necessary
for suppression of genes encoding the transcriptional master regulators of lipid 
metabolism: Cebpa, Ppara, and Srebf1. This action of CHOP required a
contemporaneous CHOP-independent stress signal. CHOP bound directly to
C/EBP-binding regions in the promoters of target genes, whereas binding of C/EBPa
and C/EBPß to the same regions was diminished during ER stress. Our results thus 
highlight a role for CHOP in the transcriptional regulation of metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3567690
PMID: 23281479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 25;216(3):343-52. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0311. Print 2013
Mar.

Exendin-4 inhibits glucolipotoxic ER stress in pancreatic ß cells via regulation 
of SREBP1c and C/EBPß transcription factors.

Oh YS(1), Lee YJ, Kang Y, Han J, Lim OK, Jun HS.

Author information: 
(1)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong,
Yeonsu-ku, Incheon, Korea.

Prolonged exposure to high glucose (HG) and palmitate (PA) results in increased
ER stress and subsequently induces ß-cell apoptosis. Exendin-4, a glucagon-like
peptide-1 agonist, is known to protect ß cells from toxicity induced by
cytokines, HG, or fatty acids by reducing ER stress. However, the detailed
molecular mechanisms for this protective effect are still not known. In this
study, we investigated the role of exendin-4 in the inhibition of
glucolipotoxicity-induced ER stress and ß-cell apoptosis. Exendin-4 treatment
protected INS-1 ß cells from apoptosis in response to HG/PA (25 mM glucose+400 µM
PA). HG/PA treatment increased cleaved caspase-3 and induced ER stress maker
proteins such as PERK (EIF2AK3), ATF6, and phosphorylated forms of PERK, eIF2a,
IRE1a (ERN1), and JNK (MAPK8), and these increases were significantly inhibited
by exendin-4 treatment. HG/PA treatment of INS-1 cells increased SREBP1 (SREBF1) 
protein and induced its nuclear translocation and subsequently increased C/EBPß
(CEBPB) protein and its nuclear translocation. Exendin-4 treatment attenuated
this increase. Knockdown of SREBP1c reduced the activation of C/EBPß and also
blocked the expression of ER stress markers induced by HG/PA treatment. Our
results indicate that exendin-4 inhibits the activation of SREBP1c and C/EBPß,
which, in turn, may reduce glucolipotoxicity-induced ER stress and ß-cell
apoptosis.

PMID: 23257266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Feb;80(2):102-17. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22141.

Estrus synchronization and ovarian hyper-stimulation treatments have negligible
effects on cumulus oocyte complex gene expression whereas induction of ovulation 
causes major expression changes.

Agca C(1), Yakan A, Agca Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

The effects of exogenous hormones, used for estrus synchronization and ovarian
hyper stimulation, on cumulus oocyte complexes (COCs) gene expression in sexually
mature rats were determined using microarrays. Gene expression in COCs collected 
from GnRH (G(trt)), GnRH + eCG (G + E(trt)), and GnRH + eCG + hCG (G + E +
H(trt)) treatments were compared to COCs from naturally cycling (NC) rats before 
the preovulatory luteninizing hormone surge. There was no significant difference 
in gene expression among NC, G(trt), and G + E(trt); however, over 2,600 genes
were significantly different between NC and G + E + H(trt) (P < 0.05). Genes
upregulated in G + E + H(trt) encode for: proteins that are involved in
prostaglandin synthesis (Ptgs2, Pla2g4a, and Runx1) and cholesterol biosynthesis 
(Hmgcr, Sc4mol, and Dhcr24); receptors that allow cholesterol uptake (Ldlr and
Scarb1), regulate progesterone synthesis (Star), and inactivate estrogen
(Sult1e1); and downstream effectors of LH signal (Pgr, Cebpb, Creb3l1, Areg,
Ereg, and Adamts1). Conversely, G + E + H(trt) downregulated genes encoding
proteins involved in: DNA replication and cell cycle progression (Ccne2, Orc5l,
Rad50, and Mcm6); reproductive developmental process; and granulosa cell
expansion (Gdf9, Bmp15, Amh, Amhr2, Bmpr1b, Tgfb2, Foxl2, Pde3a, Esr2, Fshr,
Ybx2, Ccnd2, Ccnb1ip1, and Zp3); maternal effect genes required for embryo
development (Zar1, Npm2, Nlrp5, Dnmt1, H1foo, and Zfp57); amino acid degradation;
and ketogenesis (Hmgcs2, and Cpt1b). These results from the rat show that
hormones used for estrus synchronization (G(trt)) and ovarian hyper stimulation
(G + E(trt)) had minimal effects on gene expression, whereas induction of
ovulation (G + E + H(trt)) caused major changes in gene expression of rat COCs.
This study provides comprehensive information about regulated genes during late
follicle development and ovulation induction.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23239112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Science. 2012 Dec 21;338(6114):1599-603. doi: 10.1126/science.1229765. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

C/EBP transcription factors mediate epicardial activation during heart
development and injury.

Huang GN(1), Thatcher JE, McAnally J, Kong Y, Qi X, Tan W, DiMaio JM, Amatruda
JF, Gerard RD, Hill JA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The epicardium encapsulates the heart and functions as a source of multipotent
progenitor cells and paracrine factors essential for cardiac development and
repair. Injury of the adult heart results in reactivation of a developmental gene
program in the epicardium, but the transcriptional basis of epicardial gene
expression has not been delineated. We established a mouse embryonic heart organ 
culture and gene expression system that facilitated the identification of
epicardial enhancers activated during heart development and injury. Epicardial
activation of these enhancers depends on a combinatorial transcriptional code
centered on CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) transcription factors.
Disruption of C/EBP signaling in the adult epicardium reduced injury-induced
neutrophil infiltration and improved cardiac function. These findings reveal a
transcriptional basis for epicardial activation and heart injury, providing a
platform for enhancing cardiac regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3613149
PMID: 23160954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;26(12):2016-30. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1169. Epub 2012 Oct
24.

Regulation of human endometrial stromal proliferation and differentiation by
C/EBPß involves cyclin E-cdk2 and STAT3.

Wang W(1), Taylor RN, Bagchi IC, Bagchi MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

During each menstrual cycle, the human uterus undergoes a unique transformation, 
known as decidualization, which involves endometrial stromal proliferation and
differentiation. During this process, the stromal cells are transformed into
decidual cells, which produce factors that prepare the uterus for potential
embryo implantation. We previously identified the transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)ß as a regulator of endometrial stromal
proliferation and differentiation in mice. In this study, we addressed the role
of C/EBPß in human endometrial decidualization. Using small interfering RNA
targeted to C/EBPß mRNA, we demonstrated that C/EBPß controls the proliferation
of primary human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs) by regulating the expression
of several key cell cycle-regulatory factors during the G(1)-S phase transition. 
Additionally, loss of C/EBPß expression blocked the differentiation of HESCs in
response to estrogen, progesterone, and cyclic AMP. Gene expression profiling of 
normal and C/EBPß-deficient HESCs revealed that the receptor for the cytokine
IL-11 and its downstream signal transducer signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) are targets of regulation by C/EBPß. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that C/EBPß controls the expression of
STAT3 gene by directly interacting with a distinct regulatory sequence in its
5'-flanking region. Attenuation of STAT3 mRNA expression in HESCs resulted in
markedly reduced differentiation of these cells, indicating an important role for
STAT3 in decidualization. Gene expression profiling, using STAT3-deficient HESCs,
showed an extensive overlap of pathways downstream of STAT3 and C/EBPß during
stromal cell differentiation. Collectively, these findings revealed a novel
functional link between C/EBPß and STAT3 that is a critical regulator of
endometrial differentiation in women.

PMCID: PMC3517719
PMID: 23097472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):797-801. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2117-7. Epub 2012
Oct 14.

The methylation of C/EBP ß gene promoter and regulated by GATA-2 protein.

Rui W(1), Jin Z, Zhe G, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Shanghai Medical School, Fudan University,
Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, 200032,
China. wanrui_7@hotmail.com

Mammalian genomes are punctuated by DNA sequences containing an atypically high
frequency of CpG sites (CpG islands; CGIs) that are associated with the majority 
of annotated gene promoters. Methylated C bases of CpG sites inhibit the
expression of downstream genes. During the differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß gene plays an
important role. We studied the CpG island methylation status of the C/EBP ß
promoter and its relationship with the GATA-2 protein. We used computer analysis 
to determine that the C/EBP ß promoter sequence is rich in CGIs, and observed
that two of seven methylated C bases were demethylated during the preadipocyte
differentiation using bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP). This corresponded with the 
onset of notable C/EBP ß gene expression. Immunofluorescence and molecular
docking showed that the GATA-2 protein binds the C/EBP ß promoter in front of the
first demethylated CpG site. We also found that expression of GATA-2 and C/EBP ß 
proteins is negatively correlated. These results indicate that the methylated C
bases in the C/EBP ß promoter relate to expression of the C/EBP ß gene, and that 
its demethylation is linked with GATA-2 protein association.

PMID: 23065276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Stem Cells. 2012 Dec;30(12):2619-30. doi: 10.1002/stem.1248.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta is expressed in satellite cells and controls 
myogenesis.

Marchildon F(1), Lala N, Li G, St-Louis C, Lamothe D, Keller C, Wiper-Bergeron N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Upon injury, muscle satellite cells become activated and produce skeletal muscle 
precursors that engage in myogenesis. We demonstrate that the transcription
factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPß) is expressed in the satellite
cells of healthy muscle. C/EBPß expression is regulated during myogenesis such
that C/EBPß is rapidly and massively downregulated upon induction to
differentiate. Furthermore, persistent expression of C/EBPß in myoblasts potently
inhibits differentiation at least in part through the inhibition of MyoD protein 
function and stability. As a consequence, myogenic factor expression, myosin
heavy chain expression, and fusogenic activity were reduced in
C/EBPß-overexpressing cells. Using knockout models, we demonstrate that loss of
Cebpb expression in satellite cells results in precocious differentiation of
myoblasts in growth conditions and greater cell fusion upon differentiation. In
vivo, loss of Cebpb expression in satellite cells resulted in larger muscle fiber
cross-sectional area and improved repair after muscle injury. Our results support
the notion that C/EBPß inhibits myogenic differentiation and that its levels must
be reduced to allow for activation of MyoD target genes and the progression of
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23034923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cytokine. 2012 Dec;60(3):736-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.08.009. Epub 2012 Sep
13.

Combining gene expression microarray- and cluster analysis with sequence-based
predictions to identify regulators of IL-13 in allergy.

Bruhn S(1), Katzenellenbogen M, Gustafsson M, Krönke A, Sönnichsen B, Zhang H,
Benson M.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Individualized Medication, Linköping University, Linköping,
Sweden.

The Th2 cytokine IL-13 plays a key role in allergy, by regulating IgE, airway
hyper secretion, eosinophils and mast cells. In this study, we aimed to identify 
novel transcription factors (TFs) that potentially regulated IL-13. We analyzed
Th2 polarized naïve T cells from four different blood donors with gene expression
microarrays to find clusters of genes that were correlated or anti-correlated
with IL13. These clusters were further filtered, by selecting genes that were
functionally related. In these clusters, we identified three transcription
factors (TFs) that were predicted to regulate the expression of IL13, namely
CEBPB, E2F6 and AHR. siRNA mediated knockdowns of these TFs in naïve polarized T 
cells showed significant increases of IL13, following knockdown of CEBPB and
E2F6, but not AHR. This suggested an inhibitory role of CEBPB and E2F6 in the
regulation of IL13 and allergy. This was supported by analysis of E2F6, but not
CEBPB, in allergen-challenged CD4+ T cells from six allergic patients and six
healthy controls, which showed decreased expression of E2F6 in patients. In
summary, our findings indicate an inhibitory role of E2F6 in the regulation of
IL-13 and allergy. The analytical approach may be generally applicable to
elucidate the complex regulatory patterns in Th2 cell polarization and allergy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22981205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36922-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402958. Epub
2012 Sep 12.

Prostaglandin E2-induced IL-23p19 subunit is regulated by cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein and C/AATT enhancer-binding protein ß in bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells.

Kocieda VP(1), Adhikary S, Emig F, Yen JH, Toscano MG, Ganea D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

We reported previously that prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) up-regulates IL-23 in vitro
in bone marrow-derived dendritic cells and in vivo in models of collagen-induced 
arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease, leading to preferential Th17
development and activity. There is very little information on the molecular
mechanisms involved in the PGE2-induced up-regulation of Il23a gene expression.
In this study we investigated the signaling pathways and transcription factors
involved in the stimulatory effect of PGE2. Although PGE2 does not induce
IL-23p19 expression by itself, it synergizes with both extra- and intracellular
Toll-like receptor ligands and with inflammatory cytokines such as TNFa. We
established that the effect of PGE2 in conjunction with either LPS or TNFa is
mediated through the EP4 receptor and the cAMP-dependent activation of both
protein kinase A (PKA) and exchange protein activated by cAMP (EPAC). Using the
EP4 agonist PGE(1)OH in conjunction with TNFa, we found that PKA-induced
phosphorylation of cAMP-response element-binding protein ((P)CREB) and
EPAC-induced phosphorylation of C/AATT enhancer-binding protein ß ((P)C/EBPß)
mediate the stimulatory effect of PGE2 on IL-23p19 expression. This is the first 
report of CREB and C/EBPß involvement in Il23a promoter activation. Mutation
within the putative CREB and C/EBP sites combined with in vivo DNA binding (ChIP)
assays identified the distal CREB site (-1125) and the two proximal C/EBP sites
(-274 and -232) as essential for PKA-activated CREB and EPAC-activated
C/EBPß-induced IL-23p19 expression.

PMCID: PMC3481295
PMID: 22977257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):37340-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384743. Epub
2012 Sep 6.

Increased phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression and steatosis during 
hepatitis C virus subgenome replication: role of nonstructural component 5A and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß.

Qadri I(1), Choudhury M, Rahman SM, Knotts TA, Janssen RC, Schaack J, Iwahashi M,
Puljak L, Simon FR, Kilic G, Fitz JG, Friedman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado
80045, USA.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection greatly increases the risk for type 2
diabetes and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; however, the pathogenic mechanisms
remain incompletely understood. Here we report gluconeogenic enzyme
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) transcription and associated
transcription factors are dramatically up-regulated in Huh.8 cells, which stably 
express an HCV subgenome replicon. HCV increased activation of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß), forkhead
box protein O1 (FOXO1), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) and involved activation of the cAMP response element in
the PEPCK promoter. Infection with dominant-negative CREB or C/EBPß-shRNA
significantly reduced or normalized PEPCK expression, with no change in PGC-1a or
FOXO1 levels. Notably, expression of HCV nonstructural component NS5A in Huh7 or 
primary hepatocytes stimulated PEPCK gene expression and glucose output in HepG2 
cells, whereas a deletion in NS5A reduced PEPCK expression and lowered cellular
lipids but was without effect on insulin resistance, as demonstrated by the
inability of insulin to stimulate mobilization of a pool of insulin-responsive
vesicles to the plasma membrane. HCV-replicating cells demonstrated increases in 
cellular lipids with insulin resistance at the level of the insulin receptor,
increased insulin receptor substrate 1 (Ser-312), and decreased Akt (Ser-473)
activation in response to insulin. C/EBPß-RNAi normalized lipogenic genes sterol 
regulatory element-binding protein-1c, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
<U+03B3>, and liver X receptor a but was unable to reduce accumulation of triglycerides 
in Huh.8 cells or reverse the increase in ApoB expression, suggesting a role for 
increased lipid retention in steatotic hepatocytes. Collectively, these data
reveal an important role of NS5A, C/EBPß, and pCREB in promoting HCV-induced
gluconeogenic gene expression and suggest that increased C/EBPß and NS5A may be
essential components leading to increased gluconeogenesis associated with HCV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3481331
PMID: 22955269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 14;426(1):122-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.049. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Cancer cell growth suppression by a 62nt AU-rich RNA from C/EBPß 3'UTR through
competitive binding with HuR.

Sun DQ(1), Wang Y, Liu DG.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, China.

AU-rich elements are functional motifs in the 3'untranslated region of mRNA and
are binding sites for the RNA binding protein HuR, an mRNA stabilizer and
translation enhancer implicated in carcinogenesis. It is not clear whether, and, 
if so, how the AU-rich elements function in cells when they are separated from
their mRNA and form an independent RNA species. Here, we show that a short RNA
with AU-rich elements derived from C/EBPß 3'UTR suppressed growth in a human
liver cancer cell line. It specifically bound HuR, and it competed with C/EBPß
mRNA in order to bind to HuR. Our results provide evidence that the cancer cell
growth suppression by this 62nt RNA containing AU-rich elements may be due to
competitive binding to HuR. This work may open new options for the development of
novel anti-cancer drugs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22921787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(7):e1002833. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002833. Epub 2012 Jul
26.

Human papillomavirus type 8 interferes with a novel C/EBPß-mediated mechanism of 
keratinocyte CCL20 chemokine expression and Langerhans cell migration.

Sperling T(1), Oldak M, Walch-Rückheim B, Wickenhauser C, Doorbar J, Pfister H,
Malejczyk M, Majewski S, Keates AC, Smola S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Infection with genus beta human papillomaviruses (HPV) is implicated in the
development of non-melanoma skin cancer. This was first evidenced for HPV5 and 8 
in patients with epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV), a genetic skin disease. So
far, it has been unknown how these viruses overcome cutaneous immune control
allowing their persistence in lesional epidermis of these patients. Here we
demonstrate that Langerhans cells, essential for skin immunosurveillance, are
strongly reduced in HPV8-positive lesional epidermis from EV patients.
Interestingly, the same lesions were largely devoid of the important Langerhans
cells chemoattractant protein CCL20. Applying bioinformatic tools, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays and functional studies we identified the
differentiation-associated transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß 
(C/EBPß) as a critical regulator of CCL20 gene expression in normal human
keratinocytes. The physiological relevance of this finding is supported by our in
vivo studies showing that the expression patterns of CCL20 and nuclear C/EBPß
converge spatially in the most differentiated layers of human epidermis. Our
analyses further identified C/EBPß as a novel target of the HPV8 E7 oncoprotein, 
which co-localizes with C/EBPß in the nucleus, co-precipitates with it and
interferes with its binding to the CCL20 promoter in vivo. As a consequence, the 
HPV8 E7 but not E6 oncoprotein suppressed C/EBPß-inducible and constitutive CCL20
gene expression as well as Langerhans cell migration. In conclusion, our study
unraveled a novel molecular mechanism central to cutaneous host defense.
Interference of the HPV8 E7 oncoprotein with this regulatory pathway allows the
virus to disrupt the immune barrier, a major prerequisite for its epithelial
persistence and procarcinogenic activity.

PMCID: PMC3406103
PMID: 22911498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043249. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress response by the indole-3-carbinol
cyclic tetrameric derivative CTet in human breast cancer cell lines.

Galluzzi L(1), De Santi M, Crinelli R, De Marco C, Zaffaroni N, Duranti A, Brandi
G, Magnani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, University of Urbino Carlo Bo, Fano, PU,
Italy. luca.galluzzi@uniurb.it

BACKGROUND: Indole-3-carbinol and its metabolic products are considered promising
chemopreventive and anticancer agents. Previously we have shown that the
indole-3-carbinol cyclic tetrameric derivative CTet induces autophagy and
inhibits cell proliferation via inhibition of Akt activity and overexpression of 
p21/CDKN1A and GADD45A, in both estrogen receptor-positive (MCF-7) and triple
negative (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cell lines. In the present study, we further 
characterize the autophagic response and investigate the mechanism through which 
CTet regulates these events.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Analysis of gene expression microarray data and
subsequent confirmation by quantitative real-time PCR, showed that CTet is able
to induce up-regulation of key signaling molecules involved in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response (e.g. DDIT3/CHOP, CHAC1, ATF3, HSPA5/BiP/GRP78,
CEBPB, ASNS) and autophagy (e.g. MAP1LC3B), in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell
lines. Moreover, the monitoring of Xbp-1 splicing confirmed the activation of
IRE1/Xbp-1 ER stress response branch after CTet treatment. The role of autophagic
processes (known to be induced by ER stress) was investigated further through
ATG5 gene silencing and pharmacological inhibition of AVOs formation. CTet was
shown to induce an autophagy-related cell death. Moreover, CTet-treated cells
stained with Hoechst/PI revealed the presence of necrotic processes without
evidence of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The ER stress response was identified as the main
upstream molecular mechanism through which CTet acts in both hormone-responsive
and triple-negative breast cancer cells. Because of its important role in cancer 
development, ER stress is a potential target in cancer therapy. The abiltiy of
CTet to induce ER stress response and subsequently activate a death program in
tumor cells confirms this molecule as a promising anticancer agent.

PMCID: PMC3419215
PMID: 22905241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 28;426(3):299-305. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.048. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Regulation of HOXA9 activity by predominant expression of DACH1 against C/EBPa
and GATA-1 in myeloid leukemia with MLL-AF9.

Lee JW(1), Kim HS, Hwang J, Kim YH, Lim GY, Sohn WJ, Yoon SR, Kim JY, Park TS, Oh
SH, Park KM, Choi SU, Ryoo ZY, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 5;426(4):664.

Although MLL-AF9 caused by the chromosomal translocation t(9;11) has a critical
role in acute myeloid leukemia, the molecular pathogenesis is poorly understood. 
Here, we identified that the cell fate determination factor DACH1 is directly
up-regulated by MLL-AF9. Recently we showed that the forced expression of DACH1
in myeloid cells induced p27(Kip1) and repressed p21(Cip1), which is a pivotal
characteristic of the myeloid progenitor. Consistent with our previous study,
ectopic expression of DACH1 contributed to the maintenance of colonogenic
activity and blocked the differentiation of myeloid progenitors. Moreover, we
here identified an endogenous HOXA9-DACH1 complex mediated by the carboxyl
terminus of DACH1 in t(9;11) leukemia cells. qRT-PCR revealed that DACH1 has a
stronger transcription-promoting activity with HOXA9 than does PBX2 with HOXA9.
Furthermore, C/EBPa and GATA-1 can directly bind to the promoter of DACH1 and act
as a transcriptional suppressor. Expression of DACH1 is down-regulated during
myeloid differentiation and shows an inverse pattern compared to C/EBPa and
GATA-1 expression. However, ectopic expression of C/EBPa and/or GATA-1 could not 
abrogate the over-expression of DACH1 induced by MLL-AF9. Therefore, we postulate
that the inability of C/EBPa and GATA-1 to down-regulate DACH1 expression induced
by MLL-AF9 during myeloid differentiation may contribute to t(9;11)
leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22902925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34349-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.410613. Epub 2012
Aug 19.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) expression regulates dietary-induced
inflammation in macrophages and adipose tissue in mice.

Rahman SM(1), Janssen RC, Choudhury M, Baquero KC, Aikens RM, de la Houssaye BA, 
Friedman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Strong evidence exists for a link between chronic low level inflammation and
dietary-induced insulin resistance; however, little is known about the
transcriptional networks involved. Here we show that high fat diet (HFD) or
saturated fatty acid exposure directly activates CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
(C/EBPß) protein expression in liver, adipocytes, and macrophages. Global C/EBPß 
deletion prevented HFD-induced inflammation and surprisingly increased
mitochondrial gene expression in white adipose tissue along with brown adipose
tissue markers PRDM16, CIDEa, and UCP1, consistent with a resistance to
HFD-induced obesity. In isolated peritoneal macrophages from C/EBPß(-/-) mice,
the anti-inflammatory gene LXRa and its targets SCD1 and DGAT2 were strikingly
up-regulated along with IL-10, while NLRP3, a gene important for activating the
inflammasome, was suppressed in response to palmitate. Using RAW 264.7 macrophage
cells or 3T3-L1 adipocytes, C/EBPß knockdown prevented palmitate-induced
inflammation and p65-NF<U+03BA>B DNA binding activity, while C/EBPß overexpression
induced NF<U+03BA>B binding, JNK activation, and pro-inflammatory cytokine gene
expression directly. Finally, chimeric bone marrow mice transplanted with bone
marrow lacking C/EBPß(-/-) demonstrated reduced systemic and adipose tissue
inflammatory markers, macrophage content, and maintained insulin sensitivity on
HFD. Taken together, these results demonstrate that HFD or palmitate exposure
triggers C/EBPß expression that controls expression of distinct aspects of
alternative macrophage activation. Reducing C/EBPß in macrophages confers
protection from HFD-induced systemic inflammation and insulin resistance,
suggesting it may be an attractive therapeutic target for ameliorating
obesity-induced inflammatory responses.

PMCID: PMC3464541
PMID: 22902781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Nov;6(5):961-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1034. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Transcriptional regulatory networks in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Meng X(1), Lu P, Bai H, Xiao P, Fan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, PR China.

Lung adenocarcinoma (AC) is the most common histological subtype of lung cancer
worldwide and its absolute incidence is increasing markedly. Transcriptional
regulation is one of the most fundamental processes in lung AC development.
However, high-throughput functional analyses of multiple transcription factors
and their target genes in lung AC are rare. Thus, the objective of our study was 
to interpret the mechanisms of human AC through the regulatory network using the 
GSE2514 microarray data. Our results identified the genes peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPARG), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (CEBPB), ets
variant 4 (ETV4), Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1), T-cell acute
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1) and nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene 
enhancer in B-cells 1 (NFKB1) as hub nodes in the transcriptome network. Among
these genes, it appears that: PPARG promotes the PPAR signaling pathway via the
upregulation of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) expression, but suppresses the cell
cycle pathway via downregulation of growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, <U+03B3>
(GADD45G) expression; ETV4 stimulates matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) expression
to induce the bladder cancer pathway; FLI upregulates transforming growth factor,
ß receptor II (TGFBR2) expression to activate TGF-ß signaling and upregulates
cyclin D3 (CCND3) expression to promote the cell cycle pathway; NFKB1 upregulates
interleukin 1, ß (IL-1B) expression and initiates the prostate cancer pathway;
CEBPB upregulates IL-6 expression and promotes pathways in cancer; and TAL1
promotes kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) expression to promote the TGF-ß
signaling pathway. This transcriptional regulation analysis may provide an
improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic
targets in the treatment of lung AC.

PMID: 22895549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Autophagy. 2012 Nov;8(11):1673-4. doi: 10.4161/auto.21403. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

IFNG and autophagy: a critical role for the ER-stress mediator ATF6 in
controlling bacterial infections.

Kalvakolanu DV(1), Gade P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Greenebaum Cancer Center,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
dkalvako@umaryland.edu

IFNG/IFN<U+03B3> plays a critical role in driving innate and acquired defenses against
infectious pathogens. The death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1), originally
identified as an activator of IFNG-induced cell death, controls autophagy.
Previously, we have shown that transcription factor CEBPB (C/EBP-ß) regulates
IFNG-induced expression of Dapk1 through a CRE/ATF motif in its enhancer. In this
paper we have shown that ATF6, an ER-resident transcription factor regulates
IFNG-induced Dapk1 expression through the CRE/ATF site, in association with
CEBPB. IFNG-stimulated proteolytic cleavage of ATF6, and MAPK1/3
(ERK2/1)-dependent phosphorylation of CEBPB together control the expression of
Dapk1. Consistent with their requirement for DAPK1 expression, IFNG fails to
induce autophagy in cells lacking either Atf6 or Cebpb. More importantly, the
Atf6(-/-) mice are highly susceptible to lethal bacterial infections due to a
loss of autophagy. This study reported a connection between ER stress and
autophagy in mediating antibacterial defenses.

PMCID: PMC3494595
PMID: 22874566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41807. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041807. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Cells expressing the C/EBPbeta isoform, LIP, engulf their neighbors.

Abreu M(1), Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

Descriptions of various processes that lead to cell-in-cell structures have been 
reported for decades. The exact molecular mechanism(s) of their formation and the
physiological significance of cell-in-cell structures remain poorly understood.
We had previously shown that an isoform of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
beta (C/EBPbeta) transcription factor, liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP),
induces cell death in human breast cancer cells and stimulates autophagy. Here we
describe a non-apoptotic cell death process where LIP mediates the engulfment of 
neighboring cells. We provide evidence of LIP-mediated engulfment via DNA
profiling, fluorescent imaging and cell sorting studies, as well as
ultrastructure analysis of LIP-expressing MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells. Our
work illustrates that expression of a specific transcription factor, LIP, can
mediate cell engulfment.

PMCID: PMC3409234
PMID: 22860016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Oral Dis. 2013 Mar;19(2):144-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2012.01963.x. Epub 2012
Jul 31.

Phenotypes of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta deficiency: hyperdontia and
elongated coronoid process.

Huang B(1), Takahashi K, Sakata-Goto T, Kiso H, Togo Y, Saito K, Tsukamoto H,
Sugai M, Akira S, Shimizu A, Bessho K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Dentistry, School of Medicine and Dentistry, James
Cook University, Cairns, Australia Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan Translational
Research Center, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Laboratory of Host Defense, World Premier International Immunology Frontier
Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: This investigation aimed to conduct a case-control study of
mandibular morphology and dental anomalies to propose a relationship between
mandibular/dental phenotypes and deficiency of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
beta (CEBPB).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Skulls of CEBPB(-/-), CEBPB(+/-) and CEBPB(+/+) mice were 
inspected with micro-computed tomography. Mandibular morphology was assessed with
a method of Euclidean distance matrix analysis.
RESULTS: Elongation of the coronoid process was identified in CEBPB(+/-) (P =
0.046) and CEBPB(-/-) 12-month-olds (P = 0.028) but not in 14-day-olds (P =
0.217) and 0-day-olds (P = 0.189) of either genotype. Formation of supernumerary 
teeth in CEBPB(-/-) adult mice was demonstrated (<U+03C7>(2) = 6.00, df = 1, P = 0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: CEBPB deficiency was related to elongation of the coronoid process
and formation of supernumerary teeth. The mandibular and dental phenotypes of
CEBPB deficiency were unseen by the 14th day after birth. Future investigations
into the influence of CEBPB on mandibular and dental development are needed.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22849712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Urol. 2012 Sep;188(3):1033-41. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.05.004. Epub 2012 Jul
21.

Gene expression changes induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction in mice.

Wu B(1), Brooks JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-5118, USA.

PURPOSE: Loss of renal function is often the impetus for operative intervention
in renal obstruction cases. Obstructive nephropathy is characterized by discrete 
morphological and physiological changes, including tubular dilatation, apoptosis 
and atrophy as well as interstitial cellular infiltration and progressive
interstitial fibrosis. We hypothesized that gene expression alterations correlate
with obstructive nephropathy and could serve as biomarkers for early
intervention.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were subjected to unilateral ureteral
obstruction or sham surgery at postnatal day 21. Kidneys were harvested 1, 2, 5
and 9 days postoperatively. RNA was extracted from kidneys and comprehensive gene
expression profiling was performed with microarrays. IPA® pathway analysis
software was used to analyze the biological function and gene networks of gene
expression data.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed more than 1,800 transcripts that were
up-regulated or down-regulated during days 1 through 9 after obstruction,
including many previously reported transcripts (FOS, CD44, CLU, SPP1 and EGF).
Pathway analysis showed significant enrichment of transcripts in cell
activation/differentiation, immune/inflammatory responses, cell cycle, metabolic 
process and transport. Network analysis using IPA showed that transcriptional
regulatory pathways involving CEBPB and HNF4A are involved in obstructive
nephropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: This data set provides a foundation for development of biomarkers
for obstructive nephropathy.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22819101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Mar;228(3):536-46. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24160.

Transcriptional regulators of the <U+0394>Np63: their role in limbal epithelial cell
proliferation.

Hsueh YJ(1), Kuo PC, Chen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan.

The surface cells of corneal epithelium are regularly shed off and replaced by
new cells that are derived from limbal epithelial stem cells (LESC). LESC are
believed to reside in the basal layer of the limbal epithelium and are
characterized with high expression levels of <U+0394>Np63, a transcription factor (TF)
which is believed to play roles in the regulation of LESC proliferation. In this 
study, we examined the transcriptional regulation of <U+0394>Np63 in limbal epithelial
cell. We employed DNA pull down assay followed by LC/MS analysis and cDNA
microarray analysis to identify the TFs that were capable of binding to <U+0394>Np63
promoter or were expressed at higher levels in limbus over cornea. The TFs thus
selected were further examined for their in vivo <U+0394>Np63 promoter binding by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. We identified six putative TFs (PAX6, EGR1, 
CEBPB, JUN, ATF3, and ARID5B) through the aforementioned approaches. Among them, 
PAX6 and EGR1 were shown to promote the transcription of <U+0394>Np63 and led to
increased cell proliferation. In contrast, CEBPB and ATF3 appeared to exert
little or no effect on <U+0394>Np63 expression, however, their silencing suppressed cell
proliferation. Although JUN exhibited low promoter-binding specificity, however, 
it affected <U+0394>Np63 expression and limbal epithelial cell proliferation in ways
similar to that of PAX6 and EGR1. Intriguingly, ARID5B was highly expressed in
the limbal epithelial cell, however, its silencing by siRNA did not obviously
affect the expression of <U+0394>Np63, nor did it reduce cell proliferation of the
limbal epithelial cell.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22806179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. BMC Vet Res. 2012 Jul 9;8:106. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-8-106.

Forage preservation (grazing vs. hay) fed to ewes affects the fatty acid profile 
of milk and CPT1B gene expression in the sheep mammary gland.

Dervishi E(1), Joy M, Sanz A, Alvarez-Rodriguez J, Molino F, Calvo JH.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tecnología en Producción Animal, CITA, Zaragoza, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in lipid metabolism occur when animals are exposed to
different feeding systems. In the last few decades, the characterisation of genes
involved in fat metabolism and technological advances have enabled the study of
the effect of diet on the milk fatty acid (FA) profile in the mammary gland and
aided in the elucidation of the mechanisms of the response to diet. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the effect of different forage diets (grazing vs. hay)
near the time of ewe parturition on the relationship between the fatty acid
profile and gene expression in the mammary gland of the Churra Tensina sheep
breed.
RESULTS: In this study, the forage type affected the C18:2 cis-9 trans-11 (CLA)
and long-chain saturated fatty acid (LCFA) content, with higher percentages
during grazing than during hay feeding. This may suggest that these FAs act as
regulatory factors for the transcriptional control of the carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1B (CPT1B) gene, which was more highly expressed in the
grazing group (GRE). The most highly expressed gene in the mammary gland at the
fifth week of lactation is CAAT/ enhancer- binding protein beta (CEBPB), possibly
due to its role in milk fat synthesis in the mammary gland. More stable
housekeeping genes in the ovine mammary gland that would be appropriate for use
in gene expression studies were ribosomal protein L19 (RPL19) and glyceraldehyde-
3- phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH).
CONCLUSIONS: Small changes in diet, such as the forage preservation (grazing vs. 
hay), can affect the milk fatty acid profile and the expression of the CPT1B
gene, which is associated with the oxidation of fatty acids. When compared to hay
fed indoors, grazing fresh low mountain pastures stimulates the milk content of
CLA and LCFA via mammary uptake. In this sense, LCFA in milk may be acting as a
regulatory factor for transcriptional control of the CPT1B gene, which was more
highly expressed in the grazing group.

PMCID: PMC3416728
PMID: 22776723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jul 9;9:165. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-165.

Inhibition of CD200R1 expression by C/EBP ß in reactive microglial cells.

Dentesano G(1), Straccia M, Ejarque-Ortiz A, Tusell JM, Serratosa J, Saura J,
Solà C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cerebral Ischemia and Neurodegeneration, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC), Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: In physiological conditions, it is postulated that neurons control
microglial reactivity through a series of inhibitory mechanisms, involving either
cell contact-dependent, soluble-factor-dependent or neurotransmitter-associated
pathways. In the current study, we focus on CD200R1, a microglial receptor
involved in one of these cell contact-dependent mechanisms. CD200R1 activation by
its ligand, CD200 (mainly expressed by neurons in the central nervous system),is 
postulated to inhibit the pro-inflammatory phenotype of microglial cells, while
alterations in CD200-CD200R1 signalling potentiate this phenotype. Little is
known about the regulation of CD200R1 expression in microglia or possible
alterations in the presence of pro-inflammatory stimuli.
METHODS: Murine primary microglial cultures, mixed glial cultures from wild-type 
and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß)-deficient mice, and the BV2 murine 
cell line overexpressing C/EBPß were used to study the involvement of C/EBPß
transcription factor in the regulation of CD200R1 expression in response to a
proinflammatory stimulus (lipopolysaccharide (LPS)). Binding of C/EBPß to the
CD200R1 promoter was determined by quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation
(qChIP). The involvement of histone deacetylase 1 in the control of CD200R1
expression by C/EBPß was also determined by co-immunoprecipitation and qChIP.
RESULTS: LPS treatment induced a decrease in CD200R1 mRNA and protein expression 
in microglial cells, an effect that was not observed in the absence of C/EBPß.
C/EBPß overexpression in BV2 cells resulted in a decrease in basal CD200R1 mRNA
and protein expression. In addition, C/EBPß binding to the CD200R1 promoter was
observed in LPS-treated but not in control glial cells, and also in control BV2
cells overexpressing C/EBPß. Finally, we observed that histone deacetylase 1
co-immunoprecipitated with C/EBPß and showed binding to a C/EBPß consensus
sequence of the CD200R1 promoter in LPS-treated glial cells. Moreover, histone
deacetylase 1 inhibitors reversed the decrease in CD200R1 expression induced by
LPS treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: CD200R1 expression decreases in microglial cells in the presence of 
a pro-inflammatory stimulus, an effect that is regulated, at least in part, by
C/EBPß. Histone deacetylase 1 may mediate C/EBPß inhibition of CD200R1
expression, through a direct effect on C/EBPß transcriptional activity and/or on 
chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC3414764
PMID: 22776069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Oncol Rep. 2012 Sep;28(3):1110-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1886. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Studies on the mechanisms of superagonistic pro-differentiating activities of
side-chain modified analogs of vitamin D2.

Baurska H(1), Marchwicka A, Klopot A, Kutner A, Marcinkowska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, 50-137 Wroclaw, Poland.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) is implicated in many cellular functions
including cell proliferation and differentiation, thus, exerting potential
antitumor effects. A major limitation for therapeutic use of 1,25D are its potent
calcemic and phosphatemic activities. Therefore, synthetic analogs of 1,25D for
use in anticancer therapy should retain cell differentiating potential, with
calcemic activity being reduced. Previously, we described pro-differentiating
effects of vitamin D2 analogs with extended and branched side-chains. Analogs
with side-chains extended by a pair of one (PRI-1906) or two carbon units
(PRI-1907) displayed elevated cell-differentiating activity towards some acute
leukemia cell lines (AML) in comparison to 1,25D. In this study, the potential
mechanism of this superagonistic activity of the analogs was addressed. At first,
possible differences in the expression of CYP24A1, a major catabolizing enzyme
for vitamin D compounds and resulting differences in the degradation of analogs
were investigated. In addition, interactions of the analogs with vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and resulting activation of CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein ß
(C/EBPß) were studied. The results obtained show that superagonistic
pro-differentiating activities of analogs PRI-1906 and PRI-1907 do not seem to be
caused by their altered catabolism, but most probably by altered interactions
with VDR and resulting downstream proteins.

PMID: 22751936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;44(11):1919-28. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.06.015. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Prostaglandin E2 stimulates S100A8 expression by activating protein kinase A and 
CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta in prostate cancer cells.

Miao L(1), Grebhardt S, Shi J, Peipe I, Zhang J, Mayer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences,
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

S100A8 and S100A9 are strongly expressed in epithelial cells of human prostate
cancer. However, the regulation of their expression is unclear. Here we show that
S100A8 and to a lesser extent S100A9 mRNA expression is induced by prostaglandin 
E2 in a dose and time-dependent manner in PC-3 prostate cancer cells as well as
in BPH-1 benign prostatic epithelial cells. Prostanoid receptor EP2 antagonist
AH6809 and EP4 antagonist AH23848, as well as protein kinase A inhibitor H89,
inhibited prostaglandin E2 mediated increase in S100A8 mRNA expression as well as
promoter activity. Sequence analysis detected a potential binding site of the
transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta within the proximal
S100A8 promoter. CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta overexpression increased
S100A8 mRNA and protein expression as well as its promoter activity. The latter
was prevented by mutation of the potential CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta
binding site within the S100A8 promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed
increased binding of CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta to the S100A8 promoter
in prostaglandin E2 treated cells. Knockdown of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta by siRNA blocked prostaglandin E2 mediated
induction of S100A8 promoter activity and mRNA expression. Our results indicate
that in prostate cancer cells, S100A8 expression is stimulated by prostaglandin
E2 via EP2 and EP4 receptors through activation of the protein kinase A signaling
pathway and subsequent stimulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding-protein-beta binding
to the S100A8 promoter.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22728165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3466-75. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24223.

Statins modulate transcriptional activity of heme-oxygenase-1 promoter in NIH 3T3
Cells.

Mrad MF(1), Mouawad CA, Al-Hariri M, Eid AA, Alam J, Habib A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, American University of
Beirut, Lebanon.

Statins, inhibitors of HMG CoA reductase, have pleiotropic effects independent of
their capacity to lower cholesterol. Heme-oxygenase-1(HO-1) plays an important
role as an anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory enzyme. In the present study, we
used NIH 3T3 cells which express HO-1 to investigate the molecular mechanisms of 
HO-1 induction by statins. Simvastatin or fluvastatin induced a significant
increase in HO-1 protein expression and mRNA levels. Both statins stimulated
activity of a mouse HO-1 promoter (-1,287 to +73<U+2009>bp)/luciferase reporter gene,
3.25<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.23 (Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test) and 3.13<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.33
(Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test), respectively. This effect was more
pronounced in the short proximal promoter than the full promoter of HO-1. Gel
retardation experiments for C/EBP and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
DNA-binding activities using simvastatin- or fluvastatin-treated cells showed
significant nuclear protein-DNA complexes which were supershifted with antibodies
specific for C/EBP ß and d or USF-1 and USF-2. Point mutations of the proximal
HO-1 promoter (-149 to +73<U+2009>bp) for the myc/max which binds USF or the C/EBP
binding sequences showed a reduction in statin-induced reporter activity whereas 
no role of the distal C/EBP binding elements located at -4<U+2009>kb was observed.
Moreover, overexpression of mutated C/EBP ß and USF factor or the siRNA for both 
factors supported a role of these transcription factors in statin-dependent
induction of HO-1, with a clearer effect for C/EBP.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22689023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 22;423(1):134-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.096. Epub 2012 May 24.

Lung epithelial-C/EBPß contributes to LPS-induced inflammation and its
suppression by formoterol.

Roos AB(1), Barton JL, Miller-Larsson A, Dahlberg B, Berg T, Didon L, Nord M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Unit, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. abraham.roos@ki.se

The inflammatory processes associated with pulmonary disorders remains
incompletely understood. CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)ß is implicated in
inflammatory lung disorders as well as in ß(2)-adrenoceptor signaling. We
hypothesized that C/EBPß in the lung epithelium contributes to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced airway neutrophilia and expression of neutrophil chemoattractant
chemokine (C-X-C) motif ligand (CXCL)1, as well as the suppressive effects of
long-acting ß(2)-agonists (LABAs) and glucocorticoids (GCs). To investigate this,
mice with a lung epithelial-specific deletion of C/EBPß (Cebpb(<U+0394>LE)) and control 
littermates (Cebpb(fl/fl)) were pre-treated with a LABA, formoterol and/or a GC, 
budesonide, and challenged with LPS. Inflammatory cell recruitment in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and pulmonary expression of inflammatory
mediators were investigated. In addition, the ability of formoterol to increase
C/EBP transactivation was assessed in vitro. LPS-challenged Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) mice
exhibited fewer BAL neutrophils and lower pulmonary expression of CXCL1 versus
Cebpb(fl/fl) mice. Suppression of LPS-induced neutrophilia by formoterol was
impaired in Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) mice and Cxcl1 expression was increased. However,
suppression of the neutrophilia by budesonide with/without formoterol was
preserved. Further studies indicated that C/EBP transactivation was increased by 
the cAMP elevating agent forskolin and formoterol in a ß(2)-adrenoceptor
dependent manner. Thus, C/EBPß in the lung epithelium contributes to LPS-induced 
CXCL1 expression and airway neutrophilia as well as to the suppressive effects of
formoterol. Reduced C/EBPß activity, observed in smokers with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, may impair the responsiveness to LABAs when used without GCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22634316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Cells. 2012 Jun;33(6):575-81. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-0002-9. Epub 2012 May
18.

Differentiated embryo chondrocyte 1 (DEC1) represses PPAR<U+03B3>2 gene through
interacting with CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß).

Park YK(1), Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul 130-743, Korea.

DEC1 is a transcription repressor that is induced by Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-a/ß
(HIF-a/ß). In this study, we found that either hypoxic treatment or ectopic
expression of DEC1 blocks induction of a master adipogenic transactivator,
peroxisome proliferative activated receptor-<U+03B3>2 (PPAR<U+03B3>2) in 3T3-L1 cells. DEC1 did
not prevent C/EBPß, which is an upstream transactivator for PPAR<U+03B3>2, from
occupying the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. DEC1 occupied the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter by interacting
with DNA-bound C/EBPß. DEC1 occupancy was accompanied by a reduction of
acetylated histones and an increase in histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) occupancy on
the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. Based on the fact that DEC1 interacts with HDAC1, this study
suggests that DEC1 blocks adipogenesis by reinforcing HDAC1 recruitment to the
PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. This study implies that DEC1 is one of the mediators that reset 
the pattern of PPAR<U+03B3>2 expression in response to hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3887761
PMID: 22610404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(4):e1001314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001314. Epub 2012 Apr 
24.

Essential role for miR-196a in brown adipogenesis of white fat progenitor cells.

Mori M(1), Nakagami H, Rodriguez-Araujo G, Nimura K, Kaneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.

The recent discovery of functional brown adipocytes in adult humans illuminates
the potential of these cells in the treatment of obesity and its associated
diseases. In rodents, brown adipocyte-like cells are known to be recruited in
white adipose tissue (WAT) by cold exposure or ß-adrenergic stimulation, but the 
molecular machinery underlying this phenomenon is not fully understood. Here, we 
show that inducible brown adipogenesis is mediated by the microRNA miR-196a. We
found that miR-196a suppresses the expression of the white-fat gene Hoxc8
post-transcriptionally during the brown adipogenesis of white fat progenitor
cells. In mice, miR-196a is induced in the WAT-progenitor cells after cold
exposure or ß-adrenergic stimulation. The fat-specific forced expression of
miR-196a in mice induces the recruitment of brown adipocyte-like cells in WAT.
The miR-196a transgenic mice exhibit enhanced energy expenditure and resistance
to obesity, indicating the induced brown adipocyte-like cells are metabolically
functional. Mechanistically, Hoxc8 targets and represses C/EBPß, a master switch 
of brown-fat gene program, in cooperation with histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3)
through the C/EBPß 3' regulatory sequence. Thus, miR-196a induces functional
brown adipocytes in WAT through the suppression of Hoxc8, which functions as a
gatekeeper of the inducible brown adipogenesis. The miR-196a-Hoxc8-C/EBPß
signaling pathway may be a therapeutic target for inducing brown adipogenesis to 
combat obesity and type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3335871
PMID: 22545021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Jun 5;53(7):3357-67. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-9414.

Angiogenesis potential of human limbal stromal niche cells.

Li GG(1), Chen SY, Xie HT, Zhu YT, Tseng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tongji Hospital, Wuhan, People's Republic of
China.

PURPOSE: The perivascular localization of stem cell (SC) niches suggests the
presence of a vascular niche. We aimed to determine the angiogenesis potential of
limbal niche cells (NCs).
METHODS: Human limbal NCs were isolated and serially passaged on plastic or
coated Matrigel in embryonic SC medium containing BFGF and leukemia inhibitory
factor before being reseeded in 3D Matrigel. Expression of angiogenesis markers
was assessed by RT-qPCR and immunofluorescence staining. Their angiogenesis
potential was measured by differentiation into vascular endothelial cells and by 
supporting vascular tube network formed by human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVEC) on Matrigel. Their support of limbal epithelial progenitor cells (LEPC)
was examined in sphere growth formed by reunion in 3D Matrigel.
RESULTS: On plastic, limbal NC could be cultured only up to four passages before 
turning into myofibroblasts. In contrast, on coated Matrigel, they could be
expanded for up to 12 passages with upregulation of markers suggestive of
angiogenesis progenitors when reseeded in 3D Matrigel because they could
differentiate into vascular endothelial cells and pericytes stabilizing the tube 
network formed by HUVEC. Although both expanded limbal NCs and HUVEC rejoined
with LEPC to form spheres to upregulate expression of <U+0394>Np63a, CK15, and CEBPd,
the former but not the latter abolished expression of CK12 keratin.
CONCLUSIONS: Human limbal NCs continuously expanded on the basement membrane
differentiate into angiogenesis progenitors that prevent differentiation of
LEPC/SCs. They may partake in formation of the vascular niche and contribute to
angiogenesis during wound healing.

PMCID: PMC3374622
PMID: 22538425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 20;420(4):931-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.110. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Dicer has a crucial role in the early stage of adipocyte differentiation, but not
in lipid synthesis, in 3T3-L1 cells.

Fujimoto Y(1), Nakagawa Y, Shingyouchi A, Tokushige N, Nakanishi N, Satoh A,
Matsuzaka T, Ishii KA, Iwasaki H, Kobayashi K, Yatoh S, Suzuki H, Yahagi N,
Urayama O, Yamada N, Shimano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Metabolism and Endocrinology), Faculty of
Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575,
Japan.

Dicer is a rate-limiting enzyme for microRNA (miRNA) synthesis. To determine the 
effects of Dicer on adipogenesis, we performed stage-specific knockdown of Dicer 
using adenovirus encoding short-hairpin RNAi against Dicer in 3T3-L1 cells. When 
cells were infected with the adenovirus before induction of adipocyte
differentiation, Dicer RNAi suppressed the gene expression of inducers of
adipocyte differentiation such as PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa, and FAS in 3T3-L1 cells during
adipocyte differentiation. Concurrently, both adipocyte differentiation and
cellular lipid accumulation were cancelled by Dicer RNAi when compared with
control RNAi. Meanwhile, we addressed the roles of Dicer in lipid synthesis and
accumulation in the final stages of differentiation. When the differentiated
cells at day 4 after induction of differentiation were infected with adenovirus
Dicer RNAi, cellular lipid accumulation was unchanged. Consistent with this,
Dicer RNAi had no effects on the expression of genes related to cellular lipid
accumulation, including PPAR<U+03B3> and FAS. Thus, Dicer controls proadipogenic genes
such as C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> in the early, but not in the late, stage of adipogenesis
via regulation of miRNA synthesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22475483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2012 Jan-Mar;26(1):29-37.

Early angiogenic response to shock waves in a three-dimensional model of human
microvascular endothelial cell culture (HMEC-1).

Sansone V(1), D' Agostino MC, Bonora C, Sizzano F, De Girolamo L, Romeo P.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Department, University of Milan, IRCCS Orthopedic Institute
Galeazzi, Milan, Italy. valerio.sansone@unimi.it

The exact nature of shock wave (SW) action is not, as yet, fully understood,
although a possible hypothesis may be that shock waves induce neoangiogenesis. To
test this hypothesis, a three-dimensional (3D) culture model on Matrigel was
developed employing a human microvascular endothelial cell line (HMEC-1) which
was stimulated with low energy soft- focused SW generated by an SW lithotripter. 
After 12 hours we observed a statistically significant increase in capillary
connections subsequent to shock-wave treatment in respect to the control group
and a marked 3-hour down-regulation in genes involved in the apoptotic processes 
(BAX, BCL2LI, GADD45A, PRKCA), in cell cycle (CDKN2C, CEBPB, HK2, IRF1, PRKCA),
oncogenes (JUN, WNT1), cell adhesion (ICAM-1), and proteolytic systems (CTSD,
KLK2, MMP10). Our preliminary results indicate that microvascular endothelial
cells in vitro quickly respond to SW, proliferating and forming vessel-like
structures, depending on the energy level employed and the number of shocks
released. The early decreased expression in the analysed genes could be
interpreted as the first reactive response of the endothelial cells to the
external stimuli and the prelude to the events characterizing the neo-angiogenic 
sequence.

PMID: 22475095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Dev Dyn. 2012 May;241(5):911-23. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23773. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Airway epithelial cell differentiation during lung organogenesis requires C/EBPa 
and C/EBPß.

Roos AB(1), Berg T, Barton JL, Didon L, Nord M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Respiratory Medicine Unit, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. abraham.roos@ki.se

BACKGROUND: CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)a is crucial for lung
development and differentiation of the pulmonary epithelium. Conversely, no lung 
defects have been observed in C/EBPß-deficient mice, although C/EBPß
trans-activate pulmonary genes by binding to virtually identical DNA-sequences as
C/EBPa. Thus, the pulmonary phenotype of mice lacking C/EBPß could be explained
by functional replacement with C/EBPa. We investigated whether C/EBPa and C/EBPß 
have overlapping functions in regulating lung epithelial differentiation during
organogenesis. Epithelial differentiation was assessed in mice with a lung
epithelial-specific (SFTPC-Cre-mediated) deletion of C/EBPa (Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) ), C/EBPß
(Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) ), or both genes (Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) ; Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) ).
RESULTS: Both Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) mice and Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) ; Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) mice demonstrated
severe pulmonary immaturity compared to wild-type littermates, while no
differences in lung histology or epithelial differentiation were observed in
Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) mice. In contrast to Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) mice, Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) ; Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) mice
also displayed undifferentiated Clara cells with markedly impaired protein and
mRNA expression of Clara cell secretory protein (SCGB1A1), compared to wild-type 
littermates. In addition, ectopic mucus-producing cells were observed in the
conducting airways of Cebpa(<U+0394>LE) ; Cebpb(<U+0394>LE) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that C/EBPa and C/EBPß play pivotal, and
partly overlapping roles in determining airway epithelial differentiation, with
possible implications for tissue regeneration in lung homeostasis and disease.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22411169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Mar 16;419(3):550-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.058. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Phosphorylation prevents C/EBPß from the calpain-dependent degradation.

Zhang YY(1), Li SF, Qian SW, Zhang YY, Liu Y, Tang QQ, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, The Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University, Shanghai Medical College,
PR China.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß plays an important role in proliferation
and differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. C/EBPß is sequentially
phosphorylated during the 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation program, first by
MAPK/Cyclin A/cdk2 on Thr(188) and subsequently by GSK3ß on Ser(184) or Thr(179).
Dual phosphorylation is critical for the gain of DNA binding activity of C/EBPß. 
In this manuscript, we found that phosphorylation also contributed to the
stability of C/EBPß. Both ex vivo and in vitro experiments showed that
phosphorylation by MAPK/Cyclin A/cdk2 and GSK3ß protected C/EBPß from
µ-calpain-mediated proteolysis, while phosphorylation on Thr(188) by MAPK/Cyclin 
A/cdk2 contributed more to the stabilization of C/EBPß, Further studies indicated
that phosphorylation mimic C/EBPß was insensitive to both calpain accelerator and
calpain inhibitor. Thus, phosphorylation might contribute to the stability as
well as the gain of DNA binding activity of C/EBPß.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22369944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Fertil Steril. 2012 May;97(5):1199-205.e1-9. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.02.011. Epub 2012 Feb 25.

Arachidonic acid regulation of the cytosolic phospholipase A 2a/cyclooxygenase-2 
pathway in mouse endometrial stromal cells.

Zhao ZA(1), Zhang ZR, Xu X, Deng WB, Li M, Leng JY, Liang XH, Yang ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Shantou University, Shantou, People's Republic of 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of arachidonic acid (AA) in mouse endometrial 
stromal cells.
DESIGN: Experimental animal study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
ANIMAL(S): Sexually mature female CD1-strain mice.
INTERVENTION(S): Primary culture of endometrial stromal cells.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Western blot and real-time polymerase chain reaction for
gene expression and/or phosphorylation analysis. Luciferase assay for Cox-2
promoter analysis.
RESULT(S): AA-derived prostaglandins play important roles during embryo
implantation and decidualization. However, the function of AA itself in
reproduction is largely unknown. In this study, exogenous AA stimulated cPLA(2a) 
phosphorylation and COX-2 expression, mainly through ERK1/2 in mouse endometrial 
stromal cells, and p38 inhibitor modestly inhibited cPLA(2a) phosphorylation
induced by AA. The induction of COX-2 by AA was diminished by short interfering
RNA against C/EBPß and inhibitory C/EBPß (LIP). C/EBPß binding site at -872--864 
of Cox-2 promoter contributes to Cox-2 promoter activation induced by C/EBPß
transfection. The expression of C/EBPß protein induced by AA was inhibited by p38
inhibitor, and the phosphorylation of C/EBPß induced by AA was inhibited by p38
inhibitor and ERK1/2 inhibitor. A nonmetabolized analogue of AA (ETYA) also
enhanced cPLA(2a) phosphorylation and COX-2 expression. The activation of
cPLA(2a)/COX-2 by AA was not inhibited by COX inhibitor indomethacin.
CONCLUSION(S): AA can induce cPLA(2a)/COX-2 pathway activation in mouse
endometrial stromal cells.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22369775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Sci Rep. 2011;1:178. doi: 10.1038/srep00178. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

Srebf1a is a key regulator of transcriptional control for adipogenesis.

Ayala-Sumuano JT(1), Velez-Delvalle C, Beltrán-Langarica A, Marsch-Moreno M,
Cerbón-Solorzano J, Kuri-Harcuch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados
del Instituto Politcénico Nacional, Mexico City, Federal District, 07360, Mexico.

Adipogenesis is regulated by a complex cascade of transcriptional factors, but
little is known about the early events that regulate the adipogenic program.
Here, we report the role of the srebf1a gene in the differentiation of
fibroblastic 3T3-F442A cells. We found that expression of srebf1a depended on
GSK3ß activity and that GSK3ß activity was necessary for C/EBPß phosphorylation
at Thr188. Knockdown of srebf1a inhibited the adipogenic program because it
blocked the expression of genes encoding PPAR<U+03B3>2, C/EBPa, SREBP1c and even FABP4, 
demonstrating that SREBP1a activation is upstream of these three essential
adipogenic transcription factors. Kinetic analysis during differentiation
illustrated that the order of expression of adipogenic genes was the following:
cebpb, srebf1a, pparg2, cebpa, srebp1c and fabp4. Our data suggest that srebf1a
acts as an essential link between the GSK3ß-C/EBPß signaling axis and the
beginning of the adipogenic transcriptional cascade.

PMCID: PMC3240949
PMID: 22355693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Feb 2;14(2):126-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb2430.

Efficient generation of adipocytes in a dish.

Elefanty AG, Stanley EG.

PMID: 22298041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30831. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030831. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Inhibition of adipogenesis and induction of apoptosis and lipolysis by stem
bromelain in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Dave S(1), Kaur NJ, Nanduri R, Dkhar HK, Kumar A, Gupta P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbial Technology (CSIR), Chandigarh, India.

The phytotherapeutic protein stem bromelain (SBM) is used as an anti-obesity
alternative medicine. We show at the cellular level that SBM irreversibly
inhibits 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation by reducing adipogenic gene expression 
and induces apoptosis and lipolysis in mature adipocytes. At the molecular level,
SBM suppressed adipogenesis by downregulating C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> independent of
C/EBPß gene expression. Moreover, mRNA levels of adipocyte fatty acid-binding
protein (ap2), fatty acid synthase (FAS), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), CD36, and
acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) were also downregulated by SBM. Additionally, SBM
reduced adiponectin expression and secretion. SBM's ability to repress PPAR<U+03B3>
expression seems to stem from its ability to inhibit Akt and augment the TNFa
pathway. The Akt-TSC2-mTORC1 pathway has recently been described for PPAR<U+03B3>
expression in adipocytes. In our experiments, TNFa upregulation compromised cell 
viability of mature adipocytes (via apoptosis) and induced lipolysis. Lipolytic
response was evident by downregulation of anti-lipolytic genes perilipin,
phosphodiestersae-3B (PDE3B), and GTP binding protein G(i)a(1), as well as
sustained expression of hormone sensitive lipase (HSL). These data indicate that 
SBM, together with all-trans retinoic-acid (atRA), may be a potent modulator of
obesity by repressing the PPAR<U+03B3>-regulated adipogenesis pathway at all stages and 
by augmenting TNFa-induced lipolysis and apoptosis in mature adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC3265525
PMID: 22292054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Feb;40(1):1-5. doi: 10.1042/BST20110606.

Novel control of cAMP-regulated transcription in vascular endothelial cells.

Milne GR(1), Palmer TM, Yarwood SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis, are a major cause of
death and disability in the developed world. In this respect, although
cholesterol obviously plays a predominant role in atherosclerosis, targeting
inflammation at lesion sites may be just as important. Indeed, elevated IL-6
(interleukin 6) levels are as strongly associated with coronary heart disease as 
increased cholesterol. We have been investigating novel cAMP-regulated pathways
that combat the action of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and leptin, in
the VECs (vascular endothelial cells) of the circulatory system. In this respect,
we have begun to unravel new molecular mechanisms by which the cAMP/Epac1
(exchange protein directly activated by cAMP 1)/Rap1 pathway can initiate a
rigorous programme of protective anti-inflammatory responses in VECs. Central to 
this is the coupling of cAMP elevation to the mobilization of two C/EBP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) family transcription factors, resulting in the
induction of the SOCS3 (suppressor of cytokine signalling 3) gene, which
attenuates pro-inflammatory cytokine signalling in VECs. These novel 'protective'
mechanisms of cAMP action will inform the development of the next generation of
pharmaceuticals specifically designed to combat endothelial inflammation
associated with cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 22260656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Jan 15;14(2):209-19. doi: 10.1038/ncb2411.

Programming human pluripotent stem cells into white and brown adipocytes.

Ahfeldt T(1), Schinzel RT, Lee YK, Hendrickson D, Kaplan A, Lum DH, Camahort R,
Xia F, Shay J, Rhee EP, Clish CB, Deo RC, Shen T, Lau FH, Cowley A, Mowrer G,
Al-Siddiqi H, Nahrendorf M, Musunuru K, Gerszten RE, Rinn JL, Cowan CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;13(2):62-3.

The utility of human pluripotent stem cells is dependent on efficient
differentiation protocols that convert these cells into relevant adult cell
types. Here we report the robust and efficient differentiation of human
pluripotent stem cells into white or brown adipocytes. We found that inducible
expression of PPARG2 alone or combined with CEBPB and/or PRDM16 in mesenchymal
progenitor cells derived from pluripotent stem cells programmed their development
towards a white or brown adipocyte cell fate with efficiencies of 85%-90%. These 
adipocytes retained their identity independent of transgene expression, could be 
maintained in culture for several weeks, expressed mature markers and had mature 
functional properties such as lipid catabolism and insulin-responsiveness. When
transplanted into mice, the programmed cells gave rise to ectopic fat pads with
the morphological and functional characteristics of white or brown adipose
tissue. These results indicate that the cells could be used to faithfully model
human disease.

PMCID: PMC3385947
PMID: 22246346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochemistry. 2012 Feb 7;51(5):952-62. doi: 10.1021/bi201593q. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Human CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß interacts with chromatin remodeling
complexes of the imitation switch subfamily.

Steinberg XP(1), Hepp MI, Fernández García Y, Suganuma T, Swanson SK, Washburn M,
Workman JL, Gutiérrez JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Concepción,
Barrio Universitario s/n, Concepción, Chile 4070043.

Transcription factor C/EBPß is involved in several cellular processes, such as
proliferation, differentiation, and energy metabolism. This factor exerts its
activity through recruitment of different proteins or protein complexes,
including the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF. The C/EBPß
protein is found as three major isoforms, C/EBPß1, -2, and -3. They are generated
by translation at alternative AUG initiation codons of a unique mRNA, C/EBPß1
being the full-length isoform. It has been found that C/EBPß1 participates in
terminal differentiation processes. Conversely, C/EBPß2 and -3 promote cell
proliferation and are involved in malignant progression in a number of tissues.
The mechanisms by which C/EBPß2 and -3 promote cell proliferation and tumor
progression are not fully understood. In this work, we sought to identify
proteins interacting with hC/EBPß using a proteomics approach. We found that all 
three isoforms interact with hSNF2H and hACF, components of ACF and CHRAC
chromatin remodeling complexes, which belong to the imitation switch subfamily.
Additional protein-protein interaction studies confirmed this finding and also
showed that hC/EBPß directly interacts with hACF1. By overexpressing hC/EBPß,
hSNF2H, and hACF1 in HepG2 cells and analyzing variations in expression of cyclin
D1 and other C/EBPß target genes, we observed a functional interaction between
C/EBPß and SNF2H/ACF1, characterized mainly by suppression of C/EBPß
transactivation activity in the presence of SNF2H and ACF1. Consistent with these
findings, induction of differentiation of HepG2 cells by 1% DMSO was accompanied 
by a reduction in the level of cyclin D1 expression and the appearance of
hC/EBPß, hSNF2H, and hACF1 on the promoter region of this gene.

PMID: 22242598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 22;86(3):86. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095927. Print 2012
Mar.

Generation of mice expressing only the long form of the prolactin receptor
reveals that both isoforms of the receptor are required for normal ovarian
function.

Le JA(1), Wilson HM, Shehu A, Mao J, Devi YS, Halperin J, Aguilar T, Seibold A,
Maizels E, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar;86(3):85.

Prolactin (PRL), a pleiotropic hormone essential for maintenance of corpus luteum
(CL) function and pregnancy, transduces its signal through two types of
receptors, a short form (PRLR-S) and a long form (PRLR-L). Both types of
receptors are expressed in the CL, yet their individual roles are not well
defined. We have shown previously that female transgenic mice expressing only
PRLR-S display total infertility characterized by defective follicular
development and early degeneration of CL, suggesting that expression of PRLR-L is
a prerequisite for normal follicular development and maintenance of CL. To
determine whether PRLR-L alone is the sole receptor required to maintain normal
CL formation, differentiation, and progesterone secretion, we generated two
transgenic mice which express only PRLR-L, either ubiquitously (Tg-RL) or in a
CL-specific manner (CL-RL). To generate CL-specific expression, we used the
HSD17B7 promoter. We found both transgenic mice models cycled normally, displayed
no apparent defect in follicular development, and had normal ovulation rates. The
STAT5 signaling pathway, considered essential for luteinization and progesterone 
production, was activated by PRL in both transgenic mice models. However, soon
after mating, Tg-RL and CL-RL mice showed early regression of CL, lack of
progesterone production, and implantation failure that rendered them totally
infertile. Embryo transfer studies demonstrated no embryo abnormalities, and
supplementation with progesterone rescued implantation failure in these mice.
Close observation revealed lack of luteinization and reduced expression of
proteins involved in progesterone biosynthesis despite normal levels of LHCGR
(LH-R), ESR1 (ER-alpha), CEBPB (C/EBP-beta) and CDKN1B (p27), proteins essential 
for luteinization. However, we found VEGFA, a key regulator of angiogenesis and
vascularization, to be dramatically reduced in both Tg-RL and CL-RL mice. We also
found collagen IV, a marker for the basal lamina of endothelial cells, aberrantly
expressed and a discordant organization of endothelial cells in CL. Although
luteinization did not occur in vivo, granulosa cells isolated from these mice
luteinized in culture. Taken together, these results suggest that a
vascularization defect in the CL may be responsible for lack of luteinization,
progesterone production, and infertility in mice expressing only PRLR-L. This
investigation therefore demonstrates that in contrast to earlier presumptions
that PRLR-L alone is able to support normal CL formation and function, both
isoforms of the PRL receptor are required in the CL for normal female fertility.

PMCID: PMC3316271
PMID: 22190699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028768. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

Distinct peripheral blood RNA responses to Salmonella in pigs differing in
Salmonella shedding levels: intersection of IFNG, TLR and miRNA pathways.

Huang TH(1), Uthe JJ, Bearson SM, Demirkale CY, Nettleton D, Knetter S, Christian
C, Ramer-Tait AE, Wannemuehler MJ, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, United States
of America.

Transcriptomic analysis of the response to bacterial pathogens has been reported 
for several species, yet few studies have investigated the transcriptional
differences in whole blood in subjects that differ in their disease response
phenotypes. Salmonella species infect many vertebrate species, and pigs colonized
with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (ST) are usually asymptomatic,
making detection of these Salmonella-carrier pigs difficult. The variable fecal
shedding of Salmonella is an important cause of foodborne illness and zoonotic
disease. To investigate gene pathways and biomarkers associated with the variance
in Salmonella shedding following experimental inoculation, we initiated the first
analysis of the whole blood transcriptional response induced by Salmonella. A
population of pigs (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>40) was inoculated with ST and peripheral blood and fecal
Salmonella counts were collected between 2 and 20 days post-inoculation (dpi).
Two groups of pigs with either low shedding (LS) or persistent shedding (PS)
phenotypes were identified. Global transcriptional changes in response to ST
inoculation were identified by Affymetrix Genechip® analysis of peripheral blood 
RNA at day 0 and 2 dpi. ST inoculation triggered substantial gene expression
changes in the pigs and there was differential expression of many genes between
LS and PS pigs. Analysis of the differential profiles of gene expression within
and between PS and LS phenotypic classes identified distinct regulatory pathways 
mediated by IFN-<U+03B3>, TNF, NF-<U+03BA>B, or one of several miRNAs. We confirmed the
activation of two regulatory factors, SPI1 and CEBPB, and demonstrated that
expression of miR-155 was decreased specifically in the PS animals. These data
provide insight into specific pathways associated with extremes in Salmonella
fecal shedding that can be targeted for further exploration on why some animals
develop a carrier state. This knowledge can also be used to develop rational
manipulations of genetics, pharmaceuticals, nutrition or husbandry methods to
decrease Salmonella colonization, shedding and spread.

PMCID: PMC3236216
PMID: 22174891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Aging Cell. 2012 Apr;11(2):262-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00782.x. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein-beta expression in vivo is associated with muscle 
strength.

Harries LW(1), Pilling LC, Hernandez LD, Bradley-Smith R, Henley W, Singleton AB,
Guralnik JM, Bandinelli S, Ferrucci L, Melzer D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula College of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Declining muscle strength is a core feature of aging. Several mechanisms have
been postulated, including CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta
(C/EBP-ß)-triggered macrophage-mediated muscle fiber regeneration after
micro-injury, evidenced in a mouse model. We aimed to identify in vivo
circulating leukocyte gene expression changes associated with muscle strength in 
the human adult population. We undertook a genome-wide expression microarray
screen, using peripheral blood RNA samples from InCHIANTI study participants
(aged 30 and 104). Logged expression intensities were regressed with muscle
strength using models adjusted for multiple confounders. Key results were
validated by real-time PCR. The Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) score
tested walk speed, chair stand, and balance. CEBPB expression levels were
associated with muscle strength (ß coefficient = 0.20560, P = 1.03*10(-6), false 
discovery rate q = 0.014). The estimated handgrip strength in 70-year-old men in 
the lowest CEBPB expression tertile was 35.2 kg compared with 41.2 kg in the top 
tertile. CEBPB expression was also associated with hip, knee, ankle, and shoulder
strength and the SPPB score (P = 0.018). Near-study-wide associations were also
noted for TGF-ß3 (P = 3.4*10(-5) , q = 0.12) and CEBPD expression (P = 9.7*10(-5)
, q = 0.18) but not for CEBPA expression. We report here a novel finding that
raised CEBPB expression in circulating leukocyte-derived RNA samples in vivo is
associated with greater muscle strength and better physical performance in
humans. This association may be consistent with mouse model evidence of
CEBPB-triggered muscle repair: if this mechanism is confirmed, it may provide a
target for intervention to protect and enhance aging muscle.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3486692
PMID: 22152057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jan 15;52(2):462-72. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.10.453. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Nuclear factor erythroid-derived factor 2-related factor 2 regulates
transcription of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß during adipogenesis.

Hou Y(1), Xue P, Bai Y, Liu D, Woods CG, Yarborough K, Fu J, Zhang Q, Sun G,
Collins S, Chan JY, Yamamoto M, Andersen ME, Pi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Safety Sciences, The Hamner Institutes for Health
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Nuclear factor erythroid-derived factor 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a
cap-n-collar basic leucine zipper transcription factor that is involved in the
cellular adaptive response to oxidative stress. Our previous study reported that 
targeted disruption of the Nrf2 gene in mice decreases adipose tissue mass and
protects against obesity induced by a high-fat diet. Deficiency of Nrf2 in
preadipocytes and mouse embryonic fibroblasts led to impaired adipogenesis.
Consistent with these findings, the current study found that lack of Nrf2 in
primary cultured mouse preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells hampered adipogenic
differentiation induced by hormonal cocktails. Stable knockdown of Nrf2 in 3T3-L1
cells blocked the enhanced adipogenesis caused by deficiency of kelch-like
ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), a Cul3-adapter protein that allows for Nrf2 to 
be ubiquinated and degraded by the 26S protesome complex. In addition, increased 
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and activation of Nrf2 occurred at
the very early stage upon adipogenic hormonal challenge in 3T3-L1 cells, followed
by an immediate induction of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß). Knockdown
of Nrf2 led to reduced expression of C/EBPß induced by adipogenic hormonal
cocktails, chemical Nrf2 activators or Keap1 silencing. Cebpß promoter-driven
reporter assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation suggested that Nrf2 associates 
with a consensus antioxidant response element (ARE) binding site in the promoter 
of the Cebpß gene during adipogenesis and upregulates its expression. These
findings demonstrate a novel role of Nrf2 beyond xenobiotic detoxification and
antioxidant response, and suggest that Nrf2 is one of the transcription factors
that control the early events of adipogenesis by regulating expression of Cebpß.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3307524
PMID: 22138520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Dec;94(12):5913-25. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4230.

Dietary lipid during the transition period to manipulate subcutaneous adipose
tissue peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> co-regulator and target gene 
expression.

Schmitt E(1), Ballou MA, Correa MN, DePeters EJ, Drackley JK, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Clínicas Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, NUPEEC,
Campus Universitário, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Objectives were to determine adipose tissue mRNA expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)<U+03B3> co-regulators, target enzymes and
transcription regulators, inflammation-related genes, and adipokines in response 
to dietary long-chain fatty acids (LCFA). From -21 through 10 d relative to
parturition cows were fed no supplemental LCFA (control), saturated LCFA (SFAT;
mainly 16:0 and 18:0), or fish oil (FO). Lipid was fed at 250 g/d prepartum or
approximately 1.5 to 1.9% of the previous day's dry matter intake postpartum.
Transcript profiling of 35 genes via quantitative PCR was conducted on biopsies
(n=5 cows/diet) collected at -14 and 11 d from parturition. Despite lower dry
matter intake with FO, pre- and postpartal blood nonesterified fatty acids,
ß-hydroxybutyrate, and liver triacylglycerol were unaffected by treatment but
increased after calving regardless of diet. Prepartal expression of
adipogenic/lipogenic transcription regulators [CEBPA, CEBPB, RXRA, KLF5, and
MLXIPL (formerly ChREBP)] and co-regulators (CARM1, EP300, NCOA1, MED1, NCOR2,
and NRIP1) was upregulated by FO and SFAT versus control, whereas most enzymes
involved in lipogenesis/triacylglycerol synthesis (FASN, SCD, DGAT2, and LPIN1)
had greater expression only with FO. Expression of most adipogenic/lipogenic
genes decreased after parturition, but feeding SFAT led to sustained upregulation
of CEBPA, CEBPB, RXRA, several PPAR-co-activators, and DGAT2 and SCD, suggesting 
maintenance of a pro-adipogenic/pro-lipogenic state with SFAT. The co-activator
CREBBP was greater in cows fed lipid and did not decrease after parturition,
suggesting ligand activation of PPAR<U+03B3>. The greater peripartal expression of NFKB1
and TBK1 due to dietary lipid was suggestive of a local inflammatory response. At
amounts fed prepartum, both FO and SFAT were effective in upregulating the
adipose tissue PPAR<U+03B3>-gene network. In contrast, only SFAT led to sustaining that 
response. Overall, the observed expression patterns are suggestive of an
adipogenic regulatory mechanism particularly responsive to SFAT.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22118082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 1;21(5):1111-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr540. Epub 2011 Nov
17.

C/EBPß and RUNX2 cooperate to degrade cartilage with MMP-13 as the target and
HIF-2a as the inducer in chondrocytes.

Hirata M(1), Kugimiya F, Fukai A, Saito T, Yano F, Ikeda T, Mabuchi A, Sapkota
BR, Akune T, Nishida N, Yoshimura N, Nakagawa T, Tokunaga K, Nakamura K, Chung
UI, Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory and Motor System Medicine, University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. hiratam-tky@umin.ac.jp

To elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying the endochondral ossification
process during the skeletal growth and osteoarthritis (OA) development, we
examined the signal network around CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-ß (C/EBPß,
encoded by CEBPB), a potent regulator of this process. Computational predictions 
and a C/EBP motif-reporter assay identified RUNX2 as the most potent
transcriptional partner of C/EBPß in chondrocytes. C/EBPß and RUNX2 were induced 
and co-localized in highly differentiated chondrocytes during the skeletal growth
and OA development of mice and humans. The compound knockout of Cebpb and Runx2
in mice caused growth retardation and resistance to OA with decreases in
cartilage degradation and matrix metalloproteinase-13 (Mmp-13) expression. C/EBPß
and RUNX2 cooperatively enhanced promoter activity of MMP13 through specific
binding to a C/EBP-binding motif and an osteoblast-specific cis-acting element 2 
motif as a protein complex. Human genetic studies failed to show the association 
of human CEBPB gene polymorphisms with knee OA, nor was there a genetic variation
around the identified responsive region in the human MMP13 promoter. However,
hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a), a functional and genetic regulator of knee 
OA through promoting endochondral ossification, was identified as a potent and
functional inducer of C/EBPß expression in chondrocytes by the CEBPB promoter
assay. Hence, C/EBPß and RUNX2, with MMP-13 as the target and HIF-2a as the
inducer, control cartilage degradation. This molecular network in chondrocytes
may represent a therapeutic target for OA.

PMID: 22095691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nature. 2011 Nov 13;480(7377):383-6. doi: 10.1038/nature10595.

Regulatory evolution through divergence of a phosphoswitch in the transcription
factor CEBPB.

Lynch VJ(1), May G, Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Systems Biology Institute and Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.
vincent.j.lynch@yale.edu

There is an emerging consensus that gene regulation evolves through changes in
cis-regulatory elements and transcription factors. Although it is clear how
nucleotide substitutions in cis-regulatory elements affect gene expression, it is
not clear how amino-acid substitutions in transcription factors influence gene
regulation. Here we show that amino-acid changes in the transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-ß (CEBPB, also known as C/EBP-ß) in the
stem-lineage of placental mammals changed the way it responds to cyclic
AMP/protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) signalling. By functionally analysing resurrected
ancestral proteins, we identify three amino-acid substitutions in an internal
regulatory domain of CEBPB that are responsible for the novel function. These
amino-acid substitutions reorganize the location of key phosphorylation sites,
introducing a new site and removing two ancestral sites, reversing the response
of CEBPB to GSK-3ß-mediated phosphorylation from repression to activation. We
conclude that changing the response of transcription factors to signalling
pathways can be an important mechanism of gene regulatory evolution.

PMID: 22080951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 18;31(2):351-65. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.390. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

FOG-1 and GATA-1 act sequentially to specify definitive megakaryocytic and
erythroid progenitors.

Mancini E(1), Sanjuan-Pla A, Luciani L, Moore S, Grover A, Zay A, Rasmussen KD,
Luc S, Bilbao D, O'Carroll D, Jacobsen SE, Nerlov C.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Mouse Biology Unit, Monterotondo, Italy.

The transcription factors that control lineage specification of haematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) have been well described for the myeloid and lymphoid lineages,
whereas transcriptional control of erythroid (E) and megakaryocytic (Mk) fate is 
less understood. We here use conditional removal of the GATA-1 and FOG-1
transcription factors to identify FOG-1 as required for the formation of all
committed Mk- and E-lineage progenitors, whereas GATA-1 was observed to be
specifically required for E-lineage commitment. FOG-1-deficient HSCs and
preMegEs, the latter normally bipotent for the Mk and E lineages, underwent
myeloid transcriptional reprogramming, and formed myeloid, but not erythroid and 
megakaryocytic cells in vitro. These results identify FOG-1 and GATA-1 as
required for formation of bipotent Mk/E progenitors and their E-lineage
commitment, respectively, and show that FOG-1 mediates transcriptional Mk/E
programming of HSCs as well as their subsequent Mk/E-lineage commitment. Finally,
C/EBPs and FOG-1 exhibited transcriptional cross-regulation in early
myelo-erythroid progenitors making their functional antagonism a potential
mechanism for separation of the myeloid and Mk/E lineages.

PMCID: PMC3261555
PMID: 22068055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Scand J Immunol. 2012 Feb;75(2):184-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02648.x.

Altered PKR Signalling and C<U+200A>/<U+200A>EBPß Expression is Associated with HLA-B27
Expression in Monocytic Cells.

Sahlberg AS(1), Ruuska M(1), Colbert RA(1), Granfors K(1), Penttinen MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Welfare, Turku, FinlandNIAMS, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USADepartment of Medical Microbiology,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Infection caused by certain gram-negative bacteria, e.g. Salmonella, can trigger 
inflammatory joint disease reactive arthritis (ReA). It is suggested that the
disease-triggering bacteria or bacterial components persist in patients for an
abnormally long time. Development of ReA is strongly associated with tissue
antigen HLA-B27. Previously, we reported an enhanced replication of Salmonella
enteritidis and altered p38 MAP kinase signalling in HLA-B27-expressing monocytic
cells. Here we aimed to investigate the role of HLA-B27 in regulation of
double-stranded RNA-activated kinase (PKR)-related signalling in
Salmonella-infected or Salmonella lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated human U937 
monocytic cells, as PKR has been reported to modify p38 signalling in
Salmonella-infected cells. In cells expressing HLA-B27, PKR is overexpressed and 
hypophosphorylated, and the expression of transcription factor CCAAT enhancer
binding protein beta (C/EBPß) is increased upon Salmonella infection and LPS
stimulation. The expression of C/EBPß is PKR-dependent in LPS-stimulated mock
cells, whereas in LPS-stimulated B27 cells the majority of C/EBPß is expressed in
a PKR-independent manner. Our results show that the expression of HLA-B27
disturbs the PKR-mediated signalling pathway. Moreover, altered signalling is
related to misfolding-linked Glu45 in the B pocket of the HLA-B27 heavy chain. We
suggest that the expression of HLA-B27 HCs modulates the intracellular
environment of monocyte/macrophages and the mechanisms that are important in
eliminating intracellular S. enteritidis by altering the intracellular
signalling. This phenomenon is at least partly dependent on the misfolding
feature of the B27 molecule. These observations offer a novel mechanism by which 
HLA-B27 may modulate inflammatory response induced by ReA-triggering bacteria.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3271165
PMID: 21988375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025205. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Negative regulation of C/EBPbeta1 by sumoylation in breast cancer cells.

Atwood AA(1), Jerrell R, Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

Sumoylation is a post-translational modification that is oftentimes deregulated
in diseases such as cancer. Transcription factors are frequent targets of
sumoylation and modification by SUMO can affect subcellular localization,
transcriptional activity, and stability of the target protein. C/EBPbeta1 is one 
such transcription factor that is modified by SUMO-2/3. Non-sumoylated
C/EBPbeta1, p52-C/EBPbeta1, is expressed in normal mammary epithelial cells but
not breast cancer cell lines and plays a role in oncogene-induced senescence, a
tumor suppressive mechanism. Although p52-C/EBPbeta1 is not observed via
immunoblot in breast cancer cell lines, higher molecular weight bands are
observed when breast cancer cell lines are subjected to immunoblot analysis with 
a C/EBPbeta1-specific antibody. We show that exogenously expressed C/EBPbeta1 is 
sumoylated in breast cancer cells, and that the higher molecular weight bands we 
observe in anti-C/EBPbeta1 immunoblots of breast cancer cell lines is sumoylated 
C/EBPbeta1. Phosphorylation oftentimes enhances sumoylation, and phosphorylation 
cascades are activated in breast cancer cells. We demonstrate that
phosphorylation of C/EBPbeta1Thr235 by Erk-2 enhances sumoylation of C/EBPbeta1
in vitro. In addition, sumoylated C/EBPbeta1 is phosphorylated on Thr235 and
mutation of Thr235 to alanine leads to a decrease in sumoylation of C/EBPbeta1.
Finally, using a C/EBPbeta1-SUMO fusion protein we show that constitutive
sumoylation of C/EBPbeta1 completely blocks its capability to induce senescence
in WI38 fibroblasts expressing hTERT. Thus, sumolylation of C/EBPbeta1 in breast 
cancer cells may be a mechanism to circumvent oncogene-induced senescence.

PMCID: PMC3182197
PMID: 21980398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Nov;226(11):2807-16. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22625.

Role of epimorphin in bile duct formation of rat liver epithelial stem-like
cells: involvement of small G protein RhoA and C/EBPß.

Jia Y(1), Yao H, Zhou J, Chen L, Zeng Q, Yuan H, Shi L, Nan X, Wang Y, Yue W, Pei
X.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Lab, Beijing Institute of Transfusion
Medicine, Beijing, China.

Epimorphin/syntaxin 2 is a high conserved and very abundant protein involved in
epithelial morphogenesis in various organs. We have shown recently that
epimorphin (EPM), a protein exclusively expressed on the surface of hepatic
stellate cells and myofibroblasts of the liver, induces bile duct formation of
hepatic stem-like cells (WB-F344 cells) in a putative biophysical way. Therefore,
the aim of this study was to present some of the molecular mechanisms by which
EPM mediates bile duct formation. We established a biliary differentiation model 
by co-culture of EPM-overexpressed mesenchymal cells (PT67(EPM)) with WB-F344
cells. Here, we showed that EPM could promote WB-F344 cells differentiation into 
bile duct-like structures. Biliary differentiation markers were also elevated by 
EPM including Yp, Cx43, aquaporin-1, CK19, and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase
(GGT). Moreover, the signaling pathway of EPM was analyzed by focal adhesion
kinase (FAK), extracellular regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), and RhoA Western blot.
Also, a dominant negative (DN) RhoA-WB-F344 cell line (WB(RhoA-DN)) was
constructed. We found that the levels of phosphorylation (p) of FAK and ERK1/2
were up-regulated by EPM. Most importantly, we also showed that RhoA is necessary
for EPM-induced activation of FAK and ERK1/2 and bile duct formation. In
addition, a dual luciferase-reporter assay and CHIP assay was performed to reveal
that EPM regulates GGT IV and GGT V expression differentially, possibly mediated 
by C/EBPß. Taken together, these data demonstrated that EPM regulates bile duct
formation of WB-F344 cells through effects on RhoA and C/EBPß, implicating a dual
aspect of this morphoregulator in bile duct epithelial morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21935930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024600. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Transcriptional profiling of chondrodysplasia growth plate cartilage reveals
adaptive ER-stress networks that allow survival but disrupt hypertrophy.

Cameron TL(1), Bell KM, Tatarczuch L, Mackie EJ, Rajpar MH, McDermott BT,
Boot-Handford RP, Bateman JF.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, Schmid type (MCDS) is characterized by mild short
stature and growth plate hypertrophic zone expansion, and caused by collagen X
mutations. We recently demonstrated the central importance of ER stress in the
pathology of MCDS by recapitulating the disease phenotype by expressing
misfolding forms of collagen X (Schmid) or thyroglobulin (Cog) in the
hypertrophic zone. Here we characterize the Schmid and Cog ER stress signaling
networks by transcriptional profiling of microdissected mutant and wildtype
hypertrophic zones. Both models displayed similar unfolded protein responses
(UPRs), involving activation of canonical ER stress sensors and upregulation of
their downstream targets, including molecular chaperones, foldases, and
ER-associated degradation machinery. Also upregulated were the emerging UPR
regulators Wfs1 and Syvn1, recently identified UPR components including Armet and
Creld2, and genes not previously implicated in ER stress such as Steap1 and
Fgf21. Despite upregulation of the Chop/Cebpb pathway, apoptosis was not
increased in mutant hypertrophic zones. Ultrastructural analysis of mutant growth
plates revealed ER stress and disrupted chondrocyte maturation throughout mutant 
hypertrophic zones. This disruption was defined by profiling the expression of
wildtype growth plate zone gene signatures in the mutant hypertrophic zones.
Hypertrophic zone gene upregulation and proliferative zone gene downregulation
were both inhibited in Schmid hypertrophic zones, resulting in the persistence of
a proliferative chondrocyte-like expression profile in ER-stressed Schmid
chondrocytes. Our findings provide a transcriptional map of two chondrocyte UPR
gene networks in vivo, and define the consequences of UPR activation for the
adaptation, differentiation, and survival of chondrocytes experiencing ER stress 
during hypertrophy. Thus they provide important insights into ER stress signaling
and its impact on cartilage pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC3174197
PMID: 21935428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 14;30(18):3663-4. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.288.

C/EBPß: lost beyond translation.

Peeper DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. d.peeper@nki.nl

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2011 Sep 14;30(18):3714-28.

PMCID: PMC3173799
PMID: 21915145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Anim Sci. 2012 Jan;90(1):54-66. doi: 10.2527/jas.2011-4057. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

The forage type (grazing versus hay pasture) fed to ewes and the lamb sex affect 
fatty acid profile and lipogenic gene expression in the longissimus muscle of
suckling lambs.

Dervishi E(1), Joy M, Alvarez-Rodriguez J, Serrano M, Calvo JH.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tecnología en Producción Animal, Centro de Investigación y
Tecnología Agroalimentaria (CITA), Avda Montañana 930, 50059 Zaragoza, Spain.

Meat intramuscular fat (IMF) contributes to meat quality and consumer acceptance.
Molecular events that occur during IMF deposition and the identification of genes
that are differentially expressed during this process are important to the design
of an optimal nutrition plan for animals. In the present study, we examined the
effect of the forage type (grazing vs. hay pasture) fed to ewes and the effect of
lamb sex on the LM fatty acid (FA) profile and gene expression of suckling lambs 
(10 to 12 kg of BW at slaughter); ewes received pasture hay (PH) or grazed
pasture (GRE). Forage type had a significant effect on IMF FA profile. Ewes
grazing green forage (GRE) promoted the formation and deposition of vaccenic acid
(C18:1n-7), CLA, and PUFA n-3 in LM from their suckling lambs (P < 0.05). We
found that forage type affected the expression of the sterol regulatory element
binding transcription factor 1 (SREBF1) gene in females. However, in males, it
modulated stearoyl CoA desaturase (SCD) gene expression (P < 0.05). Moreover, our
results showed that females, independent of the diet of the ewes (PH or GRE), are
predisposed to develop fat and to upregulate the expression of key genes of
transcriptional factors PPARA, CEBPB, SREBF1, and lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and
SCD (P < 0.05). The data suggest that SREBF1, SCD, and most likely CEBPB gene
expression in young suckling lambs is modulated by both lamb sex and forage type 
fed to ewes. Fatty acid indicators PUFA, n-6/n-3, CLA, and SFA are closely
related to LPL, SCD, PPARA, and CEBPB gene expression depending on animal sex or 
the diet of ewes. This study suggests that grazing pasture affects FA composition
promoting greater vaccenic, CLA, and total PUFA n-3 FA in female and male
suckling lambs, and it is mediated through the regulation of lipogenic enzyme
expression.

PMID: 21856892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Eur Respir J. 2012 Mar;39(3):705-11. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00174310. Epub 2011
Aug 18.

Cigarette smoke inhibits lung fibroblast proliferation by translational
mechanisms.

Miglino N(1), Roth M, Lardinois D, Sadowski C, Tamm M, Borger P.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology, Pulmonary Cell Research, Dept of Biomedicine, University Hospital 
Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, CH-4031 Basel, Switzerland. nicola.miglino@unibas.ch

Cigarette smoke is a major cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
and emphysema. Although cigarette smoke represses cellular proliferation, the
molecular mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are unknown.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) are key regulators of cell cycle
progression, differentiation and pro-inflammatory gene expression, are regulated 
predominantly at the translational level and may be involved in the pathogenesis 
of COPD. The aim of this study was to assess the effect of cigarette smoke on
proliferation and the expression and translational regulation of C/EBPa and
C/EBPß in nondiseased primary human lung fibroblasts. Fibroblasts were exposed to
cigarette smoke-conditioned medium (10% and 20% for 24 h). Proliferation was
determined by [(3)H]thymidine incorporation. Protein expression levels were
determined by immunoblotting and translation was monitored using a translation
control reporter system. Cigarette smoke significantly reduced fibroblast
proliferation and significantly upregulated full-length C/EBPa and C/EBPß
proteins due to a shift in the translational control of CEBPA and CEBPB mRNAs.
This shift involved the re-initiation of mRNA translation via the regulatory
upstream open reading frame, which coincided with increased interleukin-8 release
and a decrease in functional elastin level. These findings provide a novel
mechanism to understanding the tissue remodelling observed in the lungs of COPD
patients.

PMID: 21852335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(19):9877-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05558-11. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

A Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded ortholog of microRNA miR-155
induces human splenic B-cell expansion in NOD/LtSz-scid IL2R<U+03B3>null mice.

Boss IW(1), Nadeau PE, Abbott JR, Yang Y, Mergia A, Renne R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of
Florida,Gainesville, FL, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNA molecules that function as
posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression. Kaposi's sarcoma
(KS)-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), a B-cell-tropic virus associated with KS and 
B-cell lymphomas, encodes 12 miRNA genes that are highly expressed in these tumor
cells. One viral miRNA, miR-K12-11, shares 100% seed sequence homology with
hsa-miR-155, an oncogenic human miRNA that functions as a key regulator of
hematopoiesis and B-cell differentiation. So far, in vitro studies have shown
that both miRNAs can regulate a common set of cellular target genes, suggesting
that miR-K12-11 may mimic miR-155 function. To comparatively study miR-K12-11 and
miR-155 function in vivo, we used a foamy virus vector to express the miRNAs in
human hematopoietic progenitors and performed immune reconstitutions in
NOD/LtSz-scid IL2R<U+03B3>(null) mice. We found that ectopic expression of miR-K12-11 or
miR-155 leads to a significant expansion of the CD19(+) B-cell population in the 
spleen. Subsequent quantitative PCR analyses of these splenic B cells revealed
that C/EBPß, a transcriptional regulator of interleukin-6 that is linked to
B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders, is downregulated when either miR-K12-11 or 
miR-155 is ectopically expressed. In addition, inhibition of miR-K12-11 function 
using antagomirs in KSHV-infected human primary effusion lymphoma B cells
resulted in derepression of C/EBPß transcript levels. This in vivo study
validates miR-K12-11 as a functional ortholog of miR-155 in the context of
hematopoiesis and suggests a novel mechanism by which KSHV miR-K12-11 induces
splenic B-cell expansion and potentially KSHV-associated lymphomagenesis by
targeting C/EBPß.

PMCID: PMC3196388
PMID: 21813606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. EMBO J. 2011 Jul 29;30(18):3714-28. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.250.

3'UTR elements inhibit Ras-induced C/EBPß post-translational activation and
senescence in tumour cells.

Basu SK(1), Malik R, Huggins CJ, Lee S, Sebastian T, Sakchaisri K, Quiñones OA,
Alvord WG, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick, NIH, MD, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Sep 14;30(18):3663-4.

C/EBPß is an auto-repressed protein that becomes post-translationally activated
by Ras-MEK-ERK signalling. C/EBPß is required for oncogene-induced senescence
(OIS) of primary fibroblasts, but also displays pro-oncogenic functions in many
tumour cells. Here, we show that C/EBPß activation by H-Ras(V12) is suppressed in
immortalized/transformed cells, but not in primary cells, by its 3' untranslated 
region (3'UTR). 3'UTR sequences inhibited Ras-induced cytostatic activity of
C/EBPß, DNA binding, transactivation, phosphorylation, and homodimerization,
without significantly affecting protein expression. The 3'UTR suppressed
induction of senescence-associated C/EBPß target genes, while promoting
expression of genes linked to cancers and TGFß signalling. An AU-rich element
(ARE) and its cognate RNA-binding protein, HuR, were required for 3'UTR
inhibition. These components also excluded the Cebpb mRNA from a perinuclear
cytoplasmic region that contains activated ERK1/2, indicating that the site of
C/EBPß translation controls de-repression by Ras signalling. Notably, 3'UTR
inhibition and Cebpb mRNA compartmentalization were absent in primary
fibroblasts, allowing Ras-induced C/EBPß activation and OIS to proceed. Our
findings reveal a novel mechanism whereby non-coding mRNA sequences selectively
regulate C/EBPß activity and suppress its anti-oncogenic functions.

PMCID: PMC3173785
PMID: 21804532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):1083-8. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092304. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Synergistic regulation of human oxytocin receptor promoter by CCAAT/
enhancer-binding protein and RELA.

Khanjani S(1), Terzidou V, Lee YS, Thornton S, Johnson MR, Bennett PR.

Author information: 
(1)Parturition Research Group, Institute of Reproductive and Developmental
Biology, Imperial College London, London, UK. s.khanjani@imperial.ac.uk

Uterine activation is associated with increased oxytocin receptor (OXTR)
expression and myometrial sensitivity to oxytocin. The OXTR promoter contains
binding sites for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) and nuclear factor-kappa 
B p65 (RELA). RELA and CEBP beta (CEBPB) play a synergistic role in OXTR promoter
activation. We created deletions in a DNA construct consisting of 850 bp upstream
of the transcription start site linked to luc reporter to identify the CIS
element of the OXTR promoter responsible for the synergistic activation by RELA
and CEBPB. Deletion from -712 to -692 bp eliminated synergy, demonstrating that
the critical region lies within these 20 bp. Binding studies showed that this
sequence binds both RELA and CEBPB. The 20-bp critical region for synergistic
activation of OXTR requires full-length RELA but only the basic leucine zipper
domain of CEBPB.

PMID: 21734268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 20;13(3):R65. doi: 10.1186/bcr2902.

Stat3 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBP-beta) regulate Jab1/CSN5
expression in mammary carcinoma cells.

Shackleford TJ(1), Zhang Q, Tian L, Vu TT, Korapati AL, Baumgartner AM, Le XF,
Liao WS, Claret FX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas - MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The c-Jun coactivator, Jun activation-domain binding protein 1
(Jab1) also known as the fifth component of the COP9 signalosome complex (CSN5), 
is a novel candidate oncogene whose aberrant expression contributes to the
progression of breast carcinoma and other human cancers. The mechanism of Jab1
gene expression and its deregulation in cancer cells remains to be identified. We
therefore investigated the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of Jab1
expression in human breast carcinoma cells.
METHODS: To identify potential regulators of Jab1 transcription, we cloned the 5'
upstream region of the human Jab1 gene and mapped its transcriptional start site.
We identified binding sequences for the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
and GATA, as well as a signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3)
consensus sequence overlapping the C/EBP site, using 5'- deletion analysis and a 
gene reporter assay. Mutational analysis of these binding sites was performed to 
confirm their roles in promoting Jab1 transcription in breast cancer cells. We
further confirmed these binding sites using electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. We also analyzed whether
the siRNA-mediated inactivation of Stat3 and Src could reduce Jab1-promoter
activity and whether interleukine-6 (IL-6) could mediate increased Jab1
expression through Stat3 signaling.
RESULTS: We identified binding sequences for C/EBP, GATA, as well as a Stat3
consensus sequence overlapping the C/EBP site in the promoter region of Jab1.
C/EBP-beta2 is a potential transcriptional activator of Jab1 and mutation of the 
C/EBP/Stat3 binding site significantly reduced Jab1-promoter activity. In
addition, inhibiting Stat3 significantly reduced Jab1-promoter activation. EMSA
and ChIP assays confirmed that C/EBP, GATA1 and Stat3 bind to Jab1 promoter in
breast carcinoma cells. We also found that Src, an activator of Stat3, is
involved in Jab1-promoter activation. siRNA knockdown of Src reduced the
Jab1-promoter activity, similar to the results seen when Stat3 was inhibited in
breast carcinoma cells. Interestingly, reactivation of Stat3 in normal mammary
epithelial cells (MCF-10A, MCF-10F) is sufficient to reactivate Jab1 expression. 
Treatment with the cytokine IL-6 resulted in increased Jab1 expression that was
blocked by inhibition of Stat3.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal a novel mechanism of Jab1 gene regulation and 
provide functional and mechanistic links between the Src/Stat3 and IL-6/Stat3
signaling axes that are involved in the activation of Jab1 transcription and
regulation of this novel oncogenic protein.

PMCID: PMC3218954
PMID: 21689417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mod Pathol. 2011 Nov;24(11):1421-32. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.102. Epub 2011
Jun 10.

Clonally related histiocytic/dendritic cell sarcoma and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma: a study of seven cases.

Shao H(1), Xi L, Raffeld M, Feldman AL, Ketterling RP, Knudson R,
Rodriguez-Canales J, Hanson J, Pittaluga S, Jaffe ES.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Histiocytic and interdigitating dendritic cell sarcomas are rare tumors
originating from bone marrow-derived myeloid stem cells. Recent studies have
shown evidence of cross-lineage transdifferentiation of B cells in follicular
lymphoma to histiocytic and dendritic cell sarcomas. In this study, we report the
morphologic, molecular and cytogenetic analysis of seven cases of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) associated with
histiocytic and dendritic cell sarcomas. All seven patients were elderly males
(median age 71 years). The B-cell neoplasms preceded the development of the
histiocytic and dendritic cell sarcomas in six of seven patients, and one patient
had both tumors diagnosed at the same time. The tumors included four
interdigitating dendritic cell sarcomas: one Langerhans cell sarcoma, one
histiocytic sarcoma and one immature neoplasm with evidence of histiocytic
origin. Laser-capture microdissection and PCR analysis showed identical clonal
immunoglobulin gene rearrangements in the two phenotypically distinct components 
in all cases. There was a preferential usage of IGHV4-39 by the V-D-J gene
rearrangement. By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, two cases
showed deletion 17p in both components, whereas four cases had normal cytogenetic
findings by FISH in the CLL/SLL cells, but acquired cytogenetic abnormalities in 
the corresponding histiocytic and dendritic tumors. Chromosome 17p abnormalities 
were the most common cytogenetic abnormality detected in the sarcomas, seen in
five of six cases studied. Compared with the CLL/SLL cells, the
histiocytic/dendritic cells were largely negative for PAX5, but showed strong
expression of PU.1 and variable and weak expression of CEBPß. Our study provides 
evidence for transdifferentiation of CLL/SLL B cells to tumors of dendritic and
less often histiocytic lineage, and suggests that secondary genetic events may
play a role in this phenomenon.

PMCID: PMC3175277
PMID: 21666687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Oct;31(7):1089-101. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9708-z. Epub
2011 May 26.

Expression analysis of prestin and selected transcription factors in newborn
rats.

Gross J(1), Angerstein M, Fuchs J, Stute K, Mazurek B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
johann.gross@charite.de

Transcription factors (TFs) have a central role to play in regulating gene
expression. To analyze the co-expression patterns of selected TFs with the motor 
protein prestin of the outer hair cells, we applied an real-time PCR approach
combining several kinds of information: (i) expression changes during postnatal
development, (ii) expression changes by exposure of organotypic cultures of the
organ of Corti to factors which significantly affect prestin expression [thyroid 
hormone (T4), retinoic acid (RA), butyric acid (BA), increased KCl concentration]
and (iii) changes along the apical-basal gradient. We found that the mRNA levels 
of the TF Brn-3c (Pou4f3), a member of the POU family, are significantly
associated with the regulation of prestin during postnatal development and in
cultures supplemented with T4 (0.5 µM), BA (0.5-2.0 mM), and high KCl (50 mM)
concentration. The mRNA level of the constitutively active TF C/ebpb
(CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta) correlates positively with the prestin
expression during postnatal development and in cultures exposed to T4 and RA
(50-100 µM). The mRNA levels of the calcium-dependent TF CaRF correlates
significantly with the prestin expression in cultures exposed to T4 and high KCl 
concentration. The observed coexpression patterns may suggest that the TFs
Brn-3c, C/ebpb, and Carf contribute to regulating the expression of prestin under
the investigated conditions.

PMID: 21614551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 15;17(14):4650-60. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0127. 
Epub 2011 May 24.

Genetic aberrations leading to MAPK pathway activation mediate oncogene-induced
senescence in sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas.

Jacob K(1), Quang-Khuong DA, Jones DT, Witt H, Lambert S, Albrecht S, Witt O,
Vezina C, Shirinian M, Faury D, Garami M, Hauser P, Klekner A, Bognar L, Farmer
JP, Montes JL, Atkinson J, Hawkins C, Korshunov A, Collins VP, Pfister SM, Tabori
U, Jabado N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University Health Center Research
Institute, Montreal, Canada.

PURPOSE: Oncogenic BRAF/Ras or NF1 loss can potentially trigger oncogene-induced 
senescence (OIS) through activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway. Somatic genetic abnormalities affecting this pathway occur in the
majority of pilocytic astrocytomas (PA), the most prevalent brain neoplasm in
children. We investigated whether OIS is induced in PA.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We tested expression of established senescence markers in
three independent cohorts of sporadic PA. We also assessed for OIS in vitro,
using forced expression of wild-type and V600E-mutant BRAF in two astrocytic cell
lines: human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)-immortalized astrocytes and
fetal astrocytes.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that PAs are senescent as evidenced by marked
senescence-associated acidic ß-galactosidase activity, low KI-67 index, and
induction of p16(INK4a) but not p53 in the majority of 52 PA samples (46 of 52;
88.5%). Overexpression of a number of senescence-associated genes [CDKN2A (p16), 
CDKN1A (p21), CEBPB, GADD45A, and IGFBP7] was shown at the mRNA level in two
independent PA tumor series. In vitro, sustained activation of wild-type or
mutant BRAF induced OIS in both astrocytic cell lines. Loss of p16(INK4a) in
immortalized astrocytes abrogated OIS, indicative of the role of this pathway in 
mediating this phenomenon in astrocytes. OIS is a mechanism of tumor suppression 
that restricts the progression of benign tumors. We show that it is triggered in 
PAs through p16(INK4a) pathway induction following aberrant MAPK activation.
CONCLUSIONS: OIS may account for the slow growth pattern in PA, the lack of
progression to higher-grade astrocytomas, and the high overall survival of
affected patients.

PMID: 21610151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(14):2997-3008. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05096-11. Epub 2011
May 23.

The Ric-8B gene is highly expressed in proliferating preosteoblastic cells and
downregulated during osteoblast differentiation in a SWI/SNF- and
C/EBPbeta-mediated manner.

Grandy R(1), Sepulveda H, Aguilar R, Pihan P, Henriquez B, Olate J, Montecino M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, Faculty of Biological Sciences and Faculty of 
Medicine, and FONDAP Center forGenome Regulation, Universidad Andres Bello,
Santiago, Chile.

The Ric-8 gene encodes a guanine exchange factor (GEF) that modulates G
protein-mediated signaling, exhibiting a relevant role during regulation of cell 
division. In mammals, two Ric-8 homologues have been reported (Ric-8A and
Ric-8B), and recent studies indicate equivalent roles for each protein. Here, we 
show that the Ric-8B gene is negatively regulated during osteoblast
differentiation by the transcription factor C/EBPß. Only the larger C/EBPß
isoform (C/EBPß-LAP*) downregulates Ric-8B gene promoter activity in osteoblastic
cells. Accordingly, knockdown of C/EBPß expression by small intefering RNA in
osteoblastic cells results in a significant increase of Ric-8B gene expression.
Transient overexpression of Brg1 or Brm, the catalytic subunits of the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex, inhibits Ric-8B promoter activity. Also, the
presence of inactive SWI/SNF complexes in osteoblastic cells results in increased
endogenous Ric-8B transcription, indicating that SWI/SNF activity negatively
regulates Ric-8B expression. During osteoblast differentiation, Ric-8B gene
repression is accompanied by changes in nucleosome placement at the proximal
Ric-8B gene promoter and reduced accessibility to regulatory sequences.

PMCID: PMC3133387
PMID: 21606199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. RNA Biol. 2011 Jul-Aug;8(4):648-64. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.4.15583. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Gene expression profiling indicate role of ER stress in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster 
induced apoptosis in HEK293T cells.

Chhabra R(1), Dubey R, Saini N.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology,
Delhi, India.

Previously, we had reported that overexpression of miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster
induces caspase-dependent and -independent apoptosis via JNK in human embryonic
kidney (HEK293T) cells. Herein, we describe the molecular mechanism(s)
responsible for miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster induced apoptosis. Gene expression
profiling was used to characterize the transcriptional response to
miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster overexpression in HEK293T cells. The microarray analysis
gave 1,025 differentially expressed genes and analysis of the gene expression
data with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software revealed p53 signaling,
oxidative stress response and mitochondrial dysfunction among the top processes
being affected. This data substantiates our previous study where we had reported 
increase of ROS and the release of proapoptotic factors such as cytochrome c (cyt
c) and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to cytosol.
Additionally, components of ER stress-mediated apoptosis pathway i.e., C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP/DDIT3/GADD153) and TRIB3, an Akt inhibitor were found to
be significantly enriched. Also, the enhanced expression of ATF3 and ATF4 was
observed at RNA as well as protein level in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster
overexpressed HEK293T cells. Induction of BIM appeared to be specific, because ER
stress caused only a minor change in the expression of the related BH3-only
proteins BID or PUMA. The fact that miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster triggered
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) was further established by the increase 
in cytosolic calcium levels after overexpression of this cluster in HEK293T
cells. These findings were also supported by PANTHER analysis wherein biological 
process categories of apoptosis and stress response were enriched. Taken
together, this work underlines the role of ER stress in miR-23a~27a~24-2 cluster 
mediated apoptosis in HEK293T cells. Since the detailed knowledge of this cluster
induced apoptosis has now been elucidated, the in vivo study of this cluster
would help evaluate the prospect of its use as a therapeutic in diseases known to
occur because of deregulation of apoptosis.

PMID: 21593605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):22716-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.152538. Epub 2011
May 10.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta inhibits proliferation in monocytic cells by 
affecting the retinoblastoma protein/E2F/cyclin E pathway but is not directly
required for macrophage morphology.

Gutsch R(1), Kandemir JD, Pietsch D, Cappello C, Meyer J, Simanowski K, Huber R, 
Brand K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse
1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Monocytic differentiation is orchestrated by complex networks that are not fully 
understood. This study further elucidates the involvement of transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß). Initially, we demonstrated a marked
increase in nuclear C/EBPß-liver-enriched activating protein*
(LAP*)/liver-enriched activating protein (LAP) levels and LAP/liver-enriched
inhibiting protein (LIP) ratios in phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-treated 
differentiating THP-1 premonocytic cells accompanied by reduced proliferation. To
directly study C/EBPß effects on monocytic cells, we generated novel
THP-1-derived (low endogenous C/EBPß) cell lines stably overexpressing C/EBPß
isoforms. Most importantly, cells predominantly overexpressing LAP*
(C/EBPß-long), but not those overexpressing LIP (C/EBPß-short), exhibited a
reduced proliferation, with no effect on morphology. PMA-induced inhibition of
proliferation was attenuated in C/EBPß-short cells. In C/EBPß(WT) macrophage-like
cells (high endogenous C/EBPß), we measured a reduced proliferation/cycling index
compared with C/EBPß(KO). The typical macrophage morphology was only observed in 
C/EBPß(WT), whereas C/EBPß(KO) stayed round. C/EBPa did not compensate for C/EBPß
effects on proliferation/morphology. Serum reduction, an independent approach
known to inhibit proliferation, induced macrophage morphology in C/EBPß(KO)
macrophage-like cells but not THP-1. In PMA-treated THP-1 and C/EBPß-long cells, 
a reduced phosphorylation of cell cycle repressor retinoblastoma was found. In
addition, C/EBPß-long cells showed reduced c-Myc expression accompanied by
increased CDK inhibitor p27 and reduced cyclin D1 levels. Finally, C/EBPß-long
and C/EBPß(WT) cells exhibited low E2F1 and cyclin E levels, and C/EBPß
overexpression was found to inhibit cyclin E1 promoter-dependent transcription.
Our results suggest that C/EBPß reduces monocytic proliferation by affecting the 
retinoblastoma/E2F/cyclin E pathway and that it may contribute to, but is not
directly required for, macrophage morphology. Inhibition of proliferation by
C/EBPß may be important for coordinated monocytic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3123039
PMID: 21558273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Aug;126(1-2):46-54. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.04.006. Epub 2011 Apr 29.

Structure-function analysis of vitamin D(2) analogs as potential inducers of
leukemia differentiation and inhibitors of prostate cancer proliferation.

Baurska H(1), Klopot A, Kielbinski M, Chrobak A, Wijas E, Kutner A, Marcinkowska 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Wroclaw, Tamka, Poland.

We characterized a structure-function relationships of four analogs of vitamin
D(2) with extended and branched side-chains. We tested their ability to induce
differentiation of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells both in vitro and ex 
vivo. Our experiments on five human cell lines revealed substantial differences
among tested analogs. Analogs with side-chains extended by one (PRI-1906) or two 
carbon units (PRI-1907) displayed similar or elevated cell-differentiating
activity in comparison to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1,25D), whereas further
extending side-chain resulted in substantially lower biological activity
(PRI-1908 and PRI-1909). Similar pattern of cell-differentiating activities to
that observed in human cell lines has also been shown in blast cells isolated
from patients diagnosed with AML. The ability of the analogs to activate
expression of CYP24A1 gene has been studied in HL60 cell line. The analog
PRI-1906 activated expression of CYP24A1 similarly to 1,25D, while PRI-1907
weaker than 1,25D. In addition, the analogs PRI-1906 and PRI-1907 were able to
moderately inhibit proliferation and significantly activate expression of CYP24A1
mRNA in prostate cancer cells PC-3. Finally, we examined the molecular actions
triggered by these analogs and found that their biological activity was related
to their ability to induce expression and nuclear translocation of VDR and
C/EBPß.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21550403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 May 8;8:42. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-42.

Genomic profile of Toll-like receptor pathways in traumatically brain-injured
mice: effect of exogenous progesterone.

Hua F(1), Wang J, Ishrat T, Wei W, Atif F, Sayeed I, Stein DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brain Research Laboratory, Emory University 
School of Medicine, 1365B Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. fhua2@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: Traumatic brain injury (TBI) causes acute inflammatory responses that
result in an enduring cascade of secondary neuronal loss and behavioral
impairments. It has been reported that progesterone (PROG) can inhibit the
increase of some inflammatory cytokines and inflammation-related factors induced 
by TBI. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a critical role in the induction and
regulation of immune/inflammatory responses. Therefore, in the present study, we 
examined the genomic profiles of TLR-mediated pathways in traumatically injured
brain and PROG's effects on these genes.
METHODS: Bilateral cortical impact injury to the medial frontal cortex was
induced in C57BL/6J mice. PROG was injected (i.p., 16 mg/kg body weight) at 1 and
6 h after surgery. Twenty-four hours post-surgery, mice were killed and
peri-contusional brain tissue was harvested for genomic detection and protein
measurement. RT-PCR arrays were used to measure the mRNA of 84 genes in
TLR-mediated pathways. Western blot, ELISA and immunohistochemistry were used to 
confirm the protein expression of genes of interest.
RESULTS: We found that 2 TLRs (TLR1 and 2), 5 adaptor/interacting proteins (CD14,
MD-1, HSPA1a, PGRP and Ticam2) and 13 target genes (Ccl2, Csf3, IL1a, IL1b,
IL1r1, IL6, IL-10, TNFa, Tnfrsf1a, Cebpb, Clec4e, Ptgs2 and Cxcl10) were
significantly up-regulated after injury. Administration of PROG significantly
down-regulated three of the 13 increased target genes after TBI (Ccl-2, IL-1b and
Cxcl-10), but did not inhibit the expression of any of the detected TLRs and
adaptor/interacting proteins. Rather, PROG up-regulated the expression of one TLR
(TLR9), 5 adaptor/interacting proteins, 5 effectors and 10 downstream target
genes. We confirmed that Ccl-2, Cxcl-10, TLR2 and TLR9 proteins were expressed in
brain tissue, a finding consistent with our observations of mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate that TBI can increase gene expression in
TLR-mediated pathways. PROG does not down-regulate the increased TLRs or their
adaptor proteins in traumatically injured brain. Reduction of the observed
inflammatory cytokines by PROG does not appear to be the result of inhibiting
TLRs or their adaptors in the acute stage of TBI.

PMCID: PMC3098165
PMID: 21549006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Meat Sci. 2011 Sep;89(1):91-7. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.04.003. Epub 2011 Apr 
14.

The effect of feeding system in the expression of genes related with fat
metabolism in semitendinous muscle in sheep.

Dervishi E(1), Serrano C, Joy M, Serrano M, Rodellar C, Calvo JH.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tecnología en Producción Animal, CITA, Zaragoza, Spain.
edervishi@aragon.es

The effect of feeding system on the expression of LPL, ACACA, FASN, FABP4, DGAT1,
SCD, CPT1B, PRKAA2, LEP, SREBP1, PPARG, PPARA and CEBPB genes in semitendinous
muscle was studied. Forty-four single born male lambs of the Rasa Aragonesa
breed, allocated to four different dietary treatments, were used: grazing
alfalfa, grazing alfalfa with supplement for lambs, indoor lambs with grazing
ewes and drylot. Significant differences were found in the expression of genes
LPL, ACACA, FASN, FABP4, CPT1B and SCD. Genes related to adipogenesis (LPL,
ACACA, FASN, FABP4, and SCD) are up-regulated in the intensive groups. In grazing
groups CPT1B gene expression, related to ß-oxidation process, is up-regulated.
The relative expression of CPT1B was 1.54 fold higher in ALF+S, and 0.43 and 0.37
fold lower in IND- GRE and IND, respectively. The results support the hypothesis 
that changes in fatty acid profile due to feeding system implicate changes in the
mRNA expression level of genes related with fat metabolism. Feeding strategy is
an important tool to manipulate intramuscular fatty acid profile in meat through 
altering gene expression of enzymes related with fat metabolism.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21543161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Aug;226(8):2016-24. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22542.

Modulation of intracellular glutathione affects adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells.

Vigilanza P(1), Aquilano K, Baldelli S, Rotilio G, Ciriolo MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Impairment of redox homeostasis has been extensively associated with obesity, as 
a consequence of the chronic inflammatory state present in overweight subjects.
Deregulation of glutathione (GSH), the most important non-enzymatic intracellular
anti-oxidant, induces insulin resistance in mature adipocytes, but data are
lacking about its effects on adipogenesis. In this report we demonstrate that
during adipogenesis of 3T3-L1 cells the GSH/GSSG ratio decreases, shifting redox 
status towards oxidizing conditions. Moreover, we demonstrate that inhibition of 
GSH synthesis, obtained by treatment with L-buthionine-sulfoximine (BSO),
enhances C/EBPß LAP/LIP ratio and PPAR<U+03B3> expression during mitotic clonal
expansion (MCE) stimulating adipogenesis. On the contrary, GSH ethyl ester
(GSHest) supplementation completely abrogates this process also in the presence
of BSO. GSH decrement during the first 24<U+2009>h of adipogenesis is sufficient to
induce higher triglyceride accumulation in differentiated adipocytes with respect
to control, whereas GSHest treatment inhibits lipid droplets formation. We
further demonstrate that Resveratrol (RV) could exert anti-adipogenic properties 
also by increasing GSH content through <U+03B3>-glutamyl-cysteine ligase (GCL)
induction. Overall data indicate that in pre-adipocytes the decrease of GSH
accelerates adipogenesis, suggesting that the use of agents able to maintain GSH 
redox status in adipose tissue, such as RV, could be promising in stopping the
lipogenic loop of obesity.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21520053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19364-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.224543. Epub 2011
Apr 12.

Adenomatous polyposis coli protein associates with C/EBP beta and increases
Bacillus anthracis edema toxin-stimulated gene expression in macrophages.

Larabee JL(1), Shakir SM, Hightower L, Ballard JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA. jason-larabee@ouhsc.edu

The production of cAMP from Bacillus anthracis edema toxin (ET) activates gene
expression in macrophages through a complex array of signaling pathways, most of 
which remain poorly defined. In this study, the tumor suppressor protein
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) was found to be important for the up-regulation 
of previously defined ET-stimulated genes (Vegfa, Ptgs2, Arg2, Cxcl2, Sdc1, and
Cebpb). A reduction in the expression of these genes after ET exposure was
observed when APC was disrupted in macrophages using siRNA or in bone
marrow-derived macrophages obtained from C57BL/6J-Apc(Min) mice, which are
heterozygous for a truncated form of APC. In line with this observation, ET
increased the expression of APC at the transcriptional level, leading to
increased amounts of APC in the nucleus. The mechanism utilized by APC to
increase ET-induced gene expression was determined to depend on the ability of
APC to interact with C/EBP ß, which is a transcription factor activated by cAMP. 
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments found that APC associated with C/EBP ß and that
levels of this complex increase after ET exposure. A further connection was
uncovered when silencing APC was determined to reduce the ET-induced
phosphorylation of C/EBP ß at Thr-188. This ET-mediated phosphorylation of C/EBP 
ß was blocked by glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) inhibitors, suggesting that
GSK-3 is involved in the activation of C/EBP ß and supporting the idea of APC
helping direct interactions between GSK-3 and C/EBP ß. These results indicate
that ET stimulates gene expression by promoting the formation of an inducible
protein complex consisting of APC and C/EBP ß.

PMCID: PMC3103314
PMID: 21487015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011 May;300(5):R1250-60. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00764.2010. Epub 2011 Feb 23.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß-deficiency enhances type 1 diabetic bone
phenotype by increasing marrow adiposity and bone resorption.

Motyl KJ(1), Raetz M, Tekalur SA, Schwartz RC, McCabe LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Integrative Physiology, Biomedical Imaging
Research Center, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Bone loss in type 1 diabetes is accompanied by increased marrow fat, which could 
directly reduce osteoblast activity or result from altered bone marrow
mesenchymal cell lineage selection (adipocyte vs. osteoblast). CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein beta (C/EBPß) is an important regulator of both adipocyte and
osteoblast differentiation. C/EBPß-null mice have delayed bone formation and
defective lipid accumulation in brown adipose tissue. To examine the balance of
C/EBPß functions in the diabetic context, we induced type 1 diabetes in
C/EBPß-null (knockout, KO) mice. We found that C/EBPß deficiency actually
enhanced the diabetic bone phenotype. While KO mice had reduced peripheral fat
mass compared with wild-type mice, they had 5-fold more marrow adipocytes than
diabetic wild-type mice. The enhanced marrow adiposity may be attributed to
compensation by C/EBPd, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>2, and
C/EBPa. Concurrently, we observed reduced bone density. Relative to genotype
controls, trabecular bone volume fraction loss was escalated in diabetic KO mice 
(-48%) compared with changes in diabetic wild-type mice (-22%). Despite greater
bone loss, osteoblast markers were not further suppressed in diabetic KO mice.
Instead, osteoclast markers were increased in the KO diabetic mice. Thus, C/EBPß 
deficiency increases diabetes-induced bone marrow (not peripheral) adipose depot 
mass, and promotes additional bone loss through stimulating bone resorption.
C/EBPß-deficiency also reduced bone stiffness and diabetes exacerbated this
(two-way ANOVA P < 0.02). We conclude that C/EBPß alone is not responsible for
the bone vs. fat phenotype switch observed in T1 diabetes and that suppression of
CEBPß levels may further bone loss and decrease bone stiffness by increasing bone
resorption.

PMCID: PMC3094035
PMID: 21346244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3349-54. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22693.

CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein beta activation of MMP-1 gene expression in SW1353
cells: independent roles of extracellular signal-regulated and p90/ribosomal S6
kinases.

Petrella BL(1), Armstrong DA, Vincenti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, Department of Veterans Affairs, White River Junction,
Vermont 05009, USA.

CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein beta (CEBPB) is a pluripotent transcription factor
that controls inflammation, proliferation, and differentiation. We recently
reported a role for CEBPB during matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) gene expression, 
but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. To address this we
interrogated CEBPB-dependent MMP-1 and MMP-13 gene activation in the SW1353
chondrosarcoma cell line, a well-established model of MMP gene regulation in
mesenchymal cells. IL-1B treatment increased CEBPB expression in SW1353 cells
over a 24-h period and knockdown of CEBPB with shRNA abrogated IL-1B-dependent
MMP-1 and MMP-13 gene activation. Exogenous expression of the CEBPB isoforms LAP1
or LAP2 was sufficient to induce MMP-1 mRNA levels comparable to IL-1B-induced
expression, while the truncated LIP isoform repressed IL-1B-induced MMP-1.
Although exogenous CEBPB expression induced MMP-13 mRNA, the response was less
robust than was observed for MMP-1. CEBPB is activated by the
extracellular-regulated kinases (ERK) and RSK kinases in response to oncogenes
and growth factors. We found that the MEK inhibitor U0126 and the RSK inhibitor
BI-D1870 both reduced IL-1B-dependent MMP-1 gene expression in SW1353 cells.
Although ERK is known to phosphorylate CEBPB on threonine 235, this residue was
not required for CEBPB-dependent activation of MMP-1. In contrast, the RSK target
serine 321 was required for LAP1 and LAP2-dependent activation of MMP-1. These
findings establish CEBPB as a critical intermediate for IL-1B-dependent MMP gene 
activation and assign specific roles for the ERK and RSK kinases in this pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. BMC Genomics. 2011 Feb 16;12:112. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-112.

Identification of differentially expressed genes in chickens differing in muscle 
glycogen content and meat quality.

Sibut V(1), Hennequet-Antier C, Le Bihan-Duval E, Marthey S, Duclos MJ, Berri C.

Author information: 
(1)INRA UR83 Recherches Avicoles, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, 
Nouzilly, France.

BACKGROUND: The processing ability of poultry meat is highly related to its
ultimate pH, the latter being mainly determined by the amount of glycogen in the 
muscle at death. The genetic determinism of glycogen and related meat quality
traits has been established in the chicken but the molecular mechanisms involved 
in variations in these traits remain to be fully described. In this study,
Chicken Genome Arrays (20 K) were used to compare muscle gene expression profiles
of chickens from Fat (F) and Lean (L) lines that exhibited high and low muscle
glycogen content, respectively, and of individuals exhibiting extremely high (G+)
or low (G-) muscle glycogen content originating from the F2 cross between the Fat
and Lean lines. Real-time RT-PCR was subsequently performed to validate the
differential expression of genes either selected from the microarray analysis or 
whose function in regulating glycogen metabolism was well known.
RESULTS: Among the genes found to be expressed in chicken P. major muscle, 197
and 254 transcripts appeared to be differentially expressed on microarrays for
the F vs. L and the G+ vs. G- comparisons, respectively. Some involved
particularly in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism were selected for further
validation studies by real-time RT-PCR. We confirmed that, as in mammals, the
down-regulation of CEBPB and RGS2 coincides with a decrease in peripheral
adiposity in the chicken, but these genes are also suggested to affect muscle
glycogen turnover through their role in the cAMP-dependent signalling pathway.
Several other genes were suggested to have roles in the regulation of glycogen
storage in chicken muscle. PDK4 may act as a glycogen sensor in muscle, UGDH may 
compete for glycogen synthesis by using UDP-glucose for glucoronidation, and
PRKAB1, PRKAG2, and PHKD may impact on glycogen turnover in muscle, through
AMP-activated signalling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first stage in the understanding of molecular
mechanisms underlying variations in poultry meat quality. Large scale analyses
are now required to validate the role of the genes identified and ultimately to
find molecular markers that can be used for selection or to optimize rearing
practices.

PMCID: PMC3047303
PMID: 21324179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jun;39(11):4664-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr024. Epub 2011
Feb 11.

Integrated genome-wide chromatin occupancy and expression analyses identify key
myeloid pro-differentiation transcription factors repressed by Myb.

Zhao L(1), Glazov EA, Pattabiraman DR, Al-Owaidi F, Zhang P, Brown MA, Leo PJ,
Gonda TJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Queensland 4102, 
Australia.

To gain insight into the mechanisms by which the Myb transcription factor
controls normal hematopoiesis and particularly, how it contributes to
leukemogenesis, we mapped the genome-wide occupancy of Myb by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in ERMYB
myeloid progenitor cells. By integrating the genome occupancy data with whole
genome expression profiling data, we identified a Myb-regulated transcriptional
program. Gene signatures for leukemia stem cells, normal hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells and myeloid development were overrepresented in 2368 Myb
regulated genes. Of these, Myb bound directly near or within 793 genes. Myb
directly activates some genes known critical in maintaining hematopoietic stem
cells, such as Gfi1 and Cited2. Importantly, we also show that, despite being
usually considered as a transactivator, Myb also functions to repress
approximately half of its direct targets, including several key regulators of
myeloid differentiation, such as Sfpi1 (also known as Pu.1), Runx1, Junb and
Cebpb. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that interaction with p300, an
established coactivator for Myb, is unexpectedly required for Myb-mediated
transcriptional repression. We propose that the repression of the above mentioned
key pro-differentiation factors may contribute essentially to Myb's ability to
suppress differentiation and promote self-renewal, thus maintaining progenitor
cells in an undifferentiated state and promoting leukemic transformation.

PMCID: PMC3113568
PMID: 21317192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;25(4):681-93. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0232. Epub 2011 Feb
3.

C/EBPß mediates growth hormone-regulated expression of multiple target genes.

Cui TX(1), Lin G, LaPensee CR, Calinescu AA, Rathore M, Streeter C,
Piwien-Pilipuk G, Lanning N, Jin H, Carter-Su C, Qin ZS, Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5622, USA.

Regulation of c-Fos transcription by GH is mediated by CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein ß (C/EBPß). This study examines the role of C/EBPß in mediating GH
activation of other early response genes, including Cyr61, Btg2, Socs3, Zfp36,
and Socs1. C/EBPß depletion using short hairpin RNA impaired responsiveness of
these genes to GH, as seen for c-Fos. Rescue with wild-type C/EBPß led to
GH-dependent recruitment of the coactivator p300 to the c-Fos promoter. In
contrast, rescue with C/EBPß mutated at the ERK phosphorylation site at T188
failed to induce GH-dependent recruitment of p300, indicating that ERK-mediated
phosphorylation of C/EBPß at T188 is required for GH-induced recruitment of p300 
to c-Fos. GH also induced the occupancy of phosphorylated C/EBPß and p300 on
Cyr61, Btg2, and Socs3 at predicted C/EBP-cAMP response element-binding protein
motifs in their promoters. Consistent with a role for ERKs in GH-induced
expression of these genes, treatment with U0126 to block ERK phosphorylation
inhibited their GH-induced expression. In contrast, GH-dependent expression of
Zfp36 and Socs1 was not inhibited by U0126. Thus, induction of multiple early
response genes by GH in 3T3-F442A cells is mediated by C/EBPß. A subset of these 
genes is regulated similarly to c-Fos, through a mechanism involving
GH-stimulated ERK 1/2 activation, phosphorylation of C/EBPß, and recruitment of
p300. Overall, these studies suggest that C/EBPß, like the signal transducer and 
activator of transcription proteins, regulates multiple genes in response to GH.

PMCID: PMC3063086
PMID: 21292824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 24;6(1):e16543. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016543.

Tumor suppression by RNA from C/EBPß 3'UTR through the inhibition of protein
kinase Ce activity.

Wang Y(1), Sun DQ, Liu DG.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Since the end of last century, RNAs from the 3'untranslated region
(3'UTR) of several eukaryotic mRNAs have been found to exert tumor suppression
activity when introduced into malignant cells independent of their whole mRNAs.
In this study, we sought to determine the molecular mechanism of the tumor
suppression activity of a short RNA from 3'UTR of C/EBPß mR<U+039D><U+0391> (C/EBPß 3'UTR RNA) 
in human hepatocarcinoma cells SMMC-7721.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By using Western blotting, immunocytochemistry,
molecular beacon, confocal microscopy, protein kinase inhibitors and in vitro
kinase assays, we found that, in the C/EBPß 3'UTR-transfectant cells of
SMMC-7721, the overexpressed C/EBPß 3'UTR RNA induced reorganization of keratin
18 by binding to this keratin; that the C/EBPß 3'UTR RNA also reduced
phosphorylation and expression of keratin 18; and that the enzyme responsible for
phosphorylating keratin 18 is protein kinase Ce. We then found that the C/EBPß
3'UTR RNA directly inhibited the phosphorylating activity of protein kinase Ce;
and that C/EBPß 3'UTR RNA specifically bound with the protein kinase Ce-keratin
18 conjugate.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Together, these facts suggest that the tumor suppression
in SMMC-7721 by C/EBPß 3'UTR RNA is due to the inhibition of protein kinase Ce
activity through direct physical interaction between C/EBPß 3'UTR RNA and protein
kinase Ce. These facts indicate that the 3'UTR of some eukaryotic mRNAs may
function as regulators for genes other than their own.

PMCID: PMC3026020
PMID: 21283634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Jul;31(1):10-21. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.01.015.
Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Activation of cytokine expression occurs through the TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway 
in birnavirus-infected cells.

Wang WL(1), Liu W, Gong HY, Hong JR, Lin CC, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang 115,
Taipei, Taiwan.

The infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) belongs to the Birnaviridae
family of viruses and causes acute contagious diseases in a number of
economically important freshwater and marine fish. In this study, we infected
zebrafish embryonic cells (ZF4) with IPNV and analyzed the gene expression
patterns of normal and infected cells using quantitative real-time PCR. We
identified a number of immune response genes, including ifna, ifng, mx, irf1,
irf2, irf4, tnfa, tnfb, il-1b, il-15, il-26, ccl4 and mmp family genes, that are 
induced after viral infection. Transcriptional regulators, including cebpb, junb,
nfkb and stat1, stat4 and stat5, were also upregulated in IPNV-infected cells. In
addition, we used Pathway Studio software to identify TNFa as having the greatest
downstream influence among these altered genes. Treating virus-infected cells
with an siRNA targeting TNFa inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B expression. To further interrupt the
TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway, the expression levels of cytokines and
metalloproteinases were inhibited in IPNV-infected cells. These data suggest
that, during IPNV infection, the expression of cytokines and metalloproteinases
might be initiated through the TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway. The modulation of
TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-related mechanisms may provide a therapeutic strategy for inhibiting
viral infection in teleosts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21272652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2011 Apr;94(3-4):96-103. doi:
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2011.01.002. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Niacin promotes adipogenesis by reducing production of anti-adipogenic PGF2a
through suppression of C/EBPß-activated COX-2 expression.

Fujimori K(1), Amano F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biodefense and Regulation, Osaka University of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 4-20-1 Nasahara, Takatsuki, Osaka 569-1094, Japan.
fujimori@gly.oups.ac.jp

Niacin is converted to NAD and NADP in tissues, whose products are involved in a 
number of cellular processes; and it is associated with the regulation of
adipogenesis. In this study, we identified the molecular mechanism by which
niacin promotes the adipogenesis in mouse 3T3-L1 cells. When the cells were
cultured with niacin, the expression of adipogenic peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>, CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)a, and
their target genes was enhanced concomitant with an increase in triglyceride
storage. Moreover, niacin suppressed the expression of cyclooxygenase-2 and
decreased the production of prostaglandin (PG) F(2a) in the early phase of
adipogenesis, which PG suppresses the progression of adipogenesis via the PGF(2a)
receptor. Furthermore, niacin decreased the C/EBPß level in the early phase of
adipogenesis. These results indicate that niacin promoted adipogenesis by
suppressing the production of the anti-adipogenic PGF(2a) through down-regulation
of C/EBPß-activated cyclooxygenase-2 expression in adipocytes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21236357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Comp Immunol. 2011 Apr;35(4):490-500. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.11.017. Epub
2010 Dec 24.

Porcine S100A8 and S100A9: molecular characterizations and crucial functions in
response to Haemophilus parasuis infection.

Chen H(1), Lunney JK, Cheng L, Li X, Cao J, Zhu M, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, PR 
China.

S100 calcium-binding protein A8 (S100A8) and S100 calcium-binding protein A9
(S100A9) are pivotal mediators of inflammatory and protective anti-infection
responses for the mammalian host. In this study, we present the molecular cloning
of porcine S100A8 (pS100A8) and porcine S100A9 (pS100A9). Both genes comprise 3
exons and 2 introns and are located on pig chromosome 4q21-q23 (closely linked to
SW512). Homology comparison to other mammalian species affirmed that critical
functional amino acids for post-transcriptional modification, inflammatory
regulation, and formation of heterodimeric complexes exist in pS100A8 and
pS100A9. Under normal conditions, both genes are preferentially expressed in
porcine immune or immune-related organs, e.g., bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, 
and lung. Upon stimulation in porcine whole blood cultures with LPS or Poly(I:C),
they are dramatically induced. Interestingly, the maximum increase of mRNA levels
in blood cultures of Meishan pigs is significantly greater than that in Duroc
pigs. We previously showed that pS100A8 and pS100A9 mRNA were up-regulated
following Haemophilus parasuis (HPS) infection. We herein further confirm their
up-regulation at the protein level in multiple HPS infected tissues (spleen, lung
and liver). Functional cluster and network analysis based on our previous
microarray data discovered that CEBPB may be one of the key transcription
factors. A pS100A8/pS100A9-CASP3-SLC1A2 pathway regulating lipid metabolism was
found. Both of their pro- and anti-inflammatory functions in response to HPS
infection are highlighted.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Neuroscience. 2011 Mar 10;176:110-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.12.025.
Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Decreased CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß expression inhibits the growth of
glioblastoma cells.

Aguilar-Morante D(1), Cortes-Canteli M, Sanz-Sancristobal M, Santos A,
Perez-Castillo A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier, 4 and Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
28029-Madrid, Spain.

C/EBPß is a leucine-zipper transcription factor implicated in the control of
metabolism, development, cell differentiation, and proliferation. However, it
remains unclear its role in tumor development. Here, we show that down-regulation
of C/EBPß by RNA interference inhibits proliferation in the GL261 murine
glioblastoma cell line, induces an arrest of the cell cycle at the G0/G1
boundary, and diminishes their transformation capacity and migration. In
addition, we show that C/EBPß regulates the expression of several DNA damage
response- and invasion-related genes. Lastly, C/EBPß depletion significantly
retards tumor onset and prolongs survival in a murine orthotopic brain tumor
model. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a significant diminution of
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) labeling in tumors derived from
C/EBPß-depleted GL261 cells compared with that in controls. These results show,
for the first time, the dependence of glioma cells on C/EBPß and suggest a
potential role of this transcription factor in glioma development.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cell. 2010 Dec 23;143(7):1072-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.036.

C/EBPß controls exercise-induced cardiac growth and protects against pathological
cardiac remodeling.

Boström P(1), Mann N, Wu J, Quintero PA, Plovie ER, Panáková D, Gupta RK, Xiao C,
MacRae CA, Rosenzweig A, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 3 Blackfan Circle, CLS
Building, Floor 11, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2011 Jan 5;13(1):3-4.

The heart has the ability to grow in size in response to exercise, but little is 
known about the transcriptional mechanisms underlying physiological hypertrophy. 
Adult cardiomyocytes have also recently been proven to hold the potential for
proliferation, a process that could be of great importance for regenerative
medicine. Using a unique RT-PCR-based screen against all transcriptional
components, we showed that C/EBPß was downregulated with exercise, whereas the
expression of CITED4 was increased. Reduction of C/EBPß in vitro and in vivo
resulted in a phenocopy of endurance exercise with cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and 
proliferation. This proliferation was mediated, at least in part, by the
increased CITED4. Importantly, mice with reduced cardiac C/EBPß levels displayed 
substantial resistance to cardiac failure upon pressure overload. These data
indicate that C/EBPß represses cardiomyocyte growth and proliferation in the
adult mammalian heart and that reduction in C/EBPß is a central signal in
physiologic hypertrophy and proliferation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3035164
PMID: 21183071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Feb;25(2):253-68. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0318. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP)-a and -ß are essential for ovulation,
luteinization, and the expression of key target genes.

Fan HY(1), Liu Z, Johnson PF, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

LH activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor/RAS/ERK1/2 pathway is
essential for ovulation and luteinization because granulosa cell (GC) depletion
of ERK1/2 (ERK1/2(gc)(-/-) mice) renders mice infertile. As mediators of
ERK1/2-dependent GC differentiation, the CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins,
(C/EBP)a and C/EBPß, were also disrupted. Female Cebpb(gc)(-/-) mutant mice, but 
not Cebpa(gc)(-/-) mice, were subfertile whereas Cebpa/b(gc)(-/-) double-mutant
females were sterile. Follicles failed to ovulate, ovaries were devoid of corpora
lutea, luteal cell marker genes (Lhcgr, Prlr, Ptgfr, Cyp11a1, and Star) were
absent, and serum progesterone levels were low. Microarray analyses identified
numerous C/EBPa/ß target genes in equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG)-human
(h)CG-treated mice. At 4 h post-hCG, a subset (19%) of genes altered in the
Cebpa/b-depleted cells was also altered in ERK1/2-depleted cells; hence they are 
common effectors of ERK1/2. Additional genes down-regulated in the
Cebpa/b-depleted cells at 8 and 24 h post-hCG include known (Akr1b7, Runx2, Star,
Saa3) and novel (Abcb1b, Apln, Igfbp4, Prlr, Ptgfr Timp4) C/EBP targets and
effectors of luteal and vascular cell development. Bhmt, a gene controlling
methionine metabolism and thought to be expressed exclusively in liver and
kidney, was high in wild-type luteal cells but totally absent in Cebpa/b mutant
cells. Because numerous genes potentially associated with vascular development
were suppressed in the mutant cells, C/EBPa/ß appear to dictate the luteinization
process by also controlling genes that regulate the formation of the extensive
vascular network required to sustain luteal cells. Thus, C/EBPa/ß mediate the
terminal differentiation of GCs during the complex process of luteinization.

PMCID: PMC3386543
PMID: 21177758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Aug;45(2):436-44. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0260OC. 
Epub 2010 Dec 10.

JUN-CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein complexes inhibit surfactant-associated
protein B promoter activity.

Bein K(1), Leight H, Leikauf GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130, USA. Kbein@pitt.edu

The murine surfactant-associated protein B (Sftpb) gene promoter, spanning
nucleotides -653 to +42, is composed of functionally distinct proximal and distal
regions. Although both regions contain consensus/putative activator protein 1
(AP-1) sites, the distal, but not the proximal, region mediates the inhibition by
jun proto-oncogene (JUN) of Sftpb promoter activity. In transient cotransfection 
assays, JUN inhibited the luciferase reporter activity of plasmid constructs
containing Sftpb promoter fragments that lacked the distal putative AP-1 site,
indicating that another regulatory motif mediates JUN-dependent inhibition.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and in silico analyses identified a DNA
target sequence (Sftpb nucleotides -339 to -316) and transcription factors that
regulate Sftpb promoter activity. The identified sequence contains a
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) consensus recognition element. Mutation of
the site reduced Sftpb promoter activity and sensitivity to inhibition by JUN.
Purified recombinant JUN, which did not recognize the -339 to -316 target
sequence when added alone, supershifted the mobility of in vitro translated
C/EBP-a and C/EBP-ß proteins complexed with the identified cis-regulatory
element. These findings support the idea that heterodimerization between JUN and 
C/EBP-a and/or C/EBP-ß targets JUN to the Sftpb promoter, thereby mediating its
inhibitory regulatory role.

PMCID: PMC3175569
PMID: 21148742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Microvasc Res. 2011 Jan;81(1):52-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2010.11.008. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

Inflammatory response of human coronary artery endothelial cells to saturated
long-chain fatty acids.

Krogmann A(1), Staiger K, Haas C, Gommer N, Peter A, Heni M, Machicao F, Häring
HU, Staiger H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Angiology, Nephrology, and Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.

Saturated long-chain fatty acids (SFAs) exert unfavourable metabolic effects
(lipotoxicity) and induce apoptotic cell death (lipoapoptosis) in certain
cell-types. Their contribution to inflammatory cell responses is unclear. We
studied the expression of 113 inflammatory genes in human coronary artery
endothelial cells (hCAECs) and their regulation by SFAs and unsaturated
long-chain fatty acids (UFAs). Gene regulation in hCAECs was assessed with
macroarrays, real-time RT-PCR and immunoblotting. Participation of the
transcription factor NF<U+03BA>B and the stress kinases JNK and p38 MAPK in
gene-regulatory events was examined with pharmacological inhibitors. Based on
macroarray data, 59 inflammatory genes were expressed in hCAECs, 14 were
regulated by the SFA palmitate. SFA-triggered induction of IL1A, IL6, IL8, CXCL2,
CXCL3, CCL20, SPP1 and CEBPB was confirmed by RT-PCR or immunoblotting. All gene 
inductions were SFA-specific. Using inhibitor SN50, palmitate-induced expression 
of IL8, CXCL3 and CCL20 was NF<U+03BA>B-dependent (all p<0.05). Furthermore, JNK was
involved in palmitate-induced expression of IL1A, IL8, CXCL3, SPP1 and CEBPB as
determined with inhibitor SP600125 (all p<0.05). Finally, the effectiveness of
the tested fatty acids to induce inflammatory genes was closely reflected by
their effectiveness to trigger endoplasmic reticulum stress. In conclusion,
hCAECs express a large panel of inflammatory genes with a series of genes being
regulated by palmitate and stearate, but not by UFAs. Thus, SFAs represent
potential contributors to vascular inflammation.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Sep 1;10(5):509-19. doi: 10.4161/cbt.10.5.12725. Epub 2010
Sep 21.

Genomic profiling of C/EBPß2 transformed mammary epithelial cells: a role for
nuclear interleukin-1ß.

Russell A(1), Boone B, Jiang A, Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA.

C/EBPß is essential for mammary gland growth and development and has been
associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. Overexpression of C/EBPß2 in
MCF10A cells results in a variety of cancer phenotypes including EMT and ErbB
independence. IL1ß is dramatically upregulated in MCF10A-C/EBPß2 cells but there 
is little, if any, processing to the mature 17 kD form. Although proIL1b has
previously been considered to be biologically inactive, we demonstrate proIL1b is
not only localized to the nucleus, but is also tightly associated with the
chromatin. We show that proIL1ß is bound at specific locations in the genome and 
is positioned in such a way to play a role in the cancer phenotypes observed in
MCF10A-C/EBPß2 cells. Moreover, nuclear IL1ß is detected in some human breast
tumor samples. This study demonstrates the presence of nuclear proIL1ß in
transformed mammary epithelial cells providing the first evidence that IL1ß may
be a dual function cytokine.

PMCID: PMC3040973
PMID: 21057224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 27;5(10):e13650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013650.

Dexamethasone treatment induces the reprogramming of pancreatic acinar cells to
hepatocytes and ductal cells.

Al-Adsani A(1), Burke ZD, Eberhard D, Lawrence KL, Shen CN, Rustgi AK, Sakaue H, 
Farrant JM, Tosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The pancreatic exocrine cell line AR42J-B13 can be reprogrammed to
hepatocytes following treatment with dexamethasone. The question arises whether
dexamethasone also has the capacity to induce ductal cells as well as
hepatocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: AR42J-B13 cells were treated with and without
dexamethasone and analyzed for the expression of pancreatic exocrine, hepatocyte 
and ductal markers. Addition of dexamethasone inhibited pancreatic amylase
expression, induced expression of the hepatocyte marker transferrin as well as
markers typical of ductal cells: cytokeratin 7 and 19 and the lectin peanut
agglutinin. However, the number of ductal cells was low compared to hepatocytes. 
The proportion of ductal cells was enhanced by culture with dexamethasone and
epidermal growth factor (EGF). We established several features of the mechanism
underlying the transdifferentiation of pancreatic exocrine cells to ductal cells.
Using a CK19 promoter reporter, we show that a proportion of the ductal cells
arise from differentiated pancreatic exocrine-like cells. We also examined
whether C/EBPß (a transcription factor important in the conversion of pancreatic 
cells to hepatocytes) could alter the conversion from acinar cells to a ductal
phenotype. Overexpression of an activated form of C/EBPß in
dexamethasone/EGF-treated cells provoked the expression of hepatocyte markers and
inhibited the expression of ductal markers. Conversely, ectopic expression of a
dominant-negative form of C/EBPß, liver inhibitory protein, inhibited hepatocyte 
formation in dexamethasone-treated cultures and enhanced the ductal phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that hepatocytes and ductal
cells may be induced from pancreatic exocrine AR42J-B13 cells following treatment
with dexamethasone. The conversion from pancreatic to hepatocyte or ductal cells 
is dependent upon the expression of C/EBPß.

PMCID: PMC2965100
PMID: 21048969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Int J Hematol. 2010 Nov;92(4):571-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0686-6. Epub 2010
Oct 28.

C/EBPß and CHOP participate in tanshinone IIA-induced differentiation and
apoptosis of acute promyelocytic leukemia cells in vitro.

Zhang K(1), Li J, Meng W, Xing H, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, West China Medical School, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, Sichuan, China.

Our studies indicated that Tanshinone IIA (TanIIA), which is widely applied in
the treatment of cardiovascular diseases with a rare occurrence of side effects, 
could promote APL cell differentiation and apoptosis. We found TanIIA induced the
differentiation of NB4 and MR2 cells with elevated C/EBPß and CHOP. When C/EBPß
was overexpressed in NB4 cells, the level of CD11b in the transfected cells was
significantly elevated. When we used CHOP siRNA to suppress CHOP expression in
NB4 cells and then treated these cells with a high concentration of TanIIA, the
differentiation and apoptosis of these cells were both significantly increased.
These data demonstrate that C/EBPß is critical for APL cell differentiation and
apoptosis induced by TanIIA, and that CHOP acts as a negative regulator of C/EBPß
activity. Our study suggested that TanIIA is a promising drug for treating newly 
diagnosed and ATRA-resistant APL, and a high concentration of TanIIA associated
with inhibition of CHOP, maybe a potentially promising therapy strategy.

PMID: 20981511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;56(1):97-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.134. Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Chromosome 17q21 SNP and severe asthma.

Binia A, Khorasani N, Bhavsar PK, Adcock I, Brightling CE, Chung KF, Cookson WO, 
Moffatt MF.

PMCID: PMC3027598
PMID: 20981039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Virol. 2010 Dec;84(24):12982-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01224-10. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

The early whole-blood transcriptional signature of dengue virus and features
associated with progression to dengue shock syndrome in Vietnamese children and
young adults.

Hoang LT(1), Lynn DJ, Henn M, Birren BW, Lennon NJ, Le PT, Duong KT, Nguyen TT,
Mai LN, Farrar JJ, Hibberd ML, Simmons CP.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, 190 
Ben Ham Tu, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

Dengue is a pantropic public health problem. In children, dengue shock syndrome
(DSS) is the most common life-threatening complication. The ability to predict
which patients may develop DSS may improve triage and treatment. To this end, we 
conducted a nested case-control comparison of the early host transcriptional
features in 24 DSS patients and 56 sex-, age-, and virus serotype-matched
uncomplicated (UC) dengue patients. In the first instance, we defined the "early 
dengue" profile. The transcriptional signature in acute rather than convalescent 
samples (=72 h post-illness onset) was defined by an overabundance of
interferon-inducible transcripts (31% of the 551 overabundant transcripts) and
canonical gene ontology terms that included the following: response to virus,
immune response, innate immune response, and inflammatory response. Pathway and
network analyses identified STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, IRF7, IRF9, IRF1, CEBPB, and SP1
as key transcriptional factors mediating the early response. Strikingly, the only
difference in the transcriptional signatures of early DSS and UC dengue cases was
the greater abundance of several neutrophil-associated transcripts in patients
who progressed to DSS, a finding supported by higher plasma concentrations of
several canonical proteins associated with neutrophil degranulation
(bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein [BPI], elastase 2 [ELA2], and
defensin 1 alpha [DEF1A]). Elevated levels of neutrophil-associated transcripts
were independent of the neutrophil count and also of the genotype of the
infecting virus, as genome-length sequences of dengue virus serotype 1 (DENV-1)
(n = 15) and DENV-2 (n = 3) sampled from DSS patients were phylogenetically
indistinguishable from those sampled from uncomplicated dengue patients (32
DENV-1 and 9 DENV-2 sequences). Collectively, these data suggest a hitherto
unrecognized association between neutrophil activation, pathogenesis, and the
development of DSS and point to future strategies for guiding prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3004338
PMID: 20943967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010 Oct 13;11:511. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-511.

Trimming of mammalian transcriptional networks using network component analysis.

Tran LM(1), Hyduke DR, Liao JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1592, USA.

BACKGROUND: Network Component Analysis (NCA) has been used to deduce the
activities of transcription factors (TFs) from gene expression data and the
TF-gene binding relationship. However, the TF-gene interaction varies in
different environmental conditions and tissues, but such information is rarely
available and cannot be predicted simply by motif analysis. Thus, it is
beneficial to identify key TF-gene interactions under the experimental condition 
based on transcriptome data. Such information would be useful in identifying key 
regulatory pathways and gene markers of TFs in further studies.
RESULTS: We developed an algorithm to trim network connectivity such that the
important regulatory interactions between the TFs and the genes were retained and
the regulatory signals were deduced. Theoretical studies demonstrated that the
regulatory signals were accurately reconstructed even in the case where only
three independent transcriptome datasets were available. At least 80% of the main
target genes were correctly predicted in the extreme condition of high noise
level and small number of datasets. Our algorithm was tested with transcriptome
data taken from mice under rapamycin treatment. The initial network topology from
the literature contains 70 TFs, 778 genes, and 1423 edges between the TFs and
genes. Our method retained 1074 edges (i.e. 75% of the original edge number) and 
identified 17 TFs as being significantly perturbed under the experimental
condition. Twelve of these TFs are involved in MAPK signaling or myeloid leukemia
pathways defined in the KEGG database, or are known to physically interact with
each other. Additionally, four of these TFs, which are Hif1a, Cebpb, Nfkb1, and
Atf1, are known targets of rapamycin. Furthermore, the trimmed network was able
to predict Eno1 as an important target of Hif1a; this key interaction could not
be detected without trimming the regulatory network.
CONCLUSIONS: The advantage of our new algorithm, relative to the original NCA, is
that our algorithm can identify the important TF-gene interactions. Identifying
the important TF-gene interactions is crucial for understanding the roles of
pleiotropic global regulators, such as p53. Also, our algorithm has been
developed to overcome NCA's inability to analyze large networks where multiple
TFs regulate a single gene. Thus, our algorithm extends the applicability of NCA 
to the realm of mammalian regulatory network analysis.

PMCID: PMC2967563
PMID: 20942926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Dec 15;10(12):1244-51. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Fibronectin 1 is a potential biomarker for radioresistance in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.

Jerhammar F(1), Ceder R, Garvin S, Grénman R, Grafström RC, Roberg K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of
Otorhinolaryngology, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
fredrik.jerhammar@liu.se

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Dec 15;10(12):1252-5.

Radiotherapy remains the backbone of head and neck cancer therapy but response is
sometimes impeded by tumor radioresistance. Identifying predictive biomarkers of 
radiotherapy response is a crucial step towards personalized therapy. The aim of 
this study was to explore gene expression data in search of biomarkers predictive
of the response to radiotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
Microarray analysis was performed on five cell lines with various intrinsic
radiosensitivity, selected from a panel of 29 HNSCC cell lines. The
bioinformatics approach included Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment profiling and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The GO-analysis detected 16 deregulated
categories from which development, receptor activity, and extracellular region
represented the largest groups. Fourteen hub genes (CEBPA, CEBPB, CTNNB1, FN1,
MYC, MYCN, PLAU, SDC4, SERPINE1, SP1, TAF4B, THBS1, TP53 and VLDLR) were
identified from the IPA network analysis. The hub genes in the highest ranked
network, (FN1, SERPINE1, THBS1 and VLDLR) were further subjected to qPCR analysis
in the complete panel of 29 cell lines. Of these genes, high FN1 expression
associated to high intrinsic radiosensitivity (p=0.047). In conclusion, gene
ontologies and hub genes of importance for intrinsic radiosensitivity were
defined. The overall results suggest that FN1 should be explored as a potential
novel biomarker for radioresistance.

PMID: 20930522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cell Res. 2010 Oct;20(10):1158-69. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.134. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

miR-223 and miR-142 attenuate hematopoietic cell proliferation, and miR-223
positively regulates miR-142 through LMO2 isoforms and CEBP-ß.

Sun W(1), Shen W, Yang S, Hu F, Li H, Zhu TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, Nankai University,
Tianjin 300071, China.

miR-142 and miR-223 have been identified as hematopoietic specific microRNAs.
miR-223 has crucial functions in myeloid lineage development. However, the
function of miR-142 remains unclear. In this study, we found that both miR-142
and miR-223 attenuated the proliferation of hematopoietic cells, and that miR-223
up-regulated miR-142 expression through the LMO2-L/-S isoforms and CEBP-ß.
miR-223 negatively regulated both LMO2-L/-S isoforms and CEBP-ß
post-transcriptionally, while CEBP-ß positively regulated the LMO2-L/-S isoforms 
and both of the LMO2-L/-S isoforms negatively regulated miR-142. These results
reveal a novel miR-223--CEBP-ß--LMO2--miR-142 regulatory pathway, which has
pivotal functions in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 20856265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 5;285(45):34773-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133884. Epub 2010
Sep 9.

C/EBP{delta} and STAT-1 are required for TLR8 transcriptional activity.

Zannetti C(1), Bonnay F, Takeshita F, Parroche P, Ménétrier-Caux C, Tommasino M, 
Hasan UA.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Cancer Biology Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, Lyon 69008, France. claudia.zannetti@inserm.fr

Toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8), which is expressed primarily in myeloid cells, plays
a central role in initiating immune responses to viral single-stranded RNA.
Despite the great interest in the field of TLR8 research, very little is known in
terms of TLR8 biology and its transcriptional regulation. Here, we describe the
isolation of the hTLR8 promoter and the characterization of the molecular
mechanisms involved in its regulation. Reporter gene analysis and ChIP assays
demonstrated that the hTLR8 regulation of the basal transcription is regulated
via three C/EBP cis-acting elements that required C/EBPd and C/EBPß activity. In 
addition, we observed that R848 stimulation increases TLR8 transcriptional
activity via an enhanced binding of C/EBPd, and not C/EBPß, to its responsive
sites within the TLR8 promoter. Moreover, we showed that IFN-<U+03B3> also increased
TLR8 transcription activity via the binding of STAT1 transcription factor to
IFN-<U+03B3> activated sequence elements on the TLR8 promoter and enhanced TLR8
functionality. These results shed new light on the mechanisms involved during
TLR8-mediated innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC2966093
PMID: 20829351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 11;29(45):6004-15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.336. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Regulation of C/EBPbeta1 by Ras in mammary epithelial cells and the role of
C/EBPbeta1 in oncogene-induced senescence.

Atwood AA(1), Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Overexpression of Ras(V12) in MCF10A cells, an immortalized mammary epithelial
cell line, leads to transformation of these cells. We demonstrate that this is
accompanied by degradation of C/EBPbeta1. C/EBPbeta is a transcription factor in 
which three protein isoforms exist because of alternative translation at three
in-frame methionines. When C/EBPbeta1 is expressed in MCF10A-Ras(V12) cells,
immunoblot analysis reveals that C/EBPbeta1 is degraded in these cells. Treatment
of MCF10A-Ras(V12)-C/EBPbeta1 cells with the cdk inhibitor roscovitine leads to
stabilization of C/EBPbeta1. It has been previously shown that cdk2
phosphorylates C/EBPbeta on Thr235. We demonstrate that mutation of Thr235 to
alanine in C/EBPbeta1 is sufficient to restore the stability of C/EBPbeta1
expression in MCF10A-Ras(V12) cells. Overexpression of Ras(V12) in primary cells 
induces senescence rather than transformation, thus suppressing tumorigenesis.
C/EBPbeta is required for Ras(V12)-induced senescence in primary mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts. Upregulation of interleukin-6 (IL6) by C/EBPbeta has been shown to
be necessary for oncogene-induced senescence, but the specific isoform of
C/EBPbeta has not been investigated. We show that the C/EBPbeta1 isoform
upregulates IL6 when introduced into normal fibroblasts. In addition, we show
that C/EBPbeta1 induces senescence. Taken together, degradation of C/EBPbeta1 by 
Ras activation may represent a mechanism to bypass OIS.

PMCID: PMC2978746
PMID: 20818427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Vis. 2010 Aug 4;16:1475-86.

MicroRNA expression in human retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells:
increased expression of microRNA-9 by N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide.

Kutty RK(1), Samuel W, Jaworski C, Duncan T, Nagineni CN, Raghavachari N, Wiggert
B, Redmond TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retinal Cell and Molecular Biology, Bldg. 6, Room 112, National 
Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, 6 Center Dr., MSC 0608, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. kuttyk@nei.nih.gov

PURPOSE: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators of many cellular functions
due to their ability to target mRNAs for degradation or translational inhibition.
Previous studies have reported that the expression of microRNA-9 (miR-9) is
regulated by retinoic acid and reactive oxygen species (ROS). We have previously 
shown that N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-retinamide (4HPR), a retinoic acid derivative,
induces ROS generation and apoptosis in cultured human retinal pigment epithelial
(RPE) cells, known as ARPE-19 cells. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the expression of miR-9 in ARPE-19 cells in response to 4HPR
treatment, and to identify other miRNAs normally expressed in these cells.
METHODS: ARPE-19 cells in culture were treated with 4HPR, the total RNA fractions
were isolated, and the expression of various miRNAs and mRNAs was analyzed using 
real-time PCR. The miRNA expression profile of ARPE-19 cells was analyzed using
microarray hybridization.
RESULTS: Treatment of ARPE-19 cells with 4HPR resulted in apoptosis characterized
by the increased expression of HMOX1 and GADD153 genes. A twofold increase in the
expression of miR-9 was also observed during this response. Potential binding
sites for the transcription factors encoded by CEBPA and CEBPB genes were found
to be present in the putative promoter regions of all three genes encoding miR-9.
4HPR-induced miR-9 expression was associated with parallel increases in the
expression of these transcription factor genes. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a methyl 
transferase inhibitor, also increased the expression of miR-9 in ARPE-19 cells.
Microarray hybridization analysis identified let-7b, let-7a, miR-125b, miR-24,
miR-320, miR-23b, let-7e, and let-7d as the most abundant miRNAs normally
expressed in ARPE-19 cells. These miRNAs are known to regulate cell growth,
differentiation or development. The 4HPR treatment increased the expression of
miR-16, miR-26b, miR-23a, and miR-15b in ARPE-19 cells, although these increases 
were modest when compared to the increase in the expression of miR-9.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate that miR-9 is expressed in the RPE cell line
ARPE-19, and its expression is increased by a retinoic acid derivative and by an 
inhibitor of promoter hypermethylation. Several miRNAs with inherent ability to
regulate cell growth, differentiation and development are also normally expressed
in ARPE-19 cells. Thus, miR-9 and other miRNAs could be important in maintaining 
RPE cell function.

PMCID: PMC2925906
PMID: 20806079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. FEBS Lett. 2010 Sep 24;584(18):4077-82. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.08.035. Epub 
2010 Sep 7.

Lysophosphatidic acid stimulates gastric cancer cell proliferation via
ERK1-dependent upregulation of sphingosine kinase 1 transcription.

Ramachandran S(1), Shida D, Nagahashi M, Fang X, Milstien S, Takabe K, Spiegel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, USA.

In MKN1 gastric cancer cells, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) upregulates expression 
of sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) and its downregulation or inhibition suppresses
LPA mediated proliferation. Although LPA activates numerous signaling pathways
downstream of its receptors, including extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2,
p38, JNK, and Akt, and the transactivation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor, pharmacological and molecular approaches demonstrated that only
activation of ERK1, in addition to the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
transcription factor, is involved in transcriptional upregulation of SphK1 by
LPA. Our data implicate ERK1 as an important mediator of LPA signaling leading to
upregulation of SphK1 and point to SphK1 and sphingosine-1-phosphate production
as potential therapeutic targets in gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2947956
PMID: 20804754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33092-103. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.130377. Epub
2010 Aug 11.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß and NF-<U+03BA>B mediate high level expression of
chemokine genes CCL3 and CCL4 by human chondrocytes in response to IL-1ß.

Zhang Z(1), Bryan JL, DeLassus E, Chang LW, Liao W, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

A large set of chemokines is highly up-regulated in human chondrocytes in
response to IL-1ß (Sandell, L. J., Xing, X., Franz, C., Davies, S., Chang, L. W.,
and Patra, D. (2008) Osteoarthr. Cartil. 16, 1560-1571). To investigate the
mechanism of transcriptional regulation, deletion constructs of selected
chemokine gene promoters, the human CCL3 (MIP-1a) and CCL4 (MIP-1ß), were
transfected into human chondrocytes with or without IL-1ß. The results show that 
an IL-1ß-responsive element is located between bp -300 and -140 of the CCL3
promoter and between bp -222 and -100 of the CCL4 promoter. Because both of these
elements contain CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) motifs, the function
of C/EBPß was examined. IL-1ß stimulated the expression of C/EBPß, and the direct
binding of C/EBPß to the C/EBPß motif was confirmed by EMSA and ChIP analyses.
The -300 bp CCL3 promoter and -222 bp CCL4 promoter were strongly up-regulated by
co-transfection with the C/EBPß expression vector. Mutation of the C/EBPß motif
and reduction of C/EBPß expression by siRNA decreased the up-regulation.
Additionally, another cytokine-related transcription factor, NF-<U+03BA>B, was also
shown to be involved in the up-regulation of chemokines in response to IL-1ß, and
the binding site was identified. The regulation of C/EBPß and NF-<U+03BA>B was confirmed
by the inhibition by C/EBPß and NF-<U+03BA>B and by transfection with C/EBPß and NF-<U+03BA>B
expression vectors in the presence or absence of IL-1ß. Taken together, our
results suggest that C/EBPß and NF-<U+03BA>B are both involved in the IL-1ß-responsive
up-regulation of chemokine genes in human chondrocytes. Time course experiments
indicated that C/EBPß gradually and steadily induces chemokine up-regulation,
whereas NF-<U+03BA>B activity was highest at the early stage of chemokine up-regulation.

PMCID: PMC2963416
PMID: 20702408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Nov 15;316(19):3227-38. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.07.021. Epub
2010 Aug 7.

The C/EBPbeta isoform, liver-inhibitory protein (LIP), induces autophagy in
breast cancer cell lines.

Abreu MM(1), Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, 752 Preston Research Building, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Autophagy is a process involving the bulk degradation of cellular components in
the cytoplasm via the lysosomal degradation pathway. Autophagy manifests a
protective role in stressful conditions such as nutrient or growth factor
depletion; however, extensive degradation of regulatory molecules or organelles
essential for survival can lead to the demise of the cell, or autophagy-mediated 
cell death. The role of autophagy in cancer is complex with roles in both tumor
suppression and tumor promotion proposed. Here we report that an isoform of the
C/EBPbeta transcription factor, liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP), induces 
cell death in human breast cancer cells and stimulates autophagy. Overexpression 
of LIP is incompatible with cell growth and when cell cycle analysis was
performed, a DNA profile of cells undergoing apoptosis was not observed. Instead,
LIP expressing cells appeared to have large autophagic vesicles when examined via
electron microscopy. Autophagy was further assessed in LIP expressing cells by
monitoring the development of acidic vesicular organelles and conversion of LC3
from the cytoplasmic form to the membrane-bound form. Our work shows that
C/EBPbeta isoform, LIP, is another member of the group of transcription factors, 
including E2F1 and p53, which are capable of playing a role in autophagy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2967436
PMID: 20699097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Feb;30(1):37-47. doi: 10.1007/s10637-010-9512-5. Epub 2010
Aug 5.

Nutlin-1 strengthened anti-proliferation and differentiation-inducing activity of
ATRA in ATRA-treated p-glycoprotein deregulated human myelocytic leukemia cells.

Zhang L(1), Yan Y, Zhu D, Yang W, Wang W, Hu Y, Yang B, He Q.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Zhejiang University, 388# Yuhangtang Rd., Hangzhou 310058, China.

Unlike its cytotoxicity in p53-functional cell lines, Nutlin-1, the
small-molecule inhibitor of murine double minute (MDM2), significantly enhanced
the differentiation-inducing activity of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in HL60
and NB4 cells (p53-nonfunctional) but not in U937 cells (p53 wild-type).
Moreover, we demonstrated that the synergistic differentiation-inducing activity 
of Nutlin-1 combined with ATRA appeared in a p53-independent manner. In the
present study, we found that ATRA could selectively induce expression of
p-glycoprotein (p-gp) in HL60 and NB4 cells but not in U937 cells. Investigation 
of p-gp-ATPase activity showed that Nutlin-1 and ATRA were likely to act as p-gp 
transport substrates. Furthermore, Nutlin-1 enhanced the ability of ATRA to
induce expression of the myeloid differentiation-related transcription factor
C/EBPß and to reduce expression of c-myc. Additionally, the expression of
retinoic acid receptor a (RARa) was further reduced in cells treated with ATRA in
combination with Nutlin-1. Taken together, the mechanisms of synergistic
differentiation-inducing activity of Nutlin-1 combined with ATRA could be
attributed to Nutlin-1 competitive binding to p-gp, leading to ATRA efflux
inhibition, and then the differentiation pathways involved were therefore further
activated. Nutlin-1 might be a useful adjuvant with ATRA for patients with
retinoid-resistant leukemia induced by overexpression of p-gp.

PMID: 20686816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 1;285(40):30837-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.128272. Epub 2010
Jul 20.

The biological effects of C/EBPalpha in K562 cells depend on the potency of the
N-terminal regulatory region, not on specificity of the DNA binding domain.

Ferrari-Amorotti G(1), Mariani SA, Novi C, Cattelani S, Pecorari L, Corradini F, 
Soliera AR, Manzotti G, Fragliasso V, Zhang Y, Martinez RV, Lam EW, Guerzoni C,
Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
41100 Modena, Italy.

The transcription factor C/EBPa is more potent than C/EBPß in inducing
granulocitic differentiation and inhibiting BCR/ABL-expressing cells. We took a
"domain swapping" approach to assess biological effects, modulation of gene
expression, and binding to C/EBPa-regulated promoters by wild-type and chimeric
C/EBPa/C/EBPß proteins. Wild-type and N-C/EBPa+ C/EBPß-DBD induced transcription 
of the granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR) gene, promoted
differentiation, and suppressed proliferation of K562 cells vigorously; instead, 
wild-type C/EBPß and N-C/EBPß+C/EBPa-DBD had modest effects, although they bound 
the G-CSFR promoter like wild-type C/EBPa and N-C/EBPa+C/EBPß-DBD. Chimeric
proteins consisting of the TAD of VP16 and the DBD of C/EBPa or C/EBPß inhibited 
proliferation and induced differentiation of K562 cells as effectively as
wild-type C/EBPa. Gene expression profiles induced by C/EBPa resembled those
modulated by N-C/EBPa+C/EBPß-DBD, whereas C/EBPß induced a pattern similar to
that of N-C/EBPß+C/EBPa-DBD. C/EBPa activation induced changes in the expression 
of more cell cycle- and apoptosis-related genes than the other proteins and
enhanced Imatinib-induced apoptosis of K562 cells. Expression of FOXO3a, a novel 
C/EBPa-regulated gene, was required for apoptosis but not for differentiation
induction or proliferation inhibition of K562 cells.

PMCID: PMC2945577
PMID: 20659895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):29760-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.121459. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

A novel mechanism involving coordinated regulation of nuclear levels and
acetylation of NF-YA and Bcl6 activates RGS4 transcription.

Yang J(1), Huang J, Chatterjee TK, Twait E, Fisher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Neuronally enriched RGS4 plays a critical role attenuating G protein signaling in
brain, although the mechanisms regulating RGS4 expression are unknown. Here we
describe a novel mechanism for transcriptional activation of RGS4 in neuron-like 
PC6 cells, where RGS4 is markedly induced during confluence-induced growth
arrest. Transcriptional activation of RGS4 in confluent PC6 cells was accompanied
by impaired G(i/o)-dependent MAPK activation. In the human RGS4 gene promoter, we
identified three phylogenetically conserved cis-elements: an inverted CCAAT box
element (ICE), a cAMP response element, and a B-cell lymphoma 6 (Bcl6)-binding
site. The ICE and the cAMP response element mediate activation, and the Bcl6 site
mediates repression of RGS4 transcription. Activation of RGS4 transcription in
confluent PC6 cells is accompanied by increases in NF-YA and C/EBPß and decreases
in Bcl6 levels in the nucleus. Increases in NF-YA and C/EBPß lead to their
increased binding to the RGS4 promoter in vivo, and dominant negative forms of
these proteins repressed RGS4 promoter activity. Acetylation of NF-YA and Bcl6
were increased in postconfluent cells. Trichostatin A stimulation of RGS4
promoter activity, accompanied by increased binding of NF-YA and decreased
binding of Bcl6 to the promoter, was abolished by mutation of the ICE and
enhanced by mutation of the Bcl6 site. These findings demonstrate a dynamic and
coordinated regulation of nuclear levels and acetylation status of trans-acting
factors critical in determining the off/on state of the RGS4 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2943308
PMID: 20630860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genome Inform. 2010;24:139-53.

Robust gene network analysis reveals alteration of the STAT5a network as a
hallmark of prostate cancer.

Reddy A(1), Huang CC, Liu H, Delisi C, Nevalainen MT, Szalma S, Bhanot G.

Author information: 
(1)BioMaPS Institute, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
anupamar@gmail.com.

We develop a general method to identify gene networks from pair-wise correlations
between genes in a microarray data set and apply it to a public prostate cancer
gene expression data from 69 primary prostate tumors. We define the degree of a
node as the number of genes significantly associated with the node and identify
hub genes as those with the highest degree. The correlation network was pruned
using transcription factor binding information in VisANT (http://visant.bu.edu/) 
as a biological filter. The reliability of hub genes was determined using a
strict permutation test. Separate networks for normal prostate samples, and
prostate cancer samples from African Americans (AA) and European Americans (EA)
were generated and compared. We found that the same hubs control disease
progression in AA and EA networks. Combining AA and EA samples, we generated
networks for low low (<7) and high (=7) Gleason grade tumors. A comparison of
their major hubs with those of the network for normal samples identified two
types of changes associated with disease: (i) Some hub genes increased their
degree in the tumor network compared to their degree in the normal network,
suggesting that these genes are associated with gain of regulatory control in
cancer (e.g. possible turning on of oncogenes). (ii) Some hubs reduced their
degree in the tumor network compared to their degree in the normal network,
suggesting that these genes are associated with loss of regulatory control in
cancer (e.g. possible loss of tumor suppressor genes). A striking result was that
for both AA and EA tumor samples, STAT5a, CEBPB and EGR1 are major hubs that gain
neighbors compared to the normal prostate network. Conversely, HIF-la is a major 
hub that loses connections in the prostate cancer network compared to the normal 
prostate network. We also find that the degree of these hubs changes
progressively from normal to low grade to high grade disease, suggesting that
these hubs are master regulators of prostate cancer and marks disease
progression. STAT5a was identified as a central hub, with ~120 neighbors in the
prostate cancer network and only 81 neighbors in the normal prostate network. Of 
the 120 neighbors of STAT5a, 57 are known cancer related genes, known to be
involved in functional pathways associated with tumorigenesis. Our method is
general and can easily be extended to identify and study networks associated with
any two phenotypes.

PMID: 22081596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Blood. 2010 Oct 7;116(14):2462-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-259630. Epub 2010
Jun 25.

STAT3 controls myeloid progenitor growth during emergency granulopoiesis.

Zhang H(1), Nguyen-Jackson H, Panopoulos AD, Li HS, Murray PJ, Watowich SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030-1903, USA.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) mediates "emergency" granulopoiesis
during infection, a process that is mimicked by clinical G-CSF use, yet we
understand little about the intracellular signaling cascades that control
demand-driven neutrophil production. Using a murine model with conditional
deletion of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) in bone
marrow, we investigated the cellular and molecular mechanisms of STAT3 function
in the emergency granulopoiesis response to G-CSF administration or infection
with Listeria monocytogenes, a pathogen that is restrained by G-CSF signaling in 
vivo. Our results show that STAT3 deficiency renders hematopoietic progenitor
cells and myeloid precursors refractory to the growth-promoting functions of
G-CSF or L monocytogenes infection. STAT3 is necessary for accelerating
granulocyte cell-cycle progression and maturation in response to G-CSF. STAT3
directly controls G-CSF-dependent expression of CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein ß 
(C/EBPß), a crucial factor in the emergency granulopoiesis response. Moreover,
STAT3 and C/EBPß coregulate c-Myc through interactions with the c-myc promoter
that control the duration of C/EBPa occupancy during demand-driven
granulopoiesis. These results place STAT3 as an essential mediator of emergency
granulopoiesis by its regulation of transcription factors that direct
G-CSF-responsive myeloid progenitor expansion.

PMCID: PMC2953883
PMID: 20581311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 25;397(2):170-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.067. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Albumin expression is required for adipocyte differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells.

Yoo W(1), Lee J, Park S, Kim YS, Lim C, Yoon E, Hur G, Oh J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Korea University Graduate School of Medicine,
Ansan, Gyeonggi do 425-707, Republic of Korea.

We have previously demonstrated that albumin is directly involved in the
formation of cytoplasmic lipid droplets in pancreatic stellate cells and may act 
as a downstream effector of adipogenic transcription factors, PPAR-gamma and
C/EBP-alpha. Here, we investigated the role of albumin in adipocyte
differentiation using 3T3-L1 cells. Albumin expression was significantly
increased at later stages of adipocyte differentiation, which was accompanied
with increased C/EBP-beta binding to albumin promoter. Suppression of albumin
expression using short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) during differentiation led to a
considerable reduction in lipid droplet formation, whereas albumin overexpression
was stimulatory. Furthermore, point mutation in its fatty acid-binding sites
inhibited lipid droplet formation. Consistent with these in vitro finding, Nagase
analbuminemic rats displayed reduced fat accumulation. Therefore, our findings
suggest that albumin may play a distinct role in adipocyte differentiation by
promoting lipid accumulation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20529675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Genes Dev. 2010 May 15;24(10):1035-44. doi: 10.1101/gad.1907110.

Propagation of adipogenic signals through an epigenomic transition state.

Steger DJ(1), Grant GR, Schupp M, Tomaru T, Lefterova MI, Schug J, Manduchi E,
Stoeckert CJ Jr, Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The transcriptional mechanisms by which temporary exposure to developmental
signals instigates adipocyte differentiation are unknown. During early
adipogenesis, we find transient enrichment of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (CEBPbeta), p300, mediator subunit 1, and
histone H3 acetylation near genes involved in cell proliferation, development,
and differentiation, including the gene encoding the master regulator of
adipocyte differentiation, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma2
(PPARgamma2). Occupancy and enhancer function are triggered by adipogenic
signals, and diminish upon their removal. GR, which is important for adipogenesis
but need not be active in the mature adipocyte, functions transiently with other 
enhancer proteins to propagate a new program of gene expression that includes
induction of PPARgamma2, thereby providing a memory of the earlier adipogenic
signal. Thus, the conversion of preadipocyte to adipocyte involves the formation 
of an epigenomic transition state that is not observed in cells at the beginning 
or end of the differentiation process.

PMCID: PMC2867208
PMID: 20478996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 11;396(4):1054-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.064. Epub 2010 May 21.

Sildenafil promotes adipogenesis through a PKG pathway.

Zhang X(1), Ji J, Yan G, Wu J, Sun X, Shen J, Jiang H, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu
Chong Zhi Road, Zhang Jiang Hi-Tech Park, Pudong, Shanghai 201203, China.

Sildenafil is the first oral PDE5 inhibitor for the treatment of erectile
dysfunction and pulmonary arterial hypertension. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of sildenafil on adipogenesis in 3T3L1 preadipocytes.
Treatment with sildenafil for 8 days significantly promoted adipogenesis
characterized by increased lipid droplet and triglyceride content in 3T3L1 cells.
Meanwhile, sildenafil induced a pronounced up-regulation of the expression of
adipocyte-specific genes, such as aP2 and GLUT4. The results by RT-PCR and
Western blotting further showed that sildenafil increased the sequential
expression of C/EBP beta, PPAR gamma and C/EBP alpha. Additionally, we found that
the other two PDE5 inhibitors (vardenafil and tadalafil) and the cGMP analog
8-pCPT-cGMP also increased adipogenesis. Likewise, 8-pCPT-cGMP could up-regulate 
the expression of adipogenic and adipocyte-specific genes. Importantly, the PKG
inhibitor Rp-8-pCPT-cGMP was able to inhibit both sildenafil and
8-pCPT-cGMP-induced adipogenesis. Furthermore, sildenafil promoted basal and
insulin-mediated glucose uptake in 3T3L1 cells, which was counteracted by
Rp-8-pCPT-cGMP. These results indicate that sildenafil could promote adipogenesis
accompanied by increased glucose uptake through a PKG pathway at least partly.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20471953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2010 Jul;7(3):195-203. doi: 10.1177/1479164110366274. Epub
2010 May 11.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha, beta and delta gene variants: associations 
with obesity related phenotypes in the Leeds Family Study.

Bennett CE(1), Nsengimana J, Bostock JA, Cymbalista C, Futers TS, Knight BL,
McCormack LJ, Prasad UK, Riches K, Rolton D, Scarrott T, Barrett JH, Carter AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Diabetes Research, Leeds Institute of Genetics,
Health and Therapeutics, University of Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel polymorphisms in the genes encoding the
transcription factors CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha, beta and delta (
CEBPA, CEBPB, CEBPD) and investigate associations between polymorphisms and
obesity-related phenotypes.
METHODS: Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to
screen for novel gene variants and polymorphisms were genotyped in stored DNA
from participants of the Leeds Family Study (537 subjects from 89 families).
Genotype and haplotype analyses were carried out in STATA and PBAT, respectively.
RESULTS: Twenty-five polymorphisms were identified; 11 in CEBPA, 12 in CEBPB and 
2 in CEBPD. Several allelic variants were associated at a nominal 5% level with
waist-to-hip ratio (-919G>A in CEBPA, -412G>T and 646C>T in CEBPB), leptin
(1558G>A in CEBPA, -1051A>G and 1383T>- in CEBPB) and adiponectin (1382G>T and
1903G>T in CEBPB). Effects of CEBPA and CEBPB allelic variants were independent, 
but variants within each gene were in linkage disequilibrium. Several
associations were observed between other obesity-related traits and allelic
variants in CEBPA and CEBPB, but not CEBPD.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that common allelic variants in CEBPA and
CEBPB could influence abdominal obesity and related metabolic abnormalities
associated with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in healthy White
Northern European families, although results require independent confirmation.

PMID: 20460359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cell Biol Int. 2010 Sep;34(9):883-91. doi: 10.1042/CBI20090401.

ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analysis demonstrates co-ordinated binding
of two transcription factors to the promoter of the p53 tumour-suppressor gene.

Polson A(1), Takahashi P, Reisman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA.

p53 is a tumour-suppressor protein that plays a role in many cellular processes, 
including regulation of the cell cycle, DNA repair, transcriptional regulation of
genes, chromosomal segregation, cell senescence and apoptosis. The protein's role
as a transcription factor has shown that deregulated transcription, whether
increased or decreased, has the potential to contribute to the formation of human
cancers. It was previously reported that binding of two transcription factors,
C/EBPbeta and RBP-Jkappa, to a regulatory site on the p53 promoter regulates its 
activity, in vitro, in a cell cycle-dependent manner. C/EBPbeta is a CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein that is a member of the basic leucine zipper
transcription factor (bZIP) family that plays an important role in mediating cell
proliferation, differentiation and can also be involved in inflammatory
responses, metabolism, cellular transformation, oncogene-induced senescence and
tumorigenesis. RBP-Jkappa participates in the transcriptional regulation of
target genes by interacting with the cytoplasmic domain of the Notch receptors.
When RBP-Jkappa is released, transcriptional repression of its target genes
occurs through the recruitment of co-repressor complexes and prevents
transcription from occurring. Our reports, here and previously published, show
that repression of p53 by RBP-Jkappa and activation of p53 by C/EBPbeta through
differential binding of these two factors indicates a type of co-operative
regulation in p53 expression. Here, we demonstrate through the use of chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays that the co-ordinated binding of these two
factors to the p53 promoter occurs in vivo and serves to regulate p53's activity 
during the cell cycle.

PMID: 20446924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6318-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00635-10. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

MicroRNA miR-155 inhibits bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling and
BMP-mediated Epstein-Barr virus reactivation.

Yin Q(1), Wang X, Fewell C, Cameron J, Zhu H, Baddoo M, Lin Z, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Tulane Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

MicroRNA miR-155 is expressed at elevated levels in human cancers including
cancers of the lung, breast, colon, and a subset of lymphoid malignancies. In B
cells, miR-155 is induced by the oncogenic latency gene expression program of the
human herpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Two other oncogenic herpesviruses,
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and Marek's disease virus, encode
functional homologues of miR-155, suggesting a role for this microRNA in the
biology and pathogenesis of these viruses. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling is involved in an array of cellular processes, including
differentiation, growth inhibition, and senescence, through context-dependent
interactions with multiple signaling pathways. Alteration of this pathway
contributes to a number of disease states including cancer. Here, we show that
miR-155 targets the 3' untranslated region of multiple components of the BMP
signaling cascade, including SMAD1, SMAD5, HIVEP2, CEBPB, RUNX2, and MYO10.
Targeting of these mediators results in the inhibition of BMP2-, BMP6-, and
BMP7-induced ID3 expression as well as BMP-mediated EBV reactivation in the
EBV-positive B-cell line, Mutu I. Further, miR-155 inhibits SMAD1 and SMAD5
expression in the lung epithelial cell line A549, it inhibits BMP-mediated
induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21, and it reverses
BMP-mediated cell growth inhibition. These results suggest a role for miR-155 in 
controlling BMP-mediated cellular processes, in regulating BMP-induced EBV
reactivation, and in the inhibition of antitumor effects of BMP signaling in
normal and virus-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC2903268
PMID: 20427544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Haematologica. 2010 Jul;95(7):1114-21. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.015099. Epub
2010 Apr 23.

Gene expression profiling identifies a subset of adult T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with myeloid-like gene features and over-expression of miR-223.

Chiaretti S(1), Messina M, Tavolaro S, Zardo G, Elia L, Vitale A, Fatica A,
Gorello P, Piciocchi A, Scappucci G, Bozzoni I, Fozza C, Candoni A, Guarini A,
Foà R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology,
Sapienza University of Rome, Via Benevento 6, 00161 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Until recently, few molecular aberrations were recognized in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia of T-cell origin; novel lesions have recently been
identified and a certain degree of overlap between acute myeloid leukemia and
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia has been suggested. To identify novel T-cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia entities, gene expression profiling was performed
and clinico-biological features were studied.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Sixty-nine untreated adults with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia were evaluated by oligonucleotide arrays: unsupervised and supervised
analyses were performed. The up-regulation of myeloid genes and miR-223
expression were validated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis.
RESULTS: Using unsupervised clustering, we identified five subgroups. Of these,
one branch included seven patients whose gene expression profile resembled that
of acute myeloid leukemia. These cases were characterized by over-expression of a
large set of myeloid-related genes for surface antigens, transcription factors
and granule proteins. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis
confirmed over-expression of MPO, CEBPA, CEBPB, GRN and IL8. We, therefore,
evaluated the expression levels of miR-223, involved in myeloid differentiation: 
these cases had significantly higher levels of miR-223 than had the other cases
of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, with values comparable to those observed 
in acute myeloid leukemia. Finally, these patients appear to have an unfavorable 
clinical course.
CONCLUSIONS: Using gene profiling we identified a subset of adult T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, accounting for 10% of the cases analyzed, which displays 
myeloid features. These cases were not recognized by standard approaches,
underlining the importance of gene profiling in identifying novel acute leukemia 
subsets. The recognition of this subgroup may have clinical, prognostic and
therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC2895035
PMID: 20418243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 14;395(4):465-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.04.023. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

Foxa2 (HNF-3beta) regulates expression of hepatotrophic factor ALR in liver
cells.

Dayoub R(1), Groitl P, Dobner T, Bosserhoff AK, Schlitt HJ, Weiss TS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Liver Cell Research, University Medical Center Regensburg, Germany.

Liver regeneration is a multistep and well-orchestrated process which is
initiated by injuries such as tissue loss, infectious or toxic insults. Augmenter
of liver regeneration (ALR) is a hepatotrophic growth factor which has been shown
to stimulate hepatic regeneration after partial hepatectomy and therefore seems
to be regulated during the regenerative process in the liver. Our aim was to
analyze how ALR is regulated in hepatic tissues and which transcription factors
might regulate its tissue-specific expression. Promoter studies of ALR (-733/+527
bp) revealed potential regulatory elements for various transcription factors like
Foxa2, IL-6 RE-BP and C/EBPbeta. Analysis of the promoter activity by performing 
luciferase assays revealed that co-transfection with Foxa2 significantly induced 
the activity of ALR promoter in HepG2 cells. EMSA and Supershift analysis using
anti-Foxa2 antibody confirmed the specific binding of Foxa2 to ALR promoter and
this binding was inducible when the cells were simultaneously stimulated with
IL-6. The increased binding after activation with IL-6 and/or Foxa2 was confirmed
by elevated ALR protein levels using Western blot technique. In addition, we
could not detect any binding of C/EBPbeta and IL-6 RE-BP to the promoter of ALR. 
In conclusion, these results indicate that ALR is regulated by Foxa2, and this
regulation may be amplified by IL-6.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20382118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Cell Biochem. 2010 May 15;110(2):438-46. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22556.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta is up-regulated in giant cell tumor of bone
and regulates RANKL expression.

Ng PK(1), Tsui SK, Lau CP, Wong CH, Wong WH, Huang L, Kumta SM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR.

Giant cell tumor (GCT) of bone is an aggressive non-cancerous tumor, which
consists of multi-nucleated osteoclast-like giant cells, stromal cells, and
monocytes. It is believed that stromal cells are the neoplastic component of this
tumor. Expression of the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand
(RANKL) in the stromal cells stimulates the monocytes to form giant
multi-nucleated osteoclast-like cells, causing bone over-resorption at the tumor 
site. Previously, our group has reported the up-regulation of RANKL in GCT of
bone stromal cells, but the mechanism is unknown. Using stromal cell culture of
GCT obtained from patients, we demonstrated the up-regulation of the
transcriptional activator CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta). RANKL 
promoter studies revealed that C/EBPbeta over-expression induced RANKL promoter
activity in a dose-dependent manner and a CCAAT-box within the region nt -357/-1 
contributed to the basal transcription activity, with a possible C/EBPbeta
binding element in the region nt -460/-358 leading to further induction.
Furthermore, we also showed that C/EBPbeta bound to the RANKL promoter in GCT
stromal cells in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation. To conclude, our study
has shown that C/EBPbeta is a RANKL promoter activator in stromal cells of GCT of
bone and we have proposed a model in which C/EBPbeta plays an important role in
the osteolytic characteristics and pathological causes of GCT of bone.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20225273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Reprod Sci. 2010 May;17(5):434-43. doi: 10.1177/1933719110361384. Epub 2010 Mar
11.

The transcription factor C/EBPß is a marker of uterine receptivity and expressed 
at the implantation site in the primate.

Kannan A(1), Fazleabas AT, Bagchi IC, Bagchi MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vet. Biosciences University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.

During early pregnancy, the endometrium undergoes pronounced hormone-dependent
functional changes in preparation for embryo implantation. Local
autocrine-paracrine signaling at the fetal-maternal interface is crucial for the 
establishment of pregnancy. We previously reported that the transcription factor 
C/ EBPbeta, which is expressed at the implantation sites (ISs) in pregnant mice, 
acts as a key mediator of steroid hormone responsiveness in the endometrium. Mice
lacking C/EBPbeta fail to support implantation due to defects in epithelial
proliferation and stromal cell differentiation. In the current study, C/EBPbeta
expression was dramatically stimulated in the endometrium of baboons (Papio
anubis) during the window of uterine receptivity in response to a local infusion 
of chorionic gonadotropin, an embryonic signal. A robust induction of C/EBPbeta
expression was also seen at the IS in the baboon and the human. Collectively, our
results indicate that C/EBPbeta is a biomarker of endometrial receptivity and
plays a conserved functional role during implantation in the primate.

PMCID: PMC3048823
PMID: 20224108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14088-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.017129. Epub
2010 Mar 10.

Induction of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin expression by
co-stimulation with interleukin-17 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha is controlled 
by IkappaB-zeta but neither by C/EBP-beta nor C/EBP-delta.

Karlsen JR(1), Borregaard N, Cowland JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology (93.2.2), Granulocyte Research Laboratory, University
of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is a siderophore-binding
antimicrobial protein that is up-regulated in epithelial tissues during
inflammation. We demonstrated previously that the gene encoding NGAL (LCN2) is
strongly up-regulated by interleukin (IL)-1beta in an NF-kappaB-dependent manner 
but not by tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, another potent activator of
NF-kappaB. This is due to an IL-1beta-specific synthesis of the NF-kappaB-binding
co-factor IkappaB-zeta, which is essential for NGAL induction. We demonstrate
here that NGAL is strongly induced by stimulation with TNF-alpha in the presence 
of IL-17, a pro-inflammatory cytokine produced by the newly discovered subset of 
CD4(+) T helper cells, T(H)-17. In contrast to the murine NGAL orthologue,
24p3/lipocalin 2, we found no requirement for C/EBP-beta or C/EBP-delta for NGAL 
induction by IL-17 and TNF-alpha as neither small interfering RNAs against the
two C/EBP mRNAs nor mutation of the C/EBP sites in the LCN2 promoter abolished
IL-17- and TNF-alpha-induced up-regulation of NGAL. NGAL induction is governed
solely by NF-kappaB and its co-factor IkappaB-zeta. This was demonstrated by a
pronounced reduction in the amount of NGAL mRNA and NGAL protein synthesized in
cells treated with small interfering RNA against IkappaB-zeta and a total lack of
activation of an LCN2 promoter construct with a mutated NF-kappaB site. As IL-17 
stimulation stabilizes the IkappaB-zeta transcript, we propose a model where
TNF-alpha induces activation and binding of NF-kappaB to the promoters of both
NFKBIZ and LCN2 genes but induce only transcription of IkappaB-zeta.
Co-stimulation with IL-17 leads to accumulation of IkappaB-zeta mRNA and
IkappaB-zeta protein, which can bind to NF-kappaB on the LCN2 promoter and thus
induce NGAL expression.

PMCID: PMC2863242
PMID: 20220144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Jun;87(6):1069-82. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1009668. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 in peptidoglycan-induced COX-2 expression in
macrophages.

Hsu MJ(1), Chang CK, Chen MC, Chen BC, Ma HP, Hong CY, Lin CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Department of Pharmacology, College of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan.

In this study, we investigated the role of ASK1 in PGN-induced C/EBPbeta
activation and COX-2 expression in RAW 264.7 macrophages. The PGN-induced COX-2
expression was attenuated by the DNs of ASK1, JNK1, JNK2, a JNK inhibitor
(SP600125), and an AP-1 inhibitor (curcumin). PGN caused ASK1 dephosphorylation
time-dependently at Ser967, dissociation from the ASK1-14-3-3 complex, and
subsequent ASK1 activation. In addition, PGN activated PP2A and suppression of
PP2A by okadaic acid markedly inhibited PGN-induced ASK1 Ser967 dephosphorylation
and COX-2 expression. PGN induced the activation of the JNK-AP-1 signaling
cascade downstream of ASK1. PGN-increased C/EBPbeta expression and DNA-binding
activity were inhibited by the ASK1-JNK-AP-1 signaling blockade. COX-2 promoter
luciferase activity induced by PGN was attenuated in cells transfected with the
COX-2 reporter construct possessing the C/EBP-binding site mutation. In addition,
the ASK1-JNK-AP-1-C/EBPbeta cascade was activated in human peripheral mononuclear
cells exposure to PGN. The TLR2 agonist Pam(3)CSK(4) was also shown to induce
ASK1 Ser967 dephosphorylation, JNK and c-jun phosphorylation, C/EBPbeta
activation, and COX-2 expression in RAW 264.7 macrophages. PGN-induced COX-2
promoter luciferase activity was prevented by selective inhibition of TLR2 and
c-Jun in RAW 264.7 macrophages. Our data demonstrate that PGN might activate the 
TLR2-mediated PP2A-ASK1-JNK-AP-1-C/EBPbeta cascade and subsequent COX-2
expression in RAW 264.7 macrophages.

PMID: 20200402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13274-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.054536. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Transcription factor Smad3 is required for the inhibition of adipogenesis by
retinoic acid.

Marchildon F(1), St-Louis C, Akter R, Roodman V, Wiper-Bergeron NL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada.

The process of adipocyte differentiation is driven by a highly coordinated
cascade of transcriptional events that results in the development of the mature
adipocyte and in lipid accumulation. One of the early events of differentiation
is the up-regulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)
expression. C/EBPbeta then acts to up-regulate the expression of adipogenic
factors such as C/EBPalpha, which control the late stage of adipogenesis.
Retinoic acid (RA) is a potent inhibitor of adipogenesis, and its action appears 
to block C/EBPbeta transcriptional potential early during differentiation. Using 
preadipocytes and mesenchymal stem cell models, we show that RA specifically
blocks the occupancy of C/EBPbeta of the Cebpa promoter, thereby abrogating the
differentiation process. RA does not act directly on C/EBPbeta but rather
stimulates the expression of the transforming growth factor beta-effector protein
Smad3, which can interact with C/EBPbeta via its Mad homology 1 domain and can
interfere with C/EBPbeta DNA binding. The RA-induced increase in Smad3 expression
results in increased cytoplasmic and nuclear Smad3, an important event as ectopic
expression of Smad3 in preadipocytes in the absence of RA treatment only modestly
inhibits adipogenesis and C/EBPbeta DNA binding, suggesting that Smad3 alone is
not sufficient to completely recapitulate the effects of retinoic acid treatment 
during differentiation. However, in the absence of Smad3, RA is not able to
inhibit adipocyte differentiation or to elicit a decrease in C/EBPbeta DNA
occupancy suggesting that Smad3 is necessary to convey the inhibitory effects of 
retinoic acid during adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2857127
PMID: 20179325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Jun;87(6):1133-43. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0809547. Epub 2010 Feb 9.

HIV-1 Vpr induces TLR4/MyD88-mediated IL-6 production and reactivates viral
production from latency.

Hoshino S(1), Konishi M, Mori M, Shimura M, Nishitani C, Kuroki Y, Koyanagi Y,
Kano S, Itabe H, Ishizaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, International Medical Center of Japan, 1-21-1 Toyama,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Vpr, a HIV-1 accessory protein, was believed to be present in the plasma of
HIV-1-positive patients, and our previous work demonstrated the presence of
plasma Vpr in 20 out of 52 patients. Interestingly, our data revealed that
patients' viral titer was correlated with the level of Vpr detected in their
plasma. Here, we first show that rVpr, when incubated with human monocytes or
MDMs, caused viral production from latently infected cells, and IL-6 was
identified as a responsible factor. The induction of IL-6 by rVpr was dependent
on signaling through TLR4 and its adaptor molecule, MyD88. We next provide
evidence that rVpr induced the formation of OxPC and that a mAb against OxPC
blocked rVpr-induced IL-6 production with the concomitant attenuation of MAPK
activation. Moreover, the addition of NAC, a scavenger of ROS, abrogated the
rVpr-induced formation of OxPC, the phosphorylation of C/EBP-beta, a substrate of
MAPK, and IL-6 production. As rIL-6 reactivated viral replication in latently
infected cells, our data indicate that rVpr-induced oxidative stress triggers
cell-based innate immune responses and reactivates viral production in latently
infected cells via IL-6 production. Our results suggest that Vpr should be
monitored based on the viral titer, and they provide the rationale for the
development of novel, anti-AIDS therapeutics targeting Vpr.

PMID: 20145198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Neoplasma. 2010;57(2):123-8.

Differential gene expression identified in Uigur women cervical squamous cell
carcinoma by suppression subtractive hybridization.

Pan Z(1), Chen S, Pan X, Wang Z, Han H, Zheng W, Wang X, Li F, Qu S, Shao R.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory on Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Shihezi
University, Xinjiang, China. panzemin89@yahoo.com.cn

Cervical cancer is one of the most common gynecological cancers worldwide. Over
the past decade, much progress has been made in understanding the genetic changes
associated with the development and progression of cervical cancer. However, the 
precise mechanisms of cervical carcinogenesis in Uigur women remain unclear. To
screen differential gene expression in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the
cervix in Uigur women, suppressive subtractive hybridization (SSH) was performed 
on the cervical squamous cell carcinoma and corresponding normal cervical tissues
of a Uigur patient. Thus we were be able to find the genes that are related with 
cervical tumors of Uigur women. A total of 300 samples were subject to DNA
sequencing analysis and 46 genes were found to express differentially in tumors
compared with normal tissues. Of the 46 genes, 24 genes were up-regulated whereas
22 genes were down-regulated in cervical tumors. The expression profiles of 5 of 
the 46 genes were further confirmed in 15 other Uigur patients by
semi-quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Our results
revealed that ACADVL, CEBPB, IFITM1 and DNAJC9 are involved in cervical
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20099975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Stem Cells. 2010 Mar 31;28(3):535-44. doi: 10.1002/stem.297.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta regulates stem cell activity and specifies
luminal cell fate in the mammary gland.

LaMarca HL(1), Visbal AP, Creighton CJ, Liu H, Zhang Y, Behbod F, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

The bZIP transcription factor C/EBP beta is important for mammary gland
development and its expression is deregulated in human breast cancer. To
determine whether C/EBP beta regulates mammary stem cells (MaSCs), we employed
two different knockout strategies. Using both a germline and a conditional
knockout strategy, we demonstrate that mammosphere formation was significantly
decreased in C/EBP beta-deficient mammary epithelial cells (MECs). Functional
limiting dilution transplantation assays indicated that the repopulating ability 
of C/EBP beta-deleted MECs was severely impaired. Serial transplantation
experiments demonstrated that C/EBP beta deletion resulted in decreased outgrowth
potential and premature MaSC senescence. In accord, fluorescence-activated cell
sorting analysis demonstrated that C/EBP beta-null MECs contained fewer MaSCs,
the loss of luminal progenitors and an increase in differentiated luminal cells
as compared with wild-type. Gene profiling of C/EBP beta-null stem cells revealed
an alteration in cell fate specification, exemplified by the expression of basal 
markers in the luminal compartment. Thus, C/EBP beta is a critical regulator of
both MaSC repopulation activity and luminal cell lineage commitment. These
findings have critical implications for understanding both stem cell biology and 
the etiology of different breast cancer subtypes.

PMCID: PMC3006225
PMID: 20054865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 12;285(11):8395-407. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038638. Epub
2010 Jan 4.

GADD45beta enhances Col10a1 transcription via the MTK1/MKK3/6/p38 axis and
activation of C/EBPbeta-TAD4 in terminally differentiating chondrocytes.

Tsuchimochi K(1), Otero M, Dragomir CL, Plumb DA, Zerbini LF, Libermann TA, Marcu
KB, Komiya S, Ijiri K, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cartilage Biology, Research Division, The Hospital for Special 
Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

GADD45beta (growth arrest- and DNA damage-inducible) interacts with upstream
regulators of the JNK and p38 stress response kinases. Previously, we reported
that the hypertrophic zone of the Gadd45beta(-/-) mouse embryonic growth plate is
compressed, and expression of type X collagen (Col10a1) and matrix
metalloproteinase 13 (Mmp13) genes is decreased. Herein, we report that
GADD45beta enhances activity of the proximal Col10a1 promoter, which contains
evolutionarily conserved AP-1, cAMP-response element, and C/EBP half-sites, in
synergism with C/EBP family members, whereas the MMP13 promoter responds to
GADD45beta together with AP-1, ATF, or C/EBP family members. C/EBPbeta expression
also predominantly co-localizes with GADD45beta in the embryonic growth plate.
Moreover, GADD45beta enhances C/EBPbeta activation via MTK1, MKK3, and MKK6, and 
dominant-negative p38alphaapf, but not JNKapf, disrupts the combined
trans-activating effect of GADD45beta and C/EBPbeta on the Col10a1 promoter.
Importantly, GADD45beta knockdown prevents p38 phosphorylation while decreasing
Col10a1 mRNA levels but does not affect C/EBPbeta binding to the Col10a1 promoter
in vivo, indicating that GADD45beta influences the transactivation function of
DNA-bound C/EBPbeta. In support of this conclusion, we show that the
evolutionarily conserved TAD4 domain of C/EBPbeta is the target of the
GADD45beta-dependent signaling. Collectively, we have uncovered a novel molecular
mechanism linking GADD45beta via the MTK1/MKK3/6/p38 axis to C/EBPbeta-TAD4
activation of Col10a1 transcription in terminally differentiating chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC2832989
PMID: 20048163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nature. 2010 Jan 21;463(7279):318-25. doi: 10.1038/nature08712. Epub 2009 Dec 23.

The transcriptional network for mesenchymal transformation of brain tumours.

Carro MS(1), Lim WK, Alvarez MJ, Bollo RJ, Zhao X, Snyder EY, Sulman EP, Anne SL,
Doetsch F, Colman H, Lasorella A, Aldape K, Califano A, Iavarone A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
New York 10032, USA.

The inference of transcriptional networks that regulate transitions into
physiological or pathological cellular states remains a central challenge in
systems biology. A mesenchymal phenotype is the hallmark of tumour aggressiveness
in human malignant glioma, but the regulatory programs responsible for
implementing the associated molecular signature are largely unknown. Here we show
that reverse-engineering and an unbiased interrogation of a glioma-specific
regulatory network reveal the transcriptional module that activates expression of
mesenchymal genes in malignant glioma. Two transcription factors (C/EBPbeta and
STAT3) emerge as synergistic initiators and master regulators of mesenchymal
transformation. Ectopic co-expression of C/EBPbeta and STAT3 reprograms neural
stem cells along the aberrant mesenchymal lineage, whereas elimination of the two
factors in glioma cells leads to collapse of the mesenchymal signature and
reduces tumour aggressiveness. In human glioma, expression of C/EBPbeta and STAT3
correlates with mesenchymal differentiation and predicts poor clinical outcome.
These results show that the activation of a small regulatory module is necessary 
and sufficient to initiate and maintain an aberrant phenotypic state in cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC4011561
PMID: 20032975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. BMC Genomics. 2009 Dec 10;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-595.

Deciphering the transcriptional circuitry of microRNA genes expressed during
human monocytic differentiation.

Schmeier S(1), MacPherson CR, Essack M, Kaur M, Schaefer U, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western
Cape, Modderdam Road, Bellville, South Africa. sebastian.schmeier@kaust.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Macrophages are immune cells involved in various biological processes
including host defence, homeostasis, differentiation, and organogenesis.
Disruption of macrophage biology has been linked to increased pathogen infection,
inflammation and malignant diseases. Differential gene expression observed in
monocytic differentiation is primarily regulated by interacting transcription
factors (TFs). Current research suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) degrade and
repress translation of mRNA, but also may target genes involved in
differentiation. We focus on getting insights into the transcriptional circuitry 
regulating miRNA genes expressed during monocytic differentiation.
RESULTS: We computationally analysed the transcriptional circuitry of miRNA genes
during monocytic differentiation using in vitro time-course expression data for
TFs and miRNAs. A set of TF-->miRNA associations was derived from predicted TF
binding sites in promoter regions of miRNA genes. Time-lagged expression
correlation analysis was utilised to evaluate the TF-->miRNA associations. Our
analysis identified 12 TFs that potentially play a central role in regulating
miRNAs throughout the differentiation process. Six of these 12 TFs (ATF2, E2F3,
HOXA4, NFE2L1, SP3, and YY1) have not previously been described to be important
for monocytic differentiation. The remaining six TFs are CEBPB, CREB1, ELK1,
NFE2L2, RUNX1, and USF2. For several miRNAs (miR-21, miR-155, miR-424, and
miR-17-92), we show how their inferred transcriptional regulation impacts
monocytic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that miRNAs and their transcriptional
regulatory control are integral molecular mechanisms during differentiation.
Furthermore, it is the first study to decipher on a large-scale, how miRNAs are
controlled by TFs during human monocytic differentiation. Subsequently, we have
identified 12 candidate key controllers of miRNAs during this differentiation
process.

PMCID: PMC2797535
PMID: 20003307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 2010 Feb 18;29(7):1062-72. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.371. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

PU.1 is regulated by NF-kappaB through a novel binding site in a 17 kb upstream
enhancer element.

Bonadies N(1), Neururer Ch, Steege A, Vallabhapurapu S, Pabst T, Mueller BU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Research, University Hospital
Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The majority of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) still die of their
disease, and novel therapeutic concepts are needed. Timely expression of the
hematopoietic master regulator PU.1 is crucial for normal development of myeloid 
and lymphoid cells. Targeted disruption of an upstream regulatory element (URE)
located several kb upstream in the PU.1 promoter decreases PU.1 expression
thereby inducing AML in mice. In addition, suppression of PU.1 has been observed 
in specific subtypes of human AML. Here, we identified nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB) to activate PU.1 expression through a novel site within the URE. We
found sequence variations of this particular NF-kappaB site in 4 of 120 AML
patients. These variant NF-kappaB sequences failed to mediate activation of PU.1.
Moreover, the synergistic activation of PU.1 together with CEBPB through these
variant sequences was also lost. Finally, AML patients with such variant
sequences had suppressed PU.1 mRNA expression. This study suggests that changes
of a single base pair in a distal element critically affect the regulation of the
tumor suppressor gene PU.1 thereby contributing to the development of AML.

PMID: 19966852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Br J Haematol. 2010 Mar;148(5):777-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.08012.x.
Epub 2009 Dec 1.

ITD- and FL-induced FLT3 signal transduction leads to increased C/EBPbeta-LIP
expression and LIP/LAP ratio by different signalling modules.

Haas SC(1), Huber R, Gutsch R, Kandemir JD, Cappello C, Krauter J, Duyster J,
Ganser A, Brand K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

FLT3 receptor-associated signalling plays a role in proliferation and leukaemia. 
The transcription factor C/EBPbeta may be involved in malignancy with its
alternative translation product C/EBPbeta-LIP. We investigated a potential
connection between FLT3 signalling and the C/EBPbeta system in FLT3-internal
tandem duplication (ITD)-positive leukaemia cells and FLT3-ITD- or FLT3-wild type
(WT)-transfected 32D cells. In FLT3-ITD-positive cells or when ITD sequences were
inserted into the FLT3-WT receptor, significant LIP levels, increased LIP/LAP
ratios, and enhanced proliferation rates were detected, which were reduced by
FLT3 inhibition. In FLT3-WT cells, incubation with FLT3 receptor ligand (FL) also
elevated LIP, LIP/LAP, and proliferation, albeit to a lesser extent.
CEBPB-directed siRNA decreased both LIP and proliferation rates in
FLT3-ITD-positive and FL-stimulated FLT3-WT-positive cells. PI3K inhibition
affected ITD-associated and FL-induced LIP levels. Rapamycin, an inhibitor of
mTOR involved in CEBPB translation, completely blocked the increase in LIP in
FL-stimulated FLT3-WT- but not FLT3-ITD-positive cells. In contrast, the
ITD-associated LIP elevation was mediated by p(90)-ribosomal-S6-kinase. This is
the first report showing a LIP increase in the presence of ITD or following FL
exposure. Our data suggest fundamental differences in the signalling cascades
activated via ITD mutations or following FL stimulation, indicating the need for 
adapted molecular therapy.

PMID: 19958352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Pharmacogenomics. 2009 Dec;10(12):1941-53. doi: 10.2217/pgs.09.128.

Decreased sigmoidal ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein) expression in ulcerative colitis is
associated with disease activity.

Ufer M(1), Häsler R, Jacobs G, Haenisch S, Lächelt S, Faltraco F, Sina C,
Rosenstiel P, Nikolaus S, Schreiber S, Cascorbi I.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Arnold-Heller-Str. 3 (Hs. 30); D-24105
Kiel, Germany. mikeufer@gmx.de

AIMS: The modulation of the intestinal expression of detoxifying proteins by
relevant transcription factors, intracellular receptors and cytokines in
ulcerative colitis (UC) is poorly understood. Here, we compared the intestinal
expression of drug transporters, metabolizing enzymes and putative regulatory
genes between inflamed and noninflamed tissue and studied their modulation by
disease activity.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Sigmoidal biopsies of 18 UC patients and 18 healthy
volunteers matched for age, gender and ABCB1 3435C>T genotype were investigated
for mRNA expression levels of 43 systematically selected candidate genes by
low-density array real-time PCR. Additionally, the ABCB1 gene product
P-glycoprotein was visualized by immunohistochemistry and quantified by western
blotting. Disease phenotype was categorized by clinical, endoscopic and
histopathological examination. Disease activity was quantified by clinical
activity index.
RESULTS: In inflamed sigmoidal tissue from UC patients, 11 genes (NAT1, NR2B1,
CEBPB, IFG, IL8, IL10, S100A12, SPP1, DEFA5, DEFA6 and HAMP) were overexpressed. 
By contrast, only the major human efflux transporter ABCB1 showed significantly
lower expression levels, that were inversely correlated with those of certain
antimicrobial peptides (DEFA5/6) and cytokines (IL1beta and IL8). Cell culture
experiments revealed a time-dependent decrease of ABCB1 expression upon IL8
exposure. Disease activity profoundly modified ABCB1 expression, indicated by an 
inverse correlation of clinical activity index values with ABCB1 mRNA expression 
(r = -0.603; p = 0.017) and markedly reduced protein expression in UC patients
with moderate and severe symptomology (p = 0.011).
CONCLUSION: Cytokine-mediated downregulation of the major human efflux
transporter ABCB1 in inflamed intestine of UC patients is presumably dependent on
disease activity, with a possible contribution from IL8.

PMID: 19958093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Apr;88(5):1113-23. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22272.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta in microglial activation.

Ejarque-Ortiz A(1), Gresa-Arribas N, Straccia M, Mancera P, Solà C, Tusell JM,
Serratosa J, Saura J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cerebral Ischaemia and Neurodegeneration, IIBB, CSIC, IDIBAPS,
Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBP delta)
regulates transcription of genes that play important roles in glial activation.
Previous studies have shown the astroglial expression of C/EBP delta but the
microglial expression of C/EBP delta remains virtually unexplored, with the
exception of two microarray studies. In this report, using murine primary
cultures and BV2 cells we clearly demonstrate that C/EBP delta is expressed by
microglia and it is upregulated in microglial activation. Lipopolysaccharide
upregulates C/EBP delta both in microglia and in astrocytes. This effect is
time-dependent, with a maximum effect at 3 hr at mRNA level and at 4-8 hr at
protein level, and concentration-dependent, with a maximum effect at 100 ng/mL.
The lipopolysaccharide-induced C/EBP delta upregulation in BV2 microglia is
mimicked by agonists of the toll-like receptors 2, 3 and 9 and can be prevented
by an inhibitor of extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation. C/EBP delta 
from activated BV2 microglia binds to the cyclooxygenase-2 promoter and forms
complexes with C/EBP beta isoforms. These results point to C/EBP delta as a
putative key regulator of proinflammatory gene expression in microglial
activation.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19908286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jan;21(1):73-81. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009040432. Epub 2009
Oct 29.

ER stress depresses NF-kappaB activation in mesangial cells through preferential 
induction of C/EBP beta.

Hayakawa K(1), Nakajima S, Hiramatsu N, Okamura M, Huang T, Saito Y, Tagawa Y,
Tamai M, Takahashi S, Yao J, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, University of Yamanashi, Shimokato 1110,
Chuo, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

Modest induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress confers resistance to
inflammation in glomeruli. Recently, we found that ER stress leads to mesangial
insensitivity to cytokine-induced activation of NF-kappaB, but the underlying
mechanisms are incompletely understood. ER stress can trigger expression of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs), which interact with transcription
factors including NF-kappaB. Here, we investigated a role for C/EBPs in the ER
stress-induced resistance to cytokines. Mesangial cells preferentially induced
C/EBPbeta after exposure to thapsigargin or tunicamycin; induction of C/EBPdelta 
was modest and transient, and expression of C/EBPalpha was absent. The induction 
of C/EBPbeta correlated with accumulation of C/EBPbeta protein and enhanced
transcriptional activity of C/EBP. Overexpression of C/EBPbeta markedly
suppressed TNF-alpha-induced activation of NF-kappaB, independent of its
transacting potential. Knockdown of C/EBPbeta by small interfering RNA reversed
the suppressive effect of ER stress on NF-kappaB. In vivo, preconditioning of
mice with ER stress induced renal C/EBPbeta and suppressed NF-kappaB-dependent
gene expression in response to LPS. Using dominant negative mutants and null
mutants for individual branches of the unfolded protein response, we identified
the RNA-dependent protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK) and the inositol-requiring
ER-to-nucleus signal kinase 1 (IRE1) pathways as the unfolded protein response
responsible for ER stress-induced C/EBPbeta. These results suggest that ER stress
blunts cytokine-triggered activation of NF-kappaB, in part through PERK- and
IRE1-mediated preferential induction of C/EBPbeta.

PMCID: PMC2799283
PMID: 19875812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Neurochem Int. 2010 Jan;56(1):188-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.10.002. Epub
2009 Oct 13.

Age-dependent response of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins following traumatic
brain injury in mice.

Sandhir R(1), Berman NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Exacerbated inflammatory responses have been reported following traumatic injury 
to the aged brain. The present study was designed to investigate the involvement 
of the transcription factors belonging to the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP) family that regulate expression of many of the pro-inflammatory genes
which show increased expression following injury to the aged brain. Controlled
cortical impact injury was induced in adult (5-6 months) and aged (22-24 months) 
C57/BL6 mice. C/EBP mRNA and protein expression were analyzed in injured cortex
at 1, 3, and 7 days post-injury. Expression of C/EBPalpha was reduced relative to
baseline at day 1 in both adult and aged mice, whereas, it increased at days 3
and 7 post-injury. No significant differences were observed between adult and
aged brain. Upregulation of C/EBPbeta was observed 1 day following injury in both
the adult and aged brain, but there were no major age-related differences in mRNA
levels. However, there was higher C/EBPbeta protein in the aged brain. C/EBPdelta
expression increased beginning 1 day post-injury in both adult and aged brain. In
this case, the increase in C/EBPdelta expression was higher in the aged brain
than in the adult at all time points studied. Expression of CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), a transcription factor involved in ER 
stress and protein unfolding responses, was also up-regulated in response to
injury, but CHOP levels were significantly lower in the aged than the adult
brain. Based on these results, we conclude that differential expression of C/EBP 
beta, delta and CHOP might contribute to the hyper-inflammatory response and poor
prognosis following traumatic brain injury in the elderly patients. In addition
elevated C/EBPdelta levels following TBI in the aged brain may play a role in the
link between TBI and Alzheimer's disease.

2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2815015
PMID: 19833158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Endocrine. 2009 Dec;36(3):404-11. doi: 10.1007/s12020-009-9245-4. Epub 2009 Oct
6.

Stimulation of 11ß-HSD1 expression by IL-1ß via a C/EBP binding site in human
fetal lung fibroblasts.

Yang Z(1), Zhu X, Guo C, Sun K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 220 Handan Road, Shanghai 200433,
People's Republic of China.

Proinflammatory cytokines, just like glucocorticoids (GCs), have been reported to
upregulate 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11ß-HSD1) expression in many 
cell types. This concerted regulation of 11ß-HSD1 by interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) and
GCs is in marked contrast to their antagonistic effects on inflammation. Further,
the molecular mechanisms underlying the induction of 11ß-HSD1 by IL-1ß are not
very well understood. In this study, we demonstrated that IL-1ß dramatically
stimulated 11ß-HSD1 expression and enzyme activity as well as promoter activity
including the -64 bp fragment upstream to the transcription start site in human
fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1). Nucleotide mutations of the proximal CCAAT box
within this region abolished the induction of 11ß-HSD1 promoter activity by
IL-1ß. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that IL-1ß induced the expression
of C/EBPß dramatically while C/EBPa was barely detectable in HFL-1 cells. Global 
inhibition of CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) with transfection of
C/EBP-specific dominant-negative expression plasmid (CMV500-A-C/EBP)
significantly attenuated the induction of 11ß-HSD1 by IL-1ß, whereas
over-expression of C/EBPß enhanced the expression of 11ß-HSD1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay revealed the recruitment of C/EBPß to the promoter
region containing the C/EBP binding site. In conclusion, IL-1ß induces the
expression of 11ß-HSD1 mRNA in the fetal lung tissue through mechanisms that
involve C/EBPß binding to the promoter. This impact of IL-1ß on the expression of
11ß-HSD1 in human fetal lung cells may explain the alternate mechanism for the
lung maturation that appears to occur when there is a risk of premature delivery 
of the fetus due to the presence of infection.

PMID: 19806478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 13;106(41):17475-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0908641106. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

A CREB-C/EBPbeta cascade induces M2 macrophage-specific gene expression and
promotes muscle injury repair.

Ruffell D(1), Mourkioti F, Gambardella A, Kirstetter P, Lopez RG, Rosenthal N,
Nerlov C.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Via Ramarini 32,
00015 Monterotondo, Italy.

Macrophages play an essential role in the resolution of tissue damage through
removal of necrotic cells, thus paving the way for tissue regeneration.
Macrophages also directly support the formation of new tissue to replace the
injury, through their acquisition of an anti-inflammatory, or M2, phenotype,
characterized by a gene expression program that includes IL-10, the IL-13
receptor, and arginase 1. We report that deletion of two CREB-binding sites from 
the Cebpb promoter abrogates Cebpb induction upon macrophage activation. This
blocks the downstream induction of M2-specific Msr1, Il10, II13ra, and Arg-1
genes, whereas the inflammatory (M1) genes Il1, Il6, Tnfa, and Il12 are not
affected. Mice carrying the mutated Cebpb promoter (betaDeltaCre) remove necrotic
tissue from injured muscle, but exhibit severe defects in muscle fiber
regeneration. Conditional deletion of the Cebpb gene in muscle cells does not
affect regeneration, showing that the C/EBPbeta cascade leading to muscle repair 
is muscle-extrinsic. While betaDeltaCre macrophages efficiently infiltrate
injured muscle they fail to upregulate Cebpb, leading to decreased Arg-1
expression. CREB-mediated induction of Cebpb expression is therefore required in 
infiltrating macrophages for upregulation of M2-specific genes and muscle
regeneration, providing a direct genetic link between these two processes.

PMCID: PMC2762675
PMID: 19805133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Sep;7(9):1517-24. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0082. Epub
2009 Sep 1.

CCAAT enhancer binding protein-beta regulates matrix metalloproteinase-1
expression in interleukin-1beta-stimulated A549 lung carcinoma cells.

Armstrong DA(1), Phelps LN, Vincenti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, Department of Veterans Affairs, White River Junction, VT
05009, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) is an inflammation-inducible neutral protease 
that mediates extracellular matrix remodeling and promotes tumor invasion. In
this study, we examined the activation of MMP-1 gene expression in A549 lung
carcinoma cells stimulated with the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta
(IL-1beta). We found that MMP-1 mRNA levels were maximal following 16 hours of
IL-1beta stimulation and that this correlated with the expression of the
transcription factor CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-beta (CEBPB). Knockdown of
CEBPB expression with short hairpin RNA abrogated the expression of MMP-1, MMP-3,
and MMP-10 in IL-1beta-stimulated A549 cells. An established CEBP element in the 
MMP-1 promoter was found to be required for basal and IL-1beta-induced
transcription. Electrophoresis mobility shift assays showed that CEBPB binds to
this promoter element maximally 16 hours after IL-1beta stimulation. DNA affinity
chromatography studies showed that the LAP1, LAP2, and LIP isoforms of CEBPB bind
to the IL-1beta-responsive CEBPB site in the MMP-1 promoter. Exogenous expression
of the LAP1 and LAP2 isoforms stimulated the MMP-1 promoter, whereas LIP had no
effect. Phosphorylation of CEBPB at Thr(235) peaked at 16 hours in
IL-1beta-stimulated cells. The MEK inhibitor U0126 inhibited this phosphorylation
and reduced MMP-1 gene induction. These studies establish CEBPB as an important
mediator of metalloproteinase gene activation during inflammatory responses in
lung cancer cells and highlight the different regulatory roles of CEBPB isoforms.

PMID: 19723873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Chromosoma. 2009 Oct;118(5):647-63. doi: 10.1007/s00412-009-0225-5. Epub 2009 Jul
8.

The spatial repositioning of adipogenesis genes is correlated with their
expression status in a porcine mesenchymal stem cell adipogenesis model system.

Szczerbal I(1), Foster HA, Bridger JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Poznan University of Life
Sciences, 60-637 Poznan, Poland. izabel@jay.au.poznan.pl

Alterations in the nuclear positioning of chromosomes and specific genes during
differentiation and development have suggested strongly the existence of a
relationship between non-random organization of the genome and its function. In
this study, we have examined the genome organization in interphase nuclei during 
adipogenesis, using the pig as a model organism. We hypothesized that changes in 
the gene expression profile and chromatin remodeling which occur during cellular 
differentiation would elicit repositioning of whole chromosomes, moving specific 
genes on them to different regions of the nucleus. We established an in vitro
adipogenesis differentiation system using mesenchymal stem cells, derived from
porcine bone marrow. The nuclear position of seven adipogenesis genes (PPARG,
SREBF1, FABP4, CEBPA, CEBPB, CREB, and GATA2), two control genes (SOX9 and MYL1),
and six chromosomes carrying these gene loci (SSC4, SSC6, SSC12, SSC13, SSC15,
and SSC17) was determined. We found that during adipogenesis, using the in vitro 
stem cell model system, in contrast to our original hypothesis, the nuclear
position of genes involved in adipogenesis was altered radically with the
up-regulation of gene expression correlating with these genes becoming more
internally located within nuclei. Chromosome territories, containing these genes,
were also found to alter their nuclear position during the in vitro adipogenesis 
model, with the most dramatic repositioning being SSC4 that moved from the
nuclear periphery towards the nuclear interior. We found that during in vitro
adipogenesis chromosome territories decondensed and the genes were found on loops
and projections of chromatin, away from the main body of the chromosomes. From
our data, it appears that the temporal repositioning of genes, emanating away
from chromosomes, during adipogenesis is correlated with gene activity,
supporting models of the involvement of spatial genome repositioning in
regulating gene expression and the nuclear interior being an important region of 
the nucleus for transcription.

PMID: 19585140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Infect Dis. 2009 Jul 15;200(2):252-62. doi: 10.1086/599986.

Gene expression and immunohistochemistry in adipose tissue of HIV type 1-infected
patients with nucleoside analogue reverse-transcriptase inhibitor-associated
lipoatrophy.

Sievers M(1), Walker UA, Sevastianova K, Setzer B, Wågsäter D, Eriksson P,
Yki-Järvinen H, Sutinen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Medizinische
Universitätsklinik, Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Long-term use of both zidovudine (AZT) and stavudine (d4T) is
associated with lipoatrophy, but it occurs possibly through different mechanisms.
METHODS: Surgical biopsy specimens of subcutaneous adipose tissue were obtained
from 18 human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)-infected lipoatrophic
patients (the LA+ group) who were treated with either zidovudine (the AZT+LA+
group; n = 10) or stavudine (the d4T+LA+ group; n = 8) and from 10
nonlipoatrophic HIV-1-infected patients (the LA- group) who received
antiretroviral therapy. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy numbers, gene expression, 
and immunohistochemistry data were analyzed.
RESULTS: mtDNA copy numbers were significantly reduced in the LA+ group, compared
with the LA- group, and in the d4T+LA+ group, compared with the AZT+LA+ group.
The ratio of mtDNA-encoded cytochrome COX3 to nuclear DNA-encoded COX4 expression
was significantly lower in the LA+ group than in the LA- group. Compared with the
LA- group, the LA+ group had significantly lower expression of genes involved in 
adipogenesis (SREBP1c and CEBPB), lipid (fatty acid synthase), and glucose
(GLUT4) metabolism. Expression of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis
(PGC1B), apoptosis (FAS), inflammation (IL1B), oxidative stress (PCNA and SOD1), 
and lamin B was significantly higher in the LA+ group than in the LA- group. The 
d4T+LA+ group had significantly lower expression of genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis (POLG1), energy metabolism (the COX3/COX4 ratio),
adipogenesis (SREBP1c and CEBPA), perilipin, and hexokinase than did the AZT+LA+ 
group. There were 7-fold more macrophages in adipose tissue specimens obtained
from patients in the LA+ group, compared with the LA- group.
CONCLUSIONS: Lipoatrophy is characterized by mtDNA depletion, inflammation, and
signs of apoptosis. Changes were more profound in the d4T+LA+ group than in the
AZT+LA+ group.

PMID: 19519254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Science. 2009 May 15;324(5929):938-41. doi: 10.1126/science.1171396.

MAPK3/1 (ERK1/2) in ovarian granulosa cells are essential for female fertility.

Fan HY(1), Liu Z, Shimada M, Sterneck E, Johnson PF, Hedrick SM, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 May 15;324(5929):890-1.

A surge of luteinizing hormone (LH) from the pituitary gland triggers ovulation, 
oocyte maturation, and luteinization for successful reproduction in mammals.
Because the signaling molecules RAS and ERK1/2 (extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2) are activated by an LH surge in granulosa cells of preovulatory 
follicles, we disrupted Erk1/2 in mouse granulosa cells and provide in vivo
evidence that these kinases are necessary for LH-induced oocyte resumption of
meiosis, ovulation, and luteinization. In addition, biochemical analyses and
selected disruption of the Cebpb gene in granulosa cells demonstrate that
C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/Enhancer-binding protein-beta) is a critical downstream mediator
of ERK1/2 activation. Thus, ERK1/2 and C/EBPbeta constitute an in vivo
LH-regulated signaling pathway that controls ovulation- and luteinization-related
events.

PMCID: PMC2847890
PMID: 19443782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Int J Radiat Biol. 2009 Mar;85(3):250-61. doi: 10.1080/09553000902748609.

Low-dose, low-dose-rate proton radiation modulates CD4(+) T cell gene expression.

Gridley DS(1), Pecaut MJ, Rizvi A, Coutrakon GB, Luo-Owen X, Makinde AY, Slater
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiation Research Laboratories, Loma Linda 
University, CA 92354, USA. dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

PURPOSE: To evaluate cluster of differentiation 4(+) (CD4(+)) T cell gene
expression and related parameters after whole-body exposure to proton radiation
as it occurs in the spaceflight environment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were irradiated to total doses of 0, 0.01,
0.05, and 0.1 gray (Gy) at 0.1 cGy/h. On day 0 spleens were harvested from a
subset in the 0, 0.01 and 0.1 Gy groups; (CD4(+)) T cells were isolated; and
expression of 84 genes relevant to T helper (Th) cell function was determined
using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Remaining mice
were euthanized on days 0, 4, and 21 for additional analyses.
RESULTS: Genes with >2-fold difference and p < 0.05 compared to 0 Gy were noted. 
After 0.01 Gy, five genes were up-regulated (Ccr5, Cd40, Cebpb, Igsf6, Tnfsf4)
and three were down-regulated (Il4ra, Mapk8, Nfkb1). After 0.1 Gy there were nine
up-regulated genes (Ccr4, Cd40, Cebpb, Cxcr3, Socs5, Stat4, Tbx21, Tnfrsf4,
Tnfsf4); none were down-regulated. On day 0 after 0.01 Gy, CD4(+) T cell counts
and CD4:CD8 ratio were low in the spleen (p < 0.05). Spontaneous DNA synthesis in
both spleen and blood was lowest in the 0.01 Gy group on day 0; on days 4 and 21 
all p values were >0.1.
CONCLUSION: The data show that the pattern of gene expression in CD4(+) T cells
after protracted low-dose proton irradiation was significantly modified and
highly dependent upon total dose. The findings also suggest that low-dose
radiation, especially 0.01 Gy, may enhance CD4(+) T cell responsiveness.

PMID: 19296339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2588-98. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2312. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

RasV12-mediated down-regulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta in
immortalized fibroblasts requires loss of p19Arf and facilitates bypass of
oncogene-induced senescence.

Sebastian T(1), Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) is
involved in cellular responses to oncogenic and physiologic Ras signals.
C/EBPbeta is required for premature senescence of primary mouse fibroblasts
induced by expression of H-Ras(V12), demonstrating its role in oncogene-induced
senescence. Here, we have investigated the mechanisms by which Ras inhibits
proliferation of normal cells but transforms immortalized cells. We show that
oncogenic Ras down-regulates C/EBPbeta expression in NIH 3T3 cells, which are
immortalized by a deletion of the CDKN2A locus and, therefore, lack the
p16(Ink4a) and p19(Arf) tumor suppressors. Ras(V12)-induced silencing of
C/EBPbeta occurred at the mRNA level and involved both the Raf-mitogen-activated 
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase-ERK and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling pathways. Oncogenic Ras decreased
C/EBPbeta expression in Ink4a/Arf(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) but
increased C/EBPbeta levels in wild-type MEFs. C/EBPbeta down-regulation in NIH
3T3 cells was reversed by expression of p19(Arf), but not of p53 or p16(Ink4a),
highlighting a critical role for p19(Arf) in sustaining C/EBPbeta levels. Ectopic
expression of p34 C/EBPbeta (LAP) inhibited Ras(V12)-mediated transformation of
NIH 3T3 cells, suppressed their tumorigenicity in nude mice, and reactivated
expression of the proapoptotic Fas receptor, which is also down-regulated by Ras.
Our findings indicate that Cebpb gene silencing eliminates a growth inhibitory
transcription factor that would otherwise restrain oncogenesis. We propose that
C/EBPbeta is part of a p53-independent, p19(Arf)-mediated network that enforces
Ras-induced cell cycle arrest and tumor suppression in primary fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC2693277
PMID: 19276382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Genes Nutr. 2009 Mar;4(1):69-72. doi: 10.1007/s12263-009-0111-z. Epub 2009 Feb
18.

Hepatocyte RXR alpha deletion in mice leads to inhibition of angiogenesis.

Razny U(1), Wator L, Polus A, Wan YJ, Dyduch G, Tomaszewska R, Dembinska-Kiec A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Kopernika 15a Street, 31-501, Cracow, Poland, urazny@cm-uj.krakow.pl.

To investigate the effect of RXRalpha deficiency in liver on angiogenesis,
hepatocyte RXRalpha-deficient and control wild-type mice were fed either standard
or high-fat diet (HF) for 7 weeks. In the 6th week of feeding, Matrigel model of 
in vivo angiogenesis was applied. Matrigel plug infiltrating cells were then used
for visualization of vessels (CD31 staining) as well as for gene expression
analysis. HF diet appeared to decrease angiogenesis in hRXRalpha-deficient mice. 
Genes related to angiogenesis (Nos3, Kdr) were down-regulated, whereas genes
connected with adipogenesis (Cebpb, Srebf1), apoptosis (Gzmb, Bcl2) and
proinflammatory pathway (NfkappaB, Tnfalpha) were up-regulated by HF diet in
hRXRalpha-deficient mice in the microarray study. Our results suggest that
impaired fatty acid metabolism in liver (hRXRalpha-deficient mice) leads to
impaired angiogenesis due to lipotoxicity and promotion of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2654051
PMID: 19224264  [PubMed]


318. J Endocrinol. 2009 May;201(2):263-74. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0514. Epub 2009 Feb 13.

Misexpression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta causes osteopenia.

Zanotti S(1), Stadmeyer L, Smerdel-Ramoya A, Durant D, Canalis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, 114
Woodland Street, Hartford, Connecticut 06105-1299, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are expressed by osteoblasts and
adipocytes during differentiation. C/EBP beta is critical for adipogenesis;
however, its role in osteoblastogenesis is unclear, and its function in the
postnatal skeleton is not known. To study C/EBP beta in osteoblasts in vivo, we
created transgenic mice expressing full length C/EBP beta under the control of a 
3.8 kb fragment of the human osteocalcin promoter. Two transgenic lines were
established in a friend leukemia virus strain B genetic background, and compared 
with wild type littermate controls. Both C/EBP beta transgenic lines exhibited
osteopenia, with a 30% decrease in bone volume, due to a decrease in trabecular
number. The number of osteoblasts and osteoclasts per bone perimeter was not
changed. Bone marrow stromal cells from C/EBP beta transgenics showed reduced
mineralization, and reduced alkaline phosphatase mRNA levels. Calvarial
osteoblasts from C/EBP beta transgenics displayed reduced alkaline phosphatase
activity. To determine the consequences of the Cebpb deletion in vivo, the
phenotype of Cebpb null mice was compared with that of wild type controls of
identical genetic composition. Cebpb null mice exhibited reduced weight, body
fat, and bone mineral density, and decreased bone volume, due to a decrease in
trabecular number. The number of osteoblasts and osteoclasts per bone perimeter
was not changed. C/EBP beta downregulation by RNA interference in calvarial
osteoblasts had no effect on osteoblast differentiation/function. The phenotype
of the Cebpb inactivation may be secondary to systemic indirect effects, and to
direct effects of C/EBP beta in osteoblasts. In conclusion, C/EBP beta plays a
role in mesenchymal cell differentiation and its misexpression in vivo causes
osteopenia.

PMCID: PMC2674520
PMID: 19218285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. BMC Genomics. 2009 Feb 5;10:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-64.

Understanding Haemophilus parasuis infection in porcine spleen through a
transcriptomics approach.

Chen H(1), Li C, Fang M, Zhu M, Li X, Zhou R, Li K, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction, Ministry 
of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, PR China.
rose060417@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Haemophilus parasuis (HPS) is an important swine pathogen that causes
Glässer's disease, which is characterized by fibrinous polyserositis, meningitis 
and arthritis. The molecular mechanisms that underlie the pathogenesis of the
disease remain poorly understood, particularly the resistance of porcine immune
system to HPS invasion. In this study, we investigated the global changes in gene
expression in the spleen following HPS infection using the Affymetrix Porcine
Genechip.
RESULTS: A total of 931 differentially expressed (DE) transcripts were identified
in the porcine spleen 7 days after HPS infection; of these, 92 unique genes
showed differential expression patterns based on analysis using BLASTX and Gene
Ontology. The DE genes involved in the immune response included genes for
inflammasomes (RETN, S100A8, S100A9, S100A12), adhesion molecules (CLDN3, CSPG2, 
CD44, LGALS8), transcription factors (ZBTB16, SLC39A14, CEBPD, CEBPB),
acute-phase proteins and complement (SAA1, LTF, HP, C3), differentiation genes
for epithelial cells and keratinocytes (TGM1, MS4A8B, CSTA), and genes related to
antigen processing and presentation (HLA-B, HLA-DRB1). Further immunostimulation 
analyses indicated that mRNA levels of S100A8, S100A9, and S100A12 in porcine
PK-15 cells increased within 48 h and were sustained after administration of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Poly(I:C) respectively. In addition, mapping of DE
genes to porcine health traits QTL regions showed that 70 genes were distributed 
in 7 different known porcine QTL regions. Finally, 10 DE genes were validated by 
quantitative PCR.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate previously unrecognized changes in gene
transcription that are associated with HPS infection in vivo, and many potential 
cascades identified in the study clearly merit further investigation. Our data
provide new clues to the nature of the immune response in mammals, and we have
identified candidate genes that are related to resistance to HPS.

PMCID: PMC2660370
PMID: 19196461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Aquat Toxicol. 2009 Mar 9;91(4):312-9. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.11.001. Epub
2008 Nov 12.

Solea senegalensis genes responding to lipopolysaccharide and copper sulphate
challenges: large-scale identification by suppression subtractive hybridization
and absolute quantification of transcriptional profiles by real-time RT-PCR.

Prieto-Alamo MJ(1), Abril N, Osuna-Jiménez I, Pueyo C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Córdoba, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Spain.

Solea senegalensis is a commercially relevant aquaculture species that remains
largely unexplored at the genomic level. The aim of this study was to identify
novel genomic responses to lipopolysaccharide and copper sulphate challenges
using suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) and real-time RT-PCR. Forward- 
and reverse-subtractive libraries were generated for the identification of genes 
whose transcription is altered in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
(immunomodulator) in head kidney (immunologically important organ) and to CuSO(4)
(common algacide) in liver (central metabolic organ and important source of
immune transcripts). A total of 156 genes involved in major physiological
functions were identified by SSH, the identified sequences representing a
significant increase in the number of sole ESTs in public databases. Fifteen
genes represented in the subtracted libraries were selected for further tissue,
temporal and inducible transcriptional profiling by real-time RT-PCR. A rigorous 
quantification of transcript copy numbers was performed for this purpose in both 
pooled and individual samples from two independent experiments. More than half of
the investigated mRNAs encode proteins that deal with different aspects of the
immune response, like NCCRP1 (non-specific cytotoxic cell receptor), C3 and C7
(complement components), and ferritin M, HP and TF (iron homeostasis), or play a 
crucial role in its regulation, like TRAF3. Other mRNAs studied encode proteins
involved in metabolism, like TKT and NDUFA4, the response to stimulus, like CEBPB
(transcription factor) and CIRBP (RNA-binding protein), and other cell processes.
Highly abundant (>500 molecules/pg total RNA) and rare (< or =1 molecules/pg)
mRNA species were quantified in each sole organ examined, and outstanding
differences were also recorded in the comparison between the two organs, e.g. C3 
and TF mRNAs were largely overexpressed in liver (>5000 molecules/pg) as compared
to head kidney (<5 molecules/pg). Most investigated mRNAs displayed significant
alterations in their steady-state copy number following LPS and/or CuSO(4)
stimulation, i.e. they were (i) up-regulated in response to both treatments in at
least one of the two organs (NCCRP1, CEBPB, SQSTM1, NDUFA4, C7 and HP), (ii)
up-regulated (TF, CIRBP, TRFA, C3) or down-regulated (TKT) by LPS, their levels
remaining essentially unchanged upon CuSO(4) challenge, or (iii) down-regulated
by LPS, though up-regulated by CuSO(4) (ferritin M). Quantifications in
individual fish were consistent with those in pooled samples with respect to both
the direction and the absolute changes in transcript abundance.

PMID: 19070373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Nov;36(19):6066-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn607. Epub 2008
Sep 27.

Sumoylation of LAP1 is involved in the HDAC4-mediated repression of COX-2
transcription.

Wang WL(1), Lee YC, Yang WM, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan.

CEBPB, one of the CEBP family members, is a crucial regulator of gene expression 
during innate immunity, inflammatory responses and adipogenesis. In this study,
the EGF-induced increase of CEBPB mRNA is shown to be coincident with the
decrease of COX-2 mRNA. We identified that all of the individual CEBPB isoforms, 
LAP1, LAP2 and LIP, attenuate EGF-induced COX-2 promoter activity. Although
increased sumoylation of both LAP1 and LAP2 is observed during the lagging stage 
of EGF treatment, only the sumoylated LAP1, but not the sumoylated LAP2, is
responsible for COX-2 gene repression. In addition, EGF treatment can regulate
the nucleocytoplasmic redistribution of HDAC4 and SUMO1. We further demonstrated 
by loss-of- and gain-of-function approaches that HDAC4 can be a negative
regulator while inactivating COX-2 transcription. The sumoylation mutant LAP1,
LAP1K174A, exhibits an attenuated ability to interact with HDAC4, and increased
COX-2 promoter activity. Furthermore, the in vivo DNA binding assay demonstrated 
that LAP1K174A and CEBPDK120A, sumoylation-defective CEBPD mutants, attenuate the
binding of HDAC4 on the COX-2 promoter. In light of the above, our data suggest
that the suCEBPD and suLAP1 are involved in the repression of COX-2 transcription
through the recruitment of HDAC4.

PMCID: PMC2577330
PMID: 18820298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. DNA Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;27(11):589-600. doi: 10.1089/dna.2008.0766.

Regulation of the mouse Treacher Collins syndrome homolog (Tcof1) promoter
through differential repression of constitutive expression.

Shows KH(1), Shiang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298-0033, USA. khshows@vcu.edu

Treacher Collins syndrome is an autosomal-dominant mandibulofacial dysostosis
caused by haploinsufficiency of the TCOF1 gene product treacle. Mouse Tcof1
protein is approximately 61% identical and 71% similar to treacle, and
heterozygous knockout of Tcof1 causes craniofacial malformation. Tcof1 expression
is high in developing neural crest, but much lower in other tissues. To
investigate this dual regulation, highly conserved regions upstream of TCOF1
homologs were tested through deletion and mutation reporter assays, and conserved
predicted transcription factor binding sites were assessed through chromatin
binding studies. Assays were performed in mouse P19 embryonic carcinoma cells and
in HEK293 cells to determine differential activation in cell types at different
stages of differentiation. Binding of Cebpb, Zfp161, and Sp1 transcription
factors was specific to the Tcof1 regulatory region in P19 cells. The Zfp161
binding site demonstrated P19 cell-specific repression, while the Sp1/Sp3
candidate site demonstrated HEK293 cell-specific activation. Moreover, presence
of c-myb and Zfp161 transcripts was specific to P19 cells. A minimal promoter
fragment from -253 to +43 bp directs constitutive expression in both cell types, 
and dual regulation of Tcof1 appears to be through differential repression of
this minimal promoter. The CpG island at the transcription start site remains
unmethylated in P19 cells, 11.5 dpc mouse embryonic tissue, and adult mouse ear, 
which supports constitutive activation of the Tcof1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2925028
PMID: 18771418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;121(1):50-4. doi: 10.1159/000124381. Epub 2008 May 7.

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis.

Szczerbal I(1), Chmurzynska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, August Cieszkowski Agricultural
University of Poznan, Poznan, Poland. izabel@jay.au.poznan.pl

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis was determined. BAC clones harboring sequences of
selected genes CEBPA (SSC6q12), CEBPB (SSC17q23), CEBPD (SSC4q15), CEBPG
(SSC6q12), PPARG (SSC13q24), SREBF1 (SSC10q17), DDIT3 (SSC12q15), GATA2 (SSC13q24
-->q31) and GATA3 (SSC5p12) were mapped by FISH. The positions of these genes in 
the human and pig genomes were compared. A potential role of the genes encoding
adipogenesis factors as candidate genes for fatness traits as well as
obesity-related phenotypes is discussed.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18544926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Br J Haematol. 2008 Jun;142(2):192-201. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07130.x.
Epub 2008 May 19.

TGF-beta receptor kinase inhibitor LY2109761 reverses the anti-apoptotic effects 
of TGF-beta1 in myelo-monocytic leukaemic cells co-cultured with stromal cells.

Xu Y(1), Tabe Y, Jin L, Watt J, McQueen T, Ohsaka A, Andreeff M, Konopleva M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) is an essential regulator of cell
proliferation, survival and apoptosis, depending on the cellular context.
TGF-beta1 is also known to affect cell-to-cell interactions between tumour cells 
and stromal cells. We investigated the role of TGF-beta1 in the survival of
myelo-monocytic leukaemia cell lines co-cultured with bone marrow (BM)-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Treatment with recombinant human (rh)TGF-beta1
inhibited spontaneous and cytarabine-induced apoptosis in U937 cells, most
prominently in U937 cells directly attached to MSCs. Conversely, the pro-survival
effects of TGF-beta1 were inhibited by LY2109761 or TGF-beta1 neutralizing
antibody. rhTGF-beta1 increased pro-survival phosphorylation of Akt, which was
inhibited by LY2109761. The combination of rhTGF-beta1 and MSC co-culture induced
significant upregulation of C/EBPbeta gene (CEBPB) and protein expression along
with increased C/EBPbeta liver-enriched activating protein: liver-enriched
inhibitory protein ratio, suggesting the novel role of C/EBPbeta in
TGF-beta1-mediated U937 cell survival in the context of stromal cell support. In 
summary, these results indicate that TGF-beta1 produced by BM stromal cells
promotes the survival and chemoresistance of leukaemia cells under the direct
cell-to-cell interactions. The blockade of TGF-beta signalling by LY2109761,
which effectively inhibited the pro-survival signalling, may enhance the efficacy
of chemotherapy against myelo-monocytic leukaemic cells in the BM
microenvironment.

PMID: 18492113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. BMC Cancer. 2008 Apr 16;8:106. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-106.

Explorative data analysis of MCL reveals gene expression networks implicated in
survival and prognosis supported by explorative CGH analysis.

Blenk S(1), Engelmann JC, Pinkert S, Weniger M, Schultz J, Rosenwald A,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Müller T, Dandekar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum, Am Hubland, 
D-97074 Würzburg, Germany. steffen.blenk@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de

BACKGROUND: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an incurable B cell lymphoma and
accounts for 6% of all non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. On the genetic level, MCL is
characterized by the hallmark translocation t(11;14) that is present in most
cases with few exceptions. Both gene expression and comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) data vary considerably between patients with implications for
their prognosis.
METHODS: We compare patients over and below the median of survival. Exploratory
principal component analysis of gene expression data showed that the second
principal component correlates well with patient survival. Explorative analysis
of CGH data shows the same correlation.
RESULTS: On chromosome 7 and 9 specific genes and bands are delineated which
improve prognosis prediction independent of the previously described
proliferation signature. We identify a compact survival predictor of seven genes 
for MCL patients. After extensive re-annotation using GEPAT, we established
protein networks correlating with prognosis. Well known genes (CDC2, CCND1) and
further proliferation markers (WEE1, CDC25, aurora kinases, BUB1, PCNA, E2F1)
form a tight interaction network, but also non-proliferative genes (SOCS1, TUBA1B
CEBPB) are shown to be associated with prognosis. Furthermore we show that
aggressive MCL implicates a gene network shift to higher expressed genes in late 
cell cycle states and refine the set of non-proliferative genes implicated with
bad prognosis in MCL.
CONCLUSION: The results from explorative data analysis of gene expression and CGH
data are complementary to each other. Including further tests such as Wilcoxon
rank test we point both to proliferative and non-proliferative gene networks
implicated in inferior prognosis of MCL and identify suitable markers both in
gene expression and CGH data.

PMCID: PMC2442114
PMID: 18416826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Exp Hematol. 2008 Jul;36(7):786-98. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.02.008. Epub 2008 
Apr 8.

Socs3 maintains the specificity of biological responses to cytokine signals
during granulocyte and macrophage differentiation.

Croker BA(1), Mielke LA, Wormald S, Metcalf D, Kiu H, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ,
Roberts AW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) play key
roles in regulating emergency granulopoiesis and inflammation, and are both
negatively regulated by the inducible intracellular protein suppressor of
cytokine signaling-3 (Socs3). Mice with Socs3 deleted specifically in
hematopoietic cells succumb to severe neutrophil and macrophage-driven
inflammation by 1 year of age, and responses to G-CSF are grossly exacerbated. In
order to determine which elements of cellular responses to cytokines require
Socs3, we have examined the differentiative and proliferative capacity of
hematopoietic progenitor cells stimulated by G-CSF and IL-6. The differentiation 
of Socs3-deficient progenitor cells is skewed toward macrophage production in
response to G-CSF or IL-6, whereas wild-type progenitor cells produce mainly
neutrophils. The proliferative capacity of Socs3-deficient progenitor cells is
greatly enhanced in response to G-CSF at all concentrations, but only at low
concentrations for IL-6. Strikingly, synergistic responses to costimulation with 
stem cell factor and IL-6 (but not G-CSF) are lost at higher concentrations in
Socs3-deficient progenitor cells. Cytokine-induced expression of transcriptional 
regulators including cebpb, Ets2, Bcl3, c-Myc, Jun, and Fosl2 are differentially 
regulated in Socs3-deficient cells. The tight regulation by Socs3 of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 phosphorylation and gene
transcription after cytokine receptor ligation significantly influences the fate 
of myeloid progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2556307
PMID: 18400361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cell Metab. 2008 Apr;7(4):339-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.02.001.

Transcriptional regulation of adipogenesis by KLF4.

Birsoy K(1), Chen Z, Friedman J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.

While adipogenesis is known to be controlled by a complex network of
transcription factors, less is known about the transcriptional cascade that
initiates this process. We report here the characterization of Krüppel-like
factor 4 (KLF4) as an essential early regulator of adipogenesis. Klf4 is
expressed in 3T3-L1 cells within 30 min after exposure to a standard adipogenic
cocktail of insulin, glucocorticoids, and IBMX. Knockdown of KLF4 inhibits
adipogenesis and downregulates C/EBPbeta levels. KLF4 binds directly to the
C/EBPbeta (Cebpb) promoter as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel
shift assays and, together with Krox20, cooperatively transactivates a C/EBPbeta 
reporter. C/EBPbeta knockdown increases levels of KLF4 and Krox20, suggesting
that C/EBPbeta normally suppresses Krox20 and KLF4 expression via a tightly
controlled negative feedback loop. KLF4 is specifically induced in response to
cAMP, which by itself can partially activate adipogenesis. These data suggest
that KLF4 functions as an immediate early regulator of adipogenesis to induce
C/EBPbeta.

PMCID: PMC2430156
PMID: 18396140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cell Sci. 2008 Apr 15;121(Pt 8):1224-34. doi: 10.1242/jcs.025031.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta deficiency provides cerebral protection
following excitotoxic injury.

Cortes-Canteli M(1), Luna-Medina R, Sanz-Sancristobal M, Alvarez-Barrientos A,
Santos A, Perez-Castillo A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier, 4, Madrid, Spain.

The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta, also known as CEBPB) was
first identified as a regulator of differentiation and inflammatory processes in 
adipose tissue and liver. Although C/EBPbeta was initially implicated in synaptic
plasticity, its function in the brain remains largely unknown. We have previously
shown that C/EBPbeta regulates the expression of genes involved in inflammatory
processes and brain injury. Here, we have demonstrated that the expression of
C/EBPbeta is notably increased in the hippocampus in a murine model of
excitotoxicity. Mice lacking C/EBPbeta showed a reduced inflammatory response
after kainic acid injection, and exhibited a dramatic reduction in pyramidal cell
loss in the CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus. These data reveal an
essential function for C/EBPbeta in the pathways leading to
excitotoxicity-mediated damage and suggest that inhibitors of this transcription 
factor should be evaluated as possible neuroprotective therapeutic agents.

PMID: 18388310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Virol. 2008 Jun;82(11):5295-306. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02380-07. Epub 2008 Mar 26.

MicroRNA-155 is an Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene that modulates Epstein-Barr
virus-regulated gene expression pathways.

Yin Q(1), McBride J, Fewell C, Lacey M, Wang X, Lin Z, Cameron J, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium, New Orleans, USA.

The cellular microRNA miR-155 has been shown to be involved in lymphocyte
activation and is expressed in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected cells displaying
type III latency gene expression but not type I latency gene expression. We show 
here that the elevated levels of miR-155 in type III latency cells is due to EBV 
gene expression and not epigenetic differences in cell lines tested, and we show 
that expression in EBV-infected cells requires a conserved AP-1 element in the
miR-155 promoter. Gene expression analysis was carried out in a type I latency
cell line transduced with an miR-155-expressing retrovirus. This analysis
identified both miR-155-suppressed and -induced cellular mRNAs and suggested that
in addition to direct targeting of 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), miR-155 alters
gene expression in part through the alteration of signal transduction pathways.
3' UTR reporter analysis of predicted miR-155 target genes identified the
transcriptional regulatory genes encoding BACH1, ZIC3, HIVEP2, CEBPB, ZNF652,
ARID2, and SMAD5 as miR-155 targets. Western blot analysis of the most highly
suppressed of these, BACH1, showed lower expression in cells transduced with a
miR-155 retrovirus. Inspection of the promoters from genes regulated in
EBV-infected cells and in cells infected with an miR-155 retrovirus identified
potential binding sequences for BACH1 and ZIC3. Together, these experiments
suggest that the induction of miR-155 by EBV contributes to EBV-mediated
signaling in part through the modulation of transcriptional regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC2395216
PMID: 18367535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Apr 22;33(2):218-29. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00263.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

HepG2/C3A cells respond to cysteine deprivation by induction of the amino acid
deprivation/integrated stress response pathway.

Lee JI(1), Dominy JE Jr, Sikalidis AK, Hirschberger LL, Wang W, Stipanuk MH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA.

To further define genes that are differentially expressed during cysteine
deprivation and to evaluate the roles of amino acid deprivation vs. oxidative
stress in the response to cysteine deprivation, we assessed gene expression in
human hepatoma cells cultured in complete or cysteine-deficient medium. Overall, 
C3A cells responded to cysteine deprivation by activation of the eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF)2alpha kinase-mediated integrated stress response to
inhibit global protein synthesis; increased expression of genes containing amino 
acid response elements (ASNS, ATF3, CEBPB, SLC7A11, and TRIB3); increased
expression of genes for amino acid transporters (SLC7A11, SLC1A4, and SLC3A2),
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (CARS), and, to a limited extent, amino acid
metabolism (ASNS and CTH); increased expression of genes that act to suppress
growth (STC2, FOXO3A, GADD45A, LNK, and INHBE); and increased expression of
several enzymes that favor glutathione synthesis and maintenance of protein thiol
groups (GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A11, and TXNRD1). Although GCLC, GCLM, SLC7A11, HMOX, and
TXNRD1 were upregulated, most genes known to be upregulated via oxidative stress 
were not affected by cysteine deprivation. Because most genes known to be
upregulated in response to eIF2alpha phosphorylation and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4) synthesis were differentially expressed in response to cysteine
deprivation, it is likely that many responses to cysteine deprivation are
mediated, at least in part, by the general control nondepressible 2
(GCN2)/ATF4-dependent integrated stress response. This conclusion was supported
by the observation of similar differential expression of a subset of genes in
response to leucine deprivation. A consequence of sulfur amino acid restriction
appears to be the upregulation of the cellular capacity to cope with oxidative
and chemical stresses via the integrated stress response.

PMID: 18285520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(8):2528-48. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00784-07. Epub 2008 Feb
4.

Critical role for transcription factor C/EBP-beta in regulating the expression of
death-associated protein kinase 1.

Gade P(1), Roy SK, Li H, Nallar SC, Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, 660 West Redwood St., Howard Hall 350, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
dkalvako@umaryland.edu

Transcription factor C/EBP-beta regulates a number of physiological responses.
During an investigation of the growth-suppressive effects of interferons (IFNs), 
we noticed that cebpb(-/-) cells fail to undergo apoptosis upon gamma IFN
(IFN-gamma) treatment, compared to wild-type controls. To examine the basis for
this response, we have performed gene expression profiling of isogenic wild-type 
and cebpb(-/-) bone marrow macrophages and identified a number of
IFN-gamma-regulated genes that are dependent on C/EBP-beta for their expression. 
These genes are distinct from those regulated by the JAK-STAT pathways. Genes
identified in this screen appear to participate in various cellular pathways.
Thus, we identify a new pathway through which the IFNs exert their effects on
cellular genes through C/EBP-beta. One of these genes is death-associated protein
kinase 1 (dapk1). DAPK1 is critical for regulating the cell cycle, apoptosis, and
metastasis. Using site-directed mutagenesis, RNA interference, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we show that C/EBP-beta binds to the promoter of
dapk1 and is required for the regulation of dapk1. Both mouse dapk1 and human
dapk1 exhibited similar dependences on C/EBP-beta for their expression. The
expression of the other members of the DAPK family occurred independently of
C/EBP-beta. Members of the C/EBP family of transcription factors other than
C/EBP-beta did not significantly affect dapk1 expression. We identified two
elements in this promoter that respond to C/EBP-beta. One of these is a consensus
C/EBP-beta-binding site that constitutively binds to C/EBP-beta. The other
element exhibits homology to the cyclic AMP response element/activating
transcription factor binding sites. C/EBP-beta binds to this site in an
IFN-gamma-dependent manner. Inhibition of ERK1/2 or mutation of an ERK1/2 site in
the C/EBP-beta protein suppressed the IFN-gamma-induced response of this
promoter. Together, our data show a critical role for C/EBP-beta in a novel
IFN-induced cell growth-suppressive pathway via DAPK1.

PMCID: PMC2293111
PMID: 18250155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2007 Dec 19;2(12):e1334.

The Cebpd (C/EBPdelta) gene is induced by luteinizing hormones in ovarian theca
and interstitial cells but is not essential for mouse ovary function.

Huang AM(1), Rudelius M, Sharan S, McAllister JM, Raffeld M, Christenson LK,
Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland,
United States of America.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (CEBP) family of transcription factors
includes five genes. In the ovary, both Cebpa and Cebpb are essential for
granulosa cell function. In this study we have explored the role of the Cebpd
gene in ovarian physiology by expression and functional studies. Here we report
that Cebpd (C/EBPdelta) is expressed in the mouse ovary in a highly restricted
temporal and spatial pattern. In response to luteinizing hormone (LH/hCG), CEBPD 
expression is transiently induced in interstitial cells and in theca cells of
follicles from the primary to pre-ovulatory stage, and overlaps in part with
expression of the alpha-smooth muscle actin protein. Efficient down-regulation of
CEBPD was dependent on a functional Cebpb gene. Proliferating human theca cells
in culture also express Cebpd. Cells from patients with polycystic ovarian
syndrome (PCOS) exhibited higher Cebpd expression levels. However, deletion of
Cebpd in mice had no overt effect on ovarian physiology and reproductive
function. Very little is known at present about the molecular mechanisms
underlying theca/interstitial cell functions. The expression pattern of CEBPD
reported here identifies a novel functional unit of mouse theca cells of primary 
through tertiary follicles responding to LH/hCG together with a subset of
interstitial cells. This acute stimulation of CEBPD expression may be exploited
to further characterize the hormonal regulation and function of theca and
interstitial cells.

PMCID: PMC2129115
PMID: 18092000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2007 Dec;23(6):1285-93. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Innate immune gene expression in individual zebrafish after Listonella
anguillarum inoculation.

Rojo I(1), de Ilárduya OM, Estonba A, Pardo MA.

Author information: 
(1)AZTI-Tecnalia, Food Research Unit, Txatxarramendi Ugartea z/g, E-48395
Sukarrieta, Bizkaia, Spain.

Zebrafish were intraperitoneally injected with 10(6)CFU (LD50) Listonella
anguillarum. Three inoculated and control fish were collected at 1, 2, 4, 6 and
22h post infection (hpi) and the expression of genes related to the immune
response (il1b, cebpb, tfa, mpx, tnfa, nitr9, tlr22, hsc70, cp, mrlp1, c3b and
lyz) in each fish was monitored by means of real-time RT-PCR. A similar
experiment was performed considering an intermediate time point at 15 hpi.
Different relative levels of expression were found among genes. Also, wide
interindividual variation in gene expression for most genes was detected among
fish, inoculated or not. A steady increase of expression starting from the
initial stages of the interaction was found for interleukin-1beta. An initial
increase in levels of gene expression was found for the genes coding for the
CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein subunit beta and the Novel Immune-Type Receptor 9,
although their levels decreased later on and were indistinguishable from the
controls at 22 hpi. Finally, some genes (Transferrin, Myeloid-specific Peroxidase
and Tumour Necrosis Factor alpha) were upregulated at 22 hpi. Taken together, our
results show an induction in gene expression of genes involved in the
inflammatory and immune response upon L. anguillarum infection but also reveal
the existence of a wide variation in the levels of expression of the studied
genes in the zebrafish population.

PMID: 17804254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Oncol. 2007 Sep;1(2):181-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2007.05.005. Epub 2007 Jun
3.

Phosphoprotein Keratin 23 accumulates in MSS but not MSI colon cancers in vivo
and impacts viability and proliferation in vitro.

Birkenkamp-Demtroder K(1), Mansilla F, Sørensen FB, Kruhøffer M, Cabezón T,
Christensen LL, Aaltonen LA, Verspaget HW, Ørntoft TF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aarhus
University Hospital/Skejby, Brendstrupgaardsvej, DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
kbdr@ki.au.dk

Transcript profiling of 27 normal colon mucosas and 258 adenocarcinomas showed
Keratin23 to be increased in 78% microsatellite-stable tumors, while
microsatellite-instable tumors showed low transcript levels, comparable to normal
mucosas. Immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated that 88% of
microsatellite-instable tumors were negative for Keratin23 protein, while 70% of 
MSS tumors and metastases derived from MSS-tumors showed high Keratin23 levels.
Immunofluorescence analysis localized Keratin23 in the Golgi-apparatus. Golgi
accumulation was unique for gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas. Immunoprecipitation
and 2D-blot analysis revealed Keratin23 to be a 46.8 kDa phosphoprotein.
Keratin23 impaired the proliferation of human colon cancer cells significantly,
leading to cell death in microsatellite-instable but not microsatellite-stable
cell lines, while COS7 cells experienced multiple nuclei and apoptosis. Keratin23
expression correlated significantly with transcription factor CEBPB. In
conclusion, Keratin23 expression is a novel and important difference between
microsatellite-stable and microsatellite-instable colon cancers.

PMID: 19383294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Aug;177(1):16-9.

Genomic imbalances in Schistosoma-associated and non-Schistosoma-associated
bladder carcinoma. An array comparative genomic hybridization analysis.

Armengol G(1), Eissa S, Lozano JJ, Shoman S, Sumoy L, Caballín MR, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)U. Antropologia, Departament de Biologia Animal, Biologia Vegetal i Ecologia, 
Faculty of Sciences, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona
08193, Spain. gemma.armengol@uab.cat

Comment in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jan 15;180(2):160-2.

Carcinoma of the urinary bladder is the most common malignancy in many tropical
and subtropical countries due to endemic infection by Schistosoma hematobium
(bilharzia). In the current study, we performed a high-resolution analysis of
gene copy number amplifications using array comparative genomic hybridization to 
compare DNA copy number changes in pools of Schistosoma-associated (SA) and
non-Schistosoma-associated (NSA) bladder cancer (BC). Many DNA copy number
changes were detected in all studies, with multiple gains and losses of genetic
material. The most frequent alterations were gains on 5p15.2 approximately
p15.33, 8q13.1, and 11q13, and losses on 8p21.3 approximately p22 and 22q13. Even
when SA pools showed no Schistosoma-specific gene copy number profiling as
compared to NSA pools, some genes seemed to be gained (ELN on 7q11.23) and some
lost (PRKAG3 on 2q35 and PRDM6 on 5q23.2) in SA-SCC. The following genes were
gained in all histopathologic categories: SRC (20q11.23), CEBPB (20q13.13), and
GPR9 (Xq13.1). Our study did not provide clear evidence of differences in
carcinogenesis of SA-BC and NSA-BC.

PMID: 17693186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Neural Dev. 2007 Jan 25;2:4.

Neurotrophin/Trk receptor signaling mediates C/EBPalpha, -beta and NeuroD
recruitment to immediate-early gene promoters in neuronal cells and requires
C/EBPs to induce immediate-early gene transcription.

Calella AM(1), Nerlov C, Lopez RG, Sciarretta C, von Bohlen und Halbach O,
Bereshchenko O, Minichiello L.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mouse Biology Unit, via Ramarini, 00016
Monterotondo, Italy. AnnaMaria.Calella@usz.ch

BACKGROUND: Extracellular signaling through receptors for neurotrophins mediates 
diverse neuronal functions, including survival, migration and differentiation in 
the central nervous system, but the transcriptional targets and regulators that
mediate these diverse neurotrophin functions are not well understood.
RESULTS: We have identified the immediate-early (IE) genes Fos, Egr1 and Egr2 as 
transcriptional targets of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)/TrkB
signaling in primary cortical neurons, and show that the Fos serum response
element area responds to BDNF/TrkB in a manner dependent on a combined C/EBP-Ebox
element. The Egr1 and Egr2 promoters contain homologous regulatory elements. We
found that C/EBPalpha/beta and NeuroD formed complexes in vitro and in vivo, and 
were recruited to all three homologous promoter regions. C/EBPalpha and NeuroD
co-operatively activated the Fos promoter in transfection assays. Genetic
depletion of Trk receptors led to impaired recruitment of C/EBPs and NeuroD in
vivo, and elimination of Cebpa and Cebpb alleles reduced BDNF induction of Fos,
Egr1 and Egr2 in primary neurons. Finally, defective differentiation of cortical 
dendrites, as measured by MAP2 staining, was observed in both compound Cebp and
Ntrk knockout mice.
CONCLUSION: We here identify three IE genes as targets for BDNF/TrkB signaling,
show that C/EBPalpha and -beta are recruited along with NeuroD to target
promoters, and that C/EBPs are essential mediators of Trk signaling in cortical
neurons. We show also that C/EBPs and Trks are required for cortical dendrite
differentiation, consistent with Trks regulating dendritic differentiation via a 
C/EBP-dependent mechanism. Finally, this study indicates that BDNF induction of
IE genes important for neuronal function depends on transcription factors (C/EBP,
NeuroD) up-regulated during neuronal development, thereby coupling the functional
competence of the neuronal cells to their differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1796876
PMID: 17254333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Diabetologia. 2007 Feb;50(2):481-9. Epub 2006 Dec 16.

Increased expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta and -delta and
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 genes in aortas from hyperinsulinaemic rats.

Sato Y(1), Nishio Y, Sekine O, Kodama K, Nagai Y, Nakamura T, Maegawa H,
Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Seta-Tsukinowa-Cho, Otsu, Shiga, 520-2192, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We evaluated whether hyperinsulinaemia stimulates the expression
of transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-beta and
C/EBP-delta and leads to the induction of the chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 gene
(Ccl2, also known as MCP-1) expression in aortas.
METHODS: Hyperinsulinaemia was induced by feeding rats a high-fructose diet. CCL2
production was analysed by ELISA. The expression of Ccl2, Cebpb and Cebpd mRNAs
was investigated by quantitative RT-PCR. The binding of C/EBP-beta to Ccl2 was
assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay.
RESULTS: Insulin at a concentration of 10 nmol/l significantly stimulated the
expression of Cebpb, Cebpd and Ccl2 mRNAs, depending on activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells.
The knock-down of C/EBP-beta with siRNA abolished the insulin-induced Ccl2 mRNA
expression. In the aortas from fructose-fed rats, the levels of phosphorylation
of Akt/protein kinase B, a downstream effector of PI3K, were also increased. The 
expression of Cebpb, Cebpd and Ccl2 mRNAs in the aortas from fructose-fed rats
were significantly elevated, by 330, 300 and 300%, respectively, compared with
those of control-fed rats. The induction Ccl2 mRNA expression in the aortas was
significantly correlated with the expression of Cebpb and Cebpd mRNAs in the
aortas. Furthermore, the ChIP assay showed elevated binding of C/EBP-beta to the 
5' upstream region of Ccl2 in the aortas from fructose-fed rats.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These findings clearly indicate the role of C/EBPs in
the mechanism of upregulation of CCL2, an inflammation-related protein, observed 
in the hyperinsulinaemic state, which may initiate the process of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 17180354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Blood. 2007 Apr 15;109(8):3451-61. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Five members of the CEBP transcription factor family are targeted by recurrent
IGH translocations in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL).

Akasaka T(1), Balasas T, Russell LJ, Sugimoto KJ, Majid A, Walewska R, Karran EL,
Brown DG, Cain K, Harder L, Gesk S, Martin-Subero JI, Atherton MG, Brüggemann M, 
Calasanz MJ, Davies T, Haas OA, Hagemeijer A, Kempski H, Lessard M, Lillington
DM, Moore S, Nguyen-Khac F, Radford-Weiss I, Schoch C, Struski S, Talley P,
Welham MJ, Worley H, Strefford JC, Harrison CJ, Siebert R, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology Unit, Medical Research Council, University of Leicester, Lancaster 
Road, Leicester, UK.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) transcription factors play pivotal roles in
proliferation and differentiation, including suppression of myeloid
leukemogenesis. Mutations of CEBPA are found in a subset of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and in some cases of familial AML. Here, using cytogenetics,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and molecular cloning, we show that 5 
CEBP gene family members are targeted by recurrent IGH chromosomal translocations
in BCP-ALL. Ten patients with t(8;14)(q11;q32) involved CEBPD on chromosome 8,
and 9 patients with t(14;19)(q32;q13) involved CEBPA, while a further patient
involved CEBPG, located 71 kb telomeric of CEBPA in chromosome band 19q13; 4
patients with inv(14)(q11q32)/t(14;14)(q11;q32) involved CEBPE and 3 patients
with t(14;20)(q32;q13) involved CEBPB. In 16 patients the translocation
breakpoints were cloned using long-distance inverse-polymerase chain reaction
(LDI-PCR). With the exception of CEBPD breakpoints, which were scattered within a
43-kb region centromeric of CEBPD, translocation breakpoints were clustered
immediately 5' or 3' of the involved CEBP gene. Except in 1 patient with
t(14;14)(q11;q32), the involved CEBP genes retained germ-line sequences.
Quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR showed overexpression of the
translocated CEBP gene. Our findings implicate the CEBP gene family as novel
oncogenes in BCP-ALL, and suggest opposing functions of CEBP dysregulation in
myeloid and lymphoid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17170124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Clin Invest. 2006 Dec;116(12):3171-82. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

Functional validation of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase signature identifies
CEBPB and BCL2A1 as critical target genes.

Piva R(1), Pellegrino E, Mattioli M, Agnelli L, Lombardi L, Boccalatte F, Costa
G, Ruggeri BA, Cheng M, Chiarle R, Palestro G, Neri A, Inghirami G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Experimental Research and Medical
Studies (CeRMS), University of Turin, Turin, Italy. roberto.piva@unito.it

Anaplastic large cell lymphomas (ALCLs) represent a subset of lymphomas in which 
the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene is frequently fused to the
nucleophosmin (NPM) gene. We previously demonstrated that the constitutive
phosphorylation of ALK chimeric proteins is sufficient to induce cellular
transformation in vitro and in vivo and that ALK activity is strictly required
for the survival of ALK-positive ALCL cells. To elucidate the signaling pathways 
required for ALK-mediated transformation and tumor maintenance, we analyzed the
transcriptomes of multiple ALK-positive ALCL cell lines, abrogating their
ALK-mediated signaling by inducible ALK RNA interference (RNAi) or with potent
and cell-permeable ALK inhibitors. Transcripts derived from the gene expression
profiling (GEP) analysis uncovered a reproducible signature, which included a
novel group of ALK-regulated genes. Functional RNAi screening on a set of these
ALK transcriptional targets revealed that the transcription factor C/EBPbeta and 
the antiapoptotic protein BCL2A1 are absolutely necessary to induce cell
transformation and/or to sustain the growth and survival of ALK-positive ALCL
cells. Thus, we proved that an experimentally controlled and functionally
validated GEP analysis represents a powerful tool to identify novel pathogenetic 
networks and validate biologically suitable target genes for therapeutic
interventions.

PMCID: PMC1636692
PMID: 17111047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):2156-64. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Gene-expression profiling of systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma reveals
differences based on ALK status and two distinct morphologic ALK+ subtypes.

Lamant L(1), de Reyniès A, Duplantier MM, Rickman DS, Sabourdy F, Giuriato S,
Brugières L, Gaulard P, Espinos E, Delsol G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U563 Centre
de physiopathologie Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse, France.

With the use of microarray gene-expression profiling, we analyzed a homogeneous
series of 32 patients with systemic anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) and 5
ALCL cell lines. Unsupervised analysis classified ALCL in 2 clusters,
corresponding essentially to morphologic subgroups (ie, common type vs small cell
and "mixed" variants) and clinical variables. Patients with a morphologic variant
of ALCL had advanced-stage disease. This group included a significant number of
patients who experienced early relapse. Supervised analysis showed that ALK+ALCL 
and ALK- ALCL have different gene-expression profiles, further confirming that
they are different entities. Among the most significantly differentially
expressed genes between ALK+ and ALK- samples, we found BCL6, PTPN12, CEBPB, and 
SERPINA1 genes to be overexpressed in ALK+ ALCL. This result was confirmed at the
protein level for BCL-6, C/EBPbeta and serpinA1 through tissue microarrays. The
molecular signature of ALK- ALCL included overexpression of CCR7, CNTFR, IL22,
and IL21 genes but did not provide any obvious clues to the molecular mechanism
underlying this tumor subtype. Once confirmed on a larger number of patients, the
results of the present study could be used for clinical and therapeutic
management of patients at the time of diagnosis.

PMID: 17077326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Virology. 2006 Sep 15;353(1):1-5. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Adenovirus-induced alterations in host cell gene expression prior to the onset of
viral gene expression.

Granberg F(1), Svensson C, Pettersson U, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

In this report, we have studied gene expression profiles in human primary lung
fibroblasts (IMR-90) during the very early phase of an adenovirus infection.
Eight out of twelve genes with known functions encoded transcription factors
linked to two major cellular processes; inhibition of cell growth (ATF3, ATF4,
KLF4, KLF6 and ELK3) and immune response (NR4A1 and CEBPB), indicating that the
earliest consequences of an adenovirus infection are growth arrest and induction 
of an immune response. A time course analysis showed that the induction of these 
immediate-early response genes was transient and suppressed after the onset of
the adenovirus early gene expression.

PMID: 16860366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1412-20. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Prenatal programming of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in the rat: A key
mechanism in the 'foetal origins of hyperglycaemia'?

Nyirenda MJ(1), Dean S, Lyons V, Chapman KE, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical Research Institute,
University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
m.nyirenda@ed.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2006 Nov;49(11):2809-10.
    Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1138-41.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure causes lifelong hyperglycaemia 
in rat offspring, associated with permanently increased hepatic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2 (PCK2), the rate-controlling enzyme of
gluconeogenesis. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the 'programming' of
PCK2, this study examined the effect of prenatal dexamethasone treatment on
expression of transcription factors that regulate Pck2.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridisation were used to
measure and localise hepatic mRNA transcribed from the genes for PCK2, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4, alpha (HNF4A), transcription factor 1 (TCF1), CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein, alpha (CEBPA), CEBPB, the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1) and
peroxisome proliferative activated receptor, gamma, coactivator 1 alpha
(PPARGC1A) in foetal and adult offspring of dams treated with dexamethasone or
vehicle during the last week of gestation.
RESULTS: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure significantly elevated Hnf4a mRNA
expression in foetal and adult liver. This resulted from increased expression of 
isoforms derived from the 'adult' (P1) Hnf4a promoter. In contrast, isoforms from
the 'foetal' (P2) promoter were markedly suppressed by dexamethasone. Like Pck2, 
the increase in hepatic Hnf4a mRNA occurred exclusively in the periportal zone.
Foetal Tcf1 expression was also increased by dexamethasone treatment, but this
did not persist into adulthood. Prenatal dexamethasone did not affect the amounts
of foetal and/or adult Cebpa, Cebpb, Nr3c1 or Ppargc1a mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure caused a permanent
increase in hepatic Hnf4a mRNA. This increase, which was associated with a
premature switch from foetal to adult promoter predominance, was congruent with
changes in Pck2 expression. These data suggest that HNF4A might mediate Pck2
overexpression and subsequent hyperglycaemia.

PMID: 16570165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Blood. 2006 May 15;107(10):4080-9. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Inducible activation of CEBPB, a gene negatively regulated by BCR/ABL, inhibits
proliferation and promotes differentiation of BCR/ABL-expressing cells.

Guerzoni C(1), Bardini M, Mariani SA, Ferrari-Amorotti G, Neviani P, Panno ML,
Zhang Y, Martinez R, Perrotti D, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson Medical College, 233 South and 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107,
USA.

Translational regulation by oncogenic proteins may be a rapid and efficient
mechanism to modulate gene expression. We report here the identification of the
CEBPB gene as a target of translational regulation in myeloid precursor cells
transformed by the BCR/ABL oncogene. Expression of CEBPB was repressed in
32D-BCR/ABL cells and reinduced by imatinib (STI571) via a mechanism that appears
to depend on expression of the CUG-repeat RNA-binding protein CUGBP1 and the
integrity of the CUG-rich intercistronic region of c/ebpbeta mRNA. Constitutive
expression or conditional activation of wild-type CEBPB induced differentiation
and inhibited proliferation of 32D-BCR/ABL cells in vitro and in mice, but a DNA 
binding-deficient CEBPB mutant had no effect. The proliferation-inhibitory effect
of CEBPB was, in part, mediated by the CEBPB-induced GADD45A gene. Because
expression of CEBPB (and CEBPA) is low in the blast crisis (BC) stage of chronic 
myelogenous leukemia (CML) and is inversely correlated with BCR/ABL tyrosine
kinase levels, these findings point to the therapeutic potential of restoring
C/EBP activity in CML-BC and, perhaps, other types of acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC1895282
PMID: 16418324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3330-8. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

ATRA resolves the differentiation block in t(15;17) acute myeloid leukemia by
restoring PU.1 expression.

Mueller BU(1), Pabst T, Fos J, Petkovic V, Fey MF, Asou N, Buergi U, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, 3010 Bern, Switzerland. 
beatrice.mueller@insel.ch

Tightly regulated expression of the transcription factor PU.1 is crucial for
normal hematopoiesis. PU.1 knockdown mice develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
and PU.1 mutations have been observed in some populations of patients with AML.
Here we found that conditional expression of promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid
receptor alpha (PML-RARA), the protein encoded by the t(15;17) translocation
found in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), suppressed PU.1 expression, while
treatment of APL cell lines and primary cells with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
restored PU.1 expression and induced neutrophil differentiation. ATRA-induced
activation was mediated by a region in the PU.1 promoter to which CEBPB and OCT-1
binding were induced. Finally, conditional expression of PU.1 in human APL cells 
was sufficient to trigger neutrophil differentiation, whereas reduction of PU.1
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) blocked ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation.
This is the first report to show that PU.1 is suppressed in acute promyelocytic
leukemia, and that ATRA restores PU.1 expression in cells harboring t(15;17).

PMCID: PMC1895760
PMID: 16352814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Immunogenetics. 2005 Oct;57(9):682-9. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Characterization and expression of a CD40 homolog gene in Japanese flounder
Paralichthys olivaceus.

Park CI(1), Hirono I, Hwang JY, Aoki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Science, Graduate School of Marine Science and
Technology, Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology, Minato, Tokyo,
108-8477, Japan.

A CD40 homolog cDNA encoding 300 amino acid residues was isolated from a Japanese
flounder leukocyte cDNA library. The amino acid sequence identities of Japanese
flounder CD40 and previously reported CD40s of cow, human, mouse, and chicken
range from 32 to 35%. The positions of cysteine residues, CD40 ligand binding
amino acid residues, and four cysteine-rich domains are well conserved in
Japanese flounder CD40. The Japanese flounder CD40 gene is composed of nine exons
and eight intervening introns spread over 6 kb. The nucleotide sequence of the
5'-flanking region of this gene revealed the presence of several regulatory
regions, including a TATA-like box, AP-1-, CEBPB-, IRF-1-, LYF-1-, NF-kappaBp-,
SP-1-, and Stat-1-like motifs. In healthy fish, reverse transcriptase-polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) detected constitutive expression of CD40 in all tested
tissues (leukocytes, kidney, spleen, liver, intestine, brain, gill, and skin).
The mRNA of CD40 was predominantly expressed in several tissues that contained
lymphocytes (leukocytes, kidney, spleen, intestine, and gill). Expression of the 
Japanese flounder CD40 molecule was induced in peripheral blood leukocytes from 1
to 6 h following Con A (50 microg/ml)/phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) (0.35
microg/ml) stimulation, with a peak at 1 h after stimulation, and increased at 1,
3, and 6 h after induction by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (500 microg/ml) compared
with the control.

PMID: 16189669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Glia. 2005 Aug 1;51(2):132-47.

Genetic expression profile of olfactory ensheathing cells is distinct from that
of Schwann cells and astrocytes.

Vincent AJ(1), Taylor JM, Choi-Lundberg DL, West AK, Chuah MI.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroRepair Group, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
Tasmania, Australia.

Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) accompany the axons of olfactory receptor
neurons, which regenerate throughout life, from the olfactory mucosa into the
olfactory bulb. OECs have shown widely varying efficacy in repairing the injured 
nervous system. Analysis of the transcriptome of OECs will help in understanding 
their biology and will provide tools for investigating the mechanisms of their
efficacy and interactions with host tissues in lesion models. In this study, we
compared the transcriptional profile of cultured OECs with that of Schwann cells 
(SCs) and astrocytes (ACs), two glial cell types to which OECs have similarities.
Two biological replicates of RNA from cultured OECs, SCs, and ACs were hybridized
to long oligo rat 5K arrays against a common reference pool of RNA (50% cultured 
fibroblast RNA and 50% neonatal rat brain RNA). Transcriptional profiles were
analyzed by hierarchical clustering, Principal Components Analysis, and the Venn 
diagram. The three glial cell types had similarly increased or decreased
expression of numerous transcripts compared with the reference. However, OECs
were distinguishable from both SCs and ACs by a modest number of transcripts,
which were significantly enriched or depleted. Furthermore, OECs and SCs were
more closely related to each other than to ACs. Expression of selected
transcripts not previously characterized in OECs, such as Lyz, Timp2, Gro1
(Cxcl1), Ccl2 (MCP1), Ctgf, and Cebpb, was validated by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); immunohistochemistry in
cultured OECs, SCs, and ACs, and adult tissues was performed to demonstrate their
expression at the protein level.

PMID: 15789429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Int J Cancer. 2005 Jul 1;115(4):556-60.

Myxoid liposarcoma FUS-DDIT3 fusion oncogene induces C/EBP beta-mediated
interleukin 6 expression.

Göransson M(1), Elias E, Ståhlberg A, Olofsson A, Andersson C, Aman P.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research (LLCR), Department of Pathology,
Goteborg University, Gothenburg, Sweden. melker.goransson@llcr.med.gu.se

The myxoid/round cell liposarcoma oncogene FUS-DDIT3 is the result of a
translocation derived gene fusion between the splicing factor FUS and DDIT3. In
order to investigate the downstream targets of DDIT3, and the transforming
effects of the FUS-DDIT3 fusion protein, we have introduced DDIT3-GFP and
FUS-DDIT3-GFP constructs into a human fibrosarcoma cell line. The gene expression
profiles of stable transfectants were compared to the original fibrosarcoma cell 
line by microarray analysis. We here report that the NFkappaB and C/EBP beta
controlled gene IL6 is upregulated in DDIT3- and FUS-DDIT3-expressing
fibrosarcoma cell lines and in myxoid liposarcoma cell lines. Strong expression
of the tumor associated multifunctional cytokine interleukin 6 was confirmed both
at mRNA and protein level. Knockdown experiments using siRNA against CEBPB
transcripts showed that the effect of FUS-DDIT3 on IL6 expression is C/EBP beta
dependent. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed direct interaction between the 
IL6 promoter and the C/EBP beta protein. In addition, the effect of DDIT3 and
FUS-DDIT3 on the expression of other acute phase genes was examined using
real-time PCR. We demonstrate for the first time that DDIT3 and FUS-DDIT3 show
opposite transcriptional regulation of IL8 and suggest that FUS-DDIT3 may affect 
the synergistic activation of promoters regulated by C/EBP beta and NFkappaB.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15688424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biol Reprod. 2005 May;72(5):1194-204. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

Expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins alpha and beta in the porcine ovary
and regulation in primary cultures of granulosa cells.

Gillio-Meina C(1), Hui YY, LaVoie HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins alpha and beta (CEBPA/ CEBPB) were evaluated in
the porcine ovary during the estrous cycle. CEBPB mRNA was present in antral
follicles and was significantly increased in healthy corpora lutea (CL), whereas 
CEBPA mRNA was constitutively expressed in these structures. Both isoforms of
CEBPA (42 and 30 kDa) exhibited greater expression in preovulatory follicles, and
the 42-kDa isoform increased in CL, whereas the 30-kDa isoform decreased. All
major isoforms of CEBPB (38, 34, and 20 kDa) were expressed, with the 34- and
20-kDa isoforms being more abundant in preovulatory follicles and further
increased in CL. The effects of FSH and cAMP analogue on the distribution of CEBP
isoforms were evaluated in primary cultures of porcine granulosa cells. FSH and
8-Br-cAMP had little stimulatory effect on isoform distribution, but cAMP
treatment for 24 h tended to decrease the 30-kDa form of CEBPA and the 34-kDa
form of CEBPB. The 34-kDa form of CEBPB was decreased by the protein kinase A
inhibitor H89 at 4 h (with FSH treatment), and by both protein kinase A and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors at 24 h of treatment. In transfected
granulosa cells, FSH and cAMP analogue stimulated a CEBP consensus
sequence-reporter construct that was blocked by H89. These data implicate protein
kinase A as the major regulator of CEBPB isoform distribution and CEBP-mediated
transactivation in granulosa cells. The differential expression of specific
CEBPA/B isoforms observed in maturing follicles and CL may contribute to changes 
in follicular cell differentiation and increasing steroidogenic capacity.

PMID: 15647458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 1;23(14):2548-53.

Comparison of mammary gland involution between 129S1 and C57BL/6 inbred mouse
strains: differential regulation of Bcl2a1, Trp53, Cebpb, and Cebpd expression.

Thangaraju M(1), Sharan S, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Regulation of Cell Growth Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Natinal Institutes of Health, PO Box B, Frederick, MD 21702,
USA.

Genetic engineering has made the mouse an invaluable tool to address the function
of individual genes in a targeted manner. Over the last decade it has become
apparent that the genetic mouse strain background can significantly influence the
phenotype of an engineered mouse. Therefore, it is essential to characterize the 
biology of the different wild-type background strains. In this study, we have
compared mouse mammary gland involution in the 129S1 and C57BL/6 inbred strains
and report significant differences at the molecular level with differential
expression of Bcl2a1 (Bfl1), Trp53 (p53), Cebpb (C/EBP beta), and Cebpd (C/EBP
delta). The C57BL/6 strain exhibits dynamic responses with induction of Trp53 and
Cebpd and concomitant downregulation of Bcl2a1 during the first phase of
involution. In contrast, expression of these genes does not change significantly 
in 129S1 mice. During the second phase, C57BL/6 glands contain more Cebpb than
129S1 glands. Nevertheless, involution proceeds morphologically with similar
kinetics in both strains. The data demonstrate that the genetic response of
mammary tissue varies significantly between 129S1 and C57BL/6. These results may 
provide a basis for the interpretation of strain-specific phenotypes in
engineered mice and underline the importance of pure strains for large-scale
expression studies with mutant mice.

PMID: 14981542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Physiol Genomics. 2003 Aug 15;14(3):225-39.

New quantitative trait loci that contribute to cholesterol gallstone formation
detected in an intercross of CAST/Ei and 129S1/SvImJ inbred mice.

Lyons MA(1), Wittenburg H, Li R, Walsh KA, Leonard MR, Churchill GA, Carey MC,
Paigen B.

Author information: 
(1)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Cholesterol gallstone formation is a response to interactions between multiple
genes and environmental stimuli. To determine the subset of cholesterol gallstone
susceptibility (Lith) genes possessed by strains CAST/Ei (susceptible) and
129S1/SvImJ (resistant), we conducted quantitative trait locus (QTL) analyses of 
an intercross between these strains. Parental strains and F(1) mice of both
genders were evaluated for gallstone formation after consumption of a lithogenic 
diet for 8 wk. Gallstone susceptibility of strain CAST was predominantly due to
cholesterol hypersecretion. Male intercross offspring were genotyped and
phenotyped for cholesterol gallstone formation after consumption of the
lithogenic diet for 10 wk. Linkage analysis was performed using PSEUDOMARKER
software. One significant, new QTL was detected and named Lith13 [chromosome
(Chr) 5, 30 cM]. Statistical analyses and QTL fine mapping suggest this QTL may
comprise two closely linked loci. We confirmed the presence of Lith6 (Chr 6).
Suggestive QTL were detected on Chrs 1, 2, 5, 14, and 16. The QTL on Chrs 2 and
16 confirmed previously identified, suggestive QTL. Therefore, they were named
Lith12 (101 cM) and Lith14 (42 cM), respectively. We identified candidate genes
based on known function and location and performed mRNA expression analyses using
both parental strains and intercross progeny for preliminary evaluation of their 
contributions to gallstone formation. Cebpb (Lith12), Pparg (Lith6), and Slc21a1 
(Lith6) displayed expression differences. Our work continues to demonstrate the
genetic complexity and to elucidate the pathophysiology of cholesterol gallstone 
formation. It should facilitate the development of new approaches for treating
this common human disorder.

PMID: 12837957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Mar 4;100(5):2754-9. Epub 2003 Feb 24.

Sex- and age-dependent human transcriptome variability: implications for chronic 
heart failure.

Boheler KR(1), Volkova M, Morrell C, Garg R, Zhu Y, Margulies K, Seymour AM,
Lakatta EG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Science, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. bohelerk@grc.nia.nih.gov

Heart failure (HF) is the end result of progressive and diverse biological
adaptations within the diseased myocardium. We used cDNA microarrays and
quantitative PCR to examine the transcriptomes of 38 left ventricles from failing
and nonfailing human myocardium. After identification of a pool of putative
HF-responsive candidate genes by microarrays on seven nonfailing and eight
failing hearts, we used quantitative PCR and a general linear statistical model
in a larger sample set (n = 34) to validate and examine the role of contributing 
biological variables (age and sex). We find that most HF-candidate genes
(transcription factors, Cebpb, Npat; signaling molecules, Map2k3, Map4k5;
extracellular matrix proteins, Lum, Cola1; and metabolic enzymes, Mars)
demonstrated significant changes in gene expression; however, the majority of
differences among samples depended on variables such as sex and age, and not on
HF alone. Some HF-responsive gene products also demonstrated highly significant
changes in expression as a function of age and/or sex, but independent of HF
(Ngp1, Cd163, and Npat). These results emphasize the need to account for
biological variables (HF, sex and age interactions) to elucidate genomic
correlates that trigger molecular pathways responsible for the progression of HF 
syndromes.

PMCID: PMC151413
PMID: 12601168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Gene. 2001 Sep 5;275(1):93-101.

Cloning and characterization of human cathepsin L promoter.

Bakhshi R(1), Goel A, Seth P, Chhikara P, Chauhan SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.

Cathepsin L is a lysosomal cysteine protease, which is over-expressed and
secreted by malignant cells. It is very potent in degrading collagen, elastin,
laminin and other components of the basement membrane and, therefore, has been
implicated in tumor invasion and metastasis. The structural portion of the human 
cathepsin L (hCATL) gene was cloned to elucidate its genomic organization
(Chauhan et al., J. Biol. Chem. 218 (1993) 1039). In the present study, a 1.90 kb
DNA fragment, containing 1825 bp of the 5' upstream region of hCATL and 75 bases 
of the first exon of the hCATL, was amplified by PCR from an adaptor ligated
placental genomic library. This fragment has been demonstrated to exhibit
promoter activity by luciferase reporter assays. Sequence analysis of this
fragment revealed the presence of approximately 29 different putative
transcription factor binding sites. Several of them like AP-4, GATA-1, Lmo2,
CEBPB, MZF-1, NF-AT, etc. were present more than once in this region. However, a 
consensus CAAT box but no consensus TATA box was found within the 1.0 kb upstream
of exon 1. The transcription initiation site of hCATL, using placental total RNA,
was mapped to a single adenine residue 289 bases upstream of the ATG codon.

PMID: 11574156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2001 Jun;280(6):R1772-80.

Altered expression of C/EBP family members results in decreased adipogenesis with
aging.

Karagiannides I(1), Tchkonia T, Dobson DE, Steppan CM, Cummins P, Chan G,
Salvatori K, Hadzopoulou-Cladaras M, Kirkland JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Fat mass, adipocyte size and metabolic responsiveness, and preadipocyte
differentiation decrease between middle and old age. We show that expression of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-alpha, a key regulator of adipogenesis and
fat cell function, declined substantially with aging in differentiating
preadipocytes cultured under identical conditions from rats of various ages.
Overexpression of C/EBP alpha in preadipocytes cultured from old rats restored
capacity to differentiate into fat cells, indicating that downstream
differentiation-dependent genes maintain responsiveness to regulators of
adipogenesis. C/EBP alpha-expression also decreased with age in fat tissue from
three different depots and in isolated fat cells. The overall level of C/EBP
beta, which modulates C/EBP alpha-expression, did not change with age, but the
truncated, dominant-negative C/EBP beta-liver inhibitory protein (LIP) isoform
increased in cultured preadipocytes and isolated fat cells. Overexpression of
C/EBP beta-LIP in preadipocytes from young rats impaired adipogenesis. C/EBP
delta, which acts with full-length C/EBP beta to enhance adipogenesis, decreased 
with age. Thus processes intrinsic to adipose cells involving changes in C/EBP
family members contribute to impaired adipogenesis and altered fat tissue
function with aging. These effects are potentially reversible.

PMID: 11353682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Genomics. 1999 Dec 1;62(2):208-15.

A physical map of the 20q12-q13.1 region associated with type 2 diabetes.

Price JA(1), Brewer CS, Howard TD, Fossey SC, Sale MM, Ji L, Krolewski AS, Bowden
DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

Several recent genetic studies have suggested linkage of Type 2 diabetes
(non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus) susceptibility to a region of
chromosome 20q12-q13.1. To facilitate the identification and cloning of a
diabetes susceptibility gene(s) in this region, we have constructed correlated
radiation hybrid and YAC/BAC contig physical maps of the region. A
high-resolution radiation hybrid map encompassing 9.5 Mb between the PLC and the 
CEBPB genes was constructed using 68 markers: 25 polymorphic markers, 15 known
genes, 21 ESTs, and 7 random genomic sequences. The physical order of the
polymorphic markers within this radiation hybrid map is consistent with published
genetic maps. A YAC/BAC contig that gives continuous coverage between PLC and
CEBPB was also constructed. This contig was constructed from 24 YACs, 34 BACs,
and 1 P1 phage clone onto which 71 markers were mapped: 23 polymorphic markers,
12 genes, 24 ESTs, and 12 random genomic sequences. The radiation hybrid map and 
YAC/BAC physical map enable precise mapping of newly identified transcribed
sequences and polymorphic markers that will aid in linkage and linkage
disequilibrium studies and facilitate identification and cloning of candidate
Type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes residing in 20q12-q13.1.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10610714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 2;264(3):668-75.

Involvement of the Sp1 site in ras-mediated downregulation of the RECK metastasis
suppressor gene.

Sasahara RM(1), Takahashi C, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan.

We have isolated and characterized the 5'-flanking region of the mouse RECK gene 
aiming to understand the mechanism of oncogene-mediated suppression of RECK gene 
expression. The upstream 52-base region was found to contain a promoter activity 
which is, to some extent, suppressed by the ras oncogene. This region contains
two Sp1-binding motifs, one cEBPb-binding motif, and one CAAT box. Although both 
of the Sp1 sites were found to associate with Sp1 as well as Sp3 proteins, ras
responsiveness seems to be mediated only by the downstream Sp1 site. Our data
indicate that the Sp1 motif in certain contexts can serve as a negative target
for the Ras signal.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10543990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):333-6.

Mouse chromosomal location of the CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins C/EBP beta
(Cebpb), C/EBP delta (Cebpd), and CRP1 (Cebpe).

Jenkins NA(1), Gilbert DJ, Cho BC, Strobel MC, Williams SC, Copeland NG, Johnson 
PF.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

There are four known members of the C/EBP family of basic region-leucine zipper
transcription factors: Cebpa, Cebpb, Cebpd, and Cebpe. Cebpa has previously been 
mapped to mouse chromosome 7. Here, we show that Cebpb maps to mouse chromosome
2, Cebpd to chromosome 16, and Cebpe to chromosome 14. The assignment of Cebpd to
chromosome 16 identifies a new region of homology between mouse chromosome 16 and
human chromosome 8.

PMID: 8530045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Genet Res. 1995 Apr;65(2):83-93.

Thirteen genes (Cebpb, E2f1, Tcf4, Cyp24, Pck1, Acra4, Edn3, Kcnb1, Mc3r, Ntsr,
Cd40, Plcg1 and Rcad) that probably lie in the distal imprinting region of mouse 
chromosome 2 are not monoallelically expressed.

Williamson CM(1), Dutton ER, Abbott CM, Beechey CV, Ball ST, Peters J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Radiobiology Unit, Didcot, Oxon, UK.

Seven imprinted genes are currently known in the mouse but none have been
identified yet in the distal imprinting region of mouse Chromosome (Chr) 2, a
region which shows striking linkage conservation with human chromosome 20q13.
Both maternal duplication/paternal deficiency and its reciprocal for distal Chr 2
lead to mice with abnormal body shapes and behavioural abnormalities. We have
tested a number of candidate genes, that are either likely or known to lie within
the distal imprinting region, for monoallelic expression. These included 3 genes 
(Cebpb, E2f1 and Tcf4) that express transcription factors, 2 genes (Cyp24 and
Pck1) that are involved in growth, 5 genes (Acra4, Edn3, Kcnb1, Mc3r and Ntsr)
where a defect could lead to neurological and probably behavioural problems, and 
3 genes (Cd40, Plcg1 and Rcad) that are less obvious candidates but sequence
information was available for designing primers to test their expression. On/off 
expression of each gene was tested by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of RNA extracted from tissues of mice with maternal
duplication/paternal deficiency and its reciprocal for the distal region of Chr
2. None of the 13 genes is monoallelically expressed in the appropriate tissues
before and shortly after birth which suggests that these genes are not imprinted 
later in development. This study has narrowed down the search for imprinted
genes, and valuable information on which genes have been tested for on/off
expression is provided. Since there is considerable evidence of conservation of
imprinting between mouse and human, we would predict that the 13 genes are not
imprinted in human. Five of the genes: E2f1, Tcf4, Kcnb1, Cd40 and Rcad, have not
yet been mapped in human. However, because of the striking linkage conservation
observed between mouse Chr 2 and human chromosome 20, we would expect these genes
to map on human chromosome 20q13.

PMID: 7781998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Genomics. 1992 Sep;14(1):12-7.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP alpha) gene (CEBPA) maps to human
chromosome 19q13.1 and the related nuclear factor NF-IL6 (C/EBP beta) gene
(CEBPB) maps to human chromosome 20q13.1.

Hendricks-Taylor LR(1), Bachinski LL, Siciliano MJ, Fertitta A, Trask B, de Jong 
PJ, Ledbetter DH, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77054.

The CEBPA gene encoding CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP alpha) has been
mapped to human chromosome 19 and the CEBPB (formerly TCF5) gene encoding NF-IL6 
(C/EBP beta) to human chromosome 20 by Southern blot analysis of Chinese hamster 
x human and mouse x human somatic cell hybrids. CEBPA has been further mapped to 
19q13.1 between the loci GPI and TGFB using human x hamster somatic cell hybrids 
containing restricted fragments of human chromosome 19. This position was
confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Furthermore, CEBPB has been
mapped to 20q13.1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 1427819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


