
1. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar 10. [Epub ahead of print]

IL-22 Impedes the Proliferation of Schwann cells: Transcriptome Sequencing and
Bioinformatics Analysis.

Xu S(1), Ao J(2), Gu H(3), Wang X(4), Xie C(4), Meng D(1), Wang L(5), Liu M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and
Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200032, China. (3)Department of
Transfusion, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
200433, China. (4)Department of Neurology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (5)Med-X Research Insitute of
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China. LishanWangfh@163.com.
(6)Department of Neurology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200433, China. lciryuan@163.com.

Schwann cells (SCs) proliferation is crucial for nerve regeneration following
nerve injury. This study aims to investigate effects of interleukin-22 (IL-22) on
SCs proliferation in vitro, as well as the corresponding mechanism. Rat SCs were 
treated with 100 ng/ml rat IL-22 for 48 h, and cell proliferation and apoptosis
were detected using fluorescent staining and flow cytometry. After transcriptome 
sequencing, raw reads were filtered and mapped to reference genome rn5. Then,
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and long non-coding RNAs (DElncRNAs)
between IL-22 and control groups were identified (tool: Cuffdiff). Functional and
pathway enrichment analyses were performed (tool: GOFunction), and
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed (tool: STRING and
Cytoscape). Furthermore, Pearson's correlations between DEGs and DElncRNAs were
analyzed, and regulatory network of DEGs, DElncRNAs, and transcription factors
(TFs) was constructed. IL-22 significantly inhibited proliferation (p
value<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and promoted apoptosis of Schwann cells. Totally, 932 DEGs and 118 
DElncRNAs were identified, among which Ccl2 and Ccna2 were hub genes in PPI
network. Up-regulated DEGs were enriched in apoptosis related terms, whereas
down-regulated DEGs were enriched in proliferation related terms. DElncRNAs like 
NONRATT023505, NONRATG020400, and NONRATT022748 were correlated with multiple
DEGs enriched in cell cycle and division. Moreover, up-regulated TFs Egr1, Cebpd,
and Atf4 play crucial roles in regulatory network, and NONRATG020400-Cebpd-Ccl2, 
NONRATT023505/NONRATT022748-Atf4-Ccna2, and
NONRATT022748-Egr1-Id1/Aldoc/Eno2/F3/Serpine1 regulatory pathways were identified
in SCs after IL-22 treatment. IL-22 might influence SCs proliferation and
apoptosis via regulating lncRNA-TF-gene pathways in SCs. However, more studies
are required to confirm these results.

PMID: 26960328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Environ Toxicol. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.1002/tox.22242. [Epub ahead of print]

Toxicogenomic analysis of the pulmonary toxic effects of hexanal in F344 rat.

Cho Y(1,)(2), Lim JH(1), Song MK(1), Jeong SC(1), Lee K(3,)(4), Heo Y(3,)(4), Kim
TS(2), Ryu JC(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environment, Health and Welfare Research, Cellular and Molecular
Toxicology Laboratory, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), P.O. Box
131, Cheongryang, Seoul, 130-650, Korea. (2)School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Korea University, Anam-Dong, Seoungbuk-Gu, Seoul, 136-701, Korea. 
(3)Human and Environmental Toxicology, University of Science and Technology,
Gajeong-Ro 217, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, 305-350, Korea. (4)Inhalation Toxicology
Research Center, Korea Institute of Toxicology, 30, Baekhak 1-Gil, Jeongeup-Si,
Jeollabuk-Do, 580-185, Korea.

Hexanal is a major component of indoor air pollutants and is a kind of aldehydes;
it has adverse effects on human health. We performed an in vivo inhalation study 
and transcriptomic analysis to determine the mode of toxic actions in response to
hexanal. Fischer 344 rats of both sexes were exposed by inhalation to hexanal
aerosol for 4 h day(-1) , 5 days week(-1) for 4 weeks at 0, 600, 1000, and 1500
ppm. Throughout our microarray-based genome-wide expression analysis, we
identified 56 differentially expressed genes in three doses of hexanal; among
these genes, 11 genes showed dose-dependent expression patterns (10 downregulated
and 1 upregulated, 1.5-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Through a comparative toxicogenomics
database (CTD) analysis of 11 genes, we determined that five genes (CCL12, DDIT4,
KLF2, CEBPD, and ADH6) are linked to diverse disease categories such as cancer,
respiratory tract disease, and immune system disease. These diseases were
previously known for being induced by volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Our data
demonstrated that the hexanal-induced dose-dependent altered genes could be
valuable quantitative biomarkers to predict hexanal exposure and to perform
relative risk assessments, including pulmonary toxicity. © 2016 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. Environ Toxicol, 2016.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26880647  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Br J Pharmacol. 2016 Mar;173(6):1058-69. doi: 10.1111/bph.13418. Epub 2016 Feb
22.

a1B -Adrenoceptor signalling regulates bone formation through the up-regulation
of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d expression in osteoblasts.

Tanaka K(1), Hirai T(1), Kodama D(1), Kondo H(1), Hamamura K(1), Togari A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi Gakuin University,
Nagoya, 464-8650, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The sympathetic nervous system regulates bone
remodelling, in part, through ß2 -adrenoceptor signalling. However, the
physiological role of a1 -adrenoceptor signalling in bone in vivo remains
unclear. Therefore, to obtain a deeper understanding of bone remodelling by the
sympathetic nervous system, we investigated the role of a1B -adrenoceptor
signalling in bone metabolism.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Prazosin, a nonspecific a1 -adrenoceptor antagonist, was
administered for 2 weeks in C57BL6 mice, and efficacy was evaluated by bone
microarchitecture using microcomputed tomography and determination of bone
formation by fluorescent labelling of bone. We also compared the bone phenotype
of a1B -adrenoceptor null mice (a1B (-/-) ) with that of wild-type littermates.
KEY RESULTS: We demonstrated that the systemic administration of prazosin
decreased bone formation. In addition, a1B -adrenoceptor-deficient mice had a
lower bone mass due to decreased bone formation but did not exhibit any changes
in bone-resorbing activity. Furthermore, stimulation with phenylephrine, a
non-specific a1 -adrenoceptor agonist, increased the expression of the
transcriptional factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d (Cebpd) in MC3T3-E1
osteoblastic cells. The overexpression of Cebpd induced cellular proliferation in
MC3T3-E1 cells, whereas the silencing of Cebpd suppressed it.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Taken together, these results suggested that a1B
-adrenoceptor signalling is required for bone formation and regulated cellular
proliferation through a mechanism relevant to the up-regulation of Cebpd in
osteoblasts and, thus, provide new evidence for the physiological importance of
a1B -adrenoceptor signalling in bone homeostasis.

© 2016 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMID: 26750808  [PubMed - in process]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 13;467(2):211-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.004. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Phosphoprotein phosphatase 1CB (PPP1CB), a novel adipogenic activator, promotes
3T3-L1 adipogenesis.

Cho YL(1), Min JK(2), Roh KM(1), Kim WK(3), Han BS(3), Bae KH(3), Lee SC(3),
Chung SJ(4), Kang HJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dongguk University, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea.
(2)Functional Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomolecular
Science, University of Science & Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Functional Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Chemistry,
Dongguk University, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea; Research Institute of
Biomolecular Chemistry, Dongguk University, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: sjchung@dongguk.edu. (5)Research Institute of Biomolecular
Chemistry, Dongguk University, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: jin0305@dongguk.edu.

Understanding the molecular networks that regulate adipogenesis is crucial for
gaining insight into obesity and identifying medicinal targets thereof is
necessary for pharmacological interventions. However, the identity and molecular 
actions of activators that promote the early development of adipocytes are still 
largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate a novel role for phosphoprotein phosphatase
1CB (PPP1CB) as a potent adipogenic activator that promotes adipocyte
differentiation. PPP1CB expression increased in vitro during the early phase of
3T3-L1 adipogenesis and in the murine model of high-fat diet-induced obesity.
Depletion of PPP1CB dramatically suppressed the differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells
into mature adipocytes, with a concomitant change in adipocyte marker genes and
significantly inhibited clonal expansion. We also showed that knockdown of PPP1CB
caused a significant decrease in C/EBPd expression, which in turn resulted in
attenuation of PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa, adiponectin, and aP2. In addition, we elucidated
the functional significance of PPP1CB by linking p38 activation to C/EBPd
expression in early adipogenesis. Overall, our findings demonstrate a novel
function of PPP1CB in promoting adipogenesis and suggest that PPP1CB may be a
promising therapeutic target for treatment of obesity and obesity-related
diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26449462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 15;6:199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00199. eCollection
2015.

Systems pharmacology of adiposity reveals inhibition of EP300 as a common
therapeutic mechanism of caloric restriction and resveratrol for obesity.

Nishimura Y(1), Sasagawa S(2), Ariyoshi M(2), Ichikawa S(2), Shimada Y(2),
Kawaguchi K(2), Kawase R(2), Yamamoto R(3), Uehara T(3), Yanai T(3), Takata R(3),
Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Mie 
University Medical Zebrafish Research Center Tsu, Japan ; Department of Systems
Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Department 
of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology Innovation Institute Tsu,
Japan ; Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center
Tsu, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine Tsu, Japan. (3)Product Development Research Institute, Mercian
Corporation Fujisawa, Japan.

Both caloric restriction (CR) and resveratrol (RSV) have beneficial effects on
obesity. However, the biochemical pathways that mediate these beneficial effects 
might be complex and interconnected and have not been fully elucidated. To reveal
the common therapeutic mechanism of CR and RSV, we performed a comparative
transcriptome analysis of adipose tissues from diet-induced obese (DIO) zebrafish
and obese humans. We identified nine genes in DIO zebrafish and seven genes in
obese humans whose expressions were regulated by CR and RSV. Although the gene
lists did not overlap except for one gene, the gene ontologies enriched in the
gene lists were highly overlapped, and included genes involved in adipocyte
differentiation, lipid storage and lipid metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis of
cis-regulatory sequences of these genes revealed that their transcriptional
regulators also overlapped, including EP300, HDAC2, CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and
FOXA2. We also identified 15 and 46 genes that were dysregulated in the adipose
tissue of DIO zebrafish and obese humans, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis
identified EP300, HDAC2, and CEBPB as common transcriptional regulators for these
genes. EP300 is a histone and lysyl acetyltransferase that modulates the function
of histone and various proteins including CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and FOXA2. We
demonstrated that adiposity in larval zebrafish was significantly reduced by
C646, an inhibitor of EP300 that antagonizes acetyl-CoA. The reduction of
adiposity by C646 was not significantly different from that induced by RSV or
co-treatment of C646 and RSV. These results indicate that the inhibition of EP300
might be a common therapeutic mechanism between CR and RSV in adipose tissues of 
obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC4569862
PMID: 26441656  [PubMed]


6. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Nov;14(11):2623-33. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0025.
Epub 2015 Sep 10.

HMDB and 5-AzadC Combination Reverses Tumor Suppressor CCAAT/Enhancer-Binding
Protein Delta to Strengthen the Death of Liver Cancer Cells.

Li CF(1), Tsai HH(2), Ko CY(3), Pan YC(4), Yen CJ(5), Lai HY(6), Yuh CH(7), Wu
WC(4), Wang JM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)Institute 
of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Program for Neural Regenerative Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Hematology and Oncology, Department
of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan. (7)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research 
Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan. (8)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal
Transduction, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. Graduate Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
yumingw@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) can arise from chronic inflammation due to viral
infection, organ damage, drug toxicity, or alcohol abuse. Moreover, gene
desensitization via aberrant CpG island methylation is a frequent epigenetic
defect in HCC. However, the details of how inflammation is linked with
epigenetic-mediated desensitization of tumor suppressor genes remains less
investigated. In this study, we found that loss of CEBPD enhances the growth of
liver cancer cells and is associated with the occurrence of liver cancers, as
determined by the assessment of clinical specimens and in vivo animal models.
Moreover, E2F1-regulated epigenetic axis attenuated CEBPD expression in liver
cancer cells. CEBPD is responsive to the hydroxymethyldibenzoylmethane
(HMDB)-induced p38/CREB pathway and plays an important role in the HMDB-induced
apoptosis of cancer cells. Regarding depression of epigenetic effects to enhance 
HMDB-induced CEBPD expression, the combination of HMDB and 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-AzadC) could enhance the death of liver cancer cells and reduce the tumor
formation of Huh7 xenograft mice. In conclusion, these results suggest that CEBPD
could be a useful diagnostic marker and therapeutic target in HCC. The results
also reveal the therapeutic potential for low-dose 5-AzadC to enhance the
HMDB-induced death of HCC cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26358750  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31069-84. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5209.

CEBPD amplification and overexpression in urothelial carcinoma: a driver of tumor
metastasis indicating adverse prognosis.

Wang YH(1,)(2), Wu WJ(3,)(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Wang WJ(2), Huang HY(8), Li
WM(3,)(4,)(5), Yeh BW(4,)(5,)(7), Wu TF(9), Shiue YL(10), Sheu JJ(10), Wang
JM(2), Li CF(8,)(9,)(11,)(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)Institute 
of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Urology, School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (6)Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Municipal Hsiao-Kang Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (7)Center for Stem Cell Research, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (8)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (9)Department of Biotechnology, Southern Taiwan University of Science and
Technology, Tainan, Taiwan. (10)Institute of Biomedical Science, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (11)National Institute of Cancer Research,
National Health Research Institutes, Tainan, Taiwan. (12)Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (13)Department of
Internal Medicine and Cancer Center, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

The molecular aberrations responsible for the progression of urothelial carcinoma
(UC) remain largely obscure. To search candidate driver oncogenes in UC, we
performed array-based genomic hybridization (aCGH) on 40 UBUC samples.
Amplification of 8q11.21 was preferentially identified in patients who developed 
disease-specific death (53.8%) and distal metastasis (50.0%) but was barely
detected in non-eventful cases (3.7% and 0%, respectively). In order to quantify 
the expression of candidate genes harbored in 8q11.21, laser-capture
microdissection coupled with RT-PCR was performed on 32 of the 40 cases submitted
to aCGH. With this, we identified CEBPD mRNA expression as most significantly
associated with gains of 8q11.21, suggesting amplification-driven expression. By 
performing CEBPD-specific FISH and immunohistochemistry on 295 UBUCs, we
confirmed CEBPD amplification (21.3%) and overexpression (29.8%) were strongly
related to each other (p<0.001). Moreover, both were associated with adverse
clinicopathologic features and worse outcomes. Furthermore, the clinical
significance of CEBPD expression was also confirmed in an independent cohort
comprised of 340 UCs from the upper urinary tract. Interestingly, CEBPD knockdown
suppressed cell proliferation, migration and, most significantly, cell invasion
ability in UC cells. The latter phenotype is attributed to downregulation of MMP2
as identified by RT2 Profiler PCR array. Moreover, expression of CEBPD
significantly enhanced MMP2 expression and transcriptional activation by directly
binding to its promoter region, as confirmed by promoter reporter assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Conclusively, CEBPD amplification is a
mechanism driving increased mRNA and protein expression that confers
aggressiveness in UC through MMP2-mediated cell invasiveness.

PMCID: PMC4741589
PMID: 26307680  [PubMed - in process]


8. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jul 20;8:1795-803. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S80075. eCollection
2015.

Identification of the key genes connected with plasma cells of multiple myeloma
using expression profiles.

Zhang K(1), Xu Z(1), Sun Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Spinal Surgery, Jining No 1 People's Hospital, Jining, People's Republic of
China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, The People's Hospital of Laiwu City, Laiwu, 
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To uncover the potential regulatory mechanisms of the relevant genes
that contribute to the prognosis and prevention of multiple myeloma (MM).
METHODS: Microarray data (GSE13591) were downloaded, including five plasma cell
samples from normal donors and 133 plasma cell samples from MM patients.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by Student's t-test.
Functional enrichment analysis was performed for DEGs using the Gene Ontology
(GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases. Transcription 
factors and tumor-associated genes were also explored by mapping genes in the
TRANSFAC, the tumor suppressor gene (TSGene), and tumor-associated gene (TAG)
databases. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and PPI subnetworks were
constructed by Cytoscape software using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of
Interacting Genes (STRING) database.
RESULTS: A total of 63 DEGs (42 downregulated, 21 upregulated) were identified.
Functional enrichment analysis showed that HLA-DRB1 and VCAM1 might be involved
in the positive regulation of immune system processes, and HLA-DRB1 might be
related to the intestinal immune network for IgA production pathway. The genes
CEBPD, JUND, and ATF3 were identified as transcription factors. The top ten nodal
genes in the PPI network were revealed including HLA-DRB1, VCAM1, and TFRC. In
addition, genes in the PPI subnetwork, such as HLA-DRB1 and VCAM1, were enriched 
in the cell adhesion molecules pathway, whereas CD4 and TFRC were both enriched
in the hematopoietic cell pathway.
CONCLUSION: Several crucial genes correlated to MM were identified, including
CD4, HLA-DRB1, TFRC, and VCAM1, which might exert their roles in MM progression
via immune-mediated pathways. There might be certain regulatory correlations
between HLA-DRB1, CD4, and TFRC.

PMCID: PMC4516193
PMID: 26229487  [PubMed]


9. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Jul 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Astrocytic CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein d Regulates Neuronal Viability and
Spatial Learning Ability via miR-135a.

Chu YY(1), Ko CY, Wang WJ, Wang SM, Gean PW, Kuo YM, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 701, Taiwan.

The progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been associated with
astrocytes-induced neuroinflammation. However, the detailed mechanism of
astrocytes associated with learning impairments and neuronal loss in AD is poorly
defined. Here, we provide novel evidences that astrocytic miR-135a is critical
for neuronal viability and spatial learning ability in vivo. The AppTg/Cebpd
(-/-) mice showed a spatial learning improvement compared with the APPswe/PS1/E9 
bigenic (AppTg) mice. miR-135a was found to be a CCAAT/enhancer binding protein d
(CEBPD) responsive miRNA and can repress the transcription of thrombospondin 1
(THBS1) / Thbs1 (mouse) via its 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR). We used different
experimental approaches to attenuate the expression of CEBPD/Cebpd (mouse) or
miR-135a in astrocytes and found the following results: increase in THBS1/Thbs1
expression, decrease in neuronal apoptosis, and increase in growth of neurites.
Importantly, injection of miR-135a antagonist (AM135a) into the brain of AppTg
mice was found to prevent neuronal apoptosis and improved the spatial learning
ability. Together, our findings demonstrate a critical function for the
astrocytic CEBPD, and point to miR-135a antagonist as an attractive therapeutic
target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 26208701  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Biomark Res. 2015 Jun 5;3:11. doi: 10.1186/s40364-015-0036-1. eCollection 2015.

A case of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a child with Down syndrome
bearing a t(2;12)(p12;p13) involving ETV6 and biallelic IGH@ rearrangements.

Tirado CA(1), Shabsovich D(1), Kim Y(1), Traum P(1), Pullarkat S(1), Kallen M(1),
Rao N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA USA.

Erratum in
    Biomark Res. 2015;3:27.

BACKGROUND: Rearrangements involving ETV6 (12p13) are among the most common
structural abnormalities in pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL)
and involve numerous partner genes. Additionally, the t(8;14)(q11.2;q32), which
can result in the placement of CEBPD (8q11.2) near the regulatory regions of IGH@
(14q32) and consequent overexpression of CEPBD, occurs at a higher frequency in
individuals with Down syndrome-associated ALL (DS-ALL) compared to both the
general and pediatric population. The coexistence of cytogenetically detectable
ETV6 abnormalities and t(8;14)(q11.2;q32) is a rare occurrence in B-ALL and has
only been reported in a single case in the literature.
FINDINGS: Herein, we present a case of B-ALL in a 9-year old male with Down
syndrome in which conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed two reciprocal
translocations: a t(8;14)(q11.2;q32) and a t(2;12)(p12;p13). Interphase and
metaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using break apart
probes confirmed the involvement of IGH@ and ETV6 in these translocations,
respectively. Additionally, interphase FISH revealed a clonal subpopulation
bearing biallelic IGH@ rearrangements not observed by conventional cytogenetic
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of
B-ALL bearing an ETV6 translocation with a partner gene on the short arm of
chromosome 2 confirmed by FISH. Additionally, it is the second reported case of
t(8;14)(q11.2;q32)-ALL bearing a concomitant, cytogenetically detectable
abnormality involving ETV6. This case provides insight into a novel translocation
involving ETV6 as well as potentially unique and understudied mechanisms of
clonal evolution in pediatric B-ALL.

PMCID: PMC4509750
PMID: 26203356  [PubMed]


11. Gene. 2015 Nov 15;573(1):129-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.07.037. Epub 2015 Jul
15.

Androgen receptor activation integrates complex transcriptional effects in
osteoblasts, involving the growth factors TGF-ß and IGF-I, and transcription
factor C/EBPd.

McCarthy TL(1), Centrella M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine New Haven, CT
06520, USA; Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine New
Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: michaelcentrellayale_edu@yahoo.com.

Osteoblasts respond to many growth factors including IGF-I and TGF-ß, which
themselves are sensitive to other bone growth regulators. Here we show that IGF-I
gene promoter activity in prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) induced osteoblasts is
suppressed by dihydrotestosterone (DHT) through an essential C/EBP response
element (RE) in exon 1 of the igf1 gene. Inhibition by DHT fails to occur when
the androgen receptor (AR) gene is mutated within its DNA binding domain.
Correspondingly, DHT activated AR inhibits gene transactivation by C/EBPd, and
transgenic C/EBPd expression inhibits AR activity. Inhibition by DHT persists
when upstream Smad and Runx REs in the IGF-I gene promoter are mutated. TGF-ß
also enhances IGF-I gene promoter activity, although modestly relative to PGE2,
and independently of the C/EBP, Smad, or Runx REs. Still, DHT suppresses TGF-ß
induced IGF-I promoter activity, but not its effects on DNA or collagen
synthesis. Notably, DHT suppresses plasminogen activator inhibitor gene promoter 
activity, but synergistically increases Smad dependent gene promoter activity in 
TGF-ß induced cells, which are differentially sensitive to AR mutations and the
AR co-regulator ARA55. Finally, although the PGE2 sensitive C/EBP RE in the igf1 
gene is not essential for basal TGF-ß induction, C/EBPd activity through this
site is potently enhanced by TGF-ß. Thus DHT suppresses the PGE2 and TGF-ß
induced IGF-I gene promoter and differentiates other aspects of TGF-ß activity in
osteoblasts. Our results extend the complex interactions among local and systemic
bone growth regulators to DHT, and predict complications from anabolic steroid
use in other DHT sensitive tissues.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 7;5:11953. doi: 10.1038/srep11953.

Transcriptome analysis of mRNA and miRNA in skeletal muscle indicates an
important network for differential Residual Feed Intake in pigs.

Jing L(1), Hou Y(1), Wu H(1), Miao Y(1), Li X(1), Cao J(1), Brameld JM(2), Parr
T(2), Zhao S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Education,
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, P. R. China. (2)Division of Nutritional Sciences,
University of Nottingham, School of Biosciences, Loughborough, Leics. LE12 5RD,
United Kingdom.

Feed efficiency (FE) can be measured by feed conversion ratio (FCR) or residual
feed intake (RFI). In this study, we measured the FE related phenotypes of 236
castrated purebred Yorkshire boars, and selected 10 extreme individuals with high
and low RFI for transcriptome analysis. We used RNA-seq analyses to determine the
differential expression of genes and miRNAs in skeletal muscle. There were 99
differentially expressed genes identified (q = 0.05). The down-regulated genes
were mainly involved in mitochondrial energy metabolism, including FABP3, RCAN,
PPARGC1 (PGC-1A), HK2 and PRKAG2. The up-regulated genes were mainly involved in 
skeletal muscle differentiation and proliferation, including IGF2, PDE7A, CEBPD, 
PIK3R1 and MYH6. Moreover, 15 differentially expressed miRNAs (|log2FC| = 1,
total reads count = 20, p = 0.05) were identified. Among them, miR-136,
miR-30e-5p, miR-1, miR-208b, miR-199a, miR-101 and miR-29c were up-regulated,
while miR-215, miR-365-5p, miR-486, miR-1271, miR-145, miR-99b, miR-191 and
miR-10b were down-regulated in low RFI pigs. We conclude that decreasing
mitochondrial energy metabolism, possibly through AMPK - PGC-1A pathways, and
increasing muscle growth, through IGF-1/2 and TGF-ß signaling pathways, are
potential strategies for the improvement of FE in pigs (and possibly other
livestock). This study provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms that
determine RFI and FE in pigs.

PMCID: PMC4493709
PMID: 26150313  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):4829-36. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4030. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Bioinformatics analysis to identify the differentially expressed genes of
glaucoma.

Yan X(1), Yuan F(2), Chen X(2), Dong C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Pudong District Gongli Hospital, Shanghai 200135,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to screen the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) associated with glaucoma and investigate the changing patterns of the
expression of these genes. The GSE2378 gene microarray data of glaucoma was
downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database, which included seven normal
samples and eight glaucoma astrocyte samples. Taking into account the
corresponding associations between the probe ID and gene symbols, the DEGs were
identified prior to and subsequent to the summation of probe level values using
the Limma package in R language, followed by Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway
enrichment analyses. Interaction networks of the DEGs were constructed using the 
Biomolecular Interaction Network Database, and cluster analysis of the genes in
the networks was performed using ClusterONE. Subsequent to the summation of probe
value, a total of 223 genes were identified as DEGs between the normal and
glaucoma samples, including 74 downregulated and 149 upregulated genes. In
addition, the DEGs were found to be associated with several functions, including 
response to wounding, extracellular region part and calcium ion binding. The most
significantly enriched pathways were complement and coagulation cascades,
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy and extracellular matrix
(ECM)-receptor interaction. Furthermore, interaction networks were constructed of
the DEGs prior to and subsequent to the summation of probe values, and HNF4A and 
CEBPD were identified as hub genes. Additionally, 37 and 31 GO terms were
identified to be enriched in the two DEGs of the networks prior to and subsequent
to summation, respectively. The results indicated the identified genes associated
with ECM as important, and the CEBPD gene was considered to be a critical gene in
glaucoma. The findings of the present study offer a potential reference value in 
further investigations of glaucoma at the gene level.

PMCID: PMC4581750
PMID: 26135629  [PubMed - in process]


14. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 15;6(27):23987-4001.

Targeting chemotherapy-induced PTX3 in tumor stroma to prevent the progression of
drug-resistant cancers.

Chi JY(1), Hsiao YW(2), Li CF(3), Lo YC(2), Lin ZY(4), Hong JY(2), Liu YM(2), Han
X(2), Wang SM(1), Chen BK(2), Tsai KK(5), Wang JM(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Science, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan R.O.C. (2)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan R.O.C. (3)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei 
Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan R.O.C. (4)Cancer Center and Division of
Hepatobiliary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Taiwan R.O.C. (5)National Institute of Cancer Research and
Translational Center for Glandular Malignancies, National Health Research
Institutes, Tainan, Taiwan R.O.C. (6)Institute of Medical Sciences, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan R.O.C.

The tumor microenvironment has been suggested to participate in tumorigenesis,
but the nature of the communication between cancer cells and the
microenvironment, especially in response to anticancer drugs, remains obscure. We
determined that activation of the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD)
response to Cisplatin and 5-Fluorouracil in cancer-associated macrophages and
fibroblasts contributed to the metastasis, invasion, acquired chemoresistance and
stemness of cancer cells by in vitro and in vivo assays. Specifically, reporter
and in vivo DNA binding assays were used to determine that Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is 
a CEBPD responsive gene and serves a protumor role upon anticancer drug
treatment. Finally, a PTX3 peptide inhibitor RI37 was developed and assessed the 
antitumor effects by in vivo assays. RI37 could function as a promising inhibitor
for preventing cancer progression and the metastasis, invasion and progression of
drug-resistant cancers. The identification of PTX3 provided a new insight in the 
interaction between host and tumor and the RI37 peptide showed a great
opportunity to largely reduce the risk of invasion and metastasis of cancer and
drug-resistant cancers.

PMCID: PMC4695165
PMID: 26124179  [PubMed - in process]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0124462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124462.
eCollection 2015.

Gene Expression Analyses during Spontaneous Reversal of Cardiomyopathy in Mice
with Repressed Nuclear CUG-BP, Elav-Like Family (CELF) Activity in Heart Muscle.

Dasgupta T(1), Coram RJ(1), Stillwagon SJ(1), Ladd AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

CUG-BP, Elav-like family (CELF) proteins regulate cell type- and developmental
stage-specific alternative splicing in the heart. Repression of CELF-mediated
splicing activity via expression of a nuclear dominant negative CELF protein in
heart muscle was previously shown to induce dysregulation of alternative
splicing, cardiac dysfunction, cardiac hypertrophy, and dilated cardiomyopathy in
MHC-CELF<U+0394> transgenic mice. A "mild" line of MHC-CELF<U+0394> mice that expresses a lower
level of the dominant negative protein exhibits cardiac dysfunction and myopathy 
at a young age, but spontaneously recovers normal cardiac function and heart size
with age despite the persistence of splicing defects. To the best of our
knowledge, this was the first example of a genetically induced cardiomyopathy
that spontaneously recovers without intervention. In this study, we explored the 
basis for this recovery. We examined whether a transcriptional program regulated 
by serum response factor (SRF) that is dysregulated in juvenile MHC-CELF<U+0394> mice is
restored in the mild line with age, and evaluated global changes in gene
expression by microarray analyses. We found that differences in gene expression
between the mild line and wild type hearts are greatly reduced in older animals, 
including a partial recovery of SRF target gene expression. We did not find
evidence of a new compensatory pathway being activated in the mild line with age,
and propose that recovery may occur due to developmental stage-specific
compatibility of CELF-dependent splice variants with the cellular environment of 
the cardiomyocyte.

PMCID: PMC4404138
PMID: 25894229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Mar 12;6:21. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0014-4.

HIF-1A and C/EBPs transcriptionally regulate adipogenic differentiation of bone
marrow-derived MSCs in hypoxia.

Jiang C(1,)(2,)(3), Sun J(4,)(5,)(6), Dai Y(7,)(8,)(9), Cao P(10,)(11,)(12),
Zhang L(13), Peng S(14,)(15), Zhou Y(16,)(17), Li G(18,)(19,)(20), Tang J(21),
Xiang J(22,)(23,)(24).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer
Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry
of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410078,
China. jiangchen3701@163.com. (2)Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer 
Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan, 410013, China. jiangchen3701@163.com. (3)Hunan Key Laboratory of
Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China.
jiangchen3701@163.com. (4)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. sunjun0828@csu.edu.cn. (5)Hunan Cancer Hospital
and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. sunjun0828@csu.edu.cn. (6)Hunan Key
Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha, Hunan, 410013,
China. sunjun0828@csu.edu.cn. (7)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. daiyafei136@126.com. (8)Hunan Cancer Hospital and
the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. daiyafei136@126.com. (9)Hunan Key
Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha, Hunan, 410013,
China. daiyafei136@126.com. (10)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. caopengfei66@163.com. (11)Hunan Cancer Hospital
and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. caopengfei66@163.com. (12)Hunan Key
Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha, Hunan, 410013,
China. caopengfei66@163.com. (13)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. 124769836@qq.com. (14)Cancer Research Institute, 
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education,
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South University,
110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. shuping@csu.edu.cn. (15)Hunan
Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. shuping@csu.edu.cn.
(16)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer
Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry
of Health, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410078,
China. zhouyanhong2004@hotmail.com. (17)Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated 
Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. zhouyanhong2004@hotmail.com. (18)Cancer Research 
Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of
Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South 
University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. lgy@csu.edu.cn.
(19)Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China.
lgy@csu.edu.cn. (20)Hunan Key Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer,
Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. lgy@csu.edu.cn. (21)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan, 410011, China. jingquntang@hotmail.com. (22)Cancer Research Institute, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of Ministry of Education, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry of Health, Central South University, 110
Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China. xiangjj@csu.edu.cn. (23)Hunan
Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410013, China. xiangjj@csu.edu.cn.
(24)Hunan Key Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha,
Hunan, 410013, China. xiangjj@csu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs, also known as
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells) are known to be a component of the
tumor microenvironment. BMSCs are multipotent stromal cells that can
differentiate into a variety of cell types, including osteocytes, chondrocytes,
adipocytes, epithelial cells and endothelial cells. Stem cells found in niches or
transplanted into injured tissues constantly encounter hypoxic stress. Areas with
very low to no oxygen pressure exist in solid tumors. The differentiation
capacity of BMSCs under hypoxic conditions remains controversial.
METHODS: In this study, a hypoxic workstation, set at an oxygen concentration of 
0.2% was used to mimic the hypoxic microenvironment of cancer in vivo. Oil red O 
staining and alkaline phosphatase staining were used to examine the adipogenic or
osteogenic differentiation, respectively, of BMSCs. Real-time PCR was performed
to explore the expression of adipocyte- or osteocyte-specific genes. An RT2
Profiler PCR Array was used to screen a panel of 84 genes associated with human 
adipogenesis in BMSCs under normal and hypoxic conditions. A dual-luciferase
reporter assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) were applied to analyze
promoter activity to evaluate the possible regulatory mechanism of
adipocyte-specific gene expression.
RESULTS: We found that this extreme hypoxia impaired osteogenic differentiation
as indicated by the attenuation of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and the
reduced expression of osteogenic markers osteocalcin and osteopontin. Moreover,
extreme hypoxia enhanced adipogenic differentiation, as indicated by the
accumulation of lipid droplets and the expression of the adipocyte-specific genes
leptin, LPL, CFD, PGAR and HIG2. In the extreme hypoxic conditions (0.2% oxygen),
the overexpression of CCAAT enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs), especially
C/EBPd, and HIF-1A upregulated the promoter activities of adipocyte-specific
genes such as leptin, CFD, HIG2, LPL, PGAR. In the present study, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) exerted a negative effect on the
differentiation of BMSCs into adipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: In view of these findings, extreme hypoxia induced the adipogenic
differentiation of BMSCs through HIF-1A and C/EBPs. These findings might provide 
clues regarding the roles of BMSCs in the cancer microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4559195
PMID: 25889814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMC Cell Biol. 2015 Mar 18;16:10. doi: 10.1186/s12860-015-0057-5.

Adipogenic RNAs are transferred in osteoblasts via bone marrow adipocytes-derived
extracellular vesicles (EVs).

Martin PJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Haren N(5,)(6,)(7), Ghali O(8,)(9,)(10), Clabaut
A(11,)(12,)(13), Chauveau C(14,)(15,)(16), Hardouin P(17,)(18,)(19), Broux
O(20,)(21,)(22).

Author information: 
(1)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille, France.
perrine.martin@univ-littoral.fr. (2)Université du Littoral Côte d'Opale, ULCO,
F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France. perrine.martin@univ-littoral.fr. (3)UCEIV EA
4492, F-59140, Dunkerque, France. perrine.martin@univ-littoral.fr. (4)Université 
du Littoral Côte d'Opale, EA4492 - Unité de Chimie Environnementale et
Interactions sur le Vivant (UCEIV), Maison de la Recherche en Environnement
Industriel 2, ULCO, 189A, Avenue Maurice Schumann, 59140, Dunkerque, France.
perrine.martin@univ-littoral.fr. (5)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille,
France. nathalie.haren@u-picardie.fr. (6)PMOI EA 4490, IFR 114, F-62327 Boulogne 
sur Mer and F-59000, Lille, France. nathalie.haren@u-picardie.fr. (7)Université
du Littoral Côte d'Opale, ULCO, F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France.
nathalie.haren@u-picardie.fr. (8)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille,
France. olfa.ghali@univ-littoral.fr. (9)PMOI EA 4490, IFR 114, F-62327 Boulogne
sur Mer and F-59000, Lille, France. olfa.ghali@univ-littoral.fr. (10)Université
du Littoral Côte d'Opale, ULCO, F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France.
olfa.ghali@univ-littoral.fr. (11)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille,
France. aline.clabaut@univ-littoral.fr. (12)PMOI EA 4490, IFR 114, F-62327
Boulogne sur Mer and F-59000, Lille, France. aline.clabaut@univ-littoral.fr.
(13)Université du Littoral Côte d'Opale, ULCO, F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France.
aline.clabaut@univ-littoral.fr. (14)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille,
France. christophe.chauveau@univ-littoral.fr. (15)PMOI EA 4490, IFR 114, F-62327 
Boulogne sur Mer and F-59000, Lille, France.
christophe.chauveau@univ-littoral.fr. (16)Université du Littoral Côte d'Opale,
ULCO, F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France. christophe.chauveau@univ-littoral.fr.
(17)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille, France.
pierre.hardouin@univ-littoral.fr. (18)PMOI EA 4490, IFR 114, F-62327 Boulogne sur
Mer and F-59000, Lille, France. pierre.hardouin@univ-littoral.fr. (19)Université 
du Littoral Côte d'Opale, ULCO, F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France.
pierre.hardouin@univ-littoral.fr. (20)Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000, Lille, 
France. odile.broux@univ-littoral.fr. (21)PMOI EA 4490, IFR 114, F-62327 Boulogne
sur Mer and F-59000, Lille, France. odile.broux@univ-littoral.fr. (22)Université 
du Littoral Côte d'Opale, ULCO, F-62327, Boulogne sur Mer, France.
odile.broux@univ-littoral.fr.

BACKGROUND: In osteoporosis, bone loss is accompanied by increased marrow
adiposity. Given their proximity in the bone marrow and their shared origin, a
dialogue between adipocytes and osteoblasts could be a factor in the competition 
between human Mesenchymal Stem Cells (hMSC) differentiation routes, leading to
adipocyte differentiation at the expense of osteoblast differentiation. The
adipocyte/osteoblast balance is highly regulated at the level of gene
transcription. In our work, we focused on PPARgamma, CEBPalpha and CEBPdelta, as 
these transcription factors are seen as master regulators of adipogenesis and
expressed precociously, and on leptin and adiponectin, considered as adipocyte
marker genes. In 2010, our group has demonstrated, thanks to a coculture model,
that in the presence of hMSC-derived adipocytes (hMSC-Adi), hMSC-derived
osteoblasts (hMSC-Ost) express lesser amounts of osteogenic markers but exhibit
the expression of typical adipogenic genes. Nevertheless, the mechanisms
underlying this modulation of gene expression are not clarified. Recently,
adipocytes were described as releasing extracellular vesicles (EVs), containing
and transferring adipocyte specific transcripts, like PPARgamma, leptin and
adiponectin. Here, we investigated whether EVs could be the way in which
adipocytes transfer adipogenic RNAs in our coculture model.
RESULTS: We observed in hMSC-Ost incubated in hAdi-CM an increase in the
adipogenic PPAR<U+03B3>, leptin, CEBPa and CEBPd transcripts as well as the
anti-osteoblastic miR-138, miR30c, miR125a, miR-125b, miR-31 miRNAs, probably
implicated in the observed osteocalcin (OC) and osteopontin (OP) expression
decrease. Moreover, EVs were isolated from conditioned media collected from
cultures of hMSC at different stages of adipocyte differentiation and these
specific adipogenic transcripts were detected inside. Finally, thanks to
interspecies conditioned media exposition, we could highlight for the first time 
a horizontal transfer of adipogenic transcripts from medullary adipocytes to
osteoblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we have shown, for the first time, RNA transfer between
hMSC-derived adipocytes and osteoblasts through EVs. Additional studies are
needed to clarify if this mechanism has a role in the adipocytic switch driven on
osteoblasts by adipocytes inside bone marrow and if EVs could be a target
component to regulate the competition between osteoblasts and adipocytes in the
prevention or in the therapy of osteoporosis and other osteopenia.

PMCID: PMC4369894
PMID: 25887582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Mar 29;8:14. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0088-y.

Gene expression network analysis reveals new transcriptional regulators as novel 
factors in human ischemic cardiomyopathy.

Herrer I(1), Roselló-Lletí E(2), Ortega A(3), Tarazón E(4), Molina-Navarro MM(5),
Triviño JC(6), Martínez-Dolz L(7), Almenar L(8), Lago F(9), Sánchez-Lázaro I(10),
González-Juanatey JR(11), Salvador A(12), Portolés M(13), Rivera M(14).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University
Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain.
isaherrer@gmail.com. (2)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La
Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia,
Spain. esther_rosello_lleti@hotmail.com. (3)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health
Research Institute of La Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell,
106, 46026, Valencia, Spain. anaortegagutierrez@hotmail.com. (4)Cardiocirculatory
Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando
Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain. estamel@alumni.uv.es.
(5)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University
Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia, Spain.
micaela.molina.navarro@googlemail.com. (6)Genomic Systems, Paterna, Valencia,
Spain. jc.trivino@sistemasgenomicos.com. (7)Heart Failure and Transplantation
Unit, Cardiology Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
lmartinezd@meditex.es. (8)Heart Failure and Transplantation Unit, Cardiology
Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain. lualmenar@gmail.com.
(9)Cellular and Molecular Cardiology Unit, Department of Cardiology and Institute
of Biomedical Research, University Clinical Hospital, Santiago Compostela, Spain.
francisca.lago.paz@sergas.es. (10)Heart Failure and Transplantation Unit,
Cardiology Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
ignaciosanchezlazaro@gmail.com. (11)Cellular and Molecular Cardiology Unit,
Department of Cardiology and Institute of Biomedical Research, University
Clinical Hospital, Santiago Compostela, Spain.
jose.ramon.gonzalez.juanatey@sergas.es. (12)Heart Failure and Transplantation
Unit, Cardiology Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
salvador_ant@gva.es. (13)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La 
Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026, Valencia,
Spain. portoles_man@gva.es. (14)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute
of La Fe University Hospital, Avd de Fernando Abril Martorell, 106, 46026,
Valencia, Spain. miguelrivera492@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) is characterized by transcriptomic
changes that alter cellular processes leading to decreased cardiac output.
Because the molecular network of ICM is largely unknown, the aim of this study
was to characterize the role of new transcriptional regulators in the molecular
mechanisms underlying the responses to ischemia.
METHODS: Myocardial tissue explants from ICM patients and control (CNT) subjects 
were analyzed by RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) and quantitative Real-Time PCR.
RESULTS: Enrichment analysis of the ICM transcriptomic profile allowed the
characterization of novel master regulators. We found that the expression of the 
transcriptional regulators SP100 (-1.5-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), CITED2 (-3.8-fold,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), CEBPD (-4.9-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and BCL3 (-3.3-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) were lower 
in ICM than in CNT. To gain insights into the molecular network defined by the
transcription factors, we identified CEBPD, BCL3, and HIF1A target genes in the
RNA-Seq datasets. We further characterized the biological processes of the target
genes by gene ontology annotation. Our results suggest that CEBPD-inducible genes
with roles in the inhibition of apoptosis are downregulated and that
BCL3-repressible genes are involved in the regulation of cellular metabolism in
ICM. Moreover, our results suggest that CITED2 downregulation causes increased
expression of HIF1A target genes. Functional analysis of HIF1A target genes
revealed that hypoxic and stress response genes are activated in ICM. Finally, we
found a significant correlation between the mRNA levels of BCL3 and the mRNA
levels of both CEBPD (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.73, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and CITED2 (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.56, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
Interestingly, CITED2 mRNA levels are directly related to ejection fraction (EF) 
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.54, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that changes in the expression of SP100, CITED2,
CEBPD, and BCL3 affect their transcription regulatory networks, which
subsequently alter a number of biological processes in ICM patients. The
relationship between CITED2 mRNA levels and EF emphasizes the importance of this 
transcription factor in ICM. Moreover, our findings identify new mechanisms used 
to interpret gene expression changes in ICM and provide valuable resources for
further investigation of the molecular basis of human cardiac ischemic response.

PMCID: PMC4386080
PMID: 25884818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 24;290(17):11177-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.641514. Epub
2015 Mar 18.

Inhibition of Stat3 activation suppresses caspase-3 and the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system, leading to preservation of muscle mass in cancer cachexia.

Silva KA(1), Dong J(2), Dong Y(3), Dong Y(4), Schor N(5), Tweardy DJ(6), Zhang
L(7), Mitch WE(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine, and the Nephrology
Division, Department of Medicine, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo
04023-900, Brazil. (2)From the Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine, and
the College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China, and.
(3)From the Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine, and the Beijing
Institute of Heart, Lung, and Blood Vessel Diseases, An Zhen Hospital Affiliated 
to Capital Medical University, Beijing 100029, China. (4)From the Nephrology
Division, Department of Medicine, and. (5)the Nephrology Division, Department of 
Medicine, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo 04023-900, Brazil. (6)the
Departments of Medicine (Section of Infectious Diseases), Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030. (7)From the Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine,
and lipingz@bcm.edu.

Cachexia occurs in patients with advanced cancers. Despite the adverse clinical
impact of cancer-induced muscle wasting, pathways causing cachexia are
controversial, and clinically reliable therapies are not available. A trigger of 
muscle protein loss is the Jak/Stat pathway, and indeed, we found that
conditioned medium from C26 colon carcinoma (C26) or Lewis lung carcinoma cells
activates Stat3 (p-Stat3) in C2C12 myotubes. We identified two proteolytic
pathways that are activated in muscle by p-Stat3; one is activation of caspase-3,
and the other is p-Stat3 to myostatin, MAFbx/Atrogin-1, and MuRF-1 via
CAAT/enhancer-binding protein d (C/EBPd). Using sequential deletions of the
caspase-3 promoter and CHIP assays, we determined that Stat3 activation increases
caspase-3 expression in C2C12 cells. Caspase-3 expression and proteolytic
activity were stimulated by p-Stat3 in muscles of tumor-bearing mice. In mice
with cachexia caused by Lewis lung carcinoma or C26 tumors, knock-out of p-Stat3 
in muscle or with a small chemical inhibitor of p-Stat3 suppressed muscle mass
losses, improved protein synthesis and degradation in muscle, and increased body 
weight and grip strength. Activation of p-Stat3 stimulates a pathway from C/EBPd 
to myostatin and expression of MAFbx/Atrogin-1 and increases the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Indeed, C/EBPd KO decreases the expression of
MAFbx/Atrogin-1 and myostatin, while increasing muscle mass and grip strength. In
conclusion, cancer stimulates p-Stat3 in muscle, activating protein loss by
stimulating caspase-3, myostatin, and the ubiquitin-proteasome system. These
results could lead to novel strategies for preventing cancer-induced muscle
wasting.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4409274 [Available on 2016-04-24]
PMID: 25787076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Oct;290(5):1659-71. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1026-6. Epub
2015 Mar 16.

Transcriptome analysis reveals the potential contribution of long noncoding RNAs 
to brown adipocyte differentiation.

You LH(1), Zhu LJ(1), Yang L(1), Shi CM(1), Pang LX(1), Zhang J(1), Cui XW(2), Ji
CB(3), Guo XR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029,
China. (2)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity
and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, 210029, China. cuixianwei198615@126.com. (3)Nanjing Maternity and Child 
Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
chenboji@njmu.edu.cn. (4)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China. xrguo@njmu.edu.cn.

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) functions to dissipate energy in response to cold
exposure or overfeeding. Counteracting obesity has been extensively considered as
a promising target. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an important class of
pervasive genes involved in a variety of biological functions. However, the
potential biological functions of lncRNAs during mouse brown fat cell
differentiation have not been fully understood. Here, we performed lncRNA and
mRNA expression profile analysis using microarray technology and identified 1064 
lncRNAs with differential expression (fold change| =4, p = 0.01) on day 0 and day
8 during differentiation. Furthermore, candidate lncRNAs were characterized by
comprehensive examination of their genomic context, gene ontology (GO) enrichment
of their associated protein-coding genes and pathway analysis. We identified
three lncRNAs (Gm15051, Tmem189 and Cebpd) associated with their flanking coding 
genes (Hoxa1, C/EBPß and C/EBPd), which participated in adipose commitment.
Collectively, our findings indicated lncRNAs are involved in mouse BAT
development and provide potential targets for obesity therapy.

PMID: 25773316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. FEBS Lett. 2015 Apr 13;589(9):1018-25. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.03.004. Epub
2015 Mar 12.

ROCK2 promotes HCC proliferation by CEBPD inhibition through
phospho-GSK3ß/ß-catenin signaling.

Li M(1), Zhou W(2), Yuan R(3), Chen L(1), Liu T(3), Huang D(1), Hao L(4), Xie
Y(5), Shao J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330006, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Second
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, China; Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Jiangxi Provincial Cancer Hospital, Nanchang 330029,
China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330006, China; Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center 
of Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang 330006, China. (4)Jiangxi Province Key
Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang 330006, China. (5)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Ganzhou People's Hospital, Jiangxi Province 34100 China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330006, China; Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center 
of Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang 330006, China; Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory
of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang 330006, China. Electronic address:
shao5022@163.com.

Rho-associated kinase 2 (Rock2) is known to promote tumorigenesis in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (CEBPD)
functions as a tumor suppressor. In this study, we found that the expression of
Rock2 and CEBPD are inversely correlated. Knockdown of Rock2 increased CEBPD
expression and inhibited the proliferation of HCC cells in vitro and in vivo.
Mechanistically, we found that Rock2 regulates CEBPD expression through the
p-GSK3ß/ß-catenin pathway. Taken together, we identified a novel
Rock2-p-GSK3ß/ß-catenin-CEBPD regulatory circuitry, the dysfunction of which may 
contribute to the tumorigenic characteristic of HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Genomics. 2015 Feb 8;16:64. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1253-6.

Transcriptome analysis of northern elephant seal (Mirounga angustirostris) muscle
tissue provides a novel molecular resource and physiological insights.

Khudyakov JI(1), Preeyanon L(2), Champagne CD(3), Ortiz RM(4), Crocker DE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sonoma State University, 1801 E Cotati Ave, Rohnert
Park, CA, 94928, USA. khudyako@sonoma.edu. (2)Michigan State University,
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 567 Wilson Rd, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.
preeyano@msu.edu. (3)National Marine Mammal Foundation, Conservation and
Biological Research Program, 224 0Shelter Island Drive, San Diego, CA, 92106,
USA. cory.champagne@nmmfoundation.org. (4)University of California, Merced,
School of Natural Sciences, 5200 North Lake Rd, Merced, CA, 95343, USA.
rortiz@ucmerced.edu. (5)Department of Biology, Sonoma State University, 1801 E
Cotati Ave, Rohnert Park, CA, 94928, USA. crocker@sonoma.edu.

BACKGROUND: The northern elephant seal, Mirounga angustirostris, is a valuable
animal model of fasting adaptation and hypoxic stress tolerance. However, no
reference sequence is currently available for this and many other marine mammal
study systems, hindering molecular understanding of marine adaptations and unique
physiology.
RESULTS: We sequenced a transcriptome of M. angustirostris derived from muscle
sampled during an acute stress challenge experiment to identify species-specific 
markers of stress axis activation and recovery. De novo assembly generated
164,966 contigs and a total of 522,699 transcripts, of which 68.70% were
annotated using mouse, human, and domestic dog reference protein sequences. To
reduce transcript redundancy, we removed highly similar isoforms in large gene
families and produced a filtered assembly containing 336,657 transcripts. We
found that a large number of annotated genes are associated with metabolic
signaling, immune and stress responses, and muscle function. Preliminary
differential expression analysis suggests a limited transcriptional response to
acute stress involving alterations in metabolic and immune pathways and muscle
tissue maintenance, potentially driven by early response transcription factors
such as Cebpd.
CONCLUSIONS: We present the first reference sequence for Mirounga angustirostris 
produced by RNA sequencing of muscle tissue and cloud-based de novo transcriptome
assembly. We annotated 395,102 transcripts, some of which may be novel isoforms, 
and have identified thousands of genes involved in key physiological processes.
This resource provides elephant seal-specific gene sequences, complementing
existing metabolite and protein expression studies and enabling future work on
molecular pathways regulating adaptations such as fasting, hypoxia, and
environmental stress responses in marine mammals.

PMCID: PMC4328371
PMID: 25758323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biomed Res. 2015;36(1):21-9. doi: 10.2220/biomedres.36.21.

Regulation of mouse chondrocyte differentiation by CCAAT/enhancer-binding
proteins.

Okuma T(1), Hirata M, Yano F, Mori D, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI, Tanaka S, Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) ß regulates chondrocyte differentiaion and
proliferation during endochondral ossification. However, expression and function 
of other C/EBP family members in chondrocytes have not been fully understood. To 
understand the comprehensive regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by C/EBPs,
we initially examined their expression levels. Among four members (C/EBPa,
C/EBPß, C/EBPd and C/EBPe) with transactivation domain, expression of Cebpb and
Cebpd was abundant compared to Cebpa, while Cebpe was hardly expressed in mouse
isolated chondrocytes. Doxycycline (DOX)-inducible overexpression of each of the 
three C/EBPs (C/EBPa, C/EBPß and C/EBPd) in ATDC5 cells suppressed expressions of
early differentiation markers including Col2a1, aggrecan and Sox9, enhanced those
of late differentiation markers including Mmp13, Vegfa and Col10a1, and
decelerated cell proliferation, indicating their overlapped functions in
chondrocytes. In contrast, DOX-inducible overexpression of A-CEBP, which exerts a
dominant-negative effect against all C/EBPs, increased expressions of early
differentiation markers and decreased those of late differentiation markers.
Finally, microarray and gene ontology analyses showed that A-CEBP altered many
genes related with various events or tissues such as skeletal development,
cartilage, cell cycle, inflammation and apoptosis. In conclusion, C/EBPa, C/EBPß 
and C/EBPd regulate proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and
possibly is involved with apoptosis and inflammation. C/EBPs may play a variety
of roles in the homeostasis of joint cartilage under physiological and
pathological conditions.

PMID: 25749148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 3;10(3):e0118517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118517.
eCollection 2015.

Serum-free and xenobiotic-free preservation of cultured human limbal epithelial
cells.

Utheim O(1), Islam R(2), Lyberg T(3), Roald B(4), Eidet JR(3), de la Paz MF(5),
Dartt DA(6), Raeder S(7), Utheim TP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
Department of Ophthalmology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway. (3)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway. (4)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Institut Universitari Barraquer, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain. (6)Schepens Eye Research Institute / Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, 
Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of
America. (7)The Norwegian Dry Eye Clinic, Oslo/Tromsoe, Norway. (8)Department of 
Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Department of
Ophthalmology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Department of Oral
Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

AIM/PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: To develop a one-week storage method, without serum and
xenobiotics, that would maintain cell viability, morphology, and phenotype of
cultured human limbal epithelial sheets.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human limbal explants were cultured on intact human
amniotic membranes for two weeks. The sheets were stored in a hermetically sealed
container at 23°C in either a serum-free medium with selected animal
serum-derived compounds (Quantum 286) or a xenobiotic-free medium (Minimal
Essential Medium) for 4 and 7 days. Stored and non-stored cultures were analyzed 
for cell viability, amniotic membrane and epithelial sheet thickness, and a panel
of immunohistochemical markers for immature cells (<U+0394>Np63a, p63, Bmi-1, C/EBP<U+2202>,
ABCG2 and K19), differentiated cells (K3 and Cx43), proliferation (PCNA), and
apoptosis (Caspase-3).
RESULTS: The cell viability of the cultures was 98 ± 1% and remained high after
storage. Mean central thickness of non-stored limbal epithelial sheets was 23 ± 3
µm, and no substantial loss of cells was observed after storage. The non-stored
epithelial sheets expressed a predominantly immature phenotype with <U+0394>Np63a
positivity of more than 3% in 9 of 13 cultures. After storage, the expression of 
ABCG2 and C/EBP<U+2202> was reduced for the 7 day Quantum 286-storage group; (P = 0.04),
and Bmi-1 was reduced after 4 day Quantum 286-storage; (P = 0.02). No other
markers varied significantly. The expression of differentiation markers was
unrelated to the thickness of the epithelia and amniotic membrane, apart from
ABCG2, which correlated negatively with thickness of limbal epithelia (R = -0.69,
P = 0.01) and <U+0394>Np63a, which correlated negatively with amniotic membrane
thickness (R = -0.59, P = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: Limbal epithelial cells cultured from explants on amniotic membrane
can be stored at 23°C in both serum-free and xenobiotic-free media, with
sustained cell viability, ultrastructure, and <U+0394>Np63a-positivity after both 4 and 
7 days.

PMCID: PMC4348416
PMID: 25734654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genetika. 2014 Aug;50(8):986-95.

[Somatic genome variations in vascular tissues and peripheral blood leukocytes in
patients with atherosclerosis].

[Article in Russian]

Sleptsov AA, Nazarenko MS, Lebedev IN, Skriabin NA, Frolov AV, Popov VA,
Barbarash LS, Puzyrev VP.

The first data on the existence of multiple genomic rearrangements, such as copy 
number variation (CNV) and copy neutral loss of heterozygosity, in vascular
tissues and peripheral blood leukocytes from patients with atherosclerosis, are
presented. Compared to internal mammary arteries and peripheral blood leukocytes,
right coronary arteries in the atherosclerotic plaque area presented with a
higher CNV length and number of genes located in their vicinity. In each of the
patients, 6-16% of CNVs were common to the three types of tissues examined.
Therefore, most of the copy number variations in the tissues affected by
atherosclerosis (from 68 to 91% in each of the patients) were of somatic origin. 
The gains in 3p21.31 (CACNA2D2), 7q32.1 (FLNC), 19p13.3 (C19orf29, PIP5K1C), and 
21q22.3 (COL6A1) were detected in vascular tissues but not in peripheral blood
leukocytes. Moreover, the gain in 7p15.2 (SKAP2), detected in the patients with
atherosclerosis, did not overlap with any CNV regions currently reported in The
Database of Genomic Variants. The loss of heterozygosity in 12 out of 13
chromosomal regions was copy neutral and covered tumor suppressor genes (SFRP1,
CEBPD, RB1CC1, DIRAS3, TUSC3, and ZDHHC2).

PMID: 25731028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Kidney Int. 2015 Aug;88(2):262-75. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.21. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

Inflammation and hypoxia linked to renal injury by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
d.

Yamaguchi J(1), Tanaka T(1), Eto N(2), Nangaku M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, The University of Tokyo Graduate
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2015 Aug;88(2):213-5.

Tubulointerstitial hypoxia plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of kidney
injury, and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 is a master regulator of cellular
adaptation to hypoxia. Aside from oxygen molecules, factors that modify HIF-1
expression and functional operation remain obscure. Therefore, we sought to
identify novel HIF-1-regulating genes in kidney. A short-hairpin RNA library
consisting of 150 hypoxia-inducible genes was derived from a microarray analysis 
of the rat renal artery stenosis model screened for the effect on HIF-1 response.
We report that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d (CEBPD), a transcription factor
and inflammatory response gene, is a novel HIF-1 regulator in kidney. CEBPD was
induced in the nuclei of tubular epithelial cells in both acute and chronic
hypoxic kidneys. In turn, CEBPD induction augmented HIF-1a expression and its
transcriptional activity. Mechanistically, CEBPD directly bound to the HIF-1a
promoter and enhanced its transcription. Notably, CEBPD was rapidly induced by
inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1ß in a nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-dependent manner,
which not only increased HIF-1a expression during hypoxia, but was also
indispensable for the non-hypoxic induction of HIF-1a. Thus our study provides
novel insight into HIF-1 regulation in tubular epithelial cells and offers a
potential hypoxia and inflammation link relevant in both acute and chronic kidney
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4526770
PMID: 25692954  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Biomed Sci. 2015 Jan 16;22:6. doi: 10.1186/s12929-014-0110-2.

Biological roles of CCAAT/Enhancer-binding protein delta during inflammation.

Ko CY(1,)(2), Chang WC(3), Wang JM(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Program for Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of Medical Science and
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan.
ko680108@tmu.edu.tw. (2)Center for Neurotrauma and Neuroregeneration, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. ko680108@tmu.edu.tw. (3)Graduate
Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. wcchang@tmu.edu.tw. (4)Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, 11031, Taiwan. 
yumingw@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (5)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal
Transduction, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, 70101, Taiwan. yumingw@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (6)Infectious
Disease and Signaling Research Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
70101, Taiwan. yumingw@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (7)Center of Molecular Inflammation,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 70101, Taiwan. yumingw@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (CEBPD) belongs to the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family, and these proteins function as
transcription factors in many biological processes, including cell
differentiation, motility, growth arrest, proliferation, cell death, metabolism
and immune responses. The functional diversity of CEBPD depends, in part, on the 
cell type and cellular context, which indicates that CEBPD could interpret a
variety of cues to adjust cellular responses in specific situations. Here, we
review the regulation of the CEBPD gene and its function in response to
inflammatory stimuli. We also address its effects in inflammation-related
diseases through a discussion of its recently discovered downstream targets.
Regarding to the previous discoveries and new insights in inflammation-associated
diseases, suggesting CEBPD could also be a central gene in inflammation.
Importantly, the results of this study indicate that the investigation of CEBPD
could open a new avenue to help better understand the inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC4318212
PMID: 25591788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Mar;36(3):1356-68. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.11.020. Epub 2014 Dec 4.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta/miR135a/thrombospondin 1 axis mediates
PGE2-induced angiogenesis in Alzheimer's disease.

Ko CY(1), Chu YY(2), Narumiya S(3), Chi JY(4), Furuyashiki T(3), Aoki T(3), Wang 
SM(4), Chang WC(5), Wang JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Ph.D. Program for Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of Medical Science and
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Center for Neurotrauma and
Neuroregeneration, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute of
Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), 
Kyoto, Japan. (4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan. (5)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Institute of
Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan; Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Infectious Disease and Signaling
Research Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. Electronic
address: yumingw@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

In Alzheimer's disease (AD), large populations of endothelial cells undergo
angiogenesis due to brain hypoxia and inflammation. Substantial evidence from
epidemiologic, pathologic, and clinical reports suggests that vascular factors
are critical for the pathogenesis of AD. However, the precise mechanistic
correlation between inflammation and angiogenesis in AD has not been well
elucidated. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), a key factor of the inflammatory response,
has been known to promote angiogenesis. In this study, we demonstrated that PGE2 
acts through EP4 receptor and protein kinase A to modulate CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein delta (CEBPD) abundance in astrocytes. Attenuated vessel formation was
observed in the brains of AppTg/Cebpd(-/-) mice. We showed that miR135a was
responsive to the induction of CEBPD and further negatively regulated
thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) transcription by directly targeting its 3'-untranslated 
region (3'UTR) in astrocytes. Furthermore, conditioned media from astrocytes
expressing miR135a promoted Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)
tube-like formation, which correlated with the effects of PGE2 on angiogenesis.
Our results indicated that CEBPD contributes to the repression of THBS1
transcription by activating the expression of miR135a in astrocytes following
PGE2 treatment. We provided new evidence that astrocytic CEBPD increases
angiogenesis during AD pathogenesis. This discovery supports the negative
influence of CEBPD activation in astrocytes with respect to AD pathogenesis and
implies that the CEBPD/miR135a/THBS1 axis could be a therapeutic target of AD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25554493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. BMC Genomics. 2014 Dec 18;15:1134. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1134.

Discovery of osmotic sensitive transcription factors in fish intestine via a
transcriptomic approach.

Wong MK(1), Ozaki H, Suzuki Y, Iwasaki W, Takei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. martywong@aori.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Teleost intestine is crucial for seawater acclimation by sensing
osmolality of imbibed seawater and regulating drinking and water/ion absorption. 
Regulatory genes for transforming intestinal function have not been identified. A
transcriptomic approach was used to search for such genes in the intestine of
euryhaline medaka.
RESULTS: Quantitative RNA-seq by Illumina Hi-Seq Sequencing method was performed 
to analyze intestinal gene expression 0 h, 1 h, 3 h, 1 d, and 7 d after seawater 
transfer. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment results showed that cell adhesion, signal
transduction, and protein phosphorylation gene categories were augmented soon
after transfer, indicating a rapid reorganization of cellular components and
functions. Among >50 transiently up-regulated transcription factors selected via 
co-expression correlation and GO selection, five transcription factors, including
CEBPB and CEBPD, were confirmed by quantitative PCR to be specific to
hyperosmotic stress, while others were also up-regulated after freshwater control
transfer, including some well-known osmotic-stress transcription factors such as 
SGK1 and TSC22D3/Ostf1. Protein interaction networks suggest a high degree of
overlapping among the signaling of transcription factors that respond to osmotic 
and general stresses, which sheds light on the interpretation of their roles
during hyperosmotic stress and emergency.
CONCLUSIONS: Since cortisol is an important hormone for seawater acclimation as
well as for general stress in teleosts, emergency and osmotic challenges could
have been evolved in parallel and resulted in the overlapped signaling networks. 
Our results revealed important interactions among transcription factors and offer
a multifactorial perspective of genes involved in seawater acclimation.

PMCID: PMC4377849
PMID: 25520040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Exp Lung Res. 2015 Mar;41(2):74-83. doi: 10.3109/01902148.2014.971472. Epub 2014 
Dec 16.

Comprehensive analysis of genes, pathways, and TFs in nonsmoking Taiwan females
with lung cancer.

Lv M(1), Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School
of Medicine , Shanghai , People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular mechanism of lung
cancer among nonsmoking Taiwan females.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: By using the GSE19804 microarray data accessible from Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, we identified differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between nonsmoking female lung cancer patients and healthy controls
(!logFC! >1.5 and p-value < 0.05). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway and Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed using Database
for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). The Search Tool
for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) tool was utilized to build a
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, followed by the construction of a
transcriptional regulatory network based on Transcription factor (TRANSFAC)
database.
RESULTS: As a result, 320 DEGs were identified between nonsmoking female patients
with lung cancer and healthy controls. Pathway enrichment analysis showed
significantly enriched pathways such as extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor
interaction and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling
pathway, both of which were enriched with genes COL11A1 (encoding collagen XI
alpha-1 chain protein), COL1A1, cluster of differentiation 36(CD36). GO
enrichment analysis found that DEGs were significantly related to chemotaxis,
vasculature development and cell adhesion GO terms. IL-6 was the node of the PPI 
network. Critical transcription factors (TFs) including CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein delta (CEBPD) and Rel/NF-<U+03BA>B were also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed that ECM-receptor interaction, PPAR signaling
pathways, and important biomolecules including COL11A1, COL1A1, CD36, IL-6,
CEBPD, and Rel/NF-<U+03BA>B might be involved in lung cancer. This study might pave the 
way for the development and application of targeted therapeutics of lung cancer
irrelevant to smoking.

PMID: 25514196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):1849-57. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2787-y. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

A comprehensive analysis of candidate genes and pathways in pancreatic cancer.

Liu J(1), Li J, Li H, Li A, Liu B, Han L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of general surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, No.23, Youzheng Street, Nangang District, Harbin, 150001, China.

Retraction in
    Liu J, Li J, Li H, Li A, Liu B, Han L. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug;36(9):7327.

The study aimed to dissect the molecular mechanism of pancreatic cancer by a
range of bioinformatics approaches. Three microarray datasets (GSE32676,
GSE21654, and GSE14245) were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with logarithm of fold change (|logFC|)
>0.585 and p value <0.05 were identified between pancreatic cancer samples and
normal controls. Transcription factors (TFs) were selected from the DEGs based on
TRASFAC database. Gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
pathway enrichment analyses were performed for the DEGs using The Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (p value <0.05), followed by
construction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) network using Search Tool for
the Retrieval of Interacting Genes software. Latent pathway identification
analysis was applied to analyze the DEGs-related pathways crosstalk and the
pathways with high weight value were included in the pathway crosstalk network
using Cytoscape. Sixty-five DEGs were screened out. CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein delta (CEBPD), FBJ osteosarcoma oncogene B (FOSB), Stratifin (SFN),
Krüppel-like factor 5 (KLF5), Pentraxin 3 (PTX3), and nuclear receptor subfamily 
4, group A, member 3 (NR4A3) were important TFs. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) was the hub
node of the PPI network. DEGs were significantly enriched in NOD-like receptor
signaling pathway which was primarily interacted with inflammation and immune
related pathways (cytosolic DNA-sensing, hematopoietic cell lineage, intestinal
immune network for IgA production and chemokine pathways). The study suggested
CEBPD, FOSB, SFN, KLF5, PTX3, NR4A3, IL-6, and NOD-like receptor pathways were
involved in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 25409614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Cells. 2015 Feb;20(2):121-34. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12201. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

ABLIM1 splicing is abnormal in skeletal muscle of patients with DM1 and regulated
by MBNL, CELF and PTBP1.

Ohsawa N(1), Koebis M, Mitsuhashi H, Nishino I, Ishiura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an RNA-mediated disorder characterized by
muscle weakness, cardiac defects and multiple symptoms and is caused by expanded 
CTG repeats within the 3' untranslated region of the DMPK gene. In this study, we
found abnormal splicing of actin-binding LIM protein 1 (ABLIM1) in skeletal
muscles of patients with DM1 and a DM1 mouse model (HSA(LR) ). An exon 11
inclusion isoform is expressed in skeletal muscle and heart of non-DM1
individuals, but not in skeletal muscle of patients with DM1 or other adult human
tissues. Moreover, we determined that ABLIM1 splicing is regulated by several
splice factors, including MBNL family proteins, CELF1, 2 and 6, and PTBP1, using 
a cellular splicing assay. MBNL proteins promoted the inclusion of ABLIM1 exon
11, but other proteins and expanded CUG repeats repressed exon 11 of ABLIM1. This
result is consistent with the hypothesis that MBNL proteins are trapped by
expanded CUG repeats and inactivated in DM1 and that CELF1 is activated in DM1.
However, activation of PTBP1 has not been reported in DM1. Our results suggest
that the exon 11 inclusion isoform of ABLIM1 may have a muscle-specific function,
and its abnormal splicing could be related to muscle symptoms of DM1.

© 2014 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2014 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25403273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell. 2014 Oct 9;159(2):402-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.021.

Identification of causal genetic drivers of human disease through systems-level
analysis of regulatory networks.

Chen JC(1), Alvarez MJ(2), Talos F(3), Dhruv H(4), Rieckhof GE(5), Iyer A(5),
Diefes KL(6), Aldape K(7), Berens M(4), Shen MM(8), Califano A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas
Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY
10032, USA; Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, 701 West
168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. (2)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia
University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, 1130 Saint
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA. (3)Department of Genetics and
Development, Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Cancer & Cell Biology Division, TGen, 445N 5th Street, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.
(5)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas
Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, University of Texas, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(7)Adult Brain Tumor Centre, Ontario Cancer Institute, University of Toronto,
610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada. (8)Department of Systems
Biology, Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032,
USA; Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, 701 West 168th 
Street, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Medicine, Columbia University, 630
West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Urology, Herbert Irving
Pavilion, Columbia University, 161 Fort Washington Avenue, New York, NY 10032,
USA; Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 1130 Saint 
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA. (9)Department of Systems Biology,
Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA; Center 
for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, 1130 Saint
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Biochemistry & Molecular Biophysics, and Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia 
University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA; Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 1130 Saint Nicholas Avenue, New
York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: califano@c2b2.columbia.edu.

Identification of driver mutations in human diseases is often limited by cohort
size and availability of appropriate statistical models. We propose a framework
for the systematic discovery of genetic alterations that are causal determinants 
of disease, by prioritizing genes upstream of functional disease drivers, within 
regulatory networks inferred de novo from experimental data. We tested this
framework by identifying the genetic determinants of the mesenchymal subtype of
glioblastoma. Our analysis uncovered KLHL9 deletions as upstream activators of
two previously established master regulators of the subtype, C/EBPß and C/EBPd.
Rescue of KLHL9 expression induced proteasomal degradation of C/EBP proteins,
abrogated the mesenchymal signature, and reduced tumor viability in vitro and in 
vivo. Deletions of KLHL9 were confirmed in > 50% of mesenchymal cases in an
independent cohort, thus representing the most frequent genetic determinant of
the subtype. The method generalized to study other human diseases, including
breast cancer and Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4194029
PMID: 25303533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 May;52(5):543-53. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0109OC.

Glucocorticoid genes and the developmental origins of asthma susceptibility and
treatment response.

Sharma S(1), Kho AT, Chhabra D, Qiu W, Gaedigk R, Vyhlidal CA, Leeder JS,
Barraza-Villarreal A, London SJ, Gilliland F, Raby BA, Weiss ST, Tantisira KG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Channing Division of Network Medicine and.

Antenatal corticosteroids enhance lung maturation. However, the importance of
glucocorticoid genes on early lung development, asthma susceptibility, and
treatment response remains unknown. We investigated whether glucocorticoid genes 
are important during lung development and their role in asthma susceptibility and
treatment response. We identified genes that were differentially expressed by
corticosteroids in two of three genomic datasets: lymphoblastoid cell lines of
participants in the Childhood Asthma Management Program, a glucocorticoid
chromatin immunoprecipitation/RNA sequencing experiment, or a murine model; these
genes made up the glucocorticoid gene set (GCGS). Using gene expression profiles 
from 38 human fetal lungs and C57BL/6J murine fetal lungs, we identified
developmental genes that were in the top 5% of genes contributing to the top
three principal components (PCs) most highly associated with post-conceptional
age. Glucocorticoid genes that were enriched in this set of developmental genes
were then included in the developmental glucocorticoid gene set (DGGS). We then
investigated whether glucocorticoid genes are important during lung development, 
and their role in asthma susceptibility and treatment response. A total of 232
genes were included in the GCGS. Analysis of gene expression demonstrated that
glucocorticoid genes were enriched in lung development (P = 7.02 × 10(-26)). The 
developmental GCGS was enriched for genes that were differentially expressed
between subjects with asthma and control subjects (P = 4.26 × 10(-3)) and were
enriched after treatment of subjects with asthma with inhaled corticosteroids (P 
< 2.72 × 10(-4)). Our results show that glucocorticoid genes are overrepresented 
among genes implicated in fetal lung development. These genes influence asthma
susceptibility and treatment response, suggesting their involvement in the early 
ontogeny of asthma.

PMCID: PMC4491138 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25192440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 8;289(32):22128-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.551242. Epub 2014
Jun 25.

CD1d-mediated presentation of endogenous lipid antigens by adipocytes requires
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein.

Rakhshandehroo M(1), Gijzel SM(1), Siersbæk R(2), Broekema MF(1), de Haar C(3),
Schipper HS(4), Boes M(3), Mandrup S(2), Kalkhoven E(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine and. (2)the 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark,
DK-5230 Odense, Denmark. (3)the Department of Pediatric Immunology, University
Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CG Utrecht, the Netherlands and. (4)From the
Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine and the Department of
Pediatric Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CG Utrecht, the
Netherlands and. (5)From the Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular
Medicine and e.kalkhoven@umcutrecht.nl.

Obesity-induced adipose tissue (AT) dysfunction results in a chronic low-grade
inflammation that predisposes to the development of insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes. During the development of obesity, the AT-resident immune cell profile 
alters to create a pro-inflammatory state. Very recently, CD1d-restricted
invariant (i) natural killer T (NKT) cells, a unique subset of lymphocytes that
are reactive to so called lipid antigens, were implicated in AT homeostasis.
Interestingly, recent data also suggest that human and mouse adipocytes can
present such lipid antigens to iNKT cells in a CD1d-dependent fashion, but little
is known about the lipid antigen presentation machinery in adipocytes. Here we
show that CD1d, as well as the lipid antigen loading machinery genes pro-saposin 
(Psap), Niemann Pick type C2 (Npc2), a-galactosidase (Gla), are up-regulated in
early adipogenesis, and are transcriptionally controlled by
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-ß and -d. Moreover, adipocyte-induced Th1 
and Th2 cytokine release by iNKT cells also occurred in the absence of exogenous 
ligands, suggesting the display of endogenous lipid antigen-D1d complexes by
3T3-L1 adipocytes. Furthermore, we identified microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein, which we show is also under the transcriptional regulation of C/EBPß and
-d, as a novel player in the presentation of endogenous lipid antigens by
adipocytes. Overall, our findings indicate that adipocytes can function as
non-professional lipid antigen presenting cells, which may present an important
aspect of adipocyte-immune cell communication in the regulation of whole body
energy metabolism and immune homeostasis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4139226
PMID: 24966328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Genomics. 2014 May 31;15:413. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-413.

Longissimus dorsi transcriptome analysis of purebred and crossbred Iberian pigs
differing in muscle characteristics.

Ovilo C(1), Benítez R, Fernández A, Núñez Y, Ayuso M, Fernández AI, Rodríguez C, 
Isabel B, Rey AI, López-Bote C, Silió L.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto Mejora Genética Animal, INIA, Ctra Coruña km 7,5, Madrid 28040, Spain.
ovilo@inia.es.

BACKGROUND: The two main genetic types in Iberian pig production show important
phenotypic differences in growth, fattening and tissue composition since early
developmental stages. The objective of this work was the evaluation of muscle
transcriptome profile in piglets of both genetic types, in order to identify
genes, pathways and regulatory factors responsible for their phenotypic
differences. Contemporary families coming from pure Iberian pigs (IB) or from
crossing with Duroc boars (DU×IB) were generated. Piglets (14 from each genetic
type) were slaughtered at weaning (28 days) and longissimus dorsi was sampled for
composition and gene expression studies. RNA was obtained and hybridized to
Affymetrix Porcine Genechip expression arrays.
RESULTS: Loin muscle chemical composition showed significant differences between 
genetic types in intramuscular fat content (6.1% vs. 4.3% in IB and DUxIB
animals, respectively, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) and in saturated (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.019) and
monounsaturated fatty acid proportions (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044). The statistical analysis of
gene expression data allowed the identification of 256 differentially expressed
(DE) genes between genetic types (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.10), 102 upregulated in IB and 154
upregulated in DU×IB. Transcript differences were validated for a subset of DE
genes by qPCR. We observed alteration in biological functions related to
extracellular matrix function and organization, cellular adhesion, muscle growth,
lipid metabolism and proteolysis. Candidate genes with known effects on muscle
growth were found among the DE genes upregulated in DU×IB. Genes related to lipid
metabolism and proteolysis were found among those upregulated in IB. Regulatory
factors (RF) potentially involved in the expression differences were identified
by calculating the regulatory impact factors. Twenty-nine RF were found, some of 
them with known relationship with tissue development (MSTN, SIX4, IRX3),
adipogenesis (CEBPD, PPARGC1B), or extracellular matrix processes (MAX, MXI1).
Correlation among the expression of these RF and DE genes show relevant
differences between genetic types.
CONCLUSION: These results provide valuable information about genetic mechanisms
determining the phenotypic differences on growth and meat quality between the
genetic types studied, mainly related to the development and function of the
extracellular matrix and also to some metabolic processes as proteolysis and
lipid metabolism. Transcription factors and regulatory mechanisms are proposed
for these altered biological functions.

PMCID: PMC4070551
PMID: 24885501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Leuk Res. 2014 Jul;38(7):850-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.04.013. Epub 2014 May
9.

Comparison of promoter DNA methylation and expression levels of genes encoding
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins in AML patients.

Musialik E(1), Bujko M(2), Kober P(3), Grygorowicz MA(4), Libura M(5),
Przestrzelska M(6), Juszczynski P(7), Borg K(8), Florek I(9), Jakóbczyk M(10),
Baranowska A(11), Siedlecki JA(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic
address: musialik.ewa@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular and Translational
Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of
Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: mbujko@coi.waw.pl. (3)Department of
Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer
Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
pkober@coi.waw.pl. (4)Department of Immunology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial
Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
m.a.grygorowicz@gmail.com. (5)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Internal
Diseases, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
marta.libura@gmail.com. (6)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Internal
Diseases, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
m.przest@autograf.pl. (7)Department of Diagnostic Hematology, Institute of
Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
pjuszczynski@ihit.waw.pl. (8)Department of Diagnostic Hematology, Institute of
Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
kborg@ihit.waw.pl. (9)Department of Hematology, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, 
Poland. Electronic address: iflorek@gmail.com. (10)Department of Hematology,
Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland. Electronic address: jakobcz@tlen.pl.
(11)Neuroortopedic Department, Marian Weiss Memorial Mazowia Rehabilitation
Center, Konstancin-Jeziorna, Poland. Electronic address:
alicja.baranowska@onet.eu. (12)Department of Molecular and Translational
Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of
Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: jas@coi.waw.pl.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (CEBPs) are transcription factors regulating
myeloid differentiation. Disturbances of their expression may contribute to
leukemogenesis. In this study we compared promoter methylation and expression
levels of selected CEBP genes in a group of 78 AML patients, normal bone marrow
and hematopoietic precursor cells. CEBPA, CEBPD and CEBPE promoter methylation
levels were elevated in 37%, 35.5% and 56.7% of patients. No CEBPZ(DDIT3)
methylation was observed. An inverse relationship between CEBPA and CEBPD DNA
methylation and expression levels was observed. AML cytogenetic risk groups and
patients with particular translocation are characterized by distinct
methylation/expression profile of CEBPs encoding genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24878001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 8;5:e1220. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.106.

The combination of the prodrugs perforin-CEBPD and perforin-granzyme B
efficiently enhances the activation of caspase signaling and kills prostate
cancer.

Chuang CH(1), Wang WJ(2), Li CF(3), Ko CY(4), Chou YH(5), Chuu CP(6), Cheng
TL(1), Wang JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Environmental Biology, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Basic Medical Science, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (3)1] Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei
Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan [2] National Institute of Cancer Research,
National Health Research Institutes, Tainan, Taiwan [3] Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)1] PhD Program for 
Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Center for Neurotrauma and
Neuroregeneration, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (6)Institute of
Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli,
Taiwan. (7)1] Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan [2] 
Infectious Disease and Signaling Research Center, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan [3] Center of Molecular Inflammation, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan [4] Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 

The survival of prostate cancer (PrCa) patients is associated with the transition
to hormone-independent tumor growth and metastasis. Clinically, the dysregulation
of androgen action has been associated with the formation of PrCa and the outcome
of androgen deprivation therapy in PrCa. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta
(CEBPD) is a transcription factor that has been reported to act as an oncogene or
tumor suppressor, depending on the extra- and intracellular environments
following tumorigenesis. We found that androgen can activate CEBPD transcription 
by direct binding of the androgen receptor (AR) to the CEBPD promoter region.
Increases of suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) and enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) attenuated the androgen-induced transcription of CEBPD. Importantly, the
increases in E2F1, SUZ12 and EZH2 as well as the inactivation of CEBPD were
associated with the clinicopathological variables and survival of PrCa patients. 
We revealed that caspase 8 (CASP8), an apoptotic initiator, is responsive to
CEBPD induction. Reporter and in vivo DNA-binding assays revealed that CEBPD
directly binds to and activates CASP8 reporter activity. A prodrug system was
developed for therapeutic application in AR-independent or androgen-insensitive
PrCa to avoid the epigenetic effects on the suppression of CEBPD expression. Our 
results showed that the combination of a perforin (PF)-CEBPD prodrug (which
increases the level of procaspase-8) and a PF-granzyme B prodrug (which activates
CASP8 and caspase 3 (CASP3)) showed an additive effect in triggering the
apoptotic pathway and enhancing apoptosis in PrCa cells.

PMCID: PMC4047860
PMID: 24810056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;51(1):370-82. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8714-9. Epub 2014
May 1.

Increase of zinc finger protein 179 in response to CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
delta conferring an antiapoptotic effect in astrocytes of Alzheimer's disease.

Wang SM(1), Lee YC, Ko CY, Lai MD, Lin DY, Pao PC, Chi JY, Hsiao YW, Liu TL, Wang
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, 701, Taiwan.

Reactive astrogliosis is a cellular manifestation of neuroinflammation and occurs
in response to all forms and severities of the central nervous system (CNS)'s
injury and disease. Both astroglial proliferation and antiapoptotic processes are
aspects of astrogliosis. However, the underlying mechanism of this response
remains poorly understood. In addition, little is known about why activated
astrocytes are more resistant to stress and inflammation. CCAAT/enhancer binding 
protein delta (CEBPD) is a transcription factor found in activated astrocytes
that surround ß-amyloid plaques. In this study, we found that astrocytes
activation was attenuated in the cortex and hippocampus of APPswe/PS1 E9
(AppTg)/Cebpd (-/-)mice. Furthermore, an increase in apoptotic astrocytes was
observed in AppTg/Cebpd (-/-)mice, suggesting that CEBPD plays a functional role 
in enhancing the antiapoptotic ability of astrocytes. We found that Zinc Finger
Protein 179 (ZNF179) was a CEBPD-regulated gene that played an antiapoptotic, but
not proliferative, role in astrocytes. The transcriptions of the proapoptotic
genes, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) and BCL2-interacting
killer (BIK), were suppressed by ZNF179 via its interaction with the
promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) protein in astrocytes. This study
provides the first evidence that ZNF179, PLZF, IGFBP3, and BIK contributed to the
novel CEBPD-induced antiapoptotic feature of astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC4309906
PMID: 24788683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 18;9(4):e94967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094967. eCollection
2014.

C/EBPd deficiency sensitizes mice to ionizing radiation-induced hematopoietic and
intestinal injury.

Pawar SA(1), Shao L(1), Chang J(1), Wang W(1), Pathak R(1), Zhu X(1), Wang J(1), 
Hendrickson H(2), Boerma M(1), Sterneck E(3), Zhou D(1), Hauer-Jensen M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States
of America. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States of America. (3)Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, United States of
America. (4)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States
of America; Surgical Service, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little
Rock, Arkansas, United States of America.

Knowledge of the mechanisms involved in the radiation response is critical for
developing interventions to mitigate radiation-induced injury to normal tissues. 
Exposure to radiation leads to increased oxidative stress, DNA-damage, genomic
instability and inflammation. The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein delta (Cebpd; C/EBPd is implicated in regulation of these same processes,
but its role in radiation response is not known. We investigated the role of
C/EBPd in radiation-induced hematopoietic and intestinal injury using a Cebpd
knockout mouse model. Cebpd-/- mice showed increased lethality at 7.4 and 8.5 Gy 
total-body irradiation (TBI), compared to Cebpd+/+ mice. Two weeks after a 6 Gy
dose of TBI, Cebpd-/- mice showed decreased recovery of white blood cells,
neutrophils, platelets, myeloid cells and bone marrow mononuclear cells,
decreased colony-forming ability of bone marrow progenitor cells, and increased
apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells compared to Cebpd+/+
controls. Cebpd-/- mice exhibited a significant dose-dependent decrease in
intestinal crypt survival and in plasma citrulline levels compared to Cebpd+/+
mice after exposure to radiation. This was accompanied by significantly decreased
expression of <U+03B3>-H2AX in Cebpd-/- intestinal crypts and villi at 1 h post-TBI,
increased mitotic index at 24 h post-TBI, and increase in apoptosis in intestinal
crypts and stromal cells of Cebpd-/- compared to Cebpd+/+ mice at 4 h
post-irradiation. This study uncovers a novel biological function for C/EBPd in
promoting the response to radiation-induced DNA-damage and in protecting
hematopoietic and intestinal tissues from radiation-induced injury.

PMCID: PMC3991713
PMID: 24747529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gene. 2014 Apr 10;539(1):141-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.011. Epub 2014 Jan
15.

Stratified control of IGF-I expression by hypoxia and stress hormones in
osteoblasts.

McCarthy TL(1), Yun Z(2), Madri JA(3), Centrella M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Surgery, New Haven, CT
06520-8041, USA; Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, New
Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA. Electronic address: thomas.mccarthy@yale.edu. (2)Yale 
University School of Medicine, Department of Therapeutic Radiology, New Haven, CT
06520-8040, USA. (3)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, 
New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA. (4)Yale University School of Medicine, Department 
of Surgery, New Haven, CT 06520-8041, USA; Yale University School of Medicine,
Department of Pathology, New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA. Electronic address:
michael.centrella@yale.edu.

Bone cells respond to the integrated effects of local and systemic regulation.
Here we show that hypoxia and the stress hormones PGE2 and glucocorticoid
interact in complex ways in osteoblasts, converging on insulin like growth factor
I (IGF-I) expression. Whereas hypoxia alone rapidly increased transcription
factor HIF activity, it suppressed DNA synthesis, had no significant effects on
protein synthesis or alkaline phosphatase activity, and drove discrete changes in
a panel of osteoblast mRNAs. Notably, hypoxia increased expression of the acute
phase response transcription factor C/EBPd which can induce IGF-I in response to 
PGE2, but conversely prevented the stimulatory effect of PGE2 on IGF-I mRNA.
However, unlike its effect on C/EBPd, hypoxia suppressed expression of the
obligate osteoblast transcription factor Runx2, which can activate an upstream
response element in the IGF-I gene promoter. Hypoxic inhibition of IGF-I and
Runx2 were enforced by glucocorticoid, and continued with prolonged exposure. Our
studies thus reveal that IGF-I expression is stratified by two critical
transcriptional elements in osteoblasts, which are resolved by the individual and
combined effects of hypoxic stress and stress hormones. In so doing, hypoxia
suppresses Runx2, limits the enhancing influence of PGE2, and interacts with
glucocorticoid to reduce IGF-I expression by osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4316208
PMID: 24440782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 9;9(1):e85469. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085469. eCollection 
2014.

Insulin-like growth factor-1 and bone morphogenetic protein-2 jointly mediate
prostaglandin E2-induced adipogenic differentiation of rat tendon stem cells.

Liu J(1), Chen L(2), zhou Y(1), Liu X(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, Wuhan General
Hospital of Guangzhou Military Region, Wuhan, China.

Tendinopathy is characterized histopathologically by lipid accumulation and
tissue calcification. Adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation of tendon stem
cells (TSCs) are believed to play key roles in these processes. The major
inflammatory mediator prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been shown to induce osteogenic
differentiation of TSCs via bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), and BMP-2 has
also been implicated in adipogenic differentiation of stem cells. We therefore
examined the mechanisms responsible for PGE2-induced adipogenesis in rat TSCs in 
vitro. Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) mRNA and protein were significantly
up-regulated in PGE2-stimulated TSCs, measured by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay,
respectively. Incubation with specific inhibitors of cAMP, cAMP-dependent protein
kinase A (PKA), and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-d (CEBPd) demonstrated that
IGF-1 up-regulation occurred via a cAMP/PKA/CEBPd pathway. Furthermore, neither
IGF-1 nor BMP-2 alone was able to mediate adipogenic differentiation of TSCs, but
IGF-1 together with BMP-2 significantly increased adipogenesis, indicated by Oil 
Red O staining. Moreover, knock-down of endogenous IGF-1 and BMP2 abolished
PGE2-induced adipogenic differentiation. Phosphorylation of CREB and Smad by
IGF-1 and BMP-2, respectively, were required for induction of the
adipogenesis-related peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>2 (PPAR<U+03B3>2) gene 
and for adipogenic differentiation. In conclusion, IGF-1 and BMP-2 together
mediate PGE2-induced adipogenic differentiation of TSCs in vitro via a CREB- and 
Smad-dependent mechanism. This improved understanding of the mechanisms
responsible for tendinopathies may help the development of more effective
therapies.

PMCID: PMC3887066
PMID: 24416413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int J Obes (Lond). 2014 Aug;38(8):1053-60. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.217. Epub 2013
Nov 20.

Downregulation of Max dimerization protein 3 is involved in decreased visceral
adipose tissue by inhibiting adipocyte differentiation in zebrafish and mice.

Shimada Y(1), Kuroyanagi J(2), Zhang B(2), Ariyoshi M(3), Umemoto N(3), Nishimura
Y(1), Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Mie, Japan [2]
Department of Systems Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Mie, Japan [3] Mie University Medical Zebrafish Research Center, Mie, Japan [4]
Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center, Mie,
Japan [5] Department of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology
Innovation, Mie, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine, Mie, Japan. (3)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine, Mie, Japan [2] Department of Systems Pharmacology, Mie University
Graduate School of Medicine, Mie, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The diet-induced obesity model of zebrafish (DIO-zebrafish) share a
common pathophysiological pathway with mammalian obesity.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to investigate the role of Max dimerization protein 3 (MXD3)
in visceral fat accumulation and adipocyte differentiation, by conducting
knockdown experiments using zebrafish and mouse preadipocytes.
METHODS: To identify genes related to visceral adiposity, we conducted
transcriptome analyses of human and zebrafish obese populations using the Gene
Expression Omnibus and DNA microarray. We then intraperitoneally injected
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides (MO-mxd3) to knockdown mxd3 gene expression
in DIO-zebrafish and measured several parameters, which reflected human obesity
and associated metabolic diseases. Finally, lentiviral Mxd3 shRNA knockdown in
mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes was conducted. Quantitative PCR analyses of several
differentiation markers were conducted during these gene knockdown experiments.
RESULTS: We found that MXD3 expression was increased in the obese population in
humans and zebrafish. Intraperitoneal MO-mxd3 administration to DIO-zebrafish
suppressed the increase in body weight, visceral fat accumulation and the size of
mature adipocytes. Subsequently, dyslipidemia and liver steatosis were also
ameliorated by MO-mxd3. In mouse adipocytes, Mxd3 expression was drastically
increased in the early differentiation stage. Mxd3 shRNA inhibited preadipocyte
proliferation and adipocyte maturation. Quantitative PCR analyses showed that the
early differentiation marker, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (Cebpd) and
late differentiation markers (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein, alpha and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma) were downregulated by Mxd3
knockdown in 3T3-L1 cells and DIO-zebrafish. Subsequently, mature adipocyte
markers (adiponectin and caveolin 1 for zebrafish, and fatty acid binding protein
4 and stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase 1 for mouse adipocytes) were also decreased.
CONCLUSION: Mxd3 regulates preadipocyte proliferation and early adipocyte
differentiation via Cebpd downregulation in vitro and in vivo. Integrated
analysis of human and zebrafish transcriptomes allows identification of a novel
therapeutic target against human obesity and further associated metabolic
disease.

PMID: 24254064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Biol Sci. 2013 Sep 20;9(9):917-33. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.7224. eCollection
2013.

The many faces of C/EBPd and their relevance for inflammation and cancer.

Balamurugan K(1), Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD-21702-1201, U.S.A.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD, C/EBPd) is a transcription
factor that modulates many biological processes including cell differentiation,
motility, growth arrest, proliferation, and cell death. The diversity of C/EBPd's
functions depends in part on the cell type and cellular context and can have
opposing outcomes. For example, C/EBPd promotes inflammatory signaling, but it
can also inhibit pro-inflammatory pathways, and in a mouse model of mammary
tumorigenesis, C/EBPd reduces tumor incidence but promotes tumor metastasis. This
review highlights the multifaceted nature of C/EBPd's functions, with an emphasis
on pathways that are relevant for cancer and inflammation, and illustrates how
C/EBPd emerged from the shadow of its family members as a fascinating "jack of
all trades." Our current knowledge on C/EBPd indicates that, rather than being
essential for a specific cellular process, C/EBPd helps to interpret a variety of
cues in a cell-type and context-dependent manner, to adjust cellular functions to
specific situations. Therefore, insights into the roles and mechanisms of C/EBPd 
signaling can lead to a better understanding of how the integration of different 
signaling pathways dictates normal and pathological cell functions and
physiology.

PMCID: PMC3805898
PMID: 24155666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 15;273(3):435-41. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.10.005. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Isoniazid suppresses antioxidant response element activities and impairs
adipogenesis in mouse and human preadipocytes.

Chen Y(1), Xue P, Hou Y, Zhang H, Zheng H, Zhou T, Qu W, Teng W, Zhang Q,
Andersen ME, Pi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Safety Sciences, The Hamner Institutes for Health
Sciences, 6 Davis Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA; The First
Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

Transcriptional signaling through the antioxidant response element (ARE),
orchestrated by the Nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), is a major
cellular defense mechanism against oxidative or electrophilic stress. Here, we
reported that isoniazid (INH), a widely used antitubercular drug, displays a
substantial inhibitory property against ARE activities in diverse mouse and human
cells. In 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, INH concentration-dependently suppressed the
ARE-luciferase reporter activity and mRNA expression of various ARE-dependent
antioxidant genes under basal and oxidative stressed conditions. In keeping with 
our previous findings that Nrf2-ARE plays a critical role in adipogenesis by
regulating expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), suppression of ARE signaling by INH
hampered adipogenic differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells and human adipose-derived
stem cells (ADSCs). Following adipogenesis induced by hormonal cocktails,
INH-treated 3T3-L1 cells and ADSCs displayed significantly reduced levels of
lipid accumulation and attenuated expression of C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3>. Time-course
studies in 3T3-L1 cells revealed that inhibition of adipogenesis by INH occurred 
in the early stage of terminal adipogenic differentiation, where reduced
expression of C/EBPß and C/EBPd was observed. To our knowledge, the present study
is the first to demonstrate that INH suppresses ARE signaling and interrupts with
the transcriptional network of adipogenesis, leading to impaired adipogenic
differentiation. The inhibition of ARE signaling may be a potential underlying
mechanism by which INH attenuates cellular antioxidant response contributing to
various complications.

© 2013.

PMID: 24128855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Jan;35(1):24-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.07.021.
Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3ß-mediated CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta
phosphorylation in astrocytes promotes migration and activation of
microglia/macrophages.

Ko CY(1), Wang WL, Wang SM, Chu YY, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Alzheimer's disease is neuropathologically characterized by the accumulation of
amyloid-ß protein into senile plaques that are sites of chronic inflammation
involving reactive microglia, astrocytes, and proinflammatory molecules, such as 
interleukin-1ß and tumor necrosis factor-a. The human CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (CEBP) delta (CEBPD) is known to be induced in many inflammation-related 
diseases. In Alzheimer's disease, this protein is responsive to amyloid-ß and
proinflammatory cytokines in astrocytes. However, the functional role of CEBPD in
astrocytes remains largely unclear. In this study, we show that CEBPD is
upregulated by interleukin-1ß through the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38
(MAPKp38) signaling pathway and phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase
(GSK)-3ß at Ser167 in astrocytes. CEBPD in astrocytes is associated with
microglia activation and migration in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice
(AppTg) mice. We further identified that the monocyte chemotactic protein-1, a
chemoattractive factor, and migration factors matrix metalloproteinase-1 and -3
are responsive to GSK3ß-mediated CEBPD Ser167 phosphorylation. Our results
revealed the novel regulation of LiCl on astrocytes and that GSK3ß-mediated CEBPD
phosphorylation in astrocytes plays an important role in the activation of
microglia.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23993701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Sci Signal. 2013 Jul 16;6(284):ra59. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003648.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein d in macrophages contributes to immunosuppression 
and inhibits phagocytosis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Hsiao YW(1), Li CF, Chi JY, Tseng JT, Chang Y, Hsu LJ, Lee CH, Chang TH, Wang SM,
Wang DD, Cheng HC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan, ROC.

Although tumors tend to be associated with immune cells and inflammation, this
immune response often fails to eliminate the cancer and instead promotes cancer
progression. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) fail to phagocytose tumor cells,
and they also produce signals that suppress the adaptive immune response. We
showed that immunosuppressive prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) led to the production and
activity of the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein d (C/EBPd) by
stimulating the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the RNA binding protein Hu antigen
R (HuR), which bound to and stabilized CEBPD mRNA in macrophages. An increase in 
C/EBPd abundance in macrophages in response to PGE2 resulted in enhanced
production of the immunosuppressive cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10) and of
pentraxin 3 (PTX3), which suppresses the ability of macrophages to phagocytose
tumor cells. Furthermore, conditioned medium from C/EBPd-replete, but not
C/EBPd-deficient, macrophages inhibited the phagocytosis of tumor cells by
macrophages, suggesting an autocrine mode of regulation. Immunohistochemical
analysis demonstrated that the amount of cytosolic HuR protein correlated with
increased C/EBPd abundance in TAMs in malignant nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Together, these data suggest that the inflammatory PGE2-HuR-C/EBPd axis in
macrophages promotes tumor progression by preventing the phagocytosis of tumor
cells and inducing immunosuppressive cytokine production.

PMID: 23861541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Hyperthermia. 2013 Aug;29(5):455-63. doi: 10.3109/02656736.2013.798037.
Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Extracellular Hsp70 inhibits pro-inflammatory cytokine production by IL-10 driven
down-regulation of C/EBPß and C/EBPd.

Borges TJ(1), Lopes RL, Pinho NG, Machado FD, Souza AP, Bonorino C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Biomedical Research Institute, Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul , Av. Ipiranga, 6690, Porto Alegre,
Rio Grande do Sul , Brazil.

PURPOSE: Extracellular Hsp70 has anti-inflammatory potential, demonstrated in
different models of inflammatory diseases. We investigated probable mechanisms
used by Hsp70 to down-regulate pro-inflammatory cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analysed cytokine mRNA levels in bone marrow-derived
murine dendritic cells treated with Hsp70, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
peptidoglycan (PGN) or OVA (an irrelevant protein control), hypothesising that
this was mediated by C/EBPß and C/EBPd transcription factors. We also tested the 
involvement of TLR2, IL-10, ERK and STAT3, using genetically deficient mice and
pharmacological inhibitors.
RESULTS: C/EBPß and C/EBPd levels were inhibited in bone marrow derived dendritic
cells (BMDCs) treated with Hsp70, and that correlated with inhibition of TNF-a,
IFN-<U+03B3> and MCP-1. Such inhibition was not observed in TLR2 or IL-10 knockout mice,
and was also abrogated upon pretreatment of cells with ERK and JAK2/STAT3
inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: C/EBPß and C/EBPd transcription factors are inhibited by Hsp70
treatment, and their inhibition occurs via the TLR2-ERK-STAT3-IL-10 pathway in
BMDCs, mediating the anti-inflammatory effects of Hsp70.

PMID: 23808579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061706. Print 2013.

Mapping of MN1 sequences necessary for myeloid transformation.

Kandilci A(1), Surtel J, Janke L, Neale G, Terranova S, Grosveld GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States of America.

The MN1 oncogene is deregulated in human acute myeloid leukemia and its
overexpression induces proliferation and represses myeloid differentiation of
primitive human and mouse hematopoietic cells, leading to myeloid leukemia in
mouse models. To delineate the sequences within MN1 necessary for MN1-induced
leukemia, we tested the transforming capacity of in-frame deletion mutants, using
retroviral transduction of mouse bone marrow. We found that integrity of the
regions between amino acids 12 to 458 and 1119 to 1273 are required for MN1's in 
vivo transforming activity, generating myeloid leukemia with some mutants also
producing T-cell lympho-leukemia and megakaryocytic leukemia. Although both full 
length MN1 and a mutant that lacks the residues between 12-228 (<U+0394>12-228 mutant)
repressed myeloid differentiation and increased myeloproliferative activity in
vitro, the mutant lost its transforming activity in vivo. Both MN1 and <U+0394>12-228
increased the frequency of common myeloid progentiors (CMP) in vitro and
microarray comparisons of purified MN1-CMP and <U+0394>12-228-CMP cells showed many
differentially expressed genes including Hoxa9, Meis1, Myb, Runx2, Cebpa, Cebpb
and Cebpd. This collection of immediate MN1-responsive candidate genes
distinguishes the leukemic activity from the in vitro myeloproliferative capacity
of this oncoprotein.

PMCID: PMC3634013
PMID: 23626719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 9;336(1):85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.04.007. Epub
2013 Apr 16.

Instability at the FRA8I common fragile site disrupts the genomic integrity of
the KIAA0146, CEBPD and PRKDC genes in colorectal cancer.

Brueckner LM(1), Hess EM, Schwab M, Savelyeva L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Specific patterns of genomic aberrations have been associated with different
types of malignancies. In colorectal cancer, losses of chromosome arm 8p and
gains of chromosome arm 8q are among the most common chromosomal rearrangements, 
suggesting that the centromeric portion of chromosome 8 is particularly sensitive
to breakage. Genomic alterations frequently occur in the early stages of
tumorigenesis at specific genomic regions known as common fragile sites (cFSs).
CFSs represent parts of the normal chromosome structure that are prone to
breakage under replication stress. In this study, we identified the genomic
location of FRA8I, spanning 530 kb at 8q11.21 and assessed the composition of the
fragile DNA sequence. FRA8I encompasses KIAA0146, a large protein-coding gene
with yet unknown function, as well as CEBPD and part of PRKDC, two genes encoding
proteins involved in tumorigenesis in a variety of cancers. We show that FRA8I is
unstable in lymphocytes and epithelial cells, displaying similar expression
rates. We examined copy number alteration patterns within FRA8I in a panel of 25 
colorectal cancer cell lines and surveyed publically available profiles of 56
additional colorectal cancer cell lines. Combining these data shows that focal
recombination events disrupt the genomic integrity of KIAA0146 and neighboring
cFS genes in 12.3% of colorectal cancer cell lines. Moreover, data analysis
revealed evidence that KIAA0146 is a translocation partner of the immunoglobulin 
heavy chain gene in recurrent t(8;14)(q11;q32) translocations in a subset of
patients with B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Our data molecularly
describe a region of enhanced chromosomal instability in the human genome and
point to a role of the KIAA0146 gene in tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23603433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genome Res. 2013 Jun;23(6):988-97. doi: 10.1101/gr.146654.112. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

CG methylated microarrays identify a novel methylated sequence bound by the
CEBPB|ATF4 heterodimer that is active in vivo.

Mann IK(1), Chatterjee R, Zhao J, He X, Weirauch MT, Hughes TR, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

To evaluate the effect of CG methylation on DNA binding of sequence-specific
B-ZIP transcription factors (TFs) in a high-throughput manner, we enzymatically
methylated the cytosine in the CG dinucleotide on protein binding microarrays.
Two Agilent DNA array designs were used. One contained 40,000 features using de
Bruijn sequences where each 8-mer occurs 32 times in various positions in the DNA
sequence. The second contained 180,000 features with each CG containing 8-mer
occurring three times. The first design was better for identification of binding 
motifs, while the second was better for quantification. Using this novel
technology, we show that CG methylation enhanced binding for CEBPA and CEBPB and 
inhibited binding for CREB, ATF4, JUN, JUND, CEBPD, and CEBPG. The CEBPB|ATF4
heterodimer bound a novel motif CGAT|GCAA 10-fold better when methylated. The
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) confirmed these results. CEBPB
ChIP-seq data using primary female mouse dermal fibroblasts with 50× methylome
coverage for each strand indicate that the methylated sequences well-bound on the
arrays are also bound in vivo. CEBPB bound 39% of the methylated canonical
10-mers ATTGC|GCAAT in the mouse genome. After ATF4 protein induction by
thapsigargin which results in ER stress, CEBPB binds methylated CGAT|GCAA in
vivo, recapitulating what was observed on the arrays. This methodology can be
used to identify new methylated DNA sequences preferentially bound by TFs, which 
may be functional in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3668366
PMID: 23590861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Transpl Infect Dis. 2013 Jun;15(3):E119-21. doi: 10.1111/tid.12081. Epub 2013 Apr
14.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPd) plays a minor role in renal host
defense against uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Duitman J, Teske GJ, Butter LM, Leemans JC, Florquin S, Spek CA.

PMID: 23582055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1662. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2677.

FBXW7a attenuates inflammatory signalling by downregulating C/EBPd and its target
gene Tlr4.

Balamurugan K(1), Sharan S, Klarmann KD, Zhang Y, Coppola V, Summers GH, Roger T,
Morrison DK, Keller JR, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signalling, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick, PO Box B, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Toll-like receptor 4 (Tlr4) has a pivotal role in innate immune responses, and
the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPd, Cebpd) is 
a Tlr4-induced gene. Here we identify a positive feedback loop in which C/EBPd
activates Tlr4 gene expression in macrophages and tumour cells. In addition, we
discovered a negative feedback loop whereby the tumour suppressor FBXW7a (FBW7,
Cdc4), whose gene expression is inhibited by C/EBPd, targets C/EBPd for
degradation when C/EBPd is phosphorylated by GSK-3ß. Consequently, FBXW7a
suppresses Tlr4 expression and responses to the ligand lipopolysaccharide. FBXW7a
depletion alone is sufficient to augment pro-inflammatory signalling in vivo.
Moreover, as inflammatory pathways are known to modulate tumour biology, Cebpd
null mammary tumours, which have reduced metastatic potential, show altered
expression of inflammation-associated genes. Together, these findings reveal a
role for C/EBPd upstream of Tlr4 signalling and uncover a function for FBXW7a as 
an attenuator of inflammatory signalling.

PMCID: PMC3625980
PMID: 23575666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;45(7):1281-92. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.03.014. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

ß-Arrestin signal complex plays a critical role in adipose differentiation.

Santos-Zas I(1), Lodeiro M, Gurriarán-Rodríguez U, Bouzo-Lorenzo M, Mosteiro CS, 
Casanueva FF, Casabiell X, Pazos Y, Camiña JP.

Author information: 
(1)Área de Endocrinología Molecular y Celular, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria de Santiago, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Servicio 
Gallego de Salud, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

ß-Arrestins were identified as scaffold-proteins that have the capacity to
desensitize G protein-coupled receptors. However, it has been found that
ß-arrestins activate signaling pathways independent of G protein activation. The 
diversity of these signaling pathways has also been recognized for receptor
tyrosine kinase. The aim of the present study was to validate the
ß-arrestin-dependent signaling mechanism(s) responsible for regulation of
adipogenesis. Two signal models were selected, ghrelin and insulin, based on its 
ß-arrestin-associated Akt activity. Herein, we found that ß-arrestin 1 and 2 were
essential molecules for adipocyte differentiation. More specifically, the role of
these scaffolding proteins was demonstrated by depletion of ß-arrestin 1 and 2
during ghrelin-induced adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells, which decreased the
adipocyte differentiation and the expression levels of master regulators of
early, the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) and the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d (C/EBPd), and terminal, the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR<U+03B3>) and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a 
(C/EBPa), adipogenesis. Accordingly ghrelin-induced Akt activity and its
downstream targets, the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and the 
ribosomal protein S6 kinase beta-1 (S6K1), were inhibited by ß-arrestin 1 and 2
siRNAs. By contrast, assays performed during insulin-activated adipogenesis
showed an intensifying effect on the adipocyte differentiation as well as on the 
expression of C/EBPß, C/EBPd, PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa. The increase in insulin-induced
adipogenesis by ß-arrestin knock-down was concomitant to a decrease in the
insulin receptor susbtrate-1 (IRS-1) serine phosphorylation, proving the loss of 
the negative feedback loop on IRS-1/phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt.
Therefore, ß-arrestins control the extent and intensity of the lipogenic and
adipogenic factors associated to Akt signaling, although the mechanistic and
functional principles that underlie the connection between signaling and
ß-arrestins are specifically associated to each receptor type.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23557604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 May;27(5):769-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1332. Epub 2013 Mar
22.

THRAP3 interacts with HELZ2 and plays a novel role in adipocyte differentiation.

Katano-Toki A(1), Satoh T, Tomaru T, Yoshino S, Ishizuka T, Ishii S, Ozawa A,
Shibusawa N, Tsuchiya T, Saito T, Shimizu H, Hashimoto K, Okada S, Yamada M, Mori
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan.

Using yeast two-hybrid screen, we previously isolated HELZ2 (helicase with zinc
finger 2, transcriptional coactivator) that functions as a coregulator of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). To further delineate its
molecular function, we here identified thyroid hormone receptor-associated
protein3 (THRAP3), a putative component of the Mediator complex, as a protein
stably associating with HELZ2 using immunoprecipitation coupled with mass
spectrometry analyses. In immunoprecipitation assays, Thrap3 could associate with
endogenous Helz2 as well as Pparg in differentiated 3T3-L1 cells. HELZ2 interacts
with the serine/arginine-rich domain and Bcl2 associated transcription
factor1-homologous region in THRAP3, whereas THRAP3 directly binds 2 helicase
motifs in HELZ2. HELZ2 and THRAP3 synergistically augment transcriptional
activation mediated by PPAR<U+03B3>, whereas knockdown of endogenous THRAP3 abolished
the enhancement by HELZ2 in reporter assays. Thrap3, similar to Helz2, is evenly 
expressed in the process of adipogenic differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Knockdown
of Thrap3 in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes using short-interfering RNA did not influence
the expression of Krox20, Klf5, Cebpb, or Cebpd during early stages of adipocyte 
differentiation, but significantly attenuated the expression of Pparg, Cebpa, and
Fabp4/aP2 and accumulation of lipid droplets. Pharmacologic activation of Pparg
by troglitazone could not fully restore the differentiation of Thrap3-knockdown
adipocytes. In chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, endogenous Helz2 and Thrap3 
could be co-recruited, in a ligand-dependent manner, to the PPAR<U+03B3>-response
elements in Fabp4/aP2 and Adipoq gene enhancers in differentiated 3T3-L1 cells.
These findings collectively suggest that Thrap3 could play indispensable roles in
terminal differentiation of adipocytes by enhancing PPAR<U+03B3>-mediated gene
activation cooperatively with Helz2.

PMID: 23525231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56590. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056590. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Gene expression analyses implicate an alternative splicing program in regulating 
contractile gene expression and serum response factor activity in mice.

Dasgupta T(1), Stillwagon SJ, Ladd AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Members of the CUG-BP, Elav-like family (CELF) regulate alternative splicing in
the heart. In MHC-CELF<U+0394> transgenic mice, CELF splicing activity is inhibited
postnatally in heart muscle via expression of a nuclear dominant negative CELF
protein under an a-myosin heavy chain promoter. MHC-CELF<U+0394> mice develop dilated
cardiomyopathy characterized by alternative splicing defects, enlarged hearts,
and severe contractile dysfunction. In this study, gene expression profiles in
the hearts of wild type, high- and low-expressing lines of MHC-CELF<U+0394> mice were
compared using microarrays. Gene ontology and pathway analyses identified
contraction and calcium signaling as the most affected processes. Network
analysis revealed that the serum response factor (SRF) network is highly
affected. Downstream targets of SRF were up-regulated in MHC-CELF<U+0394> mice compared 
to the wild type, suggesting an increase in SRF activity. Although SRF levels
remained unchanged, known inhibitors of SRF activity were down-regulated.
Conversely, we found that these inhibitors are up-regulated and downstream SRF
targets are down-regulated in the hearts of MCKCUG-BP1 mice, which mildly
over-express CELF1 in heart and skeletal muscle. This suggests that changes in
SRF activity are a consequence of changes in CELF-mediated regulation rather than
a secondary result of compensatory pathways in heart failure. In MHC-CELF<U+0394> males,
where the phenotype is only partially penetrant, both alternative splicing
changes and down-regulation of inhibitors of SRF correlate with the development
of cardiomyopathy. Together, these results strongly support a role for
CELF-mediated alternative splicing in the regulation of contractile gene
expression, achieved in part through modulating the activity of SRF, a key
cardiac transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC3577904
PMID: 23437181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jun-Jul;1829(6-7):695-707. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.01.001. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

CELFish ways to modulate mRNA decay.

Vlasova-St Louis I(1), Dickson AM, Bohjanen PR, Wilusz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

The CELF family of RNA-binding proteins regulates many steps of mRNA metabolism. 
Although their best characterized function is in pre-mRNA splice site choice,
CELF family members are also powerful modulators of mRNA decay. In this review we
focus on the different modes of regulation that CELF proteins employ to mediate
mRNA decay by binding to GU-rich elements. After starting with an overview of the
importance of CELF proteins during development and disease pathogenesis, we then 
review the mRNA networks and cellular pathways these proteins regulate and the
mechanisms by which they influence mRNA decay. Finally, we discuss how CELF
protein activity is modulated during development and in response to cellular
signals. We conclude by highlighting the priorities for new experiments in this
field. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: RNA Decay mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3640684
PMID: 23328451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Dec 10;13:35. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-35.

Alternative splicing of the neurofibromatosis type 1 pre-mRNA is regulated by the
muscleblind-like proteins and the CUG-BP and ELAV-like factors.

Fleming VA(1), Geng C, Ladd AN, Lou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 44106,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Alternative splicing is often subjected to complex regulatory control
that involves many protein factors and cis-acting RNA sequence elements. One
major challenge is to identify all of the protein players and define how they
control alternative expression of a particular exon in a combinatorial manner.
The Muscleblind-like (MBNL) and CUG-BP and ELAV-Like family (CELF) proteins are
splicing regulatory proteins, which function as antagonists in the regulation of 
several alternative exons. Currently only a limited number of common targets of
MBNL and CELF are known that are antagonistically regulated by these two groups
of proteins.
RESULTS: Recently, we identified neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) exon 23a as a
novel target of negative regulation by CELF proteins. Here we report that MBNL
family members are positive regulators of this exon. Overexpression of MBNL
proteins promote exon 23a inclusion in a low MBNL-expressing cell line, and
simultaneous siRNA-mediated knockdown of MBNL1 and MBNL2 family members in a high
MBNL-expressing cell line promotes exon 23a skipping. Importantly, these two
groups of proteins antagonize each other in regulating inclusion of exon 23a.
Furthermore, we analyzed the binding sites of these proteins in the intronic
sequences upstream of exon 23a by UV cross-linking assays. We show that in vitro,
in addition to the previously identified preferred binding sequence UGCUGU, the
MBNL proteins need the neighboring sequences for optimal binding.
CONCLUSION: This study along with our previous work that demonstrated roles for
Hu, CELF, and TIA-1 and TIAR proteins in the regulation of NF1 exon 23a establish
that this exon is under tight, complex control.

PMCID: PMC3558374
PMID: 23227900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Pathol. 2013 Feb;182(2):420-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.10.013. Epub 2012
Nov 21.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d is a critical mediator of
lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury.

Yan C(1), Johnson PF, Tang H, Ye Y, Wu M, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, the Center for 
Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2013 Apr;182(4):1459.
    Am J Pathol. 2013 Apr;182(4):1459-60.

Although inflammation plays a central role in the pathogenesis of acute lung
injury, the molecular mechanisms underlying inflammatory responses in acute lung 
injury are poorly understood, and therapeutic options remain limited.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins, C/EBPß and C/EBPd, are expressed in the lung and
have been implicated in the regulation of inflammatory mediators. However, their 
functions in lung pathobiological characteristics are not well characterized.
Herein, we show that C/EBPß and C/EBPd are activated in mouse lung after
intrapulmonary deposition of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Mice carrying a targeted
deletion of the C/EBPd gene displayed significant attenuation of the lung
permeability index (lung vascular leak of albumin), lung neutrophil accumulation 
(myeloperoxidase activity), and neutrophils in bronchial alveolar lavage fluids
compared with wild-type mice. These phenotypes were consistent with morphological
evaluation of lung, which showed reduced inflammatory cell influx and minimal
intra-alveolar hemorrhage. Moreover, mutant mice expressed considerably less
tumor necrosis factor-a, IL-6, and macrophage inflammatory protein-2 in bronchial
alveolar lavage fluids in LPS-injured lung compared with wild-type mice. In
contrast, C/EBPß deficiency had no effect on LPS-induced lung injury. By using
small-interfering RNA-mediated knockdown for C/EBPd, we demonstrate, for the
first time to our knowledge, that C/EBPd plays a critical role for the tumor
necrosis factor-a, IL-6, and macrophage inflammatory protein-2 production in
LPS-stimulated alveolar macrophages. These findings demonstrate that C/EBPd, but 
not C/EBPß, plays an important role in LPS-induced lung inflammatory responses
and injury.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3562738
PMID: 23177475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Science. 2012 Dec 21;338(6114):1599-603. doi: 10.1126/science.1229765. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

C/EBP transcription factors mediate epicardial activation during heart
development and injury.

Huang GN(1), Thatcher JE, McAnally J, Kong Y, Qi X, Tan W, DiMaio JM, Amatruda
JF, Gerard RD, Hill JA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The epicardium encapsulates the heart and functions as a source of multipotent
progenitor cells and paracrine factors essential for cardiac development and
repair. Injury of the adult heart results in reactivation of a developmental gene
program in the epicardium, but the transcriptional basis of epicardial gene
expression has not been delineated. We established a mouse embryonic heart organ 
culture and gene expression system that facilitated the identification of
epicardial enhancers activated during heart development and injury. Epicardial
activation of these enhancers depends on a combinatorial transcriptional code
centered on CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) transcription factors.
Disruption of C/EBP signaling in the adult epicardium reduced injury-induced
neutrophil infiltration and improved cardiac function. These findings reveal a
transcriptional basis for epicardial activation and heart injury, providing a
platform for enhancing cardiac regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3613149
PMID: 23160954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045378. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Role of macrophage CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta in the pathogenesis of
rheumatoid arthritis in collagen-induced arthritic mice.

Chang LH(1), Huang HS, Wu PT, Jou IM, Pan MH, Chang WC, Wang DD, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The up-regulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD) has
frequently been observed in macrophages in age-associated disorders, including
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the role of macrophage CEBPD in the
pathogenesis of RA is unclear.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that the collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) score and the number of affected paws in Cebpd(-/-) mice were significantly
decreased compared with the wild-type (WT) mice. The histological analysis
revealed an attenuated CIA in Cebpd(-/-) mice, as shown by reduced pannus
formation and greater integrity of joint architecture in affected paws of
Cebpd(-/-) mice compared with WT mice. In addition, immunohistochemistry analysis
revealed decreased pannus proliferation and angiogenesis in Cebpd(-/-) mice
compared with WT mice. CEBPD activated in macrophages played a functional role in
promoting the tube formation of endothelial cells and the migration and
proliferation of synoviocytes. In vivo DNA binding assays and reporter assays
showed that CEBPD up-regulated CCL20, CXCL1, IL23A and TNFAIP6 transcripts
through direct binding to their promoter regions. CCL20, IL23A, CXCL1 and TNFAIP6
contributed to the migration and proliferation of synoviocytes, and the latter
two proteins were involved in tube formation of endothelial cells. Finally, two
anti-inflammatory chemicals, inotilone and rosmanol, reduced the expression of
CEBPD and its downstream targets and mitigated the above phenomena.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Collectively, our findings suggest that CEBPD and
its downstream effectors could be biomarkers for the diagnosis of RA and
potentially serve as therapeutic targets for RA therapy.

PMCID: PMC3454428
PMID: 23028973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Bone Miner Metab. 2013 Jan;31(1):53-63. doi: 10.1007/s00774-012-0385-x. Epub
2012 Sep 27.

Retinoic acid regulates commitment of undifferentiated mesenchymal stem cells
into osteoblasts and adipocytes.

Hisada K(1), Hata K, Ichida F, Matsubara T, Orimo H, Nakano T, Yatani H,
Nishimura R, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate
School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Evidence indicates that the balance between osteoblastogenesis and adipogenesis
of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is regulated by several hormones, growth
factors, and their downstream signaling cascades. Previous studies suggest that
retinoic acid (RA) plays a role in osteoblastogenesis and adipogenesis. However, 
it is unknown whether RA regulates commitment of MSCs into osteoblasts and
adipocytes. In this study, we investigated the role of RA in differentiation of
MSCs using the C3H10T1/2 cell line. RA stimulated activity and expression of
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and upregulated activity of the ALP gene promoter. The
effects of RA were further enhanced by bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) and
resultant Smad signaling. Furthermore, overexpression of Runx2 and Msx2, critical
transcription factors for bone formation and BMP2-dependent osteoblastogenesis,
enhanced RA-dependent ALP activity. In view of these findings, RA likely
stimulates osteoblast differentiation through the BMP2-Smad-Runx2/Msx2 pathway.
In contrast, RA markedly inhibited BMP2-induced adipocyte differentiation,
suppressing expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)a and C/EBPd, and inhibiting adipogenic
function of C/EBPß, C/EBPd, and PPAR<U+03B3>. In conclusion, our data suggest that RA
regulates commitment of MSCs into osteoblasts and adipocytes by controlling
transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 23014973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Br J Cancer. 2012 Aug 7;107(4):732-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.308. Epub 2012 Jul
10.

Site-specific CpG methylation in the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPd)
CpG island in breast cancer is associated with metastatic relapse.

Palmieri C(1), Monteverde M, Lattanzio L, Gojis O, Rudraraju B, Fortunato M, Syed
N, Thompson A, Garrone O, Merlano M, Lo Nigro C, Crook T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Laboratories, Imperial Centre for Translational and
Experimental Medicine, Division of Cancer, Imperial College London, Du Cane Road,
London W12 0NN, UK. c.palmieri@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPd) is a member of a
highly conserved family of basic region leucine zipper transcription factors. It 
has properties consistent with a tumour suppressor; however, other data suggest
that CEBPd may be involved in the metastatic process.
METHODS: We analysed the expression of CEBPd and the methylation status of the
CpG island in human breast cancer cell lines, in 107 archival cases of primary
breast cancer and in two series of metastatic breast cancers using qPCR and
pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: Expression of CEBPd is downregulated in primary breast cancer by
site-specific methylation in the CEBPd CpG island. Expression is also
downregulated in 50% of cases during progression from primary carcinoma to
metastatic lesions. The CEBPd CpG island is methylated in 81% metastatic breast
cancer lesions, while methylation in the CEBPd CpG island in primary cancers is
associated with increased risk of relapse and metastasis.
CONCLUSION: CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta CpG island methylation is
associated with metastasis in breast cancer. Detection of methylated CEBPd
genomic DNA may have utility as an epigenetic biomarker of primary breast
carcinomas at increased risk of relapse and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3419957
PMID: 22782348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1480-90. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200877. Epub 2012
Jun 25.

Critical role for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß in immune complex-induced
acute lung injury.

Yan C(1), Wu M, Cao J, Tang H, Zhu M, Johnson PF, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative, and Pain Medicine, Center for
Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

C/EBPs, particularly C/EBPß and C/EBPd, are known to participate in the
regulation of many genes associated with inflammation. However, very little is
known regarding the activation and functions of C/EBPß and C/EBPd in acute lung
inflammation and injury. In this study, we show that both C/EBPß and C/EBPd
activation are triggered in lungs and in alveolar macrophages following
intrapulmonary deposition of IgG immune complexes. We further show that mice
carrying a targeted deletion of the C/EBPß gene displayed significant attenuation
of the permeability index (lung vascular leak of albumin), lung neutrophil
accumulation (myeloperoxidase activity), total number of WBCs, and neutrophils in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluids compared with wild-type mice. Moreover, the mutant 
mice expressed considerably less TNF-a, IL-6, and CXC/CC chemokine and soluble
ICAM-1 proteins in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids, and corresponding mRNAs in the 
IgG immune complex-injured lung, compared with wild-type mice. These phenotypes
were associated with a significant reduction in morphological lung injury. In
contrast, C/EBPd deficiency had no effect on IgG immune complex-induced lung
injury. IgG immune complex-stimulated C/EBPß-deficient alveolar macrophages
released significantly less TNF-a, IL-6, MIP-2, keratinocyte cell-derived
chemokine, and MIP-1a compared with wild-type cells. Similar decreases in IgG
immune complex-induced inflammatory mediator production were observed following
small interfering RNA ablation of C/EBPß in a murine alveolar macrophage cell
line. These findings implicate C/EBPß as a critical regulator of IgG immune
complex-induced inflammatory responses and injury in the lung.

PMCID: PMC3401325
PMID: 22732594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3466-75. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24223.

Statins modulate transcriptional activity of heme-oxygenase-1 promoter in NIH 3T3
Cells.

Mrad MF(1), Mouawad CA, Al-Hariri M, Eid AA, Alam J, Habib A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, American University of
Beirut, Lebanon.

Statins, inhibitors of HMG CoA reductase, have pleiotropic effects independent of
their capacity to lower cholesterol. Heme-oxygenase-1(HO-1) plays an important
role as an anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory enzyme. In the present study, we
used NIH 3T3 cells which express HO-1 to investigate the molecular mechanisms of 
HO-1 induction by statins. Simvastatin or fluvastatin induced a significant
increase in HO-1 protein expression and mRNA levels. Both statins stimulated
activity of a mouse HO-1 promoter (-1,287 to +73<U+2009>bp)/luciferase reporter gene,
3.25<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.23 (Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test) and 3.13<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.33
(Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test), respectively. This effect was more
pronounced in the short proximal promoter than the full promoter of HO-1. Gel
retardation experiments for C/EBP and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
DNA-binding activities using simvastatin- or fluvastatin-treated cells showed
significant nuclear protein-DNA complexes which were supershifted with antibodies
specific for C/EBP ß and d or USF-1 and USF-2. Point mutations of the proximal
HO-1 promoter (-149 to +73<U+2009>bp) for the myc/max which binds USF or the C/EBP
binding sequences showed a reduction in statin-induced reporter activity whereas 
no role of the distal C/EBP binding elements located at -4<U+2009>kb was observed.
Moreover, overexpression of mutated C/EBP ß and USF factor or the siRNA for both 
factors supported a role of these transcription factors in statin-dependent
induction of HO-1, with a clearer effect for C/EBP.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22689023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Endocrinology. 2012 Aug;153(8):3679-91. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1056. Epub 2012 May 
25.

Genomic characterization of human and rat prolactinomas.

Tong Y(1), Zheng Y, Zhou J, Oyesiku NM, Koeffler HP, Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Academic Affairs, Room
2015, 8700 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Although prolactinomas can be effectively treated with dopamine agonists, about
20% of patients develop dopamine resistance or tumor recurrence after surgery,
indicating a need for better understanding of underlying disease mechanisms.
Although estrogen-induced rat prolactinomas have been widely used to investigate 
the development of this tumor, the extent that the model recapitulates features
of human prolactinomas is unclear. To prioritize candidate genes and gene sets
regulating human and rat prolactinomas, microarray results derived from human
prolactinomas and pituitaries of estrogen-treated ACI rats were integrated and
analyzed. A total of 4545 differentially expressed pituitary genes were
identified in estrogen-treated ACI rats [false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01]. By
comparing pituitary microarray results derived from estrogen-treated Brown Norway
rats (a strain not sensitive to estrogen), 4073 genes were shown specific to
estrogen-treated ACI rats. Human prolactinomas exhibited 1177 differentially
expressed genes (FDR < 0.05). Combining microarray data derived from human
prolactinoma and pituitaries of estrogen-treated ACI rat, 145 concordantly
expressed genes, including E2F1, Myc, Igf1, and CEBPD, were identified. Gene set 
enrichment analysis revealed that 278 curated pathways and 59 gene sets of
transcription factors were enriched (FDR < 25%) in estrogen-treated ACI rats,
suggesting a critical role for Myc, E2F1, CEBPD, and Sp1 in this rat
prolactinoma. Similarly increased Myc, E2F1, and Sp1 expression was validated
using real-time PCR and Western blot in estrogen-treated Fischer rat pituitary
glands. In summary, characterization of individual genes and gene sets in human
and in estrogen-induced rat prolactinomas validates the model and provides
insights into genomic changes associated with this commonly encountered pituitary
tumor.

PMCID: PMC3404356
PMID: 22635680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Eur J Med Res. 2012 May 18;17:12. doi: 10.1186/2047-783X-17-12.

DNA hypomethylation of the COX-2 gene promoter is associated with up-regulation
of its mRNA expression in eutopic endometrium of endometriosis.

Wang D(1), Chen Q, Zhang C, Ren F, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China 
Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China. wangdb@sj-hospital.org

BACKGROUND: Accumulated evidence reveals that cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) was
overexpressed in eutopic endometrium of endometriosis, which may play a critical 
role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. However, few studies have been
performed to explore the molecular mechanisms underlying the abnormal high
expression of COX-2 in endometriosis. Considering the fact that a number of
recent studies have shown DNA methylation affecting some genes in endometriosis, 
the present study was therefore aimed to determine whether the observed high
expression COX-2 in endometriosis is caused by the hypomethylation of CpG island 
within the promoter of this gene.
METHODS: The endometrial tissues were collected from 60 women with endometriosis 
(endometriosis group) and 20 women without endometriosis (control group). The
methylation status of COX-2 was examined by methylation specific PCR.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed to measure COX-2 mRNA level in
endometrial tissues.
RESULTS: The frequency of promoter hypermethylation of COX-2 was lower in eutopic
endometrium of the endometriosis group (41.7%) than that in the control group
(75.0%), P < 0.05. COX-2 mRNA level in the eutopic endometrium of the
endometriosis group was 2.61-fold higher than that in the control group (P <
0.01). COX-2 mRNA level in unmethylated endometrium of the endometriosis group or
the control group was 2.39-fold and 2.66-fold, respectively, higher than that in 
the methylated endometrium of the same group (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The hypomethylation within the promoter of COX-2 may be responsible 
for the elevated gene expression in eutopic endometrium of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3479074
PMID: 22608095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Jun;99:17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.04.004. Epub 2012 Apr
21.

Activation of survival pathways in the degenerating retina of rd10 mice.

Samardzija M(1), Wariwoda H, Imsand C, Huber P, Heynen SR, Gubler A, Grimm C.

Author information: 
(1)Lab for Retinal Cell Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Blinding diseases of the retina are frequently characterized by loss of
photoreceptor cells. The retinal degeneration 10 (rd10) mouse expresses a mutant 
form of rod phosphodiesterase leading to autosomal recessive photoreceptor
degeneration. In contrast to rd1, rd10 mice have remaining rod function mimicking
more closely most forms of human Retinitis Pigmentosa. Here we use morphology,
biochemistry, retinal whole mounts, real-time PCR, Western blotting and
immunofluorescence to compile a comprehensive report on progression of retinal
degeneration in the rd10 retina up to one year of age. We show that retinal
development, morphology, gene expression pattern and retinal vasculature was
normal until postnatal day 15. Thereafter, a bi-phasic pattern of rod cell death 
emerged with a first rapid phase peaking around 3 weeks of age followed by a
slower second phase. Death of cone cells followed with a delay and vessel dropout
was prominent in the retinal periphery of 6 months old rd10 mice. At one year of 
age, RPE atrophy was evident. The degenerating retina rapidly induced expression 
of transcriptional regulators Atf3 and Cebpd. Induction of Atf3 was transient and
lasted only for several days at the beginning of degeneration whereas levels of
Cebpd remained elevated throughout the period of photoreceptor loss. Several
protective genes such as Lif, Edn2 and Fgf2 which are implicated in a potent
endogenous survival pathway, and Mt1 and Mt2 were strongly upregulated in the
rd10 retina. In addition, increased expression of Casp1 and Il1b suggested an
inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22546314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Clin Pathol. 2012 May;65(5):419-23. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200569. Epub
2012 Mar 12.

The neurofibromin 1 type I isoform predominance characterises female population
affected by sporadic breast cancer: preliminary data.

Marrero D(1), Peralta R, Valdivia A, De la Mora A, Romero P, Parra M, Mendoza N, 
Mendoza M, Rodriguez D, Camacho E, Duarte A, Castelazo G, Vanegas E, Garcia I,
Vargas C, Arenas D, Jimenez F, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Oncogenómica, Unidad de Investigación Médica en Enfermedades
Oncológicas, Hospital de Oncología, CMN-SXXI, IMSS, Mexico, D.F.

AIMS: Neurofibromin 1 (NF1) as a tumour suppressor gene can give rise to several 
transcripts by an alternative splicing event, generated at least for CELF
cofactors. At present, the NF1 isoforms and CELF splicing transcripts in sporadic
breast cancer are unknown. The aim of the authors was to detect NF1 gene
expression, the NF1 isoform ratio and the CELF transcripts present in sporadic
breast cancer.
METHODS: Neurofibromin and RAS expression were analysed on tissue microarrays
containing sporadic breast cancer (n=22), benign lesions (n=18, including six
fibroadenomas, six fibrocystic changes and six ductal hyperplasias) and normal
breast tissue (n=6) by immunohistochemistry assay. NF1 and CELF 3-6 RNA
expression was performed by end point reverse transcription-PCR in the breast
samples.
RESULTS: NF1 and RAS expression in breast tissues showed no differential
expression by immunohistochemistry results. Interestingly, the authors observed a
shift transition in the isoform transcripts, from type II in normal breast tissue
to type I isoform in breast carcinomas. CELF cofactor expression failed to be
related with the shift transition of NF1 in breast tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that there is a tendency for an NF1 expression
shift transition from type II to type I isoform, which could comprise a
significant event in the development and progression of sporadic breast cancer.
This shift transition may not be related with CELF cofactors.

PMID: 22412049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Brain Res. 2012 Jun 26;1462:100-11. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.02.030. Epub
2012 Feb 22.

RNA-binding proteins in microsatellite expansion disorders: mediators of RNA
toxicity.

Echeverria GV(1), Cooper TA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Although protein-mediated toxicity in neurological disease has been extensively
characterized, RNA-mediated toxicity is an emerging mechanism of pathogenesis. In
microsatellite expansion disorders, expansion of repeated sequences in noncoding 
regions gives rise to RNA that produces a toxic gain of function, while
expansions in coding regions can disrupt protein function as well as produce
toxic RNA. The toxic RNA typically aggregates into nuclear foci and contributes
to disease pathogenesis. In many cases, toxicity of the RNA is caused by the
disrupted functions of RNA-binding proteins. We will discuss evidence for
RNA-mediated toxicity in microsatellite expansion disorders. Different
microsatellite expansion disorders are linked with alterations in the same as
well as disease-specific RNA-binding proteins. Recent studies have shown that
microsatellite expansions can encode multiple repeat-containing toxic RNAs
through bidirectional transcription and protein species through repeat-associated
non-ATG translation. We will discuss approaches that have characterized the toxic
contributions of these various factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3372679
PMID: 22405728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):12241-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.293613. Epub 2012 
Feb 20.

Noggin is novel inducer of mesenchymal stem cell adipogenesis: implications for
bone health and obesity.

Sawant A(1), Chanda D, Isayeva T, Tsuladze G, Garvey WT, Ponnazhagan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Noggin is a glycosylated-secreted protein known so far for its inhibitory effects
on bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling by sequestering the BMP ligand. We 
report here for the first time a novel mechanism by which noggin directly induces
adipogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells independently of major human adipogenic
signals through C/EBPd, C/EBPa and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>. 
Evaluation of a possible mechanism for noggin-induced adipogenesis of mesenchymal
stem cells identified the role of Pax-1 in mediating such differentiation. The
relevance of elevated noggin levels in obesity was confirmed in a preclinical,
immunocompetent mouse model of spontaneous obesity and in human patients with
higher body mass index. These data clearly provide a novel role for noggin in
inducing adipogenesis and possibly obesity and further indicates the potential of
noggin as a therapeutic target to control obesity.

PMCID: PMC3320975
PMID: 22351751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031062. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

The transcription factor C/EBP delta has anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory
roles in pancreatic beta cells.

Moore F(1), Santin I, Nogueira TC, Gurzov EN, Marselli L, Marchetti P, Eizirik
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium. fmoore@ulb.ac.be

In the course of Type 1 diabetes pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1ß, IFN-<U+03B3>
and TNF-a) produced by islet-infiltrating immune cells modify expression of key
gene networks in ß-cells, leading to local inflammation and ß-cell apoptosis.
Most known cytokine-induced transcription factors have pro-apoptotic effects, and
little is known regarding "protective" transcription factors. To this end, we
presently evaluated the role of the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein delta (C/EBPd) on ß-cell apoptosis and production of inflammatory
mediators in the rat insulinoma INS-1E cells, in purified primary rat ß-cells and
in human islets. C/EBPd is expressed and up-regulated in response to the
cytokines IL-1ß and IFN-<U+03B3> in rat ß-cells and human islets. Small interfering
RNA-mediated C/EBPd silencing exacerbated IL-1ß+IFN-<U+03B3>-induced caspase 9 and 3
cleavage and apoptosis in these cells. C/EBPd deficiency increased the
up-regulation of the transcription factor CHOP in response to cytokines,
enhancing expression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member BIM. Interfering
with C/EBPd and CHOP or C/EBPd and BIM in double knockdown approaches abrogated
the exacerbating effects of C/EBPd deficiency on cytokine-induced ß-cell
apoptosis, while C/EBPd overexpression inhibited BIM expression and partially
protected ß-cells against IL-1ß+IFN-<U+03B3>-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, C/EBPd
silencing boosted cytokine-induced production of the chemokines CXCL1, 9, 10 and 
CCL20 in ß-cells by hampering IRF-1 up-regulation and increasing STAT1 activation
in response to cytokines. These observations identify a novel function of C/EBPd 
as a modulatory transcription factor that inhibits the pro-apoptotic and
pro-inflammatory gene networks activated by cytokines in pancreatic ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3275575
PMID: 22347430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30831. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030831. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Inhibition of adipogenesis and induction of apoptosis and lipolysis by stem
bromelain in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Dave S(1), Kaur NJ, Nanduri R, Dkhar HK, Kumar A, Gupta P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbial Technology (CSIR), Chandigarh, India.

The phytotherapeutic protein stem bromelain (SBM) is used as an anti-obesity
alternative medicine. We show at the cellular level that SBM irreversibly
inhibits 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation by reducing adipogenic gene expression 
and induces apoptosis and lipolysis in mature adipocytes. At the molecular level,
SBM suppressed adipogenesis by downregulating C/EBPa and PPAR<U+03B3> independent of
C/EBPß gene expression. Moreover, mRNA levels of adipocyte fatty acid-binding
protein (ap2), fatty acid synthase (FAS), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), CD36, and
acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) were also downregulated by SBM. Additionally, SBM
reduced adiponectin expression and secretion. SBM's ability to repress PPAR<U+03B3>
expression seems to stem from its ability to inhibit Akt and augment the TNFa
pathway. The Akt-TSC2-mTORC1 pathway has recently been described for PPAR<U+03B3>
expression in adipocytes. In our experiments, TNFa upregulation compromised cell 
viability of mature adipocytes (via apoptosis) and induced lipolysis. Lipolytic
response was evident by downregulation of anti-lipolytic genes perilipin,
phosphodiestersae-3B (PDE3B), and GTP binding protein G(i)a(1), as well as
sustained expression of hormone sensitive lipase (HSL). These data indicate that 
SBM, together with all-trans retinoic-acid (atRA), may be a potent modulator of
obesity by repressing the PPAR<U+03B3>-regulated adipogenesis pathway at all stages and 
by augmenting TNFa-induced lipolysis and apoptosis in mature adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC3265525
PMID: 22292054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Feb;40(1):1-5. doi: 10.1042/BST20110606.

Novel control of cAMP-regulated transcription in vascular endothelial cells.

Milne GR(1), Palmer TM, Yarwood SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis, are a major cause of
death and disability in the developed world. In this respect, although
cholesterol obviously plays a predominant role in atherosclerosis, targeting
inflammation at lesion sites may be just as important. Indeed, elevated IL-6
(interleukin 6) levels are as strongly associated with coronary heart disease as 
increased cholesterol. We have been investigating novel cAMP-regulated pathways
that combat the action of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and leptin, in
the VECs (vascular endothelial cells) of the circulatory system. In this respect,
we have begun to unravel new molecular mechanisms by which the cAMP/Epac1
(exchange protein directly activated by cAMP 1)/Rap1 pathway can initiate a
rigorous programme of protective anti-inflammatory responses in VECs. Central to 
this is the coupling of cAMP elevation to the mobilization of two C/EBP
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) family transcription factors, resulting in the
induction of the SOCS3 (suppressor of cytokine signalling 3) gene, which
attenuates pro-inflammatory cytokine signalling in VECs. These novel 'protective'
mechanisms of cAMP action will inform the development of the next generation of
pharmaceuticals specifically designed to combat endothelial inflammation
associated with cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 22260656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Aging Cell. 2012 Apr;11(2):262-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00782.x. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein-beta expression in vivo is associated with muscle 
strength.

Harries LW(1), Pilling LC, Hernandez LD, Bradley-Smith R, Henley W, Singleton AB,
Guralnik JM, Bandinelli S, Ferrucci L, Melzer D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula College of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Declining muscle strength is a core feature of aging. Several mechanisms have
been postulated, including CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta
(C/EBP-ß)-triggered macrophage-mediated muscle fiber regeneration after
micro-injury, evidenced in a mouse model. We aimed to identify in vivo
circulating leukocyte gene expression changes associated with muscle strength in 
the human adult population. We undertook a genome-wide expression microarray
screen, using peripheral blood RNA samples from InCHIANTI study participants
(aged 30 and 104). Logged expression intensities were regressed with muscle
strength using models adjusted for multiple confounders. Key results were
validated by real-time PCR. The Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) score
tested walk speed, chair stand, and balance. CEBPB expression levels were
associated with muscle strength (ß coefficient = 0.20560, P = 1.03*10(-6), false 
discovery rate q = 0.014). The estimated handgrip strength in 70-year-old men in 
the lowest CEBPB expression tertile was 35.2 kg compared with 41.2 kg in the top 
tertile. CEBPB expression was also associated with hip, knee, ankle, and shoulder
strength and the SPPB score (P = 0.018). Near-study-wide associations were also
noted for TGF-ß3 (P = 3.4*10(-5) , q = 0.12) and CEBPD expression (P = 9.7*10(-5)
, q = 0.18) but not for CEBPA expression. We report here a novel finding that
raised CEBPB expression in circulating leukocyte-derived RNA samples in vivo is
associated with greater muscle strength and better physical performance in
humans. This association may be consistent with mouse model evidence of
CEBPB-triggered muscle repair: if this mechanism is confirmed, it may provide a
target for intervention to protect and enhance aging muscle.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3486692
PMID: 22152057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(2):320-32. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05790-11. Epub 2011 Oct
28.

Identification of a Src tyrosine kinase/SIAH2 E3 ubiquitin ligase pathway that
regulates C/EBPd expression and contributes to transformation of breast tumor
cells.

Sarkar TR(1), Sharan S, Wang J, Pawar SA, Cantwell CA, Johnson PF, Morrison DK,
Wang JM, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPd, CEBPD) is 
a tumor suppressor that is downregulated during breast cancer progression but may
also promote metastasis. Here, we have investigated the mechanism(s) regulating
C/EBPd expression and its role in human breast cancer cells. We describe a novel 
pathway by which the tyrosine kinase Src downregulates C/EBPd through the SIAH2
E3 ubiquitin ligase. Src phosphorylates SIAH2 in vitro and leads to tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of SIAH2 in breast tumor cell lines. SIAH2
interacts with C/EBPd, but not C/EBPß, and promotes its polyubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation. Src/SIAH2-mediated inhibition of C/EBPd expression
supports elevated cyclin D1 levels, phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein
(Rb), motility, invasive properties, and survival of transformed cells.
Pharmacological inhibition of Src family kinases by SKI-606 (bosutinib) induces
C/EBPd expression in an SIAH2-dependent manner, which is necessary for
"therapeutic" responses to SKI-606 in vitro. Ectopic expression of
degradation-resistant mutants of C/EBPd, which do not interact with SIAH2 and/or 
cannot be polyubiquitinated, prevents full transformation of MCF-10A cells by
activated Src (Src truncated at amino acid 531 [Src-531]) in vitro. These data
reveal that C/EBPd expression can be regulated at the protein level by oncogenic 
Src kinase signals through SIAH2, thus contributing to breast epithelial cell
transformation.

PMCID: PMC3255785
PMID: 22037769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Nov;25(11):1880-91. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1075. Epub 2011 Oct
6.

CEBPD suppresses prolactin expression and prolactinoma cell proliferation.

Tong Y(1), Zhou J, Mizutani J, Fukuoka H, Ren SG, Gutierrez-Hartmann A, Koeffler 
HP, Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Affairs, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Hyperprolactinemia, usually caused by a pituitary lactotroph tumor, leads to
galactorrhea and infertility. Increased prolactin (PRL) levels may be due to
enhanced PRL expression or proliferation of PRL-secreting cells. We hypothesize
that PRL expression and PRL-secreting cell proliferation are linked. Using
microarray-based gene expression profiling, we identified CCAAT-enhancer-binding 
protein d (CEBPD) transcription factor as a critical gene that regulates both PRL
expression and lactotroph cell proliferation. CEBPD expression levels are
decreased approximately 7-fold in experimental rat prolactinoma cells. Forced
expression of this transcription factor in PRL-secreting cells (GH3 and MMQ)
inhibited PRL expression and cellular proliferation, and CEBPD knockdown by small
interfering RNA leads to increased PRL expression in both cell lines. To
determine mechanisms underlying this observation, we determined binding of CEBPD 
to the PRL promoter and also showed marked suppression (96%) of PRL promoter
activity. CEBPD and Pit1 interact and attenuate each other's binding to the PRL
promoter. CEBPD also suppresses expression of proliferation-related genes,
including c-Myc, survivin, as well as cyclins B1, B2, and D1. These results show 
that PRL expression and cell proliferation are controlled in part by CEBPD.

PMCID: PMC3198962
PMID: 21980073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jan;5(1):177-83. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.595. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Obtain osteoarthritis related molecular signature genes through regulation
network.

Li Y(1), Wang B, Lv G, Xiong G, Liu WD, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spinal Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Hunan 410011, PR China.

Osteoarthritis (OA), also known as degenerative joint disease or osteoarthrosis, 
is the most common form of arthritis. OA occurs when cartilage in the joints
wears down over time. We used the GSE1919 series to identify potential genes that
correlated to OA. The aim of our study was to obtain a molecular signature of OA 
through the regulation network based on differentially expressed genes. From the 
result of regulation network construction in OA, a number of transcription
factors (TFs) and pathways closely related to OA were linked by our method.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> also arises as hub nodes in our
transcriptome network and certain TFs containing CEBPD, EGR2 and ETS2 were shown 
to be related to OA by a previous study.

PMID: 21946934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2010 Nov;50(11):982-3.

[Double the trouble: bidirectional expression of the SCA8 CAG/CTG expansion
mutation - evidence for RNA and protein gain of function effects].

[Article in Japanese]

Ranum LP(1), Daughters RS, Tuttle DL, Gao W, Ikeda Y, Moseley ML, Ebner T,
Swanson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

PMID: 21921535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Nov 21;52(12):8965-78. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-7084.

In vivo gene expression profiling of retina postintravitreal injections of
dexamethasone and triamcinolone at clinically relevant time points for patient
care.

Smit-McBride Z(1), Modjtahedi SP, Cessna CT, Telander DG, Hjelmeland LM, Morse
LS.

Author information: 
(1)Vitreoretinal Research Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, University of 
California Davis, Davis, California, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify retinal genes and their relevant expression pathways
affected by intravitreal injections of dexamethasone (Dex) and triamcinolone
acetonide (TAA) in mice at clinically relevant time points for patient care.
METHODS: Differential gene expressions of over 34,000 well-characterized mouse
genes, in the retinas of 6-week-old C57BL/6J mice, were analyzed after
intravitreal steroid injections at 1 week and 1 month time points, using mouse
genome microarrays. The data were analyzed using commercial microarray analysis
software for biologically relevant changes in gene expression pathways.
RESULTS: A common gene pathway, with differentially activated genes for both
steroids and time points, was "Semaphorin Signaling in Neurons," a member of the 
"Axonal Guidance Signaling System." At 1 week postinjection a common theme was
activation of genes expressed in retinal glial cells, tumor necrosis factor-a,
and transforming growth factor-ß signaling pathways and upregulation of stress
response proteins (Serpina3n, Cebpd), as well as neuropeptide signaling
somatostatin receptor (Sstr2). Unique for Dex was the upregulation of acute phase
proteins (Gfap, Cp, Edn2) as well as Plexna2, a semaphorin signaling receptor,
whereas EphrinB receptor ephexin 1 (Argef15) was downregulated. Folate signaling 
appears to be unique for TAA at 1 week (Folh1, Cubn), whereas aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor signaling might be important for both steroids at 1 month postinjection.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the molecular and genetic effects of intraocular
steroid treatments is of clinical relevance. This in vivo study has elucidated
several genes and pathways that are potentially altering the
neuroprotective/neurodegenerative balance between glial and retinal ganglion
cells during intravitreal steroid treatment.

PMID: 21873667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Trends Mol Med. 2011 Sep;17(9):506-17. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2011.05.004. Epub
2011 Jul 2.

Myotonic dystrophy mouse models: towards rational therapy development.

Gomes-Pereira M(1), Cooper TA, Gourdon G.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U781, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Medicine Necker Enfants
Malades, Paris, France. mario.pereira@inserm.fr

DNA repeat expansions can result in the production of toxic RNA. RNA toxicity has
been best characterised in the context of myotonic dystrophy. Nearly 20 mouse
models have contributed significant and complementary insights into specific
aspects of this novel disease mechanism. These models provide a unique resource
to test pharmacological, anti-sense, and gene-therapy therapeutic strategies that
target specific events of the pathobiological cascade. Further proof-of-principle
concept studies and preclinical experiments require critical and thorough
analysis of the multiple myotonic dystrophy transgenic lines available. This
review provides in-depth assessment of the molecular and phenotypic features of
these models and their contribution towards the dissection of disease mechanisms,
and compares them with the human condition. More importantly, it provides
critical assessment of their suitability and limitations for preclinical testing 
of emerging therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3881009
PMID: 21724467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):28662-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.270710. Epub
2011 Jun 28.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta mediates tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced
Aurora kinase C transcription and promotes genomic instability.

Wu SR(1), Li CF, Hung LY, Huang AM, Tseng JT, Tsou JH, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

Epidemiologic and clinical research indicates that chronic inflammation increases
the risk of certain cancers, possibly through chromosomal instability. However,
the mechanism of inflammation-dependent chromosomal instability associated with
tumorigenesis is not well characterized. The transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein d (C/EBPd, CEBPD) is induced by tumor necrosis
factor a (TNFa) and expressed in chronically inflamed tissue. In this study, we
show that TNFa promotes aneuploidy. Loss of CEBPD attenuated TNFa-induced
aneuploidy, and CEBPD caused centromere abnormality. Additionally, TNFa-induced
CEBPD expression augmented anchorage-independent growth. We found that TNFa
induced expression of aurora kinase C (AURKC) through CEBPD, and that AURKC also 
causes aneuploidy. Furthermore, high CEBPD expression correlated with AURKC
expression in inflamed cervical tissue specimens. These data provide insight into
a novel function for CEBPD in inducing genomic instability through the activation
of AURKC expression in response to inflammatory signals.

PMCID: PMC3190673
PMID: 21715338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 26;6(4):e19274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019274.

Expression of a dominant negative CELF protein in vivo leads to altered muscle
organization, fiber size, and subtype.

Berger DS(1), Moyer M, Kliment GM, van Lunteren E, Ladd AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: CUG-BP and ETR-3-like factor (CELF) proteins regulate tissue- and
developmental stage-specific alternative splicing in striated muscle. We
previously demonstrated that heart muscle-specific expression of a nuclear
dominant negative CELF protein in transgenic mice (MHC-CELF<U+0394>) effectively
disrupts endogenous CELF activity in the heart in vivo, resulting in impaired
cardiac function. In this study, transgenic mice that express the dominant
negative protein under a skeletal muscle-specific promoter (Myo-CELF<U+0394>) were
generated to investigate the role of CELF-mediated alternative splicing programs 
in normal skeletal muscle.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Myo-CELF<U+0394> mice exhibit modest changes in
CELF-mediated alternative splicing in skeletal muscle, accompanied by a reduction
of endomysial and perimysial spaces, an increase in fiber size variability, and
an increase in slow twitch muscle fibers. Weight gain and mean body weight, total
number of muscle fibers, and overall muscle strength were not affected.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although these findings demonstrate that CELF activity 
contributes to the normal alternative splicing of a subset of muscle transcripts 
in vivo, the mildness of the effects in Myo-CELF<U+0394> muscles compared to those in
MHC-CELF<U+0394> hearts suggests CELF activity may be less determinative for alternative
splicing in skeletal muscle than in heart muscle. Nonetheless, even these small
changes in CELF-mediated splicing regulation were sufficient to alter muscle
organization and muscle fiber properties affected in myotonic dystrophy. This
lends further evidence to the hypothesis that dysregulation of CELF-mediated
alternative splicing programs may be responsible for the disruption of these
properties during muscle pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3082560
PMID: 21541285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jul;125(3-5):192-201. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.01.007. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Influence of anabolic combinations of an androgen plus an estrogen on biochemical
pathways in bovine uterine endometrium and ovary.

Becker C(1), Riedmaier I, Reiter M, Tichopad A, Groot MJ, Stolker AA, Pfaffl MW, 
Nielen MF, Meyer HH.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology-Weihenstephan, Technical University Munich, Weihenstephaner Berg 3,
85384 Freising, Germany. Christiane.Becker@wzw.tum.de

The application of anabolic steroids in food producing animals is forbidden in
the EU since 1988, but the abuse of such drugs is a potential problem. The
existing test systems are based on known compounds and can be eluded by newly
emerging substances. The examination of physiological effects of anabolic
hormones on different tissues to indirectly detect misuse might overcome this
problem. Two studies were conducted with post-pubertal 24-months old Nguni
heifers and pre-pubertal female 2-4 weeks old Holstein Friesian calves,
respectively. The animals of the accordant treatment groups were administered
combinations of estrogenic and androgenic compounds. The measurement of the gene 
expression pattern was undertaken with RT-qPCR. Target genes of different
functional groups (receptors, angiogenesis, steroid synthesis, proliferation,
apoptosis, nutrient metabolism and others) have been quantified. Several
biochemical pathways were shown to be influenced by anabolic treatment. Both
studies identified significant regulations in steroid and growth factor receptors
(AR, ERß, LHR, FSHR, Flt-1, PR, IGF-1R, Alk-6), angiogenic and tissue remodeling 
factors (VEGFs, FGFs, BMPs, ANGPT-2, MMPs, TIMP-2, CTSB), steroid synthesis
(S5A1, HSD17, CYP19A1), proliferation (TNFa, IGF-1, IGFBPs, p53, c-fos; CEBPD,
c-kit), apoptosis (CASP3, FasL, p53) and others (C7, INHA, STAR). Several genes
were regulated to opposite directions in post-pubertal compared to pre-pubertal
animals. PCA for Nguni heifers demonstrated a distinct separation between the
control and the treatment group. In conclusion, anabolics modify hormone
sensitivity and steroid synthesis, and they induce proliferative effects in the
whole reproductive tract (uterus and ovary) as well as anti-angiogenic effects in
the ovary. However, the extent will depend on the developmental stage of the
animals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21272641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Feb;33(2):422.e11-25. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.09.017. Epub 2010 Nov 26.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD) elevating PTX3 expression inhibits
macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of dying neuron cells.

Ko CY(1), Chang LH, Lee YC, Sterneck E, Cheng CP, Chen SH, Huang AM, Tseng JT,
Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction Research, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD, C/EBPd, NF-IL6ß) is induced in
many inflammation-related diseases, suggesting that CEBPD and its downstream
targets may play central roles in these conditions. Neuropathological studies
show that a neuroinflammatory response parallels the early stages of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). However, the precise mechanistic correlation between inflammation
and AD pathogenesis remains unclear. CEBPD is upregulated in the astrocytes of AD
patients. Therefore, we asked if activation of astrocytic CEBPD could contribute 
to AD pathogenesis. In this report, a novel role of CEBPD in attenuating
macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of damaged neuron cells was found. By global
gene expression profiling, we identified the inflammatory marker pentraxin-3
(PTX3, TNFAIP5, TSG-14) as a CEBPD target in astrocytes. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that PTX3 participates in the attenuation of macrophage-mediated
phagocytosis of damaged neuron cells. This study provides the first demonstration
of a role for astrocytic CEBPD and the CEBPD-regulated molecule PTX3 in the
accumulation of damaged neurons, which is a hallmark of AD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. EMBO J. 2010 Dec 15;29(24):4106-17. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.280. Epub 2010 Nov
12.

The tumour suppressor C/EBPd inhibits FBXW7 expression and promotes mammary
tumour metastasis.

Balamurugan K(1), Wang JM, Tsai HH, Sharan S, Anver M, Leighty R, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signalling, CCR, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Dec 15;29(24):4063-5.

Inflammation and hypoxia are known to promote the metastatic progression of
tumours. The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-d (C/EBPd, CEBPD) is an inflammatory 
response gene and candidate tumour suppressor, but its physiological role in
tumourigenesis in vivo is unknown. Here, we demonstrate a tumour suppressor
function of C/EBPd using transgenic mice overexpressing the Neu/Her2/ERBB2
proto-oncogene in the mammary gland. Unexpectedly, this study also revealed that 
C/EBPd is necessary for efficient tumour metastasis. We show that C/EBPd is
induced by hypoxia in tumours in vivo and in breast tumour cells in vitro, and
that C/EBPd-deficient cells exhibit reduced glycolytic metabolism and cell
viability under hypoxia. C/EBPd supports CXCR4 expression. On the other hand,
C/EBPd directly inhibits expression of the tumour suppressor F-box and WD
repeat-domain containing 7 gene (FBXW7, FBW7, AGO, Cdc4), encoding an F-box
protein that promotes degradation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).
Consequently, C/EBPd enhances mTOR/AKT/S6K1 signalling and augments translation
and activity of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), which is necessary for
hypoxia adaptation. This work provides new insight into the mechanisms by which
metastasis-promoting signals are induced specifically under hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3018791
PMID: 21076392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 1;16(23):5770-80. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1025.
Epub 2010 Oct 22.

CEBPD reverses RB/E2F1-mediated gene repression and participates in HMDB-induced 
apoptosis of cancer cells.

Pan YC(1), Li CF, Ko CY, Pan MH, Chen PJ, Tseng JT, Wu WC, Chang WC, Huang AM,
Sterneck E, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Recent evidence indicates that a tumor suppressor gene CEBPD
(CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta) is downregulated in many cancers including
cervical cancer, which provides a therapeutic potential associated with its
reactivation. However, little is known for CEBPD activators and the effect of
reactivation of CEBPD transcription upon anticancer drug treatment. In this
study, we identified a novel CEBPD activator,
1-(2-hydroxy-5-methylphenyl)-3-phenyl-1,3-propanedione (HMDB). The purpose of
this study is to characterize the mechanism of HMDB-induced CEBPD activation and 
its potential effect in cancer therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Methylation-specific PCR assay, reporter assay, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay were performed to dissect the
signaling pathway of HMDB-induced CEBPD transcription. Furthermore, a consequence
of HMDB-induced CEBPD expression was linked with E2F1 and retinoblastoma (RB),
which discloses the scenario of CEBPD, E2F1, and RB bindings and transcriptional 
regulation on the promoters of proapoptotic genes, PPARG2 and GADD153. Finally,
the anticancer effect of HMDB was examined in xenograft mice.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that CEBPD plays an essential role in HMDB-mediated
apoptosis of cancer cells. HMDB up-regulates CEBPD transcription through the
p38/CREB pathway, thus leading to transcriptional activation of PPARG2 and
GADD153. Furthermore, increased level of CEBPD attenuates E2F1-induced cancer
cell proliferation and partially rescues RB/E2F1-mediated repression of PPARG2
and GADD153 transcription. Moreover, HMDB treatment attenuates the growth of A431
xenografts in severe combined immunodeficient mice mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results clearly demonstrate that HMDB kills cancer cells
through activation of CEBPD pathways and suggest that HMDB can serve as a
superior chemotherapeutic agent with limited potential for adverse side effects.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 20971808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 5;285(45):34773-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133884. Epub 2010
Sep 9.

C/EBP{delta} and STAT-1 are required for TLR8 transcriptional activity.

Zannetti C(1), Bonnay F, Takeshita F, Parroche P, Ménétrier-Caux C, Tommasino M, 
Hasan UA.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Cancer Biology Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, Lyon 69008, France. claudia.zannetti@inserm.fr

Toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8), which is expressed primarily in myeloid cells, plays
a central role in initiating immune responses to viral single-stranded RNA.
Despite the great interest in the field of TLR8 research, very little is known in
terms of TLR8 biology and its transcriptional regulation. Here, we describe the
isolation of the hTLR8 promoter and the characterization of the molecular
mechanisms involved in its regulation. Reporter gene analysis and ChIP assays
demonstrated that the hTLR8 regulation of the basal transcription is regulated
via three C/EBP cis-acting elements that required C/EBPd and C/EBPß activity. In 
addition, we observed that R848 stimulation increases TLR8 transcriptional
activity via an enhanced binding of C/EBPd, and not C/EBPß, to its responsive
sites within the TLR8 promoter. Moreover, we showed that IFN-<U+03B3> also increased
TLR8 transcription activity via the binding of STAT1 transcription factor to
IFN-<U+03B3> activated sequence elements on the TLR8 promoter and enhanced TLR8
functionality. These results shed new light on the mechanisms involved during
TLR8-mediated innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC2966093
PMID: 20829351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 14;107(37):16131-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002603107. Epub 2010 Aug 30.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta, CEBPD)-mediated nuclear import 
of FANCD2 by IPO4 augments cellular response to DNA damage.

Wang J(1), Sarkar TR, Zhou M, Sharan S, Ritt DA, Veenstra TD, Morrison DK, Huang 
AM, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Maintenance of genomic integrity is an essential cellular function. We previously
reported that the transcription factor and tumor suppressor CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein d (C/EBPd, CEBPD; also known as "NFIL-6ß") promotes genomic
stability. However, the molecular mechanism was not known. Here, we show that
C/EBPd is a DNA damage-induced gene, which supports survival of mouse bone marrow
cells, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF), human fibroblasts, and breast tumor cells 
in response to the DNA cross-linking agent mitomycin C (MMC). Using gene
knockout, protein depletion, and overexpression studies, we found that C/EBPd
promotes monoubiquitination of the Fanconi anemia complementation group D2
protein (FANCD2), which is necessary for its function in replication-associated
DNA repair. C/EBPd interacts with FANCD2 and importin 4 (IPO4, also known as
"Imp4" and "RanBP4") via separate domains, mediating FANCD2-IPO4 association and 
augmenting nuclear import of FANCD2, a prerequisite for its monoubiquitination.
This study identifies a transcription-independent activity of C/EBPd in the DNA
damage response that may in part underlie its tumor suppressor function.
Furthermore, we report a function of IPO4 and nuclear import in the Fanconi
anemia pathway of DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC2941265
PMID: 20805509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Oct;42A(2):114-30. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00065.2010. Epub 2010 Jul 27.

Discovery and characterization of nutritionally regulated genes associated with
muscle growth in Atlantic salmon.

Bower NI(1), Johnston IA.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Oceans Institute, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, St
Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom. nib@st-andrews.ac.uk

A genomics approach was used to identify nutritionally regulated genes involved
in growth of fast skeletal muscle in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Forward
and reverse subtractive cDNA libraries were prepared comparing fish with zero
growth rates to fish growing rapidly. We produced 7,420 ESTs and assembled them
into nonredundant clusters prior to annotation. Contigs representing 40
potentially unrecognized nutritionally responsive candidate genes were
identified. Twenty-three of the subtractive library candidates were also
differentially regulated by nutritional state in an independent fasting-refeeding
experiment and their expression placed in the context of 26 genes with
established roles in muscle growth regulation. The expression of these genes was 
also determined during the maturation of a primary myocyte culture, identifying
13 candidates from the subtractive cDNA libraries with putative roles in the
myogenic program. During early stages of refeeding DNAJA4, HSPA1B, HSP90A, and
CHAC1 expression increased, indicating activation of unfolded protein response
pathways. Four genes were considered inhibitory to myogenesis based on their in
vivo and in vitro expression profiles (CEBPD, ASB2, HSP30, novel transcript
GE623928). Other genes showed increased expression with feeding and highest in
vitro expression during the proliferative phase of the culture (FOXD1, DRG1) or
as cells differentiated (SMYD1, RTN1, MID1IP1, HSP90A, novel transcript
GE617747). The genes identified were associated with chromatin modification
(SMYD1, RTN1), microtubule stabilization (MID1IP1), cell cycle regulation (FOXD1,
CEBPD, DRG1), and negative regulation of signaling (ASB2) and may play a role in 
the stimulation of myogenesis during the transition from a catabolic to anabolic 
state in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2957792
PMID: 20663983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2010 Jul;7(3):195-203. doi: 10.1177/1479164110366274. Epub
2010 May 11.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha, beta and delta gene variants: associations 
with obesity related phenotypes in the Leeds Family Study.

Bennett CE(1), Nsengimana J, Bostock JA, Cymbalista C, Futers TS, Knight BL,
McCormack LJ, Prasad UK, Riches K, Rolton D, Scarrott T, Barrett JH, Carter AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Diabetes Research, Leeds Institute of Genetics,
Health and Therapeutics, University of Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel polymorphisms in the genes encoding the
transcription factors CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha, beta and delta (
CEBPA, CEBPB, CEBPD) and investigate associations between polymorphisms and
obesity-related phenotypes.
METHODS: Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to
screen for novel gene variants and polymorphisms were genotyped in stored DNA
from participants of the Leeds Family Study (537 subjects from 89 families).
Genotype and haplotype analyses were carried out in STATA and PBAT, respectively.
RESULTS: Twenty-five polymorphisms were identified; 11 in CEBPA, 12 in CEBPB and 
2 in CEBPD. Several allelic variants were associated at a nominal 5% level with
waist-to-hip ratio (-919G>A in CEBPA, -412G>T and 646C>T in CEBPB), leptin
(1558G>A in CEBPA, -1051A>G and 1383T>- in CEBPB) and adiponectin (1382G>T and
1903G>T in CEBPB). Effects of CEBPA and CEBPB allelic variants were independent, 
but variants within each gene were in linkage disequilibrium. Several
associations were observed between other obesity-related traits and allelic
variants in CEBPA and CEBPB, but not CEBPD.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that common allelic variants in CEBPA and
CEBPB could influence abdominal obesity and related metabolic abnormalities
associated with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in healthy White
Northern European families, although results require independent confirmation.

PMID: 20460359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 18;107(20):9210-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0913813107. Epub 2010 May 3.

C/EBP{delta} targets cyclin D1 for proteasome-mediated degradation via induction 
of CDC27/APC3 expression.

Pawar SA(1), Sarkar TR, Balamurugan K, Sharan S, Wang J, Zhang Y, Dowdy SF, Huang
AM, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta, CEBPD,
NFIL-6beta) has tumor suppressor function; however, the molecular mechanism(s) by
which C/EBPdelta exerts its effect are largely unknown. Here, we report that
C/EBPdelta induces expression of the Cdc27 (APC3) subunit of the anaphase
promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), which results in the polyubiquitination and 
degradation of the prooncogenic cell cycle regulator cyclin D1, and also
down-regulates cyclin B1, Skp2, and Plk-1. In C/EBPdelta knockout mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEF) Cdc27 levels were reduced, whereas cyclin D1 levels were
increased even in the presence of activated GSK-3beta. Silencing of C/EBPdelta,
Cdc27, or the APC/C coactivator Cdh1 (FZR1) in MCF-10A breast epithelial cells
increased cyclin D1 protein expression. Like C/EBPdelta, and in contrast to
cyclin D1, Cdc27 was down-regulated in several breast cancer cell lines,
suggesting that Cdc27 itself may be a tumor suppressor. Cyclin D1 is a known
substrate of polyubiquitination complex SKP1/CUL1/F-box (SCF), and our studies
show that Cdc27 directs cyclin D1 to alternative degradation by APC/C. These
findings shed light on the role and regulation of APC/C, which is critical for
most cellular processes.

PMCID: PMC2889124
PMID: 20439707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Aug 1;80(3):325-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.04.007. Epub 
2010 Apr 10.

Transcriptional up-regulation of SOD1 by CEBPD: a potential target for cisplatin 
resistant human urothelial carcinoma cells.

Hour TC(1), Lai YL, Kuan CI, Chou CK, Wang JM, Tu HY, Hu HT, Lin CS, Wu WJ, Pu
YS, Sterneck E, Huang AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Graduate Institute of Biochemistry, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Bladder cancer is the fourth most common type of cancer in men (ninth in women)
in the United States. Cisplatin is an effective agent against the most common
subtype, urothelial carcinoma. However, the development of chemotherapy
resistance is a severe clinical problem for the successful treatment of this and 
other cancers. A better understanding of the cellular and molecular events in
response to cisplatin treatment and the development of resistance are critical to
improve the therapeutic options for patients. Here, we report that expression of 
the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPD, C/EBPdelta, NF-IL6beta) is
induced by cisplatin in the human bladder urothelial carcinoma NTUB1 cell line
and is specifically elevated in a cisplatin resistant subline. Expression of
CEBPD reduced cisplatin-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and apoptosis in
NTUB1 cells by inducing the expression of Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) via
direct promoter transactivation. Several reports have implicated CEBPD as a tumor
suppressor gene. This study reveals a novel role for CEBPD in conferring drug
resistance, suggesting that it can also be pro-oncogenic. Furthermore, our data
suggest that SOD inhibitors, which are already used as anti-angiogenic agents,
may be suitable for combinatorial chemotherapy to prevent or treat cisplatin
resistance in bladder and possibly other cancers.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586239
PMID: 20385105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):L36-50. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00427.2009. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

Regulated gene expression in cultured type II cells of adult human lung.

Ballard PL(1), Lee JW, Fang X, Chapin C, Allen L, Segal MR, Fischer H, Illek B,
Gonzales LW, Kolla V, Matthay MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, USA. ballardp@peds.ucsf.edu

Alveolar type II cells have multiple functions, including surfactant production
and fluid clearance, which are critical for lung function. Differentiation of
type II cells occurs in cultured fetal lung epithelial cells treated with
dexamethasone plus cAMP and isobutylmethylxanthine (DCI) and involves increased
expression of 388 genes. In this study, type II cells of human adult lung were
isolated at approximately 95% purity, and gene expression was determined
(Affymetrix) before and after culturing 5 days on collagen-coated dishes with or 
without DCI for the final 3 days. In freshly isolated cells, highly expressed
genes included SFTPA/B/C, SCGB1A, IL8, CXCL2, and SFN in addition to ubiquitously
expressed genes. Transcript abundance was correlated between fetal and adult
cells (r = 0.88), with a subset of 187 genes primarily related to inflammation
and immunity that were expressed >10-fold higher in adult cells. During control
culture, expression increased for 8.1% of expressed genes and decreased for
approximately 4% including 118 immune response and 10 surfactant-related genes.
DCI treatment promoted lamellar body production and increased expression of
approximately 3% of probed genes by > or =1.5-fold; 40% of these were also
induced in fetal cells. Highly induced genes (> or =10-fold) included PGC,
ZBTB16, DUOX1, PLUNC, CIT, and CRTAC1. Twenty-five induced genes, including six
genes related to surfactant (SFTPA/B/C, PGC, CEBPD, and ADFP), also had decreased
expression during control culture and thus are candidates for hormonal regulation
in vivo. Our results further define the adult human type II cell molecular
phenotype and demonstrate that a subset of genes remains hormone responsive in
cultured adult cells.

PMCID: PMC2904098
PMID: 20382749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14088-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.017129. Epub
2010 Mar 10.

Induction of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin expression by
co-stimulation with interleukin-17 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha is controlled 
by IkappaB-zeta but neither by C/EBP-beta nor C/EBP-delta.

Karlsen JR(1), Borregaard N, Cowland JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology (93.2.2), Granulocyte Research Laboratory, University
of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, 9 Blegdamsvej, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is a siderophore-binding
antimicrobial protein that is up-regulated in epithelial tissues during
inflammation. We demonstrated previously that the gene encoding NGAL (LCN2) is
strongly up-regulated by interleukin (IL)-1beta in an NF-kappaB-dependent manner 
but not by tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, another potent activator of
NF-kappaB. This is due to an IL-1beta-specific synthesis of the NF-kappaB-binding
co-factor IkappaB-zeta, which is essential for NGAL induction. We demonstrate
here that NGAL is strongly induced by stimulation with TNF-alpha in the presence 
of IL-17, a pro-inflammatory cytokine produced by the newly discovered subset of 
CD4(+) T helper cells, T(H)-17. In contrast to the murine NGAL orthologue,
24p3/lipocalin 2, we found no requirement for C/EBP-beta or C/EBP-delta for NGAL 
induction by IL-17 and TNF-alpha as neither small interfering RNAs against the
two C/EBP mRNAs nor mutation of the C/EBP sites in the LCN2 promoter abolished
IL-17- and TNF-alpha-induced up-regulation of NGAL. NGAL induction is governed
solely by NF-kappaB and its co-factor IkappaB-zeta. This was demonstrated by a
pronounced reduction in the amount of NGAL mRNA and NGAL protein synthesized in
cells treated with small interfering RNA against IkappaB-zeta and a total lack of
activation of an LCN2 promoter construct with a mutated NF-kappaB site. As IL-17 
stimulation stabilizes the IkappaB-zeta transcript, we propose a model where
TNF-alpha induces activation and binding of NF-kappaB to the promoters of both
NFKBIZ and LCN2 genes but induce only transcription of IkappaB-zeta.
Co-stimulation with IL-17 leads to accumulation of IkappaB-zeta mRNA and
IkappaB-zeta protein, which can bind to NF-kappaB on the LCN2 promoter and thus
induce NGAL expression.

PMCID: PMC2863242
PMID: 20220144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biomed Sci. 2010 Jan 11;17:2. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-2.

Genetic copy number variants in sib pairs both affected with schizophrenia.

Lee CH(1), Liu CM, Wen CC, Chang SM, Hwu HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a complex disorder with involvement of multiple
genes.
METHODS: In this study, genome-wide screening for DNA copy-number variations
(CNVs) was conducted for ten pairs, a total of 20 cases, of affected siblings
using oligonucleotide array-based CGH.
RESULTS: We found negative symptoms were significantly more severe (p < 0.05) in 
the subgroup that harbored more genetic imbalance (n >== 13, n = number of
CNV-disrupted genes) as compared with the subgroup with fewer CNVs (n <== 6),
indicating that the degree of genetic imbalance may influence the severity of the
negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Four central nervous system (CNS) related
genes including CCAAT/enhancer binding protein, delta (CEBPD, 8q11.21), retinoid 
x receptor, alpha (RXRA, 9q34.2), LIM homeobox protein 5 (LHX5, 12q24.13) and
serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11, 19p13.3) are recurrently (incidence >== 16.7%)
disrupted by CNVs. Two genes, PVR (poliovirus receptor) and BU678720, are
concordantly deleted in one and two, respectively, pairs of co-affected siblings.
However, we did not find a significant association of this BU678720 deletion and 
schizophrenia in a large case-control sample.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the high genetic loading of CNVs may be the
underlying cause of negative symptoms of schizophrenia, and the CNS-related genes
revealed by this study warrant further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2843606
PMID: 20064257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2009 Oct;27(160):265-72.

[Expression of genes connected with nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB) estimated
by oligonucleotide microarray analysis HG-U133A in patients with acute myocardial
infarction].

[Article in Polish]

Dabek J(1), Swiderski R, Glogowska-Ligus J, Kulach A, Gasior Z.

Author information: 
(1)Slaski Uniwersytet Medyczny w Katowicach, Katedra i Klinika Kardiologii.
jdabek@sum.edu.pl

Atherosclerosis is a permanently progressive chronic inflammatory disorder which 
nuclear factor kappaKB (NFkappaB) is involved. Therefore NFkappaB has become
integral aspect of atherogenesis and its complications.THE AIM OF THE STUDY:
Estimation of genes expression involved in NFkappaB signaling pathway and
separation genes differentiate patients with acute myocardial infarction from
healthy subjects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The examination was assess using the Affymetrix HG-U133A
oligonucleotide microarray. Differentiating genes were determined using
Bland-Altman graph analysis. Patients wasn't treated due to cardiac diseases
before. All patients were subjected to 12-lead ECG, 2-D echocardiography,
coronarography and laboratory studies including cardiac troponin, CK and CK-MB.
The healthy individuals were subjected to coronarography and computed tomography 
(calcium score)--coronary artery disease was out of the question.
RESULTS: Hierarchical clusterization has demonstrated that the genes expression
of patients with acute myocardial infarction was different from healthy
individuals. It also demonstrated that the individual groups are homogeneous,
especially the group of patients with acute myocardial infarction, regardless of 
diagnosis, number of risk factors and progression of coronary artery disease.
Further Bland-Altman graph analysis showed three important differentiating genes:
TLR2, TNFRSF1A i IKBKAP.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirmed the share of genes involved in NFkappaB
signaling pathway in acute complications of atherosclerosis. Noticed differences 
in genes expression of patients with acute myocardial infarction and healthy
subjects can show important role isolated differentiating genes in
destabilization of atherogenic plaque and acute myocardial infarction occurrence.

PMID: 19928652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(1):253-64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp766. Epub 2009 Oct 
23.

The neurofibromatosis type I pre-mRNA is a novel target of CELF protein-mediated 
splicing regulation.

Barron VA(1), Zhu H, Hinman MN, Ladd AN, Lou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The CUG-BP and ETR-3 like factors (CELF) are a family of six highly conserved
RNA-binding proteins that preferentially bind to UG-rich sequences. One of the
key functions of these proteins is to mediate alternative splicing in a number of
tissues, including brain, heart and muscle. To fully understand the function of
CELF proteins, it is important to identify downstream targets of CELF proteins.
In this communication, we report that neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) exon 23a is 
a novel target of CELF protein-mediated splicing regulation in neuron-like cells.
NF1 regulates Ras signaling, and the isoform that excludes exon 23a shows 10
times greater ability to down-regulate Ras signaling than the isoform that
includes exon 23a. Five of the six CELF proteins strongly suppress the inclusion 
of NF1 exon 23a. Over-expression or siRNA knockdown of these proteins in cell
transfection experiments altered the levels of NF1 exon 23a inclusion. In vitro
binding and splicing analyses demonstrate that CELF proteins block splicing
through interfering with binding of U2AF(65). These studies, combined with our
previous investigations demonstrating a role for Hu proteins and TIA-1/TIAR in
controlling NF1 exon 23a inclusion, highlight the complex nature of regulation of
this important alternative splicing event.

PMCID: PMC2800208
PMID: 19854948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Neurochem Int. 2010 Jan;56(1):188-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.10.002. Epub
2009 Oct 13.

Age-dependent response of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins following traumatic
brain injury in mice.

Sandhir R(1), Berman NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Exacerbated inflammatory responses have been reported following traumatic injury 
to the aged brain. The present study was designed to investigate the involvement 
of the transcription factors belonging to the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP) family that regulate expression of many of the pro-inflammatory genes
which show increased expression following injury to the aged brain. Controlled
cortical impact injury was induced in adult (5-6 months) and aged (22-24 months) 
C57/BL6 mice. C/EBP mRNA and protein expression were analyzed in injured cortex
at 1, 3, and 7 days post-injury. Expression of C/EBPalpha was reduced relative to
baseline at day 1 in both adult and aged mice, whereas, it increased at days 3
and 7 post-injury. No significant differences were observed between adult and
aged brain. Upregulation of C/EBPbeta was observed 1 day following injury in both
the adult and aged brain, but there were no major age-related differences in mRNA
levels. However, there was higher C/EBPbeta protein in the aged brain. C/EBPdelta
expression increased beginning 1 day post-injury in both adult and aged brain. In
this case, the increase in C/EBPdelta expression was higher in the aged brain
than in the adult at all time points studied. Expression of CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), a transcription factor involved in ER 
stress and protein unfolding responses, was also up-regulated in response to
injury, but CHOP levels were significantly lower in the aged than the adult
brain. Based on these results, we conclude that differential expression of C/EBP 
beta, delta and CHOP might contribute to the hyper-inflammatory response and poor
prognosis following traumatic brain injury in the elderly patients. In addition
elevated C/EBPdelta levels following TBI in the aged brain may play a role in the
link between TBI and Alzheimer's disease.

2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2815015
PMID: 19833158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Blood. 2009 Oct 1;114(14):3001-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211334. Epub 2009
Aug 7.

Gene expression profiling of minimally differentiated acute myeloid leukemia: M0 
is a distinct entity subdivided by RUNX1 mutation status.

Silva FP(1), Swagemakers SM, Erpelinck-Verschueren C, Wouters BJ, Delwel R,
Vrieling H, van der Spek P, Valk PJ, Giphart-Gassler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicogenetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Minimally differentiated acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M0) is defined by immature
morphology and expression of early hematologic markers. By gene expression
profiling (GEP) and subsequent unsupervised analysis of 35 AML-M0 samples and 253
previously reported AML cases, we demonstrate that AML-M0 cases express a unique 
signature that is largely separated from other molecular subtypes. Hematologic
transcription regulators such as CEBPA, CEBPD, and ETV6, and the differentiation 
associated gene MPO appeared strongly down-regulated, in line with the primitive 
state of this leukemia. AML-M0 frequently carries loss-of-function RUNX1
mutation. Unsupervised analyses revealed a subdivision between AML-M0 cases with 
and without RUNX1 mutations. RUNX1 mutant AML-M0 samples showed a distinct
up-regulation of B cell-related genes such as members of the B-cell receptor
complex, transcription regulators RUNX3, ETS2, IRF8, or PRDM1, and major
histocompatibility complex class II genes. Importantly, prediction with high
accuracy of the AML-M0 subtype and prediction of patients carrying RUNX1 mutation
within this subtype were possible based on the expression level of only a few
transcripts. We propose that RUNX1 mutations in this AML subgroup cause lineage
infidelity, leading to aberrant coexpression of myeloid and B-lymphoid genes.
Furthermore, our results imply that AML-M0, although originally determined by
morphology, constitutes a leukemia subgroup.

PMID: 19666867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Leuk Res. 2010 Mar;34(3):e82-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.002. Epub 2009 Jul
1.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with t(8;14)(q11.2;q32) in an elderly patient.

Kubo Y, Kakazu N, Tasaka T, Oka D, Hirose T, Matsuhashi Y, Wada H, Tohyama K,
Sugihara T.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with chromosome aberration t(8;14)(q11.2;q32) 
mostly affects patients younger than 20 years old. One third of patients with
this translocation have been reported to have Down syndrome. This translocation
has been reported rarely in patients over the age of 50. Here we report a
71-year-old male ALL patient who carried t(8;14)(q11.2;q32). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed the involvement of CCAAT enhancer-binding 
protein delta (CEBPD) gene on chromosome 8, and IgH gene on chromosome 14. This
case provides a new aspect for considering this clinical entity.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19573915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Immunol. 2009 Jun 1;182(11):7212-21. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802971.

Differential role for c-Rel and C/EBPbeta/delta in TLR-mediated induction of
proinflammatory cytokines.

Lu YC(1), Kim I, Lye E, Shen F, Suzuki N, Suzuki S, Gerondakis S, Akira S, Gaffen
SL, Yeh WC, Ohashi PS.

Author information: 
(1)The Campbell Family Institute for Breast Cancer Research, Ontario Cancer
Institute, Ontario, Canada.

TLR stimulation triggers a signaling pathway via MyD88 and IL-1R-associated
kinase 4 that is essential for proinflammatory cytokine induction. Although
NF-kappaB has been shown to be one of the key transcriptional regulators of these
cytokines, evidence suggests that other factors may also be important. In this
study, we showed that MyD88-deficient macrophages have defective c-Rel
activation, which has been linked to IL-12p40 induction, but not IL-6 or
TNF-alpha. We also investigated other transcription factors and showed that
C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta expression was limited in MyD88- or IL-1R-associated
kinase 4-deficient macrophages treated with LPS. Importantly, the absence of both
C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta resulted in the impaired induction of proinflammatory
cytokines stimulated by several TLR ligands. Our results identify c-Rel and
C/EBPbeta/delta as important transcription factors in a MyD88-dependent pathway
that regulate the induction of proinflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC2805849
PMID: 19454718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Toxicol Pathol. 2009 Jun;37(4):502-11. doi: 10.1177/0192623309335631. Epub 2009
Apr 24.

Gene expression studies reveal that DNA damage, vascular perturbation, and
inflammation contribute to the pathogenesis of carbonyl sulfide neurotoxicity.

Morrison JP(1), Ton TV, Collins JB, Switzer RC, Little PB, Morgan DL, Sills RC.

Author information: 
(1)Charles River Laboratories, Pathology Associates, Durham, NC 27703, USA.

Carbonyl sulfide (COS) is an odorless gas that produces highly reproducible
lesions in the central nervous system. In the present study, the time course for 
the development of the neurotoxicological lesions was defined and the gene
expression changes occurring in the posterior colliculus upon exposure to COS
were characterized. Fischer 344 rats were exposed to 0 or 500 ppm COS for one,
two, three, four, five, eight, or ten days, six hours per day. On days 1 and 2,
no morphological changes were detected; on day 3, 10/10 (100%) rats had necrosis 
in the posterior colliculi; and on day 4 and later, necrosis was observed in
numerous areas of the brain. Important gene expression changes occurring in the
posterior colliculi after one or two days of COS exposure that were predictive of
the subsequent morphological findings included up-regulation of genes associated 
with DNA damage and G1/S checkpoint regulation (KLF4, BTG2, GADD45g), apoptosis
(TGM2, GADD45g, RIPK3), and vascular mediators (ADAMTS, CTGF, CYR61, VEGFC).
Proinflammatory mediators (CCL2, CEBPD) were up-regulated prior to increases in
expression of the astrocytic marker GFAP and macrophage marker CSF2rb1. These
gene expression findings were predictive of later CNS lesions caused by COS
exposure and serve as a model for future investigations into the mechanisms of
disease in the central nervous system.

PMID: 19395590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nat Immunol. 2009 Apr;10(4):437-43. doi: 10.1038/ni.1721. Epub 2009 Mar 8.

Function of C/EBPdelta in a regulatory circuit that discriminates between
transient and persistent TLR4-induced signals.

Litvak V(1), Ramsey SA, Rust AG, Zak DE, Kennedy KA, Lampano AE, Nykter M,
Shmulevich I, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, USA.

The innate immune system is like a double-edged sword: it is absolutely required 
for host defense against infection, but when uncontrolled, it can trigger a
plethora of inflammatory diseases. Here we use systems-biology approaches to
predict and confirm the existence of a gene-regulatory network involving dynamic 
interaction among the transcription factors NF-kappaB, C/EBPdelta and ATF3 that
controls inflammatory responses. We mathematically modeled transcriptional
regulation of the genes encoding interleukin 6 and C/EBPdelta and experimentally 
confirmed the prediction that the combination of an initiator (NF-kappaB), an
amplifier (C/EBPdelta) and an attenuator (ATF3) forms a regulatory circuit that
discriminates between transient and persistent Toll-like receptor 4-induced
signals. Our results suggest a mechanism that enables the innate immune system to
detect the duration of infection and to respond appropriately.

PMCID: PMC2780024
PMID: 19270711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. BMC Genomics. 2009 Feb 5;10:64. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-64.

Understanding Haemophilus parasuis infection in porcine spleen through a
transcriptomics approach.

Chen H(1), Li C, Fang M, Zhu M, Li X, Zhou R, Li K, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction, Ministry 
of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, PR China.
rose060417@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Haemophilus parasuis (HPS) is an important swine pathogen that causes
Glässer's disease, which is characterized by fibrinous polyserositis, meningitis 
and arthritis. The molecular mechanisms that underlie the pathogenesis of the
disease remain poorly understood, particularly the resistance of porcine immune
system to HPS invasion. In this study, we investigated the global changes in gene
expression in the spleen following HPS infection using the Affymetrix Porcine
Genechip.
RESULTS: A total of 931 differentially expressed (DE) transcripts were identified
in the porcine spleen 7 days after HPS infection; of these, 92 unique genes
showed differential expression patterns based on analysis using BLASTX and Gene
Ontology. The DE genes involved in the immune response included genes for
inflammasomes (RETN, S100A8, S100A9, S100A12), adhesion molecules (CLDN3, CSPG2, 
CD44, LGALS8), transcription factors (ZBTB16, SLC39A14, CEBPD, CEBPB),
acute-phase proteins and complement (SAA1, LTF, HP, C3), differentiation genes
for epithelial cells and keratinocytes (TGM1, MS4A8B, CSTA), and genes related to
antigen processing and presentation (HLA-B, HLA-DRB1). Further immunostimulation 
analyses indicated that mRNA levels of S100A8, S100A9, and S100A12 in porcine
PK-15 cells increased within 48 h and were sustained after administration of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Poly(I:C) respectively. In addition, mapping of DE
genes to porcine health traits QTL regions showed that 70 genes were distributed 
in 7 different known porcine QTL regions. Finally, 10 DE genes were validated by 
quantitative PCR.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate previously unrecognized changes in gene
transcription that are associated with HPS infection in vivo, and many potential 
cascades identified in the study clearly merit further investigation. Our data
provide new clues to the nature of the immune response in mammals, and we have
identified candidate genes that are related to resistance to HPS.

PMCID: PMC2660370
PMID: 19196461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3323-32. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162248. Epub 2009
Jan 28.

Runx2 induces acute myeloid leukemia in cooperation with Cbfbeta-SMMHC in mice.

Kuo YH(1), Zaidi SK, Gornostaeva S, Komori T, Stein GS, Castilla LH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The core-binding factor (CBF) is a master regulator of developmental and
differentiation programs, and CBF alterations are frequently associated with
acute leukemia. The role of the CBF member RUNX2 in hematopoiesis is poorly
understood. Genetic evidence suggests that deregulation of Runx2 may cause
myeloid leukemia in mice expressing the fusion oncogene Cbfb-MYH11. In this
study, we show that sustained expression of Runx2 modulates Cbfbeta-smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain (SMMHC)-mediated myeloid leukemia development. Expression of
Runx2 is high in the hematopoietic stem cell compartment and decreases during
myeloid differentiation. Sustained Runx2 expression hinders myeloid progenitor
differentiation capacity and represses expression of CBF targets Csf1R, Mpo,
Cebpd, the cell cycle inhibitor Cdkn1a, and myeloid markers Cebpa and Gfi1. In
addition, full-length Runx2 cooperates with Cbfbeta-SMMHC in leukemia development
in transplantation assays. Furthermore, we show that the nuclear matrix-targeting
signal and DNA-binding runt-homology domain of Runx2 are essential for its
leukemogenic activity. Conversely, Runx2 haplo-insufficiency delays the onset and
reduces the incidence of acute myeloid leukemia. Together, these results indicate
that Runx2 is expressed in the stem cell compartment, interferes with
differentiation and represses CBF targets in the myeloid compartment, and
modulates the leukemogenic function of Cbfbeta-SMMHC in mouse leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2665897
PMID: 19179305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Apr;17(4):657-64. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.630. Epub
2009 Jan 22.

Adipogenic cascade can be induced without adipogenic media by a human adenovirus.

Rathod MA(1), Rogers PM, Vangipuram SD, McAllister EJ, Dhurandhar NV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Several metabolic abnormalities are associated with relative excess or deficiency
of adipose tissue. Identifying the regulators of adipogenic differentiation is
critical for its successful manipulation. Ad36, a human adenovirus, is a novel
factor that promotes adipogenesis. We exploited the adipogenic potential of Ad36 
to reveal exogenous modifiers of adipogenesis in rodent preadipocyte cell line in
the presence or absence of differentiation inducers methyl-isobutyl-xanthine,
dexamethasone, and insulin (M, D, and I; MDI). A nonadipogenic human adenovirus
Ad2 was used as a negative control for viral infection. First, we confirmed that,
Ad36, but not Ad2, increases lipid accumulation in the presence or absence of
MDI. Time-course studies for expression of key genes of adipogenic cascade showed
that it is Ad36, but not Ad2, which downregulated preadipocyte marker gene
Wnt10b, and upregulated expression of early (C/EBPDelta and C/EBPbeta),
intermediate (PPARgamma2), and late genes (aP2 and G3PDH) of adipogenic cascade
even in the absence of MDI. In the presence of MDI, onset of expression of
adipogenic genes coincided for Ad36 and control groups, but the expressions were 
significantly greater for the Ad36 group. Next, we observed that attenuation of
Ad36 mRNA expression by an antiadenoviral agent reduced 3T3-L1 differentiation,
indicating that viral mRNA expression is required for the process. Furthermore,
with or without MDI or its components, Ad36 significantly increased lipid
accumulation in 3T3-L1 cells. Cell confluency at the time of Ad36 infection
positively influenced lipid accumulation. The results reveal that Ad36 is an
MDI-independent exogenous regulator of the adipogenic process. Elucidating the
molecular pathways involved may reveal novel regulatory controls of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2744396
PMID: 19165154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Mar;46(3):395-404. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.10.030.
Epub 2008 Nov 24.

CELF-mediated alternative splicing is required for cardiac function during early,
but not later, postnatal life.

Terenzi F(1), Brimacombe KR, Penn MS, Ladd AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave. NC10, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

During the transition from juvenile to adult life, the heart undergoes programmed
remodeling at the levels of transcription and alternative splicing. Members of
the CUG-BP and ETR-3-like factor (CELF) family have been implicated in driving
developmental transitions in alternative splicing of cardiac transcripts during
maturation of the heart. Here, we investigated the timing of the requirement for 
CELF activity in the postnatal heart using a previously described transgenic
mouse model (MHC-CELFDelta). In MHC-CELFDelta mice, nuclear CELF activity has
been disrupted specifically in the heart by cardiac-specific expression of a
dominant negative CELF protein. Longitudinal analyses of two lines of
MHC-CELFDelta mice with differing levels of dominant negative protein expression 
demonstrate that CELF splicing activity is required for healthy cardiac function 
during juvenile, but not adult, life. Cardiac function, chamber dilation, and
heart size all recover with age in the mild line of MHC-CELFDelta mice without a 
loss of dominant negative protein expression or change in expression of
endogenous CELF proteins or known CELF antagonists. This is the first example of 
a mouse model with genetically induced cardiomyopathy that spontaneously recovers
without intervention. Our results suggest that CELF proteins are key players in
the integrated gene expression program involved in postnatal cardiac remodeling
and maturation.

PMID: 19073192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Nov;36(19):6066-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn607. Epub 2008
Sep 27.

Sumoylation of LAP1 is involved in the HDAC4-mediated repression of COX-2
transcription.

Wang WL(1), Lee YC, Yang WM, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan.

CEBPB, one of the CEBP family members, is a crucial regulator of gene expression 
during innate immunity, inflammatory responses and adipogenesis. In this study,
the EGF-induced increase of CEBPB mRNA is shown to be coincident with the
decrease of COX-2 mRNA. We identified that all of the individual CEBPB isoforms, 
LAP1, LAP2 and LIP, attenuate EGF-induced COX-2 promoter activity. Although
increased sumoylation of both LAP1 and LAP2 is observed during the lagging stage 
of EGF treatment, only the sumoylated LAP1, but not the sumoylated LAP2, is
responsible for COX-2 gene repression. In addition, EGF treatment can regulate
the nucleocytoplasmic redistribution of HDAC4 and SUMO1. We further demonstrated 
by loss-of- and gain-of-function approaches that HDAC4 can be a negative
regulator while inactivating COX-2 transcription. The sumoylation mutant LAP1,
LAP1K174A, exhibits an attenuated ability to interact with HDAC4, and increased
COX-2 promoter activity. Furthermore, the in vivo DNA binding assay demonstrated 
that LAP1K174A and CEBPDK120A, sumoylation-defective CEBPD mutants, attenuate the
binding of HDAC4 on the COX-2 promoter. In light of the above, our data suggest
that the suCEBPD and suLAP1 are involved in the repression of COX-2 transcription
through the recruitment of HDAC4.

PMCID: PMC2577330
PMID: 18820298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30919-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804029200. Epub 2008 
Aug 27.

Epigenetic silencing of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta activity by
YY1/polycomb group/DNA methyltransferase complex.

Ko CY(1), Hsu HC, Shen MR, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan
70101, Taiwan.

Human CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (CEBPD) has been reported as a tumor
suppressor because it both induces growth arrest involved in differentiation and 
plays a crucial role as a regulator of pro-apoptotic gene expression. In this
study, CEBPD gene expression is down-regulated, and "loss of function"
alterations in CEBPD gene expression are observed in cervical cancer and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12), a component of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), silences CEBPD promoter activity, enhancing
the methylation of exogenous CEBPD promoter through the proximal CpG islands.
Moreover, this molecular approach is consistent with the opposite mRNA expression
pattern between SUZ12 and CEBPD in cervical cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma
patients. We further demonstrated that Yin-Yang-1 (YY1) physically interacts with
SUZ12 and can act as a mediator to recruit the polycomb group proteins and DNA
methyltransferases to participate in the CEBPD gene silencing process. Taking
these results into consideration, we not only demonstrate the advantage of
SUZ12-silenced CEBPD expression in tumor formation but also clarify an in vivo
evidence for YY1-mediated silencing paths of SUZ12 and DNA methyltransferases on 
the CEBPD promoter.

PMCID: PMC2662167
PMID: 18753137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. BMC Neurosci. 2008 Aug 1;9:76. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-9-76.

Temporal gene expression profiling reveals CEBPD as a candidate regulator of
brain disease in prosaposin deficient mice.

Sun Y(1), Jia L, Williams MT, Zamzow M, Ran H, Quinn B, Aronow BJ, Vorhees CV,
Witte DP, Grabowski GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 4006, Cincinnati, OH, USA. ying.sun@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: Prosaposin encodes, in tandem, four small acidic activator proteins
(saposins) with specificities for glycosphingolipid (GSL) hydrolases in
lysosomes. Extensive GSL storage occurs in various central nervous system regions
in mammalian prosaposin deficiencies.
RESULTS: Our hypomorphic prosaposin deficient mouse, PS-NA, exhibited 45% WT
levels of brain saposins and showed neuropathology that included neuronal GSL
storage and Purkinje cell loss. Impairment of neuronal function was observed as
early as 6 wks as demonstrated by the narrow bridges tests. Temporal
transcriptome microarray analyses of brain tissues were conducted with mRNA from 
three prosaposin deficient mouse models: PS-NA, prosaposin null (PS-/-) and a
V394L/V394L glucocerebrosidase mutation combined with PS-NA (4L/PS-NA). Gene
expression alterations in cerebrum and cerebellum were detectable at birth
preceding the neuronal deficits. Differentially expressed genes encompassed a
broad spectrum of cellular functions. The number of down-regulated genes was
constant, but up-regulated gene numbers increased with age.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (CEBPD) was the only up-regulated
transcription factor in these two brain regions of all three models. Network
analyses revealed that CEBPD has functional relationships with genes in
transcription, pro-inflammation, cell death, binding, myelin and transport.
CONCLUSION: These results show that: 1) Regionally specific gene expression
abnormalities precede the brain histological and neuronal function changes, 2)
Temporal gene expression profiles provide insights into the molecular mechanism
during the GSL storage disease course, and 3) CEBPD is a candidate regulator of
brain disease in prosaposin deficiency to participate in modulating disease
acceleration or progression.

PMCID: PMC2518924
PMID: 18673548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Oct;1783(10):1803-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.06.008. Epub 2008 Jun 19.

HDAC1/HDAC3 modulates PPARG2 transcription through the sumoylated CEBPD in
hepatic lipogenesis.

Lai PH(1), Wang WL, Ko CY, Lee YC, Yang WM, Shen TW, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, 
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors gamma (PPARG) play critical roles in the regulation of lipid metabolism
genes. Overexpression of CEBPdelta (CEBPD) enhances lipid accumulation and
specifically activates PPARG2 transcription in HepG2 cells. By using 5'-serial
deletion reporter analysis, we show that the region comprising the -457 to +129
base pairs is required for CEBPD response of the PPARG2 promoter. Two critical
CEBPD-binding motifs on the -324/-311 and -158/-145 of human PPARG2 promoter are 
identified. We previously have shown that the human CEBPD is sumoylated by small 
ubiquitin-related modifier-1 (SUMO1). We further demonstrated that the
sumoylation of CEBPD lysine 120 is also detectable in HepG2 cells, and this
modification functions for binding of the recruits, HDAC1 and HDAC3. Meanwhile,
an in vivo chromatin IP assay demonstrated that the sumoylation mutant of CEBPD
lost a significant portion of HDAC1 and HDAC3 interaction. Combining that the
increasing amount of CEBPD and the sumoylated CEBPD (suCEBPD) consistently
responded to lipogenic stimulation, these results suggest that the excess
non-sumoylated CEBPD could be a critical activator which reverses
suCEBPD/HDAC1/HDAC3-mediated PPARG2 gene inactivation and promotes hepatic
lipogenesis. Taken together, we suggest that suCEBPD/HDAC1/HDAC3 complex
inactivates PPARG2 transcription, and the induction of CEBPD expression
transiently activates PPARG2 transcription which is involved in adipocyte-like
lipogenesis in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 18619497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 2;27(44):5856-66. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.195. Epub 2008 Jun 16.

Gene array analysis reveals a common Runx transcriptional programme controlling
cell adhesion and survival.

Wotton S(1), Terry A, Kilbey A, Jenkins A, Herzyk P, Cameron E, Neil JC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Molecular Oncology Laboratory,Institute of
Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland.
S.Wotton@vet.gla.ac.uk

The Runx genes are important in development and cancer, where they can act either
as oncogenes or tumour suppressors. We compared the effects of ectopic Runx
expression in established fibroblasts, where all three genes produce an
indistinguishable phenotype entailing epithelioid morphology and increased cell
survival under stress conditions. Gene array analysis revealed a strongly
overlapping transcriptional signature, with no examples of opposing regulation of
the same target gene. A common set of 50 highly regulated genes was identified
after further filtering on regulation by inducible RUNX1-ER. This set revealed a 
strong bias toward genes with annotated roles in cancer and development, and a
preponderance of targets encoding extracellular or surface proteins, reflecting
the marked effects of Runx on cell adhesion. Furthermore, in silico prediction of
resistance to glucocorticoid growth inhibition was confirmed in fibroblasts and
lymphoid cells expressing ectopic Runx. The effects of fibroblast expression of
common RUNX1 fusion oncoproteins (RUNX1-ETO, TEL-RUNX1 and CBFB-MYH11) were also 
tested. Although two direct Runx activation target genes were repressed (Ncam1
and Rgc32), the fusion proteins appeared to disrupt the regulation of
downregulated targets (Cebpd, Id2 and Rgs2) rather than impose constitutive
repression. These results elucidate the oncogenic potential of the Runx family
and reveal novel targets for therapeutic inhibition.

PMCID: PMC2562521
PMID: 18560354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;121(1):50-4. doi: 10.1159/000124381. Epub 2008 May 7.

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis.

Szczerbal I(1), Chmurzynska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, August Cieszkowski Agricultural
University of Poznan, Poznan, Poland. izabel@jay.au.poznan.pl

Chromosomal localization of nine porcine genes encoding transcription factors
involved in adipogenesis was determined. BAC clones harboring sequences of
selected genes CEBPA (SSC6q12), CEBPB (SSC17q23), CEBPD (SSC4q15), CEBPG
(SSC6q12), PPARG (SSC13q24), SREBF1 (SSC10q17), DDIT3 (SSC12q15), GATA2 (SSC13q24
-->q31) and GATA3 (SSC5p12) were mapped by FISH. The positions of these genes in 
the human and pig genomes were compared. A potential role of the genes encoding
adipogenesis factors as candidate genes for fatness traits as well as
obesity-related phenotypes is discussed.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18544926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008 May;294(5):R1628-37. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00853.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 19.

Inflammatory gene changes associated with the repeated-bout effect.

Hubal MJ(1), Chen TC, Thompson PD, Clarkson PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
mhubal@cnmcresearch.org

This study proposed that attenuated expression of inflammatory factors is an
underlying mechanism driving the repeated-bout effect (rapid adaptation to
eccentric exercise). We investigated changes in mRNA levels and protein
localization of inflammatory genes after two bouts of muscle-lengthening
exercise. Seven male subjects performed two bouts of lower body exercise
(separated by 4 wk) in which one leg performed 300 eccentric-concentric actions, 
and the contralateral leg performed 300 concentric actions only. Vastus lateralis
biopsies were collected at 6 h, and strength was assessed at baseline and at 0,
3, and 5 days after exercise. mRNA levels were measured via semiquantitative
RT-PCR for the following genes: CYR61, HSP40, HSP70, IL1R1, TCF8, ZFP36, CEBPD,
and MCP1. Muscle functional adaptation was demonstrated via attenuated strength
loss (16% less, P = 0.04) at 5 days after bout 2 compared with bout 1 in the
eccentrically exercised leg. mRNA expression of three of the eight genes tested
was significantly elevated in the eccentrically exercised leg from bout 1 to bout
2 (+3.9-fold for ZFP36, +2.3-fold for CEBPD, and +2.6-fold for MCP1), while all
eight mRNA levels were unaffected by bout in the concentrically exercised leg.
Immunohistochemistry further localized the protein of one of the elevated factors
[monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP1)] within the tissue. MCP1 colocalized
with resident macrophage and satellite cell populations, suggesting that
alterations in cytokine signaling between these cell populations may play a role 
in muscle adaptation to exercise. Contrary to our hypothesis, several
inflammatory genes were transcriptionally upregulated (rather than attenuated)
after a repeated exercise bout, potentially indicating a role for these genes in 
the adaptation process.

PMID: 18353886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Chromosome Res. 2007;15(8):985-1000. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Localized co-transcriptional recruitment of the multifunctional RNA-binding
protein CELF1 by lampbrush chromosome transcription units.

Morgan GT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK. garry.morgan@nottingham.ac.uk

The highly-extended transcription units of lampbrush chromosomes (LBCs) offer
unique opportunities to study the co-transcriptional events occurring on nascent 
transcripts. Using LBCs from amphibian oocytes, I investigated whether CELF1, an 
RNA binding protein involved in the regulation of alternative splicing, mRNA
stability and translation, is localized to active transcription units. Antibodies
raised against mammalian (CUG-BP1) and amphibian (EDEN-BP) CELF1 were used to
immunostain LBC spreads prepared from several species, including Xenopus laevis
and the axolotl Ambystoma mexicanum. Up to about 50 separate LBC loci were
convincingly immunostained and it was clear that CELF1 was present in the nascent
RNPs of lateral loops. Furthermore, myc-tagged CUG-BP1 expressed in microinjected
axolotl oocytes was specifically targeted to nascent transcripts of loops that
recruit endogenous CELF1. In many active transcription units CELF1 was distinctly
localized, being first recruited by nascent transcripts only far downstream of
the transcription start site and remaining associated until the end of
transcription. Overall it appears possible that the multiple functions of CELF1
in regulating posttranscriptional gene expression could all be predetermined
during transcription by virtue of a region-specific binding to the nascent
transcripts of target genes.

PMID: 18095176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2007 Dec 19;2(12):e1334.

The Cebpd (C/EBPdelta) gene is induced by luteinizing hormones in ovarian theca
and interstitial cells but is not essential for mouse ovary function.

Huang AM(1), Rudelius M, Sharan S, McAllister JM, Raffeld M, Christenson LK,
Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland,
United States of America.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (CEBP) family of transcription factors
includes five genes. In the ovary, both Cebpa and Cebpb are essential for
granulosa cell function. In this study we have explored the role of the Cebpd
gene in ovarian physiology by expression and functional studies. Here we report
that Cebpd (C/EBPdelta) is expressed in the mouse ovary in a highly restricted
temporal and spatial pattern. In response to luteinizing hormone (LH/hCG), CEBPD 
expression is transiently induced in interstitial cells and in theca cells of
follicles from the primary to pre-ovulatory stage, and overlaps in part with
expression of the alpha-smooth muscle actin protein. Efficient down-regulation of
CEBPD was dependent on a functional Cebpb gene. Proliferating human theca cells
in culture also express Cebpd. Cells from patients with polycystic ovarian
syndrome (PCOS) exhibited higher Cebpd expression levels. However, deletion of
Cebpd in mice had no overt effect on ovarian physiology and reproductive
function. Very little is known at present about the molecular mechanisms
underlying theca/interstitial cell functions. The expression pattern of CEBPD
reported here identifies a novel functional unit of mouse theca cells of primary 
through tertiary follicles responding to LH/hCG together with a subset of
interstitial cells. This acute stimulation of CEBPD expression may be exploited
to further characterize the hormonal regulation and function of theca and
interstitial cells.

PMCID: PMC2129115
PMID: 18092000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2007 Dec;64(24):3282-94.

Role of transcriptional factors Sp1, c-Rel, and c-Jun in LPS-induced C/EBPdelta
gene expression of mouse macrophages.

Liu YW(1), Chen CC, Wang JM, Chang WC, Huang YC, Chung SY, Chen BK, Hung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, College of
Life Sciences, National Chiayi University, Chiayi, Taiwan. ywlss@mail.ncyu.edu.tw

Transcription factor C/EBPs are involved in the regulation of various cellular
responses. Here, it was suggested that C/EBPdelta gene was activated by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) through transcription factors Sp1, c-Rel, and c-Jun.
Assay of the luciferase reporter vectors containing a 5'-deletion of the
C/EBPdelta gene promoter indicated that a LPS-responsive element was positioned
between -345 and -35 bp of mouse C/EBPdelta gene promoter. Transcription factors 
Sp1, c-Rel, and c-Jun bound to this region were identified using both in vivo
chromatin immunoprecipitation and in vitro DNA-protein binding assays. LPS
enhanced the proteins and DNA binding capacities of c-Rel and c-Jun, and the
downstream Sp1 site was essential for LPS-induced C/EBPdelta gene. Treatment of
cells with ERK/JNK/p38 inhibitors or NF-kappaB inhibitor inhibited the
LPS-induced C/EBPdelta gene expression by inhibiting c-Jun, c-Rel, and p300
binding to DNA. Our findings provide a better understanding of LPS-induced
C/EBPdelta gene expression.

PMID: 17965828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 15;176(6):602-9. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Gene expression profiling identifies C/EBPdelta as a candidate regulator of
endotoxin-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Slofstra SH(1), Groot AP, Obdeijn MH, Reitsma PH, ten Cate H, Spek CA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, G2-132, Academic Medical
Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
s.h.slofstra@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep 15;176(6):528-30.

RATIONALE: A runaway inflammatory response to systemic infection or severe trauma
is characterized by the activation of a diversity of pathways, ultimately
resulting in the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and 
multiorgan failure.
OBJECTIVES: Despite increased fundamental knowledge of the pathogenesis of DIC,
the exact molecular mechanisms remain elusive. We aimed therefore to improve our 
understanding of the molecular pathways underlying endotoxin-induced DIC.
METHODS: We performed large-scale gene expression profiling in the liver of mice 
during the onset of endotoxin-induced DIC. The relevance of an identified
candidate gene involved in endotoxin-induced DIC was subsequently assessed in the
generalized Shwartzman reaction.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Approximately 5% of over 20,000 genes were
differentially regulated. In addition to well-established sepsis-associated
genes, such as macrophage inflammatory protein 1, plasminogen activator inhibitor
1, CD14, and A20, we identified several novel candidates for inflammatory disease
of which the transcription factor C/EBPdelta (CAAT/enhancer binding protein
delta) was studied further. Induction of DIC in C/EBPdelta-deficient mice
decreased endotoxin-induced systemic inflammation as compared with wild-type
mice, as evident from decreased plasma levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and 
IL-6. In addition, C/EBPdelta deficiency partly protected against DIC-induced
mortality. Interestingly, C/EBPdelta deficiency seemed mainly protective by
improving renal function. This latter notion was confirmed in an experimental
model of renal ischemia/reperfusion injury in which C/EBPdelta deficiency reduced
ischemia/reperfusion-induced creatinine and urea levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results endorse the usefulness of gene expression profiling in
identifying novel mediators of DIC by showing that C/EBPdelta regulates specific 
pathologic features of this endotoxin-induced syndrome.

PMID: 17600275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Neuromuscul Disord. 2007 Apr;17(4):306-12. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

Expression of MBNL and CELF mRNA transcripts in muscles with myotonic dystrophy.

Nezu Y(1), Kino Y, Sasagawa N, Nishino I, Ishiura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is an autosomal dominant disorder that causes
muscle wasting, myotonia, cardiac conduction abnormalities, and other
multi-systemic symptoms. Current evidence supports a pathogenic mechanism
involving aberrantly expanded CTG repeats in the 3'-untranslated region of the DM
protein kinase (DMPK) gene. The repeats are thought to recruit various
RNA-binding proteins such as muscleblind-like (MBNL) proteins into foci in the
nuclei of DM cells, resulting in loss of function. However, aberrant regulation
of transcription or subsequent RNA processing of MBNL-family mRNAs might also be 
part of the pathogenic mechanism of DM. We used real-time RT-PCR analysis to
examine the possibility that MBNL mRNA expression is altered in DM1 patients. We 
also examined mRNA expression for members of the CUG-BP and ETR-3-like factor
(CELF) family of RNA-binding proteins given that CELF proteins regulate
alternative splicing and are also implicated in DM. We found that DM1 muscles
displayed aberrant regulation of alternative splicing as reported previously;
however, the levels of MBNL and CELF mRNA expression did not show any significant
changes. Our results suggest that the expression and stability of the mRNA for
these RNA-binding proteins are unaffected in DM1.

PMID: 17331722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Diabetologia. 2007 Feb;50(2):481-9. Epub 2006 Dec 16.

Increased expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta and -delta and
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 genes in aortas from hyperinsulinaemic rats.

Sato Y(1), Nishio Y, Sekine O, Kodama K, Nagai Y, Nakamura T, Maegawa H,
Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Seta-Tsukinowa-Cho, Otsu, Shiga, 520-2192, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We evaluated whether hyperinsulinaemia stimulates the expression
of transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-beta and
C/EBP-delta and leads to the induction of the chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 gene
(Ccl2, also known as MCP-1) expression in aortas.
METHODS: Hyperinsulinaemia was induced by feeding rats a high-fructose diet. CCL2
production was analysed by ELISA. The expression of Ccl2, Cebpb and Cebpd mRNAs
was investigated by quantitative RT-PCR. The binding of C/EBP-beta to Ccl2 was
assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay.
RESULTS: Insulin at a concentration of 10 nmol/l significantly stimulated the
expression of Cebpb, Cebpd and Ccl2 mRNAs, depending on activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells.
The knock-down of C/EBP-beta with siRNA abolished the insulin-induced Ccl2 mRNA
expression. In the aortas from fructose-fed rats, the levels of phosphorylation
of Akt/protein kinase B, a downstream effector of PI3K, were also increased. The 
expression of Cebpb, Cebpd and Ccl2 mRNAs in the aortas from fructose-fed rats
were significantly elevated, by 330, 300 and 300%, respectively, compared with
those of control-fed rats. The induction Ccl2 mRNA expression in the aortas was
significantly correlated with the expression of Cebpb and Cebpd mRNAs in the
aortas. Furthermore, the ChIP assay showed elevated binding of C/EBP-beta to the 
5' upstream region of Ccl2 in the aortas from fructose-fed rats.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These findings clearly indicate the role of C/EBPs in
the mechanism of upregulation of CCL2, an inflammation-related protein, observed 
in the hyperinsulinaemic state, which may initiate the process of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 17180354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Blood. 2007 Apr 15;109(8):3451-61. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Five members of the CEBP transcription factor family are targeted by recurrent
IGH translocations in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL).

Akasaka T(1), Balasas T, Russell LJ, Sugimoto KJ, Majid A, Walewska R, Karran EL,
Brown DG, Cain K, Harder L, Gesk S, Martin-Subero JI, Atherton MG, Brüggemann M, 
Calasanz MJ, Davies T, Haas OA, Hagemeijer A, Kempski H, Lessard M, Lillington
DM, Moore S, Nguyen-Khac F, Radford-Weiss I, Schoch C, Struski S, Talley P,
Welham MJ, Worley H, Strefford JC, Harrison CJ, Siebert R, Dyer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology Unit, Medical Research Council, University of Leicester, Lancaster 
Road, Leicester, UK.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (CEBP) transcription factors play pivotal roles in
proliferation and differentiation, including suppression of myeloid
leukemogenesis. Mutations of CEBPA are found in a subset of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) and in some cases of familial AML. Here, using cytogenetics,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and molecular cloning, we show that 5 
CEBP gene family members are targeted by recurrent IGH chromosomal translocations
in BCP-ALL. Ten patients with t(8;14)(q11;q32) involved CEBPD on chromosome 8,
and 9 patients with t(14;19)(q32;q13) involved CEBPA, while a further patient
involved CEBPG, located 71 kb telomeric of CEBPA in chromosome band 19q13; 4
patients with inv(14)(q11q32)/t(14;14)(q11;q32) involved CEBPE and 3 patients
with t(14;20)(q32;q13) involved CEBPB. In 16 patients the translocation
breakpoints were cloned using long-distance inverse-polymerase chain reaction
(LDI-PCR). With the exception of CEBPD breakpoints, which were scattered within a
43-kb region centromeric of CEBPD, translocation breakpoints were clustered
immediately 5' or 3' of the involved CEBP gene. Except in 1 patient with
t(14;14)(q11;q32), the involved CEBP genes retained germ-line sequences.
Quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR showed overexpression of the
translocated CEBP gene. Our findings implicate the CEBP gene family as novel
oncogenes in BCP-ALL, and suggest opposing functions of CEBP dysregulation in
myeloid and lymphoid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17170124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Clin Neuropathol. 2006 Nov-Dec;25(6):272-81.

Neuronal intranuclear inclusions, dysregulation of cytokine expression and cell
death in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3.

Evert BO(1), Schelhaas J, Fleischer H, de Vos RA, Brunt ER, Stenzel W,
Klockgether T, Wüllner U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: We analyzed the expression of the inflammatory mediators IL-1beta,
IL-1ra, IL-6 and the transcription factors IRF-1 and C/EBPdelta (previously
identified in a transgenic model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) by gene 
expression profiling) in the central nervous system of SCA3 patients in relation 
to neuronal cell loss and ataxin-3-positive neuronal intranuclear inclusions
(NI), to identify a putative upregulation of cytokines or microglia in SCA3
brains and to investigate whether enhanced cytokine expression was a generalized 
event mediating neuronal dysfunction in SCA3.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Light- and electronmicroscopic immunohistochemistry was
performed on SCA3 tissues derived from five patients from unrelated families with
genetically confirmed diagnosis, and six individuals without a history of
neurological or inflammatory disease.
RESULTS: NI were found almost exclusively in brain regions that also showed
neuronal cell loss, i.e. in pons and dentate nucleus neurons, rarely in putamen
and thalamus, but not in cerebral or cerebellar cortex. NI displayed an irregular
surface and were mostly attached to the nucleoli. Quantitative analysis of NI in 
the pons revealed an inverse relation of NI and cell loss, i.e. patients with
more severe neuronal cell loss had a smaller proportion of neurons with NI. Thus,
formation of NI is not necessarily an indicator of cell death but could exert a
protective effect. We found increased expression of IL-1beta, IL-1ra, IL-6 and
C/EBPdelta only in pons and dentate nucleus neurons and both in neurons with and 
without NI, suggesting that NI are not a prerequisite for transcriptional
changes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the selectively affected neuronal populations 
in SCA3 undergo a complex alteration of gene expression independent from the
formation of NI.

PMID: 17140157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Kidney Dis. 2006 Oct;48(4):616-28.

Hemodialysis modulates gene expression profile in skeletal muscle.

Shah VO(1), Dominic EA, Moseley P, Pickett G, Fleet M, Ness S, Raj DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Department of Medicine, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

BACKGROUND: Uremia alters diverse metabolic pathways involving multiple organ
systems, including skeletal muscle. Skeletal muscle has an important role in
nutrition, metabolism, oxidative stress, and inflammation. We hypothesized that
hemodialysis (HD) will change the genomic fingerprinting associated with uremia
and facilitate expression of a distinct set of genes.
METHODS: Five patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) were studied. Skeletal
muscle biopsy specimens from the vastus lateralis were obtained before (pre-HD)
and during the last 10 minutes of HD (post-HD). Oligonucleotide microarray
(version 2, GeneChip arrays; Affymetrix U95A, Santa Clara, CA) was used to
analyze global transcriptional modification in skeletal muscle by HD. Pre-HD data
were compared with data from 3 subjects without renal failure.
RESULTS: In skeletal muscle of patients with ESRD, 83 genes were upregulated and 
8 genes were downregulated pre-HD compared with controls. Pathway analysis linked
55 genes to 5 gene networks involved in the regulation of cell cycle, cell
proliferation, cellular organization, apoptosis, and inflammation. During HD,
expression of 22 genes increased and 1 (TOB1) decreased. Pathway analysis mapped 
20 genes to 2 genetic networks involved in: (1) inflammation, cell proliferation,
and cell signaling; and (2) apoptosis, cell function, protein synthesis, and
tissue morphology. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction confirmed
increased expression of GADD45A, BTG2, PDE4B, and CEBPD and downregulation of
TOB1 in skeletal muscle intradialysis.
CONCLUSION: In response to the uremic milieu, skeletal muscle goes through very
active transcriptional and translational changes. HD activates a diverse, yet
biologically linked, network of genes related to inflammation and apoptosis in
skeletal muscle.

PMID: 16997058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Haematologica. 2006 May;91(5):596-604.

Common features and differences in the transcriptome of large cell anaplastic
lymphoma and classical Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Willenbrock K(1), Küppers R, Renné C, Brune V, Eckerle S, Weidmann E, Bräuninger 
A, Hansmann ML.

Author information: 
(1)Senckenbergisches Institut für Pathologie, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. willenbrock@em.uni-frankfurt.de

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) and classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) are derived from different cell types, namely T cells and
B cells, respectively. However, both lymphomas share a similar cytological and
immunohistochemical tumor cell phenotype with little resemblance to their cells
of origin.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study, the transcriptional profiles of ALCL cell
lines, primary ALCL tumor cells from peripheral blood and HL cell lines were
compared to each other and to normal B-cell subsets, B non-Hodgkin's lymphomas
(NHL) and B NHL- and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B-cell lines in order
to establish their relationship at the transcriptional level and to identify
genes with possible pathobiological impact. Expression of some of the genes
identified was confirmed in microdissected primary tumor cells by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: HL samples clustered separately from ALCL samples, but HL and ALCL were 
found to be more closely related to each other than to any normal or malignant
B-cell sample in the dataset. Their relationship was determined to a large
extent, but not exclusively, by lack of expression of B-cell antigens and by the 
over-expression of mRNA encoding activation markers and structural proteins.
Apart from established differences between HL and ALCL, further genes of interest
could be identified that distinguish both entities from each other and from the
other samples. The differential expression of PRAME, DDR2, SOCS3 and CEBPD in HL 
and ALCL was confirmed in primary tumor tissue by immunohistochemistry and/or
RT-PCR.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: At a transcriptional level HL is more closely
related to Alk+ ALCL than to the B-NHL or B-cell samples investigated, although
it is a B-cell derived lymphoma. The newly identified genes discriminating HL and
ALCL may be pathobiologically important and may serve as possible therapeutic
targets.

PMID: 16670065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Acta Myol. 2005 Oct;24(2):74-7.

Regulation of splicing by MBNL and CELF family of RNA-binding protein.

Ishiura S(1), Kino Y, Nezu Y, Onishi H, Ohno E, Sasagawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Myotonic Dystrophy (DM), the most common form of adult-onset muscular dystrophy, 
comprises at least 2 subtypes, DM1 and DM2. DM1 is caused by the expansion of a
CTG repeat located in the 3' untranslated region of the DM protein kinase (DMPK) 
gene. Recently, the expansion of a CCTG tetranucleotide repeat located in the
first intron of the ZNF9 gene was identified as the mutation responsible for DM2.
Since both DM1 and DM2 are caused by the expansion of repetitive sequences, some 
common factors that interact with these sequences might be involved in the
pathogenesis of DM. MBNL1 is a candidate for such factors and is thought to be
sequestered by the expanded forms of DM transcripts.

PMID: 16550919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Apr;1762(4):460-7. Epub 2005 Dec 29.

Brain-specific change in alternative splicing of Tau exon 6 in myotonic dystrophy
type 1.

Leroy O(1), Wang J, Maurage CA, Parent M, Cooper T, Buée L, Sergeant N, Andreadis
A, Caillet-Boudin ML.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U422, Pl. de Verdun. 59045 Lille Cedex- France.

Alternative splicing is altered in myotonic dystrophy of type 1 (DM1), a syndrome
caused by an increase of CTG triplet repeats in the 3' untranslated region of the
myotonic dystrophy protein kinase gene. Previously, we reported the preferential 
skipping of Tau exon 2 in DM1 brains. In this study, we analyze the alternative
splicing of Tau exon 6 which can be inserted in three different forms (c, p and
d) depending on the 3' splice site used. In fact, inclusion of exon 6c decreases 
in DM1 brains compared to control brains whereas inclusion of 6d increases.
Alteration of exon 6 splicing was not observed in DM1 muscle although this exon
was inserted in RNAs from normal muscle and DM1 splicing alterations were first
described in this organ. In contrast, alteration of exon 2 of Tau mRNA was
observed in both muscle and brain. However, co-transfections of a minigene
containing exon 6 with CELF or MBNL1 cDNAs, two splicing factor families
suspected to be involved in DM1, showed that they influence exon 6 splicing.
Altogether, these results show the importance of determining all the exons and
organs targeted by mis-splicing to determine the dysregulation mechanisms of
mis-splicing in DM1.

PMID: 16487687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochimie. 2006 May;88(5):515-25. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Mammalian CELF/Bruno-like RNA-binding proteins: molecular characteristics and
biological functions.

Barreau C(1), Paillard L, Méreau A, Osborne HB.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 6061 CNRS-Université de Rennes-I, IFR 140, 2, avenue Léon-Bernard, CS
34317, 35043 Rennes cedex, France.

In mammals, the CELF/Bruno-like family of RNA-binding proteins contains six
members. The founder members of the family are the CUG-BP1 (CELF1) and ETR-3
(CELF2) proteins. Four other members have been identified mainly by sequence
similarity. The founder members were cloned or identified in a number of
laboratories which has lead to a profusion of names and two separate naming
systems. In addition, different members of the CELF/Bruno-like protein family
have been shown to be implicated in two major post-transcriptional regulatory
processes, namely the alternative splicing and the control of translation and
stability of target mRNAs. Several studies have indicated a certain functional
redundancy between the CELF proteins in fulfilling these functions. The
multiplicity of gene names and the eventual functional redundancy is a source of 
potential confusion in published work. We present here a synthetic picture of the
present situation and, where possible, models are proposed that can account for
the data obtained in the various laboratories with different biological models.
Furthermore, we have highlighted some important questions that still need to be
resolved.

PMID: 16480813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Jan 5;34(1):217-31. Print 2006.

Functional role of NF-IL6beta and its sumoylation and acetylation modifications
in promoter activation of cyclooxygenase 2 gene.

Wang JM(1), Ko CY, Chen LC, Wang WL, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

NF-IL6beta regulates gene expression and plays function roles in many tissues.
The EGF-regulated cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2) expression is mediated through
p38(MAPK) signaling pathway and positively correlates with NF-IL6beta expression 
in A431 cells. NF-IL6beta coordinated with c-Jun on cox-2 transcriptional
activation by reporter and small interfering RNA assays. NF-IL6beta could
directly bind to CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) and cyclic AMP-response
element (CRE) sites of the cox-2 promoter by in vitro-DNA binding assay. The
C/EBP site was important for basal and, to a lesser extent, for EGF-regulated
cox-2 transcription, while the CRE site was a more specific response to EGF
inducibility of cox-2 gene. SUMO1 expression attenuated EGF- and
NF-IL6beta-induced cox-2 promoter activities. NF-IL6beta was found to be
sumoylated by in vivo- and in vitro-sumoylation assays, and the SUMO1-NF-IL6beta 
(suNF-IL6beta) lost its ability to interact with p300 in in vitro-binding assay. 
NF-IL6beta was also acetylated by p300, and acetylation of NF-IL6beta enhanced
the cox-2 promoter activity stimulated by NF-IL6beta itself. In vivo-DNA binding 
assay demonstrated that EGF stimulated the recruitment of p300 and NF-IL6beta to 
the cox-2 promoter, yet promoted the dissociation of SUMO1-modificated proteins
from the promoter. These results indicated that NF-IL6beta plays a pivotal role
in the regulation of basal and EGF-induced cox-2 transcription.

PMCID: PMC1325205
PMID: 16397300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006 Jan;95(2):161-70. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Promoter methylation reduces C/EBPdelta (CEBPD) gene expression in the SUM-52PE
human breast cancer cell line and in primary breast tumors.

Tang D(1), Sivko GS, DeWille JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Ohio State Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteins (C/EBPs) are a highly conserved family of leucine
zipper proteins that regulate cell growth and differentiation. C/EBPdelta
functions in the initiation and maintenance of mammary epithelial cell G(0)
growth arrest and 'loss of function' alterations in C/EBPdelta gene expression
have been reported in human breast cancer and in rodent carcinogen-induced
mammary tumors. The molecular mechanism underlying reduced C/EBPdelta gene
expression in mammary tumorigenesis, however, is unknown. In this report we
demonstrate that C/EBPdelta gene expression is undetectable in the SUM-52PE human
breast cancer cell line and that silencing of SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene expression
is due to epigenetic promoter hypermethylation (26/27 CpGs methylated). The
hypermethylated SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene promoter is associated with reduced
levels of acetylated Histone H4, consistent with a closed, transcriptionally
inactive chromatin conformation. Treatment with 5'-aza-cytidine and trichostatin 
A (TSA) re-activates cytokine-induced SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene expression.
C/EBPdelta gene expression is reduced to virtually undetectable levels in 32%
(18/57) of primary human breast tumors. Site-specific CpG methylation was
observed in 33% (6/18) of the low C/EBPdelta expressing primary breast tumors.
CpG methylation adjacent to the C/EBPdelta proximal promoter Sp1 site was
associated with reduced C/EBPdelta expression in a primary breast cancer sample. 
Electromobility shift assays (EMSA) demonstrated a significant reduction in
binding to oligos containing the CpG methylation 5' to the Sp1 binding site.
These results demonstrate a direct link between C/EBPdelta gene promoter hyper-
and site specific-methylation and reduced C/EBPdelta gene expression in breast
cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors.

PMID: 16322893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Immunol. 2006 Mar;43(7):773-82. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

Glucocorticoid inhibits the human pro-interleukin lbeta gene (ILIB) by decreasing
DNA binding of transactivators to the signal-responsive enhancer.

Waterman WR(1), Xu LL, Tetradis S, Motyckova G, Tsukada J, Saito K, Webb AC,
Robinson DR, Auron PE.

Author information: 
(1)Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery,
Philadelphia, PA 19131, USA.

Elucidating the role of glucocorticoid in regulating gene expression is crucial
to developing effective strategies against inflammatory diseases such as
arthritis. In this report we demonstrate that glucocorticoid inhibits
transcription directed by the IL-lbeta gene (IL1B) upstream induction sequence
(UIS) enhancer, and to a much lesser extent by the tissue-specific basal
promoter. Within the enhancer, three transcription factor binding sites,
previously demonstrated by us to be important for the induction of IL1B by
lipopolysaccharide, are now shown to be directly inhibited by the synthetic
glucocorticoid, dexamethasone. We also previously showed that one of these sites 
could bind a novel STAT-like factor, while the other two bound heterodimers
containing NF-IL6(C/EBPbeta). Although it has been reported by others that NF-IL6
homodimers can interact with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) to enhance
transcription of the alpha1-acid glycoprotein gene, it now appears that
glucocorticoid represses DNA binding of NF-IL6 heterodimers as well as the novel 
STAT-like factor to the critical sites within the IL1B UIS. Thus, GR likely
disrupts the DNA binding capability of critical IL1B factors via transrepression.

PMID: 16095699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Circ Res. 2005 Sep 2;97(5):427-33. Epub 2005 Aug 4.

Depletion of serum response factor by RNA interference mimics the mitogenic
effects of platelet derived growth factor-BB in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Kaplan-Albuquerque N(1), Van Putten V, Weiser-Evans MC, Nemenoff RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
CO 80262, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2005 Sep 2;97(5):409-10.

Promoters of many smooth muscle-specific genes (SM-genes) contain multiple CArG
boxes, which represent a binding site for serum response factor (SRF).
Transcriptional control through these regions involves interactions with SRF and 
specific coactivators such as myocardin. We have previously reported that
suppression of SM-gene expression by platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) is
associated with redistribution of SRF, leading to lower intra-nuclear levels, and
a reduction in SRF transactivation. To further assess the role of SRF depletion
on VSMC phenotype, the current study used RNA interference (RNAi). Two
SRF-specific sequences constructed as hairpins were stably expressed in rat VSMC.
Clones expressing SRF RNAi had no detectable SRF expression by immunoblotting,
and showed diminished levels of SM alpha-actin protein and promoter activity.
Unexpectedly, depletion of VSMC resulted in increased rates of proliferation and 
migration. Several genes whose expression is increased by PDGF stimulation,
including c-Jun, were similarly induced in cells lacking SRF. Effects of SRF
depletion were not attributable to altered PDGF receptor activity or alterations 
in activation of Akt. These data indicate that loss of SRF transactivation in
VSMC, in this case through suppression via RNAi, induces biological responses
similar to that seen with PDGF.

PMID: 16081871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):85-6.

Getting fat: two new players in molecular adipogenesis.

Gonzalez FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Building 37, Room 3106, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2005 Jan;1(1):27-39.
    Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):93-106.

A transcription factor cascade drives adipogenesis. Two new members of this
cascade have been uncovered--Kruppel-like factor 5 (KLF5), which is induced by
C/EBPbeta and delta and acts in concert with C/EBPalpha, beta, and delta to
activate PPARgamma2 expression, and Krox20, which is upstream of C/EBPbeta
expression and one of the earliest factors induced during adipogenesis.

PMID: 16054047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell Metab. 2005 Jan;1(1):27-39.

Krüppel-like transcription factor KLF5 is a key regulator of adipocyte
differentiation.

Oishi Y(1), Manabe I, Tobe K, Tsushima K, Shindo T, Fujiu K, Nishimura G, Maemura
K, Yamauchi T, Kubota N, Suzuki R, Kitamura T, Akira S, Kadowaki T, Nagai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2005 Feb;1(2):85-6.

Krüppel-like factor 5 (KLF5) is a zinc-finger transcription factor known to play 
a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Here, we show that 
neonatal heterozygous KLF5 knockout mice exhibit a marked deficiency in white
adipose tissue development, suggesting that KLF5 is also required for
adipogenesis. In 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, KLF5 expression was induced at an early
stage of differentiation, and this was followed by expression of PPARgamma2.
Constitutive overexpression of dominant-negative KLF5 inhibited adipocyte
differentiation, whereas overexpression of wild-type KLF5 induced differentiation
even without hormonal stimulation. Moreover, embryonic fibroblasts obtained from 
KLF5+/- mice showed much attenuated adipocyte differentiation, confirming the key
role played by KLF5 in adipocyte differentiation. KLF5 expression is induced by
C/EBPbeta and delta. KLF5, in turn, acts in concert with C/EBPbeta/delta to
activate the PPARgamma2 promoter. This study establishes KLF5 as a key component 
of the transcription factor network controlling adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 16054042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Cardiol. 2005 Jul 10;102(2):233-8.

Gene expression profiling of human atrial myocardium with atrial fibrillation by 
DNA microarray analysis.

Ohki R(1), Yamamoto K, Ueno S, Mano H, Misawa Y, Fuse K, Ikeda U, Shimada K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jichi Medical School,
Minamikawachi-Machi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most frequently encountered
arrhythmia in the clinical setting. However, a comprehensive investigation of the
molecular mechanism of AF has not been performed. The aim of this study was to
clarify transcriptional profiling of genes modulated in the atrium of AF patients
using DNA microarray technology.
METHODS: We obtained 17 fresh cardiac specimens, right atrial appendages,
isolated from 10 patients with normal sinus rhythm and seven chronic AF patients 
who underwent cardiac surgery. Affymetrix GeneChip (Human Genome U95A)
investigating 12,000 human genes was used for each specimen. Quantitative
analysis of selected genes was performed by the real-time PCR method.
RESULTS: The left atrial diameter in the AF group was greater than that in the
sinus rhythm group. We could identify 33 AF-specific genes that were
significantly activated (>1.5-fold), compared with the sinus rhythm group,
including an ion channel, an antioxidant, an inflammation, three cell growth/cell
cycle, three transcription such as nuclear factor-interleukin 6-beta, several
cell signaling and several protein genes, and seven expressed sequence tags
(ESTs). In contrast, we found 63 sinus rhythm-specific genes, including several
cell signaling/communication such as sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase 2,
several cellular respiration and energy production and two antiproliferative or
negative regulator of cell growth genes, and 22 ESTs.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated that about one hundred genes were
modulated in the atria of AF patients. These findings suggest that these genes
may play critical roles in the initiation or perpetuation of AF and the
pathophysiology of atrial remodeling.

PMID: 15982490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4762-8.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta: a molecular target of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 in androgen-responsive prostate cancer LNCaP cells.

Ikezoe T(1), Gery S, Yin D, O'Kelly J, Binderup L, Lemp N, Taguchi H, Koeffler
HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of
California at Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.
ikezoet@med.kochi-ms.ac.jp

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3], the active metabolite of vitamin D3,
inhibits the proliferation of prostate cancer cells. However, the molecular
mechanisms by which 1,25(OH)2D3 inhibits the proliferation of these cells remain 
to be fully elucidated. In this study, we used microarray technology to identify 
target genes of 1,25(OH)2D3 in androgen-responsive prostate cancer LNCaP cells.
1,25(OH)2D3 up-regulated CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) by
approximately 5-fold in these cells. Knockdown of C/EBPdelta expression by RNA
interference showed that C/EBPdelta is essential for the significant growth
inhibition of LNCaP cells in response to 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment. Moreover, we
found that 1,25(OH)2D3 induced C/EBPdelta in other cancer cells, including the
estrogen receptor (ER)-expressing MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer cells that are
sensitive to the growth inhibitory effects of 1,25(OH)2D3. On the other hand,
1,25(OH)2D3 was not able to induce C/EBPdelta in either androgen
receptor-negative PC-3 and DU145 or ER-negative breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells
that were relatively resistant to growth inhibition by 1,25(OH)2D3. Furthermore, 
forced expression of C/EBPdelta in prostate cancer LNCaP as well as breast cancer
MCF-7 and T47D cells dramatically reduced their clonal growth. Taken together,
forced expression of C/EBPdelta in cancer cells may be a promising therapeutic
strategy.

PMID: 15930295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jun 6;579(14):3055-62.

Mechanisms for HIV Tat upregulation of IL-10 and other cytokine expression:
kinase signaling and PKR-mediated immune response.

Li JC(1), Lee DC, Cheung BK, Lau AS.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Laboratory, Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, 
China.

HIV Tat has been known to have multiple regulatory roles including replication of
HIV and modulation of cellular kinases. We investigated whether signaling kinase 
PKR plays a critical role in mediating Tat-induced cytokine dysregulation. We
showed Tat induction of IL-10 dysregulation is associated with PKR activation. To
examine the mechanism involved, inhibition of PKR activity abrogated the
Tat-induced cytokine induction. We next identified that the MAP kinases including
ERK-1/2 and p38 are downstream of PKR in these Tat-induced pathways. Thus, PKR
may play a critical role in mediating the subversive effects of HIV Tat resulting
in IL-10 induction.

PMID: 15907845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Jul;16(7):3365-76. Epub 2005 May 18.

Induction of human NF-IL6beta by epidermal growth factor is mediated through the 
p38 signaling pathway and cAMP response element-binding protein activation in
A431 cells.

Wang JM(1), Tseng JT, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta, CRP3, CELF, NF-IL6beta)
regulates gene expression and plays functional roles in many tissues, such as in 
acute phase response to inflammatory stimuli, adipocyte differentiation, and
mammary epithelial cell growth control. In this study, we examined the expression
of human C/EBPdelta (NF-IL6beta) gene by epidermal growth factor (EGF)
stimulation in human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells. NF-IL6beta was an
immediate-early gene activated by the EGF-induced signaling pathways in cells. By
using 5'-serial deletion reporter analysis, we showed that the region comprising 
the -347 to +9 base pairs was required for EGF response of the NF-IL6beta
promoter. This region contains putative consensus binding sequences of Sp1 and
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). The NF-IL6beta promoter activity
induced by EGF was abolished by mutating the sequence of cAMP response element or
Sp1 sites in the -347/+9 base pairs region. Both in vitro and in vivo DNA binding
assay revealed that the CREB binding activity was low in EGF-starved cells,
whereas it was induced within 30 min after EGF treatment of A431 cells. However, 
no change in Sp1 binding activity was found by EGF treatment. Moreover, the
phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI3)-kinase inhibitor (wortmannin) and p38(MAPK)
inhibitor (SB203580) inhibited the EGF-induced CREB phosphorylation and the
expression of NF-IL6beta gene in cells. We also demonstrated that CREB was
involved in regulating the NF-IL6beta gene transcriptional activity mediated by
p38(MAPK). Our results suggested that PI3-kinase/p38(MAPK)/CREB pathway
contributed to the EGF activation of NF-IL6beta gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1165418
PMID: 15901830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;24(4):209-17.

Synergy between deacetylase inhibitors and IL-1beta in activation of the serum
amyloid A2 gene promoter.

Blais M(1), Désilets A, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Butyrate (NaBu) regulates intestinal inflammatory gene expression in part through
inhibition of deacetylase activity, but the exact mechanisms involved remain to
be determined. In this study, we showed by Northern blot a synergistic induction 
of the acute phase protein gene SAA2 with a combination of deacetylase inhibitors
(Trichostatin A or NaBu) and IL-1beta in the colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2.
While the NF-kappa B DNA-binding site was essential for SAA2 regulation by
IL-1beta and deacetylase inhibitors, the C/EBP DNA-binding site modulated SAA2
expression levels, as assessed by transient transfection assays and mutagenesis
studies. NaBu was sufficient to induce SAA2 expression after transient treatment 
with IL-1beta and, conversely, IL-1beta induced SAA2 after transient treatment
with NaBu. These data suggest that pretreatment with either NaBu or IL-1beta
predisposes the SAA2 promoter to further stimulation. Indeed, both NaBu and
IL-1beta led to increased recruitment of NF-kappa B p65, C/EBPbeta, and C/EBP
delta, and decreased NF-kappa B p50 and C/EBP alpha DNA-binding to the proximal
SAA2 promoter, as assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Interestingly, while IL-1beta, in contrast to NaBu, induced histone H4
acetylation, addition of IL-1beta and NaBu increased histone H4 acetylation and
both C/EBPbeta and NF-kappa B p65 DNA-binding. Therefore, these results suggest
that NaBu and IL- 1beta mediate SAA2 synergistic induction by establishing and
maintaining similar and complementary chromatin modifications and transcription
factor recruitment as well. In addition to global effects, NaBu specifically
regulate gene expression, as exemplified by SAA2.

PMID: 15812237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Gene. 2005 Jan 31;345(2):225-35. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

Interactions between CCAAT enhancer binding protein delta and estrogen receptor
alpha control insulin-like growth factor I (igf1) and estrogen receptor-dependent
gene expression in osteoblasts.

Chang W(1), Parra M, Centrella M, McCarthy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8041, USA.

Although ambient levels of estradiol and synthesis of the osteoblast growth
factor IGF-I are inversely related in vivo, estradiol has little or no direct
effect on igf1 gene expression in rat osteoblasts in vitro. Rather, estradiol
suppresses the effect of hormones that enhance igf1 expression through protein
kinase A dependent activation of CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
transcription factors. We show here that inhibition of C/EBP activity by
estradiol relates to the level of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) expression,
and that a complex between hormone-activated ERalpha and C/EBPdelta inhibits
transcription by each factor. Protein fragmentation, co-immunoprecipitation, and 
gene expression studies identified domains for physical and functional
interactions between ERalpha and C/EBPdelta. Whereas ERalpha and fragments
comprising its various domains associated with C/EBPdelta, only ERalpha fragment 
A/B alone replicated the suppressive effect of intact ERalpha on endogenous
C/EBPdelta activity. Complementary studies showed that several carboxyl regions
of C/EBPdelta cooperatively inhibit ERalpha dependent transcription. Therefore,
multiple domains of C/EBPdelta and ERalpha can physically interact to alter gene 
expression in osteoblasts in selective ways that depend on variations in the
local hormone environment. Their combined effects on one important gene target,
igf1, may help to determine the balance in the overall rates of bone formation.

PMID: 15716114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Mar;140(3):505-11.

Expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta is closely associated with
degeneration of surface mucous cells of larval stomach during the metamorphosis
of Xenopus laevis.

Ikuzawa M(1), Kobayashi K, Yasumasu S, Iuchi I.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Institute, Sophia University, Kioi-cho 7-1, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
102-8554, Japan.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBP delta) is one of the transcription
factors that have a basic-leucine zipper domain. In mammals, it has been
suggested that this transcription factor plays a role in differentiation of
adipocytes or in apoptosis of mammary gland epithelial cells. The factor also
plays a role in acute-phase response in injury, infection and inflammation. We
cloned Xenopus homologues of the C/EBP delta gene from metamorphosing stomach by 
subtractive hybridization and analyzed spatio-temporal expression pattern of the 
homologues. Two isoforms of C/EBP delta were isolated and named C/EBP delta-1 and
-2. Their deduced amino acid sequences were highly similar to each other
(identity, 91.2%). Expression of the C/EBP delta mRNAs in the stomach transiently
increased during its metamorphosis-associated remodeling, and the transient
up-regulation was also found in thyroid hormone-induced metamorphosis. The C/EBP 
delta mRNAs were exclusively localized in degenerating larval surface mucous
cells, not in newly proliferating and differentiating adult-type epithelial
cells. The result suggests a possibility that Xenopus C/EBP delta plays a role in
apoptotic cell death of larval-type epithelium during the stomach remodeling.

PMID: 15694599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Br J Haematol. 2005 Feb;128(4):540-7.

Induction of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-delta by cytokinins, but not by
retinoic acid, during granulocytic differentiation of human myeloid leukaemia
cells.

Ishii Y(1), Kasukabe T, Honma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Treatment, Research Institute for Clinical Oncology,
Saitama Cancer Center, Ina, Saitama, Japan.

Cytokinins, purine derivatives that act as hormones to control many processes in 
plants, are very effective at inducing the granulocytic differentiation of human 
myeloid leukaemia cells. Isopentenyladenine (IPA), a potent cytokinin,
significantly induced the expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP)delta, but not C/EBP alpha protein, whereas all-trans retinoic acid, a
well-known inducer of granulocytic differentiation, induced C/EBP alpha but not
C/EBP delta protein. Antisense oligonucleotide for C/EBP delta, but not C/EBP
alpha or C/EBP beta, effectively suppressed IPA-induced differentiation,
suggesting that the expression of C/EBP delta protein is necessary for
cytokinin-induced differentiation. Although C/EBP alpha is known to be crucial
for granulocytic differentiation, the function of C/EBP delta has not been well
documented in the regulation of haematopoiesis. The role of C/EBP delta in the
granulocytic differentiation of myeloid leukaemia cells is discussed.

PMID: 15686465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 24;24(9):1589-97.

C/EBPdelta expression in a BCR-ABL-positive cell line induces growth arrest and
myeloid differentiation.

Gery S(1), Tanosaki S, Hofmann WK, Koppel A, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. gerys@cshs.org

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) are a family of highly conserved
transcription factors that have important roles in normal myelopoiesis as well as
associated with myeloid disorders. The chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cell
lines, KCL22 and K562, express exceptionally low levels of endogenous C/EBPs and 
provide a good model to test the effects of C/EBPs on myeloid differentiation. To
explore the possibility that C/EBPdelta can promote differentiation in
BCR-ABL-positive cells, we generated stable KCL22 and K562 clones that expressed 
an inducible C/EBPdelta gene. C/EBPdelta expression resulted in G0/G1
proliferative arrest and a moderate increase in apoptosis of the KCL22 and the
K562 cells. Within 4 days of inducing expression of C/EBPdelta, myeloid
differentiation of the CML blast cells occurred as shown by morphologic changes
and induction of secondary granule-specific genes. We also showed that during
granulocytic differentiation of KCL22 cells, the C/EBPdelta protein was detected 
in immunocomplexes with both Rb and E2F1. Furthermore, expression of C/EBPdelta
was associated with downregulation of c-Myc and cyclin E and upregulation of the 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) in both the KCL22 and K562 cell
lines. These results show that expression of C/EBPdelta in BCR-ABL-positive
leukemic cells in blast crisis is sufficient for neutrophil differentiation and
point to the therapeutic potential of ectopic induction of C/EBPdelta in the
acute phase of CML.

PMID: 15674331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Jul;204(1):219-26.

Expression and activity of C/EBPbeta and delta are upregulated by dexamethasone
in skeletal muscle.

Yang H(1), Mammen J, Wei W, Menconi M, Evenson A, Fareed M, Petkova V, Hasselgren
PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The influence of glucocorticoids on the expression and activity of the
transcription factors CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)beta and delta in
skeletal muscle was examined by treating rats or cultured L6 myotubes with
dexamethasone. Treatment of rats with 10 mg/kg of dexamethasone resulted in
increased C/EBPbeta and delta DNA binding activity in the extensor digitorum
longus muscle as determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and
supershift analysis. A similar response was noticed in dexamethasone-treated
myotubes. In other experiments, myocytes were transfected with a plasmid
containing a promoter construct consisting of multiple C/EBP binding elements
upstream of a luciferase reporter gene. Treatment of these cells with
dexamethasone resulted in a fourfold increase in luciferase activity, suggesting 
that glucocorticoids increase C/EBP-dependent gene activation in muscle cells. In
addition, dexamethasone upregulated the protein and gene expression of C/EBPbeta 
and delta in the myotubes in a time- and dose-dependent fashion as determined by 
Western blotting and real-time PCR, respectively. The results suggest that
glucocorticoids increase C/EBPbeta and delta activity and expression through a
direct effect in skeletal muscle.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15669083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12867-75. Epub 2005 Jan 20.

Role of Krüppel-like factor 15 (KLF15) in transcriptional regulation of
adipogenesis.

Mori T(1), Sakaue H, Iguchi H, Gomi H, Okada Y, Takashima Y, Nakamura K, Nakamura
T, Yamauchi T, Kubota N, Kadowaki T, Matsuki Y, Ogawa W, Hiramatsu R, Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Division of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, 
Japan.

Krüppel-like zinc finger transcription factors (KLFs) play diverse roles during
cell differentiation and development in mammals. We have now shown by microarray 
analysis that expression of the KLF15 gene is markedly up-regulated during the
differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes into adipocytes. Inhibition of the
function of KLF15, either by expression of a dominant negative mutant or by RNA
interference, both reduced the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and blocked adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
exposed to inducers of adipocyte differentiation. However, the dominant negative 
mutant of KLF15 did not affect the expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
beta (C/EBPbeta) elicited by inducers of differentiation in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.
In addition, ectopic expression of KLF15 in NIH 3T3 or C2C12 cells triggered both
lipid accumulation and the expression of PPARgamma in the presence of inducers of
adipocyte differentiation. Ectopic expression of C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, or
C/EBPalpha in NIH 3T3 cells also elicited the expression of KLF15 in the presence
of inducers of adipocyte differentiation. Moreover, KLF15 and C/EBPalpha acted
synergistically to increase the activity of the PPARgamma2 gene promoter in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. Our observations thus demonstrate that KLF15 plays an
essential role in adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells through its regulation of PPAR
gamma expression.

PMID: 15664998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Mol Med (Berl). 2005 Feb;83(2):121-31. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism in human angiotensinogen gene is associated with
essential hypertension and affects glucocorticoid induced promoter activity.

Jain S(1), Li Y, Patil S, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Basic Science Building,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Hypertension is a serious health problem particularly for African-Americans.
Previous studies have suggested that angiotensinogen (AGT) gene locus is involved
in human essential hypertension. We have recently shown that an A/G polymorphism 
at -217 in the promoter of the AGT gene is associated with essential hypertension
especially in African-Americans. We report here that A/G polymorphism at -217
affects the glucocorticoid-induced promoter activity of the human AGT gene. We
show that recombinant glucocorticoid receptor (GR) binds strongly to the AGT gene
promoter when nucleoside A is present at -217, and dexamethasone treatment
increases the interleukin 6 induced promoter activity of reporter constructs
containing nucleoside A at -217. Similarly cotransfection of GR and C/EBP beta or
C/EBP delta increases the promoter activity of reporter construct containing
nucleoside A at -217. Since AGT is an acute phase protein, we propose that
increased expression of -217A allele of the AGT gene by glucocorticoids and C/EBP
family of transcription factors may be involved in essential hypertension.

PMID: 15630592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biol Neonate. 2005;87(3):152-9. Epub 2004 Nov 24.

Transcription factors NF-kappaB and C/EBPdelta and IL-1-induced expression of
surfactant protein A in lung explants during the perinatal period.

Seppänen O(1), Glumoff V, Paananen R, Rounioja S, Hallman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland.

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) increases the expression of surfactant protein A (SP-A) in
rabbit, lamb and human fetal lung. The upregulation disappears towards term.
Among the transcription factors, IL-1 activates nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)
and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta). NF-kappaB presumably has a
role in IL-1-induced upregulation of SP-A. Also, C/EBPdelta may regulate SP-A
expression. The aim was to study the role of these transcription factors in the
induced effect of IL-1 on SP-A expression. Explants from fetal and neonatal
rabbit lung were cultured in vitro followed by studies using
immunohistochemistry, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and Northern analysis.
We found gestation-dependent changes in IL-1-induced immunoreactivities of
NF-kappaB and C/EBPdelta in the nuclei of alveolar cells. This increase in
nuclear transcription factors correlated with IL-1-induced SP-A expression
levels. As studied in the explants from fetal and newborn lung, the SP-A mRNA
expression additionally associated with C/EBPdelta mRNA and with the binding of
nuclear extracts from the lung explants to the C/EBP consensus probe. On the
basis of the present and previous studies, we propose that NF-kappaB and
C/EBPdelta have potential mediator roles in IL-1-induced upregulation of SP-A in 
immature lung.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15564781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Diabetes. 2004 Nov;53(11):2748-56.

regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activity by
mammalian target of rapamycin and amino acids in adipogenesis.

Kim JE(1), Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 601 S. Goodwin Ave., B107 Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
jiechen@uiuc.edu.

Adipocyte differentiation is a developmental process that is critical for
metabolic homeostasis and nutrient signaling. The mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) mediates nutrient signaling to regulate cell growth, proliferation, and
diverse cellular differentiation. It has been reported that rapamycin, the
inhibitor of mTOR and an immunosuppressant, blocks adipocyte differentiation, but
the mechanism underlying this phenomenon remains unknown. Here we show that mTOR 
plays a critical role in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation and that mTOR kinase
activity is required for this process. Rapamycin specifically disrupted the
positive transcriptional feedback loop between CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-alpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma), 
two key transcription factors in adipogenesis, by directly targeting the
transactivation activity of PPAR-gamma. In addition, we demonstrate for the first
time that PPAR-gamma activity is dependent on amino acid sufficiency, revealing a
molecular link between nutrient status and adipogenesis. The results of our
further investigation have led us to propose a model in which the mTOR pathway
and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway act in parallel to regulate
PPAR-gamma activation during adipogenesis by mediating nutrient availability and 
insulin signals, respectively. It is interesting that troglitazone (a
thiazolidinedione drug) reversed the inhibitory effects of rapamycin and amino
acid deprivation, implicating therapeutic values of thiazolidinedione drugs to
counter certain side effects of rapamycin as an immunosuppressant.

PMID: 15504954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Prostate. 2005 May 1;63(2):143-54.

C/EBPdelta is a downstream mediator of IL-6 induced growth inhibition of prostate
cancer cells.

Sanford DC(1), DeWille JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although a number of reports have investigated the effects of IL-6
family cytokines on prostate cell growth, there is limited information available 
identifying IL-6 inducible downstream effector genes and their function in growth
control. Previous studies have demonstrated that IL-6 treatment results in the
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription3 (STAT3) in
prostate cancer cells. The goal of this study was to investigate the influence of
IL-6 treatment and activation of the Jak/STAT signal transduction pathway on
C/EBPdelta gene expression and growth inhibition of human prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: Expression of C/EBPdelta and STAT3 activation were assayed using
Northern and Western blotting techniques. Proliferation was assessed by [(3)H]
thymidine incorporation, flow cytometry, and colony formation analyses. The
analysis of the transcriptional regulation of C/EBPdelta was performed using
luciferase-reporter constructs.
RESULTS: In this report, we demonstrate that IL-6 treatment induces STAT3
activation (pSTAT3), pSTAT3 binds to the human C/EBPdelta gene promoter and
induces its expression. We also demonstrate that C/EBPdelta over-expression is
capable of suppressing prostate cancer cell growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that C/EBPdelta gene expression is
increased in IL-6 treated LNCaP cells. Increased C/EBPdelta gene expression plays
an important role in IL-6/STAT3 mediated growth arrest of LNCaP prostate cancer
cells. Ongoing studies are investigating the mechanism by which C/EBPdelta
controls prostate cancer cell growth and the potential role of C/EBPdelta in the 
survival and chemo resistance of prostate cancer metastasis. (c) 2004 Wiley-Liss,
Inc.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15486993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(21):11622-31.

Differential effects on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication by
alpha-defensins with comparable bactericidal activities.

Tanabe H(1), Ouellette AJ, Cocco MJ, Robinson WE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, D440 Med Sci I, University of California, Irvine, CA 
92697-4800, USA.

In addition to their antibacterial activities, certain antimicrobial peptides
inactivate enveloped viruses, including the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
To determine whether peptide bactericidal activities are predictive of antiviral 
activity, the anti-HIV properties of recombinant human alpha-defensin 5, mouse
alpha-defensins, cryptdins (Crp) 3 and 4, and rhesus macaque myeloid
alpha-defensins (RMADs) 3 and 4 were determined in vitro. The peptides, purified 
to homogeneity, had equivalent bactericidal activities that were similar to those
of the native molecules. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed RMAD-4
and Crp3 had characteristic alpha-defensin tridisulfide arrays. Of the peptides
analyzed, only RMAD-4 inhibited HIV infectivity at 150 microg/ml, and Crp3
unexpectedly increased HIV replication. Quantitative real-time PCRs for
minus-strand strong stop DNA and complete viral cDNA synthesis were used to
distinguish between preentry and postentry anti-HIV effects by RMAD-4. Viral
exposure to RMAD-4 for 1 h prior to infection reduced HIV minus-strand strong
stop DNA and HIV cDNA by 4- to 20-fold during the first round of replication,
showing that RMAD-4-exposed virions were not entering cells during the first 24
h. On the other hand, when RMAD-4 was added coincident with HIV inoculation, no
anti-HIV activity was detected. Viral exposure to Crp3 resulted in a threefold
increase in both HIV minus-strand strong stop DNA and HIV cDNA over the first
round of replication. Therefore, two alpha-defensins, RMAD-4 and Crp3, inhibit or
augment HIV replication, respectively, by mechanisms that precede reverse
transcription.

PMCID: PMC523300
PMID: 15479803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Nov 1;93(4):830-43.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding protein delta (c/EBPdelta) regulation and expression in
human mammary epithelial cells: I. "Loss of function" alterations in the
c/EBPdelta growth inhibitory pathway in breast cancer cell lines.

Sivko GS(1), DeWille JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio 43210, USA.

"Loss of function" alterations in growth inhibitory signal transduction pathways 
are common in cancer cells. In this study, we show that growth arrest (GA)
treatments--serum and growth factor withdrawal and growth inhibitory IL-6 family 
cytokines (Interleukin-6 and Oncostatin M (OSM))--increase STAT3 phosphorylation 
(pSTAT3), increase CCAAT enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) gene
expression and induce GA of primary, finite-lifespan human mammary epithelial
cells (HMECs), and immortalized breast cell lines (MCF-10A and MCF-12A). In
contrast, serum and growth factor withdrawal from human breast cancer cell lines 
(MCF-7, SK-BR-3, T-47D, and MDA-MB-231) for up to 48 h induced a relatively
modest increase in pSTAT3 levels and C/EBPdelta gene expression and resulted in
varying levels of GA. In most breast cancer cell lines, IL-6 family cytokine
treatment increased pSTAT3 levels and C/EBPdelta gene expression, however, growth
inhibition was cell line dependent. In addition to "loss of function" alterations
in growth inhibitory pathways, breast cancer cell lines also exhibit "gain of
function" alterations in growth signaling pathways. The Akt growth/ survival
pathway is constitutively activated in T-47D and MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The
Akt inhibitor LY 294,002 significantly enhanced T-47D growth inhibition by serum 
and growth factor withdrawal or IL-6 family cytokine treatment. Finally, we show 
that activation of the pSTAT3/C/EBPdelta growth control pathway is independent of
estrogen receptor status. These results demonstrate that "loss of function"
alterations in the pSTAT3/C/EBPdelta growth inhibitory signal transduction
pathway are relatively common in human breast cancer cell lines. Defective
activation of the pSTAT3/ C/EBPdelta growth inhibitory signal transduction
pathway, in conjunction with constitutive activation of the Akt growth
stimulatory pathway, may play a synergistic role in the etiology or progression
of breast cancer.

PMID: 15389879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Nov 1;93(4):844-56.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding protein delta (c/EBPdelta) regulation and expression in
human mammary epithelial cells: II. Analysis of activating signal transduction
pathways, transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and post-translational control.

Sivko GS(1), Sanford DC, Dearth LD, Tang D, DeWille JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Division of Molecular Biology and
Cancer Genetics, Ohio State Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) plays a key role in mammary
epithelial cell G0 growth arrest. C/EBPdelta gene expression is down-regulated in
rodent mammary tumorigenesis and in human breast cancer, suggesting that "loss of
function" alterations in C/EBPdelta gene expression are common in mammary gland
malignancies. The goal of this study was to systematically investigate the
mechanisms controlling C/EBPdelta gene expression in MCF-10A and MCF-12A human
mammary epithelial cell lines. The results demonstrate that G0 growth arrest
conditions (i.e., serum and growth factor withdrawal or Oncostatin M (OSM)
treatment) result in the activation of JAK1, JAK2, and Tyk 2, members of the
Janus kinase family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases, in MCF-10A and MCF-12A
cells. Growth arrest or OSM treatment also specifically increases activated
(phosphorylated) signal transduction and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3)
levels, demonstrating that STAT3, not STAT1 or STAT5, is the downstream target of
the activated Janus kinases in MCF-10A and MCF-12A cells. Whole cell lysates from
G0 growth arrested (GA) and OSM-treated MCF-12A cells exhibit increased acute
phase response element (APRE) binding compared to lysates from growing (GR)
MCF-12A cells. Transient transfection using C/EBPdelta promoter-luciferase
constructs demonstrated that the APRE (STAT3) consensus binding site is essential
for growth arrest or OSM induction of the C/EBPdelta promoter. Mutation of the
C/EBPdelta promoter STAT3 site or expression of a dominant negative STAT3
construct (STAT3delta) reduces C/EBPdelta promoter activity in response to growth
arrest conditions. The human C/EBPdelta promoter also contains an Sp1 site at -61
bp (relative to the transcriptional start site) which is required for basal
transcriptional activation. Mutation or deletion of the Sp1 site decreases
promoter activity in response to growth arrest conditions. Treatment with the
transcriptional inhibitor actinomycin D demonstrated that the C/EBPdelta mRNA
exhibits a relatively short half-life (approximately 40 min). Similarly,
treatment with the translational inhibitor anisomysin demonstrated that the
C/EBPdelta protein half-life was also relatively short (approximately 160 min).
These results indicate that the human C/EBPdelta gene is controlled at multiple
levels, consistent with a role for C/EBPdelta in cell cycle control and/or cell
fate determination.

PMID: 15389878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;18(12):2895-907. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

Gene expression profiling identifies a unique androgen-mediated
inflammatory/immune signature and a PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted 
on chromosome 10)-mediated apoptotic response specific to the rat ventral
prostate.

Desai KV(1), Michalowska AM, Kondaiah P, Ward JM, Shih JH, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, 41 Medlar's Drive, Room
C619, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Understanding androgen regulation of gene expression is critical for deciphering 
mechanisms responsible for the transition from androgen-responsive (AR) to
androgen-independent (AI) prostate cancer (PCa). To identify genes differentially
regulated by androgens in each prostate lobe, the rat castration model was used. 
Microarray analysis was performed to compare dorsolateral (DLP) and ventral
prostate (VP) samples from sham-castrated, castrated, and
testosterone-replenished castrated rats. Our data demonstrate that, after
castration, the VP and the DLP differed in the number of genes with altered
expression (1496 in VP vs. 256 in DLP) and the nature of pathways modulated. Gene
signatures related to apoptosis and immune response specific to the ventral
prostate were identified. Microarray and RT-PCR analyses demonstrated the
androgen repression of IGF binding protein-3 and -5, CCAAT-enhancer binding
protein-delta, and phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN)
genes, previously implicated in apoptosis. We show that PTEN protein was
increased only in the luminal epithelial cells of the VP, suggesting that it may 
be a key mediator of VP apoptosis in the absence of androgens. The
castration-induced immune/inflammatory gene cluster observed specifically in the 
VP included IL-15 and IL-18. Immunostaining of the VP, but not the DLP, showed an
influx of T cells, macrophages, and mast cells, suggesting that these cells may
be the source of the immune signature genes. Interestingly, IL-18 was localized
mainly to the basal epithelial cells and the infiltrating macrophages in the
regressing VP, whereas IL-15 was induced in the luminal epithelium. The VP
castration model exhibits immune cell infiltration and loss of PTEN that is often
observed in progressive PCa, thereby making this model useful for further
delineation of androgen-regulated gene expression with relevance to PCa.

PMID: 15358834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Sep;15(9):2383-90.

CCAAT/Enhancer-binding protein delta contributes to myofibroblast
transdifferentiation and renal disease progression.

Takeji M(1), Kawada N, Moriyama T, Nagatoya K, Oseto S, Akira S, Hori M, Imai E, 
Miwa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Myofibroblasts are pivotal participants in pathologic processes in a wide variety
of organs, such as lung, liver, and kidney, by producing several inflammatory
cytokines and extracellular matrices. The mechanism by which transdifferentiation
from original cell to myofibroblast occurs, however, is still unclear. The
expression of smooth muscle alpha-actin (SMalphaA) is the most characteristic
feature of myofibroblasts; therefore, it was speculated that any factors that
promote SMalphaA expression might be the key to transdifferentiation to
myofibroblasts and disease exacerbation. A transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) was identified and demonstrated
to bind to sequences including the CArG motif from SMalphaA intron 1 and to
increase transcriptional activity of this promoter. Expression of SMalphaA and
C/EBPdelta in the glomerular area was upregulated in rat anti-Thy1
glomerulonephritis and mouse Habu-venom glomerulonephritis, both of which are
models of mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis. In the latter model,
C/EBPdelta knockout mice demonstrated significantly less SMalphaA expression in
the glomerular area on day 8 and less renal functional deterioration on day 14,
compared with wild-type mice. These data suggest an important role for C/EBPdelta
in myofibroblast transdifferentiation and glomerulonephritis exacerbation.

PMID: 15339987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Endocrinology. 2004 Nov;145(11):4948-56. Epub 2004 Jul 29.

Transcription suppression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma2
gene expression by tumor necrosis factor alpha via an inhibition of CCAAT/
enhancer-binding protein delta during the early stage of adipocyte
differentiation.

Kudo M(1), Sugawara A, Uruno A, Takeuchi K, Ito S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Endocrinology, and Vascular Medicine, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1, Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai,
980-8574 Japan.

TNFalpha is known to inhibit adipocyte differentiation and induce insulin
resistance. Moreover, TNFalpha is known to down-regulate peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma2, an adipocyte-specific nuclear
receptor of insulin-sensitizer thiazolidinediones. To clarify molecular
mechanisms of TNFalpha- mediated PPARgamma2 down-regulation, we here examined the
effect of TNFalpha on transcription regulation of PPARgamma2 gene expression
during the early stage of adipocyte differentiation. 3T3-L1 preadipocytes (2 d
after 100% confluent) were incubated in a differentiation mixture (dexamethasone,
insulin, 3-isobutyl-1-methlxanthine), with or without 50 ng/ml TNFalpha, for 24
h. TNFalpha significantly decreased PPARgamma2 expression both at mRNA and
protein levels (to approximately 40%), as well as aP2 mRNA expression. The mouse 
PPARgamma2 gene promoter region (2.2-kb) was isolated and was used for luciferase
reporter assays by transient transfection. TNFalpha significantly suppressed
PPARgamma2 gene transcription (to approximately 50%), and deletion analyses
demonstrated that the suppression was mediated via CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP) binding elements at the -320/-340 region of the promoter. Moreover,
TNFalpha significantly decreased expression of C/EBPdelta mRNA and protein levels
(to approximately 40%). EMSA, using 3T3-L1 cells nuclear extracts with the
-320/-340 region as a probe, demonstrated the binding of C/EBPdelta to the
element, which was significantly decreased by TNFalpha treatment. Overexpression 
of CEBP/delta prevented the TNFalpha-mediated suppression of PPARgamma2
transactivation. Taken together, TNFalpha suppresses PPARgamma2 gene
transcription by the inhibition of C/EBPdelta expression and its DNA binding
during the early stage of adipocyte differentiation, which may contribute to the 
inhibition of adipocyte differentiation, as well as the induction of insulin
resistance.

PMID: 15284209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jul 1;32(Web Server issue):W475-84.

CONFAC: automated application of comparative genomic promoter analysis to DNA
microarray datasets.

Karanam S(1), Moreno CS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics, School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.

The advent of DNA microarray technology and the sequencing of multiple vertebrate
genomes has provided a unique opportunity for the integration of comparative
genomics with high-throughput gene expression analysis. Here we describe the
conserved transcription factor binding site (CONFAC) software that enables the
high-throughput identification of conserved transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs) in the regulatory regions of hundreds of genes at a time
(http://morenolab.whitehead.emory.edu/cgi-bin/confac/login.pl). The CONFAC
software compares non-coding regulatory sequences between human and mouse genomes
to enable identification of conserved TFBSs that are significantly enriched in
promoters of gene clusters from microarray analyses compared to sets of
unchanging control genes using a Mann-Whitney U-test. Analysis of random gene
sets demonstrated that using our approach, over 98% of TFBSs had false positive
rates below 5%. As a proof-of-principle, we have validated the CONFAC software
using gene sets from four separate microarray studies and identified TFBSs known 
to be functionally important for regulation of each of the four gene sets.

PMCID: PMC441491
PMID: 15215433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neurobiol Aging. 2004 Sep;25(8):991-9.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) expression and elevation in
Alzheimer's disease.

Li R(1), Strohmeyer R, Liang Z, Lue LF, Rogers J.

Author information: 
(1)Roberts Center for Alzheimer's Research, Sun Health Research Institute, P.O.
Box 1278, Sun City, AZ 85372, USA.

The CCAAT-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family of transcription factors,
particularly C/EBPdelta, is well known to regulate or co-regulate a wide range of
inflammatory mediators and mechanisms in the periphery, including interleukin-1
(IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). These 
cytokines, in turn, can induce C/EBPdelta expression and translocation to the
nucleus as an active transcription factor. Because IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-alpha are 
increased in pathologically vulnerable regions of the Alzheimer's disease (AD)
brain, we sought to determine if C/EBPdelta might be expressed in AD cortex.
Immunohistochemistry of AD tissue sections revealed profuse C/EBPdelta staining
of astrocytes, particularly reactive astrocytes surrounding amyloid beta peptide 
deposits. Substantially less immunoreactivity was observed in comparable sections
from nondemented elderly control (ND) patients. These qualitative findings were
consistent with quantitative Western blot densitometry results showing
significant increases in C/EBPdelta in AD compared to ND cortex samples.
Additional in vitro studies were pursued in order to characterize functional
activity of C/EBPdelta in human elderly astrocytes. Consistent with a
functionally active transcription factor, C/EBPdelta immunoreactivity
predominated in the nucleus of cultured AD and ND astrocytes, and exhibited
increases and nuclear localization, as determined by Western blots and
electrophoretic mobility shifts after exposure to C/EBPdelta-inducing cytokines.

PMID: 15212823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 May 28;1692(1):17-24.

Activation of the Interleukin-6 promoter by a dominant negative mutant of c-Jun.

Faggioli L(1), Costanzo C, Donadelli M, Palmieri M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological and Vision Sciences, Biochemistry Section,
University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 8, 37134 Verona, Italy.

The human IL-6 promoter contains multiple regulatory elements such as those
binding transcription factors belonging to the NF-kappaB (-75/-63), C/EBP
(-158/-145 and -87/-76) and AP-1 (-283/-277) families. Herein, we report that
ectopic expression of c-Jun, C/EBPdelta, and the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB
synergistically activates an IL-6 promoter construct containing only a TATA box
and a kappaB binding site. These results suggest that interactions among
NF-kappaB, C/EBP, and AP-1, which are all activated by the most powerful
physiological inducers of the IL-6 gene, namely TNF-alpha and IL-1, may be
crucial for maximal activation of the IL-6 promoter in response to the two
cytokines. Furthermore, we show that a mutated form of c-Jun lacking the
transactivation domain (TAM-67) was a much stronger activator of the IL-6
promoter than c-Jun. In combination with p65 and/or C/EBPdelta, TAM-67 also
synergistically activated the IL-6 promoter, while it inhibited TNF-alpha induced
AP-1 activity directing an AP-1-responsive reporter plasmid. Lastly,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) results strongly suggest the
formation of complexes between p65, C/EBPdelta, and/or c-Jun or TAM-67 on the
kappaB site, supporting the idea that the functional synergism is determined by a
physical interaction. These data provide new insight into the molecular
mechanisms regulating the formation of the transcription complex responsible for 
IL-6 promoter activation.

PMID: 15158360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2004 May;11(3):525-31.

Role of vav1 in the lipopolysaccharide-mediated upregulation of inducible nitric 
oxide synthase production and nuclear factor for interleukin-6 expression
activity in murine macrophages.

Godambe SA(1), Knapp KM, Meals EA, English BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Foundation Research Center, Le Bonheur
Children's Medical Center, 50 N. Dunlap, Memphis, TN 38103, USA.

vav1 has been shown to play a key role in lymphocyte development and activation, 
but its potential importance in macrophage activation has received little
attention. We have previously reported that exposure of macrophages to bacterial 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) leads to increased activity of hck and other src-related
tyrosine kinases and to the prompt phosphorylation of vav1 on tyrosine. In this
study, we tested the role of vav1 in macrophage responses to LPS, focusing on the
upregulation of nuclear factor for interleukin-6 expression (NF-IL-6) activity
and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) protein accumulation in RAW-TT10
murine macrophages. We established a series of stable cell lines expressing three
mutant forms of vav1 in a tetracycline-regulatable fashion: (i) a form producing 
a truncated protein, vavC; (ii) a form containing a point mutation in the
regulatory tyrosine residue, vavYF174; and (iii) a form with an in-frame deletion
of 6 amino acids required for the guanidine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)
activity of vav1 for rac family GTPases, vavGEFmt. Expression of the truncated
mutant (but not the other two mutants) has been reported to interfere with T-cell
activation. In contrast, we now demonstrate that expression of any of the three
mutant forms of vav1 in RAW-TT10 cells consistently inhibited LPS-mediated
increases in iNOS protein accumulation and NF-IL-6 activity. These data provide
direct evidence for a role for vav1 in LPS-mediated macrophage activation and
iNOS production and suggest that vav1 functions in part via activation of
NF-IL-6. Furthermore, these findings indicate that the GEF activity of vav1 is
required for its ability to mediate macrophage activation by LPS.

PMCID: PMC404562
PMID: 15138177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 May 19;124(2):97-104.

Synergistic effect of dexamethasone and beta-adrenergic receptor agonists on the 
nerve growth factor gene transcription.

Colangelo AM(1), Mallei A, Johnson PF, Mocchetti I.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University Medical Center, Department of Neuroscience, Research
Building, Box 571464, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Activation of beta-adrenergic receptor (betaAR) increases the synthesis of nerve 
growth factor (NGF) in the brain and in C6-2B glioma cells. However, in the
brain, the betaAR-mediated increase in NGF expression appears to require the
presence of glucocorticoids, suggesting that NGF promoter may be sensitive to
cAMP and glucocorticoid-dependent transcription factors. We tested this
hypothesis by exposing C6-2B glioma cells to dexamethasone (DEX) in combination
with agents that increase cAMP levels and examining the DNA binding activity of
two cAMP-dependent transcription factors that regulate NGF expression: cAMP
responsive element binding protein (CREB) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
delta (C/EBPdelta). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that the
beta(2)AR agonist clenbuterol (CLE) or high levels of cAMP elicited a
time-dependent increase in C/EBPdelta binding activity as well as phosphorylated 
CREB (P-CREB). When DEX, which per se showed little effect on these transcription
factors, was combined with CLE, dibutyryl cAMP or isoproterenol, enhanced
induction of P-CREB and C/EBP binding activity as well as NGF mRNA was observed. 
Moreover, the increase in NGF mRNA in the presence of DEX was prolonged compared 
to that obtained by CLE or other cAMP inducing agents alone. In fact, NGF mRNA
levels remained significantly elevated at least for 24 h. These studies suggest
that the synergistic effect of DEX on the induction of NGF mRNA may include the
ability of this glucocorticoid to potentiate the betaAR-mediated induction of
transcription factors.

PMID: 15135217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 11;279(24):25916-26. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Sequestration of thermogenic transcription factors in the cytoplasm during
development of brown adipose tissue.

Rim JS(1), Xue B, Gawronska-Kozak B, Kozak LP.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA.

Transcription factors that regulate gene expression during adipogenesis also
control the expression of genes of thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue, in
particular, the mitochondrial uncoupling protein gene (Ucp1). There is evidence
that a plasticity exists among adipocytes in which activation of the Ucp1 gene
together with mitochondrial biogenesis can increase the brown adipocyte character
of white fat. To understand this process, we have characterized the changes in
transcription that occur in interscapular brown adipocytes during development. We
have found dramatic reductions in both DNA-binding activity to probes and
immunoreactive protein for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor, retinoid X
receptor, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein, and cAMP-response element-binding
protein regulatory motifs in nuclear extracts when mice reach adulthood. Exposure
of adult mice to the cold, which reactivates Ucp1 expression, leads to a
re-accumulation of factors in the nucleus. We propose that transcription factors 
are sequestered in the cytoplasm as mice age under conditions of reduced
thermogenesis. Changes in isoform sub-types for peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma and cAMP-response element-binding proteins indicate an additional 
level of control on gene expression during thermogenesis. The increased movement 
of the RIIbeta protein kinase A regulatory subunit into the nucleus with age
suggests a mechanism for regulating the phosphorylation of transcription factors 
in the nucleus in response to the thermogenic requirements of the animal. Nuclear
factor-kappaB has been used as a model to demonstrate that the nuclear
localization of transcription factors in brown fat are reduced during post-natal 
development. Furthermore, it was found by immunofluorescence that adrenergic
stimulation of primary adipocyte cultures causes an increase of both the protein 
kinase A catalytic alpha-subunit and nuclear factor-kappaB into the nucleus.

PMID: 15073176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 1;23(14):2548-53.

Comparison of mammary gland involution between 129S1 and C57BL/6 inbred mouse
strains: differential regulation of Bcl2a1, Trp53, Cebpb, and Cebpd expression.

Thangaraju M(1), Sharan S, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Regulation of Cell Growth Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Natinal Institutes of Health, PO Box B, Frederick, MD 21702,
USA.

Genetic engineering has made the mouse an invaluable tool to address the function
of individual genes in a targeted manner. Over the last decade it has become
apparent that the genetic mouse strain background can significantly influence the
phenotype of an engineered mouse. Therefore, it is essential to characterize the 
biology of the different wild-type background strains. In this study, we have
compared mouse mammary gland involution in the 129S1 and C57BL/6 inbred strains
and report significant differences at the molecular level with differential
expression of Bcl2a1 (Bfl1), Trp53 (p53), Cebpb (C/EBP beta), and Cebpd (C/EBP
delta). The C57BL/6 strain exhibits dynamic responses with induction of Trp53 and
Cebpd and concomitant downregulation of Bcl2a1 during the first phase of
involution. In contrast, expression of these genes does not change significantly 
in 129S1 mice. During the second phase, C57BL/6 glands contain more Cebpb than
129S1 glands. Nevertheless, involution proceeds morphologically with similar
kinetics in both strains. The data demonstrate that the genetic response of
mammary tissue varies significantly between 129S1 and C57BL/6. These results may 
provide a basis for the interpretation of strain-specific phenotypes in
engineered mice and underline the importance of pure strains for large-scale
expression studies with mutant mice.

PMID: 14981542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16388-93. Epub 2004 Feb 1.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 inhibition of vascular smooth muscle cell
activation is mediated via Smad3.

Feinberg MW(1), Watanabe M, Lebedeva MA, Depina AS, Hanai J, Mammoto T, Frederick
JP, Wang XF, Sukhatme VP, Jain MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Activation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) by proinflammatory cytokines
is a key feature of atherosclerotic lesion formation. Transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-beta1 is a pleiotropic growth factor that can modulate the inflammatory
response in diverse cell types including VSMCs. However, the mechanisms by which 
TGF-beta1 is able to mediate these effects remains incompletely understood. We
demonstrate here that the ability of TGF-beta1 to inhibit markers of VSMC
activation, inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS) and interleukin (IL)-6, is
mediated through its downstream effector Smad3. In reporter gene transfection
studies, we found that among a panel of Smads, Smad3 could inhibit iNOS induction
in an analogous manner as exogenous TGF-beta1. Adenoviral overexpression of Smad3
potently repressed inducible expression of endogenous iNOS and IL-6. Conversely, 
TGF-beta1 inhibition of cytokine-mediated induction of iNOS and IL-6 expression
was completely blocked in Smad3-deficient VSMCs. Previous studies demonstrate
that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) and NF-kappaB sites are critical for 
cytokine induction of both the iNOS and IL-6 promoters. We demonstrate that the
inhibitory effect of Smad3 occurs via a novel antagonistic effect of Smad3 on
C/EBP DNA-protein binding and activity. Smad3 mediates this effect in part by
inhibiting C/EBP-beta and C/EBP-delta through distinct mechanisms. Furthermore,
we find that Smad3 prevents the cooperative induction of the iNOS promoter by
C/EBP and NF-kappaB. These data demonstrate that Smad3 plays an essential role in
mediating TGF-beta1 anti-inflammatory response in VSMCs.

PMID: 14754879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cells Tissues Organs. 2004;176(1-3):28-40.

Identification of potential modifiers of Runx2/Cbfa1 activity in C2C12 cells in
response to bone morphogenetic protein-7.

Gu K(1), Zhang L, Jin T, Rutherford RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences and Endodontics, School of
Dentistry,University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich., USA. rongguke@umich.edu

Treatment with BMP-7 causes a shift in the differentiation pathway from
myoblastic to osteoblastic in C2C12 mouse myoblast precursor cells in vitro. The 
underlying molecular mechanism is largely unknown. BMP-7 at 200 ng/ml completely 
inhibited myotube formation in C2C12 cells and dramatically induced alkaline
phosphatase activity up to 20-fold when compared to untreated cells by day 12 in 
culture. The level of Runx2/Cbfa1 mRNA, a bone-specific transcription factor, was
also stimulated up to 6-fold by BMP-7 with a peak at 24 h. In addition BMP-7
treatment stimulated a 55-fold increase in osteocalcin mRNA as early as 24 h
after treatment. A novel finding was that the expression of the chondrocyte
markers Sox9 and type II collagen was increased as well. Runx2/Cbfa1 is a
molecular switch for osteoblast differentiation. To initiate the study of
modulators of Runx2/Cbfa1, such as kinases and cofactors, during osteoblastic
differentiation of C2C12 cells treated by BMP-7 in vitro, microarray analyses of 
gene expressions were performed. Microarray data suggested that a total of 882
transcripts were either up- or downregulated at least 2-fold. Cluster analyses
revealed 76 genes (including ESTs) with expression patterns that paralleled
Runx2/Cbfa1. Thirteen of these 76 genes were initially selected as potential
transcription modulators for further study; including CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein delta, distal- less homeobox 1, forkhead box F2, insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 4, an ortholog of human osteoclast stimulating factor 1
and p300/CBP-associated factor. Some transcription modulators have been
associated with osteoblastic differentiation or interacted with Runx2/Cbfa1. Most
of them have not been extensively studied in osteoblastic differentiation and in 
relationship to Runx2/Cbfa1. Thus, these studies identify potential regulators
for Runx2/Cbfa1 and osteoblast differentiation. In addition, our data revealed
for the first time that BMP-7 not only induced the expression of osteoblastic
differentiation markers but also stimulated the expression of chondroblastic
markers in C2C12 cells.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14745233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 26;23(8):1549-57.

Loss of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta promotes chromosomal instability.

Huang AM(1), Montagna C, Sharan S, Ni Y, Ried T, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Regulation of Cell Growth Laboratory, PO Box B, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (Cebpd, also known 
as C/EBPdelta, CRP3, CELF, NF-IL6beta) is implicated in diverse cellular
functions such as the acute phase response, adipocyte differentiation, learning
and memory, and mammary epithelial cell growth control. Here, we report that lack
of Cebpd causes genomic instability and centrosome amplifications in primary
embryonic fibroblasts derived from 129S1 mice. Upon spontaneous immortalization, 
Cebpd-deficient fibroblasts acquire transformed features such as impaired contact
inhibition and reduced serum dependence. These data identify a novel role for
Cebpd in the maintenance of chromosomal stability and suggest a potential tumor
suppressor function in vivo.

PMID: 14716301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Anim Genet. 2003 Dec;34(6):470-1.

Mapping of bovine CEBPD gene to BTA14q15-17.

Ihara N(1), Yamakuchi H, Taniguchi Y, Sasaki Y, Bennett GL, Kappes S, Sugimoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shirakawa Institute of Animal Genetics, Nishigo, Fukushima 961-8061, Japan.

PMID: 14687085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 30;279(5):3852-61. Epub 2003 Nov 3.

C/EBP-delta induction by gp130 signaling. Role in transition to myelin gene
expressing phenotype in a melanoma cell line model.

Kamaraju AK(1), Adjalley S, Zhang P, Chebath J, Revel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehov Herzl, 
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Expression of genes encoding structural myelin proteins marks the inception of
the myelinating Schwann cell (SC) phenotype. Earlier embryonic SC as well as
adult non-myelinating SC produce the intermediate filament glial fibrillary acid 
protein (GFAP), which disappears from the myelinating SC. We previously observed 
that triggering of the gp130 receptor system by the IL6RIL6 ligand, comprising
interleukin-6 (IL-6) fused to the soluble IL-6 receptor, induces myelin gene
expression in rat embryonic dorsal root ganglia (DRG) cultures as well as in the 
murine melanoma cell line B16/F10.9. Study of target genes regulated by IL6RIL6
indicates a strong and selective induction of the transcriptional regulator
C/EBP-delta in DRG cultures and in the F10.9 cell line. As shown here, silencing 
of C/EBP-delta mRNA and protein expression by introduction of small interference 
RNA-producing plasmids in the F10.9 cells prevented the induction of myelin
protein zero (P0) and myelin basic protein (MBP) mRNAs by IL6RIL6.
Doxycycline-regulated overexpression of C/EBP-delta was sufficient to induce
accumulation of P0 and MBP mRNAs, the effect being selective, because C/EBP-delta
did not affect several other genes strongly regulated by IL6RIL6. Interestingly, 
GFAP was inhibited by C/EBP-delta overexpression, leading to a modulation of the 
ratio between myelin gene products versus GFAP and suggesting that C/EBP-delta
plays a role in the switch to a myelinating phenotype. The down-regulation of
Pax3, also typical of the transition to myelinating cells, was observed after
C/EBP-delta expression in correlation to P0 induction and to decrease of
melanogenesis and cell growth. In cultures of dissociated cells of embryonic rat 
DRG, where we knocked-down the C/EBP-delta mRNA, we found an inhibition of P0
mRNA induction by IL6RIL6, showing that the role of C/EBP-delta on this myelin
gene is not unique to the melanoma system.

PMID: 14600146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Oct 1;66(7):1231-44.

Interaction of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) with induced adipocyte 
differentiation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) involves tyrosine kinase
c-Src.

Vogel CF(1), Matsumura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, One Shields 
Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Adipocyte differentiation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from
c-Src wild-type or c-Src-deficient (abbreviated as MEF+/+ and MEF-/- hereafter)
C57BL/6 mice was induced by ascorbic acid (A) and beta-glycerophosphate (G). TCDD
clearly suppressed differentiation of MEF+/+, but not MEF-/-, as measured by
increased accumulation of triglycerides associated with increased expression of
adipocyte differentiation-specific genes such as peroxisome proliferators
activated receptor (PPAR)gamma, stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD-1). Studies on
inducibility of TCDD-activated genes such as cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A1 and CYP1B1 
revealed a comparable dose response in both MEF+/+ and MEF-/-. Furthermore, the
binding activity of AhR complexes to xenobiotic response elements (XREs) was
similar in both cell lines. We further studied the effect of TCDD on
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBP), which are known to be important
regulators of cell differentiation. TCDD induced C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta mRNA
expression and DNA binding activity in a time- and dose-dependent manner in
MEF+/+ but not in MEF-/-. The levels of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta were still
elevated in differentiated MEF+/+ after 10 days of treatment with TCDD. In
MEF-/-, C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta are highly expressed constitutively. In contrast
to MEF+/+, TCDD does not cause any significant change of these transcription
factors in MEF-/-. These data indicate that suppression of differentiation by
TCDD in MEF requires a functional c-Src activity and induced levels of C/EBPbeta 
and C/EBPdelta, including their maintenance at high levels by TCDD, rather than
ultimate high levels of these C/EBP isoforms.

PMID: 14505802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Neurosci. 2003 Aug 20;23(20):7470-8.

The involvement of glucose metabolism in the regulation of inducible nitric oxide
synthase gene expression in glial cells: possible role of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase and CCAAT/enhancing binding protein.

Won JS(1), Im YB, Key L, Singh I, Singh AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston,
South Carolina 29425, USA.

In rat glial cells the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) gene expression was enhanced by extracellular glucose
concentration in a dose-dependent manner. On the other hand, 2-deoxy-d-glucose
decreased the LPS-induced iNOS gene expression even in the presence of glucose (6
gm/l), suggesting that glucose metabolism is linked to the regulation of iNOS
gene expression. The intracellular NADPH/NADP+ directly correlated with the
extracellular glucose concentration, and the reduction of NADPH generation via a 
block of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) by treatment with
dehydroepiandrosterone or the antisense DNA oligomer of G6PD mRNA resulted in the
inhibition of iNOS gene expression. Gel shift assays showed that CAAT/enhancing
binding protein (C/EBP), rather than AP-1 or NF-kappaB, correlated better with a 
glucose-dependent increase in iNOS gene expression. The induction of C/EBP DNA
binding activity by LPS and glucose was attributable mainly to the increase in
C/EBP-delta protein. The cotransfection with wild-type C/EBP-delta increased the 
iNOS promoter activity to the level achieved with a higher glucose concentration 
in the presence of LPS. Therefore, our results suggest that C/EBP-delta may be a 
critical mediator in glucose-mediated regulation of iNOS gene expression.

PMID: 12930785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Sep;121(3):441-7.

Expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein transcription factors in cultured human sebocytes.

Chen W(1), Yang CC, Sheu HM, Seltmann H, Zouboulis CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Sheng-Li Road 138, 704 Tainan, Taiwan. wchen@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Lipid synthesis and accumulation represent a major step in sebocyte
differentiation and it may be of importance for sebocytes to express two families
of transcription factors, CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (c/EBPs) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), which were found to play a crucial role
in the differentiation of adipocytes. Using the immortalized human sebaceous
gland cell line SZ95 we examined the expression of the molecules before and after
treatment with testosterone, 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone, dexamethasone,
17beta-estradiol and genistein, at 6, 12, 24, and 48 h, respectively. Reverse
transcription-PCR analysis showed expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors -alpha, -delta, -gamma1, -gamma2 and CCAAT/enhancer binding
proteins-alpha, -beta, -gamma-delta in native SZ95 sebocytes. In western blot
studies, high levels of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins-alpha and -beta, and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors-gamma were expressed at 6, 24, and 12
h, respectively. Immunostaining of the cultured sebocytes showed the
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins-alpha and -beta mainly localized within nuclei,
whereas peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors-gamma in the cytoplasm.
Strong staining of sebocytes was immunohistochemically revealed in the basal
layer of sebaceous glands in human scalp and sebaceous nevus. Genistein
down-regulated the expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins-alpha and -beta,
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors-gamma on the protein level.
Treatment with linoleic acid for 48 h induced further differentiation of
sebocytes leading to abundant lipid synthesis.

PMID: 12925198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Clin Invest. 2003 Jul;112(2):244-55.

Keratinocyte growth factor and the transcription factors C/EBP alpha, C/EBP
delta, and SREBP-1c regulate fatty acid synthesis in alveolar type II cells.

Mason RJ(1), Pan T, Edeen KE, Nielsen LD, Zhang F, Longphre M, Eckart MR, Neben
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
Colorado 80206, USA. masonb@njc.org

Strategies to stimulate endogenous surfactant production require a detailed
understanding of the regulation of lipogenesis in alveolar type II cells. We
developed culture conditions in which keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) stimulates
fatty acid and phospholipid synthesis. KGF stimulated acetate incorporation into 
phosphatidylcholine, disaturated phosphatidylcholine, and phosphatidylglycerol
more than 5% rat serum alone. To determine the mRNA levels of lipogenic enzymes
and transport proteins, we analyzed gene expression by oligonucleotide
microarrays. KGF increased the mRNA levels for fatty acid synthase, stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase-1 (SCD-1), and epidermal fatty acid-binding protein more than rat
serum alone. In addition, KGF increased the mRNA levels of the transcription
factors CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) and C/EBPdelta as well 
as SREBP-1c (ADD-1), but not PPARgamma. These changes in C/EBPalpha and
C/EBPdelta were confirmed by in situ hybridization. SCD-1 was also found to be
highly expressed in alveolar type II cells in vivo. Furthermore, KGF increased
protein levels of fatty acid synthase, C/EBPalpha, C/EBPdelta, SREBP-1, epidermal
fatty acid-binding protein, and SCD. Finally, the liver X receptor agonist
T0901317 increased acetate incorporation and SREBP-1 but not SREBP-2 protein
levels. In summary, KGF stimulates lipogenesis in type II cells by a coordinated 
expression of lipogenic enzymes and transport proteins regulated by C/EBP
isoforms and SREBP-1c.

PMCID: PMC164284
PMID: 12865412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36959-65. Epub 2003 Jul 11.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family members recruit the coactivator
CREB-binding protein and trigger its phosphorylation.

Kovács KA(1), Steinmann M, Magistretti PJ, Halfon O, Cardinaux JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Lausanne, CH-1005
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):45040.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family members are transcription factors
involved in important physiological processes, such as cellular proliferation and
differentiation, regulation of energy homeostasis, inflammation, and
hematopoiesis. Transcriptional activation by C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta involves
the coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300, which promote transcription
by acetylating histones and recruiting basal transcription factors. In this
study, we show that C/EBPdelta is also using CBP as a coactivator. Based on
sequence homology with C/EBPalpha and -beta, we identify in C/EBPdelta two
conserved amino acid segments that are necessary for the physical interaction
with CBP. Using reporter gene assays, we demonstrate that mutation of these
residues prevents CBP recruitment and diminishes the transactivating potential of
C/EBPdelta. In addition, our results indicate that C/EBP family members not only 
recruit CBP but specifically induce its phosphorylation. We provide evidence that
CBP phosphorylation depends on its interaction with C/EBPdelta and define point
mutations within one of the two conserved amino acid segments of C/EBPdelta that 
abolish CBP phosphorylation as well as transcriptional activation, suggesting
that this new mechanism could be important for C/EBP-mediated transcription.

PMID: 12857754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 15;171(2):821-8.

Functional cooperation of simian virus 40 promoter factor 1 and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta and delta in lipopolysaccharide-induced gene 
activation of IL-10 in mouse macrophages.

Liu YW(1), Tseng HP, Chen LC, Chen BK, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biopharmaceutics, College of Life Science, National
Chiayi University, Chiayi, Taiwan.

Previous studies have revealed that LPS can activate transcription of the IL-10
gene promoter through an SV40 promoter factor 1 (Sp1) binding site in mouse
macrophage RAW264.7. In this study, we determined that, in addition to Sp1,
C/EBPbeta and delta were also involved in LPS-induced gene expression of IL-10.
By transient transfection with 5'-deletion mutants of the IL-10 promoter, we
found that there were two LPS-responsive elements in the promoter of the mouse
IL-10 gene. Analysis of these two regions by gel shift assay suggested that Sp1
and C/EBPbeta and delta were bound to these two regions, respectively. By
site-directed mutagenesis, we found that disruption at both the Sp1 and C/EBP
binding sites almost completely blocked the LPS response. By gel shift assay and 
Western blotting, we found that the DNA binding complex and protein expression of
C/EBPbeta and delta were increased by LPS treatment, but these results were not
found for Sp1. Overexpression of C/EBPbeta or C/EBPdelta, respectively, activated
the promoter of the IL-10 gene, and they were enhanced by LPS.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments in intact cells indicated that LPS stimulated
interaction between Sp1 and C/EBPbeta and delta. These results suggested that the
interaction between Sp1 and C/EBPbeta and delta induced by LPS cooperatively
activated expression of the IL-10 gene. The increase of C/EBPbeta and delta
proteins and the enhancement of transactivation activity of C/EBPbeta and delta
by LPS treatment, at least in part, explain the activation of IL-10 gene
expression.

PMID: 12847250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neurosci. 2003 Jul 2;23(13):5607-16.

Categorically distinct acute stressors elicit dissimilar transcriptional profiles
in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.

Reyes TM(1), Walker JR, DeCino C, Hogenesch JB, Sawchenko PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuronal Structure and Function, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (PVH) is a key site for integrating
neuroendocrine, autonomic, and behavioral adjustments to diverse homeostatic
challenges, including "physiological" (e.g., infection or hemorrhage) and
"emotional" [e.g., restraint (RST) or footshock] stresses. Both types of
challenges ultimately converge to activate common response systems represented in
PVH, including the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis and the sympathoadrenal
system. Oligonucleotide microarrays (U74A; Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) were used
to compare and contrast gene expression profiles in the PVH elicited at 1 and 3
hr after acute exposure to representative physiological [intraperitoneal
injection of 10 microg lipopolysaccharide (LPS)] and emotional (30 min RST)
stressors. In general, the two challenges recruited relatively few genes in
common, with the degree of overlap varying across functional classes of genes.
The greatest degree of commonality was seen among signaling molecules and
neuropeptides, whereas transcription factors upregulated by RST and LPS were
largely distinct. Unexpectedly, RST induced a number of immune-related molecules,
which were not regulated by LPS. Hybridization histochemical analyses localized a
subset of responsive transcripts to the PVH and/or immediately adjoining regions.
Immunerelated molecules in particular distributed broadly to vascular and other
barrier-associated cell types. These global transcriptional profiles inform the
search for early (transcription factors) and late (target genes) mechanisms in
the modulation of PVH, and generalized CNS, responses to categorically distinct
stressors.

PMID: 12843263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2003 May;79(2):175-85.

Expression of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPdelta in breast cancer: correlations with clinicopathologic parameters and
cell-cycle regulatory proteins.

Milde-Langosch K(1), Löning T, Bamberger AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Gynecopathology, University-Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany. milde@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Members of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family of transcription
factors are involved in the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of
the mammary gland. In order to investigate the role of C/EBPalpha, -beta and
-delta in breast cancer, we performed western blot analysis and partly
immunohistochemistry in 75 mammary carcinomas, 10 normal mammary tissue samples
and four mammary cell lines. Expression levels of both C/EBPalpha isoforms,
C/EBPbeta isoforms LAP1, LAP2 (liver-enriched transcriptional activating
proteins), and LIP (liver-enriched transcriptional inhibitory protein), and
C/EBPdelta in the tumors were correlated with clinicopathological tumor
parameters, expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER, PR), Ki67
immunostaining, and expression of seven cell-cycle regulatory proteins which had 
been analyzed before. High C/EBPalpha and -delta protein levels correlated
significantly with expression of cell-cycle promoters (cyclin D1 and E) and
cell-cycle inhibitory proteins (Rb, p27, p16), but with none of the established
prognostic parameters. In contrast, statistically significant relationships of
the full-length C/EBPbeta isoform LAP1 and a negative estrogen receptor status,
high grading, nodal involvement, and high cyclin E and p16 expression were found.
For the shorter isoform LIP, correlations with an ER-negative phenotype and high 
Ki67 immunostaining were detected, and high histological grading (G3) correlated 
with lower LAP/LIP ratio. These results suggest that high C/EBPbeta expression
might be involved in tumor progression and indicative of an unfavorable
prognosis.

PMID: 12825852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Sep;17(9):1834-43. Epub 2003 Jun 5.

Activation domains of CCAAT enhancer binding protein delta: regions required for 
native activity and prostaglandin E2-dependent transactivation of insulin-like
growth factor I gene expression in rat osteoblasts.

Ji C(1), Chang W, Centrella M, McCarthy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8041, USA. thomas.mccarthy@yale.edu.

In osteoblasts, hormones such as prostaglandin E2 that activate protein kinase A 
increase the translocation of transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
delta (C/EBPdelta) from the cytoplasm to the nucleus where it rapidly induces
IGF-I gene expression. In this study, we identified activation and suppression
domains in C/EBPdelta using native and heterologous gene promoter assay systems. 
We demonstrated functional interactions between C/EBPdelta and
trans-gene-expressed cAMP response element binding protein-binding protein, and
showed that the ability of C/EBPdelta to promote gene expression was suppressed
by viral protein E1A, which blocks the activity of native cAMP response element
binding protein-binding protein. Site-directed mutations at serines 62 or 191
within C/EBPdelta reduced its basal transcriptional activity, whereas mutation at
serine 191 suppressed the stimulatory effect of prostaglandin E2 on C/EBPdelta
function as well as its DNA binding potential. These results are consistent with 
the location of serine 191 in the DNA binding domain of C/EBPdelta. Our studies
provide the first evidence for regions of C/EBPdelta that are important for basal
and for hormone-induced transcriptional activity, and for its interactions with
other enhancers and suppressers of gene expression.

PMID: 12791769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 May 2;304(2):344-50.

An AU-rich element in the 3' untranslated region of the C/EBP delta mRNA is
important for protein binding during G0 growth arrest.

Dearth LR(1), DeWille J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210-1093, USA.

Posttranscriptional regulation at the level of mRNA stability is becoming
increasingly recognized as an important mechanism to control the levels of mRNAs 
that encode key cell fate determining proteins. Previous work from our laboratory
demonstrated that C/EBPdelta is a highly unstable mRNA in G(0) growth arrested
mammary epithelial cells. In this report we investigated trans-acting factor
binding to the C/EBPdelta 3'-UTR and identified a cis-acting element important
for this interaction. RNA electromobility shift assays (REMSAs) demonstrate that 
the C/EBPdelta mRNA 3'-UTR binds trans-acting factor(s) present in G(0) growth
arrested mammary epithelial cell lysates. This binding was not detected in the
presence of lysates from growing cells. UV-binding analysis detected a
RNA/protein complex of approximately 35kDa following incubation of the
full-length C/EBPdelta 3'UTR with lysates from G(0) growth arrested mammary
epithelial cells. Competition assays indicate that a specific AU-rich region (U1)
is necessary for trans-acting factor binding to the C/EBPdelta 3'-UTR. These
studies have identified an AU-rich element located within the C/EBPdelta 3'-UTR
that interacts with a putative G(0) growth arrest-specific trans-acting
factor(s), which may regulate C/EBPdelta mRNA decay.

PMID: 12711321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Probes. 2003 Feb;17(1):11-4.

Detection of base sequence changes in the CEBPD gene in human breast cancer cell 
lines and primary breast cancer isolates.

Tang D(1), DeWille J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Ohio State Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis was performed on genomic 
DNA from 97 human breast cancer samples and 10 breast cell lines to screen for
mutations in the single exon C/EBPD gene. Three C --> T transitions resulting in 
silent mutations were detected in three individual breast cancer samples. One
breast cancer sample also contained a G --> T transversion (Q253H). The SUM-52PE 
cell line contained an A --> T transversion (AAG --> TAG) resulting in a nonsense
mutation (K180Stop). All mutations identified in genomic DNA isolates were in
highly conserved regions of the C/EBPD gene. This study indicates that mutational
alterations in the coding region of the C/EBPD gene are relatively uncommon in
human breast cancer.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12628588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2003 Mar;228(3):278-85.

Nulliparous CCAAT/enhancer binding proteindelta (C/EBPdelta) knockout mice
exhibit mammary gland ductal hyperlasia.

Gigliotti AP(1), Johnson PF, Sterneck E, DeWille JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Division of Molecular Biology and
Cancer Genetics, Ohio State Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are a family of nuclear proteins that
function in the control of cell growth, death, and differentiation. We previously
reported that C/EBPdelta plays a key role in mammary epithelial cell G(0) growth 
arrest. In this report, we investigated the role of C/EBPdelta in mammary gland
development and function using female mice homozygous for a targeted deletion of 
C/EBPdelta (C/EBPdelta -/-). C/EBPdelta -/- females develop normally and exhibit 
normal reproductive and lactational performance. Adult nulliparous C/EBPdelta -/-
females, however, exhibit mammary epithelial cell growth control defects. The
mean number of mammary ductal branches is significantly higher in adult
nulliparous C/EBPdelta -/- females compared with C/EBPdelta +/+ (wild-type
control) females (66.8 +/- 5.2 vs 42.9 +/- 6.3 branch points/field, P < 0.01). In
addition, the mean total mammary gland cellular volume occupied by epithelium is 
significantly higher in adult nulliparous C/EBPdelta -/- females compared with
C/EBPdelta +/+ controls (29.0 +/- 1.4 vs 20.4 +/- 1.3, P < 0.001). Our results
showed that the BrdU labeling index was significantly higher in mammary
epithelial cells from nulliparous C/EBPdelta -/- females compared with C/EBPdelta
+/+ controls during the proestrus/estrus (4.55 +/- 0.70 vs 2.14 +/- 0.43, P <
0.01) and metestrus/diestrus (6.92 +/- 0.75 vs 3.98 +/- 0.43 P < 0.01) phases of 
the estrus cycle. In contrast, the percentage of mammary epithelial cells
undergoing apoptosis during both phases of the estrus cycle did not differ
between C/EBPdelta -/- and C/EBPdelta +/+ females. The increased epithelial cell 
content and proliferative capacity was restricted to the nulliparous C/EBPdelta
-/- females as no differences in mammary gland morphology, ductal branching or
total epithelial content were observed between multiparous C/EBPdelta -/- and
C/EBPdelta +/+ females. These results demonstrate that C/EBPdelta plays a novel
role in mammary epithelial cell growth control that appears to be restricted to
the nulliparous mammary gland.

PMID: 12626772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Mar;63(3):512-23.

Potentiation of lipopolysaccharide-inducible cyclooxygenase 2 expression by
C2-ceramide via c-Jun N-terminal kinase-mediated activation of CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein beta in macrophages.

Cho YH(1), Lee CH, Kim SG.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory (MDT), College of Pharmacy, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.

Ceramide, formed by sphingomyelinase, is involved in the expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). This study examines the effect of C2-ceramide (C2), a
cell-permeable ceramide analog, on the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-inducible COX-2
expression and signaling pathways. C2 did not induce COX-2 but potentiated
LPS-inducible COX-2 expression in Raw264.7 cells, whereas dihydro-C2 was
inactive. Treatment of cells with C2 notably increased LPS-inducible
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) DNA binding. Antibody supershift
experiments revealed that LPS-induced C/EBP DNA binding activity depended on
C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta but not C/EBP alpha, C/EBP epsilon or CBP/p300. C/EBP 
beta contributed to C2-enhanced DNA binding activity.
4-(4-Fluorophenyl)-2-(4-methylsulfinylphenyl)-5-(4-pyridyl) 1H-imidazole
(SB203580), a p38 kinase inhibitor, completely inhibited LPS-inducible and
C2-potentiated LPS-inducible COX-2 expression. Enhancement of LPS-inducible COX-2
expression and C/EBP DNA binding by C2 was abrogated in dominant-negative mutant 
of JNK1 [JNK1(-)] cells. 2'-Amino-3'-methoxyflavone (PD98059) or stable
transfection with dominant-negative mutant of MKK1 decreased COX-2 induction by
LPS but failed to inhibit C2-enhanced LPS induction of COX-2. Transfection with
dominant-negative mutant of C/EBP inhibited the ability of C2 to potentiate the
induction of COX-2 by LPS. In LPS-treated cells, C2 enhanced both the nuclear
translocation and the expression of LPS-inducible C/EBP beta with an increase in 
AP-1 DNA binding activity. These enhancements were abolished by JNK1(-)
transfection. AP-1 decoy oligonucleotide suppressed C2-potentiated C/EBP beta
expression, indicating that AP-1 was responsible for C2-mediated C/EBP beta
expression. These results demonstrate that C2 increases C/EBP beta-mediated COX-2
induction by LPS and that the pathway of JNK1 but not ERK1/2 is responsible for
C/EBP beta activation involving activator protein-1-mediated enhanced C/EBP beta 
expression.

PMID: 12606757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):11246-55. Epub 2003 Jan 27.

Posttranscriptional and posttranslational regulation of C/EBP delta in G0
growth-arrested mammary epithelial cells.

Dearth LR(1), DeWille J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, the Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210-1093, USA.

Previous work from our laboratory demonstrated that CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein delta (C/EBP delta) functions in the initiation and maintenance of G(0)
growth arrest in mouse mammary epithelial cells (MECs). In this report, we
investigated the posttranscriptional and posttranslational regulation of C/EBP
delta in G(0) growth-arrested mouse MECs. The results of transcriptional
inhibitor studies demonstrated that the C/EBP delta mRNA exhibits a relatively
short half-life in G(0) growth-arrested mouse MECs (t(1/2) approximately 35 min).
In contrast, C/EBP delta mRNA has a longer half-life in G(0) growth-arrested
mouse fibroblast cells (t(1/2) >100 min). Oligo/RNase H cleavage analysis and
rapid amplification of cDNA ends-poly(A) test both confirmed the short C/EBP
delta mRNA half-life observed in MECs and demonstrated that the C/EBP delta mRNA 
poly(A) tail is relatively short (approximately 100 nucleotides). In addition,
the poly(A) tail length was not shortened during C/EBP delta mRNA degradation,
which suggested a deadenylation-independent pathway. The C/EBP delta protein also
exhibited a relatively short half-life in G(0) growth-arrested mouse MECs (t(1/2)
approximately 120 min). The C/EBP delta protein was degraded in a
ubiquitin-dependent manner, primarily in the nucleus, during G(0) growth arrest. 
In conclusion, these studies indicated that the C/EBP delta mRNA and protein
content are under tight regulation in G(0) growth-arrested mouse MECs, despite
the general concept that G(0) growth arrest is associated with a decrease in
cellular activity.

PMID: 12554732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9609-19. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Transforming growth factor-beta inhibits adipocyte differentiation by Smad3
interacting with CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) and repressing C/EBP
transactivation function.

Choy L(1), Derynck R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Growth and Development, Programs in Cell Biology and
Developmental Biology, University of California, San Francisco, California
94143-0640, USA.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is a potent inhibitor of adipocyte
differentiation. To identify which adipocyte transcription factors might be
targeted by TGF-beta, we overexpressed key adipogenic transcription factors,
C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma
in NIH3T3 cells and tested the ability of TGF-beta to block adipogenesis. We show
that TGF-beta inhibits adipocyte differentiation driven by either C/EBPbeta or
C/EBPdelta without affecting C/EBP protein expression levels, suggesting that
these C/EBPs are a direct target of TGF-beta action. Because TGF-beta inhibits
adipogenesis by signaling through Smad3, we examined physical and functional
interactions of Smad3 and Smad4 with C/EBPbeta, C/EBPdelta, and PPARgamma2.
C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta were found to physically interact with Smad3 and Smad4, 
and Smad3 cooperated with Smad4 and TGF-beta signaling to repress the
transcriptional activity of C/EBPs. Thus, repression of the activity of C/EBPs by
Smad3/4 at C/EBP binding sites inhibited transcription from the PPARgamma2 and
leptin promoters. In contrast, PPARgamma interacted only very weakly with Smad3
and its transcriptional activity was not repressed by Smad3/4 or in response to
TGF-beta. Smad3/4 did not reduce the ability of C/EBP to bind to its cognate DNA 
sequence, but repressed transcription by inhibiting the transactivation function 
of C/EBP.

PMID: 12524424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3265-73. Epub 2002 Dec 19.

Regulation of neutrophil and eosinophil secondary granule gene expression by
transcription factors C/EBP epsilon and PU.1.

Gombart AF(1), Kwok SH, Anderson KL, Yamaguchi Y, Torbett BE, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
90048, USA. gombarta@csmc.edu

In the bone marrow of C/EBP epsilon(-/-) mice, expression of neutrophil secondary
and tertiary granule mRNAs is absent for lactoferrin (LF), neutrophil gelatinase 
(NG), murine cathelin-like protein (MCLP), and the cathelin B9; it is severely
reduced for neutrophil collagenase (NC) and neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin (NGAL). In addition, the expression of eosinophil granule genes, major 
basic protein (MBP), and eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) is absent. These mice
express C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, and C/EBP delta in the bone marrow at levels
similar to those of their wild-type counterparts, suggesting a lack of functional
redundancy among the family in vivo. Stable inducible expression of C/EBP epsilon
and C/EBP alpha in the murine fibroblast cell line NIH 3T3 activated expression
of mRNAs for B9, MCLP, NC, and NGAL but not for LF. In transient transfections of
C/EBP epsilon and C/EBP alpha, B9 was strongly induced with weaker induction of
the other genes. C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta proteins weakly induced B9
expression, but C/EBP delta induced NC expression more efficiently than the other
C/EBPs. The expression of MBP was inefficiently induced by C/EBP epsilon alone
and weakly induced with C/EBP epsilon and GATA-1, but the addition of PU.1
resulted in a striking cooperative induction of MBP in NIH 3T3 cells. Mutation of
a predicted PU.1 site in the human MBP promoter-luciferase reporter construct
abrogated the response to PU.1. Gel-shift analysis demonstrated binding of PU.1
to this site. MBP and EPX mRNAs were absent in a PU.1-null myeloid cell line
established from the embryonic liver of PU.1(-/-) mice. Restitution of PU.1
protein expression restored MBP and EPX protein expression. This study
demonstrates that C/EBP epsilon is essential and sufficient for the expression of
a particular subset of neutrophil secondary granule genes. Furthermore, it
indicates the importance of PU.1 in the cooperative activation of eosinophil
granule genes.

PMID: 12515729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Dec;15 Suppl 5:1455-8.

Molecular physiology of IGF-I expression.

Rotwein P(1), Billiard J, Woelfle J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR 97201-3098, USA. rotweinp@ohsu.edu

PMID: 12511010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2581-4. Epub 2002 Nov 7.

The Krüppel-like factor KLF2 inhibits peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma expression and adipogenesis.

Banerjee SS(1), Feinberg MW, Watanabe M, Gray S, Haspel RL, Denkinger DJ,
Kawahara R, Hauner H, Jain MK.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Obesity is an important public health problem associated with a number of disease
states such as diabetes and arteriosclerosis. As such, an understanding of the
mechanisms governing adipose tissue differentiation and function is of
considerable importance. We recently reported that the Krüppel-like zinc finger
transcription factor KLF15 can induce adipocyte maturation and GLUT4 expression. 
In this study, we identify that a second family member, KLF2/Lung Krüppel-like
factor (LKLF), as a negative regulator of adipocyte differentiation. KLF2 is
highly expressed in adipose tissue, and studies in cell lines and primary cells
demonstrate that KLF2 is expressed in preadipocytes but not mature adipocytes.
Constitutive overexpression of KLF2 but not KLF15 potently inhibits peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) expression with no effect on
the upstream regulators C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta. However, the expression of
C/EBPalpha and SREBP1c/ADD1 (adipocyte determination and differentiation
factor-1/sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1), two factors that feedback 
in a positive manner to enhance PPARgamma function, was also markedly reduced. In
addition, transient transfection studies show that KLF2 directly inhibits
PPARgamma2 promoter activity (70% inhibition; p < 0.001). Using a combination of 
promoter mutational analysis and gel mobility shift assays, we have identified a 
binding site within the PPARgamma2 promoter, which mediates this inhibitory
effect. These data identify a novel role for KLF2 as a negative regulator of
adipogenesis.

PMID: 12426306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Eur J Immunol. 2002 Oct;32(10):2897-904.

Modulation of lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-IL6 activation by protein kinase
C-alpha in a mouse macrophage cell line.

Chano F(1), Descoteaux A.

Author information: 
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du Québec, 531 des Prairies, Laval, 
Québec, H7V 1B7 Canada.

We have previously shown that overexpression of a dominant-negative (DN) mutant
of protein kinase C-alpha (PKC-alpha) in RAW 264.7 macrophages inhibited
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced IL-1alpha, inducible nitric oxide synthase and
cyclooxygenase-2 expression. This inhibition was not related to defective
NF-kappaB nuclear translocation, suggesting that PKC-alpha might be involved in
the modulation of other LPS-inducible transcription factors. In the present
study, we have investigated the impact of PKC-alpha on the activation of AP-1 and
NF-IL6 in LPS-treated RAW 264.7 macrophages. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and luciferase reporter constructs revealed that LPS-induced AP-1
transcriptional activity was normal in DN PKC-alpha-overexpressing RAW 264.7
cells. In contrast, LPS-induced DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of
NF-IL6 were inhibited in DN PKC-alpha-overexpressing RAW 264.7 cells and
correlated with an impairment of NF-IL6 nuclear translocation. Conversely,
overexpression of either wild-type PKC-alpha or a constitutively active PKC-alpha
mutant significantly enhanced LPS-stimulated NF-IL6-dependent promoter activity. 
Finally, LPS-induced expression of two genes regulated by NF-IL6, namely IL-1beta
and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, was impaired in DN
PKC-alpha-overexpressing RAW 264.7 cells. Taken together, these results suggest
that regulation of NF-IL6 activity constitutes one of the mechanisms by which
PKC-alpha modulates LPS-induced gene expression in the mouse macrophage cell line
RAW 264.7.

PMID: 12355443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 20;277(51):49776-81. Epub 2002 Sep 25.

Calcineurin mediates the calcium-dependent inhibition of adipocyte
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells.

Neal JW(1), Clipstone NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 E. Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Recent studies have revealed that the calcium-dependent serine/threonine
phosphatase calcineurin mediates the effects of intracellular calcium in many
different cell types. In this study we investigated the role of calcineurin in
the regulation of adipocyte differentiation. We found that the specific
calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A and FK506 overcame the antiadipogenic effect
of calcium ionophore on the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. This finding
suggests that calcineurin is responsible for mediating the previously documented 
Ca(2+)-dependent inhibition of adipogenesis. We further demonstrate that the
expression of a constitutively active calcineurin mutant potently inhibits the
ability of 3T3-L1 cells to undergo adipocyte differentiation by preventing
expression of the proadipogenic transcription factors peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein alpha (C/EBPalpha). This calcineurin-mediated block in adipocyte
differentiation is rescued by ectopic expression of PPARgamma1. Finally, we
demonstrate that inhibition of endogenous calcineurin activity with either FK506 
or a specific calcineurin inhibitory peptide enhances differentiation of 3T3-L1
cells in response to suboptimal adipogenic stimuli, suggesting that endogenous
calcineurin activity normally sets a signaling threshold that antagonizes
efficient adipocyte differentiation. Collectively, these data indicate that
calcineurin acts as a Ca(2+)-dependent molecular switch that negatively regulates
commitment to adipocyte differentiation by preventing the expression of critical 
proadipogenic transcription factors.

PMID: 12351639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2002 Aug;67(8):918-26.

DNA binding activity of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta for the rat alpha2-macroglobulin
gene promoter is regulated in an acute-phase dependent manner.

Milosavljevic TS(1), Petrovic MV, Cvetkovic ID, Grigorov II.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biology, Institute for Biological Research Sinisa
Stankovic, Belgrade 11060, Serbia, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
pemi@ibiss.bg.ac.yu

Turpentine-induced acute-phase (AP) response in rats is followed by
transcriptional activation of the alpha2-macroglobulin (MG) gene mediated by
cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) and glucocorticoids. Based on nucleotide sequence
analysis of the alpha2-MG gene promoter regions responsive to IL-6, we postulated
that binding of members of the liver-enriched CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins
(C/EBP) family of transcription factors to the type I IL-6 responsive element
(IL-6RE) may participate in the transcriptional activation of this gene during AP
response. Results of Western immunoblot and Northern-blot assays revealed
coordinate changes in the pool levels of C/EBPalpha, -beta. and -delta protein
isoforms and their genes expression in liver in response to turpentine. By means 
of an in vitro phosphorylation assay, South-Western blot, and selective
proteolysis we have also found that only abilities of 35-kD C/EBPbeta and 27-kD
C/EBPdelta to bind to the alpha2-MG gene promoter were affected by
phosphorylation. Based on these data we concluded that transcriptional induction 
of the rat alpha2-MG gene during AP response correlates with both increased
synthesis and phosphorylation-induced binding of 35-kD C/EBPbeta and 27-kD
C/EBPdelta.

PMID: 12223092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Circ Res. 2002 Sep 6;91(5):427-33.

Vascular inflammation is negatively autoregulated by interaction between
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-delta and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma.

Takata Y(1), Kitami Y, Yang ZH, Nakamura M, Okura T, Hiwada K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Ehime, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2002 Sep 6;91(5):373-4.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) upregulate transcription of various
inflammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins, such as interleukin (IL)-1beta, 
IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and cyclooxygenase-2. Recent studies have
demonstrated that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma is
present in atherosclerotic lesions, and negatively regulates expression of these 
genes. Interestingly, PPAR-gamma gene promoter has tandem repeats of
C/EBP-binding motif, and C/EBP-delta plays a pivotal role in transactivation of
PPAR-gamma gene. It has been well known that the interaction between C/EBPs and
PPAR-gamma plays a central role in maintaining adipocyte differentiation and
glucometabolism; however, the relationship between PPAR-gamma and C/EBPs in the
vessel wall remains unclear. In the present study, we showed that a high level of
C/EBP-delta expression induced by inflammation positively regulated transcription
and protein expression of PPAR-gamma in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). On 
the other hand, PPAR-gamma ligands troglitazone, pioglitazone, and
15-deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglandin J(2) inhibited IL-1beta-induced IL-6
expression at a transcriptional revel in VSMCs. Functional promoter analysis
revealed that PPAR-gamma ligands inhibited IL-1beta-induced transactivation of
IL-6 gene via suppression of not only nuclear factor-kappaB but also C/EBP-DNA
binding. Moreover, PPAR-gamma ligands suppressed protein expression and
transcription of C/EBP-delta through dephosphorylation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3. These findings strongly suggest that C/EBP-delta is
negatively autoregulated via transactivation of PPAR-gamma. This feedback
mechanism probably downregulates transcription of inflammatory cytokines and
acute phase proteins, and modulates inflammatory responses in the early process
of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12215492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Circ Res. 2002 Sep 6;91(5):373-4.

PPARgamma and vascular inflammation: adding another piece to the puzzle.

Marx N.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2002 Sep 6;91(5):427-33.

PMID: 12215484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Aug 15;30(16):3548-57.

A splicing silencer that regulates smooth muscle specific alternative splicing is
active in multiple cell types.

Gromak N(1), Smith CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.

Alternative splicing of alpha-tropomyosin (alpha-TM) involves mutually exclusive 
selection of exons 2 and 3. Selection of exon 2 in smooth muscle (SM) cells is
due to inhibition of exon 3, which requires both binding sites for polypyrimidine
tract-binding protein as well as UGC (or CUG) repeat elements on both sides of
exon 3. Point mutations or substitutions of the UGC-containing upstream
regulatory element (URE) with other UGC elements disrupted the alpha-TM splicing 
pattern in transfected cells. Multimerisation of the URE caused enhanced exon
skipping in SM and various non-SM cells. In the presence of multiple UREs the
degree of splicing regulation was decreased due to the high levels of exon
skipping in non-SM cell lines. These results suggest that the URE is not an
intrinsically SM- specific element, but that its functional strength is fine
tuned to exploit differences in the activities of regulatory factors between SM
and other cell types. Co-transfection of tropomyosin reporters with members of
the CUG-binding protein family, which are candidate URE-binding proteins,
indicated that these factors do not mediate repression of tropomyosin exon 3.

PMCID: PMC134246
PMID: 12177296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Exp Gerontol. 2002 Jun;37(6):757-67.

Adipogenesis and aging: does aging make fat go MAD?

Kirkland JL(1), Tchkonia T, Pirtskhalava T, Han J, Karagiannides I.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatrics Section, Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry, Boston
University, 88 East Newton Street, F435, Boston, MA 02118, USA. kirkland@bu.edu

In advanced old age, fat depot size declines while lipid is redistributed to
muscle, bone marrow, and other tissues. Decreased fat depot size is related to
reduced fat cell size and function and impaired differentiation of preadipocytes 
into fat cells. Reduced differentiation-dependent gene expression results from
decreased abundance of the adipogenic transcription factors, CCAAT/enhancer
binding alpha (C/EBPalpha) and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma). Increased expression of anti-adipogenic C/EBP family members
contributes, perhaps due to cellular stress response pathway activation with
aging. Hence, dysfunctional adipocyte-like cells appear in adipose tissue that
are smaller and less insulin responsive than fully differentiated fat cells.
Adipogenesis can be restored by overexpressing adipogenic transcription factors
in preadipocytes from old animals. Redistribution of lipid to extra-adipose sites
with aging could result from loss of lipid storage capacity in fat depots,
altered fatty acid handling resulting in lipid accumulation, dysdifferentiation
of mesenchymal precursors, such as muscle satellite cells and osteoblast
precursors, into a partial adipocyte phenotype, or a combination of these
mechanisms. Thus, accumulation of mesenchymal adipocyte-like default (MAD) cells 
in fat depots, muscle, bone marrow, and elsewhere is a potentially reversible
process that could contribute to maldistribution of fat in old age.

PMID: 12175476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36631-9. Epub 2002 Jul 26.

Insulin activates CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins and proinflammatory gene
expression through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway in vascular smooth
muscle cells.

Sekine O(1), Nishio Y, Egawa K, Nakamura T, Maegawa H, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Seta, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) is a key molecule mediating signals of
insulin in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). To examine the effect of chronic
activation of PI3K on the gene expression of VSMCs, membrane-targeted p110CAAX, a
catalytic subunit of PI3K, was overexpressed in rat VSMCs by adenovirus-mediated 
gene transfer. Similar to insulin's effects, cells overexpressing p110CAAX
exhibited a 10- to 15-fold increase in monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
mRNA expression as compared with the control cells. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay analysis showed that the overexpression of p110CAAX activated neither
the NF-kappaB binding nor the activator protein (AP-1) binding activities. We
found that two CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) binding sites located
between 2.6 and 3.6 kb upstream of the MCP-1 gene were responsible for the
induction by p110CAAX. The overexpression of C/EBP-beta and C/EBP-delta but not
C/EBP-alpha caused 6- to 8-fold induction of MCP-1 promoter activity.
Consistently, the overexpression of p110CAAX as well as insulin induced mRNA
expression and nuclear expression of C/EBP-beta and C/EBP-delta in VSMCs. These
results clearly indicate that the activation of PI3K induced proinflammatory gene
expression through activating C/EBP-beta and C/EBP-delta but not NF-kappaB, which
may explain the proinflammatory effect of insulin in the insulin-resistant state.

PMID: 12145301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Cell Physiol. 2002 Jul;192(1):64-70.

Transcription factors C/EBP-beta and -delta regulate IL-6 production in
IL-1beta-stimulated human enterocytes.

Hungness ES(1), Luo GJ, Pritts TA, Sun X, Robb BW, Hershko D, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0558, 
USA.

In recent studies, treatment with IL-1beta of cultured Caco-2 cells, a human
intestinal epithelial cell line, resulted in transcriptional upregulation of IL-6
production. The role of C/EBP-beta and -delta in enterocyte IL-6 production is
not known. Stimulation with IL-1beta of Caco-2 cells transiently transfected with
a luciferase reporter plasmid containing a wild-type IL-6 promoter resulted in an
approximately 3.5-fold increase in luciferase activity. This effect of IL-1beta
was reduced by approximately 30% when the C/EBP binding site in the IL-6 promoter
was mutated, supporting a role of C/EBP in the regulation of IL-6 production.
When Caco-2 cells were treated with IL-1beta in the presence of the MAPK
inhibitor, PD-98059, IL-6 mRNA and protein levels were reduced by the same
concentrations of PD-98059 that inhibited C/EBP DNA binding activity in previous 
studies. Finally, overexpression of C/EBP-beta and -delta in IL-1beta-treated
Caco-2 cells resulted in a 10-12-fold increase in IL-6 production. The results
suggest that the beta and delta isoforms of the C/EBP family of transcription
factors at least in part regulate IL-6 production in human intestinal epithelial 
cells.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31526-33. Epub 2002 Jun 18.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins beta and delta mediate the repression of gene
transcription of cartilage-derived retinoic acid-sensitive protein induced by
interleukin-1 beta.

Okazaki K(1), Li J, Yu H, Fukui N, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Cartilage-derived retinoic acid-sensitive protein (CD-RAP) is a secreted protein 
expressed by chondrocytes; the expression is repressed by interleukin 1 beta
(IL-1 beta). To investigate the transcriptional mechanism, by which CD-RAP
expression is suppressed by IL-1 beta, deletion constructs of the mouse CD-RAP
promoter were transfected into rat chondrocytes treated with or without IL-1
beta. The results revealed an IL-1 beta-responsive element located between -2138 
and -2068 bp. As this element contains a CAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
motif, the function of C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta was examined. IL-1 beta
stimulated the expression of C/EBP beta and -delta, and the direct binding of
C/EBP beta to the C/EBP motif was confirmed. The -2251-bp CD-RAP promoter
activity was down-regulated by co-transfection with C/EBP expression vectors.
Mutation of the C/EBP motif abolished the inhibitory response to IL-1 beta.
Additionally, C/EBP expression vectors were found to down-regulate the construct 
containing the promoter and enhancer of the type II collagen gene. Finally, the
enhancer factor, Sox9, was shown to bind adjacent to the C/EBP site competing
with C/EBP binding. Taken together, these results suggest that C/EBP beta and
-delta may play an important role in the IL-1 beta-induced repression of
cartilage-specific proteins and that expression of matrix proteins will be
influenced by the availability of positive and negative trans-acting factors.

PMID: 12072435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 May 10;293(3):907-12.

Glucocorticoids regulate the CCSP and CYP2B1 promoters via C/EBPbeta and delta in
lung cells.

Berg T(1), Cassel TN, Schwarze PE, Nord M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge
University Hospital, SE-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Glucocorticoids have several important roles in the lung and play a key role in
lung development and maturation. However, the specific molecular mechanisms of
glucocorticoid action in lung are unclear. In this study, we have investigated
two glucocorticoid-regulated genes expressed in the lung epithelium, the
secretory protein CCSP, and the P450-enzyme CYP2B1. In transient transfections of
lung epithelial cells, glucocorticoids increased expression from the CCSP and
CYP2B1 promoters and we demonstrated that induction was dependent on the
integrity of C/EBP-binding sites in both promoters. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays revealed increased DNA-binding of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta after
glucocorticoid treatment, which was not correlated to altered protein levels. The
results of this study indicate a previously unknown role for C/EBP transcription 
factors in glucocorticoid signaling in the lung epithelium.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12051744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 May 3;1575(1-3):91-8.

A role for C/EBP delta in human surfactant protein A (SP-A) gene expression.

Matlapudi A(1), Wang M, Rosenberg E, Ewing JR, Feinstein SI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Environmental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical
Center, School of Medicine, Room 1, John Morgan Building, 3620 Hamilton Walk,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6068, USA.

C/EBP delta, a member of the leucine zipper transcription factor family, is
expressed at higher levels in the lung than in any other tissue. We detected
C/EBP delta mRNA and protein in NCI-H441 cells, a cell line derived from a human 
adenocarcinoma that produces surfactant protein A (SP-A). NCI-H441 cells were
exposed to phosphorothioate-substituted antisense oligonucleotides directed
against C/EBP delta. After exposure to the oligonucleotides, cells were
harvested, total RNA prepared, and levels of mRNA for C/EBP delta, SP-A and a
control, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), were quantified from
Northern blots. An oligonucleotide that overlapped the translational start was
effective in reducing C/EBP delta mRNA. Oligonucleotides that corresponded to
regions upstream and downstream from the translational start were not as
effective. The loss of C/EBP delta was accompanied by a decrease in the level of 
SP-A mRNA. The overlapping oligonucleotide was tested more extensively. After 72 
h, antisense oligonucleotide at 3 and 5 microM reduced the level of C/EBP delta
mRNA and protein by 50% or more as compared with sense and scrambled controls.
The SP-A mRNA level was reduced even more, by about 75%. GAPDH mRNA was not
affected. We conclude that C/EBP delta plays a role in the regulation of SP-A
gene expression.

PMID: 12020823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23563-72. Epub 2002 Apr 29.

Regulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) activator proteins by
heterodimerization with C/EBPgamma (Ig/EBP).

Parkin SE(1), Baer M, Copeland TD, Schwartz RC, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation Section, Regulation of Cell Growth
Laboratory, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

The CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) are basic leucine zipper
transcription factors that play important roles in regulating cell growth and
differentiation. C/EBP proteins form leucine zipper-mediated homodimers but are
also capable of heterodimerizing with other C/EBPs in vitro. Here we show that
C/EBPbeta occurs predominantly as a heterodimer that displays rapid mobility in
gel shift assays. Biochemical fractionation and antibody supershift assays
demonstrate that the C/EBPbeta heterodimeric partner is C/EBPgamma (Ig/EBP), a
C/EBP protein that has been implicated as an inhibitor of other family members.
Although most cell types express C/EBPbeta.C/EBPgamma heterodimers, macrophages
contain a C/EBPbeta partner that is serologically distinct from C/EBPgamma. We
found that C/EBPgamma blocked the ability of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPgamma to activate
a reporter gene in L cell fibroblasts but did not inhibit a chimeric C/EBPbeta
protein containing the GCN4 leucine zipper. Repression by C/EBPgamma occurs at
the level of transactivation and requires heterodimerization with the C/EBP
partner. C/EBPgamma was an ineffective repressor in HepG2 hepatoma cells despite 
forming C/EBP heterodimers, and C/EBPalpha was not effectively inhibited in
either L or HepG2 cells. Our findings demonstrate that C/EBPgamma modulates C/EBP
activity in a cell- and isoform-specific manner.

PMID: 11980905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21489-98. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

Mitochondrial biogenesis and thyroid status maturation in brown fat require
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha.

Carmona MC(1), Iglesias R, Obregón MJ, Darlington GJ, Villarroya F, Giralt M.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquimica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona E-08028, Spain.

Brown fat differentiation in mice is fully achieved in fetuses at term and
entails the acquisition of not only adipogenic but also thermogenic and oxidative
mitochondrial capacities. The present study of the mice homozygous for a deletion
in the gene for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha-null mice)
demonstrates that C/EBPalpha is essential for all of these processes. Developing 
brown fat from C/EBPalpha-null mice showed a lack of uncoupling protein-1
expression, impaired adipogenesis, and reduced size and number of mitochondria
per cell when compared with wild-type mice. Furthermore, immature mitochondrial
morphology was found in brown fat, but not in liver or heart, from
C/EBPalpha-null mice. Concordantly, expression of both nuclear and mitochondrial 
genome-encoded genes for mitochondrial proteins was reduced in C/EBPalpha-null
brown fat, although expression of mitochondrial rRNA and mitochondrial DNA
content were unaltered. Expression of nuclear respiratory factor-2, thyroid
hormone nuclear receptors, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1, was delayed in C/EBPalpha-null brown fat. Iodothyronine
5'-deiodinase activity and thyroid hormone content were also reduced in brown fat
from C/EBPalpha-null mice, indicating for the first time a crucial role for
C/EBPalpha in controlling thyroid status in developing brown fat, which may
contribute to impaired mitochondrial biogenesis and cell differentiation. When
survival of C/EBPalpha-null mice was achieved by transgenically expressing
C/EBPalpha only in the liver, a substantial recovery in brown fat differentiation
was found by day 7 of postnatal age, which is associated with a compensatory
overexpression of C/EBPdelta and C/EBPbeta.

PMID: 11940593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Leuk Res. 2002 May;26(5):459-60.

Mutations in human cancer: how close should we look?

Cammenga J(1), Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY
10021-6007, USA.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2002 May;26(5):451-7.

PMID: 11916519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Leuk Res. 2002 May;26(5):451-7.

C/EBP-beta, C/EBP-delta, PU.1, AML1 genes: mutational analysis in 381 samples of 
hematopoietic and solid malignancies.

Vegesna V(1), Takeuchi S, Hofmann WK, Ikezoe T, Tavor S, Krug U, Fermin AC,
Heaney A, Miller CW, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Research Institute, UCLA School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2002 May;26(5):459-60.

Mutations of transcription factors are associated with the pathogenesis of
cancer. Genomic DNA from 381 cancers and cell lines representing leukemias,
lymphomas and a variety of solid tumors were examined for mutations of genes
coding for the C/EBP-beta, C/EBP-alpha, PU.1, and AML1 transcription factors
using single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and direct DNA sequencing.
Mutation of C/EBP-beta (a chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line, Kcl22) and
C/EBP-delta (a Burkitt's lymphoma cell line, Raji) were found. Interestingly, the
sample with a C/EBP-beta alterations had two missense (P236L and G252A) and two
silent mutations in a highly conserved region of the gene. The C/EBP-delta
alteration in Raji was a missense mutation (A177G). These findings suggest that
mutations of the C/EBP-beta, C/EBP-delta, PU.1, and AML1 rarely contribute to the
development of hematopoietic or solid cancers.

PMID: 11916518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;34(4):382-95.

IL-1beta activates C/EBP-beta and delta in human enterocytes through a
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway.

Hungness ES(1), Pritts TA, Luo GJ, Hershko DD, Robb BW, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, 231 Bethesda Avenue, Mail
Location 0558, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0558, USA.

The enterocyte is an active participant in the inflammatory and metabolic
response to sepsis, endotoxemia and other critical illnesses and is the site for 
cytokine and acute phase protein production in these conditions. The role of the 
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family of transcription factors in the
response to inflammatory stimuli in the enterocyte is not well understood. In the
present study, we treated Caco-2 cells with IL-1beta and determined C/EBP DNA
binding activity by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The involvement of the 
alpha, beta, and delta isoforms was determined by supershift analysis and Western
blot analysis of proteins from the nuclear fraction. The role of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway was assessed by
treating cells with the MAPK inhibitor PD-98059. Treatment of the Caco-2 cells
with IL-1beta resulted in increased CCAAT/enhancer binding protein DNA binding
activity. Supershift analysis and Western blotting indicated that this response
to IL-1beta mainly reflected the delta isoform, and to a lesser degree the beta
isoform. Treatment of the cells with PD-98059 inhibited the IL-1beta-induced
increase in beta and delta activity. The results suggest that members of the
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein family of transcription factors are activated in
enterocytes during inflammatory conditions characterized by high levels of
IL-1beta.

PMID: 11854037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Jan;118(1):17-24.

Contrasting expression patterns of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein transcription
factors in the hair follicle and at different stages of the hair growth cycle.

Bull JJ(1), Müller-Röver S, Chronnell CM, Paus R, Philpott MP, McKay IA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, St Bartholomew's and the Royal London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Hair follicles undergo repeated cycles of growth and regression, throughout the
entire life of the organism. These dynamic changes require closely co-ordinated
regulation of gene expression. The CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins are a family
of basic region/leucine zipper transcription factors that regulate gene
transcription in various tissues. They have been implicated in epidermal
differentiation and may therefore play an important role in the hair follicle. We
have investigated the localization of four members of this
family--CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha, -beta, and -delta, and Gadd153--in 
both human and murine hair follicles by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, we
examined CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha, -beta, and -delta immunoreactivity
at different stages of the depilation-induced murine hair growth cycle. Distinct 
immunoreactivity patterns for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha, -beta, and
-delta, and Gadd153 were observed in the outer root sheath, sebaceous gland,
dermal papilla, and connective tissue sheath of human anagen hair follicles. In
murine follicles, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha was expressed in the outer
root sheath, sebaceous gland, and dermal papilla, whereas CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein-beta expression was confined to the matrix, sebaceous gland, and inner
and outer root sheaths. Both CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha and -beta were 
upregulated during anagen, then downregulated in catagen follicles. In contrast, 
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-delta showed no hair cycle-dependent variation in 
immunoreactivity. These data suggests that the expression of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha and -beta may, in turn, play a part in
regulating hair cycle-dependent gene expression. Moreover, as
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha, -beta, and -delta are crucial in the
regulation of adipocyte differentiation and lipid metabolism, their expression in
sebocytes suggests they may also play a similar role in differentiation and lipid
metabolism of the sebaceous gland.

PMID: 11851871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Cell Probes. 2001 Dec;15(6):395-7.

C306A single nucleotide polymorphism in the human CEBPD gene that maps at
8p11.1-p11.2.

Angeloni D(1), Lee JD, Johnson BE, Teh BT, Dean M, Lerman MI, Sterneck E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, National Cancer Institute at Frederick,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. andreazzolid@mail.ncifcrf.gov

PMID: 11851384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2002 Feb;282(2):R439-44.

C/EBP DNA-binding activity is upregulated by a glucocorticoid-dependent mechanism
in septic muscle.

Penner G(1), Gang G, Sun X, Wray C, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0558, 
USA.

Sepsis-induced muscle cachexia is associated with increased expression of several
genes in the ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic pathway, but little is known about 
the activation of transcription factors in skeletal muscle during sepsis. We
tested the hypothesis that sepsis upregulates the expression and activity of the 
transcription factors CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)-beta and -delta in
skeletal muscle. Sepsis was induced in rats by cecal ligation and puncture, and
control rats were sham operated. C/EBP-beta and -delta DNA-binding activity was
determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift analysis. In
addition, C/EBP-beta and -delta nuclear protein levels were determined by Western
blot analysis. Sepsis resulted in increased DNA-binding activity of C/EBP, and
supershift analysis suggested that this reflected activation of the beta- and
delta-isoforms of C/EBP. Concomitantly, C/EBP-beta and -delta protein levels were
increased in the nuclear fraction of skeletal muscle. In additional experiments, 
we tested the role of glucocorticoids in sepsis-induced activation of C/EBP-beta 
and -delta by treating rats with the glucocorticoid receptor antagonist RU-38486.
This treatment inhibited the sepsis-induced activation of C/EBP-beta and -delta, 
suggesting that glucocorticoids participate in the upregulation of C/EBP in
skeletal muscle during sepsis. The present results suggest that C/EBP-beta and
-delta are activated in skeletal muscle during sepsis and that this response is, 
at least in part, regulated by glucocorticoids.

PMID: 11792653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 11;290(1):469-74.

Proteasome inhibitors activate the transcription factors C/EBP-beta and delta in 
human intestinal epithelial cells.

Hungness ES(1), Robb BW, Luo GJ, Pritts TA, Hershko DD, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, 231 Albert Sabin Way,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

In recent studies, induction of the heat shock response by hyperthermia
upregulated the expression and DNA binding activity of the transcription factor
C/EBP. This is an important observation because it may at least in part explain
why the heat shock response upregulates IL-6 production in the intestinal mucosa 
and in the enterocyte. A novel method to induce the heat shock response is
proteasome inhibition. The influence of this treatment on the expression and DNA 
binding activity of C/EBP is not known. We treated cultured Caco-2 cells, a human
intestinal epithelial cell line, with one of the proteasome inhibitors, MG-132 or
lactacystin, and measured C/EBP-beta and delta DNA binding activity by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift analysis. In addition,
nuclear levels of C/EBP-beta and delta protein were determined by Western blot
analysis. Treatment of the cells with the proteasome inhibitors resulted in
increased cellular levels of heat shock protein 72, consistent with induction of 
the heat shock response. Treatment also resulted in increased DNA binding
activity and nuclear protein levels of C/EBP-beta and delta. The effects of the
proteasome inhibitors on C/EBP were inhibited by treating the cells with
quercetin, a substance known to block the heat shock response. The results
suggest that proteasome inhibition activates the transcription factors C/EBP-beta
and delta in human intestinal epithelial cells and that this response, at least
in part, is caused by induction of the heat shock response. The observations are 
important because they provide support for a novel method to influence gene
activation in the enterocyte.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11779194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8851-8.

Autocrine production of interleukin 6 causes multidrug resistance in breast
cancer cells.

Conze D(1), Weiss L, Regen PS, Bhushan A, Weaver D, Johnson P, Rincón M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Department of Medicine, University of Vermont,
Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA.

It has been shown that serum levels of interleukin (IL)-6 are elevated in
patients with various types of cancer. However, the exact source of IL-6 in these
patients and its role in tumor progression remain unclear. Here we demonstrate
that the autocrine production of IL-6 by tumor cells promotes resistance of the
cells to chemotherapy, a novel function of IL-6 in cancer biology. Breast cancer 
cells that are sensitive to drug treatment do not express IL-6, whereas high
levels of IL-6 are produced by multidrug-resistant breast cancer cells.
Expression of the IL-6 gene in drug-sensitive breast cancer cells increases their
resistance to drug treatment by activating the CCAAT enhancer-binding protein
family of transcription factors and inducing mdr1 gene expression. Thus, the
autocrine production of IL-6 by tumor cells is an important factor in determining
the susceptibility or resistance of these cells to drug treatment. Because tumors
from some breast cancer patients contain IL-6-producing cells, it is possible
that IL-6 could potentially be used as a prognostic factor for chemotherapy
resistance.

PMID: 11751408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):2037-49.

Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases and CREB/ATF-1 mediate the
expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins beta and -delta in preadipocytes.

Belmonte N(1), Phillips BW, Massiera F, Villageois P, Wdziekonski B, Saint-Marc
P, Nichols J, Aubert J, Saeki K, Yuo A, Narumiya S, Ailhaud G, Dani C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Development Biology and Cancer Research, UMR 6543
Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, Centre de Biochimie 06108 Nice
Cedex 2, France.

The essential role of CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) beta and delta for
adipocyte differentiation has been clearly established. In preadipocytes, their
expression is up-regulated by the activation of leukemia inhibitory factor
receptor (LIF-R) and prostacyclin receptor (IP-R) via the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway and cAMP production, respectively. However,
the molecular mechanisms by which LIF and prostacyclin-induced signals are
propagated to the nucleus and the transcription factors mediating ERK and
cAMP-induced C/EBP gene expression were unknown. Here we report that both
pathways share cAMP responsive element binding protein/activation transcription
factor 1 (CREB/ATF-1) as common downstream effectors. LIF-R and IP-R activation
induced binding of CREB and/or ATF-1 to C/EBP promoters and CREB-dependent
transcription. Expression of dominant negative forms of CREB dramatically reduced
the LIF- and prostacyclin-stimulated C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta expression. Upon 
stimulation of the IP-R, the ERK pathway was activated in a PKA-dependent manner.
ERK activation by the PKA pathway was not required for CREB/ATF-1 phosphorylation
but rather was necessary for CREB-dependent up-regulation of C/EBPs expression.
Our findings suggest that ERK activation is required for CREB transcriptional
activity, possibly by recruitment of a coactivator.

PMID: 11682632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1316-23. Epub 2001 Oct 19.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) beta and delta activate osteocalcin gene 
transcription and synergize with Runx2 at the C/EBP element to regulate
bone-specific expression.

Gutierrez S(1), Javed A, Tennant DK, van Rees M, Montecino M, Stein GS, Stein JL,
Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655-0106, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) are critical determinants for cellular
differentiation and cell type-specific gene expression. Their functional roles in
osteoblast development have not been determined. We addressed a key component of 
the mechanisms by which C/EBP factors regulate transcription of a tissue-specific
gene during osteoblast differentiation. Expression of both C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPdelta increases from the growth to maturation developmental stages and, like
the bone-specific osteocalcin (OC) gene, is also stimulated 3-6-fold by vitamin
D(3), a regulator of osteoblast differentiation. We characterized a C/EBP
enhancer element in the proximal promoter of the rat osteocalcin gene, which
resides in close proximity to a Runx2 (Cbfa1) element, essential for
tissue-specific activation. We find that C/EBP and Runx2 factors interact
together in a synergistic manner to enhance OC transcription (35-40-fold) in cell
culture systems. We show by mutational analysis that this synergism is mediated
through the C/EBP-responsive element in the OC promoter and by a direct
interaction between Runx2 and C/EBPbeta. Furthermore, we have mapped a domain in 
Runx2 necessary for this interaction by immunoprecipitation. A Runx2 mutant
lacking this interaction domain does not exhibit functional synergism. We
conclude that, in addition to Runx2 DNA binding functions, Runx2 can also form a 
protein complex at C/EBP sites to regulate transcription. Taken together, our
findings indicate that C/EBP is a principal transactivator of the OC gene and the
synergism with Runx2 suggests that a combinatorial interaction of these factors
is a principal mechanism for regulating tissue-specific expression during
osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 11668178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Oct;15(10):1781-9.

Glucocorticoid suppression of IGF I transcription in osteoblasts.

Delany AM(1), Durant D, Canalis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford,
Connecticut 06105, USA.

Glucocorticoids have profound effects on bone formation, decreasing IGF I
transcription in osteoblasts, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. 
We previously showed that the bp +34 to +192 region of the rat IGF I exon 1
promoter was responsible for repression of IGF I transcription by cortisol in
cultures of osteoblasts from fetal rat calvariae (Ob cells). Here, site-directed 
mutagenesis was used to show that a binding site for members of the CAAT/enhancer
binding protein family of transcription factors, within the +132 to +158 region
of the promoter, mediates this glucocorticoid effect. EMSAs demonstrated that
cortisol increased binding of osteoblast nuclear proteins to the +132 to +158
region of the IGF I promoter. Supershift assays showed that CAAT/enhancer binding
protein alpha, beta, and delta interact with this sequence, and binding of
CAAT/enhancer binding protein delta, in particular, was increased in the presence
of cortisol. Northern blot analysis showed that CAAT/enhancer binding protein
delta and beta transcripts were increased by cortisol in Ob cells. Further,
cortisol increased the transcription of these genes and increased the stability
of CAAT/enhancer binding protein delta mRNA. In conclusion, cortisol represses
IGF I transcription in osteoblasts, and CAAT/enhancer binding proteins appear to 
play a role in this effect.

PMID: 11579210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Circ Res. 2001 Sep 14;89(6):503-8.

Targeted overexpression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-delta evokes enhanced
gene transcription of platelet-derived growth factor alpha-receptor in vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Yang ZH(1), Kitami Y, Takata Y, Okura T, Hiwada K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Ehime, Japan.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is thought to play a significant role in
various models of vascular remodeling, particularly in the early process of
vascular diseases. Its action is mediated by its specific receptor, the PDGF
receptor. The PDGF alpha-receptor (PDGFalphaR) plays an important role in the
growth and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), and its gene
expression is thought to be regulated by several potential transcriptional
nuclear factors. However, the detailed mechanisms of tissue-specific
transactivation of the PDGFalphaR gene in VSMCs remain to be clarified. We have
previously demonstrated that the rat PDGFalphaR gene contains an enhancer core
sequence for CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBPs) in its promoter region, and
we have also suggested that C/EBP-delta is the principal factor involved in the
induction of tissue-specific transcriptional activity of the PDGFalphaR gene in
VSMCs. To explore the definitive roles of C/EBP-delta protein on PDGFalphaR gene 
transcription in VSMCs, we developed C/EBP-delta transgenic rats by using a
chimeric fusion gene of the mouse smooth muscle alpha-actin promoter and an
entire coding region of rat C/EBP-delta cDNA. This report describes the first
successful targeted overexpression of C/EBP-delta capable of inducing PDGFalphaR 
gene transcription and modifying cell proliferative activity to PDGFs. Targeted
overexpression of C/EBP-delta evokes high levels of PDGFalphaR gene expression,
susceptibility to VSMC growth, and proliferation of VSMCs to PDGFs. The results
obtained reveal evidence of a new role and new functional significance of
C/EBP-delta on VSMC growth via the PDGFalphaR during the process of vascular
remodeling and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 11557737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mol Med. 2001 May;7(5):329-43.

Transcriptional regulation of the human iNOS gene by IL-1beta in endothelial
cells.

Kolyada AY(1), Madias NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelium participates in the control of vascular tone and
function via the release of nitric oxide (NO) by the endothelial-type NO synthase
(eNOS). Inducible NO synthase (iNOS) expression in endothelial cells occurs in
many clinical conditions following induction by lipopolysaccharide or cytokines
and generates large quantities of NO that result in endothelial cell activation
and dysfunction. No information exists on the transcriptional regulation of the
human iNOS gene (or that of other species) in endothelial cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the transcriptional regulation of the human
iNOS gene by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) in rat pulmonary microvascular
endothelial cells (PVEC) by transient cotransfections of different iNOS-promoter 
constructs and cDNA of different transcription factors and regulatory proteins.
RESULTS: The -1034/+88 bp iNOS promoter was strongly induced by IL-1beta, the
regulatory elements for such induction being localized downstream of -205 bp.
Cotransfection experiments with NF-kappaB isoforms, IkappaB isoforms, and IKK
mutants suggested that the NF-kappaB site at -115/-106 bp is important, but not
sufficient, for induction of iNOS promoter and that the role of NF-kappaB is
partially independent of its binding site. C/EBP sites within the -205/+88 bp
region were shown to be responsible, along with NF-kappaB site, for induction of 
iNOS promoter by IL-1beta. Overexpression of C/EBPalpha, C/EBPdelta, and
liver-enriched activator protein (LAP) activated the promoter, whereas
overexpression of liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP) strongly suppressed it.
C/EBPbeta (LAP and LIP isoforms) was constitutively present in PVEC and was
induced (approximately 2-fold) by IL-1beta, whereas C/EBPdelta was not
constitutively expressed but was strongly induced by IL-1beta. Both C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPdelta participated in DNA-protein complex formation.
CONCLUSION: Both NF-kappaB and C/EBP pathways are important for the
transcriptional regulation of the human iNOS gene by IL-1beta in PVEC.

PMCID: PMC1950040
PMID: 11474579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Endocr J. 2001 Apr;48(2):249-53.

TNF-alpha inhibits 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation without downregulating the
expression of C/EBPbeta and delta.

Kurebayashi S(1), Sumitani S, Kasayama S, Jetten AM, Hirose T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita,
Japan.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) has been reported to inhibit adipocyte
differentiation in which multiple transcription factors including CCAAT enhancer 
binding proteins (C/EBPs) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
gamma play an important role. Induction of C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma, which
regulate the expression of many adipocyte-related genes, is dependent on the
expression of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta at the early phase of adipocyte
differentiation. To elucidate the mechanism by which TNF-alpha inhibits adipocyte
differentiation, we examined the effect of TNF-alpha on the expression of these
transcription factors in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. TNF-alpha did not abrogate
the induction of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta in response to differentiation stimuli.
In fully differentiated adipocytes, TNF-alpha rapidly induced C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPdelta, whereas it downregulated the expression of C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma. 
Our results suggest that TNF-alpha inhibits adipocyte differentiation
independently of the downregulation of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta.

PMID: 11456275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 17;276(33):31238-46. Epub 2001 Jun 4.

Hormonal control of insulin-like growth factor I gene transcription in human
osteoblasts: dual actions of cAMP-dependent protein kinase on
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta.

Billiard J(1), Grewal SS, Lukaesko L, Stork PJ, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health Sciences University, Molecular Medicine Division, Department of 
Medicine, Portland, Oregon 97201-3098, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) is essential for somatic growth and promotes
bone cell replication and differentiation. IGF-I production by rat osteoblasts is
stimulated by activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). In this report, 
we define two interacting PKA-regulated pathways that control IGF-I gene
transcription in cultured human osteoblasts. Stimulation of cAMP led to a 12-fold
increase in IGF-I mRNA and enhanced IGF-I promoter activity through a DNA
response element termed HS3D and the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein delta (C/EBPdelta). Under basal conditions, C/EBPdelta was found in
osteoblast nuclei but was transcriptionally silent. Treatment with the PKA
inhibitor H-89 caused redistribution of C/EBPdelta to the cytoplasm. After
hormone treatment, the catalytic subunit of PKA accumulated in osteoblast nuclei.
Inhibition of active PKA with targeted nuclear expression of PKA inhibitor had no
effect on the subcellular location of C/EBPdelta but prevented hormone-induced
IGF-I gene activation, while cytoplasmic PKA inhibitor additionally caused the
removal of C/EBPdelta from the nucleus. These results show that IGF-I gene
expression is controlled in human osteoblasts by two PKA-dependent pathways.
Cytoplasmic PKA mediates nuclear localization of C/EBPdelta under basal
conditions, and nuclear PKA stimulates its transcriptional activity upon hormone 
treatment. Both mechanisms are indirect, since PKA failed to phosphorylate human 
C/EBPdelta in vitro.

PMID: 11390399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Immunol. 2001 May 15;166(10):6149-55.

Transcriptional regulation of intracellular IL-1 receptor antagonist gene by IL-1
alpha in primary mouse keratinocytes.

La E(1), Fischer SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

The inflammatory cytokine IL-1alpha mediates inflammatory reactions in skin and
up-regulates the expression of other proinflammatory genes. We previously found
that IL-1alpha also increases steady state mRNA levels for intracellular IL-1
receptor antagonist (icIL-1Ra) in primary mouse keratinocytes; however, the
mechanism for this was unknown. Here we show that increased expression in primary
keratinocytes is due to increased rates of transcription. To study the
transcriptional regulation of icIL-1Ra expression induced by IL-1alpha, we
functionally characterized 4.5 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the human icIL-1Ra
gene. Deletion analysis showed that regulatory elements were contained in the
-598- and -288-bp region upstream of the transcription start site. Then we
investigated cis- and trans-acting factors required for icIL-1Ra expression and
found that a NF-IL-6 site and a NF-kappaB site in the icIL-1Ra promoter were
responsible for IL-1alpha-induced icIL-1Ra expression. Moreover, gel shift assays
and cotransfection experiments showed that CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins alpha,
beta, and p65 bind to the NF-IL-6 site and NF-kappaB site, respectively, and
functionally trans-activate the icIL-1Ra promoter. Finally, mutational analysis
confirmed that these elements were both essential for maximal transcription
induced by IL-1alpha.

PMID: 11342635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Androl. 2001 May-Jun;22(3):471-80.

Differential expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-delta (c/EBPdelta) in
rat androgen-dependent tissues and human prostate cancer.

Yang G(1), Gregory CW, Shang Q, O'Brien DA, Zhang YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) is a nuclear transcription
factor that regulates cellular growth and differentiation. In this study we
demonstrate that C/EBPdelta gene expression is differentially regulated in rat
androgen-dependent tissues and human prostate cancer. C/EBPdelta messenger RNA
(mRNA) levels were very low in adult rat ventral prostate, epididymis, and
testis. In ventral prostate and epididymis, expression of C/EBPdelta mRNA
increased more than sixfold when testicular testosterone was eliminated by
surgical castration or treatment with ethane-1,2-dimethanesulfonate (EDS).
Testosterone replacement reduced C/EBPdelta mRNA levels to near control values in
both tissues. CWR22 is a human prostate cancer xenograft that mimics biological
characteristics of androgen-dependent and androgen-independent human prostate
cancer. In androgen-dependent CWR22 tumors, expression of C/EBPdelta mRNA
declined in response to castration. Both C/EBPdelta mRNA and protein levels
increased following testosterone administration. However, C/EBPdelta mRNA and
protein levels were variable in recurrent CWR22 tumors growing in the absence of 
testicular androgen for approximately 5 months. C/EBPdelta expression was also
variable in androgen-independent human prostate carcinomas (n = 3), although mRNA
levels were substantially lower than those in androgen-dependent tumors (n = 3). 
These studies demonstrate that androgen down-regulates C/EBPdelta levels in
androgen-dependent rat tissues, but induces C/EBPdelta expression in
androgen-dependent human prostate cancer. Deregulation of C/EBPdelta occurs when 
prostate cancer progresses to the androgen-independent state.

PMID: 11330648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):12893-7. Epub 2001 Jan 22.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activation inhibits
interleukin-1beta -mediated platelet-derived growth factor-alpha receptor gene
expression via CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-delta in vascular smooth muscle
cells.

Takata Y(1), Kitami Y, Okura T, Hiwada K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)-binding motifs have been identified in the
promoter regions of interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and
platelet-derived growth factor-alpha receptor (PDGFalphaR). Recently, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) have been suggested to be important
immunomodulatory mediators. Although many studies have demonstrated that the
interaction between C/EBPs and PPARs plays a central role in lipid metabolism,
expression and function of these factors are unknown in vascular smooth muscle
cells (VSMCs). In the present study, we clarified a functional relationship
between C/EBPs and PPARgamma in the regulation of IL-1beta-induced PDGFalphaR
expression in VSMCs. PPARgamma activators, troglitazone and
15-deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglandin J(2), inhibited IL-1beta-induced PDGFalphaR
expression and suppressed PDGF-induced proliferation activity of VSMCs.
Electromobility shift and supershift assays for a C/EBP motif in the PDGFalphaR
promoter region revealed that PPARgamma activators suppressed IL-1beta-induced
DNA binding activity of C/EBPdelta and beta. PPARgamma activators also suppressed
IL-1beta-induced C/EBPdelta expression. In contrast, overexpression of C/EBPdelta
reversed the suppressive effect of PPARgamma activators on PDGFalphaR expression 
almost completely. From these results, we conclude that the inhibitory effect of 
PPARgamma activators on PDGFalphaR expression is mainly mediated by C/EBPdelta
suppression. Regulation of C/EBPdelta by PPARgamma activators probably plays
critical roles in modulating inflammatory responses in the arterial wall.

PMID: 11278956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(5):1621-32.

Essential role of STAT3 in the control of the acute-phase response as revealed by
inducible gene inactivation [correction of activation] in the liver.

Alonzi T(1), Maritano D, Gorgoni B, Rizzuto G, Libert C, Poli V.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Wellcome Trust Biocenter, University of Dundee,
Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 2001 Apr;21(8):2967.

We generated mice carrying a STAT3 allele amenable to Cre-mediated deletion and
intercrossed them with Mx-Cre transgenic mice, in which the expression of Cre
recombinase can be induced by type I interferon. Interferon-induced deletion of
STAT3 occurred very efficiently (more than 90%) in the liver and slightly less
efficiently (about 70%) in the bone marrow. Analysis of the induction of liver
acute-phase genes in response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide unequivocally
identifies STAT3 as a fundamental mediator of their induction. The different
degrees of defectiveness displayed by the various genes allowed us to
differentiate them into three separate groups according to their degree of
dependence on STAT3. Induction was totally defective for group I genes, defective
at 24 h but almost normal at earlier time points for group II genes, and only
slightly defective for group III genes. This division was in good agreement with 
the known structures of the respective promoters. We also found that the overall 
induction of the transcription factors C/EBP beta and -delta was only minimally
defective in the absence of STAT3. Finally, even though corticosterone levels and
action were found to be normal in the conditional-mutant mice, production of both
proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines was increased and prolonged,
probably as a result of STAT3 deletion in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC86708
PMID: 11238899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Neurosci. 2001 Jan 1;21(1):84-91.

Fornix-dependent induction of hippocampal CCAAT enhancer-binding protein [beta]
and [delta] Co-localizes with phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding
protein and accompanies long-term memory consolidation.

Taubenfeld SM(1), Wiig KA, Monti B, Dolan B, Pollonini G, Alberini CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

The cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is an evolutionarily conserved
transcription regulator essential for long-term memory formation. It is not
known, however, whether the molecular events downstream of CREB activation are
also conserved. An early, cAMP-dependent event necessary for learning-related
long-term synaptic plasticity in the invertebrate Aplysia californica is the
induction of the transcription factor CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP).
Here we show that two homologs in the rat, C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta, are induced 
at discrete times after inhibitory avoidance learning and co-localize with
phosphorylated CREB in the hippocampus. This induction is blocked by fornix
lesions, which are known to disrupt activation of CREB in the hippocampus and to 
impair memory consolidation. These results indicate that C/EBPs are
evolutionarily conserved components of the CREB-dependent gene cascade activated 
in long-term memory.

PMID: 11150323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biol Pharm Bull. 2000 Dec;23(12):1424-9.

Gene expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta mediated by
autoregulation is repressed by related gene family proteins.

Tanabe A(1), Kumahara C, Osada S, Nishihara T, Imagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) transcription factor is rapidly
induced at an early stage of acute phase response. We previously reported that
this induction was mainly mediated by acute phase response factor/signal
transducers and activators of transcription 3 (APRF/STAT3). Furthermore, the high
expression level of C/EBPdelta is maintained by autoregulation mechanisms through
the C/EBPdelta binding sites located downstream of C/EBPdelta gene. Thereafter,
the expression of C/EBPdelta gene decreases rapidly to the basal level. However, 
these mechanisms are still unknown. According to both transfection and DNA
binding analyses, liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP), the shorter form of
C/EBPbeta and C/EBP-homologous protein 10 (CHOP10), were found to inhibit
C/EBPdelta gene expression. DNA binding analysis has further indicated that both 
LIP and CHOP10 form heterodimers with C/EBPdelta, and inhibit the binding of
C/EBPdelta homodimer to the C/EBPdelta binding sites located downstream of
C/EBPdelta gene. Taken together, these findings indicated that the maintained
expression of C/EBPdelta gene by autoregulation was inhibited and decreased to
the basal level as a result of the competition of other C/EBP family proteins.
Thus, C/EBPdelta gene expression is mediated by the gene regulation circuit
through the downstream C/EBPdelta binding sites.

PMID: 11145170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Leukoc Biol. 2000 Dec;68(6):779-84.

Expression of mammalian defensin genes.

Kaiser V(1), Diamond G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Injury Sciences, UMDNJ-New Jersey
Medical School, Newark 07103, USA.

Antimicrobial peptides are a prevalent mechanism of host defense found throughout
nature. In mammals, defensins are among the most abundant of these broad-spectrum
antibiotics, and are expressed in epithelial and hematopoietic cells. The
defensin peptides are especially abundant in neutrophils; however, gene
expression is limited to the promyelocyte stage. In epithelial cells, defensin
genes are found as both constitutively expressed and inducible. Induction has
been observed in vitro by stimulation with bacterial lipopolysaccharide as well
as inflammatory mediators. In vivo, up-regulation of several defensin genes
occurs in both infectious and inflammatory states. Gene regulation occurs via
signal transduction pathways common to other innate immune responses, utilizing
transcription factors such as nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB and NF interleukin-6.
Together, the data suggest a broad-based innate host defense whereby potent
antimicrobial peptides are present to prevent initial colonization by pathogenic 
microorganisms. In addition, the recognition of bacteria coupled with a nascent
inflammatory response can bolster this defense by a coordinated up-regulation of 
the peptides.

PMID: 11129644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Dec;20(12):2559-65.

Protein kinase A-dependent stimulation of rat type II secreted phospholipase A(2)
gene transcription involves C/EBP-beta and -delta in vascular smooth muscle
cells.

Couturier C(1), Antonio V, Brouillet A, Béréziat G, Raymondjean M, Andréani M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche de l'Université Pierre et Marie Curie, associée au
CNRS (ESA7079), Paris, France.

Type II secreted phospholipase A(2) (sPLA(2)) releases precursors of important
inflammatory lipid mediators from phospholipids. Some observations have indicated
that the sPLA(2), which has been implicated in chronic inflammatory conditions
such as arthritis, contributes to atherosclerosis in the arterial wall. sPLA(2)
was not detected in control vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). Treatment of
VSMC with agents that increase intracellular cAMP (eg, forskolin, dibutyryl
[db]-cAMP) resulted in a time- and concentration-dependent increase in sPLA(2)
gene expression. Semiquantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) showed a marked dose-dependent inhibition of forskolin-induced mRNA by
protein kinase A inhibitor. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis of nuclear
proteins from forskolin-treated and db-cAMP-treated VSMC with C/EBP consensus
oligonucleotides and C/EBP oligonucleotides from the rat promoter revealed
greater binding than in control VSMC. Incubation of VSMC with H89, a specific
protein kinase inhibitor, also blocked the binding of nuclear C/EBP to the C/EBP 
site of the rat promoter induced by db-cAMP and forskolin. Binding was unchanged 
with the use of CRE consensus oligonucleotides. Antibodies revealed the specific 
formation of C/EBP/DNA complexes, the majority of which were supershifted by
C/EBP-ss and -delta antibodies. Functional activation of C/EBP was confirmed by a
luciferase reporter gene assay. A construct comprising 4 tandem repeat copies of 
the C/EBP element from the rat sPLA(2) promoter linked to luciferase was
transcriptionally activated in VSMC by cotransfection with expression vector for 
the protein kinase A catalytic subunit. It was also significantly activated in
transfected VSMC treated by forskolin or db-cAMP. H89 inhibited this activations.
We therefore conclude that the increases in sPLA(2) mRNA and enzyme activity
produced by cAMP-elevating agents is controlled by a mechanism involving nuclear 
C/EBP-ss and -delta acting through a protein kinase A signaling pathway.

PMID: 11116053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Dec;267(23):6798-809.

Critical role of C/EBPdelta and C/EBPbeta factors in the stimulation of the
cyclooxygenase-2 gene transcription by interleukin-1beta in articular
chondrocytes.

Thomas B(1), Berenbaum F, Humbert L, Bian H, Béréziat G, Crofford L, Olivier JL.

Author information: 
(1)UPRES-A CNRS 7079, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

The activity of the [-831; +103] promoter of the human cyclooxygenase-2 gene in
cultured rabbit chondrocytes is stimulated 2.9 +/- 0.3-fold by interleukin-1beta 
and this stimulation depends on [-132; -124] C/EBP binding-and [-223; -214]
NF-kappaB binding-sites. The C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta factors bind to the [-132; 
-124] sequence. The [-61; -53] sequence is also recognized by C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPdelta as well as USF. Mutation of the whole [-61; -53] sequence abolished
the stimulation of transcription but single mutations of the C/EBP or USF site
did not alter the activity of the promoter, suggesting that the factors bound to 
the proximal [-61; -53] sequence interact with different members of the general
transcription machinery. The [-223; -214] site binds only the p50/p50 homodimer
and a non-rel-related protein, but not the transcriptionally active heterodimer
p50/p65. The p50/p50 homodimer could interact with the C/EBP family members bound
to the [-132; -124] sequence for full stimulation of the COX-2 transcription by
interleukin-1beta in chondrocytes. By contrast, the [-448; -449] sequence binds
with a low affinity both the p50/p50 homodimeric and p50/p65 heterodimeric forms 
of NF-kappaB but has no role in the regulation of the human COX-2 promoter in
chondrocytes.

PMID: 11082190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2000 Nov;279(5):H2241-8.

Expression and self-regulatory function of cardiac interleukin-6 during
endotoxemia.

Saito H(1), Patterson C, Hu Z, Runge MS, Tipnis U, Sinha M, Papaconstantinou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biological Chemistry and Genetics, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555, USA. hsaito@utmb.edu

Interleukin (IL)-6 reportedly has negative inotropic and hypertrophic effects on 
the heart. Here, we describe endotoxin-induced IL-6 in the heart that has not
previously been well characterized. An intraperitoneal injection of a bacterial
lipopolysaccharide into C57BL/6 mice induced IL-6 mRNA in the heart more strongly
than in any other tissue examined. Induction of mRNA for two proinflammatory
cytokines, IL-1beta and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, occurred rapidly
before the induction of IL-6 mRNA and protein. Although stimulation of isolated
rat neonatal myocardial cells with IL-1beta or TNF-alpha induced IL-6 mRNA in
vitro, nonmyocardial heart cells produced higher levels of IL-6 mRNA upon
stimulation with IL-1beta. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analyses
localized the IL-6 expression primarily in nonmyocardial cells in vivo.
Endotoxin-induced expression of cardiac IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 was augmented in IL-6-deficient mice compared with control
mice. Thus cardiac IL-6, expressed mainly by nonmyocardial cells via IL-1beta
action during endotoxemia, is likely to suppress expression of proinflammatory
mediators and to regulate itself via a negative feedback mechanism.

PMID: 11045959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Exp Lung Res. 2000 Jul-Aug;26(5):383-99.

Cell-specific expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBP delta) in
epithelial lung cells.

Låg M(1), Skarpen E, van Rozendaal BA, Haagsman HP, Huitfeldt HS, Thrane EV,
Schwarze PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, National Institute of Public Health,
Torshov, Oslo, Norway.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP) constitute a family of transcription
factors that are involved in regulation of proliferation and differentiation in
several cell types. In epithelial lung cells the C/EBP alpha isoform seems to
play a role in the regulation of surfactant proteins (SP) and Clara cell specific
protein (CCSP), whereas the roles of C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta are unclear. We
have examined the protein levels of C/EBP delta in bronchiolar Clara cells and
alveolar type 2 cells, and its relation to the expression of lung specific
proteins and cell proliferation. The protein expression of C/EBP delta was high
in freshly isolated Clara cells compared to type 2 cells. In both cell types
C/EBP delta levels increased during culture. Alterations of the levels of C/EBP
delta did not correspond with the proliferation levels of Clara cells, but seemed
to correspond in type 2 cells. Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) was highly
expressed in freshly isolated Clara cells, in contrast to type 2 cells. SP-D and 
CYP2B1 were expressed at somewhat higher levels in Clara cells than in type 2
cells, whereas SP-A exhibited highest expression in type 2 cells. During culture 
the levels of all these lung proteins were strongly reduced. However, compared to
with serum we found an increase in CCSP in Clara cell cultures without serum, and
this correlated with an increase in C/EBP delta. Overall our in vitro data
suggest that C/EBP delta alone is not related to the maintenance of proteins
involved in differentiation.

PMID: 10914335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Jan;203(1-2):41-51.

Transcriptional regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 in the human microvascular
endothelial cell line, HMEC-1: control by the combinatorial actions of AP2,
NF-IL-6 and CRE elements.

Kirtikara K(1), Raghow R, Laulederkind SJ, Goorha S, Kanekura T, Ballou LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Tennessee, Memphis, USA.

Interleukin-1beta (IL-1) is a potent inducer of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and
prostaglandin biosynthesis in many types of cells, yet little is known about the 
molecular mechanisms regulating IL-1 mediated prostanoid biosynthesis in the
endothelium of the microvasculature. Therefore, we examined the cis- and
trans-acting factors regulating IL-1-induced COX-2 expression in the human
microvascular endothelial cell line, HMEC-1. IL-1 enhanced steady state levels of
COX-2 protein and mRNA synthesis by approximately 2-fold which preceded a 2-fold 
increase in PGF(alpha) biosynthesis. Expression of a series of COX-2
promoter-luciferase constructs in IL-1 treated HMEC-1 cells revealed that the
'full length' (-1432/+59 bp) promoter was 10 times more active than the SV-40
promoter/enhancer and that it could be further activated by IL-1. Surprisingly
however, all except for the shortest COX-2 promoter construct retained the
ability to respond to IL-1 and luciferase activity driven by -191/+59 bp COX-2
promoter was as responsive to IL-1 as the full-length promoter. Moreover,
site-directed promoter mutagenesis and electophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) indicate that the combinatorial actions of AP2, NF-IL6, and CRE elements
are critical for both constitutive and IL-1-inducible COX-2 promoter activity.
Understanding the mechanism(s) regulating COX-2 gene expression and prostaglandin
biosynthesis in the microvasculature has important implications with regard to
inflammation and angiogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 10724331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 2000 Jan;3(1):42-7.

CYP2B1 is regulated by C/EBP alpha and C/EBP delta inlung epithelial cells.

Cassel TN(1), Gustafsson JA, Nord M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital, F60 Novum, Huddinge, S-141 86, Sweden.

Pulmonary expression of several cytochrome P450 (CYP) monooxygenases is detected 
late in gestation. Little is known of the factors involved in this
differentiation-dependent expression. C/EBP factors are known regulators of
differentiation and differentiation-dependent gene expression in several tissues.
In this study we demonstrate the importance of C/EBP alpha and C/EBP delta in
pulmonary epithelial CYP2B1 gene expression. A 1.3 kb CYP2B1 promoter fragment
which recently has been shown to confer lung tissue- and cell-specific expression
of CYP2B1 in transgenic mice was used in transient transfection studies. Both
C/EBP alpha and C/EBP delta transactivated the CYP2B1 promoter in the lung
epithelial cell lines A549 and NCI-H441. C/EBP alpha in nuclear extracts from
isolated rat primary bronchiolar Clara cells was capable of interacting with a
C/EBP-binding site in the proximal CYP2B1 promoter. Site-directed mutagenesis
studies showed that this proximal C/EBP-binding site is necessary for
transactivation of the CYP2B1 gene by C/EBP alpha and C/EBP delta. Thi study
shows that C/EBP factors have a role in pulmonary CYP2B1 expression and suggests 
that these transcription factors may be important for the
differentiation-dependent expression of CYP2B1 in the lung.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10683316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2000 Feb;278(2):L253-60.

Hyperoxia synergistically increases TNF-alpha-induced interleukin-8 gene
expression in A549 cells.

Allen GL(1), Menendez IY, Ryan MA, Mazor RL, Wispé JR, Fiedler MA, Wong HR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-8 is an important mediator of acute lung injury. Hyperoxia
induces IL-8 production in some cell types, but its effect on IL-8 gene
expression in respiratory epithelium is not well described. In addition, IL-8
gene expression resulting from the combined effects of hyperoxia and
proinflammatory cytokines has not been well characterized. We treated cultured
respiratory epithelial-like cells (A549 cells) with hyperoxia alone, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha alone, or the combination of TNF-alpha and hyperoxia 
and evaluated IL-8 gene expression. Hyperoxia alone had a minimal effect on IL-8 
gene expression, and TNF-alpha alone increased IL-8 gene expression in a
time-dependent manner. In contrast, the combination of TNF-alpha and hyperoxia
synergistically increased IL-8 gene expression as measured by ELISA (TNF-alpha
alone for 24 h = 769 +/- 89 pg/ml vs. hyperoxia + TNF-alpha for 24 h = 1, 189 +/-
89 pg/ml) and Northern blot analyses. Experiments involving IL-8
promoter-reporter assays, electromobility shift assays, and Western blot analyses
demonstrated that hyperoxia augmented TNF-alpha-mediated activation of the IL-8
promoter by a nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB-dependent mechanism and increased the
duration of NF-kappaB nuclear translocation after concomitant treatment with
TNF-alpha. Additional reporter gene assays demonstrated, however, that increased 
activation of NF-kappaB does not fully account for the synergistic effect of
hyperoxia and that the NF-IL-6 site in the IL-8 promoter is also required for the
synergistic effect of hyperoxia. We conclude that hyperoxia alone has a minimal
effect on IL-8 gene expression but synergistically increases IL-8 gene expression
in the presence of TNF-alpha by a mechanism involving cooperative interaction
between the transcription factors NF-kappaB and NF-IL-6.

PMID: 10666108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Oct 14;264(1):6-13.

Real-time study of interactions between a composite DNA regulatory region (HIV-1 
LTR NRE) and several transcription factors of nuclear extracts.

Galio L(1), Briquet S, Vaquero C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 0415, ICGM, 22 rue Méchain, Paris, 75014, France.

Here we describe the first real-time study of nuclear protein interaction with a 
composite DNA regulatory region. We studied the interplay between the three
target sites of the negative regulatory element (NRE) of HIV-1 LTR, comprising a 
noncanonical GATA site overlapping two negative regulatory regions, USF and
NFIL-6, and their corresponding transcription factors in nuclear extracts. By
bandshift analysis, no GATA binding activity could be detected between LTR NRE
and different nuclear extracts, although evidenced by in vitro footprinting.
Additionally, the LTR NRE and a USF oligonucleotide showed identical retarded
complexes. BIAcore study of these interactions revealed the binding of huGATA-3, 
as well as USF, to the immobilized LTR NRE oligonucleotide. Competition analyses,
performed with GATA, USF, and NFIL-6 oligonucleotides, clearly showed that this
regulatory region could bind both huGATA-3 and USF factors. Finally, the presence
of USF and huGATA-3 proteins in the complexes formed with LTR NRE was ascertained
using specific anti-huGATA-3 and anti-USF2 polyclonal antibodies.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10527831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 7;262(3):696-701.

Transcriptional regulation of C/EBPdelta in G(0) growth-arrested mouse mammary
epithelial cells.

O'Rourke JP(1), Hutt JA, DeWille J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Cancer Genetics, Ohio State Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio, 43210, USA.

Little is known about the control of cell cycle exit/G(0) entry, or the
regulation of genes that are expressed during G(0). In this report we used primer
extension analysis to demonstrate the high level of C/EBPdelta mRNA expression in
G(0) growth-arrested HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cells and to identify the
C/EBPdelta transcription start site. The C/EBPdelta gene transcription rate and
promoter activity are both highly induced in G(0) growth-arrested HC11 cells. The
C/EBPdelta gene promoter also exhibits G(0)-specific autoregulation. In contrast,
the C/EBPdelta promoter activity decreases in G(0) growth-arrested NIH 3T3 cells.
These data indicate that C/EBPdelta is among a relatively small number of genes
actively transcribed during G(0) growth arrest. C/EBPdelta may regulate the
expression of genes implicated in the initiation or maintenance of mammary
epithelial cell G(0) growth arrest.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10471388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 27;274(35):24965-72.

Leukemia inhibitory factor and its receptor promote adipocyte differentiation via
the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade.

Aubert J(1), Dessolin S, Belmonte N, Li M, McKenzie FR, Staccini L, Villageois P,
Barhanin B, Vernallis A, Smith AG, Ailhaud G, Dani C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie (IFR349 and UMR6543 CNRS) Université de Nice-Sophia
Antipolis, Faculté des Sciences, Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice, France.

Extracellular factors and intracellular signaling pathways involved in early
events of adipocyte differentiation are poorly defined. It is shown herein that
expression of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and LIF receptor is
developmentally regulated during adipocyte differentiation. Preadipocytes secrete
bioactive LIF, and an antagonist of LIF receptor inhibits adipogenesis.
Genetically modified embryonic stem (ES) cells combined with culture conditions
to commit stem cells into the adipocyte lineage were used to examine the
requirement of LIF receptor during in vitro development of adipose cells. The
capacity of embryoid bodies derived from lifr(-/-) ES cells to undergo adipocyte 
differentiation is dramatically reduced. LIF addition stimulates adipocyte
differentiation of Ob1771 and 3T3-F442A preadipocytes and that of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma2 ligand-treated mouse embryonic
fibroblasts. Expression of the early adipogenic transcription factors C/EBPbeta
and C/EBPdelta is rapidly stimulated following exposure of preadipose cells to
LIF. The selective inhibitors of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, i.e.
PD98059 and U0126, inhibit LIF-induced C/EBP gene expression and prevent
adipocyte differentiation induced by LIF. These results are in favor of a model
that implicates stimulation of LIF receptor in the commitment of preadipocytes to
undergo terminal differentiation by controlling the early expression of C/EBPbeta
and C/EBPdelta genes via the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade.

PMID: 10455174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Immunol. 1999 May 1;162(9):5367-73.

The role of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in IL-1 beta transcription.

Baldassare JJ(1), Bi Y, Bellone CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Sciences, St. Louis University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Several reports have shown that bicyclic imidazoles, specific inhibitors of the
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), block cytokine synthesis at the
translational level. In this study, we examined the role of p38 MAPK in the
regulation of the IL-1beta cytokine gene in monocytic cell lines using the
bicyclic imidazole SB203580. Addition of SB203580 30 min before stimulation of
monocytes with LPS inhibited IL-1beta protein and steady state message in a
dose-dependent manner in both RAW264.7 and J774 cell lines. The loss of IL-1beta 
message was due mainly to inhibition of transcription, since nuclear run-off
analysis showed an approximately 80% decrease in specific IL-1 RNA synthesis. In 
contrast, SB203580 had no effect on the synthesis of TNF-alpha message.
LPS-stimulated p38 MAPK activity in the RAW264.7 cells was blocked by SB203580,
as measured by the inhibition of MAPKAP2 kinase activity, a downstream target of 
the p38 MAPK. CCAATT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)/NFIL-6-driven
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter activity was sensitive to
SB203580, indicating that C/EBP/NFIL-6 transcription factor(s) are also targets
of p38 MAPK. In contrast, transfected CAT constructs containing NF-kappaB
elements were only partially inhibited (approximately 35%) at the highest
concentration of SB203580 after LPS stimulation. As measured by EMSA,
LPS-stimulated NF-kappaB activation was not affected by SB203580. Overall, the
results demonstrate, for the first time, a role for p38 MAPK in IL-1beta
transcription by acting through C/EBP/NFIL-6 transcription factors.

PMID: 10228013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Feb 15;362(2):317-24.

Glucocorticoids stimulate CREB binding to a cyclic-AMP response element in the
rat serine dehydratase gene.

Haas MJ(1), Pitot HC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology and Pathology, Medical School, University of
Wisconsin, 1400 University Avenue, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706, USA.

Transcription of the rat serine dehydratase (SDH) gene, which is stimulated in
hepatocytes by glucagon through the activity of the second messenger, cAMP, is
augmented by pretreatment with glucocorticoids. A putative cAMP response element 
(CRE) located approximately 3.5 kbp upstream of the transcriptional start site
was hypothesized to be responsible for this effect. Here we have demonstrated by 
DNaseI footprinting and site-directed mutagenesis that the phosphorylated cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB) binds to a cAMP response element
different from that described previously. While the amount of CREB in the
extracts is unaltered by hormone treatment, more CREB is capable of binding the
response element upon addition of dexamethasone (Dex). These studies suggest that
synergistic induction of the SDH gene by cAMP and Dex is through a CRE and is
due, in part, to regulation of CREB-DNA binding by treatment of the cells with
glucocorticoids.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9989941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Circ Res. 1998 Nov 16;83(10):980-5.

Embryonic expression suggests an important role for CRP2/SmLIM in the developing 
cardiovascular system.

Jain MK(1), Kashiki S, Hsieh CM, Layne MD, Yet SF, Sibinga NE, Chin MT, Feinberg 
MW, Woo I, Maas RL, Haber E, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, the
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Proteins of the LIM family are critical regulators of development and
differentiation in various cell types. We have described the cloning of
cysteine-rich protein 2/smooth muscle LIM protein (CRP2/SmLIM), a LIM-only
protein expressed in differentiated vascular smooth muscle cells. As a first step
toward understanding the potential functions of CRP2/SmLIM, we analyzed its
expression after gastrulation in developing mice and compared the expression of
CRP2/SmLIM with that of the other 2 members of the CRP subclass, CRP1 and
CRP3/MLP. In situ hybridization in whole-mount and sectioned embryos showed that 
CRP2/SmLIM was expressed in the sinus venosus and the 2 cardiac chambers at
embryonic day 9. Vascular expression of CRP2/SmLIM was first seen at embryonic
day 10. At subsequent time points, CRP2/SmLIM expression decreased in the heart
but remained high in the vasculature. CRP1 was expressed both in vascular and
nonvascular tissues containing smooth muscle cells, whereas CRP3/MLP was
expressed only in tissues containing striated muscle. These patterns of
expression were maintained in the adult animal and suggest an important role for 
this gene family in the development of smooth and striated muscle.

PMID: 9815145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Blood. 1998 Nov 15;92(10):3745-55.

Thymocyte contact or monoclonal antibody-mediated clustering of 3beta1 or 6beta4 
integrins activate interleukin-6 (IL-6) transcription factors (NF-kappaB and
NF-IL6) and IL-6 production in human thymic epithelial cells.

Ramarli D(1), Scupoli MT, Fiorini E, Poffe O, Brentegani M, Villa A, Cecchini G, 
Tridente G, Marchisio PC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of Verona, Verona,
Italy. dunia@borgoroma.univr.it>

T-cell precursors develop within the thymus in contact with multiple supportive
elements, among which thymic epithelial cells (TEC) are known to exert a dominant
role in their homing, survival, and functional differentiation. All these
functions are supported by cell-cell contacts and cytokine release. Signaling
events triggered in lymphoid cells by adhesion to TEC are well characterized, but
little is known about the opposite phenomenon. To address this issue, we derived 
cultures of TEC from human normal thymus. TEC monolayers were cocultured with
thymocytes and immunostained with monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) to integrin (2,
3, 4, and 6) and beta (beta1 and beta4) chains. Optical and confocal analysis
showed that integrins were polarized on TEC at discrete surface locations: 6beta4
lined the basal surface of TEC monolayers, whereas 3beta1 was found mostly at
TEC-TEC contacts; it is noteworthy that both 3beta1 and 6beta4 became highly
enriched also at the boundaries with adherent thymocytes. Functional studies
performed with MoAbs anti-beta1 and -beta4 integrins showed that beta1, and, to a
much lower extent, beta4 heterodimers are involved in the TEC-thymocyte adhesion.
Thymocyte contact or MoAb-mediated ligation of 3, 6, beta1, and beta4 integrins
was investigated as a potential inducer of intracellular signaling in TEC.
Thymocyte adhesion or cross-linking of MoAbs bound to integrins clustered at the 
TEC/thymocyte contact sites led to activation of interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene
transcription factors, namely NF-IL6 serine phosphorylation and NF-kappaB nuclear
targeting, as well as to increased IL-6 secretion. We propose that integrin
clustering occurring during TEC-thymocyte contacts modulates in TEC the gene
expression of a cytokine involved in thymocyte growth and functional
differentiation.

PMID: 9808569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10920-5.

beta-adrenergic receptor-induced activation of nerve growth factor gene
transcription in rat cerebral cortex involves CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
delta.

Colangelo AM(1), Johnson PF, Mocchetti I.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation Group, Advanced BioScience
Laboratories-Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

Stimulation of beta-adrenergic receptors (BAR) by clenbuterol (CLE) increases
nerve growth factor (NGF) biosynthesis in the rat cerebral cortex but not in
other regions of the brain. We have explored the transcription mechanisms that
may account for the cortex-specific activation of the NGF gene. Although the NGF 
promoter contains an AP-1 element, AP-1-binding activity in the cerebral cortex
was not induced by CLE, suggesting that other transcription factors govern the
brain area-specific induction of NGF. Because BAR activation increases cAMP
levels, we examined the role of CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP), some of 
which are known to be cAMP-inducible. In C6-2B glioma cells, whose NGF expression
is induced by BAR agonists, (i) CLE increased C/EBPdelta-binding activity, (ii)
NGF mRNA levels were increased by overexpressing C/EBPdelta, and (iii) C/EBPdelta
increased the activity of an NGF promoter-reporter construct. Moreover, DNase
footprinting and deletion analyses identified a C/EBPdelta site in the proximal
region of the NGF promoter. C/EBPdelta appears to be responsible for the
BAR-mediated activation of the NGF gene in vivo, since CLE elicited a
time-dependent increase in C/EBPdelta-binding activity in the cerebral cortex
only. Our data suggest that, while AP-1 may regulate basal levels of NGF
expression, C/EBPdelta is a critical component determining the area-specific
expression of NGF in response to BAR stimulation.

PMCID: PMC27996
PMID: 9724805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10908-13.

Selectively enhanced contextual fear conditioning in mice lacking the
transcriptional regulator CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta.

Sterneck E(1), Paylor R, Jackson-Lewis V, Libbey M, Przedborski S, Tessarollo L, 
Crawley JN, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation Section, Advanced BioScience
Laboratories-Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) is a transcriptional regulator 
implicated in the hepatic acute phase response and in adipogenic and myeloid cell
differentiation. We found that C/EBPdelta is widely expressed in the peripheral
and central nervous systems, including neurons of the hippocampal formation,
indicating a role in neural functions. To examine the role of C/EBPdelta in vivo,
we generated mice with a targeted deletion of the C/EBPdelta gene. This mutation 
does not interfere with normal embryonic and postnatal development. Performance
in a battery of behavioral tests indicates that basic neurological functions are 
normal. Furthermore, performance in a Morris water maze task suggests that
C/EBPdelta mutant mice have normal spatial learning. However, in the contextual
and auditory-cue-conditioned fear task, C/EBPdelta null mice displayed
significantly more conditioned freezing to the test context than did wild-type
controls, but equivalent conditioning to the auditory cue. These data demonstrate
a selectively enhanced contextual fear response in mice carrying a targeted
genomic mutation and implicate C/EBPdelta in the regulation of a specific type of
learning and memory.

PMCID: PMC27994
PMID: 9724803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2108-17.

Interleukin-6-specific activation of the C/EBPdelta gene in hepatocytes is
mediated by Stat3 and Sp1.

Cantwell CA(1), Sterneck E, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation Group, ABL-Basic Research Program,
NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

C/EBPdelta (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta) has been implicated as a
regulator of acute-phase response (APR) genes in hepatocytes. Its expression
increases dramatically in liver during the APR and can be induced in hepatic cell
lines by interleukin-6 (IL-6), an acute-phase mediator that activates
transcription of many APR genes. Here we have investigated the mechanism by which
C/EBPdelta expression is regulated by IL-6 in hepatoma cells. C/EBPdelta promoter
sequences to -125 bp are sufficient for IL-6 inducibility of a reporter gene and 
include an APR element (APRE) that is essential for IL-6 responsiveness. DNA
binding experiments and transactivation assays demonstrate that Stat3, but not
Stat1, interacts with this APRE. Two Sp1 sites, one of which is adjacent to the
APRE, are required for IL-6 induction and transactivation by Stat3. Thus, Stat3
and Sp1 function cooperatively to activate the C/EBPdelta promoter. Replacement
of the APRE with Stat binding elements (SBEs) from the ICAM-1 or C/EBPbeta
promoter, both of which recognize both Stat1 and Stat3, confers responsiveness to
gamma interferon, a cytokine that selectively activates Stat1. Sequence
comparisons suggest that the distinct Stat binding specificities of the
C/EBPdelta and C/EBPbeta SBEs are determined primarily by a single base pair
difference. Our findings indicate that the cytokine specificity of C/EBPdelta
gene expression is governed by the APRE sequence.

PMCID: PMC121443
PMID: 9528783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Endocrinology. 1997 Dec;138(12):5527-34.

Transcription factor C/EBPdelta in fetal lung: developmental regulation and
effects of cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate and glucocorticoids.

Breed DR(1), Margraf LR, Alcorn JL, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235, USA.

Pulmonary surfactant is a developmentally and hormonally regulated lipoprotein
synthesized exclusively in alveolar type II cells. Surfactant protein-A (SP-A)
gene transcription in human fetal lung in culture is stimulated by
glucocorticoids and cAMP; cAMP also enhances the rate of type II cell
differentiation. The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family of
transcription factors serves an important role in the regulation of genes
involved in energy metabolism, lipid biosynthesis, and cellular differentiation. 
The gene encoding C/EBPdelta, which is induced by glucocorticoids during the
early phases of adipocyte differentiation, is expressed at relatively high levels
in lung compared with other tissues. In the present study we have analyzed
developmental changes in C/EBPdelta messenger RNA levels in fetal rabbit lung as 
well as changes in the levels of immunoreactive C/EBPdelta in human fetal lung
during differentiation in organ culture and after treatment with cAMP and
glucocorticoids. We observed that C/EBPdelta messenger RNA is detectable in fetal
rabbit lung on day 19 of gestation and is increased approximately 3.7-fold to
maximum levels on day 28 of gestation, the time when SP-A gene transcription
increases to maximum levels. Immunohistochemical analysis of C/EBPdelta in
midgestation human fetal lung before culture revealed trace nuclear staining in
epithelial and occasional stromal cells. After 12 h of organ culture in
serum-free medium, nuclear staining of C/EBPdelta was markedly increased in
epithelial cells lining the prealveolar ducts of the human fetal lung tissue. By 
immunoblot analysis, it was found that C/EBPdelta levels were induced rapidly
during organ culture in control medium and were increased further by treatment
with dexamethasone and (Bt)2cAMP. C/EBPdelta levels were maximally induced during
the first 24 h of culture and declined thereafter; after 72 h of incubation in
control or cAMP-containing medium, C/EBPdelta was reduced markedly. By contrast, 
in fetal lung tissues incubated in medium containing dexamethasone or
dexamethasone plus (Bt)2cAMP, the decline in C/EBPdelta was more modest, so that 
levels remained elevated throughout the 96-h culture period. Our findings that
C/EBPdelta is localized primarily to alveolar epithelial cells, rapidly induced
during differentiation of human fetal lung in culture, and increased by cAMP and 
glucocorticoids suggest a possible role in the regulation of type II cell
differentiation and in the synthesis of surfactant phospholipids and proteins.

PMID: 9389540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. FEBS Lett. 1997 Sep 29;415(2):217-20.

Repression of apoC-III gene expression by TNFalpha involves C/EBPdelta/NF-IL6beta
via an IL-1 independent pathway.

Lacorte JM(1), Beigneux A, Parant M, Chambaz J.

Author information: 
(1)CJF INSERM 9508 and URA-CNRS 1283, Paris, France.

Apolipoproteins A-II and C-III, which participate in the control of
cholesterolemia and triglyceridemia, are negative acute phase proteins. Treatment
of HepG2 cells with TNFalpha showed that apoA-II and apoC-III mRNA levels were
decreased. Using transient transfection, we found that apoC-III gene expression
is controlled at the transcriptional level. By competition and supershift
experiments, we demonstrate that TNFalpha-induced complexes were related to
C/EBPdelta/NF-IL6beta and p50 and that overexpression of C/EBPdelta was able to
reproduce the inhibitory effect of TNFalpha on the apoC-III promoter. RT-PCR
failed to detect the IL-1 transcript in TNFalpha-treated HepG2 cells, suggesting 
that activation of C/EBPdelta by TNFalpha is not related to the IL-1-signalling
pathway.

PMID: 9350999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 10;272(41):25555-9.

Retinoic acid receptor-nuclear factor-interleukin 6 antagonism. A novel mechanism
of retinoid-dependent inhibition of a keratinocyte hyperproliferative
differentiation marker.

DiSepio D(1), Malhotra M, Chandraratna RA, Nagpal S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biology and Chemistry, Retinoid Research, Allergan Inc.,
Irvine, California 92612, USA.

Retinoids inhibit the expression of migration inhibitory factor-related protein-8
(MRP-8), a marker of hyperproliferative or abnormal keratinocyte differentiation,
in a retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-dependent manner in various cell culture
systems. MRP-8 expression is also down-regulated in vivo in psoriatic lesions
after topical application of an anti-psoriatic RARbeta/gamma-selective synthetic 
retinoid, tazarotene. We demonstrate that an MRP-8 promoter linked to a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter (MRP8CAT) faithfully replicates the
differentiation-specific regulation of the endogenous keratinocyte MRP-8 gene.
Further, interferon gamma and serum-induced expression of MRP8CAT is inhibited by
retinoid receptors in a ligand-dependent manner. We also show that NF-IL6 acts as
a transcriptional enhancer of MRP-8, and that RARs inhibit MRP8CAT by inhibiting 
the enhancer action of nuclear factor-interleukin-6 (NF-IL6). The NF-IL6
antagonism function of RAR is a complex of the core of the DNA binding domain and
the hydrophobic zipper region. This manuscript identifies NF-IL6 as another
transcription factor, in addition to AP1, whose activity is inhibited by RAR in a
ligand-dependent manner. The interdiction of NF-IL6-dependent signal transduction
pathway by RARs may explain some of the therapeutic effects of retinoids in
inflammatory and proliferative diseases.

PMID: 9325272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 19;272(38):23578-84.

Activation of CAAT enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) by interleukin-1
negatively influences apolipoprotein C-III expression.

Lacorte JM(1), Ktistaki E, Beigneux A, Zannis VI, Chambaz J, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, P. O. Box 1527, Herakleion 711 10, Crete, Greece.

Tissue-specific transcription of the apolipoprotein C-III (apoC-III) gene is
mainly regulated by synergistic interactions between the liver-enriched
transcription factor HNF-4, which binds to the proximal promoter, and ubiquitous 
factors, which bind to the upstream enhancer region. Here we show that apoC-III
expression in HepG2 cells is negatively regulated in response to interleukin-1
(IL-1), and this inhibition is mainly due to transcriptional repression. CAAT
enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta) was found to be the main mediator of 
IL-1-induced suppression. Analysis of the apoC-III promoter revealed two IL-1
response elements. The first is located in the proximal promoter region D and the
second in the distal enhancer region I. Proximal element D is a high affinity
binding site for C/EBPdelta, while the enhancer element I is not directly
recognized by this transcription factor. Functional analysis of different
combinations of homologous and heterologous promoter constructs revealed that
indirect interaction of C/EBPdelta with site I, in the context of the full
promoter, leads to repression. C/EBPdelta is activated by phosphorylation during 
IL-1-induced signal transduction pathway. This modification is important for both
DNA binding activity and indirect transrepression of the apoC-III promoter.

PMID: 9295296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Med Virol. 1997 Aug;52(4):413-8.

Human hepatitis B virus enhancer 1 is responsive to human interleukin-6.

Ohno H(1), Kaneko S, Kobayashi K, Murakami S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Serum levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) are elevated in acute and chronic hepatitis 
B patients. The effect of IL-6 and its transcription factor of NF-IL6 (a nuclear 
factor for IL-6) on hepatitis B virus (HBV) enhancer 1 (Enh1), which controls HBV
X expression, were investigated in HepG2 cells. Twenty ng/ml of IL-6 increased
4-fold the enhancer activity of Enh1 according to the CAT assay. The IL-6
stimulation was abolished by introducing a mutation either in an AP-1-related
site or a C-stretch sequence in the Enh1 sequence, demonstrating that the
cis-elements are necessary for the IL-6 response. Co-transfection of NF-IL6
expression plasmid similarly increased the enhancer activity of Enh1 through both
binding sites. Further, a specific complex formation of the Enh1 was detected
using HepG2 nuclear lysates by electromobility shift assays, and the complex
formation was increased in the lysates of cells treated with IL-6 and
NF-IL6-transfection. In competition assays, one half of the complex formed was
found to remain in the presence of 500-times excess competitor DNA fragment
harboring NF-IL2 binding site, suggesting indirect binding of NF-IL6 to the Enh1 
sequence. These results indicate that IL-6 increased the enhancer activity of HBV
Enh1 through signal transduction pathways, indirectly involving NF-IL6, and may
control HBV X expression and viral replication in HBV infected liver.

PMID: 9260690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biochem. 1997 Apr;121(4):731-8.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta gene expression is mediated by APRF/STAT3.

Yamada T(1), Tobita K, Osada S, Nishihara T, Imagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Osaka University, Suita.

The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta (C/EBP delta) transcription factor is
known to be rarely expressed but sharply induced at an early stage of the acute
phase response. To investigate the regulation mechanisms for this induction, the 
5'-flanking region of the rat C/EBP delta gene was isolated. Functional analyses 
involving transfection and footprinting indicated that the upstream region up to 
- 175 bp is sufficient for the full basal activity in rat fibroblast 3Y1 cells.
At least three cis-elements including a GC box are involved in this activity.
When HepG2 cells were treated with interleukin-6 (IL-6), C/EBP delta mRNA was
rapidly induced. Transfection and gel shift analyses identified the binding site 
for the acute phase response factor/signal transducers and activators of
transcription (APRF/STAT3). These findings strongly indicate that C/EBP delta
gene expression is mediated by APRF/STAT3, which is phosphorylated for the
activation through the IL-6 receptor when cells are treated with IL-6, and
trans-activates the other acute phase response genes.

PMID: 9163525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 7;272(10):6291-6.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-delta (C/EBP-delta) is induced in growth-arrested 
mouse mammary epithelial cells.

O'Rourke J(1), Yuan R, DeWille J.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State University Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio 43210, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) are a highly conserved family of
DNA-binding proteins that regulate cell growth and differentiation in a highly
tissue-specific manner. These experiments investigated the influence of the cell 
cycle on C/EBP isoform expression in mammary epithelial cells (COMMA D) and
fibroblasts (NIH3T3). C/EBP-delta gene expression is induced in COMMA D cells
arrested in G0 by serum and growth factor withdrawal or contact inhibition.
C/EBP-delta mRNA, nuclear protein content, and DNA binding activity increase
during G0 growth arrest and decrease after cell cycle induction in COMMA D cells.
Growth arrest is markedly delayed in COMMA D cells expressing a C/EBP-delta
antisense construct. C/EBP-beta is induced during G1 of the cell cycle. In
contrast to COMMA D cells, C/EBP-beta and C/EBP-delta mRNA levels remain
relatively constant in growth-arrested and cell cycle-induced NIH3T3 cells.
However, C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP10) mRNA levels markedly increase in
growth-arrested NIH3T3 cells. Both COMMA D and NIH3T3 cells express growth
arrest-specific (gas1) and JunD during G0. These results demonstrate that COMMA D
and NIH3T3 cells achieve a common growth arrest (G0) state by cell-specific
strategies that involve the induction of different C/EBP isoforms.

PMID: 9045647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4287-94.

Nuclear factor interleukin 6 motifs mediate tissue-specific gene transcription in
hypoxia.

Yan SF(1), Zou YS, Mendelsohn M, Gao Y, Naka Y, Du Yan S, Pinsky D, Stern D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology, Surgery, Medicine, and Pathology, Columbia
University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Activation of transcription at the nuclear factor interleukin 6 (NF-IL-6) DNA
binding motif modulates expression of multiple genes important in host adaptive
and developmental mechanisms. Studies showing that hypoxia-induced transcription 
of IL-6 in cultured endothelial cells was due to transcriptional activation by
the NF-IL-6 motif in the promoter (Yan, S.-F., Tritto, I., Pinsky, D., Liao, H., 
Huang, J., Fuller, G., Brett, J., May, L., and Stern, D. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
270, 11463-11471) led us to prepare transgenic mice using 115- or 14-base pair
regions of the promoter encompassing the NF-IL-6 site ligated to the lacZ
reporter gene and the basal thymidine kinase promoter. On exposure to hypoxia or 
induction of ischemia, mice bearing either of the constructs showed prominent
expression of the transgene in lung and cardiac vasculature and in the kidney but
not in the liver (parenchyma or vasculature). In contrast, transgenic mice
bearing a mutationally inactivated NF-IL-6 site showed no increase in transgene
expression in hypoxia. Gel retardation assays revealed time-dependent,
hypoxia-enhanced nuclear binding activity for the NF-IL-6 site in nuclear
extracts of the heart, lung, and kidney but not in the liver; the
hypoxia-enhanced band disappeared on addition of antibody to C/EBPbeta-NF-IL-6.
Consistent with the specificity of hypoxia-mediated activation of
C/EBPbeta-NF-IL-6, gel retardation assays showed no change in the intensity of
the hypoxia-enhanced gel shift band in the presence of excess unlabeled
oligonucleotide probes or antibodies related to other transcription factors,
including NFkappaB, AP1, cAMP response element-binding protein, SP1, and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. These data indicate that the transcription factor
NF-IL-6 is sensitive to environmental oxygen deprivation, and the tissue-specific
pattern of gene expression suggests that local mechanisms have an important
regulatory effect.

PMID: 9020146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Kidney Int. 1997 Feb;51(2):419-25.

Hypoxia-induced modulation of endothelial cell properties: regulation of barrier 
function and expression of interleukin-6.

Yan SF(1), Ogawa S, Stern DM, Pinsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Columbia University, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

The endothelial cell response to hypoxia involves a range of adaptive mechanisms 
that reflect an active response of the cell's biosynthetic and metabolic
apparatus. Hypoxia-mediated suppression of endothelial barrier function,
resulting in increased vascular leakage, is likely to contribute to pulmonary and
cerebral edema associated with high altitude and is closely associated with a
fall in intracellular cyclic AMP levels. Buttressing of this second messenger
pathway in the endothelium using membrane permeant cyclic AMP analogs prevents
increased vascular leakage due to hypoxia. Application of this principle to organ
preservation has shown that supplementation with cyclic AMP analogs or inhibition
of endogenous cAMP metabolism enables extension of the time a harvested organ can
remain extracorporeally, after which transplantation is successful. The
underlying mechanism through which cyclic AMP exerts its effects appears to be
maintenance of vascular homeostasis in the graft. A distinct adaptive mechanism
triggered in the endothelium by hypoxia is expression of the cytokine
interleukin-6 (IL-6) by a novel mechanism involving transcription driven by the
nuclear factor IL-6 (NF-IL-6) DNA binding site in the promoter. IL-6 may exert
protective effects on vascular function, thereby limiting vascular injury by a
different mechanism than those recruited by elevated cAMP levels. These studies
provide insights into tow independent mechanisms through which endothelium
responds to oxygen deprivation, and suggest possible new approaches to attentuate
vascular injury associated with ischemia.

PMID: 9027716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1996 Oct;16(10):783-98.

The kappa B enhancer of the human interleukin-6 promoter is necessary and
sufficient to confer an IL-1 beta and TNF-alpha response in transfected human
cell lines: requirement for members of the C/EBP family for activity.

Merola M(1), Blanchard B, Tovey MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology, CNRS, UPR, Villejuif, France.

The human interleukin-6 (IL-6) promoter contains two regulatory elements, a kappa
B enhancer and a NFIL-6 (C/EBP beta) binding site, which have been reported to be
essential for inducibility of the IL-6 gene. We show that the kappa B element
alone is sufficient to confer inducibility on the IL-6 gene in cells treated with
either IL-1 beta or TNF-alpha. Gel-retardation analysis of nuclear extracts from 
IL-1 beta or TNF-alpha-treated cells using specific antibodies has shown that at 
least five retarded complexes bind to the IL-6 kappa B element in addition to
NF-kappa B. Furthermore, apart from p50 (NF-kappa B1) and p65 (RelA), no other
members of the Rel family are present in these complexes. Comparative analysis
with the kappa B enhancer of the immunoglobulin kappa chain gene shows that three
of these complexes bind specifically to the IL-6 kappa B enhancer: a complex of
p50/NFIL6, a p65 homodimer, and a non-Rel-related constitutive protein. Finally, 
transfection experiments, in which NF-kappa B subunits, NFIL-6, and NFIL-6 beta
(C/EBP delta), were overexpressed in cells transfected with mutated IL-6 enhancer
elements linked to a reporter gene show that interaction between members of the
two families of factors is required for activation of the IL-6 gene in the
absence of the NFIL-6 binding site. We conclude that the kappa B enhancer of the 
IL-6 promoter is the IL-1 beta and TNF-alpha responsive element and that its
activity is dependent on the direct interaction of NF-kappa B with non-Rel
transcription factors.

PMID: 8910763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Mol Biol. 1996 Sep 27;262(3):327-35.

Regulation of HIV-1 gene expression by NF-IL6.

Tesmer VM(1), Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry Purdue University W. Lafayette, IN 47907-1393, USA.

Previous studies have shown that in human T-cells (Jurkat) and hepatoma cells
(HepG2), exogenous NF-IL6 can activate HIV-1 gene expression even in the absence 
of its consensus binding elements in the viral long terminal repeat (LTR). To
identify the LTR elements that mediate this response, we have analysed constructs
containing mutated and deleted LTR sequences. We have also examined heterologous 
plasmids to evaluate a potential requirement for the natural LTR sequences in
producing HIV-1 gene activation by NF-IL6. As observed for Jurkat and HepG2
cells, we find that in the absence of NF-IL6 binding elements, NF-IL6 can elicit 
LTR-mediated gene expression in cotransient expression assays performed in
monocytic (U937) cells. However, we detect distinct modes of regulation depending
on cell type. In U937 cells, the basal LTR sequences retain a significant
fraction (42%) of NF-IL6 responsiveness in the absence of upstream regulatory
elements in the LTR while these elements are required for maximal response. In
HepG2 cells, NF-IL6 elicits a relatively low level of gene activation from the
basal LTR elements; response to NF-IL6 is restored with either the Sp1 binding
sequences or the other upstream regulatory elements in the LTR. In addition, even
though NF-IL6 induces a relatively low gene activity from the basal LTR sequences
analysed in HepG2 cells, study of a heterologous construct indicates that these
sequences are required for the responsiveness of Sp1 elements to NF-IL6 in this
cellular background.

PMID: 8844998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Aug 1;239(3):624-31.

Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B), nuclear factor interleukin-6 (NFIL-6 or
C/EBP beta) and nuclear factor interleukin-6 beta (NFIL6-beta or C/EBP delta) are
not sufficient to activate the endogenous interleukin-6 gene in the human breast 
carcinoma cell line MCF-7. Comparative analysis with MDA-MB-231 cells, an
interleukin-6-expressing human breast carcinoma cell line.

Faggioli L(1), Costanzo C, Merola M, Bianchini E, Furia A, Carsana A, Palmieri M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Biologica, Università di Verona, Italy.

A comparative study of the molecular mechanism of interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene
induction on two breast-carcinoma-derived cell lines has been performed.
MDA-MB-231 cells produce constitutive detectable levels of both secreted IL-6 and
mRNA which, as expected, are dramatically enhanced following induction by either 
IL-1 beta or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). The levels of both secreted
IL-6 and IL-6 mRNA are significantly higher in response to IL-1 beta in spite of 
the fact that stimulation by TNF-alpha alone enhances the half life of IL-6 mRNA.
The protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide is also a fairly strong inducer of 
IL-6 in these cells. In contrast, MCF-7 cells fail to produce detectable IL-6
protein or mRNA, even after stimulation with proper inducers. Analysis of
transcription factors NF-kappa B, NFIL6 and NFIL6 beta, which have been described
to be sufficient to activate the IL-6 gene in other cell systems, shows a similar
pattern of expression in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Furthermore,
transfection of a recombinant plasmid carrying the IL-6 promoter linked to a
luciferase reporter gene shows that both cell lines are able to drive IL-1 beta
or TNF-alpha activation of this construction in a very similar manner. Finally,
when MCF-7 cells were treated with IL-1 beta or TNF-alpha in the presence of
cycloheximide, transcription of IL-6 mRNA from the endogenous IL-6 gene was
observed. These data suggest that a mechanism of IL-6 gene repression is active
in MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 8774705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Immunity. 1996 Jul;5(1):91-101.

C/EBP activators are required for HIV-1 replication and proviral induction in
monocytic cell lines.

Henderson AJ(1), Connor RI, Calame KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York 10032, USA.

Previous work has shown that C/EBP sites and C/EBP transcriptional activators are
necessary for HIV-1 LTR activity in monocytes/macrophages. We have investigated
the role that C/EBP proteins play in induction and replication of HIV-1. Ectopic 
expression of the dominant negative C/EBP protein LIP inhibited HIV-1 mRNA and
virus production in activated U1 cells, demonstrating that C/EBP proteins are
required for provirus induction. U1 lines overexpressing C/EBP activator NF-IL-6 
produced more viral mRNA and virus particles following cellular activation than
control lines, demonstrating that C/EBP proteins are limiting for virus
transcription. HIV-1 harboring mutations within two C/EBP sites were crippled in 
their ability to replicate in U937 promonocytic cells, indicating that these
sites are required for replication. These data identify C/EBP proteins as
regulators of HIV-1 expression in monocytes/macrophages.

PMID: 8758898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Immunol. 1996 Apr 1;156(7):2591-8.

Differential regulation of IL-6 gene transcription and expression by IL-4 and
IL-10 in human monocytic cell lines.

Takeshita S(1), Gage JR, Kishimoto T, Vredevoe DL, Martínez-Maza O.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA School of Nursing, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angelas, 90095, USA.

IL-4 and IL-10 inhibit the cytokine production and mRNA expression by
monocytes/macrophages. To investigate the molecular mechanism of the inhibitory
effect on transcriptional or post-transcriptional regulation of IL-6 gene
expression by IL-4 and IL-10, we studied IL-6 production, expression level of
IL-6 mRNA, IL-6 promoter activity, transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB and
NF-IL-6, and IL-6 mRNA stability in human monocytic cell lines, THP-1 and U937,
stimulated by PMA and LPS in the absence or the presence of IL-4 or IL-10. Both
IL-4 and IL-10 were seen to inhibit IL-6 production and the expression of IL-6
mRNA in both monocytic cell lines studied. In chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
assays, utilizing the transient transfection of a chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter plasmid containing the IL-6 gene promoter, IL-4, but
not IL-10, suppressed the transcriptional activity of the IL-6 gene promoter
stimulated by PMA and LPS. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that
IL-4, but not IL-10, inhibited nuclear NF-kappaB activity, and that IL-4 and
IL-10 did not affect NF-IL-6 activity. On the other hand, IL-10 enhanced the
degradation of IL-6 mRNA in a mRNA stability assay. These results suggest that
IL-4 may inhibit the transcription of the IL-6 gene by affecting NF-kappaB
binding activity, while IL-10 may inhibit the IL-6 mRNA levels
post-transcriptionally, without suppressing promoter activity. Therefore, we
conclude that IL-4 and IL-10 inhibit IL-6 production by different mechanisms in
human monocytic cell lines.

PMID: 8786324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Neurosci. 1996 Feb 1;16(3):919-29.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide,
and noradrenaline induce the transcription factors CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP)-beta and C/EBP delta in mouse cortical astrocytes: involvement in
cAMP-regulated glycogen metabolism.

Cardinaux JR(1), Magistretti PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche Neurologique, Institut de Physiologie et Service de
Neurologie du CHUV, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

We have described previously a transcription-dependent induction of glycogen
resynthesis by the vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) or noradrenaline (NA) in
astrocytes, which is mediated by cAMP. Because it has been postulated that the
cAMP-mediated regulation of energy balance in hepatocytes and adipocytes is
channeled at least in part through the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
family of transcription factors, we tested the hypothesis that C/EBP isoforms
could be expressed in mouse cortical astrocytes and that their level of
expression could be regulated by VIP, by the VIP-related neuropeptide pituitary
adenylate cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), or by NA. We report in this study
that in these cells, C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta are induced by VIP, PACAP, or NA 
via the cAMP second-messenger pathway. Induction of C/EBP beta and -delta mRNA by
VIP occurs in the presence of a protein synthesis inhibitor. Thus, c/ebp beta and
c/ebp delta behave as cAMP-inducible immediate-early genes in astrocytes.
Moreover, transfection of astrocytes with expression vectors selectively
producing the transcriptionally active form of C/EBP beta, termed liver-enriched 
transcriptional activator protein, or C/EBP delta enhance the glycogen
resynthesis elicited by NA, whereas an expression vector producing the
transcriptionally inactive form of C/EBP beta, termed liver-enriched
transcriptional inhibitory protein, reduces this resynthesis. These results
support the idea that C/EBP beta and -delta regulate gene expression of energy
metabolism-related enzymes in astrocytes.

PMID: 8558260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cytokine. 1995 Nov;7(8):753-8.

Role of IL-1 beta and corticosteroids in the regulation of the C/EBP-alpha, beta 
and delta genes in vivo.

Magalini A(1), Savoldi G, Ferrari F, Garnier M, Ghezzi P, Albertini A, Di Lorenzo
D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, University of Brescia, Italy.

We have examined the regulatory effects of interleukin 1 beta (IL-1 beta) on the 
activation of three different isoforms of the C/EBP family of transcription
factors (alpha, beta and delta), in hepatocytes of normal and adrenalectomized
(ADX) rats. C/EBP-beta and delta mRNA levels were enhanced by IL-1 beta, whereas 
that of C/EBP-alpha was not affected by treatment with this interleukin in both
normal and adrenalectomized rats. The magnitude of the induction was strikingly
higher for C/EBP delta in adrenalectomized animals, indicating a suppressive
effect of corticosteroids in the IL-1 beta regulatory pathway. The pattern of
C/EBP protein synthesis did not always reflect the mRNA findings. For C/EBP-alpha
the protein synthesis was higher than expected in IL-1 beta treated ADX animals
compared to normal rats. The pattern of C/EBP synthesis was the one that better
reflected the pattern of the mRNA transcription. Differently, the induction of
C/EBP-delta was not as pronounced as that of the corresponding mRNA in IL-1 beta 
treated ADX rats. Hormonal modulation of C/EBP transcription factors was studied 
in parallel with the hormonal induction of the Alpha-1-Acid Glycoprotein (AGP)
gene, which is known to be highly induced in rat liver during the acute phase
response. This short report also indicates an important role of corticosteroids
in the regulation of transcription factors involved in IL-1 beta signalling
during the acute phase response.

PMID: 8664441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Immunol. 1995 Nov 1;155(9):4330-8.

Multiple proteins physically interact with PU.1. Transcriptional synergy with
NF-IL6 beta (C/EBP delta, CRP3).

Nagulapalli S(1), Pongubala JM, Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

PU.1 is a transcription factor that belongs to the ets family of DNA binding
proteins. In this study, we show by Far Western blot analyses that multiple
nuclear proteins are capable of physically interacting with PU.1. Using
radiolabeled PU.1 protein as a probe, we screened a B cell cDNA expression
library and isolated a number of clones encoding PU.1 interacting proteins. Three
of these clones encode DNA binding proteins (NF-IL6 beta, HMG I/Y, and SSRP), one
clone encodes a chaperone protein, and another clone encodes a multifunctional
phosphatase. We have characterized the physical and functional interactions
between PU.1 and NF-IL6 beta, a leucine zipper transcription factor implicated in
inflammatory responses. We found that deletion of the carboxyl-terminal 28 amino 
acids of PU.1 disrupted PU.1-NF-IL6 beta physical interaction. This deletion
disrupts the PU.1 Ets domain. Deletion of the NF-IL6 beta leucine zipper domain
also greatly diminished the interaction between these two proteins. In transient 
expression assays, we found that PU.1 and NF-IL6 beta can functionally cooperate 
to synergistically activate transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
showed that PU.1 and NF-IL6 beta can simultaneously bind to adjacent DNA binding 
sites, but apparently do not influence the kinetics or affinity of each other's
DNA binding. These results suggest that transcriptional synergy is due to each
protein independently influencing the basal transcription complex.

PMID: 7594592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1995 Oct;31(9):703-9.

DNA binding by C/EBP proteins correlates with hepatocyte proliferation.

Soriano HE(1), Bilyeu TA, Juan TS, Zhao W, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The leucine zipper transcription factors C/EBP alpha and C/EBP beta exhibit
growth-related variations of expression and DNA binding during liver
regeneration. We examined the expression of C/EBP proteins in relation to
hepatocyte proliferation by studying their DNA-binding activity in primary mouse 
hepatocytes in vitro. Mouse hepatocytes were dissociated by collagenase perfusion
and cultured in a serum-free, defined medium containing a variety of growth
factors and hormones. Cell protein extracts were collected every 24 h for up to
10 d and examined for DNA-binding activity by gel retardation analysis using a
C/EBP consensus sequence oligomer (bZIP). C/EBP alpha is the major bZIP-binding
protein present in the dissociated cells prior to plating. With the culture
conditions we employed, little or no binding of C/EBP proteins was observed in
the first 24 to 48 h of cultivation. After 48 h, C/EBP beta binding activity was 
elevated relative to the level seen in freshly dissociated cells. In contrast,
C/EBP alpha binding continued to be greatly reduced and no C/EBP delta binding
was observed. C/EBP beta binding remained elevated for the duration of the
experiment. Additional growth factor treatment (EGF, FGF, TGF alpha, and HGF) of 
the hepatocytes did not appreciably alter the pattern of C/EBP binding. However, 
TGF beta treatment, known to decrease hepatocyte proliferation, increased C/EBP
beta binding activity earlier and more actively than in control cells. This study
confirms a negative correlation between DNA binding by the C/EBP transactivator
proteins and the proliferation of primary mouse hepatocytes in vitro.

PMID: 8564082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;14(8):681-8.

Role of the transcription factor C/EBP beta in expression of a rat
pregnancy-specific glycoprotein gene.

Chen H(1), Lin B, Chen CL, Johnson PF, Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Pregnancy-specific glycoproteins (PSGs), which are the major placental proteins, 
and the carcinoembryonic antigens comprise a subfamily within the immunoglobulin 
superfamily. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the control of PSG
expression, we characterized the promoter elements of a rodent PSG gene, rnCGM3, 
and showed that DNA elements at nucleotides -326 to -185 (PI) relative to the
translation start site of rnCGM3 function as a promoter. The rnCGM3 PI promoter
contains two placental factor binding sites, PISI and PISII. Both are
transcription activation elements. In the present report, we screened a placental
expression cDNA library with a rnCGM3-PISII probe (nucleotides -263 to -233)
encompassing two overlapping palindromes (TGTTGCTCAACATGTTG) and demonstrated
that the PISII-binding factor is C/EBP beta, a leucine zipper family of
transcription factor. Gel mobility-shift and transient expression analyses showed
that C/EBP beta and C/EBP isoforms, C/EBP alpha and C/EBP delta, bind to the
PISII element and trans-activate rnCGM3 gene expression. Deletion of PISII from
the rnCGM3 PI promoter greatly reduced the basal as well as the C/EBP-activated
rnCGM3 expression. Gel supershift assays demonstrated that C/EBP beta is the
placental isoform that binds to the PISII site rnCGM3. Moreover, C/EBP beta is
expressed in high levels in the placenta, ovary, liver, lung, heart, and spleen, 
in contrast to C/EBP alpha, which is expressed primarily in the liver and only
low levels in the placenta. Our results demonstrate that C/EBP beta is one of the
transcription factors that positively regulate rnCGM3 expression during
pregnancy.

PMID: 7646815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):333-6.

Mouse chromosomal location of the CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins C/EBP beta
(Cebpb), C/EBP delta (Cebpd), and CRP1 (Cebpe).

Jenkins NA(1), Gilbert DJ, Cho BC, Strobel MC, Williams SC, Copeland NG, Johnson 
PF.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

There are four known members of the C/EBP family of basic region-leucine zipper
transcription factors: Cebpa, Cebpb, Cebpd, and Cebpe. Cebpa has previously been 
mapped to mouse chromosome 7. Here, we show that Cebpb maps to mouse chromosome
2, Cebpd to chromosome 16, and Cebpe to chromosome 14. The assignment of Cebpd to
chromosome 16 identifies a new region of homology between mouse chromosome 16 and
human chromosome 8.

PMID: 8530045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Genes Dev. 1995 Jan 15;9(2):168-81.

Cascade regulation of terminal adipocyte differentiation by three members of the 
C/EBP family of leucine zipper proteins.

Yeh WC(1), Cao Z, Classon M, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik Inc., South San Francisco, California 94080.

Terminal differentiation of cultured 3T3-L1 fibroblasts to the adipogenic
phenotype is potently stimulated by dexamethasone (DEX) and
methylisobutylxanthine (MIX). Previous studies have shown that these hormones
induce the expression of genes encoding two members of the CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP) family of transcription factors. In the absence of new protein
synthesis DEX activates the gene encoding C/EBP delta. Likewise, MIX is a direct 
inducer of C/EBP beta gene expression. Optimal conditions for differentiation
entail a 2-day period wherein confluent fibroblasts are exposed to DEX and MIX,
followed by removal of the hormones and subsequent culture in the presence of
insulin and fetal bovine serum. During the early phase of differentiation, high
levels of C/EBP delta and C/EBP beta accumulate. These transcription factors
diminish during the terminal phase of differentiation and come to be replaced by 
a third member of the C/EBP family, C/EBP alpha. Conclusive evidence has already 
shown that C/EBP alpha regulates terminal adipocyte differentiation, turning on
the battery of fat-specific genes required for the synthesis, uptake, and storage
of long chain fatty acids. Here we provide evidence that C/EBP delta and C/EBP
beta play early catalytic roles in the differentiation pathway, relaying the
effects of the hormonal stimulants DEX and MIX in a cascade-like fashion, leading
to the activation of the gene encoding C/EBP alpha. Conditions facilitating the
precocious expression of either C/EBP delta or C/EBP beta were observed to
accelerate adipogenesis and, in the case of C/EBP beta, relieve dependence on the
early hormonal stimulants. Likewise, conditions that prevented the expression of 
functional C/EBP beta effectively blocked terminal differentiation. Finally, we
have discovered that ectopic expression of C/EBP beta in multipotential NIH-3T3
cells results in their conversion into committed adipoblasts capable, upon
hormonal stimulation, of synchronous and uniform differentiation into fat-laden
adipocytes.

PMID: 7531665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;70(3-4):188-91.

Sequence identity locates CEBPD and FGFR1 to mapped human loci within proximal
8p.

Wood S(1), Schertzer M, Yaremko ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

The gene loci for human CEBPD (CCAAT enhancer binding protein, delta chain) and
FGFR1 (fibroblast growth factor receptor) have been identified within two
genetically mapped cosmids by sequence homology between rare cutter site regions 
and data base sequences for these loci. Cell hybrid and fluorescence in situ
hybridization mapping places both of these loci within the chromosome region
8p11.2-->p11.1.

PMID: 7789168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 5;268(34):25311-9.

Differential acute-phase response of rat kininogen genes involves type I and type
II interleukin-6 response elements.

Chen HM(1), Liao WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

The serum concentration of rat T1 kininogen increases 20-30-fold in response to
acute inflammation. This increase, induced in the liver, is regulated primarily
at the transcriptional level. In contrast, synthesis of a homologous K kininogen 
is not induced. In this study, we further analyzed a 321-base pair interleukin
(IL)-6 response element in the T1 kininogen promoter and showed that it consists 
of at least three functionally distinct sequences (A, B, and C boxes). All three 
sequences were required for full promoter activity. The B box, a strong
C/EBP-binding site, was crucial for T1 kininogen's basal expression, whereas A
and C boxes resembled the type II IL-6 response elements and were critical for
the cytokine response. C/EBP alpha, -beta, and -delta interacted with the B box
sequence; however, upon IL-6 stimulation, C/EBP delta binding activity was
dramatically induced and became the predominant factor binding to this site.
Consistent with these binding studies were the cotransfection experiments,
revealing that C/EBP delta was the most potent transactivator under induced
conditions and that its transactivation on the T1 kininogen promoter required an 
intact B box. These findings substantiated the importance of the B box in
eliciting the full acute-phase response. A sequence comparison showed the K
kininogen promoter contained identical A and B boxes but differed from the T1
kininogen promoter by two nucleotides at the C box. This divergence reduced the
IL-6 response by approximately 4-fold, thus contributing to the differential
inflammatory response. Our studies demonstrate that evolutionary divergence of a 
few nucleotides at a critical sequence in the promoter regions can profoundly
alter the expression patterns of downstream genes.

PMID: 8244962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jan 25;21(2):289-94.

The two C/EBP isoforms, IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 and C/EBP delta/NF-IL6 beta, are induced
by IL-6 to promote acute phase gene transcription via different mechanisms.

Ramji DP(1), Vitelli A, Tronche F, Cortese R, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare (IRBM) P. Angeletti, Pomezia,
Rome, Italy.

The promoter regions of three IL-6 inducible genes, hemopexin (Hpx), haptoglobin 
(Hp) and C-reactive protein (CRP) contain cis-acting IL-6 responsive elements
(IL-6REs) which are necessary and sufficient to induce IL-6 transcription
activation. Transcription factors of the C/EBP family interact with IL-6REs.
Among these, IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 plays a key role in IL-6 signal transduction because 
its trans-activation potential is induced by IL-6 in the human hepatoma cell line
Hep3B. We show here that a different C/EBP-related factor, C/EBP delta/NF-IL6
beta, is the major IL-6 induced protein interacting with IL-6REs in the nuclei of
Hep3B cells. In contrast to IL-6DBP/NF-IL6, whose activity in Hep3B cells is
modulated by IL-6 via a post-translational mechanism, C/EBP delta/NF-IL6 beta is 
transcriptionally induced by IL-6. Another contrasting feature is that the C/EBP 
delta cDNA transfected in Hep3B cells activates transcription from an IL-6RE
synthetic promoter in a constitutive manner which is not further enhanced by
IL-6. Therefore, in Hep3B cells, two distinct members of the C/EBP family are
recruited in the IL-6 signal transduction pathway via different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC309105
PMID: 7680115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Genes Dev. 1991 Sep;5(9):1553-67.

A family of C/EBP-related proteins capable of forming covalently linked leucine
zipper dimers in vitro.

Williams SC(1), Cantwell CA, Johnson PF.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201.

Mouse and rat genomic DNA libraries were screened by reduced stringency
hybridization with the DNA-binding domain of the c/ebp gene as a probe. Three
genes were isolated that encode bZIP DNA-binding proteins (designated CRP1, CRP2,
and CRP3) with strong amino acid sequence similarities to the C/EBP-binding
domain. CRP2 is identical to the protein described recently by other groups as
NF-IL6, LAP, IL-6DBP, and AGP/EBP, whereas CRP1 and CRP3 represent novel
proteins. Several lines of evidence indicate that these three proteins, along
with C/EBP, comprise a functional family. Each bacterially expressed polypeptide 
binds to DNA as a dimer with recognition properties that are virtually identical 
to those of C/EBP. Every member also bears a conserved cysteine residue at or
near the carboxyl terminus, immediately following the leucine zipper, that at
least in vitro allows efficient disulfide cross-linking between paired zipper
helices. We developed a gel assay for covalent dimers to assess leucine zipper
specificities among the family members. The results demonstrate that all pairwise
combinations of dimer interactions are possible. To the extent that we have
examined them, the same heterodimeric complexes can be detected intracellularly
following cotransfection of the appropriate pair of genes into recipient cells.
All members are also capable of activating in vivo transcription from promoters
that contain a C/EBP-binding site. Our findings indicate that a set of
potentially interacting C/EBP-like proteins exists, whose complexity is
comparable to that of other bZIP protein subfamilies such as Jun, Fos, and
ATF/CREB.

PMID: 1884998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 1991 Aug 15;266(23):15525-31.

Molecular characterization of transcription factors that bind to the cAMP
responsive region of the substance P precursor gene. cDNA cloning of a novel
C/EBP-related factor.

Kageyama R(1), Sasai Y, Nakanishi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

A cAMP response element (CRE) plays an important role in the cAMP-mediated gene
regulation. Several factors that recognize a CRE have been characterized, and it 
has been shown that they need either covalent modification by protein kinase A or
a cofactor such as the adenovirus Ela to function as an activator. In this study 
we show that the substance P precursor gene expression is regulated by protein
kinase A and identify the CRE sequence in its promoter region. We find that a
novel factor and ATF2 bind to the region containing the CRE of the substance P
precursor gene. The sequence analysis indicates that the novel protein,
designated CELF, has a significant homology to C/EBP gene family proteins in the 
carboxyl-terminal part containing the basic region and the leucine zipper motif. 
Ubiquitous expression of CELF suggests that this factor is utilized by various
genes. Cell-free transcription analyses indicate that CELF is a constitutive
transcriptional activator without apparent phosphorylation by protein kinase A.
These results demonstrate that multiple factors are responsible for
transcriptional control of the substance P precursor gene through the CRE region.

PMID: 1714459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


