
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Apr 1;291(14):7477-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.695858. Epub 2016 
Feb 17.

Enzyme Activities of the Ceramide Synthases CERS2-6 Are Regulated by
Phosphorylation in the C-terminal Region.

Sassa T(1), Hirayama T(1), Kihara A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan. (2)From the Laboratory of 
Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku,
Sapporo 060-0812, Japan kihara@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp.

Ceramide and complex sphingolipids regulate important cellular functions
including cell growth, apoptosis, and signaling. Dysregulation of sphingolipid
metabolism leads to pathological consequences such as sphingolipidoses and
insulin resistance. Ceramides in mammals vary greatly in their acyl-chain
composition: six different ceramide synthase isozymes (CERS1-6) that exhibit
distinct substrate specificity and tissue distribution account for this
diversity. In the present study, we demonstrated that CERS2-6 were phosphorylated
at the cytoplasmic C-terminal regions. Most of the phosphorylated residues
conformed to a consensus motif for phosphorylation by casein kinase 2 (CK2), and 
treatment of cells with the CK2-specific inhibitor CX-4945 lowered the
phosphorylation levels of CERS2, -4, -5, and -6. Phosphorylation of CERS2 was
especially important for its catalytic activity, acting mainly by increasing
itsVmaxvalue. Phosphorylation modestly increased the catalytic activities of
CERS4 and -5 and mildly increased those of CERS3 and -6. Dephosphorylation of
endogenous ceramide synthases in the mouse brain led to severely reduced activity
toward the Cers2 substrates C22:0/C24:0-CoAs and modestly reduced activity toward
the Cers5/6 substrate C16:0-CoA. These results suggest that the phosphorylation
of ceramide synthases may be a key regulatory point in the control of the
distribution and levels of sphingolipids of various acyl-chain lengths.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26887952  [PubMed - in process]


2. Transl Psychiatry. 2015 Nov 17;5:e680. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.177.

Brain-specific epigenetic markers of schizophrenia.

Wockner LF(1), Morris CP(2), Noble EP(3), Lawford BR(2), Whitehall VL(1), Young
RM(2), Voisey J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Health and Biomedical
Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Epigenetics plays a crucial role in schizophrenia susceptibility. In a previous
study, we identified over 4500 differentially methylated sites in prefrontal
cortex (PFC) samples from schizophrenia patients. We believe this was the first
genome-wide methylation study performed on human brain tissue using the Illumina 
Infinium HumanMethylation450 Bead Chip. To understand the biological significance
of these results, we sought to identify a smaller number of differentially
methylated regions (DMRs) of more functional relevance compared with individual
differentially methylated sites. Since our schizophrenia whole genome methylation
study was performed, another study analysing two separate data sets of
post-mortem tissue in the PFC from schizophrenia patients has been published. We 
analysed all three data sets using the bumphunter function found in the
Bioconductor package minfi to identify regions that are consistently
differentially methylated across distinct cohorts. We identified seven regions
that are consistently differentially methylated in schizophrenia, despite
considerable heterogeneity in the methylation profiles of patients with
schizophrenia. The regions were near CERS3, DPPA5, PRDM9, DDX43, REC8, LY6G5C and
a region on chromosome 10. Of particular interest is PRDM9 which encodes a
histone methyltransferase that is essential for meiotic recombination and is
known to tag genes for epigenetic transcriptional activation. These seven DMRs
are likely to be key epigenetic factors in the aetiology of schizophrenia and
normal brain neurodevelopment.

PMID: 26575221  [PubMed - in process]


3. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 1;24(17):4792-808. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv204. Epub 2015 Jun
4.

Male meiotic cytokinesis requires ceramide synthase 3-dependent sphingolipids
with unique membrane anchors.

Rabionet M(1), Bayerle A(1), Jennemann R(2), Heid H(3), Fuchser J(4), Marsching
C(5), Porubsky S(6), Bolenz C(7), Guillou F(8), Gröne HJ(2), Gorgas K(9),
Sandhoff R(10).

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Pathobiochemistry Group, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology . (2)Department of Cellular and
Molecular Pathology . (3)Helmholtz Group for Cell Biology, German Cancer Research
Center (dkfz.), Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (4)Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen 28359,
Germany. (5)Lipid Pathobiochemistry Group, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Pathology, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology , Center for Applied
Research "Applied Biomedical Mass Spectrometry" (ABIMAS), Mannheim 68163,
Germany. (6)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Mannheim and .
(7)Department of Urology, University Medical Center Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Mannheim 68167, Germany. (8)INRA, UMR85 Physiologie de la
Reproduction et des Comportements, Nouzilly 37380, France. (9)Department of
Anatomy and Medical Cell Biology, University of Heidelberg, 69120, Germany and.
(10)Lipid Pathobiochemistry Group, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Pathology, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology , Center for Applied
Research "Applied Biomedical Mass Spectrometry" (ABIMAS), Mannheim 68163,
Germany, Instrumental Analytics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Applied
Sciences Mannheim, Mannheim 69120, Germany r.sandhoff@dkfz.de
r.sandhoff@hs-mannheim.de.

Somatic cell cytokinesis was shown to involve the insertion of sphingolipids
(SLs) to midbodies prior to abscission. Spermatogenic midbodies transform into
stable intercellular bridges (ICBs) connecting clonal daughter cells in a
syncytium. This process requires specialized SL structures. (1) Using high
resolution-mass spectrometric imaging, we show in situ a biphasic pattern of SL
synthesis with testis-specific anchors. This pattern correlates with and depends 
on ceramide synthase 3 (CerS3) localization in both, pachytene spermatocytes
until completion of meiosis and elongating spermatids. (2) Blocking the pathways 
to germ cell-specific ceramides (CerS3-KO) and further to glycosphingolipids
(glucosylceramide synthase-KO) in mice highlights the need for special SLs for
spermatid ICB stability. In contrast to somatic mitosis these SLs require
ultra-long polyunsaturated anchors with unique physico-chemical properties, which
can only be provided by CerS3. Loss of these anchors causes enhanced apoptosis
during meiosis, formation of multinuclear giant cells and spermatogenic arrest.
Hence, testis-specific SLs, which we also link to CerS3 in human testis, are
quintessential for male fertility.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26045466  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Dermatol Sci. 2015 Jul;79(1):4-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2015.04.009. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

Update on autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis: mRNA analysis using hair
samples is a powerful tool for genetic diagnosis.

Sugiura K(1), Akiyama M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. (2)Department of Dermatology,
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 
466-8550, Japan. Electronic address: makiyama@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Research on the molecular genetics and pathomechanisms of autosomal recessive
congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) has advanced considerably and several causative
genes and molecules underlying the disease have been identified. Three major ARCI
phenotypes are harlequin ichthyosis (HI), lamellar ichthyosis (LI), and
congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE). Skin barrier defects are involved in
the pathogenesis of ARCI. In this review, the causative genes of ARCI and its
phenotypes as well as recent advances in the field are summarized. The known
causative molecules underlying ARCI include ABCA12, TGM1, ALOXE3, ALOX12B,
NIPAL4, CYP4F22, PNPLA1, CERS3, and LIPN. It is important to examine genetic
associations and to elucidate the pathomechanisms of ARCI to establish effective 
therapies and beneficial genetic counseling. Next-generation sequencing is a
promising method that enables the detection of causative disease mutations, even 
in cases of unexpected concomitant genetic diseases. For genetic diagnosis,
obtaining mRNA from hair follicle epithelial cells, which are analogous to
keratinocytes in the interfollicular epidermis, is convenient and minimally
invasive in patients with ARCI. We confirmed that our mRNA analysis method using 
hair follicle samples can be applied not only to keratinization disorders, but
also to other genetic diseases in the dermatology field. Studies that suggest
potential next-generation therapies using ARCI model mice are also reviewed.

Copyright © 2015 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25982146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 22;290(21):13157-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.631325. Epub
2015 Apr 3.

Expression of Ceramide Synthase 6 Transcriptionally Activates Acid Ceramidase in 
a c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK)-dependent Manner.

Tirodkar TS(1), Lu P(1), Bai A(2), Scheffel MJ(1), Gencer S(3), Garrett-Mayer
E(4), Bielawska A(2), Ogretmen B(2), Voelkel-Johnson C(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Microbiology and Immunology. (2)Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, and. (3)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and the Department
of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 34662 Istanbul, Turkey. (4)Public Health,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston South Carolina 29425 and.
(5)From the Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, johnsocv@musc.edu.

A family of six ceramide synthases with distinct but overlapping substrate
specificities is responsible for generation of ceramides with acyl chains ranging
from ~14-26 carbons. Ceramide synthase 6 (CerS6) preferentially generates C14-
and C16-ceramides, and we have previously shown that down-regulation of this
enzyme decreases apoptotic susceptibility. In this study, we further evaluated
how increased CerS6 expression impacts sphingolipid composition and metabolism.
Overexpression of CerS6 in HT29 colon cancer cells resulted in increased
apoptotic susceptibility and preferential generation of C16-ceramide, which
occurred at the expense of very long chain, saturated ceramides. These changes
were also reflected in sphingomyelin composition. HT-CerS6 cells had increased
intracellular levels of sphingosine, which is generated by ceramidases upon
hydrolysis of ceramide. qRT-PCR analysis revealed that only expression of acid
ceramidase (ASAH1) was increased. The increase in acid ceramidase was confirmed
by expression and activity analyses. Pharmacological inhibition of JNK (SP600125)
or curcumin reduced transcriptional up-regulation of acid ceramidase. Using an
acid ceramidase promoter driven luciferase reporter plasmid, we demonstrated that
CerS1 has no effect on transcriptional activation of acid ceramidase and that
CerS2 slightly but significantly decreased the luciferase signal. Similar to
CerS6, overexpression of CerS3-5 resulted in an ~2-fold increase in luciferase
reporter gene activity. Exogenous ceramide failed to induce reporter activity,
while a CerS inhibitor and a catalytically inactive mutant of CerS6 failed to
reduce it. Taken together, these results suggest that increased expression of
CerS6 can mediate transcriptional activation of acid ceramidase in a
JNK-dependent manner that is independent of CerS6 activity.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505570 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 25839235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem J. 2014 Jul 1;461(1):147-58. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131242.

Ceramide synthase 4 deficiency in mice causes lipid alterations in sebum and
results in alopecia.

Ebel P(1), Imgrund S(1), Vom Dorp K(2), Hofmann K(1), Maier H(3), Drake H(1),
Degen J(1), Dörmann P(2), Eckhardt M(3), Franz T(4), Willecke K(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Molecular Genetics, Life and Medical Sciences Institute (LIMES), University
of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. (2)Institute of Molecular Physiology and
Biotechnology of Plants, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. (3)Institute
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany.
(4)§Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

Five ceramide synthases (CerS2-CerS6) are expressed in mouse skin. Although CerS3
has been shown to fulfill an essential function during skin development, neither 
CerS6- nor CerS2-deficient mice show an obvious skin phenotype. In order to study
the role of CerS4, we generated CerS4-deficient mice (Cers4-/-) and
CerS4-specific antibodies. With these biological tools we analysed the tissue
distribution and determined the cell-type specific expression of CerS4 in
suprabasal epidermal layers of footpads as well as in sebaceous glands of the
dorsal skin. Loss of CerS4 protein leads to an altered lipid composition of the
sebum, which is more solidified and therefore might cause progressive hair loss
due to physical blocking of the hair canal. We also noticed a strong decrease in 
C20 1,2-alkane diols consistent with the decrease of wax diesters in the sebum of
Cers4-/- mice. Cers4-/- mice at 12 months old display additional epidermal tissue
destruction due to dilated and obstructed pilary canals. Mass spectrometric
analyses additionally show a strong decrease in C20-containing sphingolipids.

PMID: 24738593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e67317. Print 2013.

Cooperative Synthesis of Ultra Long-Chain Fatty Acid and Ceramide during
Keratinocyte Differentiation.

Mizutani Y(1), Sun H, Ohno Y, Sassa T, Wakashima T, Obara M, Yuyama K, Kihara A, 
Igarashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomembrane and Biofunctional Chemistry, Faculty of Advanced
Life Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The lipid lamellae in the stratum corneum is important for the epidermal
permeability barrier. The lipid lamellae component ceramide (CER), comprising an 
ultra long-chain (ULC) fatty acid (FA) of =26 carbons (ULC CER), plays an
essential role in barrier formation. ULC acyl-CoAs, produced by the FA elongase
ELOVL4, are converted to ULC CERs by the CER synthase CERS3. In the presented
study, we observed that ELOVL4 and CERS3 mRNAs increased during keratinocyte
differentiation in vivo and in vitro. We also determined that peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor ß/d is involved in the up-regulation of the
mRNAs. Knockdown of CERS3 caused a reduction in the elongase activities toward
ULC acyl-CoAs, suggesting that CERS3 positively regulates ULCFA. Thus, we reveal 
that the two key players in ULC CER production in epidermis, CERS3 and ELOVL4,
are coordinately regulated at both the transcriptional and enzymatic levels.

PMCID: PMC3694974
PMID: 23826266  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003536. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

Mutations in CERS3 cause autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis in humans.

Radner FP(1), Marrakchi S, Kirchmeier P, Kim GJ, Ribierre F, Kamoun B, Abid L,
Leipoldt M, Turki H, Schempp W, Heilig R, Lathrop M, Fischer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):
doi/10.1371/annotation/df5af830-8e1d-495a-a206-f881ed85e7fe.

Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a rare genetic disorder of
the skin characterized by abnormal desquamation over the whole body. In this
study we report four patients from three consanguineous Tunisian families with
skin, eye, heart, and skeletal anomalies, who harbor a homozygous contiguous gene
deletion syndrome on chromosome 15q26.3. Genome-wide SNP-genotyping revealed a
homozygous region in all affected individuals, including the same microdeletion
that partially affects two coding genes (ADAMTS17, CERS3) and abolishes a
sequence for a long non-coding RNA (FLJ42289). Whereas mutations in ADAMTS17 have
recently been identified in autosomal recessive Weill-Marchesani-like syndrome in
humans and dogs presenting with ophthalmologic, cardiac, and skeletal
abnormalities, no disease associations have been described for CERS3 (ceramide
synthase 3) and FLJ42289 so far. However, analysis of additional patients with
non-syndromic ARCI revealed a splice site mutation in CERS3 indicating that a
defect in ceramide synthesis is causative for the present skin phenotype of our
patients. Functional analysis of patient skin and in vitro differentiated
keratinocytes demonstrated that mutations in CERS3 lead to a disturbed
sphingolipid profile with reduced levels of epidermis-specific very long-chain
ceramides that interferes with epidermal differentiation. Taken together, these
data present a novel pathway involved in ARCI development and, moreover, provide 
the first evidence that CERS3 plays an essential role in human sphingolipid
metabolism for the maintenance of epidermal lipid homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3675029
PMID: 23754960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jul;33(14):2787-96. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00192-13. Epub 2013 May 
20.

Impaired epidermal permeability barrier in mice lacking elovl1, the gene
responsible for very-long-chain fatty acid production.

Sassa T(1), Ohno Y, Suzuki S, Nomura T, Nishioka C, Kashiwagi T, Hirayama T,
Akiyama M, Taguchi R, Shimizu H, Itohara S, Kihara A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

The sphingolipid backbone ceramide (Cer) is a major component of lipid lamellae
in the stratum corneum of epidermis and has a pivotal role in epidermal barrier
formation. Unlike Cers in other tissues, Cers in epidermis contain extremely long
fatty acids (FAs). Decreases in epidermal Cer levels, as well as changes in their
FA chain lengths, cause several cutaneous disorders. However, the molecular
mechanisms that produce such extremely long Cers and determine their chain
lengths are poorly understood. We generated mice deficient in the Elovl1 gene,
which encodes the FA elongase responsible for producing C20 to C28 FAs. Elovl1
knockout mice died shortly after birth due to epidermal barrier defects. The
lipid lamellae in the stratum corneum were largely diminished in these mice. In
the epidermis of the Elovl1-null mice, the levels of Cers with =C26 FAs were
decreased, while those of Cers with =C24 FAs were increased. In contrast, the
levels of C24 sphingomyelin were reduced, accompanied by an increase in C20
sphingomyelin levels. Two ceramide synthases, CerS2 and CerS3, expressed in an
epidermal layer-specific manner, regulate Elovl1 to produce acyl coenzyme As with
different chain lengths. Elovl1 is a key determinant of epidermal Cer chain
length and is essential for permeability barrier formation.

PMCID: PMC3700134
PMID: 23689133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Sep;133(9):2202-11. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.153. Epub 2013 
Apr 2.

Impaired epidermal ceramide synthesis causes autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis and reveals the importance of ceramide acyl chain length.

Eckl KM(1), Tidhar R, Thiele H, Oji V, Hausser I, Brodesser S, Preil ML,
Onal-Akan A, Stock F, Müller D, Becker K, Casper R, Nürnberg G, Altmüller J,
Nürnberg P, Traupe H, Futerman AH, Hennies HC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Dermatogenetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

The barrier function of the human epidermis is supposed to be governed by lipid
composition and organization in the stratum corneum. Disorders of keratinization,
namely ichthyoses, are typically associated with disturbed barrier activity.
Using autozygosity mapping and exome sequencing, we have identified a homozygous 
missense mutation in CERS3 in patients with congenital ichthyosis characterized
by collodion membranes at birth, generalized scaling of the skin, and mild
erythroderma. We demonstrate that the mutation inactivates ceramide synthase 3
(CerS3), which is synthesized in skin and testis, in an assay of N-acylation with
C26-CoA, both in patient keratinocytes and using recombinant mutant proteins.
Moreover, we show a specific loss of ceramides with very long acyl chains from
C26 up to C34 in terminally differentiating patient keratinocytes, which is in
line with findings from a recent CerS3-deficient mouse model. Analysis of
reconstructed patient skin reveals disturbance of epidermal differentiation with 
an earlier maturation and an impairment of epidermal barrier function. Our
findings demonstrate that synthesis of very long chain ceramides by CerS3 is a
crucial early step for the skin barrier formation and link disorders presenting
with congenital ichthyosis to defects in sphingolipid metabolism and the
epidermal lipid architecture.

PMID: 23549421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Feb 1;21(3):586-608. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr494. Epub 2011 Oct
28.

Loss of ceramide synthase 3 causes lethal skin barrier disruption.

Jennemann R(1), Rabionet M, Gorgas K, Epstein S, Dalpke A, Rothermel U, Bayerle
A, van der Hoeven F, Imgrund S, Kirsch J, Nickel W, Willecke K, Riezman H, Gröne 
HJ, Sandhoff R.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular & Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Center, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

The stratum corneum as the outermost epidermal layer protects against exsiccation
and infection. Both the underlying cornified envelope (CE) and the intercellular 
lipid matrix contribute essentially to these two main protective barriers.
Epidermis-unique ceramides with ultra-long-chain acyl moities (ULC-Cers) are key 
components of extracellular lipid lamellae (ELL) and are bound to CE proteins,
thereby contributing to the cornified lipid envelope (CLE). Here, we identified
human and mouse ceramide synthase 3 (CerS3), among CerS1-6, to be exclusively
required for the ULC-Cer synthesis in vitro and of mouse CerS3 in vivo.
Deficiency of CerS3 in mice results in complete loss of ULC-Cers (=C26), lack of 
continuous ELL and a non-functional CLE. Consequently, newborn mutant mice die
shortly after birth from transepidermal water loss. Mutant skin is prone to
Candida albicans infection highlighting ULC-Cers to be pivotal for both barrier
functions. Persistent periderm, hyperkeratosis and deficient cornification are
hallmarks of mutant skin demonstrating loss of Cers to trigger a keratinocyte
maturation arrest at an embryonic pre-barrier stage.

PMID: 22038835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis.

Richard G, Bale SJ.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2001 Jan 10.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI)
encompasses several forms of nonsyndromic ichthyosis. Although most neonates with
ARCI are collodion babies, the clinical presentation and severity of ARCI may
vary significantly, ranging from harlequin ichthyosis, the most severe and often 
fatal form, to lamellar ichthyosis (LI) and (nonbullous) congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma (CIE). These phenotypes are now recognized to fall on a continuum;
however, the phenotypic descriptions are clinically useful for clarification of
prognosis and management. Infants with harlequin ichthyosis are usually born
prematurely and are encased in thick, hard, armor-like plates of cornified skin
that severely restrict movement. Life-threatening complications in the immediate 
postnatal period include respiratory distress, feeding problems, and systemic
infection. Collodion babies are born with a taut, shiny, translucent or opaque
membrane that encases the entire body and lasts for days to weeks. LI and CIE are
seemingly distinct phenotypes: classic, severe lamellar ichthyosis (LI) with dark
brown, plate-like scale with no erythroderma and CIE with finer whiter scale and 
underlying generalized redness of the skin. Affected individuals with severe
involvement can have ectropion, eclabium, scarring alopecia involving the scalp
and eyebrows, and palmar and plantar keratoderma.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of nonsyndromic ARCI is established by skin
findings at birth and in infancy. Skin biopsy is not necessary to establish the
diagnosis of ARCI. The nine genes known to be associated with ARCI are TGM1,
ALOXE3, ALOX12B, NIPAL4 (formerly known as ICHTHYIN), ABCA12, CYP4F22, PNPLA1,
LIPN, and CERS3; at least one gene remains unknown. Pathogenic variants in TGM1
account for 34%-55% of all ARCI and 90% or more of severe LI. Pathogenic variants
in the two ALOX genes are present in an estimated 17% of individuals with ARCI,
typically associated with CIE or intermediate LI/CIE phenotypes; pathogenic
variants in NIPAL4 and CYP4F22 have been reported in up to 12% and 8%,
respectively, of individuals with ARCI. The vast majority of individuals with
harlequin ichthyosis and a few individuals with LI have pathogenic variants in
ABCA12, including partial-gene deletions. ABCA12 pathogenic variants account for 
about 5% of ARCI. Least common appear to be pathogenic variants in LIPN, PNPLA1, 
and CERS3, each reported to date in only a few consanguineous families from
northern Africa or southern Europe.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For neonates, a moist environment in an 
isolette, hygienic handling to prevent infection, and treatment of infections;
petrolatum-based creams/ointments to keep the skin soft, supple, and hydrated;
for older children, humidification with long baths, lubrication, and keratolytic 
agents such as alpha-hydroxy acid or urea preparations to promote peeling and
thinning of the stratum corneum; for those with ectropion, lubrication of the
cornea; for those with severe skin involvement, cautious use of oral retinoids.
Prevention of secondary complications: Prevention of infection, dehydration,
corneal drying; when necessary, release of collodion membrane on digits to
maintain circulation and on the thorax for adequate respiration. Surveillance:
Regular physical examination for evidence of infection, management of skin
involvement, as well as for the increased (but still low) risk for skin
malignancy (squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, atypical melanocytic
nevi, or malignant melanoma). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Skin irritants;
overheating.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ARCI is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Each sib 
of an affected individual has a 25% risk of being affected, a 50% chance of being
an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. 
Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for pregnancies at
increased risk are possible if both pathogenic variants have been identified in a
family.

PMID: 20301593  [PubMed]


13. FEBS Lett. 2010 May 3;584(9):1907-13. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.12.032. Epub
2009 Dec 24.

Very long chain sphingolipids: tissue expression, function and synthesis.

Sandhoff R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany. r.sandhoff@dkfz.de

Forecort membranes of all mammalian cells contain, in addition to
phosphoglycerolipids and cholesterol, substantial amounts of sphingolipids. In
most cells the acyl moieties of these sphingolipids are of long chain type
(C16-24) and often saturated. However, epidermal keratinocytes and male germ
cells largely express sphingolipids with very long chain-acyl moieties (C26-C36) 
during their differentiation and maturation. This expression seems to depend on
CerS3, one of six ceramide synthases. However, the complex biosynthetic sequence 
for both epidermal and testicular sphingolipids has not been elucidated
completely. Whereas it is established that omega-hydroxylated very long
chain-sphingolipids are essential for proper skin barrier function, the role of
polyunsaturated very long chain-sphingolipids (ceramides, sphingomyelins and
glycosphingolipids) in differentiating spermatocytes/spermatids is just beginning
to be revealed.

Copyright 2009 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20035755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Lipid Res. 2010 Mar;51(3):480-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M000984. Epub 2009 Sep 28.

Transcript profiling and lipidomic analysis of ceramide subspecies in mouse
embryonic stem cells and embryoid bodies.

Park H(1), Haynes CA, Nairn AV, Kulik M, Dalton S, Moremen K, Merrill AH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology & Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.

Ceramides (Cers) are important in embryogenesis, but no comprehensive analysis of
gene expression for Cer metabolism nor the Cer amounts and subspecies has been
conducted with an often used model: mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) versus
embroid bodies (EBs). Measuring the mRNA levels by quantitative RT-PCR and the
amounts of the respective metabolites by LC-ESI/MS/MS, notable differences
between R1 mESCs and EBs were: EBs have higher mRNAs for CerS1 and CerS3, which
synthesize C18- and C>or=24-carbons dihydroceramides (DH)Cer, respectively; EBs
have higher CerS2 (for C24:0- and C24:1-); and EBs have lower CerS5 + CerS6 (for 
C16-). In agreement with these findings, EBs have (DH)Cer with higher proportions
of C18-, C24- and C26- and less C16-fatty acids, and longer (DH)Cer are also seen
in monohexosyl Cers and sphingomyelins. EBs had higher mRNAs for fatty acyl-CoA
elongases that produce C18-, C24-, and C26-fatty acyl-CoAs (Elovl3 and Elovl6),
and higher amounts of these cosubstrates for CerS. Thus, these studies have found
generally good agreement between genomic and metabolomic data in defining that
conversion of mESCs to EBs is accompanied by a large number of changes in gene
expression and subspecies distributions for both sphingolipids and fatty
acyl-CoAs.

PMCID: PMC2817578
PMID: 19786568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jul;7(7):1086-98. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0361.

Potentiation of cannabinoid-induced cytotoxicity in mantle cell lymphoma through 
modulation of ceramide metabolism.

Gustafsson K(1), Sander B, Bielawski J, Hannun YA, Flygare J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Ceramide levels are elevated in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) cells following
treatment with cannabinoids. Here, we investigated the pathways of ceramide
accumulation in the MCL cell line Rec-1 using the stable endocannabinoid analogue
R(+)-methanandamide (R-MA). We further interfered with the conversion of ceramide
into sphingolipids that promote cell growth. Treatment with R-MA led to increased
levels of ceramide species C16, C18, C24, and C(24:1) and transcriptional
induction of ceramide synthases (CerS) 3 and 6. The effects were attenuated using
SR141716A, which has high affinity to cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1). The
CB1-mediated induction of CerS3 and CerS6 mRNA was confirmed using Win-55,212-2. 
Simultaneous silencing of CerS3 and CerS6 using small interfering RNA abrogated
the R-MA-induced accumulation of C16 and C24. Inhibition of either of the enzymes
serine palmitoyl transferase, CerS, and dihydroceramide desaturase within the de 
novo ceramide pathway reversed ceramide accumulation and cell death induced by
R-MA treatment. To enhance the cytotoxic effect R-MA, sphingosine kinase-1 and
glucosylceramide synthase, enzymes that convert ceramide to the pro-proliferative
sphingolipids sphingosine-1-phospate and glucosylceramide, respectively, were
inhibited. Suppression of either enzyme using inhibitors or small interfering RNA
potentiated the decreased viability, induction of cell death, and ceramide
accumulation induced by R-MA treatment. Our findings suggest that R-MA induces
cell death in MCL via CB1-mediated up-regulation of the de novo ceramide
synthesis pathway. Furthermore, this is the first study were the cytotoxic effect
of a cannabinoid is enhanced by modulation of ceramide metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3077284
PMID: 19609004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Lipid Res. 2008 Nov;49(11):2356-64. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M800158-JLR200. Epub 2008 
Jun 9.

2-Hydroxy-ceramide synthesis by ceramide synthase family: enzymatic basis for the
preference of FA chain length.

Mizutani Y(1), Kihara A, Chiba H, Tojo H, Igarashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomembrane and Biofunctional Chemistry, Faculty of Advanced
Life Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Ceramide is unusually abundant in epidermal stratum corneum and is important for 
permeability barrier function. Ceramides in epidermis also comprise an unusual
variety, including 2-hydroxy (alpha-hydroxy)-ceramide. Six mammalian ceramide
synthase/longevity assurance homologue (CerS/LASS) family members have been
identified as synthases responsible for ceramide (CER) production. We reveal here
that of the six, CerS3/LASS3 mRNA is the most predominantly expressed in
keratinocytes. Moreover, its expression is increased upon differentiation. CerS
family members have known substrate specificities for fatty acyl-CoA chain length
and saturation, yet their abilities to produce 2-hydroxy-CER have not been
examined. In the present study, we demonstrate that all CerS members can produce 
2-hydroxy-CER when overproduced in HEK 293T cells. Each produced a 2-hydroxy-CER 
with a chain length similar to that of the respective nonhydroxy-CER produced. In
HeLa cells overproducing the FA 2-hydroxylase FA2H, knock-down of CerS2 resulted 
in a reduction in total long-chain 2-hydroxy-CERs, confirming enzyme substrate
specificity for chain length. In vitro CerS assays confirmed the ability of CerS1
to utilize 2-hydroxy-stearoyl-CoA as a substrate. These results suggest that all 
CerS members can synthesize 2-hydroxy-CER with specificity for 2-hydroxy-fatty
acyl-CoA chain length and that CerS3 may be important in CER and 2-hydroxy-CER
synthesis in epidermis.

PMID: 18541923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):13357-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800870200. Epub 2008 
Feb 27.

Male germ cells require polyenoic sphingolipids with complex glycosylation for
completion of meiosis: a link to ceramide synthase-3.

Rabionet M(1), van der Spoel AC, Chuang CC, von Tümpling-Radosta B, Litjens M,
Bouwmeester D, Hellbusch CC, Körner C, Wiegandt H, Gorgas K, Platt FM, Gröne HJ, 
Sandhoff R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Center,
INF 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Previously, it was found that a novel class of neutral fucosylated
glycosphingolipids (GSLs) is required for male fertility. These lipids contain
very long-chain (C26-C32) polyunsaturated (4-6 double bonds) fatty acid residues 
(VLC-PUFAs). To assess the role of these complex GSLs in spermatogenesis, we have
now investigated with which of the testicular cell types these lipids are
associated. During postnatal development, complex glycosylated and simple
VLC-PUFA sphingolipids were first detectable at day 15, when the most advanced
germ cells are pachytene spermatocytes. Their synthesis is most likely driven by 
ceramide synthase-3. This enzyme is encoded by the Cers3/Lass3 gene (longevity
assurance genes), and out of six members of this gene family, only Cers3 mRNA
expression was limited to germ cells, where it was up-regulated more than
700-fold during postnatal testicular maturation. Increasing levels of neutral
complex VLC-PUFA GSLs also correlated with the progression of spermatogenesis in 
a series of male sterile mutants with arrests at different stages of
spermatogenesis. Remarkably, fucosylation of the complex VLC-PUFA GSLs was not
essential for spermatogenesis, as fucosylation-deficient mice produced
nonfucosylated versions of the complex testicular VLC-PUFA GSLs, had complete
spermatogenesis, and were fertile. Nevertheless, sterile Galgt1(-/-) mice, with a
defective meiotic cytokinesis and a subsequent block in spermiogenesis, lacked
complex but contained simple VLC-PUFA GSLs, as well as VLC-PUFA ceramides and
sphingomyelins, indicating that the latter lipids are not sufficient for
completion of spermatogenesis. Thus, our data imply that both glycans and the
particular acyl chains of germinal sphingolipids are relevant for proper
completion of meiosis.

PMCID: PMC2442322
PMID: 18308723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


