
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Feb;15(2):614-23. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.051250. Epub
2015 Nov 23.

Identification of Serum Biomarkers for Gastric Cancer Diagnosis Using a Human
Proteome Microarray.

Yang L(1), Wang J(2), Li J(2), Zhang H(3), Guo S(3), Yan M(2), Zhu Z(2), Lan
B(4), Ding Y(5), Xu M(6), Li W(7), Gu X(8), Qi C(9), Zhu H(10), Shao Z(11), Liu
B(12), Tao SC(13).

Author information: 
(1)From the Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric
Neoplasms, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240,
China; State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, 200240, China; Department of Integrative Oncology, Shanghai
Cancer Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China; (2)From the Shanghai
Center for Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Systems
Biomedicine, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Ruijin Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China; (3)From the Shanghai
Center for Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Systems
Biomedicine, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Ruijin Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China; State Key Laboratory of
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240,
China; (4)Department of Gastroenterology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, 350005, China; (5)Shanghai East Hospital Affiliated
to Tongji University, Shanghai, 200120, China; (6)Tongren Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200050, China;
(7)Shanghai Putuo Center Hospital, Shanghai, China; (8)Shanghai Pudong Gongli
Hospital, Shanghai, China 200135; (9)Shanghai Fifth People's Hospital affiliated 
to Fudan University, Shanghai, 200240 China; (10)Department of Pharmacology and
Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205; (11)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, 200240, China. (12)From the Shanghai Center for Systems
Biomedicine, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, and
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, 200240, China; taosc@sjtu.edu.cn byliu@sjtu.edu.cn.
(13)From the Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric
Neoplasms, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240,
China; State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, 200240, China; taosc@sjtu.edu.cn byliu@sjtu.edu.cn.

We aimed to globally discover serum biomarkers for diagnosis of gastric cancer
(GC). GC serum autoantibodies were discovered and validated using serum samples
from independent patient cohorts encompassing 1,401 participants divided into
three groups, i.e. healthy, GC patients, and GC-related disease group. To
discover biomarkers for GC, the human proteome microarray was first applied to
screen specific autoantibodies in a total of 87 serum samples from GC patients
and healthy controls. Potential biomarkers were identified via a statistical
analysis protocol. Targeted protein microarrays with only the potential
biomarkers were constructed and used to validate the candidate biomarkers using
914 samples. To provide further validation, the abundance of autoantibodies
specific to the biomarker candidates was analyzed using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays. Receiver operating characteristic curves were generated to 
evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of the serum biomarkers. Finally, the efficacy
of prognosis efficacy of the final four biomarkers was evaluated by analyzing the
clinical records. The final panel of biomarkers consisting of COPS2, CTSF, NT5E, 
and TERF1 provides high diagnostic power, with 95% sensitivity and 92%
specificity to differentiate GC patients from healthy individuals. Prognosis
analysis showed that the panel could also serve as independent predictors of the 
overall GC patient survival. The panel of four serum biomarkers (COPS2, CTSF,
NT5E, and TERF1) could serve as a noninvasive diagnostic index for GC, and the
combination of them could potentially be used as a predictor of the overall GC
survival rate.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4739676 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26598640  [PubMed - in process]


2. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0132495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132495.
eCollection 2015.

Oncogenic Role of miR-15a-3p in 13q Amplicon-Driven Colorectal
Adenoma-to-Carcinoma Progression.

de Groen FL(1), Timmer LM(1), Menezes RX(2), Diosdado B(3), Hooijberg E(1),
Meijer GA(3), Steenbergen RD(1), Carvalho B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Pathology, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Pathology,
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Progression from colorectal adenoma to carcinoma is strongly associated with an
accumulation of genomic alterations, including gain of chromosome 13. This gain
affects the whole q arm and is present in 40%-60% of all colorectal cancers
(CRCs). Several genes located at this amplicon are known to be overexpressed in
carcinomas due to copy number dosage. A subset of these genes, including the
mir-17~92 cluster, are functionally involved in CRC development. The present
study set out to explore whether apart from mir-17~92, other miRNAs located at
the 13q amplicon show a copy number dependent dosage effect that may contribute
to 13q-driven colorectal adenoma-to-carcinoma progression. Integration of
publically available miRNA expression, target mRNA expression and DNA copy number
data from 125 CRCs yielded three miRNAs, miR-15a, -17, and -20a, of which high
expression levels were significantly correlated with a 13q gain and which
influenced target mRNA expression. These results could be confirmed by qRT-PCR in
a series of 100 colon adenomas and carcinomas.Functional analysis of both mature 
miRNAs encoded by mir-15a, i.e. miR-15a-5p and miR-15a-3p, showed that silencing 
of miR-15a-3p significantly inhibited viability of CRC cells. Integration of
miR-15a expression levels with mRNA expression data of predicted target genes
identified mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) and COP9 signalosome subunit
2 (COPS2) as candidates with significantly decreased expression in CRCs with 13q 
gain. Upon silencing of miR-15a-3p, mRNA expression of both genes increased in
CRC cells, supporting miR-15a-3p mediated regulation of UPC2 and COPS2
expression. In conclusion, significant overexpression of miR-15a-3p due to gain
of 13q is functionally relevant in CRC, with UCP2 and COPS2 as candidate target
genes. Taken together our findings suggest that miR-15a-3p may contribute to
adenoma-to-carcinoma progression.

PMCID: PMC4492490
PMID: 26148070  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Jan;24(1):268-75. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-0377. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Identification and diagnostic performance of a small RNA within the PCA3 and
BMCC1 gene locus that potentially targets mRNA.

Drayton RM(1), Rehman I(1), Clarke R(2), Zhao Z(3), Pang K(1), Miah S(1), Stoehr 
R(4), Hartmann A(4), Blizard S(1), Lavin M(2), Bryant HE(1), Martens-Uzunova
ES(5), Jenster G(5), Hamdy FC(6), Gardiner RA(2), Catto JW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Urology Unit and Academic Unit of Molecular Oncology, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Urology, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. (3)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Department of Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. (6)Nuffield Department of Surgery, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom. (7)Academic Urology Unit and Academic Unit of Molecular Oncology,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. j.catto@sheffield.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: PCA3 is a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) with unknown function,
upregulated in prostate cancer. LncRNAs may be processed into smaller active
species. We hypothesized this for PCA3.
METHODS: We computed feasible RNA hairpins within the BMCC1 gene (encompassing
PCA3) and searched a prostate transcriptome for these. We measured expression
using qRT-PCR in three cohorts of prostate cancer tissues (n = 60), exfoliated
urinary cells (n = 484 with cancer and n = 166 controls), and in cell lines (n = 
22). We used in silico predictions and RNA knockup to identify potential mRNA
targets of short transcribed RNAs.
RESULTS: We predicted 13 hairpins, of which PCA3-shRNA2 was most abundant within 
the prostate transcriptome. PCA3-shRNA2 is located within intron 1 of PCA3 and
appears regulated by androgens. Expression of PCA3-shRNA2 was upregulated in
malignant prostatic tissues, exfoliated urinary cells from men with prostate
cancer (13-273 fold change; t test P < 0.003), and closely correlated to PCA3
expression (r = 0.84-0.93; P < 0.001). Urinary PCA3-shRNA2 (C-index, 0.75-0.81)
and PCA3 (C-index, 0.78) could predict the presence of cancer in most men.
PCA3-shRNA2 knockup altered the expression of predicted target mRNAs, including
COPS2, SOX11, WDR48, TEAD1, and Noggin. PCA3-shRNA2 expression was negatively
correlated with COPS2 in patient samples (r = -0.32; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: We identified a short RNA within PCA3, whose expression is correlated
to PCA3, which may target mRNAs implicated in prostate biology.
IMPACT: This short RNA is stable ex vivo, suggesting a role as a robust
biomarker. We identify cytoplasmic enrichment of this RNA and potential targeting
of mRNAs implicated in prostate carcinogenesis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25392181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2014 Aug;173(7):1618-39. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-0947-6.
Epub 2014 Jun 14.

Gene expression analysis in MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with recombinant
bromelain.

Fouz N(1), Amid A, Hashim YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioprocess and Molecular Engineering Research Unit (BPMERU), Department of
Biotechnology Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, International Islamic
University Malaysia, P.O. Box 10, 50728, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
nour.fouz@gmail.com.

The contributing molecular pathways underlying the pathogenesis of breast cancer 
need to be better characterized. The principle of our study was to better
understand the genetic mechanism of oncogenesis for human breast cancer and to
discover new possible tumor markers for use in clinical practice. We used
complimentary DNA (cDNA) microarrays to compare gene expression profiles of
treated Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) with recombinant bromelain and
untreated MCF-7. SpringGene analysis was carried out of differential expression
followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), to understand the underlying
consequence in developing disease and disorders. We identified 1,102 known genes 
differentially expressed to a significant degree (p<0.001) changed between the
treatment. Within this gene set, 20 genes were significantly changed between
treated cells and the control cells with cutoff fold change of more than 1.5.
These genes are RNA-binding motif, single-stranded interacting protein 1 (RBMS1),
ribosomal protein L29 (RPL29), glutathione S-transferase mu 2 (GSTM2), C15orf32, 
Akt3, B cell translocation gene 1 (BTG1), C6orf62, C7orf60, kinesin-associated
protein 3 (KIFAP3), FBXO11, AT-rich interactive domain 4A (ARID4A), COPS2,
TBPL1|SLC2A12, TMEM59, SNORD46, glioma tumor suppressor candidate region gene 2
(GLTSCR2), and LRRFIP. Our observation on gene expression indicated that
recombinant bromelain produces a unique signature affecting different pathways,
specific for each congener. The microarray results give a molecular mechanistic
insight and functional effects, following recombinant bromelain treatment. The
extent of changes in genes is related to and involved significantly in gap
junction signaling, amyloid processing, cell cycle regulation by BTG family
proteins, and breast cancer regulation by stathmin1 that play major roles.

PMID: 24928548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. FEBS J. 2013 Apr;280(8):1861-8. doi: 10.1111/febs.12211. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

The corepressor activity of Alien is controlled by CREB-binding protein/p300.

Eckey M(1), Kraft F, Kob R, Escher N, Asim M, Fischer H, Fritsche MK, Melle C,
Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Germany.

The regulation of gene repression by corepressors is a controlled process.
Surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization MS proteomic analysis and a yeast
two-hybrid screen showed independently that the corepressor Alien interacts with 
the CREB-binding protein (CBP) coactivator. This interaction was further
confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down
experiments, suggesting that Alien interacts in vivo and in vitro with the
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) coactivators CBP and its paralog p300.
Acetylation detection experiments indicated that Alien is acetylated in vivo.
Furthermore, Alien interacts with the central region of CBP/p300 containing the
HAT domain and becomes acetylated in vitro. When an inhibitor of CBP/p300 HAT
activity was employed, the Alien-mediated silencing was enhanced. Thus, these
findings suggest crosstalk between corepressors and coactivators, and indicate
fine-tuning of corepressor function by post-translational modification through
corepressor acetylation.STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT: p300 binds to Alien &#x03B1;
by pull down (View interaction) Alien &#x03B1; physically interacts with CBP by
two hybrid (View interaction) Alien &#x03B1; physically interacts with MLK2 by
two hybrid (View interaction) p300 acetylates Alien &#x03B1; by acetylation assay
(View interaction) Alien &#x03B1; physically interacts with NAP1 by two hybrid
(View interaction) Alien &#x03B1; physically interacts with TAFI68 by two hybrid 
(View interaction) Alien &#x03B1; physically interacts with CBP by anti bait
coimmunoprecipitation (View Interaction: 1, 2, 3) Alien &#x03B1; binds to CBP by 
pull down (View interaction).

© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 23441852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032092. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Genetic architecture of local adaptation in lunar and diurnal emergence times of 
the marine midge Clunio marinus (Chironomidae, Diptera).

Kaiser TS(1), Heckel DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Jena,
Germany. tobias.kaiser@univie.ac.at

Circadian rhythms pre-adapt the physiology of most organisms to predictable daily
changes in the environment. Some marine organisms also show endogenous circalunar
rhythms. The genetic basis of the circalunar clock and its interaction with the
circadian clock is unknown. Both clocks can be studied in the marine midge Clunio
marinus (Chironomidae, Diptera), as different populations have different local
adaptations in their lunar and diurnal rhythms of adult emergence, which can be
analyzed by crossing experiments. We investigated the genetic basis of population
variation in clock properties by constructing the first genetic linkage map for
this species, and performing quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis on variation
in both lunar and diurnal timing. The genome has a genetic length of 167-193
centimorgans based on a linkage map using 344 markers, and a physical size of
95-140 megabases estimated by flow cytometry. Mapping the sex determining locus
shows that females are the heterogametic sex, unlike most other Chironomidae. We 
identified two QTL each for lunar emergence time and diurnal emergence time. The 
distribution of QTL confirms a previously hypothesized genetic basis to a
correlation of lunar and diurnal emergence times in natural populations. Mapping 
of clock genes and light receptors identified ciliary opsin 2 (cOps2) as a
candidate to be involved in both lunar and diurnal timing; cryptochrome 1 (cry1) 
as a candidate gene for lunar timing; and two timeless (tim2, tim3) genes as
candidate genes for diurnal timing. This QTL analysis of lunar rhythmicity, the
first in any species, provides a unique entree into the molecular analysis of the
lunar clock.

PMCID: PMC3285202
PMID: 22384150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Dec 2;415(4):650-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.130. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Epigenetic involvement of Alien/ESET complex in thyroid hormone-mediated
repression of E2F1 gene expression and cell proliferation.

Hong W(1), Li J, Wang B, Chen L, Niu W, Yao Z, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tianjin Medical University, 300070 Tianjin, China.
hongwei@tijmu.edu.cn

The ligand-bound thyroid hormone receptor (TR) is known to repress via a negative
TRE (nTRE) the expression of E2F1, a key transcription factor that controls the
G1/S phase transition. Alien has been identified as a novel interacting factor of
E2F1 and acts as a corepressor of E2F1. The detailed molecular mechanism by which
Alien inhibits E2F1 gene expression remains unclear. Here, we report that the
histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase (HMT) ESET is an integral component 
of the corepressor Alien complex and the Alien/ESET complex is recruited to both 
sites, the E2F1 and the nTRE site of the E2F1 gene while the recruitment to the
negative thyroid hormone response element (nTRE) is induced by the ligand-bound
TRß1 within the E2F1 gene promoter. We show that, overexpression of ESET
promotes, whereas knockdown of ESET releases, the inhibition of TRß1-regulated
gene transcription upon T3 stimulation; and H3K9 methylation is required for
TRß1-repressed transcription. Furthermore, depletion of ESET impairs thyroid
hormone-repressed proliferation as well as the G1/S transition of the cell cycle.
Taken together, our data indicate that ESET is involved in TRß1-mediated
transcription repression and provide a molecular basis of thyroid hormone-induced
repression of proliferation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22079090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 15;8(14):2139-40. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

The COP9 signalosome-cyclosome connection.

Dubiel W.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2041-9.

PMID: 19587542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2041-9. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Regulation of the anaphase-promoting complex by the COP9 signalosome.

Kob R(1), Kelm J, Posorski N, Baniahmad A, von Eggeling F, Melle C.

Author information: 
(1)Core Unit Chip Application, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena
University Hospital, Jena, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 15;8(14):2139-40.

The COP9 complex (signalosome) is a known regulator of the proteasome/ubiquitin
pathway. Furthermore it regulates the activity of the cullin-RING ligase (CRL)
families of ubiquitin E3-complexes. Besides the CRL family, the
anaphase-promoting complex (APC/C) is a major regulator of the cell cycle. To
investigate a possible connection between both complexes we assessed interacting 
partners of COP9 using an in vivo protein-protein interaction assay. Hereby, we
were able to show for the first time that CSN2, a subunit of the COP9
signalosome, interacts physically with APC/C. Furthermore, we detected a
functional influence of the COP9 complex regarding the stability of several
targets of the APC/C. Consistent with these data we showed a genetic instability 
of cells overexpressing CSN2.

PMID: 19535905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Jan;218(1):113-21. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21574.

The effect of differentiation on 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D-mediated gene expression
in the enterocyte-like cell line, Caco-2.

Cui M(1), Klopot A, Jiang Y, Fleet JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
USA.

We examined 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)(2)D(3))-induced expression of
25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) 24-hydroxylase (CYP24) and apical calcium channel (TRPV6) 
mRNA levels in 2-, 9-, and 15-day cultures Caco-2 cells that model proliferating,
post-proliferative, and differentiated enterocytes. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced (10
nM, 8 h) CYP24 and TRPV6 mRNA levels were significantly greater in differentiated
and post-proliferative than proliferating Caco-2 cells (>16X and >3X,
respectively). Neither CYP24 mRNA half-life nor induction of a -298 bp rat CYP24 
promoter-luciferase reporter construct (10 nM 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), 24 h) were
different between proliferating and post-proliferating Caco-2 cells. We next
tested whether the blunted response of natural genes to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in
proliferating Caco-2 cells is due to altered chromatin remodeling. VDR and
coactivator protein levels do not increase with differentiation but the level of 
the co-repressor Alien falls by 50% with differentiation. Over-expression of
Alien reduced 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced activity of a minimal VDRE containing
promoter-luciferase construct by more than 60% in differentiated Caco-2 cells
while siRNA knockdown of Alien in proliferating Caco-2 cells increased
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced CYP24 mRNA level by 40%. These observations suggest that 
Alien is a regulator of VDR-mediated gene transcription in Caco-2 cells. In
addition, we found that 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced association of VDR with chromatin
and with the CYP24 promoter was lower in proliferating cells. This suggests that 
decreased recruitment of VDR to vitamin D response elements also contributes to
the blunted transcriptional responsiveness to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in proliferating
Caco-2 cells.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2577712
PMID: 18726998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nucl Recept Signal. 2007 Nov 30;5:e008. doi: 10.1621/nrs.05008.

The coregulator Alien.

Papaioannou M(1), Melle C, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology,
Friedrich-Schiller-University, Jena, Germany.

Alien has characteristics of a corepressor for selected members of the nuclear
hormone receptor (NHR) superfamily and also for transcription factors involved in
cell cycle regulation and DNA repair. Alien mediates gene silencing and represses
the transactivation of specific NHRs and other transcription factors to modulate 
hormone response and cell proliferation. Alien is a highly conserved protein and 
is expressed in a wide variety of tissues. Knockout of the gene encoding Alien in
mice is embryonic lethal at a very early stage, indicating an important
evolutionary role in multicellular organisms. From a mechanistic perspective, the
corepressor function of Alien is in part mediated by histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity. In addition, Alien seems to modulate nucleosome assembly activity. This
suggests that Alien is acting on chromatin not only through recruitment of
histone-modifying activities, but also through enhancing nucleosome assembly.

PMCID: PMC2121318
PMID: 18174916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Anim Genet. 2007 Dec;38(6):665-6. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Chromosomal assignments of the porcine COPS2, COPS4, COPS5, COPS6, USP6 and USP10
genes involved in the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

Wu X(1), Li K, Yerle M, Pan YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, 2678 Qixin Road, Shanghai 201101, China.

PMID: 17976214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 27;27(14):1961-70. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Cellular senescence bypass screen identifies new putative tumor suppressor genes.

Leal JF(1), Fominaya J, Cascón A, Guijarro MV, Blanco-Aparicio C, Lleonart M,
Castro ME, Ramon Y Cajal S, Robledo M, Beach DH, Carnero A.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Senescence is a mechanism that limits cellular lifespan and constitutes a barrier
against cellular immortalization. To identify new senescence regulatory genes
that might play a role in tumorigenesis, we have designed and performed a
large-scale antisense-based genetic screen in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts
(MEFs). Out of this screen, we have identified five different genes through which
loss of function partially bypasses senescence. These genes belong to very
different biochemical families: csn2 (component of the Cop9 signalosome), aldose 
reductase (a metabolic enzyme) and brf1 (subunit of the RNA polymerase II
complex), S-adenosyl homocysteine hydrolase and Bub1. Inactivation, at least
partial, of these genes confers resistance to both p53- and p16INK4a-induced
proliferation arrest. Furthermore, such inactivation inhibits p53 but not E2F1
transcriptional activity and impairs DNA-damage-induced transcription of p21.
Since the aim of the screen was to identify new regulators of tumorigenesis, we
have tested their inactivation in human tumors. We have found, either by northern
blot or quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis, that the expression of
three genes, Csn2, Aldose reductase and Brf1, is lost at different ratios in
tumors of different origins. These genes are located at common positions of loss 
of heterogeneity (15q21.2, 7q35 and 14q32.33); therefore,we have measured genomic
losses of these specific genes in different tumors. We have found that Csn2 and
Brf1 also show genomic losses of one allele in different tumors. Our data suggest
that the three genes identified in the genome-wide loss-of-function genetic
screen are putative tumor suppressors located at 15q21.2; 7q35 and 14q32.33.

PMID: 17968325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Proteome Res. 2007 Nov;6(11):4182-8. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

The tumor suppressors p33ING1 and p33ING2 interact with alien in vivo and enhance
alien-mediated gene silencing.

Fegers I(1), Kob R, Eckey M, Schmidt O, Goeman F, Papaioannou M, Escher N, von
Eggeling F, Melle C, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, University
Jena, 07740 Jena, Germany.

The tumor suppressor p33ING1 is involved in DNA repair and cell cycle regulation.
Furthermore, p33ING1 is a transcriptional silencer that recognizes the histone
mark for trimethylated lysine 4 at histone H3. Interestingly, expression of
p33ING1 and p33ING2 is able to induce premature senescence in primary human
fibroblasts. The corepressor Alien is involved in gene silencing mediated by
selected members of nuclear hormone receptors. In addition, Alien acts as a
corepressor for E2F1, a member of the E2F cell cycle regulatory family.
Furthermore, recent findings suggest that Alien is complexed with transcription
factors participating in DNA repair and chromatin. Here, using a proteomic
approach by surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization and mass spectrometry
(SELDI-MS) combined with immunological techniques, we show that Alien interacts
in vivo with the tumor suppressor p33ING1 as well as with the related tumor
suppressor candidate p33ING2. The interaction of Alien with p33ING1 and p33ING2
was confirmed in vitro with GST-pull-down, suggesting a direct binding of Alien
to these factors. The binding domain was mapped to a central region of Alien.
Functionally, the expression of p33ING1 or p33ING2 enhances the Alien-mediated
silencing, suggesting that the interaction plays a role in transcriptional
regulation. Thus, the findings suggest that the identified interaction between
Alien and the tumor suppressors p33ING1 and p33ING2 reveals a novel cellular
protein network.

PMID: 17929852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep;1773(9):1447-54. Epub 2007 May 10.

Alien inhibits E2F1 gene expression and cell proliferation.

Tenbaum SP(1), Papaioannou M, Reeb CA, Goeman F, Escher N, Kob R, von Eggeling F,
Melle C, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology,
Friedrich-Schiller-University, 07740 Jena, Germany.

Recently, using a proteomic approach we have identified the corepressor Alien as 
a novel interacting factor of the cell cycle regulator E2F1. Unclear was whether 
this interaction influences cell proliferation and endogenous E2F1 target gene
expression. Here, we show by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that Alien is
recruited in vivo to the E2F binding sites present in the E2F1 gene promoter,
inhibits the transactivation of E2F1 and represses endogenous E2F1 gene
expression. Interestingly, using synchronized cells to assess the expression of
Alien profile during cell cycle the levels of endogenous Alien are increased
during G1, G1/S and G2 phase. Furthermore, stable transfection of Alien leads to 
reduction of cell proliferation. Thus, the data suggest that Alien acts as a
corepressor for E2F1 and is involved in cell cycle regulation.

PMID: 17570542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell Cycle. 2007 Apr 15;6(8):993-6. Epub 2007 Apr 7.

Detection and identification of transcription factors as interaction partners of 
alien in vivo.

Kob R, Baniahmad A, Escher N, von Eggeling F, Melle C.

Interacting proteins are often involved in the same cellular processes, and thus 
the identification of interacting partners of a given protein with unknown
function may give insight into the physiological role of this protein. For the
detection of protein-protein interactions of the corepressor Alien we used a
proteomic approach comprising mass spectrometry and immunological techniques. We 
assessed solely endogenously expressed proteins. In this study we present for the
first time that Alien is interacting within a network of proteins involved in
transcriptional regulation, DNA repair, and cell cycle in vivo. In this way we
detected protein interactions of Alien involving nucleophosmin, ERCC3, TRIP11, as
well as CRSP3.

PMID: 17438371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3557-68. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

The nucleosome assembly activity of NAP1 is enhanced by Alien.

Eckey M(1), Hong W, Papaioannou M, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Friedrich Schiller University,
07740 Jena, Germany.

The assembly of nucleosomes into chromatin is essential for the compaction of DNA
and inactivation of the DNA template to modulate and repress gene expression. The
nucleosome assembly protein 1, NAP1, assembles nucleosomes independent of DNA
synthesis and was shown to enhance coactivator-mediated gene expression,
suggesting a role for NAP1 in transcriptional regulation. Here, we show that
Alien, known to harbor characteristics of a corepressor of nuclear hormone
receptors such as of the vitamin D receptor (VDR), binds in vivo and in vitro to 
NAP1 and modulates its activity by enhancing NAP1-mediated nucleosome assembly on
DNA. Furthermore, Alien reduces the accessibility of the histones H3 and H4 for
NAP1-promoted assembly reaction. This indicates that Alien sustains and
reinforces the formation of nucleosomes. Employing deletion mutants of Alien
suggests that different regions of Alien are involved in enhancement of
NAP1-mediated nucleosome assembly and in inhibiting the accessibility of the
histones H3 and H4. In addition, we provide evidence that Alien is associated
with chromatin and with micrococcus nuclease-prepared nucleosome fractions and
interacts with the histones H3 and H4. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
and reimmunoprecipitation experiments suggest that NAP1 and Alien localize to the
endogenous CYP24 promoter in vivo, a VDR target gene. Based on these findings, we
present here a novel pathway linking corepressor function with nucleosome
assembly activity.

PMCID: PMC1899999
PMID: 17339334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Proteome Res. 2007 Mar;6(3):1158-64.

Various members of the E2F transcription factor family interact in vivo with the 
corepressor alien.

Escher N(1), Kob R, Tenbaum SP, Eisold M, Baniahmad A, von Eggeling F, Melle C.

Author information: 
(1)Core Unit Chip Application (CUCA), Institute of Human Genetics and
Anthropology, Medical Faculty of the Friedrich-Schiller-University, 07740 Jena,
Germany.

Proteins perform their activities in cells by the cooperation within protein
complexes. For this reason, it is important to investigate protein-protein
interactions to receive insights in physiological processes. A multitude of
proteins are involved in the regulation of the cell cycle. Specific key factors
participating here are members of the E2F transcription factors. Using an in vivo
protein-protein complex detection assay, which comprises mass spectrometric and
immunological techniques, we detected a number of known as well as new
protein-protein interactions. We describe here for the first time protein
complexes containing the corepressor Alien and members of the E2F transcription
factor family. Furthermore, we assessed the functional relevance and show a
repression of the transcriptional activity of E2F by Alien. Additionally, we
detected new interactions that link endogenously expressed Alien with the tumor
suppressor retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and with proteins involved in cell cycle 
regulation.

PMID: 17330949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jun 1;32(10):2995-3004. Print 2004.

The highly conserved region of the co-repressor Sin3A functionally interacts with
the co-repressor Alien.

Moehren U(1), Dressel U, Reeb CA, Väisänen S, Dunlop TW, Carlberg C, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Institute, Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, D-35392
Giessen, Germany.

The Sin3 proteins are evolutionarily conserved co-repressors (CoR) that function 
as mediators of gene repression for a variety of transcriptional silencers. The
paired amphipathic helices of Sin3A were identified and studied as
protein-protein interacting domains. Previously we have shown the interaction of 
Sin3A with the CoR Alien in vivo and in vitro. Here, we show that Alien and Sin3A
reside together in vivo with the vitamin D3 receptor on the human 24-hydroxylase 
(CYP24) promoter containing vitamin D3 response elements by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. We delineated and characterized the interaction domains of
Sin3A with Alien. Interestingly, the highly conserved region (HCR) of Sin3A,
which has not yet been functionally characterized, interacts with Alien. The HCR 
encompasses only 134 amino acids, shares more than 80% identity with Sin3B and
binds to the N-terminus of Alien, which harbours a transferable silencing
function. Functionally, co-expression of Sin3A enhances Alien-mediated gene
repression and overexpression of the HCR alone leads to the inhibition of
Alien-mediated repression and to the induction of the endogenous CYP24 promoter. 
Our results therefore indicate a novel functional role of the Sin3 HCR and give
novel insights into Alien-mediated gene repression.

PMCID: PMC434429
PMID: 15173382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Dec 31;213(1):71-8.

Mixed lineage kinase 2 enhances trans-repression of Alien and nuclear receptors.

Eckey M(1), Tenbaum SP, Muñoz A, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Institute, Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, D-35392
Giessen, Germany.

Alien was previously identified as a corepressor for the thyroid hormone receptor
(TR) and DAX-1 which belong both to the superfamily of nuclear receptors. Here,
we isolated the mixed lineage kinase 2 (MLK2) as an interacting partner for the
corepressor Alien using a yeast two hybrid screen. MLK2 is an upstream activator 
of JNKs and activation of MLK2-mediated signaling cascades play roles in
neurodegenerative and apoptotic mechanisms in the central nervous system. MLK2
has been shown to be localized both in the cytoplasm and cell nucleus. We
confirmed the Alien-MLK2 interaction using GST pull-down experiments and also
show that MLK2 is able to phosphorylate Alien in immune-kinase assays. Functional
analyses revealed that Alien, DAX-1 and thyroid hormone receptor mediated
transcriptional silencing is strongly enhanced in the presence of active MLK2.
Since MAP kinase signaling pathways are important mediators of cellular responses
to a wide variety of stimuli, our data suggest that signaling pathways not only
regulate transactivation but also enhancement of transcriptional silencing. This 
novel cross-talk may represent a link between MLK2-mediated signaling and
transcriptional repression of target genes during neuronal differentiation
processes.

PMID: 15062575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):6790-7.

Disruption of the COP9 signalosome Csn2 subunit in mice causes deficient cell
proliferation, accumulation of p53 and cyclin E, and early embryonic death.

Lykke-Andersen K(1), Schaefer L, Menon S, Deng XW, Miller JB, Wei N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8104, USA.

Csn2 (Trip15/Cops2/Alien) encodes the second subunit of the COP9 signalosome
(CSN), an eight-subunit heteromeric complex homologous to the lid subcomplex of
the 26S proteasome. CSN is a regulator of SCF (Skp1-cullin-F-box
protein)ubiquitin ligases, mostly through the enzymatic activity that
deconjugates the ubiquitin-like protein Nedd8 from the SCF Cul1 component. In
addition, CSN associates with protein kinase activities targeting p53, c-Jun, and
IkappaB for phosphorylation. Csn2 also interacts with and regulates a subset of
nuclear hormone receptors and is considered a novel corepressor. We report that
targeted disruption of Csn2 in mice caused arrest of embryo development at the
peri-implantation stage. Csn2(-/-) blastocysts failed to outgrow in culture and
exhibited a cell proliferation defect in inner cell mass, accompanied by a slight
decrease in Oct4. In addition, lack of Csn2 disrupted the CSN complex and
resulted in a drastic increase in cyclin E, supporting a role for CSN in
cooperating with the SCF-ubiquitin-proteasome system to regulate protein
turnover. Furthermore, Csn2(-/-) embryos contained elevated levels of p53 and
p21, which may contribute to premature cell cycle arrest of the mutant.

PMCID: PMC193936
PMID: 12972599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Biol. 2003 Feb 1;254(1):149-60.

Alien/CSN2 gene expression is regulated by thyroid hormone in rat brain.

Tenbaum SP(1), Juenemann S, Schlitt T, Bernal J, Renkawitz R, Muñoz A, Baniahmad 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas CSIC/UAM, C/ Arturo Duperier 4, 28029,
Madrid, Spain.

Alien has been described as a corepressor for the thyroid hormone receptor (TR). 
Corepressors are coregulators that mediate gene silencing of DNA-bound
transcriptional repressors. We describe here that Alien gene expression in vivo
is regulated by thyroid hormone both in the rat brain and in cultured cells. In
situ hybridization revealed that Alien is widely expressed in the mouse embryo
and also throughout the rat brain. Hypothyroid animals exhibit lower expression
of both Alien mRNAs and protein levels as compared with normal animals.
Accordingly, we show that Alien gene is inducible after thyroid hormone treatment
both in vivo and in cell culture. In cultured cells, the hormonal induction is
mediated by either TRalpha or TRbeta, while cells lacking detectable amounts of
functional TR lack hormonal induction of Alien. We have detected two
Alien-specific mRNAs by Northern experiments and two Alien-specific proteins in
vivo and in cell lines by Western analysis, one of the two forms representing the
CSN2 subunit of the COP9 signalosome. Interestingly, both Alien mRNAs and both
detected proteins are regulated by thyroid hormone in vivo and in cell lines.
Furthermore, we provide evidence for the existence of at least two Alien genes in
rodents. Taken together, we conclude that Alien gene expression is under control 
of TR and thyroid hormone. This suggests a negative feedback mechanism between TR
and its own corepressor. Thus, the reduction of corepressor levels may represent 
a control mechanism of TR-mediated gene silencing.

PMID: 12606288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2003 Jan 10;140(1):45-56.

Implication of Trip15/CSN2 in early stage of neuronal differentiation of P19
embryonal carcinoma cells.

Akiyama H(1), Sugiyama A, Uzawa K, Fujisawa N, Tashiro Y, Tashiro F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science
and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba 278-8510, 
Japan.

Trip15/CSN2 is a transcriptional corepressor/a component of COP9 signalosome
(CSN) and participates in various signaling pathways. However, participation of
Trip15/CSN2 in neural differentiation is still obscure. Here, we show that
Trip15/CSN2 plays a critical role in neuronal differentiation. The expression of 
Trip15/CSN2 mRNA was induced at an early stage of neuronal differentiation in the
retinoic acid (RA)-treated P19 cells, but not in the triiodothyronine (T3)-primed
cardiac muscular cell differentiation. The expression of Trip15/CSN2 mRNA in the 
rat brain was detected at E14 and the protein was localized in the nuclei of
neonatal rat CNS neurons. Enforced expression of sense rat Trip15/CSN2 mRNA
caused the downregulation of Oct-3/4 mRNA expression and was sufficient to
convert P19 cells into neurons, but not glial cells, only after the aggregation
without RA. In the presence of RA, exogenous expression of the sense mRNA caused 
the intense and rapid induction of neurogenic Brn-2 and Mash-1 mRNA expressions
accompanying the strong downregulation of Oct-3/4 mRNA expression, and stimulated
both neuronal and glial cell differentiations of P19 cells. In contrast, enforced
expression of the antisense mRNA suppressed the commitment of RA-treated
aggregation form of P19 cells to neuronal lineage. These data strongly suggest
that Trip15/CSN2 could implicate in the commitment of multipotent embryonal
carcinoma (EC) cells to neuronal fate through the downregulation of Oct-3/4 which
suppresses neurogenic genes. Moreover, in addition to Trip15/CSN2, RA-regulated
other factor(s) may be required for glial cell differentiation.

PMID: 12524175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 21;278(12):10752-62. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

The role of transcriptional corepressor Nif3l1 in early stage of neural
differentiation via cooperation with Trip15/CSN2.

Akiyama H(1), Fujisawa N, Tashiro Y, Takanabe N, Sugiyama A, Tashiro F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science
and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba 278-8510, 
Japan.

Mouse Nif3l1 gene is highly conserved from bacteria to human. Even though this
gene is expressed throughout embryonic development, its biological function is
still obscure. Here, we show that Nif3l1 participates in retinoic acid-primed
neural differentiation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells through cooperation with 
Trip15/CSN2, a transcriptional corepressor/component of COP9 signalosome. We
isolated Nif3l1 cDNA from P19 cell cDNA library by a yeast two-hybrid screening
using Trip15/CSN2 as a bait. This interaction was confirmed by a pull-down assay 
and an epitope-tagged coimmunoprecipitation. Although Nif3l1 was mainly detected 
in the cytoplasm, the translocation of Nif3l1 into the nuclei was observed in
retinoic acid-primed neural differentiation of P19 cells and enhanced by the
enforced expression of Trip15/CSN2. Furthermore, enforced expression of sense
Nif3l1 RNA, but not antisense RNA, enhanced the neural differentiation of P19
cells accompanying the intense down-regulation of Oct-3/4 mRNA expression and the
rapid induction of Mash-1 mRNA expression. Luciferase reporter assay showed that 
Nif3l1 could act as a transcriptional repressor and synergized the
transcriptional repression by Trip15/CSN2. These results indicate that Nif3l1
implicates in neural differentiation through the cooperation with Trip15/CSN2.

PMID: 12522100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Protein Expr Purif. 2002 Dec;26(3):462-6.

Protein-protein cross-linking in the use of the eukaryotic eGST-fusion system.

Papaioannou M(1), Ruppert T, Dotzlaw H, Dressel U, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Institute, Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62, Giessen
D-35392, Germany.

We describe here an unusual phenomenon in the isolation of protein complexes from
eukaryotic cells using expressed GST-fusion proteins. Protein complexes are
involved in a large number of regulatory mechanisms. Therefore, the use of tagged
fusion proteins is an important tool for isolation of such protein complexes. For
this purpose, we used the nuclear factor Alien, described as a corepressor for
the thyroid hormone receptor, fused to the eukaryotic eGST and expressed this
fusion in human cells. After affinity purification over glutathione-Sepharose
using stringent washing steps, we observed several co-purifying bands migrating
at molecular weights higher than the GST-Alien fusion protein. These bands
appeared specifically in the GST-Alien transfected cell preparations.
Surprisingly, using both Western blotting and MALDI-analyses, we revealed that
these bands are composed of the GST-Alien protein itself. We hypothesize that
overexpressed factors may generate unexpected cross-linking products which can
confound the analyses of such affinity-purified complexes. The cross-linking
products could not be eliminated by using beta-mercaptoethanol in the gel system 
and by boiling in SDS-sample buffer. Also, we demonstrate that Western blotting
analyses using antibodies directed against both the tag-epitope and the expressed
protein of interest can rapidly, reliably, and in a cost-saving manner identify
such artifacts, eliminating them from the analyses of potentially interesting
interaction partners. Our findings clearly show that the overexpression and
purification of proteins from eukaryotic cells may generate unusual structural
features that strongly influence complex formation and the migration in SDS-PAGE.

PMID: 12460771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Virology. 2002 Mar 30;295(1):147-59.

Differential display RT-PCR analysis of enterovirus-71-infected rhabdomyosarcoma 
cells reveals mRNA expression responses of multiple human genes with known and
novel functions.

Leong PW(1), Liew K, Lim W, Chow VT.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Kent Ridge, 117597,
Singapore.

In order to better understand cellular responses to viral infection at the
transcriptional level, we employed differential display RT-PCR to analyze mRNAs
from RD rhabdomyosarcoma cells following infection with a neurovirulent
enterovirus 71 (EV71) strain, compared with mRNAs from uninfected cells. Of 250
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) isolated, sequenced, and identified, all were of
cellular origin except 1 that was of viral origin. Of these, 156 were individual 
distinctive clones, comprising 45 mRNAs showing unaltered expression and 111
mRNAs exhibiting upregulation or downregulation. Of the 45 uniformly expressed
mRNAs, 14 represented unknown genes. Of the 111 differentially expressed mRNAs,
63 did not match any known genes. Forty-eight of the 111 mRNAs modified by EV71
infection matched known genes, including those encoding components of cell cycle,
cytoskeleton, and cell death mediators; protein degradation mediators;
mitochondrial-related proteins; components of protein translation and
modification; and cellular transport proteins. The altered expression profiles of
representative genes were authenticated by semiquantitative RT-PCR and real-time 
RT-PCR. We also identified a novel alternatively spliced transcript of TRIP7
thyroid receptor interactor protein; the putative human homolog of murine mc7
mRNA predominantly expressed in the brain; and a novel mRNA similar to that
encoding vacuolar protein 8 involved in protein targeting. These results
underscore the applicability of the mRNA differential display technique for
elucidating the expression profiles of known and even novel genes in response to 
cellular infection with pathogenic viruses.

PMID: 12033773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Curr Biol. 2002 Apr 16;12(8):667-72.

The COP9 signalosome inhibits p27(kip1) degradation and impedes G1-S phase
progression via deneddylation of SCF Cul1.

Yang X(1), Menon S, Lykke-Andersen K, Tsuge T, Di Xiao, Wang X, Rodriguez-Suarez 
RJ, Zhang H, Wei N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The COP9 signalosome (CSN) is a conserved protein complex with homologies to the 
lid subcomplex of the 26S proteasome. It promotes cleavage of the Nedd8 conjugate
(deneddylation) from the cullin component of SCF ubiquitin ligases. We provide
evidence that cullin neddylation and deneddylation is highly dynamic, that its
equilibrium can be effectively modulated by CSN, and that neddylation allows Cul1
to form larger protein complexes. CSN2 integrates into the CSN complex via its
C-terminal region and its N-terminal half region is necessary for direct
interaction with Cul1. The polyclonal antibodies against CSN2 but not other CSN
subunits cause accumulation of neddylated Cul1/Cul2 in HeLa cell extract,
indicating that CSN2 is essential in cullin deneddylation. Further, CSN inhibits 
ubiquitination and degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(kip1)
in vitro. Microinjection of the CSN complex impeded the G1 cells from entering
the S phase. Moreover, anti-CSN2 antibodies negate the CSN-dependent p27
stabilization and the G1/S blockage, suggesting that these functions require the 
deneddylation activity. We conclude that CSN inhibits SCF ubiquitin ligase
activity in targeting p27 proteolysis and negatively regulates cell cycle at the 
G1 phase by promoting deneddylation of Cul1.

PMID: 11967155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39081-9.

Interaction between interferon consensus sequence-binding protein and
COP9/signalosome subunit CSN2 (Trip15). A possible link between interferon
regulatory factor signaling and the COP9/signalosome.

Cohen H(1), Azriel A, Cohen T, Meraro D, Hashmueli S, Bech-Otschir D, Kraft R,
Dubiel W, Levi BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Technion, Haifa 32000,
Israel.

Interferon consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP) is a member of the
interferon regulatory factors (IRF) that has a pivotal role in mediating
resistance to pathogenic infections in mice and in promoting the differentiation 
of myeloid cells. ICSBP exerts some of its transcriptional activities via
association with other factors that enable its binding to a variety of promoters 
containing DNA composite elements. These interactions are mediated through a
specific COOH-terminal domain termed IAD (IRF association domain). To gain a
broader insight of the capacity of ICSBP to interact with other factors, yeast
two-hybrid screens were performed using ICSBP-IAD as a bait against a B-cell cDNA
library. Trip15 was identified as a specific interacting factor with ICSBP in
yeast cells, which was also confirmed by in vitro glutathione S-transferase
pull-down assays and by coimmunoprecipitation studies in COS7 cells. Trip15 was
recently identified as a component of the COP9/signalosome (CSN) complex composed
of eight evolutionary conserved subunits and thus termed CSN2. This complex has a
role in cell-signaling processes, which is manifested by its associated novel
kinase activity and by the involvement of its subunits in regulating multiple
cell-signaling pathways and cell-cycle progression. We show that in vitro
association of ICSBP with the CSN leads to phosphorylation of ICSBP at a unique
serine residue within its IAD. The phosphorylated residue is essential for
efficient association with IRF-1 and thus for the repressor activity of ICSBP
exerted on IRF-1. This suggests that the CSN has a role in integrating incoming
signals that affect the transcriptional activity of ICSBP.

PMID: 10991940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):7662-7.

Interaction of the corepressor Alien with DAX-1 is abrogated by mutations of
DAX-1 involved in adrenal hypoplasia congenita.

Altincicek B(1), Tenbaum SP, Dressel U, Thormeyer D, Renkawitz R, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58-62,
Giessen D-35392, Germany.

DAX-1 is an unusual member of the nuclear hormone receptor (NHR) superfamily.
Lack of DAX-1-mediated silencing leads to adrenal hypoplasia congenita and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Gene silencing through NHRs such as the thyroid
hormone receptor (TR) is mediated by corepressors. We have previously
characterized a novel corepressor, termed Alien, which interacts with TR and the 
ecdysone receptor but not with the retinoic acid receptors RAR or RXR. Here, we
show that DAX-1 interacts with the corepressor Alien but not with the corepressor
SMRT. This interaction is mediated by the DAX-1-silencing domain. Naturally
occurring mutants of the DAX-1 gene fail to interact with Alien and have lost
silencing function. Because the silencing domain of DAX-1 is unusual for NHRs, we
mapped the interaction of Alien with DAX-1 and with TR. We show that Alien
exhibits different binding characteristics to DAX-1 and TR. Furthermore, Northern
experiments demonstrate that Alien is expressed in the adrenal gland and testis
in tissues where DAX-1 is specifically expressed. Interestingly, a novel adrenal 
gland-specific mRNA of Alien was discovered. Thus, the impairment of Alien
binding seems to play an important role in the pathogenesis mediated by DAX-1
mutants.

PMID: 10713076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35297-300.

COP9 signalosome-directed c-Jun activation/stabilization is independent of JNK.

Naumann M(1), Bech-Otschir D, Huang X, Ferrell K, Dubiel W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Infektionsbiologie, Abteilung Molekulare Biologie,
Humboldt University, 10117 Berlin, Germany. naumann@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de

The basic region-leucine zipper transcription factor c-Jun regulates gene
expression and cell function. It participates in the formation of homo- or
heterodimeric complexes that specifically bind to DNA sequences called activating
protein 1 (AP-1) sites. The stability and activity of c-Jun is regulated by
phosphorylation within the N-terminal activation domain. Mitogen- and
stress-activated c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) were previously the only
described enzymes phosphorylating c-Jun at the N terminus in vivo. In this report
we demonstrate a JNK-independent activation of c-Jun in vivo directed by the
constitutive photomorphogenesis (COP9) signalosome. The overexpression of
signalosome subunit 2 (Sgn2), a subunit of the COP9 signalosome, leads to de novo
assembly of the complex with a partial incorporation of the overexpressed
subunit. The de novo formation of COP9 signalosome parallels an increase of c-Jun
protein resulting in elevated AP-1 transcriptional activity. The c-Jun activation
caused by Sgn2 overexpression is independent of JNK and mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase 4. The data demonstrate the existence of a novel COP9
signalosome-directed c-Jun activation pathway.

PMID: 10585392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3383-94.

Alien, a highly conserved protein with characteristics of a corepressor for
members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily.

Dressel U(1), Thormeyer D, Altincicek B, Paululat A, Eggert M, Schneider S,
Tenbaum SP, Renkawitz R, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetisches Institut der Justus-Liebig-Universität, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

Some members of nuclear hormone receptors, such as the thyroid hormone receptor
(TR), silence gene expression in the absence of the hormone. Corepressors, which 
bind to the receptor's silencing domain, are involved in this repression. Hormone
binding leads to dissociation of corepressors and binding of coactivators, which 
in turn mediate gene activation. Here, we describe the characteristics of Alien, 
a novel corepressor. Alien interacts with TR only in the absence of hormone.
Addition of thyroid hormone leads to dissociation of Alien from the receptor, as 
shown by the yeast two-hybrid system, glutathione S-transferase pull-down, and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Reporter assays indicate that Alien increases 
receptor-mediated silencing and that it harbors an autonomous silencing function.
Immune staining shows that Alien is localized in the cell nucleus. Alien is a
highly conserved protein showing 90% identity between human and Drosophila.
Drosophila Alien shows similar activities in that it interacts in a
hormone-sensitive manner with TR and harbors an autonomous silencing function.
Specific interaction of Alien is seen with Drosophila nuclear hormone receptors, 
such as the ecdysone receptor and Seven-up, the Drosophila homologue of COUP-TF1,
but not with retinoic acid receptor, RXR/USP, DHR 3, DHR 38, DHR 78, or DHR 96.
These properties, taken together, show that Alien has the characteristics of a
corepressor. Thus, Alien represents a member of a novel class of corepressors
specific for selected members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily.

PMCID: PMC84131
PMID: 10207062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genomics. 1999 Mar 15;56(3):310-6.

Coding sequence, genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and expression
pattern of the signalosome component Cops2: the mouse homologue of Drosophila
alien.

Schaefer L(1), Beermann ML, Miller JB.

Author information: 
(1)Myogenesis Research Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, 149 13th
Street, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

The Drosophila alien gene is highly homologous to the human thyroid receptor
interacting protein, TRIP15/COPS2, which is a component of the recently
identified signalosome protein complex. We identified the mouse homologue of
Drosophila alien through homology searches of the EST database. We found that the
mouse cDNA encodes a predicted 443-amino-acid protein, which migrates at
approximately 50 kDa. The gene for the mouse alien homologue, named Cops2,
includes 12 coding exons spanning approximately 30 kb of genomic DNA on the
central portion of mouse chromosome 2. Mouse Cops2 is widely expressed in
embryonic, fetal, and adult tissues beginning as early as E7.5. Mouse Cops2 cDNA 
hybridizes to two mRNA bands in all tissues at approximately 2.3 and
approximately 4 kb, with an additional approximately 1.9-kb band in liver.
Immunostaining of native and epitope tagged proteins localized the mouse Cops2
protein in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus, with larger amounts in the nucleus
in some cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10087198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mech Dev. 1996 Jun;57(1):59-68.

The Drosophila gene alien is expressed in the muscle attachment sites during
embryogenesis and encodes a protein highly conserved between plants, Drosophila
and vertebrates.

Goubeaud A(1), Knirr S, Renkawitz-Pohl R, Paululat A.

Author information: 
(1)Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.

We have found a novel gene (alien) that is expressed exclusively in the muscle
attachment sites (apodemes) during embryogenesis in Drosophila. Antibodies raised
against the Alien protein enable us to follow the developing attachments from
state 11/12 until stage 16/17. The coding region of the Drosophila alien gene is 
highly conserved to a gene of unknown function, isolated from a plant (Loo et
at., 1995), and to the human TRIP15 gene (Lee et al., 1995). Searching for
thyroid receptor interacting proteins, TRIP15 was isolated as a negative
regulator. Whether there is a functional correlation to Alien remains to be
analyzed. Alien expression is independent of muscle formation, as shown in
rolling stone mutant embryos. Even in twist and snail mutants, lacking mesodermal
development, alien expression is fairly normal, showing a rather autonomous
development of the apodemes. The conservation of alien suggests an important role
in differentiation.

PMID: 8817453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


