
1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Dec;35(12):2694-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306170. Epub 2015 Oct 1.

Novel CREB3L3 Nonsense Mutation in a Family With Dominant Hypertriglyceridemia.

Cefalù AB(1), Spina R(1), Noto D(1), Valenti V(1), Ingrassia V(1), Giammanco
A(1), Panno MD(1), Ganci A(1), Barbagallo CM(1), Averna MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.I., A. Giammanco,
M.D.P., A. Ganci, C.M.B., M.R.A.); and Molecular Biology Diagnostic Laboratory,
Central Laboratory of Advanced Diagnosis and Biomedical Research (CLADIBIOR),
AOUP "Paolo Giaccone", Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.V., V.I., M.R.A.).
(2)From the Dipartimento Biomedico di Medicina Interna e Specialistica (DIBIMIS),
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.I., A. Giammanco,
M.D.P., A. Ganci, C.M.B., M.R.A.); and Molecular Biology Diagnostic Laboratory,
Central Laboratory of Advanced Diagnosis and Biomedical Research (CLADIBIOR),
AOUP "Paolo Giaccone", Palermo, Italy (A.B.C., R.S., D.N., V.V., V.I., M.R.A.).
maurizio.averna@unipa.it abaldassare.cefalu@unipa.it.

OBJECTIVE: Cyclic AMP responsive element-binding protein 3-like 3 (CREB3L3) is a 
novel candidate gene for dominant hypertriglyceridemia. To date, only 4 kindred
with dominant hypertriglyceridemia have been found to be carriers of 2 nonsense
mutations in CREB3L3 gene (245fs and W46X). We investigated a family in which
hypertriglyceridemia displayed an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The proband was a 49-year-old woman with high plasma
triglycerides (=1300 mg/dL; 14.68 mmol/L). Her father had a history of moderate
hypertriglyceridemia, and her 51-year-old brother had triglycerides levels as
high as 1600 mg/dL (18.06 mmol/L). To identify the causal mutation in this
family, we analyzed the candidate genes of recessive and dominant forms of
primary hypertriglyceridemia by direct sequencing. The sequencing of CREB3L3 gene
led to the discovery of a novel minute frame shift mutation in exon 3 of CREB3L3 
gene, predicted to result in the formation of a truncated protein devoid of
function (c.359delG-p.K120fsX20). Heterozygosity for the c.359delG mutation
resulted in a severe phenotype occurring later in life in the proband and her
brother and a good response to diet and a hypotriglyceridemic treatment. The same
mutation was detected in a 13-year-old daughter who to date is
normotriglyceridemic.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel pathogenic mutation in CREB3L3 gene in a 
family with dominant hypertriglyceridemia with a variable pattern of penetrance.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26427795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gastroenterology. 2015 Oct;149(4):1030-41.e6. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.06.009. 
Epub 2015 Jun 20.

Fat-Specific Protein 27/CIDEC Promotes Development of Alcoholic Steatohepatitis
in Mice and Humans.

Xu MJ(1), Cai Y(2), Wang H(3), Altamirano J(4), Chang B(5), Bertola A(5), Odena
G(6), Lu J(7), Tanaka N(8), Matsusue K(9), Matsubara T(8), Mukhopadhyay P(10),
Kimura S(8), Pacher P(10), Gonzalez FJ(8), Bataller R(11), Gao B(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Department of
Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking
University, Beijing, China. (2)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland; Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Laboratory of Liver Diseases,
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. (4)Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) and Liver Unit-Internal Medicine
Department, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (6)Department of
Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (7)GoPath Diagnostics, LLC, Chicago,
Illinois. (8)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (9)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science,
Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. (10)Section of Oxidative Stress and Tissue
Injury, Laboratory of Physiological Studies, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (11)Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) and Liver Unit-Internal
Medicine Department, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca,
Barcelona, Spain; Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public
Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina;
Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (12)Laboratory of Liver Diseases,
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address: bgao@mail.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Alcoholic steatohepatitis (ASH) is the progressive form of
alcoholic liver disease and may lead to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
We studied mouse models and human tissues to identify molecules associated with
ASH progression and focused on the mouse fat-specific protein 27 (FSP-27)/human
cell death-inducing DFF45-like effector C (CIDEC) protein, which is expressed in 
white adipose tissues and promotes formation of fat droplets.
METHODS: C57BL/6N mice or mice with hepatocyte-specific disruption of Fsp27
(Fsp27(Hep-/-) mice) were fed the Lieber-Decarli ethanol liquid diet (5% ethanol)
for 10 days to 12 weeks, followed by 1 or multiple binges of ethanol (5 or 6
g/kg) during the chronic feeding. Some mice were given an inhibitor (GW9662) of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPARG). Adenoviral vectors were
used to express transgenes or small hairpin (sh) RNAs in cultured hepatocytes and
in mice. Liver tissue samples were collected from ethanol-fed mice or from 31
patients with alcoholic hepatitis (AH) with biopsy-proved ASH and analyzed
histologically and immunohistochemically and by transcriptome, immunoblotting,
and real-time PCR analyses.
RESULTS: Chronic-plus-binge ethanol feeding of mice, which mimics the drinking
pattern of patients with AH, produced severe ASH and mild fibrosis. Microarray
analyses revealed similar alterations in expression of many hepatic genes in
ethanol-fed mice and humans with ASH, including up-regulation of mouse Fsp27
(also called Cidec) and human CIDEC. Fsp27(Hep-/-) mice and mice given injections
of adenovirus-Fsp27shRNA had markedly reduced ASH following chronic-plus-binge
ethanol feeding. Inhibition of PPARG and cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein H (CREBH) prevented the increases in Fsp27a and FSP27ß mRNAs,
respectively, and reduced liver injury in this chronic-plus-binge ethanol feeding
model. Overexpression of FSP27 and ethanol exposure had synergistic effects in
inducing production of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and damage to
hepatocytes in mice. Hepatic CIDEC mRNA expression was increased in patients with
AH and correlated with the degree of hepatic steatosis and disease severity
including mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: In mice, chronic-plus-binge ethanol feeding induces ASH that mimics 
some histological and molecular features observed in patients with AH. Hepatic
expression of FSP27/CIDEC is highly up-regulated in mice following
chronic-plus-binge ethanol feeding and in patients with AH; this up-regulation
contributes to alcohol-induced liver damage.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4584194 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26099526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 22;290(21):13556-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.587923. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

Cyclic AMP Response Element-binding Protein H (CREBH) Mediates the Inhibitory
Actions of Tumor Necrosis Factor a in Osteoblast Differentiation by Stimulating
Smad1 Degradation.

Jang WG(1), Jeong BC(2), Kim EJ(2), Choi H(2), Oh SH(2), Kim DK(3), Koo SH(4),
Choi HS(5), Koh JT(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders, Department of
Pharmacology and Dental Therapeutics, School of Dentistry, and the Department of 
Biotechnology, School of Engineering, Daegu University, Gyeongsan 712-714, and.
(2)From the Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders, Department of
Pharmacology and Dental Therapeutics, School of Dentistry, and. (3)the National
Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor Signals, Hormone
Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam National
University, Gwangju 500-757. (4)the Division of Life Sciences, College of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul-136-701, Republic-of-Korea.
(5)the National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor
Signals, Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, hsc@chonnam.ac.kr. (6)From the
Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders, Department of Pharmacology and
Dental Therapeutics, School of Dentistry, and jtkoh@chonnam.ac.kr.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress transducers, such as old astrocyte specifically
induced substance (OASIS) and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), which are
induced by bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2), regulate bone formation and
osteoblast differentiation. Here, we examined the role of cAMP response
element-binding protein H (CREBH), a member of the same family of ER
membrane-bound basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors as OASIS and
ATF6, in osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Proinflammatory cytokine 
TNFa increased CREBH expression by up-regulating the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)
signaling pathway in osteoblasts, increased the level of N-terminal fragment of
CREBH in the nucleus, and inhibited BMP2 induction of osteoblast specific gene
expression. Overexpression of CREBH suppressed BMP2-induced up-regulation of the 
osteogenic markers runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), and osteocalcin (OC) in MC3T3-E1 cells and primary
osteoblasts, as well as BMP2-induced ALP activity and OC protein production. In
contrast, knockdown of CREBH attenuated the inhibitory effect of TNFa on
BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation. Mechanistic studies revealed that CREBH 
increased the expression of Smad ubiquitination regulatory factor 1 (Smurf1),
leading to ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Smad1, whereas knockdown of CREBH
inhibited TNFa-mediated degradation of Smad1 by Smurf1. Consistent with these in 
vitro findings, administration of Ad-CREBH inhibited BMP2-induced ectopic and
orthotopic bone formation in vivo. Taken together, these results suggest that
CREBH is a novel negative regulator of osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505601 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 25873397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Dec 12;455(3-4):212-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.10.147. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Alpha lipoic acid induces hepatic fibroblast growth factor 21 expression via
up-regulation of CREBH.

Bae KH(1), Min AK(1), Kim JG(1), Lee IK(2), Park KG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
Research Institute of Aging and Metabolism, Kyungpook National University School 
of Medicine, Daegu, South Korea. (2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Internal Medicine, Research Institute of Aging and Metabolism,
Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu, South Korea. Electronic 
address: leei@knu.ac.kr. (3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Research Institute of Aging and Metabolism, Kyungpook
National University School of Medicine, Daegu, South Korea. Electronic address:
kpark@knu.ac.kr.

Hepatic expression of fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), one of the most
promising therapeutic candidates for metabolic syndrome, is induced by multiple
factors associated with fasting, including cyclic AMP response element-binding
protein H (CREBH). Alpha lipoic acid (ALA), a naturally occurring thiol
antioxidant, has been shown to induce metabolic changes that are similar to those
induced by FGF21, including weight loss and increased energy expenditure. Here,
we investigated the effect of ALA on hepatic FGF21 expression. ALA treatment
enhanced CREBH and FGF21 mRNA expression and protein abundance in cultured
hepatocytes. ALA increased FGF21 promoter activity by up-regulating CREBH
expression and increasing CREBH binding to the FGF21 promoter, indicating that
ALA up-regulates FGF21 at the transcriptional level. Moreover, inhibition of
endogenous CREBH expression by siRNA attenuated ALA-induced FGF21 expression.
Finally, treatment of mice with ALA enhanced fasting-induced up-regulation of
CREBH and FGF21 in the liver and inhibited feeding-induced suppression of their
expression. Consistently, ALA increased serum FGF21 levels in both fasted and fed
mice. Collectively, these results indicate that ALA increases hepatic FGF21
expression via up-regulation of CREBH, identifying ALA as a novel positive
regulator of FGF21.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25449271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biochem J. 2015 Feb 15;466(1):115-21. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140819.

HBx induces the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells via AP1
over-expressed as a result of ER stress.

Cho HK(1), Kim SY(1), Kyaw YY(2), Win AA(2), Koo SH(3), Kim HH(4), Cheong J(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic
of Korea. (2)Experimental Medicine Research Division, Department of Medical
Research (Lower Myanmar), Yangon, Myanmar. (3)Division of Life Sciences, College
of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)§Department of Experimental Medicine, Pusan National University Hospital,
Busan, Republic of Korea.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide and
chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the most common risk factor for HCC.
The HBV proteins can induce oncogenic or synergy effects with a
hyperproliferative response on transformation into HCC. CREBH (cAMP-responsive,
element-binding protein H), activated by stress in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), is an ER-resident transmembrane bZIP (basic leucine zipper) transcription
factor that is specifically expressed in the liver. In the present study, we
address the role played by CREBH activated by ER stress in HBV-induced hepatic
cell proliferation. We confirmed CREBH activation by ER stress and showed that it
occurred as a result of/via hepatitis B virus X (HBx)-induced ER stress. CREBH
activated by HBx increased the expression of AP-1 target genes through c-Jun
induction. Under pathological conditions such as liver damage or liver
regeneration, activated CREBH may have an important role to play in hepatic
inflammation and cell proliferation, as an insulin receptor with dual functions
under these conditions. We showed that CREBH activated by HBx interacted with HBx
protein, leading to a synergistic effect on the expression of AP-1 target genes
and the proliferation of HCC cells and mouse primary hepatocytes. In conclusion, 
in HBV-infected hepatic cells or patients with chronic HBV, CREBH may induce
proliferation of hepatic cells in co-operation with HBx, resulting in HCC.

PMID: 25428452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Hepatology. 2015 Mar;61(3):748-50. doi: 10.1002/hep.27573. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

FSP27ß, a novel fat-specific protein 27 isoform promoting hepatic steatosis.

Puri V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2015 Mar;61(3):857-69.

PMID: 25331330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Endocrinology. 2014 Dec;155(12):4706-19. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1113. Epub 2014 Sep
18.

Hepatic CREB3L3 controls whole-body energy homeostasis and improves obesity and
diabetes.

Nakagawa Y(1), Satoh A, Yabe S, Furusawa M, Tokushige N, Tezuka H, Mikami M,
Iwata W, Shingyouchi A, Matsuzaka T, Kiwata S, Fujimoto Y, Shimizu H, Danno H,
Yamamoto T, Ishii K, Karasawa T, Takeuchi Y, Iwasaki H, Shimada M, Kawakami Y,
Urayama O, Sone H, Takekoshi K, Kobayashi K, Yatoh S, Takahashi A, Yahagi N,
Suzuki H, Yamada N, Shimano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Endocrinology and Metabolism) (Y.N., A.Sa.,
S.Yab., M.F., N.T., H.T., M.M., W.I., A.Sh., T.M., S.K., Y.F., H.Shimi., H.D.,
T.Y., K.I., T.K., Y.T., H.I., M.S., Y.K., O.U., H.So., K.T., K.K., S.Yat., A.T., 
N.Yah., H.Su., N.Yam., H.Shima.), Division of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, and 2International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS) 
(Y.N., H.Shima.), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in the liver is the key to
maintaining systemic energy homeostasis during starvation. The membrane-bound
transcription factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 3-like 3 (CREB3L3)
has been reported to be activated during fasting and to regulate triglyceride
metabolism. Here, we show that CREB3L3 confers a wide spectrum of metabolic
responses to starvation in vivo. Adenoviral and transgenic overexpression of
nuclear CREB3L3 induced systemic lipolysis, hepatic ketogenesis, and insulin
sensitivity with increased energy expenditure, leading to marked reduction in
body weight, plasma lipid levels, and glucose levels. CREB3L3 overexpression
activated gene expression levels and plasma levels of antidiabetic hormones,
including fibroblast growth factor 21 and IGF-binding protein 2. Amelioration of 
diabetes by hepatic activation of CREB3L3 was also observed in several types of
diabetic obese mice. Nuclear CREB3L3 mutually activates the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) a promoter in an autoloop fashion and is
crucial for the ligand transactivation of PPARa by interacting with its
transcriptional regulator, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1a. CREB3L3 directly and indirectly controls fibroblast growth factor
21 expression and its plasma level, which contributes at least partially to the
catabolic effects of CREB3L3 on systemic energy homeostasis in the entire body.
Therefore, CREB3L3 is a therapeutic target for obesity and diabetes.

PMID: 25233440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hepatology. 2015 Mar;61(3):857-69. doi: 10.1002/hep.27371. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Transcriptional activation of Fsp27 by the liver-enriched transcription factor
CREBH promotes lipid droplet growth and hepatic steatosis.

Xu X(1), Park JG, So JS, Lee AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2015 Mar;61(3):748-50.

Fat-specific protein 27 (Fsp27) is a lipid droplet-associated protein that
promotes lipid droplet (LD) growth and triglyceride (TG) storage in white
adipocytes. Fsp27 is also highly expressed in the steatotic liver and contributes
to TG accumulation. In this study we discovered that the liver produces Fsp27ß,
an alternative Fsp27 isoform, which contains 10 additional amino acids at the
N-terminus of the original Fsp27 (Fsp27a). White adipose tissue (WAT) and the
liver specifically expressed Fsp27a and Fsp27ß transcripts, respectively, which
were driven by distinct promoters. The Fsp27ß promoter was activated by the
liver-enriched transcription factor cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding protein
H (CREBH) but not by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>),
which activated the Fsp27a promoter. Enforced expression of the constitutively
active CREBH strongly induced Fsp27ß and the human ortholog CIDEC2 in mouse
hepatocytes and HepG2 cells, respectively. In contrast, loss of CREBH decreased
hepatic Fsp27ß in fasted mice, suggesting that CREBH plays a critical role in
Fsp27ß expression in the liver. Similar to Fsp27a, Fsp27ß localized on the
surface of lipid droplets and suppressed lipolysis. Consequently, enforced
expression of Fsp27ß or CREBH promoted lipid droplet enlargement and TG
accumulation in the liver.CONCLUSION: The CREBH-Fsp27ß axis is important for
regulating lipid droplet dynamics and TG storage in the liver.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4329115
PMID: 25125366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e86342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086342. eCollection
2014.

Orphan nuclear receptor Err<U+03B3> induces C-reactive protein gene expression through
induction of ER-bound Bzip transmembrane transcription factor CREBH.

Misra J(1), Chanda D(1), Kim DK(1), Cho SR(1), Koo SH(2), Lee CH(3), Back SH(4), 
Choi HS(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor Signals,
Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Life Sciences,
College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea. (3)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea. (4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, 
South Korea. (5)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear
Receptor Signals, Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and
Technology, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea ; Research
Institute of Medical Sciences, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chonnam
National University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(5):e0125536.

The orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor-<U+03B3> (ERR<U+03B3>) is a
constitutively active transcription factor regulating genes involved in several
important cellular processes, including hepatic glucose metabolism, alcohol
metabolism, and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. cAMP responsive
element-binding protein H (CREBH) is an ER-bound bZIP family transcription factor
that is activated upon ER stress and regulates genes encoding acute-phase
proteins whose expression is increased in response to inflammation. Here, we
report that ERR<U+03B3> directly regulates CREBH gene expression in response to ER
stress. ERR<U+03B3> bound to the ERR<U+03B3> response element (ERRE) in the CREBH promoter.
Overexpression of ERR<U+03B3> by adenovirus significantly increased expression of CREBH 
as well as C-reactive protein (CRP), whereas either knockdown of ERR<U+03B3> or
inhibition of ERR<U+03B3> by ERR<U+03B3> specific inverse agonist, GSK5182, substantially
inhibited ER stress-mediated induction of CREBH and CRP. The transcriptional
coactivator PGC1a was required for ERR<U+03B3> mediated induction of the CREBH gene as
demonstrated by the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showing binding of
both ERR<U+03B3> and PGC1a on the CREBH promoter. The ChIP assay also revealed that
histone H3 and H4 acetylation occurred at the ERR<U+03B3> and PGC1a binding site.
Moreover, chronic alcoholic hepatosteatosis, as well as the diabetic obese
condition significantly increased CRP gene expression, and this increase was
significantly attenuated by GSK5182 treatment. We suggest that orphan nuclear
receptor ERR<U+03B3> directly regulates the ER-bound transcription factor CREBH in
response to ER stress and other metabolic conditions.

PMCID: PMC3899246
PMID: 24466039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Endocrinology. 2014 Mar;155(3):769-82. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1490. Epub 2014 Jan
1.

Liver-enriched transcription factor CREBH interacts with peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor a to regulate metabolic hormone FGF21.

Kim H(1), Mendez R, Zheng Z, Chang L, Cai J, Zhang R, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics (H.K., R.M., Z.Z., J.C., R.Z.,
K.Z.), Department of Immunology and Microbiology (K.Z.), The Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201; and Cardiovascular Center
(L.C.), Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.

Lipid metabolism is tightly regulated by nuclear receptors, transcription
factors, and cellular enzymes. In this study, we demonstrated that the
liver-enriched transcription factor CREBH (cAMP-responsive element binding
protein, hepatocyte specific) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a
(PPARa) function as binary transcriptional activators to regulate lipid
metabolism by activating fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), a hepatic hormone
that regulates whole-body energy homeostasis. Gain- and loss-of-function studies 
indicated that CREBH regulates triglyceride and fatty acid metabolism in animals 
under fasting or on an atherogenic high-fat (AHF) diet. CREBH and PPARa act as
interactive trans-activators that regulate each other for their expression.
Activated CREBH protein interacts with PPARa to form a functional complex upon
fasting or the AHF diet, and both factors are required for induction of the
metabolic hormone FGF21. The CREBH-PPARa complex was found to bind to integrated 
CRE-PPAR-responsive element-binding motifs in the FGF21 gene promoter. Whereas
CREBH and PPARa function in synergy to activate FGF21 gene expression, PPARa
relies on CREBH to exert its trans-activation effect on FGF21. Supporting the key
role of CREBH in regulating FGF21, infusion of recombinant FGF21 protein can
reverse hypertriglyceridemia and hypoketonemia and partially rescue nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis developed in the CREBH-null mice after the AHF diet. Our study
demonstrated a transcriptional regulatory axis of CREBH-PPARa-FGF21 in
maintaining lipid homeostasis under metabolic stress. The functional relationship
between CREBH and PPARa in regulating FGF21 may represent an important
transcriptional coactivation mechanism that orchestrates the processes of energy 
supply upon metabolic alteration.

PMCID: PMC3929740
PMID: 24424044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Gastroenterology. 2014 Apr;146(4):1060-9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.016. Epub
2013 Dec 17.

Gluconeogenic signals regulate iron homeostasis via hepcidin in mice.

Vecchi C(1), Montosi G(1), Garuti C(1), Corradini E(1), Sabelli M(1), Canali
S(1), Pietrangelo A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hemochromatosis and Metabolic Liver Diseases, Department of Medical
and Surgical Sciences, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy. (2)Center
for Hemochromatosis and Metabolic Liver Diseases, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy. Electronic
address: antonello.pietrangelo@unimore.it.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatic gluconeogenesis provides fuel during starvation, and
is abnormally induced in obese individuals or those with diabetes. Common
metabolic disorders associated with active gluconeogenesis and insulin resistance
(obesity, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)
have been associated with alterations in iron homeostasis that disrupt insulin
sensitivity and promote disease progression. We investigated whether
gluconeogenic signals directly control Hepcidin, an important regulator of iron
homeostasis, in starving mice (a model of persistently activated gluconeogenesis 
and insulin resistance).
METHODS: We investigated hepatic regulation of Hepcidin expression in C57BL/6Crl,
129S2/SvPas, BALB/c, and Creb3l3-/- null mice. Mice were fed a standard,
iron-balanced chow diet or an iron-deficient diet for 9 days before death, or for
7 days before a 24- to 48-hour starvation period; liver and spleen tissues then
were collected and analyzed by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction and immunoblot analyses. Serum levels of iron, hemoglobin,
Hepcidin, and glucose also were measured. We analyzed human hepatoma (HepG2)
cells and mouse primary hepatocytes to study transcriptional control of Hamp (the
gene that encodes Hepcidin) in response to gluconeogenic stimuli using small
interfering RNA, luciferase promoter, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses.
RESULTS: Starvation led to increased transcription of the gene that encodes
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (a protein involved in gluconeogenesis) in
livers of mice, increased levels of Hepcidin, and degradation of Ferroportin,
compared with nonstarved mice. These changes resulted in hypoferremia and iron
retention in liver tissue. Livers of starved mice also had increased levels of
Ppargc1a mRNA and Creb3l3 mRNA, which encode a transcriptional co-activator
involved in energy metabolism and a liver-specific transcription factor,
respectively. Glucagon and a cyclic adenosine monophosphate analog increased
promoter activity and transcription of Hamp in cultured liver cells; levels of
Hamp were reduced after administration of small interfering RNAs against Ppargc1a
and Creb3l3. PPARGC1A and CREB3L3 bound the Hamp promoter to activate its
transcription in response to a cyclic adenosine monophosphate analog. Creb3l3-/- 
mice did not up-regulate Hamp or become hypoferremic during starvation.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a link between glucose and iron homeostasis, showing
that Hepcidin is a gluconeogenic sensor in mice during starvation. This response 
is involved in hepatic metabolic adaptation to increased energy demands; it
preserves tissue iron for vital activities during food withdrawal, but can cause 
excessive iron retention and hypoferremia in disorders with persistently
activated gluconeogenesis and insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3989026
PMID: 24361124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nutr Cancer. 2013;65(4):590-9. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2013.770043.

Multitargeting and antimetastatic potentials of silibinin in human HepG-2 and
PLC/PRF/5 hepatoma cells.

Ghasemi R(1), Ghaffari SH, Momeny M, Pirouzpanah S, Yousefi M, Malehmir M,
Alimoghaddam K, Ghavamzadeh A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation Research Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common sort of primary liver
malignancy with poor prognosis. This study aimed at examining the effects of
silibinin (a putative antimetastatic agent) on some transcriptional markers
mechanistically related to HCC recurrence and metastasis in HepG-2 [hepatitis B
virus (HBV)-negative and P53 intact) and PLC/PRF/5 (HBV-positive and P53 mutated)
cells. The expression of 27 genes in response to silibinin was evaluated by
real-time RT-PCR. The MMP gelatinolytic assay and microculture tetrazolium test
(MTT) were tested. Silibinin was capable of suppressing the transcriptional
levels of ANGPT2, ATP6L, CAP2, CCR6, CCR7, CLDN-10, cortactin, CXCR4, GLI2, HK2, 
ID1, KIAA0101, mortalin, PAK1, RHOA, SPINK1, and STMN1 as well as the enzymatic
activity of MMP-2 but promoted the transcripts of CREB3L3, DDX3X, and PROX1 in
both cells. Some significant differences between the cells in response to
silibinin were detected that might be related to the differences of the cells in 
terms of HBV infection and/or P53 mutation, suggesting the possible influence of 
silibinin on HCC through biological functions of these 2 prognostic factors. In
conclusion, our findings suggest that silibinin could potentially function as a
multitargeting antimetastatic agent and might provide new insights for HCC
therapy particularly for HBV-related and/or P53-mutated HCCs.

PMID: 23659451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055800. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

CREBH determines the severity of sulpyrine-induced fatal shock.

Kamiyama N(1), Yamamoto M, Saiga H, Ma JS, Ohshima J, Machimura S, Sasai M,
Kimura T, Ueda Y, Kayama H, Takeda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Although the pyrazolone derivative sulpyrine is widely used as an antipyretic
analgesic drug, side effects, including fatal shock, have been reported. However,
the molecular mechanism underlying such a severe side effect is largely unclear. 
Here, we report that the transcription factor CREBH that is highly expressed in
the liver plays an important role in fatal shock induced by sulpyrine in mice.
CREBH-deficient mice were resistant to experimental fatal sulpyrine shock. We
found that sulpyrine-induced expression of cytochrome P450 2B (CYP2B) family
genes, which are involved in sulpyrine metabolism, in the liver was severely
impaired in CREBH-deficient mice. Moreover, introduction of CYP2B in
CREBH-deficient liver restored susceptibility to sulpyrine. Furthermore, ectopic 
expression of CREBH up-regulated CYP2B10 promoter activity, and in vivo knockdown
of CREBH in wild-type mice conferred a significant resistance to fatal sulpyrine 
shock. These data demonstrate that CREBH is a positive regulator of CYP2B in
response to sulpyrine administration, which possibly results in fatal shock.

PMCID: PMC3567110
PMID: 23409047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 2;287(45):38041-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.377978. Epub 2012 
Sep 18.

Activation of cannabinoid receptor type 1 (Cb1r) disrupts hepatic insulin
receptor signaling via cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein H
(Crebh)-mediated induction of Lipin1 gene.

Chanda D(1), Kim YH, Kim DK, Lee MW, Lee SY, Park TS, Koo SH, Lee CH, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor Signals,
Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Activation of hepatic cannabinoid 1 receptor (Cb1r) signaling has been implicated
in the development of phenotypes associated with fatty liver,
hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin resistance. In the current study, we have
elucidated the critical role of endoplasmic reticulum-bound transcription factor 
cyclic AMP-response element-binding protein H (Crebh) in mediating activated Cb1r
signaling in inducing phosphatidic acid phosphatase Lipin1 gene expression and
subsequently deregulating hepatic insulin receptor signaling. Cb1r agonist
(2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)) treatment induced Lipin1 gene expression in a
Crebh-dependent manner via recruiting CREBH to the endogenous Lipin1 gene
promoter. Adenoviral overexpression of Crebh or 2-AG treatment in mice induced
Lipin1 gene expression to increase the hepatic diacylglycerol (DAG) level and
phosphorylation of protein kinase Ce (PKCe). This in turn inhibited hepatic
insulin receptor signaling. Knockdown of Crebh or Cb1r antagonism attenuated
2-AG-mediated induction of Lipin1 gene expression and decreased DAG production in
mouse liver and subsequently restored insulin receptor signaling. Similarly,
knockdown of Lipin1 attenuated the 2-AG-induced increase in the DAG level and
PKCe phosphorylation. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of Crebh partially but
significantly blunted Lipin1 expression and the DAG level in db/db mice. These
results demonstrate a novel mechanism by which Cb1r signaling induces Lipin1 gene
expression and increases DAG production by activating Crebh, thereby deregulating
insulin receptor signaling pathway and lipid homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3488074
PMID: 22989885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2012 Apr;23(2):141-6. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e3283508fed.

The role of CREB-H transcription factor in triglyceride metabolism.

Lee AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. ahlee@hsph.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding protein H (CREB-H) is a 
transcription factor that is highly and selectively expressed in liver and small 
intestine. Here I summarize recent findings on the role of CREB-H in lipid
metabolism.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies have demonstrated that hepatic CREB-H is
transcriptionally activated by fasting, and induces lipid metabolism genes, such 
as Apoa4, Apoa5, and Apoc2 apolipoproteins which exhibit stimulatory effects on
lipoprotein lipase (LPL). Consistent with the essential role of LPL in
triglyceride clearance, CREB-H-deficient mice showed hypertriglyceridemia,
associated with defective production of these apolipoproteins and decreased LPL
activity. DNA sequencing of the CREB3L3 gene (encoding CREB-H) identified
multiple nonsynonymous mutations in CREB3L3 in individuals with extreme
hypertriglyceridemia.
SUMMARY: Recent studies uncover a novel function of CREB-H in the regulation of
triglyceride metabolism in rodents and humans. In liver and small intestine,
CREB-H induces LPL coactivators, Apoa4, Apoa5, and Apoc2 that facilitate
triglyceride clearance from plasma.

PMCID: PMC3366104
PMID: 22262056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Feb 1;5(1):66-72. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.960864. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

Excess of rare variants in non-genome-wide association study candidate genes in
patients with hypertriglyceridemia.

Johansen CT(1), Wang J, McIntyre AD, Martins RA, Ban MR, Lanktree MB, Huff MW,
Péterfy M, Mehrabian M, Lusis AJ, Kathiresan S, Anand SS, Yusuf S, Lee AH,
Glimcher LH, Cao H, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western 
Ontario, London, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Feb 1;5(1):5-6.

BACKGROUND: Rare variant accumulation studies can implicate genes in disease
susceptibility when a significant burden is observed in patients versus control
subjects. Such analyses might be particularly useful for candidate genes that are
selected based on experiments other than genome-wide association studies (GWAS). 
We sought to determine whether rare variants in non-GWAS candidate genes
identified from mouse models and human mendelian syndromes of
hypertriglyceridemia (HTG) accumulate in patients with polygenic adult-onset HTG.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We resequenced protein coding regions of 3 genes with
established roles (APOC2, GPIHBP1, LMF1) and 2 genes recently implicated (CREB3L3
and ZHX3) in TG metabolism. We identified 41 distinct heterozygous rare variants,
including 29 singleton variants, in the combined sample; in total, we observed 47
rare variants in 413 HTG patients versus 16 in 324 control subjects (odds
ratio=2.3; P=0.0050). Post hoc assessment of genetic burden in individual genes
using 3 different tests suggested that the genetic burden was most prominent in
the established genes LMF1 and APOC2, and also in the recently identified CREB3L3
gene.
CONCLUSIONS: These extensive resequencing studies show a significant accumulation
of rare genetic variants in non-GWAS candidate genes among patients with
polygenic HTG, and indicate the importance of testing specific hypotheses in
large-scale resequencing studies.

PMCID: PMC3288444
PMID: 22135386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMB Rep. 2011 Nov;44(11):735-40. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2011.44.11.735.

Tunicamycin negatively regulates BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation through 
CREBH expression in MC3T3E1 cells.

Jang WG(1), Kim EJ, Koh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Science Research Institute and BK21, School of Dentistry, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Tunicamycin, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducer, specifically inhibits 
N-glycosylation. The cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element-binding protein H (CREBH)
was previously shown to be regulated by UPR-dependent proteolytic cleavage in the
liver. On the other hand, the role of CREBH in other tissues is unknown. In the
present study, tunicamycin increased the level of CREBH activation (cleavage) as 
well as mRNA expression in osteoblast cells. Adenoviral (Ad) overexpression of
CREBH suppressed BMP2-induced expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
osteocalcin (OC). Interestingly, the BMP2-induced OASIS (structurally similar to 
CREBH, a positive regulator of osteoblast differentiation) expression was also
inhibited by CREBH overexpression. In addition, inhibition of CREBH expression
using siRNA reversed the tunicamycin-suppressed ALP and OC expression. These
results suggest that CREBH inhibited osteoblast differentiation via suppressing
BMP2-induced ALP, OC and OASIS expression in mouse calvarial derived osteoblasts.

PMID: 22118540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Hepatology. 2012 Apr;55(4):1070-82. doi: 10.1002/hep.24783. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Endoplasmic reticulum-tethered transcription factor cAMP responsive
element-binding protein, hepatocyte specific, regulates hepatic lipogenesis,
fatty acid oxidation, and lipolysis upon metabolic stress in mice.

Zhang C(1), Wang G, Zheng Z, Maddipati KR, Zhang X, Dyson G, Williams P, Duncan
SA, Kaufman RJ, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics,The Wayne State University School
of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

cAMP responsive element-binding protein, hepatocyte specific (CREBH), is a
liver-specific transcription factor localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
membrane. Our previous work demonstrated that CREBH is activated by ER stress or 
inflammatory stimuli to induce an acute-phase hepatic inflammation. Here, we
demonstrate that CREBH is a key metabolic regulator of hepatic lipogenesis, fatty
acid (FA) oxidation, and lipolysis under metabolic stress. Saturated FA, insulin 
signals, or an atherogenic high-fat diet can induce CREBH activation in the
liver. Under the normal chow diet, CrebH knockout mice display a modest decrease 
in hepatic lipid contents, but an increase in plasma triglycerides (TGs). After
having been fed an atherogenic high-fat (AHF) diet, massive accumulation of
hepatic lipid metabolites and significant increase in plasma TG levels were
observed in the CrebH knockout mice. Along with the hypertriglyceridemia
phenotype, the CrebH null mice displayed significantly reduced body-weight gain, 
diminished abdominal fat, and increased nonalcoholic steatohepatitis activities
under the AHF diet. Gene-expression analysis and chromatin-immunoprecipitation
assay indicated that CREBH is required to activate the expression of the genes
encoding functions involved in de novo lipogenesis, TG and cholesterol
biosynthesis, FA elongation and oxidation, lipolysis, and lipid transport.
Supporting the role of CREBH in lipogenesis and lipolysis, forced expression of
an activated form of CREBH protein in the liver significantly increases
accumulation of hepatic lipids, but reduces plasma TG levels in mice.CONCLUSION: 
All together, our study shows that CREBH plays a key role in maintaining lipid
homeostasis by regulating the expression of the genes involved in hepatic
lipogenesis, FA oxidation, and lipolysis under metabolic stress. The
identification of CREBH as a stress-inducible metabolic regulator has important
implications in the understanding and treatment of metabolic disease.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3319338
PMID: 22095841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Zebrafish. 2011 Sep;8(3):109-17. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2011.0702. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Fasted zebrafish mimic genetic and physiological responses in mammals: a model
for obesity and diabetes?

Craig PM(1), Moon TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. pcraig@uottawa.ca

With worldwide rates of obesity and type-II diabetes increasing, it is essential 
to identify and understand the mechanisms involved during nutrient absorption and
fuel allocation. Recent studies demonstrate that nutrients (e.g., lipids and
carbohydrates) play a major regulatory role in gene transcription of glycolytic
and lipogenic enzymes in addition to hormones, including insulin and glucagon.
These nutrients generally exert their effects through key cellular
nutrient/energy receptors. Fasting was used to identify these nutrient/energy
receptors known from mammalian studies to ascertain if zebrafish (Danio rerio)
are a suitable model for the study of metabolic disorders. Zebrafish were
subjected to a fasting/re-feeding regime for 3 weeks, and gene expression of
sterol responsive binding protein 1 and 2 (SREBP), the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR), cAMP response element binding protein 3-like 3 (CREB3l3), and
AMP-activated protein kinase alpha (AMPKa) was assessed. Fasted zebrafish lost
~10% of their body mass over the 3-week experiment, with an associated depression
in oxygen consumption. Increases in liver AMPKa and CREB3l3 mRNA transcript level
were noted, concurrent with increases in the activities of the ß-oxidation and
gluconeogenic markers ß-hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase and phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase, respectively. Conversely, a depression in liver mTOR and SREBP1
and 2 expression was noted, with a decrease in pyruvate kinase and alanine
aminotransferase activities and decreases in liver lipid and glycogen contents.
Twenty-four hours after re-feeding, zebrafish rapidly recover, and the majority
of parameters return to control values. Taken together, these data suggest adult 
zebrafish are an appropriate model for the further study of human metabolic
disorders.

PMID: 21854210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 12;286(32):27971-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.224352. Epub 2011
Jun 21.

Cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1R) signaling regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis
via induction of endoplasmic reticulum-bound transcription factor cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein H (CREBH) in primary hepatocytes.

Chanda D(1), Kim DK, Li T, Kim YH, Koo SH, Lee CH, Chiang JY, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor Signals,
Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Activated cannabinoid 1 receptor (CB1R) signaling has been implicated in the
development of phenotypes associated with fatty liver, insulin resistance, and
impaired suppression of hepatic glucose output. Endoplasmic reticulum
stress-associated liver-specific transcription factor CREBH is emerging as a
critical player in various hepatic metabolic pathways and regulates hepatic
gluconeogenesis in diet-induced obese settings. In this study, we elucidated the 
critical role of CREBH in mediating CB1R signaling to regulate glucose
homeostasis in primary rat and human hepatocytes. mRNA and protein levels and
glucose production were analyzed in primary rat and human hepatocytes. ChIP
assays were performed together with various transcriptional analyses using
standard techniques. CB1R activation by 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)
specifically induced CREBH gene expression via phosphorylation of the JNK
signaling pathway and c-Jun binding to the AP-1 binding site in the CREBH gene
promoter. 2-AG treatment significantly induced hepatic gluconeogenic gene
expression and glucose production in primary hepatocytes, and we demonstrated
that the CREBH binding site mutant significantly attenuated 2-AG-mediated
activation of the gluconeogenic gene promoter. Endogenous knockdown of CREBH led 
to ablation of 2-AG-induced gluconeogenic gene expression and glucose production,
and the CB1R antagonist AM251 or insulin exhibited repression of CREBH gene
induction and subsequently inhibited gluconeogenesis in both rat and human
primary hepatocytes. These results demonstrate a novel mechanism of action of
activated CB1R signaling to induce hepatic gluconeogenesis via direct activation 
of CREBH, thereby contributing to a better understanding of the endocannabinoid
signaling mechanism involved in regulating the hepatic glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3151042
PMID: 21693703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nat Med. 2011 Jun 12;17(7):812-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.2347.

The transcription factor cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein H
regulates triglyceride metabolism.

Lee JH(1), Giannikopoulos P, Duncan SA, Wang J, Johansen CT, Brown JD, Plutzky J,
Hegele RA, Glimcher LH, Lee AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Here we report that the transcription factor cyclic AMP-responsive
element-binding protein H (CREB-H, encoded by CREB3L3) is required for the
maintenance of normal plasma triglyceride concentrations. CREB-H-deficient mice
showed hypertriglyceridemia secondary to inefficient triglyceride clearance
catalyzed by lipoprotein lipase (Lpl), partly due to defective expression of the 
Lpl coactivators Apoc2, Apoa4 and Apoa5 (encoding apolipoproteins C2, A4 and A5, 
respectively) and concurrent augmentation of the Lpl inhibitor Apoc3. We
identified multiple nonsynonymous mutations in CREB3L3 that produced hypomorphic 
or nonfunctional CREB-H protein in humans with extreme hypertriglyceridemia,
implying a crucial role for CREB-H in human triglyceride metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3374483
PMID: 21666694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biochem. 2011 May;149(5):507-18. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvr041. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

The signalling from endoplasmic reticulum-resident bZIP transcription factors
involved in diverse cellular physiology.

Asada R(1), Kanemoto S, Kondo S, Saito A, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Comment in
    J Biochem. 2012 Mar;151(3):217-9.

Eukaryotic cells can adapt to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dysfunction by producing
diverse signals from the ER to the cytosol or nucleus. These signalling pathways 
are collectively known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). The canonical
branches of the UPR are mediated by three ER membrane-bound proteins: PERK, IRE1 
and ATF6. These ER stress transducers basically play important roles in cell
survival after ER stress. Recently, novel types of ER stress transducers that
share a region of high sequence similarity with ATF6 have been identified. They
have a transmembrane domain, which allows them to associate with the ER, and
possess a transcription-activation domain and a bZIP domain. These membrane-bound
bZIP transcription factors include Luman, OASIS, BBF2H7, CREBH and CREB4. Despite
their structural similarities with ATF6, differences in activating stimuli,
tissue distribution and response element binding indicate specialized functions
of each member on regulating the UPR in specific organs and tissues. Here, we
summarize our current understanding of the biochemical characteristics and
physiological functions of the ER-resident bZIP transcription factors.

PMID: 21454302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Metab. 2010 Apr 7;11(4):331-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.02.016.

Regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis by an ER-bound transcription factor, CREBH.

Lee MW(1), Chanda D, Yang J, Oh H, Kim SS, Yoon YS, Hong S, Park KG, Lee IK, Choi
CS, Hanson RW, Choi HS, Koo SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, 300 Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, Korea.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-bound transcription factor families are shown to be
involved in the control of various metabolic pathways. Here, we report a critical
function of ER-bound transcription factor, CREBH, in the regulation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis. Expression of CREBH is markedly induced by fasting or in the
insulin-resistant state in rodents in a dexamethasone- and PGC-1alpha-dependent
manner, which results in the accumulation of active nuclear form of CREBH
(CREBH-N). Overexpression of constitutively active CREBH activates transcription 
of PEPCK-C or G6Pase by binding to its enhancer site that is distinct from the
well-characterized CREB/CRTC2 regulatory sequences in vivo. Of interest,
knockdown of CREBH in liver significantly reduces blood glucose levels without
altering expression of genes involved in the ER stress signaling cascades in
mice. These data suggest a crucial role for CREBH in the regulation of hepatic
glucose metabolism in mammals.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20374965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Sci. 2010 May 1;123(Pt 9):1438-48. doi: 10.1242/jcs.067819. Epub 2010 Mar 
31.

N-linked glycosylation is required for optimal proteolytic activation of
membrane-bound transcription factor CREB-H.

Chan CP(1), Mak TY, Chin KT, Ng IO, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Faculty of Medicine
Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

CREB-H is a liver-enriched bZIP transcription factor of the CREB3 subfamily.
CREB-H is activated by intramembrane proteolysis that removes a C-terminal
transmembrane domain. Aberrant expression of CREB-H is implicated in liver
cancer. In this study we characterized N-linked glycosylation of CREB-H in the
luminal domain at the C-terminus. We found that CREB-H is modified at three
N-linked glycosylation sites in this region. Disruption of all three sites by
site-directed mutagenesis completely abrogated N-linked glycosylation of CREB-H. 
The unglycosylated mutant of CREB-H was not unstable, unfolded or aggregated.
Upon stimulation with an activator of intramembrane proteolysis such as brefeldin
A and KDEL-tailed site 1 protease, unglycosylated or deglycosylated CREB-H was
largely uncleaved, retained in an inactive form in the endoplasmic reticulum, and
less capable of activating transcription driven by unfolded protein response
element or C-reactive protein promoter. Taken together, our findings suggest that
N-linked glycosylation is required for full activation of CREB-H through
intramembrane proteolysis. Our work also reveals a novel mechanism for the
regulation of CREB-H-dependent transcription.

PMID: 20356926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 8;391(2):1222-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.046. Epub 2009 Dec 16.

The liver-enriched transcription factor CREBH is nutritionally regulated and
activated by fatty acids and PPARalpha.

Danno H(1), Ishii KA, Nakagawa Y, Mikami M, Yamamoto T, Yabe S, Furusawa M,
Kumadaki S, Watanabe K, Shimizu H, Matsuzaka T, Kobayashi K, Takahashi A, Yatoh
S, Suzuki H, Yamada N, Shimano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Endocrinology and Metabolism), Graduate
School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai,
Tsukuba Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

To elucidate the physiological role of CREBH, the hepatic mRNA and protein levels
of CREBH were estimated in various feeding states of wild and obesity mice. In
the fast state, the expression of CREBH mRNA and nuclear protein were high and
profoundly suppressed by refeeding in the wild-type mice. In ob/ob mice, the
refeeding suppression was impaired. The diet studies suggested that CREBH
expression was activated by fatty acids. CREBH mRNA levels in the mouse primary
hepatocytes were elevated by addition of the palmitate, oleate and
eicosapenonate. It was also induced by PPARalpha agonist and repressed by
PPARalpha antagonist. Luciferase reporter gene assays indicated that the CREBH
promoter activity was induced by fatty acids and co-expression of PPARalpha.
Deletion studies identified the PPRE for PPARalpha activation. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay confirmed
that PPARalpha directly binds to the PPRE. Activation of CREBH at fasting through
fatty acids and PPARalpha suggest that CREBH is involved in nutritional
regulation.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Traffic. 2010 Jan;11(1):48-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2009.00997.x.

Different mechanisms of recognition and ER retention by transmembrane
transcription factors CREB-H and ATF6.

Llarena M(1), Bailey D, Curtis H, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey RH8 0TL, UK.

CREB-H and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) are transmembrane
transcription factors that, in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress,
traffic to the Golgi where they are cleaved by specific proteases, producing the 
N-terminal domains that effect appropriate transcriptional responses. We show
that unlike in ATF6 whose lumenal tail binds BiP and contains determinants for
stress sensing and Golgi transport, in CREB-H the lumenal tail is not involved in
ER retention, not required for Golgi transport and does not bind BiP. The main
determinant for CREB-H ER retention resides in a membrane-proximal cytoplasmic
determinant that is conserved in related members of the CREB-H family, but
lacking in ATF6. We refine requirements within the ER-retention motif (ERM) and
show that ERM-ve variants exhibited constitutive Golgi localization and
constitutive cleavage by the Golgi protease, S1P. The ERM also conferred ER
retention on a heterologous protein. Furthermore, deletion of the lumenal tail of
CREB-H had no effect on ER retention of parental CREB-H or Golgi localization of 
ERM-ve variants. Importantly, when the lumenal tail of ATF6 was transferred into 
an ERM-ve variant, the chimera was now retained in the ER. Together, these data
demonstrate novel and qualitatively distinct mechanisms of trafficking and stress
signalling in CREB-H compared to ATF6.

PMID: 19883396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3205-17. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22134.

Dynamic patterning at the pylorus: formation of an epithelial intestine-stomach
boundary in late fetal life.

Li X(1), Udager AM, Hu C, Qiao XT, Richards N, Gumucio DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-2200, USA.

In the adult mouse, distinct morphological and transcriptional differences
separate stomach from intestinal epithelium. Remarkably, the epithelial boundary 
between these two organs is literally one cell thick. This discrete junction is
established suddenly and precisely at embryonic day (E) 16.5, by sharpening a
previously diffuse intermediate zone. In the present study, we define the dynamic
transcriptome of stomach, pylorus, and intestinal tissues between E14.5 and
E16.5. We show that establishment of this boundary is concomitant with the
induction of over a thousand genes in intestinal epithelium, and these gene
products provide intestinal character. Hence, we call this process
intestinalization. We identify specific transcription factors (Hnf4 gamma,
Creb3l3, and Tcfec) and examine signaling pathways (Hedgehog and Wnt) that may
play a role in this process. Finally, we define a unique expression domain at the
pylorus itself and detect novel pylorus-specific patterns for the transcription
factor Gata3 and the secreted protein nephrocan.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2927962
PMID: 19877272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Metab. 2009 Oct;10(4):245-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2009.09.005.

A new wrinkle in the fold: hepcidin links inflammation to the unfolded protein
response.

De Domenico I(1), Kaplan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132,
USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) coordinates translational and transcriptional
changes triggered by unfolded proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum. Two
recent papers (Oliveira et al., 2009; Vecchi et al., 2009) show that the UPR
modulates transcription of the hormone hepcidin, which controls plasma iron
levels and perhaps innate immunity.

PMID: 19808016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 27;4(8):e6796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006796.

Comparative analysis of gene regulation by the transcription factor PPARalpha
between mouse and human.

Rakhshandehroo M(1), Hooiveld G, Müller M, Kersten S.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrigenomics Consortium, Top Institute (TI) Food and Nutrition, Wageningen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Studies in mice have shown that PPARalpha is an important regulator
of hepatic lipid metabolism and the acute phase response. However, little
information is available on the role of PPARalpha in human liver. Here we set out
to compare the function of PPARalpha in mouse and human hepatocytes via analysis 
of target gene regulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Primary hepatocytes from 6 human and 6 mouse
donors were treated with PPARalpha agonist Wy14643 and gene expression profiling 
was performed using Affymetrix GeneChips followed by a systems biology analysis. 
Baseline PPARalpha expression was similar in human and mouse hepatocytes.
Depending on species and time of exposure, Wy14643 significantly induced the
expression of 362-672 genes. Surprisingly minor overlap was observed between the 
Wy14643-regulated genes from mouse and human, although more substantial overlap
was observed at the pathway level. Xenobiotics metabolism and apolipoprotein
synthesis were specifically regulated by PPARalpha in human hepatocytes, whereas 
glycolysis-gluconeogenesis was regulated specifically in mouse hepatocytes. Most 
of the genes commonly regulated in mouse and human were involved in lipid
metabolism and many represented known PPARalpha targets, including CPT1A, HMGCS2,
FABP1, ACSL1, and ADFP. Several genes were identified that were specifically
induced by PPARalpha in human (MBL2, ALAS1, CYP1A1, TSKU) or mouse (Fbp2, lgals4,
Cd36, Ucp2, Pxmp4). Furthermore, several putative novel PPARalpha targets were
identified that were commonly regulated in both species, including CREB3L3,
KLF10, KLF11 and MAP3K8.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggest that PPARalpha activation has a
major impact on gene regulation in human hepatocytes. Importantly, the role of
PPARalpha as master regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism is generally
well-conserved between mouse and human. Overall, however, PPARalpha regulates a
mostly divergent set of genes in mouse and human hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC2729378
PMID: 19710929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Science. 2009 Aug 14;325(5942):877-80. doi: 10.1126/science.1176639.

ER stress controls iron metabolism through induction of hepcidin.

Vecchi C(1), Montosi G, Zhang K, Lamberti I, Duncan SA, Kaufman RJ, Pietrangelo
A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hemochromatosis, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Hospital Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):705-7.

Hepcidin is a peptide hormone that is secreted by the liver and controls body
iron homeostasis. Hepcidin overproduction causes anemia of inflammation, whereas 
its deficiency leads to hemochromatosis. Inflammation and iron are known
extracellular stimuli for hepcidin expression. We found that endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress also induces hepcidin expression and causes hypoferremia
and spleen iron sequestration in mice. CREBH (cyclic AMP response element-binding
protein H), an ER stress-activated transcription factor, binds to and
transactivates the hepcidin promoter. Hepcidin induction in response to
exogenously administered toxins or accumulation of unfolded protein in the ER is 
defective in CREBH knockout mice, indicating a role for CREBH in ER
stress-regulated hepcidin expression. The regulation of hepcidin by ER stress
links the intracellular response involved in protein quality control to innate
immunity and iron homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2923557
PMID: 19679815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 4;105(44):17061-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809151105. Epub 2008 Oct 24.

Prediction of human miRNAs using tissue-selective motifs in 3' UTRs.

Chang YM(1), Juan HF, Lee TY, Chang YY, Yeh YM, Li WH, Shih AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Information Science, Innovation Research Center, and Biodiversity
Research Center and Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei,
Taiwan.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in posttranscriptional regulation of
genes. We developed a method to predict human miRNAs without requiring
cross-species conservation. We first identified lowly/moderately expressed
tissue-selective genes using EST data and then identified overrepresented motifs 
of seven nucleotides in the 3' UTRs of these genes. Using these motifs as
potential target sites of miRNAs, we recovered more than two-thirds of the known 
human miRNAs. We then used those motifs that did not match any known human miRNA 
seed region to infer novel miRNAs. We predicted 36 new human miRNA genes with 44 
mature forms and 4 novel alternative mature forms of 2 known miRNA genes when a
stringent criterion was used and many more novel miRNAs when a less stringent
criterion was used. We tested the expression of 11 predicted miRNAs in three
human cell lines and found 5 of them expressed in all three cell lines and 1
expressed in one cell line. We selected 2 of them, P-2 and P-27-5p, to do
functional validation, using their mimics and inhibitors and using both
luciferase assay and Western blotting. These experiments provided strong evidence
that both P-2 and P-27-5p are novel miRNAs and that CREB3L3, which encodes
cAMP-responsive element binding protein 3-like 3, is a target gene of P-2,
whereas LAMB3, which encodes laminin beta3, is a target gene of P-27-5p.

PMCID: PMC2579378
PMID: 18952845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hepatology. 2008 Oct;48(4):1242-50. doi: 10.1002/hep.22439.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha is implicated in endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced acute phase response by regulating expression of cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate responsive element binding protein H.

Luebke-Wheeler J(1), Zhang K, Battle M, Si-Tayeb K, Garrison W, Chhinder S, Li J,
Kaufman RJ, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Loss of the nuclear hormone receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha)
in hepatocytes results in a complex pleiotropic phenotype that includes a block
in hepatocyte differentiation and a severe disruption to liver function. Recent
analyses have shown that hepatic gene expression is severely affected by the
absence of HNF4alpha, with expression of 567 genes reduced by > or =2.5-fold (P <
or = 0.05) in Hnf4alpha(-/-) fetal livers. Although many of these genes are
direct targets, HNF4alpha has also been shown to regulate expression of other
liver transcription factors, and this raises the possibility that the dependence 
on HNF4alpha for normal expression of some genes may be indirect. We postulated
that the identification of transcription factors whose expression is regulated by
HNF4alpha might reveal roles for HNF4alpha in controlling hepatic functions that 
were not previously appreciated. Here we identify cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
responsive element binding protein H (CrebH) as a transcription factor whose
messenger RNA can be identified in both the embryonic mouse liver and adult mouse
liver and whose expression is dependent on HNF4alpha. Analyses of genomic DNA
revealed an HNF4alpha binding site upstream of the CrebH coding sequence that was
occupied by HNF4alpha in fetal livers and facilitated transcriptional activation 
of a reporter gene in transient transfection analyses. Although CrebH is highly
expressed during hepatogenesis, CrebH(-/-) mice were viable and healthy and
displayed no overt defects in liver formation. However, upon treatment with
tunicamycin, which induces an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress response,
CrebH(-/-) mice displayed reduced expression of acute phase response
proteins.CONCLUSION: These data implicate HNF4alpha in having a role in
controlling the acute phase response of the liver induced by ER stress by
regulating expression of CrebH.

PMCID: PMC2717709
PMID: 18704925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Traffic. 2007 Dec;8(12):1796-814. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Trafficking of the bZIP transmembrane transcription factor CREB-H into alternate 
pathways of ERAD and stress-regulated intramembrane proteolysis.

Bailey D(1), Barreca C, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey, RH8 0TL, UK.

CREB-H is an ATF6-related, transmembrane transcription factor that, in response
to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated stress, is cleaved by Golgi proteases
and transported to the nucleus to effect appropriate adaptive responses. We
characterize the ER processing and turnover of CREB-H with results which have
important implications for ER stress regulation and signalling. We show that
CREB-H is glycosylated and demonstrate that both the ER and nuclear forms of
CREB-H have short half-lives. We also show that CREB-H is subject to cycles of
retrotranslocation, deglycosylation and degradation through the ER-associated
degradation (ERAD) pathway. Proteasome inhibition resulted in accumulation of a
cytosolic intermediate but additionally, in contrast to inhibition of
glycosylation, promoted specific cleavage of CREB-H and nuclear transport of the 
N-terminal-truncated product. Our data indicate that under normal conditions
CREB-H is transported back from the ER to the cytosol, where it is subject to
ERAD, but under conditions that repress proteasome function or promote load
CREB-H is diverted from this pathway instead undergoing cleavage and nuclear
transport. Finally, we identify a cytoplasmic determinant involved in CREB-H ER
retention, deletion of which results in constitutive Golgi transport and
corresponding cleavage. We present a model where cellular stresses may be sensed 
at different levels by different members of the basic and leucine zipper domain
transmembrane proteins.

PMID: 17875199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Feb;46(2):181-91.

Characterization of the native CREB3L2 transcription factor and the FUS/CREB3L2
chimera.

Panagopoulos I(1), Möller E, Dahlén A, Isaksson M, Mandahl N, Vlamis-Gardikas A, 
Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@med.lu.se

CREB3L2 was first identified as the 3'-partner of FUS in a fusion gene that seems
to be specific for low grade fibromyxoid sarcoma. In silico analyses suggest that
the predicted CREB3L2 protein is a member of the CREB3 family of transcription
factors, with its bZIP domain being highly similar to that in CREB3L1, CREB3L3,
CREB3L4, CREB3, and Drosophila Bbf-2. In the present study, the authors assessed 
various cellular outcomes after transfection of NIH3T3 and HEK-293 cells with
constructs containing full-length and truncated versions of CREB3L2 and
FUS/CREB3L2. Northern blot of CREB3L2 mRNA revealed a 7.4 kbp band that contains 
0.4 kbp and 5.5 kbp untranslated 5' and 3' regions, respectively. CREB3L2
constructs containing the first 120 amino acids (aa) showed the highest
transcriptional activation. Much stronger transcriptional activation was
consistently seen for the FUS/CREB3L2 constructs than for the corresponding
CREB3L2 constructs. Transcriptional activity was achieved through the box-B
element, ATF6 and CRE binding sites, as well as the GRP78 promoter. Proteins
encoded by full-length CREB3L2 and FUS/CREB3L2 were localized to reticular
structures of the cytoplasm, whereas the corresponding, truncated proteins
lacking the transmembrane domain and the carboxy-terminal part of CREB3L2 resided
within the nucleus. The results of the present study show that CREB3L2 is not
only structurally, but also functionally very similar to CREB3L1. Thus, studies
regarding the pathways influenced by wild-type CREB3L2 should provide valuable
clues to the pathogenetic significance of the FUS/CREB3L2 chimera in low grade
fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17117415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cell. 2006 Feb 10;124(3):587-99.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress activates cleavage of CREBH to induce a systemic
inflammatory response.

Zhang K(1), Shen X, Wu J, Sakaki K, Saunders T, Rutkowski DT, Back SH, Kaufman
RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
membrane-anchored transcription factors is known to maintain sterol homeostasis
and to mediate the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here, we identified CREBH as 
a RIP-regulated liver-specific transcription factor that is cleaved upon ER
stress and required to activate expression of acute phase response (APR) genes.
Proinflammatory cytokines increase expression of ER membrane-anchored CREBH. In
response to ER stress, CREBH is cleaved by site-1 and site-2 proteases to
liberate an amino-terminal fragment that transits to the nucleus to activate
transcription of the genes encoding serum amyloid P-component (SAP) and
C-reactive protein (CRP). Proinflammatory cytokines and lipopolysaccharide
activate the UPR and induce cleavage of CREBH in the liver in vivo. Together, our
studies delineate a molecular mechanism for activation of an ER-localized
transcription factor, CREBH, and reveal an unprecedented link by which ER stress 
initiates an acute inflammatory response.

PMID: 16469704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 30;33(6):1859-73. Print 2005.

The liver-enriched transcription factor CREB-H is a growth suppressor protein
underexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Chin KT(1), Zhou HJ, Wong CM, Lee JM, Chan CP, Qiang BQ, Yuan JG, Ng IO, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Hong Kong Hong Kong, China.

We have previously characterized transcription factor LZIP to be a growth
suppressor targeted by hepatitis C virus oncoprotein. In search of proteins
closely related to LZIP, we have identified a liver-enriched transcription factor
CREB-H. LZIP and CREB-H represent a new subfamily of bZIP factors. CREB-H
activates transcription by binding to cAMP responsive element, box B, and
ATF6-binding element. Interestingly, CREB-H has a putative transmembrane (TM)
domain and it localizes ambiently to the endoplasmic reticulum. Proteolytic
cleavage that removes the TM domain leads to nuclear translocation and activation
of CREB-H. CREB-H activates the promoter of hepatic gluconeogenic enzyme
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. This activation can be further stimulated by
cAMP and protein kinase A. CREB-H transcript is exclusively abundant in adult
liver. In contrast, the expression of CREB-H mRNA is aberrantly reduced in
hepatoma tissues and cells. The enforced expression of CREB-H suppresses the
proliferation of cultured hepatoma cells. Taken together, our findings suggest
that the liver-enriched bZIP transcription factor CREB-H is a growth suppressor
that plays a role in hepatic physiology and pathology.

PMCID: PMC1072803
PMID: 15800215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


