
1. Nutr Diabetes. 2015 Aug 24;5:e179. doi: 10.1038/nutd.2015.29.

Effects of low-fat diet and aging on metabolic profiles of Creb3l4 knockout mice.

Kim TH(1), Park JM(1), Jo SH(1), Kim MY(1), Nojima H(2), Ahn YH(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Research
Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. (3)Brain Korea 
21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Increased adipose tissue mass closely associates with the 
development of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Previously, we
reported that CREB3L4 expressed in adipose tissue negatively regulates
adipogenesis, and Creb3l4 knockout mice fed a high-fat diet for 16 weeks showed
fat cell hyperplasia, with improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity.
These mice did not show significant weight gain and fat mass. Because fat diet or
aging is known to be associated with the development of obesity, we examined the 
effects of Creb3l4 gene subjected to low-fat diet (LFD) or aging process on body 
composition and obesity risk.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: We fed Creb3l4 knockout mice a low-fat diet for 16 weeks (LFD
group) or chow diet for over 1 year (aged group) and observed various metabolic
parameters in the LFD-fed and aged Creb3l4 knockout mice.
RESULTS: LFD-fed and aged Creb3l4 knockout mice showed significant weight gain
and adiposity, impaired glucose tolerance and decreased insulin sensitivity,
compared with wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Creb3l4 has a critical role in metabolic phenotypes and a better
understanding of its function may provide improved insight into the etiology of
diabetes and other metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4558560
PMID: 26302066  [PubMed]


2. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 May 15;8(5):7251-60. eCollection 2015.

Microarray-based identification of differentially expressed genes in extramammary
Paget's disease.

Lin JR(1), Liang J(1), Zhang QA(1), Huang Q(1), Wang SS(1), Qin HH(1), Chen
LJ(1), Xu JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital Fudan University Shanghai 200040, 
China.

Extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD) is a rare cutaneous malignancy accounting for
approximately 1-2% of vulvar cancers. The rarity of this disease has caused
difficulties in characterization and the molecular mechanism underlying EMPD
development remains largely unclear. Here we used microarray analysis to identify
differentially expressed genes in EMPD of the scrotum comparing with normal
epithelium from healthy donors. Agilent single-channel microarray was used to
compare the gene expression between 6 EMPD specimens and 6 normal scrotum
epithelium samples. A total of 799 up-regulated genes and 723 down-regulated
genes were identified in EMPD tissues. Real-time PCR was conducted to verify the 
differential expression of some representative genes, including ERBB4, TCF3,
PAPSS2, PIK3R3, PRLR, SULT1A1, TCF7L1, and CREB3L4. Generally, the real-time PCR 
results were consistent with microarray data, and the expression of ERBB4, PRLR, 
TCF3, PIK3R3, SULT1A1, and TCF7L1 was significantly overexpressed in EMPD
(P<0.05). Moreover, the overexpression of PRLR in EMPD, a receptor for the
anterior pituitary hormone prolactin (PRL), was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. These data demonstrate that the differentially expressed
genes from the microarray-based identification are tightly associated with EMPD
occurrence.

PMCID: PMC4509209
PMID: 26221264  [PubMed]


3. Viral Immunol. 2015 May;28(4):236-40. doi: 10.1089/vim.2014.0144. Epub 2015 Mar
16.

Expression patterns of immune-associated genes in external genital and perianal
warts treated with sinecatechins.

Doan HQ(1), Nguyen HP, Rady P, Tyring SK.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Health Science Center ,
Houston, Texas.

The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in human disease includes external genital
and perianal warts (EGW), with some HPV genotypes having oncogenic potential
(i.e., HPV-16 and -18). While green-tea extracts have antitumor and
antiproliferative effects in vitro, the mechanism of action of sinecatechins in
the treatment of EGW is not well understood. To investigate the role of
immune-regulated genes further, an open-label, single institution, prospective
study was conducted enrolling patients with clinically diagnosed EGW. Thirty
subjects were enrolled, and 18 completed the trial. All patients applied
sinecatechins 15% ointment to target lesions in the study. RNA expression
microarrays were obtained from treated EGW lesions and analyzed for differential 
gene expression of immune-regulated genes. HPV types were analyzed and, based on 
copy number, were stratified into virological responders (VR) or nonresponders
(VNR). Gene expression analysis of RNA samples was performed using TaqMan arrays 
for human T cell receptor and CD3 complex (TCR), Toll-like receptors (TLR)
pathway, interferon (IFN) pathway, and antigen processing pathway. A total of 256
genes were analyzed across the four arrays. Genes that were significantly
regulated between VRs and VNRs were CREB3L4, HIST1H3A, HIST1H3H, IFNA1, IFNA4,
IFNA5, IFNA6, IFNA8, IFNA14, IFNG, IFNAR1, IL6, IRF9, MAPK4, MAPK5, MAPK14, NET1,
and PIK3C2A in the IFN array. In the TCR array, HLA_B was found to be
statistically significantly upregulated in both the VR and VNR groups;
concomitantly, CD8A was found to be statistically significantly downregulated
only in VRs. In the TLR array, only LBP and MAPK8 were found to be differentially
regulated. In the antigen processing array, HLA-A, HLA-C, HLA-DMA, HLA-DMB,
HLA-F, PSMA5, PSMB8, and PSMB9 were differentially downregulated. Based on these 
findings, it was determined that sinecatechins treatment modulates and
downregulates genes involved in the pro-inflammatory response to HPV infection.

PMID: 25774455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 20;5:e1527. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.490.

Identification of Creb3l4 as an essential negative regulator of adipogenesis.

Kim TH(1), Jo SH(2), Choi H(1), Park JM(1), Kim MY(1), Nojima H(3), Kim JW(1),
Ahn YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic
of Korea [2] Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Molecular
Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Understanding the molecular networks that regulate adipogenesis is crucial for
combating obesity. However, the identity and molecular actions of negative
regulators that regulate the early development of adipocytes remain poorly
understood. In this study, we investigated the role of CREB3L4, a member of the
CREB3-like family, in the regulation of adiposity. Constitutive overexpression of
CREB3L4 resulted in the inhibition of adipocyte differentiation, whereas
knockdown of Creb3l4 expression caused differentiation of preadipocytes into
mature adipocytes, bypassing the mitotic clonal expansion step. In 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, Creb3l4 knockdown resulted in increased expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>2) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBPa), either by increasing the protein stability of C/EBPß or by decreasing
the expression of GATA3, a negative regulator of PPAR<U+03B3>2 expression. Consequently,
increased PPAR<U+03B3>2 and C/EBPa levels induced adipocyte differentiation, even in the
presence of minimal hormonal inducer. Thus, it can be speculated that CREB3L4 has
a role as gatekeeper, inhibiting adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Moreover, 
adipocytes of Creb3l4-knockout mice showed hyperplasia caused by increased
adipogenesis, and exhibited improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity,
as compared with littermate wild-type mice. These results raise the possibility
that Creb3l4 could be a useful therapeutic target in the fight against obesity
and metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4260748
PMID: 25412305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 May;19(3):439-46.

The co-chaperone DNAJC12 binds to Hsc70 and is upregulated by endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Choi J, Djebbar S, Fournier A, Labrie C.

Human DNAJC12 is a J domain-containing protein whose regulation, subcellular
localization, and function are currently unknown. We show here that the abundance
of DNAJC12 in human LNCaP prostate cancer cells is upregulated by the
stress-inducing drug A23187 and by the stressregulated transcription factor
AIbZIP/CREB3L4. The DNAJC12 gene encodes two isoforms, only one of which (isoform
a) is expressed in these cells. Immunofluorescence studies showed that a
recombinant DNAJC12 protein is diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm. To
identify substrates of DNAJC12, we used an immunoaffinity-mass spectrometry
approach in cells that express epitope-tagged DNAJC12. The list of potential
DNAJC12-binding proteins that were identified in this screen includes several
nucleotide-binding proteins. The most frequently identified partner of DNAJC12 in
unstressed cells was Hsc70, a cognate Hsp70 chaperone, whereas in stressed cells,
the ER chaperone BiP was frequently associated with DNAJC12. Immunoprecipitation 
experiments confirmed that the endogenous DNAJC12 and Hsc70 proteins interact in 
LNCaP cells. These results clarify the role of DNAJC12 in the regulation of Hsp70
function.

PMCID: PMC3982032
PMID: 24122553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bioinformation. 2012;8(12):574-7. doi: 10.6026/97320630008574. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Computational analysis of human and mouse CREB3L4 Protein.

Velpula KK, Rehman AA, Chigurupati S, Sanam R, Inampudi KK, Akila CS.

CREB3L4 is a member of the CREB/ATF transcription factor family, characterized by
their regulation of gene expression through the cAMP-responsive element. Previous
studies identified this protein in mice and humans. Whereas CREB3L4 in mice
(referred to as Tisp40) is found in the testes and functions in spermatogenesis, 
human CREB3L4 is primarily detected in the prostate and has been implicated in
cancer. We conducted computational analyses to compare the structural homology
between murine Tisp40a human CREB3L4. Our results reveal that the primary and
secondary structures of the two proteins contain high similarity. Additionally,
predicted helical transmembrane structure reveals that the proteins likely have
similar structure and function. This study offers preliminary findings that
support the translation of mouse Tisp40a findings into human models, based on
structural homology.

PMCID: PMC3398783
PMID: 22829733  [PubMed]


7. J Biochem. 2011 May;149(5):507-18. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvr041. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

The signalling from endoplasmic reticulum-resident bZIP transcription factors
involved in diverse cellular physiology.

Asada R(1), Kanemoto S, Kondo S, Saito A, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Comment in
    J Biochem. 2012 Mar;151(3):217-9.

Eukaryotic cells can adapt to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dysfunction by producing
diverse signals from the ER to the cytosol or nucleus. These signalling pathways 
are collectively known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). The canonical
branches of the UPR are mediated by three ER membrane-bound proteins: PERK, IRE1 
and ATF6. These ER stress transducers basically play important roles in cell
survival after ER stress. Recently, novel types of ER stress transducers that
share a region of high sequence similarity with ATF6 have been identified. They
have a transmembrane domain, which allows them to associate with the ER, and
possess a transcription-activation domain and a bZIP domain. These membrane-bound
bZIP transcription factors include Luman, OASIS, BBF2H7, CREBH and CREB4. Despite
their structural similarities with ATF6, differences in activating stimuli,
tissue distribution and response element binding indicate specialized functions
of each member on regulating the UPR in specific organs and tissues. Here, we
summarize our current understanding of the biochemical characteristics and
physiological functions of the ER-resident bZIP transcription factors.

PMID: 21454302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Sep;36(7):1881-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9394-1. Epub 2008
Nov 4.

Genomic organization, alternative splicing and tissues expression of porcine
CREB3L4 gene.

Qi YM(1), Lei T, Zhou L, Chen XD, Long QQ, Long H, Jin D, Gan L, Yang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

CREB3L4 (cAMP response element binding protein3 like 4) belongs to mammalian
CREB/ATF subfamily transcription factors featuring a unique putative
transmembrane domain lined to the bZIP region in their C-terminals. We report
here the cloning of porcine CREB3L4 and its alternative splicing variant. The
open reading frame of normal CREB3L4 covers 1,188 bp and encodes a 395-amino acid
polypeptide, whereas its variant encodes a C-terminal truncated protein
comprising only 271 amino acids. The genomic sequence of porcine CREB3L4 spans
approximately 6 kb consisted of ten exons and nine introns, and maps closely to
Jumping translocation breakpoint gene in a head-to-head manner on the q arm of
Sus Scrofa chromosome 4. Tissue expression analysis by RT-PCR indicates that
normal porcine CREB3L4 is ubiquitously expressed with relatively high abundance
in stomach, liver, cerebellum, and is a predominant form in various tissues,
whereas the splicing variant is expressed at extremely low level in all examined 
tissues. Our study will lay the groundwork for the further investigation on the
physiological function of CREB3L4 in pig models.

PMID: 18982425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jan 1;180(1):30-6.

CREB3L4, INTS3, and SNAPAP are targets for the 1q21 amplicon frequently detected 
in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Inagaki Y(1), Yasui K, Endo M, Nakajima T, Zen K, Tsuji K, Minami M, Tanaka S,
Taniwaki M, Itoh Y, Arii S, Okanoue T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 465 Kajii-cho Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto
602-8566, Japan.

High-density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis revealed novel
amplification at 1q21 in cell lines derived from hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs). Fluorescence in situ hybridization and real-time quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction studies verified amplification at 1q21. An increase in copy number
at the region was detected in 32 of the 36 primary HCC tumors (89%). To identify 
the targets for amplification, we examined 19 HCC cell lines for expression
levels of all 26 genes located within the 700-kb amplified region. Five genes
were overexpressed in cell lines with amplification at 1q21. Among these, CREB3L4
(cAMP responsive element binding protein 3-like 4), INTS3 (integrator complex
subunit 3), and SNAPAP (SNAP-associated protein) were significantly overexpressed
in tumors from 18 HCC patients, compared with counterpart nontumorous tissues.
The findings suggest that CREB3L4, INTS3, and SNAPAP are probable targets for the
amplification mechanism and may therefore be involved, together or separately, in
the development or progression of HCCs.

PMID: 18068530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Feb;108(3-5):237-44. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Androgen-regulated transcription factor AIbZIP in prostate cancer.

Labrie C(1), Lessard J, Ben Aicha S, Savard MP, Pelletier M, Fournier A, Lavergne
E, Calvo E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Laboratory, CHUQ Research Center, Faculty
of Medicine, Laval University, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Québec, Que., Canada.
Claude.Labrie@crchul.ulaval.ca

Androgen-induced bZIP (AIbZIP/CREB3L4) is a transcription factor of the bZIP
family that associates with the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In
humans, AIbZIP RNA is most abundant in the prostate gland where the protein is
produced in luminal cells of the glandular epithelium. AIbZIP could play an
important role in prostate cancer because its expression is up-regulated by
androgens in LNCaP prostate cancer cells and the protein is more abundant in
cancerous than in non-cancerous prostate cells. We recently added 74
adenocarcinomas and 43 specimens of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) to 
our survey of AIbZIP expression in prostate tumours. This study showed that
AIbZIP is expressed in all grades of adenocarcinoma and that it is more abundant 
in high-grade PIN and in adenocarcinoma than in normal prostate. The
physiological function of AIbZIP remains unknown but its association with the ER 
and its structural homology to transcription factors such as ATF6 suggest that
AIbZIP could be activated by regulated intramembrane proteolysis during the
cellular response to ER stress. This review will describe the characteristics of 
human and mammalian AIbZIP, its relationship to prostate cancer, and our recent
efforts to characterize the transcriptional properties and targets of AIbZIP.

PMID: 17933519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Oct 22;31(2):295-305. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

Transcriptional profiling of genes that are regulated by the endoplasmic
reticulum-bound transcription factor AIbZIP/CREB3L4 in prostate cells.

Ben Aicha S(1), Lessard J, Pelletier M, Fournier A, Calvo E, Labrie C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Center, Laval University Medical
Research Center (Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec), Québec, Canada.

The androgen-regulated protein androgen-induced bZIP (AIbZIP) is a bZIP
transcription factor that localizes to the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER). The physiological role of AIbZIP is unknown, but other ER-bound
transcription factors such as ATF6 and SREBPs play a crucial role in the
regulation of protein processing and lipid synthesis, respectively. In response
to alterations in the intracellular milieu, ATF6 and SREBPs are processed to
their transcriptionally active forms by regulated intramembrane proteolysis. In
humans, AIbZIP mRNA is expressed in several organs including the pancreas, liver,
and gonads, but it is especially abundant in prostate epithelial cells. We
therefore used LNCaP human prostate cancer cells as a model to identify stimuli
that lead to AIbZIP activation and define the transcriptional targets of AIbZIP. 
In LNCaP cells, AIbZIP was processed to its transcriptionally active form by
drugs that deplete ER calcium stores (i.e., A23187 and caffeine), but it was
unaffected by an inhibitor of protein glycosylation (tunicamycin). To identify
AIbZIP-regulated genes, we generated LNCaP cell lines that conditionally express 
the processed form of AIbZIP and used Affymetrix microarrays to screen for
AIbZIP-regulated transcripts. Selected genes (n = 48) were validated by Northern 
blot hybridization. The results reveal that the downstream targets of AIbZIP
include genes that are implicated in protein processing (e.g., BAG3, DNAJC12,
KDELR3). Strikingly, a large number of AIbZIP-regulated transcripts encode
proteins that are involved in transcriptional regulation, small molecule
transport, signal transduction, and metabolism. These results suggest that AIbZIP
plays a novel role in cell homeostasis.

PMID: 17712038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Urology. 2007 Jan;69(1):196-201.

Evaluation of AIbZIP and Cdc47 as markers for human prostatic diseases.

Levesque MH(1), El-Alfy M, Berger L, Labrie F, Labrie C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Center, Laval University
Hospital Research Center, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate cancer are important public
health issues. However, histologic markers for these diseases are limited.
METHODS: Immunocytochemistry was used to analyze the cellular localization of
AIbZIP, Cdc47, androgen receptor and estrogen receptor-beta markers. AIbZIP is a 
protein recently found to be more abundant in prostate cancer than in benign
prostatic tissue, and Cdc47 is a cell proliferation-associated protein. The
localization and modulation of androgen receptor and estrogen receptor-beta
through the carcinogenesis process have been examined in several studies but
controversial results were obtained. These four proteins were evaluated as
potential markers of prostatic diseases in 210 needle core biopsies, including
normal prostate, benign prostatic hyperplasia, low-grade and high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia, and different Gleason grades of prostatic
adenocarcinoma.
RESULTS: Androgen receptor and estrogen receptor-beta do not discriminate between
benign and malignant specimens, while AIbZIP was able to distinguish between
them. Cdc47, in contrast, discriminated not only between malignant and benign
prostatic tissue, but also between benign prostatic hyperplasia and normal
prostatic tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdc47 appears to be a sensitive marker of prostatic diseases since
its expression gradually increased in parallel with the severity of the lesion.
AIbZIP discriminated between benign tissue and cancer. AIbZIP and Cdc47 thus
appear to be useful markers with diagnostic and prognostic values.

PMID: 17270658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Feb;46(2):181-91.

Characterization of the native CREB3L2 transcription factor and the FUS/CREB3L2
chimera.

Panagopoulos I(1), Möller E, Dahlén A, Isaksson M, Mandahl N, Vlamis-Gardikas A, 
Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@med.lu.se

CREB3L2 was first identified as the 3'-partner of FUS in a fusion gene that seems
to be specific for low grade fibromyxoid sarcoma. In silico analyses suggest that
the predicted CREB3L2 protein is a member of the CREB3 family of transcription
factors, with its bZIP domain being highly similar to that in CREB3L1, CREB3L3,
CREB3L4, CREB3, and Drosophila Bbf-2. In the present study, the authors assessed 
various cellular outcomes after transfection of NIH3T3 and HEK-293 cells with
constructs containing full-length and truncated versions of CREB3L2 and
FUS/CREB3L2. Northern blot of CREB3L2 mRNA revealed a 7.4 kbp band that contains 
0.4 kbp and 5.5 kbp untranslated 5' and 3' regions, respectively. CREB3L2
constructs containing the first 120 amino acids (aa) showed the highest
transcriptional activation. Much stronger transcriptional activation was
consistently seen for the FUS/CREB3L2 constructs than for the corresponding
CREB3L2 constructs. Transcriptional activity was achieved through the box-B
element, ATF6 and CRE binding sites, as well as the GRP78 promoter. Proteins
encoded by full-length CREB3L2 and FUS/CREB3L2 were localized to reticular
structures of the cytoplasm, whereas the corresponding, truncated proteins
lacking the transmembrane domain and the carboxy-terminal part of CREB3L2 resided
within the nucleus. The results of the present study show that CREB3L2 is not
only structurally, but also functionally very similar to CREB3L1. Thus, studies
regarding the pathways influenced by wild-type CREB3L2 should provide valuable
clues to the pathogenetic significance of the FUS/CREB3L2 chimera in low grade
fibromyxoid sarcoma.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17117415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 1;298(1):201-11. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

The enigma of ATCE1, an acrosome-associated transcription factor.

Gil S(1), Yosef D, Golan N, Don J.

Author information: 
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Atce1 belongs to the CREB3/LZIP subtype of the ATF/CREB transcription factor gene
family. Its transcription has previously been shown to be testis-specific and
within the testis to be restricted to haploid spermatids. In this study, we
characterized the protein's distribution in the testis and found that it
accumulates in late round and in elongating spermatids, corresponding to
developmental stages considered transcriptionally silent. ATCE1 accumulation is
acrosome-specific and persists up to mature epididymal cells, at which stage the 
protein remained associated with the inner acrosome membrane even after acrosomal
reaction. No nuclear localization was evident at any spermatogenic stage.
Expression of full-length ATCE1 in various cell lines revealed ER and Golgi
localization whereas truncation of the C-terminus allowed entrance into the
nucleus. Potent transcriptional activation activity, from kB-containing
regulatory elements (but not from CRE elements as one might expect), was observed
using the C-terminally truncated nuclear form of ATCE1. These results raise the
question of why would a transcription factor be specifically anchored to the
acrosome inner membrane? An intriguing speculation that ATCE1 might be paternally
delivered to the newly formed zygote is discussed.

PMID: 16925989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Androl. 2006 Sep-Oct;27(5):686-94. Epub 2006 May 25.

Stage-specific expression of the Atce1/Tisp40alpha isoform of CREB3L4 in mouse
spermatids.

El-Alfy M(1), Azzi L, Lessard J, Lavergne E, Pelletier M, Labrie C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Center, Université Laval Medical
Research Center, Québec, Canada.

The maturation of haploid spermatids into spermatozoa relies on the timely
production of proteins required for spermatid differentiation. The mammalian
CREB3L4 (cAMP responsive element binding protein 3-like 4) gene encodes a bZIP
transcription factor that associates with the membrane of the endoplasmic
reticulum. CREB3L4 is presumed to play an important role in protein maturation
via its involvement in the cellular response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. In 
mice, the Creb3l4 gene gives rise to 2 distinct classes of mRNAs through the use 
of alternate promoters. Transcripts that initiate upstream of the first coding
exon encode a 370-amino acid (aa) protein designated Tisp40beta, whereas
transcripts that initiate downstream of the first coding exon encode
Atce1/Tisp40alpha, a truncated (315-aa) form of Tisp40beta. In the mouse testis, 
Creb3l4 transcripts are known to be expressed exclusively in postmeiotic
spermatids but the presence of CREB3L4 protein in spermatids has not been
formally demonstrated. We produced an antibody directed against the carboxy
terminus of mouse CREB3L4 and used it in immunostaining experiments to document
that CREB3L4 protein accumulates in post-meiotic spermatids in a stage-specific
manner. Moreover, we show that Atce1/Tisp40alpha is the major form of CREB3L4 in 
mouse testis. These findings suggest that testis-specific isoforms of Creb3l4
could play an important role in spermatid differentiation.

PMID: 16728718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Jan;17(1):413-26. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

CREB4, a transmembrane bZip transcription factor and potential new substrate for 
regulation and cleavage by S1P.

Stirling J(1), O'hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

Regulated intramembrane proteolysis of the factors SREBP and ATF6 represents a
central control mechanism in sterol homeostasis and stress response within the
endoplasmic reticulum. Here, we compare localization of ATF6-related bZip factors
CREB4, CREB-H, Luman, and OASIS. These factors contain the defining features of a
bZip domain, a predicted transmembrane domain and an adjacent cleavage site for
the Golgi protease S1P, with conserved features which indicate that it represents
a specific subclass of S1P sites. Each factor localizes to the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), but a population of CREB4 was also observed in the Golgi.
Deletion of the transmembrane domain in CREB4 resulted in efficient nuclear
accumulation. An N-terminal variant of CREB4 containing the BZIp domain potently 
activated expression from a target gene containing ATF6 binding sites and from
the promoter for the ER chaperone GRP78/BIP. CREB4 was cleaved in a site-specific
manner in response to brefeldin A disruption of the Golgi or by coexpression with
S1P but only after deletion or substitution of its C-terminal lumenal domain.
Thus, S1P cleavage of CREB4 may be suppressed by a determinant in the C-terminal 
region. Dithiothreitol induced more complete transport of CREB4 to the Golgi, but
not cleavage. Together, the data identify at least one additional bZip factor
whose localization responds to ER stress, and we propose a model based on these
results that indicates additional levels of control of this novel class of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1345678
PMID: 16236796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2005 Sep;32(9):898-902.

Expression pattern and preliminary functional analysis of human CREB4 gene.

Gao YJ(1), Cao GT, Yin G, Wang X, Ji CN, Gu SH, Ni XH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences,
East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China. yigao2004@126.com

cAMP response element-binding (CREB) proteins are a family of mammalian
transcription activators that mediate cAMP and calcium-dependent gene expression 
through the cAMP response element (CRE). CREB4 is a novel member of the human
CREB family. RT-PCR showed CREB4 transcripts were found in lung carcinoma LX-1,
colon adenocarcinoma CX-1, prastatic adenocarcinoma PC-3, colon carcinoma G1-112,
and pancreatic adenocarcinoma G1-103. Constructing CREB4 and CREB(215-395aa)
fusion protein with the entire prokaryotic LexA protein respectively disclosed
that CREB4 protein functioned as a transcription activator and its N-terminal
accounted for the activation ability. Furthermore,a fusion protein of GFP and
full-length CREB4 was localized in cytoplasm,whereas the fusion protein of GFP
and a deletion mutant lacking the C-terminal putative transmembrane domain was
translocated in nucleus. Our results suggested that putative transmembrane domain
of CREB4 protein was associated with modulation of its function for the
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 16201231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(17):7657-64.

Reduction of spermatogenesis but not fertility in Creb3l4-deficient mice.

Adham IM(1), Eck TJ, Mierau K, Müller N, Sallam MA, Paprotta I, Schubert S,
Hoyer-Fender S, Engel W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Germany. iadham@gwdg.de

Creb3l4 belongs to the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors that are involved
in mediating transcription in response to intracellular signaling. This study
shows that Creb3l4 is expressed at low levels in all organs and in different
stages of embryogenesis but is present at very high levels in the testis,
particularly in postmeiotic male germ cells. In contrast to CREB3L4 in the human 
prostate, of which specific expression was detected, Creb3l4 transcripts in the
mouse prostate could be detected only by RT-PCR. To identify the physiological
function of Creb3l4, the murine gene was inactivated by replacement with the gene
encoding green fluorescent protein. Surprisingly, Creb3l4-deficient mice were
born at expected ratios, were healthy, and displayed normal long-term survival
rates. Despite a significant reduction in the number of spermatozoa in the
epididymis of Creb3l4(-)(/)(-) mice, the breeding of mutant males with wild-type 
females was productive and the average litter size was not significantly altered 
in comparison to wild-type littermates. Further analyses revealed that the
seminiferous tubules of Creb3l4(-)(/)(-) mice contained all of the developmental 
stages, though there was evidence for increased apoptosis of meiotic/postmeiotic 
germ cells. These results suggest that Creb3l4 plays a role in male germ cell
development, but its loss is insufficient to completely compromise the production
of spermatozoa.

PMCID: PMC1190296
PMID: 16107712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Lett. 2006 May 18;236(2):229-38. Epub 2005 Jul 19.

Tissue-specificity of prostate specific antigens: comparative analysis of
transcript levels in prostate and non-prostatic tissues.

Cunha AC(1), Weigle B, Kiessling A, Bachmann M, Rieber EP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute of Immunology, Technical University of Dresden,
Fetscherstrasse 74, D-01307 Dresden, Germany.

Activation of immune defense mechanisms against tumor antigens appears to be a
promising therapeutic option for advanced prostate cancer (PCa). Specific
immunotherapy critically depends on target antigens that are selectively
expressed in the tumorous and optional in the normal prostate tissue in
sufficient amounts. Although several prostate antigens have been described and
some have already been used in clinical trials, a detailed comparative evaluation
of their tissue-specificity and expression levels is still lacking. We determined
the transcript levels of eight prostate targets (PSA, PAP, PSCA, PSGR, Prostein, 
PSMA, AIbZIP, trp-p8) in 16 different tissues by quantitative PCR and calculated 
a tissue-specificity index (TSI) for each molecule. Besides a preferential
expression in prostate for all targets, striking differences in the expression
levels and TSI were revealed which may be important for the selection of
appropriate antigens for immunotherapy of PCa.

PMID: 16046056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(7):373-6.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human cAMP response
element-binding ( CREB) gene ( CREB4).

Cao G(1), Ni X, Jiang M, Ma Y, Cheng H, Guo L, Ji C, Gu S, Xie Y, Mao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China, 200433. ymmao@fudan.edu.cn

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding (CREB) proteins
are a family of mammalian transcription activators. We identified a novel human
CREB gene ( CREB4) that was 1592 bp long and encoded a protein of 395 amino acid 
residues. The protein shared high homology to mouse CREB3 (identity 62%,
similarity 72%). The expression pattern of the human CREB4 gene showed
transcripts in prostate, brain, pancreas, skeletal muscle, small intestine,
testis, leukocyte, and thymus, whereas in heart, lung, liver, kidney, placenta,
spleen, ovary, and colon, specific bands of the transcript could not be detected.
The CREB4 gene consisted of ten exons and nine introns and was mapped to
chromosome 1q21.3 by means of a bioinformatics analysis.

PMID: 12111373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Endocrinology. 2002 May;143(5):1578-88.

Atce1: a novel mouse cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-responsive
element-binding protein-like gene exclusively expressed in postmeiotic
spermatids.

Stelzer G(1), Don J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2002 May;143(5):1575-7.

Members of the ATF/CREB family of transcription factors are involved in gene
activation in various physiological systems ranging from metabolite homeostasis, 
through regulation of cell cycle, to learning and memory. Two members of this
family, cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), and cAMP-responsive
element modulator (CREM) are active during mammalian spermatogenesis and are
required for this process, as has been shown by knockout and dominant negative
experiments. In an effort to identify mouse proteins that interact with the
testis-specific protein Tctex2, a mouse testis expression library was screened
via the two-hybrid system, using the carboxyl-terminal portion of this protein as
bait. A clone containing two overlapping open reading frames, related by a
frameshift of one nucleotide, was subsequently isolated. The peptide that
interacted with Tctex2 does not initiate from a consensus AUG codon, and it is
not clear whether it exists physiologically. However, the other reading frame,
initiating from an AUG codon, encodes a 315-amino acid peptide with significant
sequence homology to a subfamily of the CREB genes whose prototype is the mouse
LZIP peptide. This novel CREB-like peptide, designated Atce1, is specifically
expressed in the testis. A developmental study using Northern hybridization and
in situ hybridization analyses revealed that Atce1 transcripts begin to
accumulate in testes of mice 24 d after birth, reflecting expression in mid/late 
round spermatids. Interestingly, EMSAs revealed that in vitro translated Atce1
binds specifically to a nuclear factor-kappaB-binding element rather then to a
CRE element. Potential roles for Atce1 are discussed.

PMID: 11956138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cancer Res. 2002 Feb 1;62(3):721-33.

AIbZIP, a novel bZIP gene located on chromosome 1q21.3 that is highly expressed
in prostate tumors and of which the expression is up-regulated by androgens in
LNCaP human prostate cancer cells.

Qi H(1), Fillion C, Labrie Y, Grenier J, Fournier A, Berger L, El-Alfy M, Labrie 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Center, Centre Hospitalier
Université Laval Research Center (CHUQ) and Laval University, Quebec G1V 4G2,
Canada.

Androgens play an important role in the development and physiology of the normal 
prostate as well as in prostate cancer cell proliferation. Comparison of the mRNA
expression profiles of control and R1881-treated cultures of LNCaP human prostate
cancer cells using cDNA subtraction led to the identification of a novel
transcription factor that we named Androgen-Induced bZIP (AIbZIP) protein. AIbZIP
is a 395 aa protein with homology to cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein/activating transcription factor transcription factors. It contains an
NH(2)-terminal activation domain, a central bZIP domain, and a COOH-terminal
transmembrane domain. The AIbZIP gene is localized on chromosome 1q21.3 and
consists of 10 exons. A major 1.7-kb transcript was detected exclusively in the
prostate as well as in breast and prostate cancer cell lines. Androgens
up-regulate AIbZIP mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner. The
kinetics of AIbZIP mRNA up-regulation and the results of experiments with
cycloheximide suggest that AIbZIP may be a delayed response gene. Immunoreactive 
AIbZIP protein was primarily detected in the cytoplasm of prostatic luminal
epithelial cells. Similarly, full-length AIbZIP-green fluorescent protein fusion 
proteins were localized in the cytoplasm of LNCaP cells, whereas a truncated form
of AIbZIP lacking the putative transmembrane domain was exclusively nuclear.
Examination of AIbZIP protein and mRNA expression in a series of transurethral
resection of the prostate and needle biopsy specimens indicated that AIbZIP is
expressed at higher levels in cancerous prostate cells compared with noncancerous
prostate cells. The highly tissue-specific expression profile, androgen
regulation, chromosomal localization, and expression profile of AIbZIP in
prostate tumors suggest that AIbZIP may play an important role in prostate cancer
and in androgen receptor signaling in prostate cells. Future studies will confirm
a possible relationship between AIbZIP and prostate cancer.

PMID: 11830526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


